A RIGHT GODLY AND learned Exposition, upon the whole Book of Psalms: Wherein
is set forth the true Division, Sense, and Doctrine contained in every Psalm:
for the great furtheraunce and necessary instruction of every Christian Reader.

Newly and faithfully set forth by a Godly Minister and Preacher of the word of
God.

2 Timothy 3. Ver. 16.17. For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct and to instruct to
righteousness.

That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

LONDON. Printed for T. Man, and W. Brom. 1586.

The printers of this present work, to al godly and Chrystian readers, do wish
all increase of knowledge and strength of faith in Christ for ever.
THere are two things especially, that behooves all good men to have regard
of in this life. The one is the enlarging of the kingdom of Christ, to the
uttermost of their powers, in a lawful and holy vocation. And the other is
simplicity and plainnes, in the places that God puts men into, or in the
words or works, that he inableth them to perform therein. At both which
things we our selves have aimed (so far forth as huma^e infirmytie would
suffer) in the pulishing of this present work, for the further declaration
whereof we have been contented to prefixe these few lines. By Gods good
providence, the book it self came into our hands from amongst the writings,
of that religious and worshipful Gentlma^ M. Herlakinden of Kent, esquier late
deceased, and for whose cause only (as we suppose) the penning of this was
performed at the first: Which having once gotten into our hands, we could not
let lie and perish amongst the worms and moaths (as the proverb is) unless we
would closly and under hand have hindered the edification of the Church, but
endeavor to our uttermost the publishing of the same. Wherein if any man think
we did it, for glory or gain unto our selves, we can not but tell them that
as they do uncharitably surmise against us, so they do fondly and foully
deceive themselves, as for glory, how can we attain, since the labor is wholly
an others, and no part ours, except men would think us to be so conceited that
we would count it credit to be decked with other birds feathers, and to wax
rich with the robbery and unjust spoils of others. And for gain there is as
little, if not less reason, for besides that we know not what vent we shall
have, the sale being very uncertain, what likelihood is there that our
advantage can be much, in publishing commentaries upon that book of which
there are so many learned expositions extant already? And yet least any should
imagine that we have without cause, caused this to be printed, besides the
reasons before alleged we say, that both the soundnes of the matter it self,
and the manner of delivery observed therein, which is both plain and short
(the one serving for the more simple sort of people, and the other fitting such
as either can not, or will not, allow themselves leisure to read long
commentaries) has drawn us on hereto. Wherein we do willingly give all the
world to understand, that we speak not so much our own minds, for we confess
our selves to be men not greatly able to discern of such high points but we
utter that, that men of good countenance in the Church, and of sound judgment,
as in respect of religion, have delivered, and that we hope all that read it,
shall well find and perceive. There rests no more but this, that every good
man labor to refer it, to good ends and holy purposes, namely to the
building up of the^ selves and others, in knowledge, in faith, in repentance
and obedience of al such good things, as God has reueiled in his word,
praying the Godly reader, for his better and more plain direction in that
behalf, diligently to observe these few points following, First that all that
is spoken, upon all the Psalms or any of them, respects either the division
of the Psalm it self into his members and parts, or the true sense and
natural meaning of the very words, or the doctrines, touching faith and manners
that are therein contained. Secondly that wheresoever they shall find, these
letters, marks, or directions ensuing: i. vz. q.d. they would take pains to
resolve and interpret them thus, namely that, i. signifies that it is to say,
vz. signifies to wit: and q.d. means as if he should say. Thirdly, that the
framer of this work in all his notes, at the least (for the most part we are
sure of it) had special respect to that english text of the Psalms and Bible
that was Imprinted, at Geneua, which was as it should seem, the first year of
the raygne of our gracious Queen, which also we thought good to advertise the
reader of that so he may have an eye always in his reading to, that text, or
others conformable to the same, printed, upon good authority, though it be not
wholly put down here, nor the words of it in other letters for difference
sake, as had been to be wished. Lastly we are earnestly to entreat the godly
reader, favorably to interpret, and with love to correct, whatsoever has
escaped here, through the negligence or ignorance of the workmen, employed
about this business, some taste whereof also even we our selves have thought
good to give unto them, by putting down some few scapes observed in the over
reading of it, that so if there be any such like (as we hope there are not
many) they may by these amend the rest. And thus beseeching God to give a
blessing unto this work in the hearts of all these into whose hands it shall
come, we end the 28. of April. 1586,

Lord Jesus begin and make an end. An Exposition upon the whole Book of
Psalms.
The penners of the Psalms were diverse men, as David, Moses, etc. but all led
by one and the self same spirit, so that the holy Ghost may rightly be said
to be the Author of this Book.
SOme Psalms have titles and inscriptions, of which we will show somewhat when
we shall come to them: othersome are without Titles or inscriptions, of which
we shall not need to say any thing. These that have Titles, do either contain
the name of the writer of that Psalm, or the instrument whereupon it was sung,
or the end whereunto it was appointed, or the principal matter therein
contained. As they were diverse Writers, so they comprehended diverse matters:
some are full of instruction touching both faith and manners, as Psalm. 1.37.
etc. Othersome contain confession of sins, and prayer for repentance, as
Psalm 25.51. etc. Othersome are Prayers against the enemies of the Church, as
Psalm. 79.83. etc. Some contain the histories of the old Testament, as Psalm.
78.105.106. etc. Some are commendations of Gods laws, as Psa. 19.119. etc.
Some descriptions of Gods wonderful power, as psalm. 18.164. Some are
particular prayers of particular persons, in particular greefes either of body
or soul, as psa. 6.86. etc. Othersome are prayers of a number of godly and
faithful people, as psalm. 44.85. etc. To be short, there is such diuersitye
of matter, that a man can hardlye divide them aright: yea one and the self
same Psalm sometimes shall comprehend the most of these things.

For the better understanding of this Book, two things specially would be
diligently observed: First, the sudden change of number, tense, person, etc.
which make the places to seem very hard. Secondlye, to discern what is spoken
in the person of the Church, and to refer the same thereto, and what is
otherwise spoken to apply it always to his right end and purpose.

Psalm 2.
1. to the 4. to the end of the Psalm.

1. The man put for every man, i. man and woman for in Christ Jesus there is no
difference, Galat. 3.28. and blessed are they not in this life only, but in
the life to come, for godliness has the promise of this life present, and in
the life to come, 1. Timothy 4.8. Does not walk in the council [by council
he understands the subtilties and crafts of the wicked, by which they push
on themselves forwards, and labor to draw others to the like, see Proverb.
1.10.11. etc. So that he means that he is blessed that joins not himself
in wicked practices with the ungodly, nor by himself does perform the same
nor stand in the way of sinners, (way is put for order and kind of living,
for manners and fashions: he means then that they are blessed that frame not
themselves, no not in outward show, like to the ungodly: see Romans 12.2.) In
the seat of the scorners [by seat he notes fellowship and society with the
ungodly as Psalm. 26.4. so that the meaning is that the godly man does not
consent with the wicked, neither has any familiarity with their vile
enterprises. Verse 2. i. his whole pleasure] in the law of the Lord [ i. in
the performaunce of these things, which GOD in his law commaundeth] Meditate
day and night [ i. continually or very much, giving himself not only 3. is a
similitude, by which the Prophet notes the flourishing state of the
faithful, and their fruitfulness also, by Tree he means either Palm Tree,
as Psalm 92.12. or some other flourishing Tree] by the Rivers of waters [ i.
in most moist places meet to make Trees grow and flourish] in due season [ i.
not untimely fruit, nor too late, but that which shall have the fullness of
grouth, and yet not be withered away] whose leaf shall not fade [ i. shall not
decay in color, nor fall from the Tree, whereby the Prophet notes the
continual flourishing of the faythfull] Whatsoever he shall do, [we must
restrain that universal term, Whatsoever, to all things that he shall
attempt according to godliness, to which indeed both here and elsewhere,
sundry times the Lord himself has annexed a promise of good successe] 4. He
amplifyeth by the contrary, the wicked are not so [ i. Like Trees planted etc.
as ver. 3. but whereto are they like? they are as the chafe [ i. Light,
unprofitable for any thing, and void of fruit. It is an usual thing in
Scripture to compare the wicked to chafe, as Psalm 35.5. Isaiah 17.13. Math.
3.12.] Which the wind dryueth away ( q.d. as chafe cannot withstand the
violence of the wind, but it tosseth it too and fro, and dryueth it whither
pleases it, so shall the wicked be before Gods judgments, how great,
mighty and strong soever they seem to be before men] Ver. 5. i. because they
are as chafe, and reprobate to all good works) they shall not stand [ vz.
with boldness and lifted up countenaunces, as the godly shall] in the
judgment ( i. in that great and last day mentioned Mat. 25.31.32. etc. to the
end of the Chapter] nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous [ i. they
shall not have place amongst the godly, but God will funder them one from
another as Math. 25.31.32. etc. as before] Ver. 6. The i. approves and
allows as not to know, is to disallowe, Math. 7.23. yea so allows, that he
blesses, which may appear by the contrary in this verse, where the Prophet
uses the word, Perish) the way ( i. the order and kind of living, as before,
verse the first, and afterward in this verse) of the righteous ( i. they that
endeavor righteousness in themselves, and have Christ's righteousness imputed
unto them) And the way (read But, and so the sense shall be more plain)
Shall perish ( vz. In time hereafter to come, or else does perish, putting
the beginning of destruction in this life, not only for the beginning of it
here, but for the finishing of it else where.

Ver. 1. Teaches a godly man to beware of the vngodlies persuasions, 2.
Teaches him by the contrary what he must do: first to 3. A promise annexed
for our 4. does not 5. Teaches that God with his Fan will make a separation
between Math. 3.12. ver. 6. Teaches this,

Psalm 2.
1. to the end of the 3. In the second 4. to the end of the 9. In 3. is
contained a loving admonition of God, who will not the death of sinners, but
rather that they should repent, wishing them in time, for fear of after
punishment, to turn to his Majesty, from verse 10. to the end of 1. Heathen
put for people, not being Jews: If you understand this Psalm of David's
kingdom, if otherwise, of Christ's kingdom, as it is referred thereto Acts.
4.25. Then understand by Heathen and people of the enemies of Christ, which
were of three manner of sorts, and in this first verse he notes two kinds of
them, some that through rage were carried to outrage and violence, and othersome
that were not so cruel, and yet murmuringly opposed themselves in words. Some
read the later part of the first verse thus: And the Nations meditate [or
think upon a vain thing ( i. a matter that can not be brought to pass, but
shall lack his effect) the sense comes all to one effect. Ver. 2. The kings
i. they that had the highest authority] bend themselves: or after some, stand
up [meaning that they consent and conspire together as it were] and the Princes
[ i. the great men by whose counsel and wisdom kings govern their countries,
noting hereby, that neither might nor council, was wanting in Christ's
aduersaries] are assembled, or after some, do take counsel together against
the Lord, [A strange matter that men like Giaunts, should arm themselves
against God and against his Christ ( i. his anointed one, meaning either David
as the figure, or Christ himself as the truth] ver. 3. q.d. Let us join all
our force to assay to break) not that they can, but that such purposes they
have in their hearts and words in their mouthes] their bands [ i. God the
fathers laws, published by David and Christ, which he calls bands, because
that by them, as it were by certain bands, the subjects are wont to be bound
and kept in their duties) their cords or as some term it, thick ( i. strong)
cords from us (I suppose that the Prophet understands by cords, the rule and
authority that God has given to David and his son Christ) the meaning is: Let
us not obaye (say the wicked their laws, and 4. He that dwells, others
read, He that sits in heaven, [a notable description of God, whereby the
Prophet means to show, that they are not able to match with him: and they are
David's words, q.d. How will these wicked men, as wicked as they are, fight with
him that is so high above their reach] shall laugh, or in the present tense, as
some read it does laugh [ i. makes no account of al their rage and murmuring,
and this is spoken of God, as the rest of the words in this verse, and the next
that follow, are, according to many, and as his capacity is able to co^prehend]
shall have them in derision (or as others read it does deride them [it is a
repetition being the same in effect, yt the former part of the verse is, by
which doubling the holy Ghost notes the certainty and assurednes of the
thing] Ver. 5. Then [ vz. when time shall require i. God) speak unto them [ vz.
the wicked and ungodly, either by his words, or by his rods, Job. 33.14. etc.
but chiefly by his rods, as Job 33.19.20.21.] in his wrath [ i. being angry
with them, meaning that he will most vehemently and sharply rebuke them] and
vex them [ i. plague them so, that they shall be vexed and grieved in his sore
displeasure (he means that being moved with great wrath, he will destroy and
overthrow the^] 6. amend thus, Saying ( vz. God himself) but I anointed my
kingly placing him in his kingdom, putting the sign of his imagination or
entrance into his kingdom [ vz. annoynting, for the possession and enjoying
thereof: And putting these words (my king) for him whom the Lord had advanced
thereto, either David or Christ] had made him ruler over Sion [which place was
the seat of David's kingdom, as may appear by sundry places, the Prophet
using a part for the whole land, and the people contained therein, and a figure
also of Christ's Church, Isaiah. 2.3.] the Mountains of my holiness [ i. My holy
mountains, for so do the Hebrews sundry times speak, using the Substantive for
the Adjective, now it is called Gods holy mountain, because that David brought
thither Gods own arc, and there were the holy exercises of his religion
observed, till the Temple was builded, see 1. Chron. 15.16. Chap. and this
verse comprehends God ye fathers words, sitting in judgment as it were, and
condemning the wicked, who labored the overthrow of his kingdom. Ver. 7. I
will declare [ i. I will faythfullye vz. which the Lord has determined
concerning men] thou art my son [ vz. by adoption, if we understand it of
David: and by nature if we understand it of Christ] This day [if you understand
it of David, you must refer it to ye time of his first anointing, and so
forward. If you understand it of Christ, you must refer it to his first
manifestation in the flesh, not but that he was begotten of the Father from
before all beginnings] and this 7. verse are the words of David or Christ
declaring Gods eternal decree touching their governments.] Ver. 8. are the
words of the David or Christ to ask somewhat of him, and as it were, a
prophecy of the enlargement of their kingdoms: In David somewhat more narrowly
thus, that the Heathen round about him, and namelye those that inhabited the
coasts nigh to the land of Judea, as Ammonites, Moabites, etc. should be
brought in subjection to him, as may appear in the Histories in 2. Samuel: in
Christ more largely, to wit that of all the nations and peoples under heaven,
he should have diverse subjected to his kingdom 9. is declared ye power of
David or christ. Thou shall crush, or after some, thou shall break them
together [ vz. not only those enemies mentioned in the beginning of this
Psalm, but all others whatsoever, that shall rise up or rebel against thee]
with a scepter, or after some, with a rod of iron, [whatsoeuer it be the holy
Ghost means under these terms, to set out the invincible power, and force
of David, or of Christ, against their several enemies] And break them in
pieces, or after some shall scatter them abroad [ vz. being already broken,
which I rather allow of] like a Potters vessel [ vz. which is broken already:
noting by this manner of speech, not only a judgment to be executed upon the
wicked, but such a judgment as the ungodly shall be past all 10. Is a
notable exhortation to Rulers in time to turn to the Lord, and his obedience.
Now [ i. while it is time, before such judgments overtake you, as are
mentioned verse 5. and 9. of this Psalme] be wise and learned [not that they
were without wit and learning, but because they wanted godly wisdom, he
exhorts 11. Serve the Lord [ q.d. Give unto him his true honor and worship,
which hitherto you have kept back from him] in fear: or after others with
reverence [both come almost to one end, if we read Fear, he means the
fear of his children, which are loath to offend him, not so much for fear of
punishment, as for lothsomnesse, on their part of love, to displease his
Majesty: If we read reverence, then he notes with what inward persuasions
and outward behavior we should perform his service to his Majesty, vz. not
so lightly and irreverently as commonly we doe] and rejoice [ vz. because he
has set such a king over you] with trembling [ vz. at his judgments, which
he sets before them, to keep them the better in awe, and to with-holde them
from manifold mischiefs.] 12. Kiss the son [ vz. not only in sign of
homage and subjection but also as a sure pledge of yt faithfulness and trust
which you will perform toward him: And by Son he understands either David
or Christ] least he be angry [and then those punishments fall upon you
mentioned before ver. 9.] and ye perish [ q.d least ye also should perish, The
Prophet puts down two reasons to induce men to yield to Christ, 1. least
they provoke him to wrath, 2. least they themselves perish, and that in the
way ( i. before they come to their iournies end, meaning thereby the full
accomplishment of their purposes and practices, which no doubt shall be a great
greefe] When his wrath shall suddenly burn, others read, if his wrath shall
burn, though never so little, if you follow the first reading, the sense is
thus, vz. he notes not only the time wherein the ungodly shall perish, but
the manner how and suddenly: If you allow the other, then this is the meaning:
[ q.d. it is good for you to take heed how you provoke against your selves
God and his judgments: for if his wrath be never so little kindled, be ye
sure, it will be your destruction, this latter I better like of as more
agreeing with the circumstance of the place) blessed are all that trust in him
[this is a grave sentence shutting up the whole Psalm, into which the Prophet
suddenly enters, not only because of the deep consideration of Gods
judgments pronounced before against the wicked, but also thereby to show that
the godly are not without hope.

Ver. 1. 2. shows yt the kings and mighty men do it likewise 4. Teaches
that God will frustrate the wicked of their hope, and mischievous 5. as also 9.
declares that the ungodly shall not escape unpunished, Ver. 7. Teaches us
not only faithfully to declare, but also humbly to stand upon the gifts and
calling that God has bestowed upon us. Ver. 8. Declares Gods liberality, who
gives to his children, rich 9. Notes the utter ruin and destruction of the
ungodly. ver. 10. Sets out Gods mercy in calling men, yea even ye highest
11. Teaches that God alone must be worshipped, 12.

Psalm 3.
THis Psalm has a large Title, David declares what great dangers he was
David gathered 1. Absolon. Ver. 2. To my soul [mend it thus, of my soul: i.
of me, my self, and my whole life: a part put for ye whole person] There is no
help for him in God [ i. the Lord will not deliver him: for they supposed when
they saw him flee from the face of his son Absolon on the one side, and
Absolons power on the other side that God had forsaken him, and that he could
look for no help of God, such Schemei, 2. Samuel 16.7.8.] Ver. 3. Art a
Buckler [ i. a sure defense from the force of my enemies] For me, or after some
about me [by which he notes in what assurance he was under the shadow and
safegarde of the Almighty] My glory ( i. who) how base soever I am now, must
and will restore me to my former glory] And the lifter up of my head [to lift
up the head, is to make one that was very sad, and thrown down with grief,
ioifull and cheerful, by exalting of him to give him matter of mirth, see
Genesis 40.13.20. Luke 21.28. he means then by these three speeches, that he
was to him without weapon, a shield or Buckler, i. a sure defense: and to him
contemned, glory and renown: and to him cast down, an Author of 4. I did
call, or after some cry, which I better like [ i. I did earnestly pray]
heard, or after some answered [ i. yielded and granted me my request] out of
his holy mountain (we heard the same before, Psalm 2.6. By holy mountain he
means the propitiatory or mercy seat, which was upon the Arc placed in
Mount Sion, which was said to be holy, because God the author of holiness
appeared there, and by reason of the holy exercises observed in that place, for
God had promised that he would hear his people out of the mercy seat from
between the Cherubines, when faithfully they should call upon him: or else he
means by Gods holy Mountain, Heaven, whereupon the Lord sits, as upon an
5. I laid me down [ vz. upon my bed or Couch: and that word, I, is full of
force, q. d. I, whose life so many enemies seeke] and slept [ vz. soundly and
sweetly, careless (as it were) of mine enemies: The Prophet meaning by sleep
wonderful quietness, for they that are doubtful of their successes, and
oppressed with greefes, have many times sleep taken from their eyes] And rose
up again [excelle^tly added, for many take their rest, and yet rise not, the
Prophet noting, that as he slept soundly, so he safely awaked, and employed
himself upon his affairs) for the Lord sustained me [this is the reason of
all, for without God we can do nothing, John, 15.5. Ver. 6. For ten thousand [a
certain number put for an uncertain, meaning innumerable people] mend the
latter end of the ver. thus, which standing about me, have pitched their tents
against me [ i. which co^passing me about, are ready even as it were with their
weapons drawn, to destroy me: q.d. though I were never in so great danger,
distress, and fear yet I will not fear, for thou Lord wilt graciously
deliver me now, as thou 7. O Lord arise [ vz. Like a courageous and ready
soldier, that hears the sound of the Trumpet, stand up upon thy feet,
take thy weapons and arms to defend me, and wound mine enemies] Help, or
after some, save me my God [ vz. from the subtlety and power of my foes] for
thou have, some read, which have smitten [both the readinges come to one sense,
vz. he prays God to deliver him out of this present danger, as he before
had done out of sundry the like] al mine enemies [ i. the greatest number of
them. For he means not that God had so destroyed his foes, as none of them
were left] Upon the cheek bone [as beasts that hurt by biting, cannot hurt
when their teeth be broken, or their iaw bones burst in sunder, so the Prophet
shows that his enemies in former time, had been so cast down, that neither
by word nor deed they were 8. Salvation belongs to the Lord, [true it is
that salvation and eternal life belong to God alone, but yet salvation in this
place is used for help and deliverance from dangers, which alone indeed
belongs to God, how great or small soever the mean be, that he works the
same by.] Mend the latter part thus: And let thy blessing be, etc. [For it is
as it were a wish and prayer that David makes for the people, as well as for
himself, here is change of the person, for in the first part of the verse he
spoke in the third and now in the second, understanding by blessings, gods
favor and goodness, and naming the people gods people, notwithstanding their
sins of rebellion and falling away with Absalon, against David his Father.]
Ver. 1. Teaches us that the multitude of our enemies should not 2. Neither yet
their 3. Ministers comfort because 4. Teaches first 5. declares that if God
be on our side Romans 8.31. etc. to the end of the chapter. Ver. 6. True faith
surmounteth all difficulties, and distresses of this life whatsoever. Ver. 7.
God alone is to be called upon in need, because he alone 8. Teaches, not only
to pray for others, as for our selves, but also even for our enemies, as David
does for the rebellious people.

Psalm. 4.
THis Psalm has a Title or inscription, (but thereof we will speak when we
come to the sense) and as it may be divided David makes his prayer to the Lord
in mercy to behold him, and graciously to grant his request: and this is
contrived in the first verse. Secondly he speaks unto his in time to repent,
from ver. 2. to the end of the 5. In the 3. he declares whereupon he staid
himself, and what were the grounds of his assurance, vz. Gods favor and
wonderful blessings, from ver. 6. unto the end of the Psalm.

viz. in music and songs, and skill upon instruments, for which knowledge
sake he was preferred before the Neginoth [here the Geneua note is good,] ver.
1. When I call [ i. when I pray unto thee] righteousness [ i. thou that art the
witness, judge, and defender of mine innocence and vprightnes toward Saul, or
any other] thou have set me at liberty [he comfort himself by former
experience trusting to feel the like favor now] when I was in distress [all
this speech is metaphorical, borrowed of them, which by enemies are driven into
a narow place, out of which they can very hardly escape, q.d. when I was
brought into wonderful dangers, thou have delivered me, and made me glad]
ver. 2. O ye sons of men [hee speaks here unto the nobles and mighty men
of Israel, that had conspired with Absalon, q.d. O ye Princes and great men,
for so the Hebrews, sundry times use these words, Sons of men. See. Psalm
58.1.] My glory into shame [glory here is put for the kingdom which God had
given him. q.d. how long will ye endeavor to kill me, that ye might shamefully
spoil me of my kingdome] loving vanities, and seeking lies [by vanities and
lies, he means every deceitful thing, which falls not out as he would
wish, and their vain councels, and endeavors which draw their hope, q.d. how
long will ye in vain endeavor to turn me out of my kingdom, by vain
devises, and lying imaginations, 3. the Lord has chosen. q.d. I take it not
upon me my self, but the Lord has laid it upon me, he speaks here of
himself in the third person suddenly changing it into the first person] when
I call [ i. When I pray to him as ver. 1. of 4. tremble. q.d.] though ye fear
not me, yet fear God at the least, who has appointed me king.] And sin not
[ vz. against God and me, going forward in your conspiracies and practises]
examine your own hearts upon your beds. [ q.d. think well upon the matter,
and determine rightly upon the matter in the night season, what time men are
wont, not only to give them selves to sleep, but to be free from weighty
causes] and be still. [ i. leave not off only to speak evil of me, but cease
from your 5. Offer the sacrifices of righteousness: [he means such lawful and
holy sacrifices, as the law commanded to be offered for sin, and he
calls them the sacrifices of righteousness because he would have them rightly
and unfeignedly to testify their repentance and change of mind. q.d. O ye
traitors confess your sins, and offer sacrifice to God for the purging
thereof, and put your trust in God alone, and not in your selves, 6. Many [ vz.
of the Israelites that have conspired against me, and other mine enemies] who
will show us any good? [ i. Who will bring to pass, that we may obtain our
desires, and amongst the rest see David cast out of his kingdom and slain:
q.d. We would we might see that] but Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us [these are David's words. q.d. I have many enemies, and some
trust in one thing, and some in an other, I wish only thy favor and cleave
unto that alone. Wherefore show us that: using light of countenance of favor
and good will: speaking of God according to men, who by their countenances
declare love and hatred, sweetly loving, and cheerfully looking upon them whom
they affect, and showing the contrary countenances to others.] ver. 7. He
means vz. wheat and wine, by them meaning all the rest. ver. 8, He notes the
assured safety that he shall be in, being under almighty Gods protection, see
Psalm. 8.5.6. Mend the latter part of this 8. verse thus, when thou Lord alone,

Ver. 1. We learn, that when men unjustly condemn us, 2. Is described man's
nature 3. We learn that whatsoever choice man makes, 4. We are taught to
labor by all the means we can to bring men to repentance. ver. 6. We learn to
prefer Gods favor, 7. We behold what effects an assured persuasion of Gods
love and goodness works: the same we may learn ver. 8. And that God is the
only staff of our strength and standing.

Psalm. 5.
THis Psalm has two parts. 1. to the end of the 7. In the second he
beseeches the Lord to direct him, that 1. to the end of the Psalm. This Psalm
has a title, which has been expounded in ye title of the 4. psalm. saving that
here is an other instrument named then there.

Ver. 1. My words. [ vz. which I power forth before thee, i. the secret prayer
of my heart, made without words uttered.] ver. 2. i. My crying voice by which he
notes his earnestnes and veheme^cy in prayer.] ver. 3. Amend thus: O Lord thou
shall here my voice in ye morning [ q.d. I will cause thee to hear me early in
the morning, for at that time will I call upon thee earnestly] for in the
morning will I direct [ vz. either my self or my prayers, or both] And I will
wait [ vz. upon thee, 4. Evil put for sin. Ver. 5. Foolish put for wicked
and ungodly ones. This is usual in the Scriptures, specially in the Proverbs.
Shall not stand, vz. with good consciences, for otherwise they cannot flee from
his presence Psa. 139. For thou hate [this is spoken of God, according to
man's capacity, 6. Abhor [ i. loath to look upon him] Bloody man ( i. he
that by any means sheddeth man's blood) Verse. 7. I will come ( vz. to serve
thee) into thy house ( i. into the court of thy tabernacle for otherwise it was
not lawful for any, except the Priests, to approach near to the Lord) In the
multitude of thy mercy [ i. Trusting upon the riches of thy goodness and
mercy, and not upon any thing in my self) the latter part of this 7. verse,
amend thus: I will bow my self ( i. I will worship, the outward sign put for
worship) toward the Temple ( viz. having my eyes fixed upon the Tabernacle
where thou do show thy self, for as yet the Temple was not builded:
therefore it must needs be put for the Tabernacle.) Of thy holiness ( i,
either where thine holiness shows it self, or else he understands thereby
holy viz Temple: as you 2.6. Psalm 3.4. Ver. 8. In thy righteousness, or
after some by thy righteousness. ( i. by the way of such righteousness, as
thou teach and allowest) Because of mine enemies, or thus, which I better
allow of, because of those which watch me. ( viz. least they might have an
occasion by my sliding, to blaspheme thy holiness, and that goodness of
Religion which I profess. Make thy way ( viz. which thou have appointed for
me to walk in) plain before my face ( i. make me so to walk in thy way,
that I never turn mine eyes from it: or thus, grant, that that way may seem
right unto me, which thou allowest. q.d. take from me al lets and hindrances,
least I stumble and fall.) verse. 9. For no constancye ( i. There is nothing that
a man may safelye trust to) in their mouth ( viz. whom he had spoken of
before verse. 5.6. putting the word, Mouth, for words uttered with the mouth,
and the instruments and parts thereof: it may also receive this same, no
constancy is in their mouth, ( i. they say and vnsaye, a man cannot tell
where to have them, so variable are they) within they are very corruption ( i.
Their heart and whatsoever is within them, is full of nothing else, but deceit
and craft.) Their throat is an open Sepulcre, (he says, that their throat
is like unto an open Sepulcher: for as an open sepulcher, looks for the
carkase (as a man would say) that it might eat it up, so mine enemies by
their fair speech, shoot at nothing else, but that alluring me unto them,
they may verse. 10. Let them fall from their councels ( i. let them dislike
that, which they had counseled and purposed before] cast them out [ vz. either
from thy self, or from the inheritance of thy children] verse. 11. Cover thou
them [ i. defend them and keep i. that fear thy majesty, and unfeignedly
profess thy religion] verse. 12. Bless [put for 1.5.6. put for such as strive
to righteousness, and are so accounted, though not so in deed of themselves, but
by means of another, vz. Jesus Christ.

Ver. 1. Moses and Anna, the mother of Samuel. verse. 2. 3. Teaches that we
should break our sleeps in the morning, to the end we might pray to the Lord.
verse. 4. Teaches yt seeing 5. In verse. 6. are comprehended judgments against
the 7. Teaches yt we may not appear before God, in the trust of our own
merits, but of his mercies only: also that with reverence we should repair to
the places of Gods service, and reverently also there behave our selves. verse.
8. 9. Is a lively description 10. We learn 11. We learn that the faithful 12.
We learn

Psalm 6.
1 THis Psalm consists of three principal parts. 1. to the end of the 4.
In the second he sets out 5. to the end of the 7. In the third he does not 8
to the end of the Psalm.

This Psalm has a title, as sundry others have, 4. and therefore look back
to that, saving that he adds here upon ye eight tune, which was a tune well
known among the Jews, and was sung with a very clear and high voice, see 1.
Chron. 15.21. verse. 1. Anger and wrath when he corrects them, and this verse.
is shortly uttered, something seeming as it were to want, which is an ordinary
matter, to those that are diseased. Add therefore this, neither chastise me in
thy wrath, vz. least I should Iere. 10.24. ver. 2. I am weak [ vz. with my
sickness. q.d. I am wonderfully weakened through my sickness, but restore me my
former forces] my bones are vexed. [ i. full of grief and ache, by the abating
of my flesh through sickness and by continual lying] 3. Will thou delay [ vz.
to send help and reliefe] verse. 4. return [ q.d. as it seemed to me, thou
have departed away from me, but now return at the length] deliver my soul.
[ vz. from present death, as may appear in the next verse. following, using
also the word soul, which is a part of man 5. in death [ i. among dead bodies]
there is no remembrance of thee [because the body has nothing without the
soule] in the i. what dead body put into the grave shall praise thee [ q.d.
none shall or can.] Verse 6. I faint rather then I fainted, because all the rest
is read in the present tense, meaning by fainting not only a long use of his
mourning, but a wearisomnes, yea a consuming and wearing away with the use
thereof. I cause my bed every night to swim, and water my couch [vpon which I
lie in the day time, for ease and refreshing: for that difference I make
between bed and couch,] with my David's mourning, and the bitterness, and
sharpnes of his disease,] verse. 7. mine eye is dimmed [ i. the clearnes, and
good sight it had, is taken from it partly through continual mourning, and
partly through despite, or freting and wrath, rather [which he carried toward
his enemies that rejoiced at 8. Depart from me etc. [ q.d. You may now go your
way for that which you looked for, vz. my death, you shall i. Graciously granted
me that which with tears I asked of him.] verse. 9. 10. Is here red as a
prophecy, or fortelling of the ruin of his enemies: others read it as a wish
and a prayer against his enemies: thus, let al mine enemies etc. There is no
hardness in it in respect of the sense: they shall be turned back [as those that
have suffered a repulse,

Ver. 1. Teaches us, to run unto the Lord by prayer to prevent his judgments.
ver. 2. Teaches us to do that, but yet always having recourse to his mercy
only: it teaches such, that the more we are afflicted, the more need we have
to come to God, specially if we be touched in soul or conscience, as verse. 3.
verse. 8.9. expresses Gods readiness in yielding to the supplications of his
servants. verse. 10. contains judgments against the wicked and ungodly.

Psalm 7.
THis Psalm consists principally of three parts. 1. to the end of the 5. In
the second he prays against 6. unto the end of the 10. In the 3. he
pronounces Gods judgments against 11. to the end of the Psalm.

The title of this Psalm, is, Shigaion of David, David sung according to the
tune of an ordinary song, the beginning whereof was Shigaion which is also in
use with us, to have latter songs song according to the tune of other songs
made before them] concerning the words [I take it to be more large then
accusation, and that it is to be stretched to deeds practiced against him, for
this is usual among the Hebrews by words to understand deeds, also Cushe,
some take it for Saul, I rather think, that he means some stranger of
Ethiopia, for Cushe, is the Hebrewe name for Ethiopia] whom Saul had gotten to
his court and made great account of, yea so much that he rebuked him, as it
were in his own stock and family, which he means by these words, The sone
of Iemini: which man, for hatred against David, and flattery toward Saul, both
falsely accused him, and villanously practiced all manner of mischief against
him. verse. 2. Least he 1.] Devour my soul [ i. Me my self, see Psalm 3.2.
Psalm. 6.4.] Like a Lion [ i. cruelty and subtlety, as Job. 39.1.2. Psalm.
10.9. His cruelty also being noted by tearing him in pieces, and his subtilty,
in taking him at such a time, as there is none to succor him. ver. 3. This
thing, [ vz. wherewith i. the affecting of the kingdom, see Psalm. 131. Or the
taking away of Saul's life, from which he was free, as 1. Samuel. 24.5. 2.
Samuel. 26. par totum] any wickedness [ vz. in this behalf wherewith I am
charged, and not otherwise, for David was a sinner: some read it thus, if this
iniquity, having respect to that whereof he was accused: which is good and I
better allow of.] In mine hands [these words may have a double sense, in my
hands: that is in my facts and deeds performed by my hands, or else in my hands
i. in my self, putting a part of man for the whole] verse. 4. evil i. that
seemed friendly unto me, or wished me, or did me any good, yea [ q.d. I have
been so far from that, that I have set him free from danger, yt vexed me, or
after some that did enemy like pursue me. [which I better allow, meaning Saul]
without cause [ i. no cause on my part given to himward, and not in these
words 5. My soul, see verse 2. of this Psalme] tread my life etc. [as a most
vile and contemptible thing,] and lay mine honor in the dust [ i. let him so
put out my glory and honor, that there may be no more remembrance of it, in
the posterity to come: so that honor here is used for the remembrance of his
honor and glory, yea and for himself 6. Arise O Lord in thy wrath [ i. show
thy self angry against this people,] and lift up thy self [ i. show thy
self high and mightie] against, or after some, because of the rage of mine
enemies, according to ye double reading there is a double sense: If you take
the first reading, the mening is this: show thy self mighty in beating down
the rage and cruel attempts of mine enemies. If you take the latter, then this
is the meaning: let the cruelties and rages of mine enemies, move thee to
defend me by thy might: q.d. if thou lay not to thy hand, I shall utterly be
destroyed: and this latter I do approve.] and awake for me [ i. not only be
careful, but take pains on my behalf, by bringing me to the kingdom that thou
have promised me] 7. He notes what good shall come by the overthrow of his
enemies, and the establishing of him in the kingdom: vz. yt the whole land
shall stand about him with reverence at his justice, as the people do judges,
when they are to pronounce a sentence] return on high [hee alludeth to the
place, wherein judges were wont to sit to give sentence, and was higher then
where the people stood: q.d. thou have seemed to come down from the bench as
it were, and to have no care of judgment, but go up once again, 8. The Lord
shall judge, or after some, judges, all comes to one purpose: for the
Prophets drift is here, to lay down this as a preamble, that seeing ye Lord
either shall or does judge, it would please him amongst other causes to take
knowledge of his] according to my righteousness [ vz. in this cause and behalf,
see verse 3.4. of this Psalm.] that is in q.d. so pronounce and give
sentence.] verse. 9. correct thus, Oh let the malice of the wicked [ i. that
mischief that the wicked have divised and intended] fail, and never come to
any effect or purpose] that thou may stablish the righteous [because the
overthrow of the one is the strengthening of ye other] even as thou O just God,
art the trier of the hearts and reins, [he puts these two words for
thoughts and affections or lusts. q.d. thou alone searchest and see men's
hearts and inward thoughts: which seeing it belongs unto thee alone, I doubt
not but thou see what difference there is between me 10. My defense is in
God [ q.d. I trust for help from 11. must be amended thus, God I say the just
judge [ q.d. upon him alone do I hang that is just in all his iudgements] yea
the strong God that troubles the^ every day. [ i. lays continually some
judgment or other upon the wicked, to see whether by that means they will come
12. and 13. is diversely read, and according thereto, has diverse senses: if we
take it as it is here, then it has this meaning, except he turn [ i. except
that wicked person, whether it were Saul or any other it skilleth not much,
unless we take it thus, that under one the Prophet minds to note many,
except I say he or they turn ( i. alter their purpose and repent them of
their evil) he ( i. the enemy or else God: if you refer it to the enemy, he
means that he has prepared him all the weapons that possibly he could to hurt
David: if you refer it to God, then he means by these weapons, that Gods
judgments are ready to prevent the wicked from doing their mischief, which I
rather allow of, because it is said verse 13. Immanuel reads it, then thus it
must be understand and read: if he ( vz. the wicked and ungodly) be not
converted ( i. changed from his purpose and amended, he may whet his sword, he
may bend his bow and direct it ( vz. as though he did aim to hit) and getting
unto himself deadlye weapons, he may prepare arrows for the persecutors ( i.
those that with him do persecute me. ver. 14. Behold ( q.d. notwithstanding
all this) he shall travail with i. to work that which he has devised) for he
has conceived ( vz. in his understanding) mischief ( vz. against me) but he
shall bring forth a lie) i. such a thing as shall deceive him of his expectation
and hope, which he does more particulerly and plainly declare in the next
verse) Ver. 15. by which and the 16. he notes that all 17. has this meaning
(q.d. Propheta) i. his faithful keeping and performing of promises deserves,
but rather notes the cause that God has given to praise him for: and by name
in this verse, he means the excellent power and majesty of God, which then
appears, when he overthrows his enemies, and delivers his own. ver. 1.
Trust and confidence in God, 2. describes the cruel and subtle nature 3.
Shows that many of Gods children may stand 4. Teaches, that we should
overcome evil with well doing. ver. 6. Shows that we may 8: Teaches, that
when men will not judge rightly: we may by prayer defer 9. that we should 10.
Teaches 1. that we ought to hang upon God: 2. the favor and love he bears
toward the^, that sincerely fear him. ver. 11. Shows that God will not the
death of sinners, in that he uses so many means to bring them to 12. and 13.
Declare what mischievous minds the wicked carry toward the godly, and what
means they will work to accomplish 14.15.16. Show ye god shall overthrow al
their purposes and practices: so that good cause we have to hang upon him, and
little 17. Teaches us to thank God either for the destruction of the wicked,
or the deliverance of the good.

Psalm 8
4. to the end of the Psalm. And this is the second part thereof.

The title of this Psalm has been expounded before, al saving this word
Gittith: which I take to be instruments, the custody whereof was committed, to
Obed Edom the Gittith, and to his family or kindred that came of 2. Samuel.
6.10.11.] ver. 1. name, put for power and majesty as Psalm. 7.17. q.d. O Lord
how great does the whole earth show thy power to be] which have set thy glory
above the heavens. [ q.d. not only the earth, but the heavens also declare thy
glory, as Psalm. 19.1. Yea he means further by these speeches, that though
gods glory appear in heaven and earth: yet notwithstanding he is infinite in
majesty and glory, because 2. Have thou ordained strength [ i. thou have
strongly established [ vz. thy providence and power. q.d. besides the earth and
the heavens, we have very infants preachers of thy power and goodness and so
does our savior understand it. Mat. 12.16.] Because of thine enemies [ i. thou
have done this, that they thereby might be confounded] that thou might still
the enemy. [ i. stop his mouth in such sort, that he should have nothing to
say,] and the auenger [he that reuengeth his own cause, and leaves not
vengeance to the Lord, to whom alone it belongs. Romans 12.19. Who by their
facts shows that they are persuaded that God cares not for men's matters, or
else would they never so violently 3. The heavens are called gods, both because
he made them, and also because he governs there, and they are as it were his
dwelling place] the work of thy fingers [ i. which thou thy self have most
exactly and perfectly made] the moon and the stars. [Hee particularly
recites some of the heavenly creatures] which thou have ordained [ vz. to be
4. That thou art mindful of him [ vz. to show favor and love toward him]
or the son of man [ i. his posterity, here he speaks generally of all,
comparing man with the rest of the creatures: see Eccle. 1.3.4.5.6.7.] that
thou should visit him [ i. have regard and consideration of him.] ver. 5.
For thou Heb. 2.6. expounds or translateth in thus. Thou have made him a
little inferior to the Angels: both in this place, and in that of the Hebrews
the meaning is, that the Lord gave unto men in this life, a certain angelical
and heavenly excellencie] and crowned him [ i. Thou have decked him as it were
with a crowne] with glory and worship [some refer this to the mind and
reasonable soul of a man, by which he does not only differ from beasts,
but draws nigh to the heavenly nature: I do not only stretch it so far,
but understand thereby also, the dominion and Lordshippe that the Lord has
given to him over all his creatures, which follows. ver. 6. In the works [
i. over the i. which thou thy self have made] all things under his feet [ i.
made the^ subject unto him] this was true in Adam by creation, it is verified
also in our savior, as may appear, Heb. 2. We lost it by Adams fall, but we
have it in part restored again unto us by Christ in our regeneration.] ver. 7.
He does particularise the general time [all] in the 6. verse.] 8. and that
which passes through the paths of the sea. [Hee means Job. 41.23.] The 9.
ver. is expounded ver. 1. of this Psalm.

Ver. 1. The glory of God in his creatures rightly considered, 2. Gods power
and providence seen in his creatures, vz. For the comfort of his children, and
the terror and confusion of the wicked. verse. 4. Serves to humble man, and to
beat 5.6.7.8. Sets forth the graces 1. to thankfulness to the giver, 2. to a
right use of them in himself and for others, 3. the more and more to humble
him, see 1. Corin. 4.7. A word or two touching this matter, let man consider,
what excellency he has lost through Adams fall, and bewail his misery: and
let him on the other side well weigh, the grace bestowed upon him in Christ,
and be joyful and thankful for mercy: knowing this, that if the creatures
be not now subjected unto us, it is by reason of the body and relickes of
sin, which yet remain in us: and that therefore, if we would have a conquest
over the creatures, we must begin first to get a victory upon sin, or else
we shall never profit that way, if any man will object and say, that many
creatures are subdued to many people that are without a god in the world, and
which notwithstanding remain in their sin: I answer that Gods dispensing in
mercy with our iniquity, or other men's, is no impeachment to the truth of this
doctrine, nay rather it should the more further us, not only in thankfulness to
him for his goodness, but in valiancy, and courage to combat against iniquity,
and that unto blood, because we have in mercy without any striving or blow
stricken on our side, half a victory, as it were gotten unto us: the rest no
doubt he will graciously supply, that has begun this, specially if there be a
willing mind: but all this belongs, to the faithful, who are in deed heirs
of the world, and to none other.

Psalm. 9.
1. to the end of the 5. In the second he scorneth his enemies, declaring God
to be just in punishing the wicked, and delivering his own children. From
ver. 6. to 10. In the third he exhorts others to praise the Lord, for his
justice toward the good, and bad, making a particular prayer, that he might be
delivered from the hands of his enemies. From ver. 11. 14. In the 4. and last
part, he shows Gods judgment upon the wicked, and his favor to the
faithful, praying the Lord to rise up against the ungodly. From ver. 15. to the
end of the Psalm.

Muth labben, which I take to be the beginning 1. I will speak of [ i. declare
abroad, and publish] al [ i. a very great number, as Psalm. 3.7.] ver. 2. In
thee: or for thee [ q.d. for the victory and other goodnesses that thou have
given me, I will sing forth thy praise] I will sing praise to thy name. [ i. I
will praise thy power and majesty: Name is used here, as Psalm. 8.1.9.] O most
high [God is so called, because he is higher then al things or 3. Are turned
back [ i. are discomfited] they shall fall and perish at thy presence. [ q.d.
They shall not be able to stand before thee, 4. For thou have etc. [In the third
verse he showed one reason, why he would praise the Lord, vz. because his
enemies were confounded: now in this verse he shows an other, vz. because
God maintained his right and just cause] thou art set on the throne [ vz. to 5.
Heathen, put for the Philistines, or some other enemies of Gods people, and he
said that God did rebuke them, [ i. with his terrible countenance, or word so
cast the^ down, that they were easily destroied] thou have destroyed the wicked
[ i. some one notorious wicked man among them, or other, that was their
captain and ring leader, as Goliath was amongst the Philistines: for the word
wicked is of the singular number, though we can not so easily discern it in
our tongue,] Thou have put out, [ i. destroyed and cast down to the ground]
their name. [ i. Their power, authority, glory, and what so ever was excellent
in them, and he means this of those people, that come out to war against
gods people, who notwithstanding their force were overthrown and destroyed.]
ver. 6. Must be q.d. is it come to pass, as you supposed, nay the contrary is
fallen out, which he notes in the next words of this verse] their memorial
is perished with them. [ i. both them selves are destroyed, and all remembrance
of them, is vanished away from amongst men. Ver. 7. But q.d. though men fail,
yet he remains sure] shall sit, or after some which I rather allow,
indureth [Meaning that he is eternal, and shall never decay, as the enemies
doe] he has prepared his throne for judgment. [ q.d. he is always ready to
execute justice, putting the throne whereupon he sits, for justice, and
upright judgment pronounced 8. Mend thus, that he may judge. [ i. That he may
perform whatsoever he has iudged] the world. [ i. All the people of the
world] in righteousness. [ i. Vprightly] and the people with equity. [This is
a repetition, expounding as it were that which went before.] ver. 10. and they
that know thy name. [ i. Such as have had experience of thy mercy, and power]
have not failed them [ vz. of that thou promisedst, and they hoped for] that
seek thee. [ vz. unfeignedly, and from a good heart.] 11. Which dwells in
Sion. [These words make me think, that this Psalm was not made presently
upon the slaughter of Goliath: because the arc was not then, nor long time
after, brought in to Sion, but that it was made upon some other particular
victory, gotten after David was king, and after he had brought the Arc to
Sion. where God is said to dwell, not that God is tied to any place, but
because that there was the most manifest and often testimonies of his residence
shewed] ver. 12. Amend thus. For he that requires slaughter. [ i. He that
lets not murder escape free, but is a revenger of the same, because he is a
most just iudge] remembers them. [ i. The poor and afflicted, which are
spoken of 9. and follow presently in this verse.] Ver. 13. Have mercy upon me,
O Lord. [ q.d. These are the words of the poor that God forgets not,
speaking that in the person of one, that appertained to many, and was no doubt
practiced by them: and here is the change of number which makes the place
more hard from the gates of death [ i. from most present and assured 14. Gates,
put here for publicly and openly. Job. 29.7. For gate in the scripture
signifies a place before the gate of a city, into which ye people were wont to
come, where also the judges did sit to minister iustice] of the daughter of
Sion. [Daughter put for the city or town as Joshua. 15.45.] 15. Knit to the
former thus, saying the heathen etc. As though this should be the matter that
he would publish to the praise and glory of God: and in this verse, by
heathen, he understands the Philistines, or some other people, as Moabites,
Ammonites, and such like, that bordered upon Judea, using two metaphors, to
express their overthrow: the first taken from hunters, who dig pits to take
wolves, and other wild beasts in: the 16. Is known [ i. makes himself
known, though men many times regard not his iudgments] the wicked [see ver.
5. Or else expound it thus, that under one he means all, which he expresses
in the next verse, the word wicked there, being 17. Is read by some, as a wish
or a prayer against the wicked, which I better allow of] into hell: again
which I take to be the better, meaning the overthrow that their enemies had
sustained and their destruction that way, though the 18. He means that God
will never forget them, that are afflicted and in misery. ver. 19. Let not man
prevail [ vz. against thee and thine, least he wax proud above measure, he
puts man for multitudes of men and for all that is of excellency, power,
and strength in him. 20. Puts in fear [ i. strike a fear of thy judgments
into the] but me^ [ i. frail, weak, and of no strength or countenance.

1. Teaches, that God must be praised for his benefits, and that, not 4. God
always defends his children and their just causes: also how corrupt soever
man is in judgment, 6. We may sometimes merrily taunt gods enemies and ours, it
teaches also the utter ^^ne of the wicked, 5. was noted. ver. 9. Is full of
comfort for all those, that are in any manner of affliction or trouble. ver.
10. shows what hope the faithful shall have in God: and on the other side,
what grace and favor 13. God helps his children in the greatest distresses
15. God in his just judgment ouertaketh the wicked in their own devises, as
7.15. The sun is declared also. ver. 16. ver. 17.18. Declare gods judgments
20. declares, that unless God bridle men, and strike them down, they will
grow to a marvelous height of pride.

Psalm. 10.
THis Psalm has two parts. 1. to the end of the second. In the second he
prays earnestly against them, desiring the 12. to the end. This Psalm. has no
title. Ver. 1. vz. From us, which we gather, because thou show not thy self
favorable unto vs] the latter part of that verse mend thus, in due time even
in afflictions [ i. in the times wherein we are very much afflicted] ver. 2.
The wicked, see Psa. 9.16.] i. being puffed up with the pride of his heart] the
poor [ i. he that is afflicted, and in misery. Psalm. 9.18.] Let them be taken
[the Prophet changes number] that they have imagined [ vz. against other] ver.
3. i. not only wishes well to himself, but praises and commends himself
in his covetousness, and other wickednes] he [ i. the wicked man generally
covetous or otherwise] verse. 4. seeks not for God [ i. q.d. the wicked ones
call not upon God: the reason is, because they think always this, God
regards not men's matters, and therefore they will do whatsoever pleases
them, see Psalm. 41.1.] ver. 5. His ways [ i. his purpose and trade of life]
always [ i. what times i. flourish wonderfully in this life] thy judgments. [
i. Thy plagues and punishments, [that thou layest upon the vngodly] are high
above his sight [ i. he thinks not upon them, neither considers thereof
deeply, [because they are above his reach, as he esteemeth] much less does
he feel them] therefore defieth he [ i. he is puffed up into such pride,
that he regards not his enemies, though never so mighty or many.] ver. 6.
He i. he persuades himself within himselfe] see Psalm. 14.1. I shall never
be moved [ i. I shall never fall, from the state and dignity wherein I am,
meaning that he should live very long, and so long as he lived, never be hurt
as it were, or sustain any loss.] ver. 7. His mouth [ i. i. in his heart,
which is under his tongue, i. beneath his tongue, as it is placed in the body]
is mischief [ vz. against others. q.d. in his heart he imagines how to work
mischief to others.] ver. 8. in the valleies [ i. in places, where there is no
great resort of people.] vz. to oppress or murder him. [ q.d. he prieth and
9. and 10. He sets out the secret councels, that the wicked use to take the
godly by. See for the Lions disposition Job. 36.1.2. draws him into his net:
it is a metaphor, taken from foulers, who use closly to lay their nets and 10.
He croucheth and boweth. [ i. The ungodly spares no pain to his own body
that he may work mischief, Yea he counterfatteth and pretends humility,
but all is hypocrisy.] i. Great number, and multitudes as it were.] ver. 11.
In his heart see ver. 6. Of this Psam, he notes in this verse what makes the
wicked vz. A false persuasion that they have of God.] ver. 12. Arise, [ vz. to
help the oppressed, as Psalm. 12.5.] lift up thine hand. [ i. declare thy
power, in striking thine enemies,] forget not the poor. [ q.d. show that thou
art not forgetful of them: [For in deed he is not forgetful of them, though
it so seem to vs] which thing the wicked persuade 11. ver. 13. contemn God:
See ver. 3. of this Psalm. Thou will not regard [ vz. their sins committed
against thee and 14. Mischief and wrong, [ vz. which the ungodly have done to
thy children.] That thou may take it into thy hands. [Not only to judge
between right and wrong, but also to punish those wicked persons with thy
power.] Himself [ i. His life, and al his causes he commends to thee.] For
thou art the helper [this is a reason why the afflicted flees to God.] Of the
fatherles [ i. of those that are void of man's help. See Job. 29.12. Hosea.
14.3.] 15. break thou his army [ i. al his power and force, and whatsoever he
has to execute it by.] Search his wickedness. [ q.d. call him to account for his
sinnes] and thou shall find none. [ vz. To answer thee. He means that if the
ungodly be sifted, the giltines of his own ungodliness, will make him to flee
his presence] and the judgment of God will so overthrow him, that he shall no
where appear, neither his place any more be known.] ver. 16. He 17. q.d.
confirm them more and more in the truth of thy promises, and dispose their
hearts to the embracing thereof] bend thine ear [ i. diligently hearken and
yield to the prayers of thy 86.1.] ver. 18. To judge. [ i. To revenge and set
free] the fatherles and poor, [See ver. 14. Of this Psalm.] That earthly man. [
i. man not only dwelling in the earth, but also made of earth] cause to fear
no more. [ i. Be no more a cause of terror and fear to thy servants.]

1. Teaches, that gods children are wonderfully assaulted, when they feel not
gods present help. ver. 1.2. etc. Till you come to the end of the 11. ver.]
the holy ghost does so diligently set out the wickeds nature, not that the
godly should fear them. For all the mischief they can imagine or perform
but to teach the Godly the more earnestly therefore to come to God by prayer,
that they may avoid these dangers, and the more carefully to look to their
steps, that they be not overtaken with these wickednesses. Verse 12. Teaches
us to pray unto God in the midst of ye confusions 13.14. 17. shows that

Psalm 11.
THis Psalm has two parts. 1. to the end of the third. In the second 4. to
the end of this Psalm.

The title of this Psalm is expounded Psalm 4. Ver. 1. i. to me a part put
for the whole] Fly [not to, as in the Geneua Texte] but out of your mountain
[Mountaynes are sure places to lodge in from the force of adversaries, but here
the enemies tell David, and those that were with him, that they shall not
prevail to keep them safe, and therefore it were better for them to get them
away. It may be that by Mountayn he means the land of Judea, because it was
full of Mountains, q.d. Get you out of Judea, but the other me thinks is
more simple, see 1. Samuel from chap. 21. to the 27.] as a bird [ vz which
sees the Fowlers snare, and therefore flies away swiftly: q.d. You are
forewarned of a danger, therefore get you away with all speed. Ver. 2. Bend
their bow [ i. prepare and gather vz. at me, and those that are with me] which
are upright in heart [ i. which mean no mischief or hurt to them or any of
them.] Ver. 3. For the vz. of the places wherein David and his, might trust]
are cast down [he speaks of that that shall be, as though it were already
done, for the certainty of it in man's iudgement] what has the righteous done,
[ q.d. have I and the people with me committed, that these mischiefs should be
meant against us, and our lives so sought for. Ver. 4. Holy palace [ i. Heaven,
as may appear by that which follows, the Lords throne is in i. he is a
heavenly Judge to revenge these outrages done upon the earth against me and
mine] His eyes will consider, or after some, do consider [eyes attributed to
God, after the manner of men, meaning that he beholds, vz. all things that the
wicked do, and the godly suffer] His eylids [ i. his eyes, it is either
Metonomya, the things containing, for the things contained, or Synecdoche, one
part for an other, or a part of the eye for the whole eye] Children of men [
i. men of what state and condition soever they be, q.d. this one thing
comfort me, that though GOD be in heaven, yet from thence he does without
respect of persons behold all things done by men upon the earth, and namely
how ungodly the wicked are against 5. Will, or does try [ vz. by afflictions
and calamities, that he might make him pure gold unto him selfe] the
righteous, [ i. righteous men, one number for another] does his soul hate [ i.
he can at no hand away with him, and this is spoken of GOD according to man,
not that this affection of hate, is or ever can be in God, 6. he ( i. God who
has all power in himself) shall rain snares [ i. shall swiftlye send
multitude of troubles, where the ungodly shall be caught, and overwhelmed as
it were with snares] Fire and Brimstone, etc. [ i. most horrible judgments)
this is the portion of their Cup ( q.d. this is that, that they must make
sure account to have, even as if it were a portion of meat and drink allowed
for a day to live withal, which was a usual custom, amongst the people of
the East, and namely 7. For, or rather But, which I allow of, as better,
correcting this verse with the former] loves righteousness ( i. righteous
men, the quality being put for the person) his countenance ( i. he himself, a
part of God (which is spoken also according to man) put for the whole) does
behold ( vz. with favor and goodness, for otherwise he does behold also the
wicked, as ver. 4. of this Psalm, and Psalm, 14.2.

1. Teaches to trust in God how great soever their dangers be: also 2.
notes, the cruelty and subtilty of the ungodly against the good people.) Ver.
3. shows that the children of God are many times persecuted, without 4.
Sets out Gods wonderful providence and government who beholds all things,
and before whose 5. Teaches two things, first that God will sundry times
afflicte his own, secondlye that he cannot away 6.7. show the judgments of
God against the wicked, and his goodness toward the righteous, with the unlikely
reward of the one, and the other.

Psalm 12
1. to the end of the 4. In the second he assures himself and the rest of
the faithful, that God will punish the wicked, notwithstanding their great
pride, and defend his own, even for his truths sake, from ver. 5. to the end of
the Psalm.

In the title upon the eight time, see Psalm 6. in the Title, 1. For there is
not [this is a reason of his prayer) a godly man [he means that the number
of good people was very small] from among the children of men [ i. from among
men themselves, as Psalm 11.4. meaning also by this true children of men,
those that presently lived, and not speaking of the time past or to come.] ver.
2. They speak deceitfullye, etc. q.d. No man may trust one another words]
with their lips [ i. with their words and speech, putting some of the
instruments wherewith the words are uttered, for the words themselves, see
Psalm 10.7.] and speak with a double heart [ i. they speak one thing and
think another, and this may serve to explane somewhat that has been said upon
Psalm 10. ver. 7. when the tongue is put for the heart, for the Prophet means
they had one heart in their body, and an other in their mouth.] ver. 3. Is a
prayer against his enemies, 4. which have said, yea and are accustomed to say)
with our tongue i. with our speech uttered by the tongue) will we prevail (
vz. against David and those that take his part, I suppose he means the
cunning flatterers of Saules Court) our lips are our own ( i. we are not
only apt and meet to speak with finenesse and eloquence, when we our selves
list, but we will speak indeed) who is Lord over us ( vz. to hinder us by his
authority from using our speech as we lust, so wickedly do these men speak
against God] Ver. 5. oppression of ye needy ( vz. wherewith they are afflicted
on every side) I vz. to help them, q.d. although hitherto I have seemed to
wink at the ungodly, in their sins, yet I will now arise, and yt presently,
being moved thereto by the calamity that I see the poor to be afflicted
withall] and will set at liberty him, etc. [ i I will set him free from the
violence and subtilty of the wicked] whom the wicked has snared [ vz. by his
craft and deceit] ver. 6. The words [ i. the promises, q.d. doubt not of that
5. for they are Gods words, and therefore shall be performed] are pure [ i.
simple and plain without any guile or falshood] as the silver [an excellent
similitude, meaning thus much in effect, as the gold and silver that has bin
most tried does never deceive men, so shall Gods promises never deceive, because
the truth and goodness of the^ has bin continually tried by others, and
graciously performed by god himself, tried in a furnace of ye earth (he means
in a furnace made of ye best and meetest earth to try metals withal) seven fold
[ i. sundry times, a certain number put for an uncertain, as Prouer. 6.31.
Psalm. 119.164.] ver. 7. is read by some as a prayer, q.d. having this promis
of thin, I make my prayer to thee) for thou, which I allow better of) from this
generation ( i. from the me^ that live in this age, see ver. 1. of this Psalm.
Ver. 8. The wicked walk on every side [ vz. seeking occasion to destroy the
good and godly people] Immanuel reads the last part of this verse thus: as
though drunkenness were exalted [ i. They run up and down to do mischief,
as though they were drunk, and drunkenness had made them mad: aptly comparing
them, whose minds are carried violentlye to commit wickedness, to drunken men]
amongst the sons of men [ i. amongst men, as verse 1. of this Psalm, and
Psalm 11.4.] or else this Text may stand thus expounded: when they [ i. the
wicked men] are exalted [ i. preferred and set up aloft] it is a shame for the
sons of men [ i. other men are not only contemned, that happily deserve
greater preferment, but are vilely handled by such men so exalted, and set up
on high.

1. Teaches us in the midst of all confusions to have recourse to God by
prayer for the amendment thereof: it teaches also that gods number is the
smallest: and is a good place against them that press multitude. ver. 2. 15.2.
ver. 3.4. Teaches us not only to 5. Expresses Gods readiness to help his,
and how forcible in his sight, the earnest prayers of his children are. ver. 6.
Teaches us to 7. Teaches Gods providence and protection over his children, if
we read it Geneua text, or else, that we ought to pray for gods favor toward
them, if we read it as Immanuel does. ver. 8. sets out both the diligence
and the rage that the wicked use in performing their mischief.

Psalm 13.
3. to the end of the Psalm.

1. he speaks as men many times do, who if they be not succored when they
themselves would, they think they are forgotten] for ever [ q.d. What will thou never think upon me? So hardly was his faith assaulted to yield to
distrust in God,] hide thy face [which thing angry persons are wont to do,
q.d. How long will thou show thy self angry toward me? See Psalm 10.1. Psa.
4.6. or else face may 2. Take council within my self [ i. how long shall I
be tossed and tumbled with diversity of councels and purposes, 3. Hear me, [
i. my prayers] lighten my eyes [whiche are waxed dim with trouble, Psalm. 6.7.
he means that he would gladlye have the Lord to drive afflictions from him]
that I sleep not in death [ i. that I do not certainly die, for it is usual
in scripture by sleep to understand death, as 1. Corinthians. 11.30. 1. Thessa.
4.14.15. and by doubling as it were the word, to note the certainty of the
thing, Genesis 2.17. Ver. 4. He shows a double reason to induce god q.d. least
otherwise mine enemies should not only every day more than other wax proud,
but also have an occasion to blaspheme thee, as though thou were weak, and not
able to help.] Ver. 5. i. in that deliverance, which thou shalt work for me
Psalm 3.8.] I will sing to the Lord [ i. I will declare my self thankful
for his benefits and goodness.

Ver. 1. Let us learn that how sharp soever our conflicts be, 3. Let us
learn by prayer to draw nigh unto 4. Notes the nature of the wicked two manner
of ways, vz. the more they prevail, the more insolent they are: the other,
that they will wonderfully insult over those that are afflicted. ver. 5.
Teaches us to make Gods

Psalm 14.
THis Psalm has three parts, In the first, 1.3.6. In the second he declares
that God sits 2.4. In the third he shows Gods judgment upon the ungodly,
and his 5.7.

The title of this Psalm is expounded before, Psalm. 4. Ver. 1. i. the wicked
man, how wise soever he be in natural wit] has said in his heart [ i. is of
this persuasion in his mind, see for this 1. Mark. 2.6.7.8.] there is no God [
vz. that cares for men's matters here on earth, see Psalm 10.4.] they [ i. the
ungodly, changing the number from the singular to the plurall] have corrupted
[ vz. their own ways, turning the light of knowledge which they had, into
darkenesse] Ver. 2. would understand [ i. endeavored i. serve him, and take
delight and pleasure in his service and religio^] Ver. 3. All [ i. the greatest
number here, but in Paul Romans 3. it is put for the way [ vz. of right and
goodness, which God had prescribed them to walk in] they are all corrupt ( i.
full of filth and stinch, it is a metaphor taken from 4. do not all, etc.
know [ q.d. their own conscience does sometimes, though they quench it
again, tell them of their crueltie] as they eat bread [ i. any kind of food
or nourishment: noting thereby not only their ravening and devouring, but the
pleasure that the ungodly take in it] they call not upon the Lord [ i. They
neglect all Gods religion and service, calling upon the Lord, or prayer being
Genesis 4.26. 2. Timoth. 2.19.] ver. 5. in the generation of the just [ i. amongst
just men, favoring their causes, and graciously delivering them.] ver. 6. the
Lord is his trust ( i. because he has his whole trust and confidence in God
only, and he uses counsel for all goodness in the poor, as holy purposes, and
careful pursuings thereof, faith, 7. give salvation ( i. deliverance from all
greefes in this life, as Psalm. 13.5. Psalm 3.8. and eternal glory after this
life is once ended) unto Israel (i. unto the faithful people) out of Sion (i.
out of heaven, the place of Gods presence earthly, put for the Heavens, see
Psalm 2.6. Psalm 9.11. turns the captiuitye of his people ( i. when the
Lord changes their bondage for freedome] then Jacob shall rejoice, and
Israel shall be glad [by these two names of the Patriarche, who was faithful,
attributed unto the rest of the people, he understands all the faithful and
true Israelites indeed.

1. Not only notes the fountain of sin, but shows how far the devil and
sin prevail in man's heart, that they make men utterly to forget 2. declares
that God has an eye to men's doings upon the earth. Ver. 4. shows that the
wicked sin many times against knowledge, and the light of their own conscience.
Ver. 5. contains a judgment 6. notes a vile sin of the ungodly, deryding
and 7. that we should pray for the whole church: and rejoice for the benefits
that God bestows upon it.

Psalm 15
2. but particularlye to avoid slaundering, lying, inconstancye, vsurye,
briberye, etc. verse 3.4.5. which done, he shows what blessings belong to
those that walk after that sort.

1. In thy Tabernacle [ i. in the visible Church q.d. who shall be accounted a
visible member thereof] In thine holy mountain [ i. in Heaven, Psalm 3.4.]
Ver. 2. He that walks uprightly (it is usual in scripture to have walking
put for conversation, it is as much then ( q.d. he that leads an upright
life) works righteousness ( i. does the thing that is right) in his heart [as
he has it in his heart, so he makes his mouth and tongue the instruments to
expres it] Ver. 3. He that 2. meaning that a man must do no manner of iniurye
whatsoeuer] to his neighbor [I take this word Neighbor to be used here
generallye, for any, as Exodus 20. in the tenth commandment, Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors house, etc. as also our Savior seems to mean, Luke
10.29, 30. etc.] nor receaueth a false report, etc. [we must not only not
slander our selves, but we must not admit a slander brought unto us by
other.] Ver. 4. In whose eyes [ i. before whom and in whose i. a wicked man]
is contemned [ i. a little or nothing set by and regarded] he that swears [
i. he that has with an oath promised a thing lawfull] to his own hinderance [
i. and yet it falls out in the end to be hurtful to him in respect of his
wealth and substaunce] and cha^geth not [ vz. that which he has promised
though he lose never so much by it.] ver. 5. he that gives not his monye to
usury [ i. he that without any vz. of them which have an unjust cause: he
seems to speak specially of Iudges] against the innocent [ i. that thereby
the innocents cause may be overthrown, and judgment, though wrongfullye
pronounced against him] shall never be moved [ i. he shall be steadfastly rooted
in the church in this life, and after the course of this life ended, be made a
citizen for ever of the Heavenly Jerusalem.

Ver. 2. Teaches that godly life and upright dealing, be very excellent
fruits: it teaches also unfeignedly to speak the truth, touching all men and
matters, as time and occasion shall serve. ver. 3. Teaches us to avoid 4.
Teaches that we should not much regard ungodly men, 5. Teaches that usury
and bribery 1. Tim. 4.8.

Psalm 16.
THis Psalm consists of two principal parts. In the f^^ste is 1. to the end
of the 6. In the second, he yields thanks to the Lord, for the abundance
of goodness and mercy, which he continuallye received from him, from verse 7.
to the end of the Psalm.

Michtan of David, and differs from any Title we have had yet, I take it to
be, q.d. a Psalm that David made to be sung after a certain tune named
Michtan, commonly known amongst the Iewishe songs for the excellency of it,
whereupon also it should seem to be named 2. thou art my Lord [ i. I
acknowledge none for Lord unto me, but thee alone] my weldoing extends not to
thee [ i. thou art nothing profited thereby, in respect of thy self, see Job ]
Ver. 3. That are in the earth [ i. that are living amongst men, whereby we may
learn also, that it cannot profit them that are departed] and to the excellent
[ vz. in virtue and goodnesse] all my delight is in them 15.4) Ver. 4.
Offerings of blood [the Prophet alludeth as I take it to the idolatrous manner
of the Gentiles, who made their children pass through the fire to their idols:
which he calls offerings of blood, or bloody offerings, because man's blood was
shed therein] make mention of their names with my lips, see Exo. 23.13. Ephesians.
5.3. noting by this manner of speech, his detestation of idols and Idolatry,
understanding by lips 5. The Lord is the portion of my inheritance [he had
said before, he would have no fellowship with the Idolaters, neither idols, now
he shows to whom he will cleave, vz. to the Lord, who is a portion even as
it were of inheritance allotted unto him, and one that fills him with
goodness, for so I take the word Cup to be used here, see Psalm. 23.5.] thou
shall mayntaine my lot [ q.d. thou alone, for in thee do I trust, and not in
my self or any other, for if it were in us to be vpholden, it could not be
mayntayned] shall mayntaine [ i. uphold and keep sure] my lot ( i. the portion
which is come to me by lot as it were: he puts lot for the thing that fell
to him by lot, as in the next verse, he puts the word lines, for that that
fell to him by the measuring of the lines or cords. Touching lots and Deuteronomy.
32.9. Proverb. 16.33.) ver. 6. in pleasant places [both for pleasure and
profite] a fair heritage [ i. fine and excellent, understanding by these
speeches, portion, inheritance, cup, lines, heritage, etc. all one thing as
it were: vz. assurance of Gods goodness toward him, for 7. Has given me
council [ i. instructed and taught me what was right, vz. by his holy spirit)
my reins [ i. my inward affections, as Psalm 7.9. reformed by the mighty
working of Gods spirit] teach me [ vz. to think upon nothing as it were but
goodnesse] in the night [when commonly we are prone to evil, and which ^ason
the ungodly use as most convenient to commit their mischief in, Job
24.13.15.16, etc,] Verse 8. I have set the Lord always before me, q.d. I
sieldome or never took any thing in hand, but I beheld the Lord, that I
might do all things according to his good pleasure] he is at my right hand [
i. he is present with me, and that on the better side, as it were, to hold me
up that I slip not] I shall not slide [ i. perish and fall away for ever,
because I have so good a prop to leave upon.] Ver. 9. Does in many 10. Soul
put for body as appears Leuit. 21.2. David speaks of himself in an assured
hope that he had of the general resurrection. And Acts. 2.25.26.27. also acts
13.35. it is applied to our Savior Christ, to prove him to be a conqueror of
death, to be truly and indeed risen again, because death could not keep him
down, and to be the author of that resurrection that all the godly shall have,
in which respect also he is called the first fruits of them that slept, 1. Cor.
15.20.] Ver. 11. The path of life [ i. the way, whereby in i. with thee, and
where thou thy self art in goodness and mercy] and at thy right hand, see
Mat. 25.33. pleasures (he uses the plural number to note the great plenty and
abundance of them for evermore ( i. that shall never perish.

Ver. 1. Roman. 10.14. Ver. 2. A notable place against merits and confidence in
3. Teaches that we must do well to the household of faith and that while they
live with us, for otherwise it will not profit them: it teaches also that we
should delighte in the company of Gods saints. Ver. 4. 5.6. declare Gods mercy
and goodness to his children. Ver. 7. Teaches thankfulness to God, 8.
shows that we should do nothing but always as in Gods presence: and that
if the Lord be on our side, we need not care who be against us. ver. 10. is a
plain testimony of the resurrection. ver. 11. Teaches us unfeignedly to
embrace the Lord, in whom is

Psalm 17
1. to the end of the eight. Secondly he describes the cruelty, pride, and
other wickednesses of the ungodly, as reasons to move the Lord to pity his
case, from verse 9. to the end of the Psalm.

1. cry put for vehemente and earnest prayer] of lips unfeigned, or as
Immanuel reads, without deceitful lips, both comes to one sense as I take
it, vz. the Prophet means that his prayers were uttered with words (for
lips are here put for words expressed with the lippes] void of faigning or
subtlety: q. d. My words truly expressed my grief, and were indeed the
liuelye image of my 2. My sentence [ i. the sentence and judgment that thou
shall pronounce on my behalfe] for thy presence [ i. from thee: q.d. make it
now manifest] and let thine eyes behold equity [ i. declare now by thy
judgments, that thou regardest equity, which I, yea with many wicked men have
doubted of, because thou have ben so long 3. Proved and visited [ i. examined
and sifted] mine heart [ i. my inward thoughts which are in the hart] in the
night [in which God is wont to stir up, and to put men in mind of his will,
after that they are called from other affairs, see Job. 4.3.14. Job 33.15.16.)
thou have tried me ( vz. by many tribulations, and is a metaphor taken from
trial of metals by fire) and foundest nothing ( vz. evil in me, or spoken by
me, to wit against Saul, or some other his enemies, in which respect he called
his cause a righteous cause, verse 1. of this Psalm. The latter part of this
verse correct thus: that which I think does not go beyond my mouth: or as it
is in Hebrew. I thought, add here, and my thought (for verbes in the Hebrew
tongue do many times comprehend their verbal nownes) passed not my mouth [
q.d. there was no difference between my mouth and my heart: I did without
deceit utter with my mouth, what I had 4. concerning the works of men [ i.
which men are wont to do) add here for the more plain sense, this, is that I
have to saye] by the words of thy lips [ i by the words, or through the
words that thou have uttered and made manifest] I kept me [ i. through goodness
and strength from thee I did abstayne] from the paths [ i. from the behauiours,
conditions i. that he uses.] ver. 5. Stay, some read staying, but I rather like
of the first, the Prophet making a prayer for himself, considering his own
weakness, rather then noting the manner howe] My steps [ i. my thoughts,
words, and deedes] in thy paths [ i. in those ways and manners which thou have
prescribed by thy word] that my feet [he goes out in his metaphor,
understanding by feet, his conversation inward, and outward] slide not ( i. go
not astray, or slip awry from the rule of righteousness that thou have
prescribed.) ver. 6. I have called ( i. prayde unto) 7. he proceeds in his
prayer, using the word mercies 16.11. and he calls them maruailous because
they so seem, as in deed they are also unto men] Savior [ i. deliverer from
dangers, 1. Timoth. 4.10. he means that God does use to save them yt put
their trust in him, to save the^ I say, from such as resist thy right hand [ i.
from such as set themselves, though in vain, against thy majesty and power,
Immanuel reads this verse otherwise, but I like this sense as well as his)
Ver. 8. As the apple of i. most dearly and tenderly, as men are wont to do
the apples of their eye, who cannot abide that any thing should touch it, hide
me under the shadow of thy wings: an other similitude to the same purpose,
q.d. deliver me with such diligence from present peril, as the hens are wont
to do their young ones under their wings, when the Kite houereth over them, or
lies in wait for them. The scripture in sundry places attributes wings to
God, that thereby it might declare Gods great care to save and defend the godly:
such a similitude Christ uses Math. 23.37.] Ver. 9. for my soul [ i. for vz.
that they might take it away from me] ver. 10. They are enclosed i. they are
monstrously fat, by reason they live in all plesures and delights, q.d. They
abound in all delights, and therefore they spare not to speak proudly, which
he adds in this verse, describing in this, and so on in ye rest, the manners
of the ungodly.] Ver. 11. They [ i. the ungodly and i. me David and the people
yt are with me) in our steps [ i. in our iornies, or as we were iornying, q.
d. In all our iornying they have most diligently observed me and mine, and many
times have in the mean while beset us about] they have set their eyes ( i. they
are earnestly and diligently bent, as one that fixes his eyes upon one, to
mark him, or to know him agayne] to bring down [ vz. me and mine] to the
ground [ i. to destroy and overthrow us as towns and castles rased and made
even with the ground.] ver. 12. He notes first their cruelty under these
words (greedye of 10.9. Ver, 13. Up Lord ( q.d. thou have deferred a long
while, up vz. of the crueltye he purposes: and he speaks of one as the
principal, meaning notwithstanding others joined with him in ye mischiefe] cast
him down [ vz. to the ground, see ver. 11. in these words, to bring down to
the grounde] deliver my soul [ i. my life, as before ver. 9. of this Psalme]
with thy sword i. with thy might and power, see Job 40.14.] Ver. 14. from men
[ vz. deliver my soul, as ver. 13.] by thine hands ( i. by thy power and
might, using hand here, as he used the word sword before] from men [ad these
words, I mean, for the more plain sence] of the world [ i. worldly men all
whose delighte is in things of this life] who have their portion in this life
(and not in the other which shall be revealed to Gods sons) whose bellies [
i. whose desires and appetites] thou fillest with thy hidden treasures [ i.
give them great abundaunce of outward benefits and blessings, which are
called Gods hidden treasures, not because they are not seen, but because they
are not so well perceived and used of the ungodly, as were meete] their
children [this serves to amplify the abundance of outward blessings that ye
wicked have, having not only more then enough for themselves, but to leave
mountains of money as it were to their posterity, whether sons, daughters,
neuewes, or any other 15. in righteousness [ i. having a good and righteous
cause on my side, Psalm 4.1. and Gods face is here taken for a more plain and
manifest knowledge of Gods mercy, then he had set before, in the time of his
affliction] with thine image [ i. with so much of thy goodness and grace, as it
shall please thee in my deliverance to make known unto me.

1. Teaches earnestnes in prayer. ver. 3. that we should keep our selves 4.
Gods word is a notable mean to keep us from wickedness. ver. 5. we shall
fall, unless the Lord uphold us. ver. 6. He that prays to God, must be well
7. If God help us not, the enemies 10. abundance of wealth and pleasure,
makes 11. sets out ye mischievous 12. expresses their cruelty and craft.
ver. 13. 14. shows that outward blessings are as well bestowed upon the
wicked as the good, and that therefore there is no certain judgments to be
given 15. Howsoever wicked men set their mind on worldly wealth, that our
delight and pleasure should be only in the Lord and his favor.

Psalm 18.
3. In the first part the Prophet promises thanks giving for benefits
received, and describes Gods wrath and power 1. to the end of the 15. In the
second part he recites sundry particular graces bestowed upon him, and
excellent matters that the Lord enabled him to perform, from ver. 16. to the
end of the 45. In the third part he yields praise and thanks unto the Lord,
promising never to forget these benefits, and to publish them continually
amongst the people, from verse 46. to the end of the Psalm.

The title is easy: these words, which spoke, put for, which sung, i. at the
time] from the hand [ i. from the violent power and raging might, and so it is
used immediately following] of al his enemies [he means of the mighty, and of
the greatest number of the^, for David was never without enemies] this title
summarily co^prehendeth ye occasion of the making of this Psalm. ver. 2. My
rock [this speech calling God a rock, is a metaphor taken Mat. 24.16.] my
fortress [another metaphor, meaning that in and by God he might be kept as
safely, yea more safely from his enemies, then in or by the strongest hold in
the world] my shield [another Metaphor, because he did as a shield ouershadow
and defend him] the horn of my salvation [saluation here is put for
deliverance, and horn put for strength or strong meats. Another metaphor: for
even as horned beasts do defend themselves with their horns, so David used
Gods help and defense as it were a horn.] Ver. 3. worthy to be praised [ vz.
of me and all others, and that 4. Sorrows of death [ i. most i. great multituds
either of wicked devises, or of wicked me^, for so I take wickedness to be used
here] ver. 5. The sorrows of ye grave [ i. such extreme sorrows as i. deadly
snares, in which if I had been taken, I had died for it] overtake me [ i.
almost seized upon me, being in a most extreme danger, for almost being catched
therein, q.d. there was but a little between me and death.] ver. 6. Out i.
either out of heaven, or else from between the Cherubins, for the temple
material was not builded in David's time, but in his son Solomon's: see 1.
Samuel. 1.9.] and my cry [ vz. which I made, or poured forth] ver. 7. Then [ i.
after that the Lord had heard my praiers] the earth trembled i. there was a
great earthquake: which that he might the better express, he uses two words,
signifying almost one thing, q.d. God showed by wonders and signs, that my
prayer came up to him] the foundations also of the mountains ( q.d. this
earthquake was not only upon the upper parts of the earth, but even the roots
as it were of the mountains which lie deep within the ground, were shaken also,
by which he means nothing else but a most vehement earthquake] because he was
angry [ vz. against my enemies, and that for the injury they offered me.] Ver.
8. Is uttered by the way of a q.d. God was so greatly angry, that it seemed
that smoke, etc. see such a manner of speech attributed to Leuiatha^, Job.
41.11.12.] Ver. 9. he bowed i. he made them seem so low as though they had
touched men's heads, which is then done, when ye clouds are thick and darke]
and came down (this also is spoken after the manner of men. Now God is said to
come down, when by evident tokens he shows his wrath in confounding ye
wicked as Genesis 9.7.) and darkness ( i. dark clouds, which are called
darkness, because they seem to bring darkness with them, he means nothing
else by these manner of speeches, but that God by a very great tempest declared
himself to be present to defend his servant, and to strike his enemies) 10.
upon Cherub. (the singular for the plural, Cherubines, of which you may read
Genesis 3.24. they are certain Angels, which readilye execute Gods will: whereby
and by his riding upon them, the Prophet notes nothing else, but Gods swiftnes
in coming to succor him: which also he notes 11. Darkness put for thick
clouds as before ver. 9.) and his pauilion round about him (understand was)
even darkness of waters ( i. clouds full of rain or water, which are called
darkness of waters, because they have a certain darkish color as the waters
also have and clouds of the air [ i. more bright and shining clouds, q.d.
God puts both the one kind of clouds and the other between himself and the
wicked, as 12. at the brightness of his presence ( q.d. when God begins to
show his majesty) his clouds passed [ i. were as a man would say, made more
light, or else did cleave as it were in sunder, and they are called his
clouds, because they are governed and directed at his appointment, see Job.
37.15.] Haylestones and coals of fire [ vz. came from 8.] ver. 13 In the
heaven [ i. in the firmament, or in that region of the air, where the thunder
is, as Philosophers deeme] and the highest gave his voice ( i. thundered, see
Psalm 29.3, etc. so that it is nothing but a repetition of yt which went
before) haylestones and coals of fire [vnderstand he gave: q.d. he sent 14.
Then [ i. after al this] he sent out his arrows [ i. after some his lightning,
but I rather take it for all the afflictions that God laid upon the ungodly,
see Psalm. 38.2] and scattered the^ [ i. destroyed them, for then an army is
wont to perish, when ye order thereof 15. and the channels of waters were seen
( i. the depths where the waters run, or as you would say, the bottom of the
sea] the foundations of the world [he alludeth to the miracle showed at the red
sea, for then were the springs of the waters (which he calls the foundations
of the earth, by reason of their wonderful depth) discovered: so that a man
might as it were see from whence so many sloudes had their beginning] at thy
rebuking [ i. when thou seemedst to rebuke them, turning their courses contrary
to those which they had before] at the blasting of the breath of thy nostrels
[this is spoken according to man: q.d. there was no need that thou should
command them, when thou did but breath upon the^, it was enough 16. He
has sent down [ vz. his power, or his Angels, for God did use to deliver his
children by Angels] from above (from heaven) and taken me ( i. delivered me,
vz. out of many dangers, he has drawn me [ q.d. even by violence, maugre
the heads and hearts of mine enimies] out of many waters [ i. not only many but
very great dangers, see Psa. 69.1.2. Psalm. 124.4.] Ver. 17. from my strong
enemy [he means enemies, 18. They prevented me [ vz. by i. when I was in
calamity and affliction] was my stay [ i. not only on whom I did lean upon and
trust to, but my helper delivering me from them] ver. 19. into a large place
(he means by this his liberty, and i. prevented me with his holy favor, and
that with out any merit or desert of mine at all) ver. 20. Righteousness, put
for righteous 41.) pureness of my hands [ i. integrity and soundnes of my
deeds, hands put for deeds and works, by which the works and deeds are
performed, note that David in this verse sets out his good cause against
them that slaundered him (not speaking of his whole life, giving the^ to
understand, that he attempted nothing but right and well, and that according to
Gods commandments.] Verse 21. The ways of the Lord 1. Laws and
commandments as verse 22. of this Psalm: and by keeping he means a
careful mind, and a certain ability also that GOD has given him to
perform the same] and did not wickedly [he means not of some simple fall, for
we read of diverse before he came to the kingdom, and after, but of reuolting
and falling away, yt does quite and clean alienate and turn 22. before me [ i.
in my sight, vz. that I might not commit any thing against the^] and I did not
cast away ( vz. as though I would not obey them, but rather unfeignedly embraced
them.) Ver. 23. I was vprighte i. I walked uprightly before God, touching this
matter of the kingdom) and have kept me (see verse 21) from my wickedness (
i. from any wickedness he might do, which he calls his wickedness,
because naturally he had it in him, though it burst not forth.) Ver. 24. see
verse 20. q.d. as he himself, vz. God, sees it sufficiently) ver. 25. with
the i. with them that unfeignedly love and profess godliness) thou will show
thy self godly ( i. merciful and gracious, for the word termed here godly, is
taken from a word that signifies merciful and liberal: q.d. thou will deal
graciously with the good people, declaring thy self such a one toward the^,
as thou have bin toward me.) ver. 26. thou will show thy self froward ( i.
their Pro. 3.34.) ver. 27. i. deliver) ye pore people ( i. ye afflicted ones)
and wilt cast down ( i. overthrow and bring to naught) ye proud looks ( i. the
proud people, for man's pride bewraieth it self in ye eyes and countenance, and
therefore he put eyes for men, one 28. Thou will light [ i. bring to a better
state, and make to shine forth] my candle [ i. my prosperity, which seemed to
be as it were a ca^dle put out] the Lord will lighten my darkness [ i. bring
my adversity into prosperity, for the scriptures use to understand by darkness
adversity, and by 29. By thee [ i. by the power or strength from thee] over vz.
of a city, ye Geneua note is good] ver. 30. The way of God [ i. either the
manner yt he uses toward his children, whom he never cease to aid: or Gods
way else is put for works, q.d. they are so sound that nothing can be blamed
in the^: whatsoever God does, he does trustily, and justly performs
whatsoever he promises) the word of the lord ( i. his promises) is tried in
the fire ( i. is most perfect and pure: q.d. as metal tried by fire has no
dross, so has Gods word no falsehood or corruption in it, see Psalm. 12.6. he
is a shield i. he saves and keeps them as a shield does soldiers) ver. 31.
For who is, etc. ( q.d. none, and by consequent seeing none can deliver but he
alone, none must be trusted in but he alone, such epiphonemata or acclamations
are usual to the^ 32. girdeth me with strength ( i. makes me strong and able,
so that I have strength in my loins, and round about me, even as it were a
girdle) and makes my way upright ( i. makes the order of my life unblameable,
teaching me an upright and a holy kind of life: or else he makes every thing
that I take in hand, to prosper: this latter I rather 33. He makes my feet
like Hinds feet ( i. not only swift, if I have occasion by flight to provide
for my self, or to pursue my enemies flying before me, but stedy also, if I
come into any dangerous places) and sets me upon mine high places ( i.
places of sure defense appointed for me to defend me from the violence and rage
of my enemies.) 34. He teaches my hands to fight ( i. if I have to do with
mine enemies in the field, he teaches me singular skill in war, to defend my
self, and to hurt my Foe) so that a Bow of brass ( q.d. yea he gives me so
great strength, that a bow of brass or steel) is broken with mine arms ( i.
with the power and strength that he gives me, or else, with mine arms
indeed, 35. The Shield of thy salvation ( i. a help for my deliverance,
Shield being put for help and defense, because men help and defend
themselves with Shieldes, and salvation for deliverance, as often times before
we have had these words so used: his meaning is that God did defend him
against dangers with his aid and help, as it were with a shield, that cannot
be pierced, and set him free also by the same aid out of dangers and troubles)
thy right hand ( i. thy might and power) has stayde me ( vz. from sliding or
falling: it is a metaphorical speech taken from man's manners, who reach them
that are sliding, their right hand, i. the best means they have to stay them
from it) to increase ( vz. in honors, credit, wealth, and all manner of 36. Thou
have enlarged my steps ( i. thou have brought to pas that whether soever I go
I go into a large and ample place, yt is freely and without fear, yea I have
a plain and ready way. This is often in the Psalms, by straitnes to signify
affliction and danger, and by enlarging to signify liberty and freedom: he
means then, that God had set him at liberty, straightened the way before
him, and drawn him out of extreme danger and dispaire] under me [ i. either
for me, or else as I go: he means that he did now tread as it were upon a
sure ground] mine heels [ i. my feet: a part of the feet being put for the
feet.] ver. 37. I have pursued mine enemies [ vz. vz. from pursuing them in
the field. ver. 38. Wounded them [ i. mine enemies as ver. 37.] that they were
vz. because their wounds were so deadly] they are fallen under my feet [ i.
they are brought in subjection unto me, as ver. 44. This phrase also is so
used Psalm. 8.6.] Ver. 39. Thou have girded me with strength 32. and it is a
reason why he so mightily prevailed against his enemies] to battle [ i.
against I was to fight, or even in ye very time of the battle: whatsoever it
be, his meaning is, that he was apted and fitted by God to that purpose] that
rose against me [ vz. to annoy and hurt me, and were in deed rebels. ver. 40.
Thou have given me the necks [ i. as some of ye Jews 41. They i. the wicked
ones my enemies] cried [ i. seemed to pray earnestly, but not of a true
affection] but there was none to save [ i. to deliver, vz. them out of their
fear and paine] even unto the Lord [ vz. did they cry and call, but he
answered them not [ i. he regarded not their dissembling prayers.] ver. 42. i.
after that the Lord had rejected them and their prayers, see ver. 7. of this
Psalm] did beat them, as small as the dust before the wind [ i. I did
wonderfully overthrow them in respect of their number, which I think the word
small imports: and these of them that remains were as light, as the dust,
which we know to be very small and light] I did tread them flat [ i. I did
quite and clean subdue them, as the clay in the streets [ i. and made no more
account of them, then men do of dirt under their feet.] ver. 43. From Saul, or
the rest of the Israelites, that took part with him against David: or else
that God appeased the seditions and rebellions of his people, that lifted up
them selves against him under Absolon, and other rebels, and this I rather
incline to] thou have made me the head [ i. the ruler and governor, for so
head is many times used in Scripture] of the heathen [as the Ammonites,
Moabites, etc. which dwelt round about him: he means, that by Gods aid, he
had brought under those people that before had discomfited Israel, and made
them now tributaries to him] whom I have not known [ i. whom I have not
allowed of, or else, with whom I have had no familiarity, or acquaintance,
because the law forbad it with some people, as with the Amalichits. Exodus
17.14. 44. As soon as they hear [ vz. of me, and the fame of my name.] and
the latter part mend thus: strangers shall lyingly yield themselves to me, [ i.
they shall in hypocrisy pretend 45. Shall shrink away [ vz. from their
companions and friendes] and fear [ i. shall be stricken with feare] in their
privy chambers [ i. in the places of their greatest ease and assurance.] ver.
46. Let the Lord live [not as though God could at any i. praised] my strength
[see ver. 2. of this Psalme] of my salvation [ i. deliverance from distresses
in this life, and the giver of eternal life. see Psalm. 3.8.] be i. lifted up
on high and praised [ vz. amongst men.] ver. 47. To avenge me [ vz. on his and
mine enemies, and this David speaks as a 48. Have set me up [ vz. in a high
and sure place, safe and sound] that rose against me, [See verse 39. of this
Psalme] cruel man he means some one who was as it were standard bearer to
the 49. Among the nations [ i. openly and before them] and as it were in the
midst of them, so must it be understood if it be referred to David. It may
appear also, by Romans 15.9. that it is a Prophecy of Christ's kingdom, and of
the calling of the Gentiles: and so has this sense: I, that is Christ, but yet
in the person of my faithful people, but chiefly ministers, whom I have
ordained, for the calling of the Gentiles, will praise thee among the Gentiles:
so that if you refer it to David, it is a promise, if to Christ, and the
calling of them Gentiles, it is a prophecy] among the nations, or gentiles [so
the Jews used to call all the people of 50. Gives he [ i. God] unto his king
[he speaks of himself in the third person, calling himself Gods king,
because he was by the Lord anointed to, and through his power established in
the kingdome] to his anointed [he puts the sign of his mauguration into
the office of the king, for the king: for Kings, Priests, and Prophets were
anointed by the law [whereby also the Prophet shows that he thrust not in
himself into that high and great office] for ever. [If you refer this to
David and his posterity, ever is here taken for a long time: but if you refer
it to Christ, and those that appertain to him, it is put for all eternity.

1. Teaches, that it is no sclender love, that we owe to the Lord. ver. 2.
Teaches us to hang upon him alone. ver. 3. Prayer is the mean, to set us free
from the force of our enemies. ver. 4.5. Declare the manifold and 6. Teaches
us in our dstresses to call upon God only: and shows also how graciously
the Lord accepts the supplications of his servant. In that description of
Gods wrath, which is comprehended from ver. 7. to the end of the 15. there is
comprehended matter of comfort to the godly, that they are under his protection
that has all creatures at his commandment for their good, and matter of
terror to the wicked, because they set them selves against him that does
whatsoever pleases him in heaven and in earth. ver. 16.17. 18. Sets out the
malice of the wicked, who spy their times ( vz. the day of adversity) wherein
they may do most mischief. ver. 19. Gods favor the only cause of all goodness
to us ward. ver. 21.22. Teaches, 25.26. Express Gods goodness toward 27. God
is nigh unto his own, though their miseries be never so many, it shows also
Gods judgments against the wicked, and namely the proud persons: it teaches
also, to carry lowlines and courtesy, even in our countenances. ver. 28.
Teaches 29. Declares that our sufficiency to do any thing is of God. ver.
30.31. is a notable commendation of gods excellent majesty, and of the truth,
and certainty of his holy word. ver. 32.33.34.35.36. Teach that God is all in
all for us, either 37.38.39. Ver. 41. The Lord hears not the wicked men's
prayers. ver. 43. Teaches that God exalts whom it pleases him, and
inlargeth the bounds of kingdoms. ver. 46. Teaches thanksgiving for mercies
received. ver. 48. 49. We should never cease praising of God, yea and that
before many, for his infinite benefits. ver. 50. God is gracious to the godly,
and their godly posterity to

Psalm. 19.
THis Psalm has three principal parts. 1. to the end of the sixth verse, In
the 2. he commends 7. to the end of the 11. In the third, he earnestly
prays to be delivered 12. to the end of the Psalm.

The title of this Psalm. is expounded before, see Psalm. 4. ver. 1. i. not only
the heavens themselves, and the most excellent workmanship thereof, but all the
things therein contained, as Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. Declare [ i. plainly
set out, even as it were by speach] and the firmament [ i. the sky, and all that which in our judgment ouerspreadeth us, whereof also in the Hebrew
tongue, it has the name.] The work of his hands [ i. that he has made them,
and not so only, but the excellency thereof also meet for so excellent a
workman, to whom hands are attributed for man's weakness sake. 2. Day unto day [
i. one day that goes before, declares the same, to the day following, and
that not so much for the days sake, as that man by a continual revolution and
success of the days, man might be instructed of the power and providence of
almighty God: and by day he means in this place the day artificial, which
after some is counted from the Sun rising to the Sun setting, or after
other some consists of xii. houres] utters [ i. after their manner speaketh]
the same [ i. Gods glory and power] and night unto night [he speaks of the
artificial night: which words also prove that vz. touching Gods power and
goodness.] ver. 3. There is no speech nor language [ vz. in them, meaning as men
use to speak, and yet notwithstanding we understand them as it were speaking
unto us. see Romans 1.20. Psalm. 8.1.3.] mend the latter part of this verse thus,
and yet not without these [ i. speech or language] is their voice understood
[he means that though they 4. Their line [ i. the stretching out of the
heavens, as a line] is gone forth through all the earth [ i. has extended
from one end of the world to another] and their words [he speaks as though
they did speak] into the ends of the world [ i. unto the furthest part thereof.
q.d. there is no part of the world nor people, but it is ouercouered with this
excellent workmanship: which serves very well for the Prophets purpose, to
amplify Gods goodness and power] in them [ i. in the heavens, or i. God] set a
tabernacle [ i. appointed as it were a dwelling place] ver. 5. Which [ vz.
sun comes forth vz. at the first, arising or appearing thereof above our
Horizon] as a bridegroom out of his chamber. [This is one similitude, serving
to express the glory and excellency of the sun: he resembles the hyding of
the sun out of our sight, to a secret chamber prepared for the bridegroom
till it please him, to make him self known, and the appearing of the Sun,
to the bridegroom coming out of his chamber in his glory and excellency] and
rejoices like a mighty man, to run his race. [This is an other similitude,
to express the swiftnes of the sun which also is noted in the beginning of
ver. 6. q.d. when the sun is once up, he goes his race, with a ready,
cheerful, and joyful mind, even as a mighty strong man, runs with a
cheerful, noble, and courageous mind, to the gole or mark set before him in
the race, resembling the Sun to a mighty strong man, and the swift passage
thereof round about the earth, to the speedy have of one that runs in a race,
noting also by the word rejoicing, the readiness and willingness, that this dumb
creature has [as it were] to perform the course set it of God.] ver. 6. His
going out [ i. the rising of i. from the East, where the sun rises and his
compass is unto the ends of the same: by the ends of the heavens, he
understands the four quarters of the world, and all their parts. q.d. the
race of the sun, which he does so swiftly perform, is from the East unto ye
west, in which course notwithstanding he visits ye South and the North] and
none, or else nothing [hee means men, or any thing else whatsoever. For there
is nothing, to which the heat of the sun comes not, I mean that quickening
heat which all things feel, not only the roots of trees, plants, etc. But
al things else, that be hidden as it were in the bowels of the earth, as gold,
water, stones, etc.] ver. 7. Is perfect [ vz. nothing may be added Proverb.
30.6.] Converting [ i. turning from evil to good] the soul [ i. the whole man
inward and outward: but yet he speaks of the inward because that reformation,
and amendment, must first be begun there] the testimony [ i. the law, using
an other term tending to the same end, and it is called testimony, because
it witnesses to us, what God would have us to doe] is sure [ i. true and can
never fail and gives wisdom unto the simple [ i. it makes them, that have
little or no skill at all in knowledge many times to exceed their teachers, see
Psalm. 119.99. and by wisdom he means not worldly wisdom, condemned, Romans
8.6. but the wisdom of the spirit commended there.] ver. 8. The statuts [ i.
the law: an i. void of any injustice or corrupt dealing] the commandment [one
number for an other, vz. the singular, for the plural: an other term put for
the law, because God thereby commands us to ye doing, or leaving undone of
this or that] is pure [ i. free from any corruption whatsoeuer] unto the eyes [
vz. of our minds.] ver. 9. The fear of i. the reverence, religion and service
of God after some: but I take it to be used here for the law, which is called
the fear of the Lord, because it teaches rules and reasons, how and wherefore
he should be feared] is clean [ vz. without any spot or show of euil] and
indureth for ever [ i. is not subject to alteration and change as men's laws
and ordinances are: the perpetuity whereof, teaches us steadfastly to
continue in the same all the days of our life.] The judgments [ i. the law
still, which is called judgments, because it contains, and pronounces
judgments against the breakers thereof: and here is a part of the law put for
the whole: it may also be called judgments, because that thereby he shows
what he judges meet to be done] are truth [and therefore can not be accused
of subtilty or falsehood: and it is more forcible in that he says they are
truth, then if he should say they are true, because that speech notes, that
nothing besides or without them, is truth but mere lying.] ver. 20. Shows
the preciousnes of the law. If we has been oftenest tried: if present use
and pleasure, before honey and the honey 11. made circumspect [ vz. in his
walking, being taught what to do, and what to flee from: and here David
speaks of himself in the third person, yet so that it does apperteine to all
Gods children.] There is great reward [ vz. through Gods mercy, for so does the
word reward import, and 12. Who can understand his faults [ i. know them, as
it were particularly, either for the multitude of the^, or because ignorantly
we commit many things which we take to be no sinnes] secret faults [ i. sins
not only hidden from other men, but from my self by 14. Words of my mouth [
i. the words I shall utter with my mouth] meditation of mine heart [ i. the
things I shall meditate in my heart: he wishes that his thoughts and words might
be such, as might be regarded before God, and answerable to his profession: and
he speaks nothing of deeds and works, because this necessarily follows,
that when the meditations and thoughts of the heart together with the words be
good, then deeds also will be good] redeemer [ vz. through Christ and none
other, speaking here not only of deliverance from dangers, but from sin, and
that which sin brings with it also, vz. eternal death and destruction.

7.8.9.10.11. We learn generally by the excellent commendation of gods law,
reverently to esteem it, and unfeignedly embrace it out of ver. 7. Where it is
called perfect, we have an answer to the papists, that accuse it of some
want, by bringing in upon it their unwritten verities and traditions: and in
these words converting the soul, that ordinarily it is possible, yt any should
repent, and have faith without the hearing of gods word, as Romans 40.17. and in
these words, is sure, there is a doctrine of comfort to the faithful, because
gods will never fail them, and of terror to the wicked, because gods judgments
shall assuredly overtake them, and in these words, gives wisdom unto the
simple, we have not only a notable effect of the law set forth, but an
argument, to convince the papists in this that they accuse ye word of darkness,
as though none could profit by it, but the learned sort. ver. 8. True joy is to
be fet from gods word: as also true light of knowledge and understanding. ver.
9. Notes ye property of gods word, and the exact perfection that is in the
whole and in every part thereof. ver. 10. Teaches in what great estimation, we
ought to have the word, and with what a holy hunger and thirst we should desire
the word. ver. 11. Teaches two things: first that we can never be truly
wise, but by learning gods word, secondly that for our better encouragement to
the doing thereof, the Lord sets great rewards before us, and indeed
graciously in good time gives us the same. ver. 12. Teaches that our sins
are innumerable, secondly that we must pray pardon of them generally, and
particularly, of these, which we have committed either of ignorance or of
knowledge, and yet remember them not. ver. 13. Teaches us to pray against the
power and rule of sin in us. ver. 14. That we should have care and
conscience, over our words and thoughts, that they might be approved before
God.

Psalm. 20.
THis Psalm has specially 2. parts. In the first, 1. to the end of the
fifth. In the second, they do assure themselves of Gods favor, and of 6. to
the end of the Psalm.

The title is expounded before, Psas. 4. ver. 1. hear thee [ i. Iaakob may be
here taken, either for the person of the Patriarth, who worshipped god with
great religion, which God also was present with him in all his afflictions: or
else it may be put for the whole people of Israel, who came of Iaakob: both the
ways are usual in the old and new testament.] ver. 2. From the sanctuary [ i.
from a place in the arc so Sion [this was the place, wherein the arc, which
was a visible token of gods aid and defense was received, he puts the place
and the arc therein contained for ye assured favor and aid of God. Some
understand by sanctuary, heaven, and by Sion ye visible place of god in his
church, what soever it is, the prophet means nothing, but aid and assistance
to be given from god.] ver. 3. Let him remember, Immanuel reads, let him
smell, meaning by yt metaphor, a gracious acceptance of his sacrifices, as
Gene. 8.21. [ vz. With favor graciously accepting] al thine offerings [he
means by offerings, the exercises of religion, joined with them, as confession
of sins, prayer etc. and turn [ vz. by fire as it were sent from heaven.] Thy
burnt offerings into ashes [declaring thereby that he allows thy services as he
did to Aaron, Leuit. 9.24. and to Eliah. 1. king. 18.38.] Ver. 4. According to
thy heart [ i. as thy heart wishes and desireth] all thy i. whatsoever thou
purposest, he means and describes here a king, yt asks nothing, but by the
direction of gods spirit, and what God himself has prescribed,] ver. 5.
Immanuel reads this verse as it were a continuance of i. in that thou sauest,
and deliuerest from dangers, vz. our king: and so have we had salvation sundry
times used before.] And set up the banner [like unto those that triumph after a
victory is gotten, he puts the sign of joy, for ioyfulnes it selfe] in the
name [this word is taken here, as ver. 1. of this Psalme] perform all thy
petitions [ i. do that, that thou have prayed for: and this is a good place to
prove, that by 3. Must be understood prayers also.] ver. 6. Know I [a sudden
change of numbers, speaking in the person of one, thereby to note the unity
and consent of the people to this prayer, as though they had been alone, and
uttered it al with one mouth.] His anointed [that is his King, whom he has
established. See Psalm. 2.2. Psalm. 18.50.] hear him [see ver. 1. of this
Psalme] from his sanctuary [ Immanuel reads from the heavens of his holiness,
meaning from heaven where his holiness dwells which I well like of] of his
right hand [ i. power and strength: this is spoken of God according to man,
because man commonly has most strength in his right hand: and it is called
mighty help, because it is such, as none is able towithstand.] 7. Is a
comparison between the faithful, and the unbelievers: these trust in outward
means of all sorts, for that is understood by chariots and horses, and so
rob God of his glory, the other cleave to, only Gods virtue, power and grace:
(for so is the word name taken, as ver. 1. and 5. 8. Brought down and fallen,
[ vz. notwithstanding all the trust that they had in the outward means: q.d.
they that said they would do al things, by man's means and strength, and
therefore are lifted up in pride and lustines, are notwithstanding all these
imaginations of their own, brought down and fallen, i. lie flat by the fall
they have received, by setting themselves against God] but we are risen, and
stand upright [ q.d. notwithstanding the great miseries and afflictions wherein
we were, we are become strong and mighty, rising up from under the burden 9.
Save Lord [ vz. us and our king, pursuing us continually with thy favor: in
such short kind of speeches, there is great grace in the Hebrewe tongue.] Let
the king hear us. This is diversely read, and according to the several readings
has several sentences. Immanuel reads the king himself will hear us,
applying it to Christ, and the assurednes that the faithful men have, that he
will hear their prayers: othersome take it to be a quick passing from the
second person to the third: q.d. O king, whose office kings in the earth have
in part communicated to them, hearken unto us so often, as we shall seek thine
aid: me thinks that the Geneua text, and note is as plain, as any of these.

1. And so forth, teaches people to pray for their magistrates: it teaches
also that the day of affliction is a notable time to pray in: also, that no
aid is to be had but from God alone. ver. 3. Teaches that kings should be
given to religious exercises. ver. 5. The prosperity of the king, is the
flourishing of the people, and on the other side, the welfare of the people is
the Kings glory. Ver. 6. Teaches those that pray, to have both before and
after their prayer, an assurance of obteyning. ver. 7. Shows that Gods
children must not at any time, trust in any thing save in God alone, whatsoever
the wicked do, whose strength and purposes GOD overthrows. verse. 8.
Declares Gods judgments against the ungodly, and his favor to his children.
verse. 9. Teaches us to use earnest prayer in affliction: for that does he
mean by these terms, in the day that we do call [ vz. upon thee.

Psalm 21
THis Psalm has two principal parts. 1. to the end of the 7. In the second
part he prophecieth of gods great and wonderful 8, to the end of the Psalm.

The title is expounded before Psalm. 4. Ver. 1. vz. which thou shall bestow
upon him, to stand against, and to overcome al his enemies] yea how greatly [
q.d. it can not be expressed in thy salvation [ i. in that deliverance that
thou shall bestow upon him, and his people, giving them victory over their
enemies, and in this verse David speaks of himself in the third person.] ver.
2. i. whatsoever his heart could wish, see Psalm. 20.4.] Have not denied him [
i. have yielded and granted unto him, for by not denying the Hebrews
understand, even as it were performing] the request of his lips [ i.
whatsoever he prayed rightly unto thee for, using in that prayer his lips,
and other instruments natural, whereby the voice is framed.] ver. 3. With
liberal i. with abundance and fulness of all good things, some particulars
whereof, he reckneth in the verses folowing] and did set a crown of pure
gold upon his head [ i. did appoint him to be king most good and glorious:
using setting of the crown upon his head, which is but a sign, as anointing
was, of his entrance into the kingdom, for the full possession and inioying
thereof.] ver. 4. vz. in this short life] a long life [ i. more long then he
desired] for ever and ever [ i. yea not only life in this life but eternal life
also.] ver. 5. His i. the glory that thou have given him and laid upon him] is
great [ i. is very much inlarged] in thy salvation [ i. through or by, the
deliverances and victories, that thou have bestowed upon him] laid upon him
[euen of thine own good will, and in despite of his foes, that would have
hindered him therefrom.] ver. 6. Thou have set him [ i. appointed him] as
blessings [ vz. unto thy people, and i. for a long season, as we have had it
sundry times before.] With ye joy of thy countenance [ i. through the grace and
favor, that as it were with a pleasant countenance, thou have showed him.]
ver. 7. The king trusts [the prophet shows here, the means vz. by hope and
trust in God] he shall not slide [ vz. from the prosperous success of his
affairs and state.] ver. 8. Thy David speaks to God] meaning by hand power,
and also by right hand in this verse he means the same thing] shall find out [
i. overtake and lay hold upon, though thine enemies would think to hide
themselves from it.] ver. 9. Like a fiery oven [he means that God will through
his wrath make them to burn still as a fiery oven does, and so in the end
consume and overthrow them, as an oven continually heat must needs be spoiled,
by which manner of speech he notes two things, first that there shall be no
intermission of plagues and punishments, secondly that these punishments shall
not tend to their bettering but to their confusion, yea to the confusion of
their posterity, as he notes in the next verse] the fire [ vz. sent from
heaven, as upon Sodom and Gomorrah: or else by fire understand most vehement
afflictions, which is usual also in the Scriptures.] 10. Their fruit [ i.
their children and posterity] from the children of men [ i. from amongst men
and their posterity, so that when other men and 11. Against thee [hee means
chiefly God, but with all Gods anointed, in setting themselves against whom,
they set themselves against God.] But they shall not prevail [ vz. in their
mischievous intents and imaginations, for they deal against him, that will
overtake them in their own evil.] ver. 12. And the strings vz. with arrows in
the^, the bow being already bent, see Psalm. 7.12. etc. 13. Be thou exalted, O
Lord, in thy strength [ i. show thy dignity and power in helping the king:
perform some thing that may set out thy might and strength, that we may have
occasion to praise thy power, and justly to say, that thou only art mighty and
powerful.

1. Teaches, wherein kings should specially glory, vz. in Gods strength, and
not in their own. ver. 2.3. etc. Declare not only gods goodness to magistrates,
but teach them, that the more they have received, the more carefully they
should walk in the obedience of his will. ver. 3. Teaches, that God does us
much good before we ask any good thing of him, which expresses his wonderful
mercy. ver. 4. Teaches that God sundry times gives more to his children, then
they demand. ver. 5. Teaches both wherein the true glory of kings and
kingdoms consists, and also from whom it comes. ver. 6. Declares wherein
kings should take their greatest delight and pleasure, vz. in Gods favor, see
Psalm. 4.6.7. Ver. 7. Shows that the way to have kings surely settled in
their seat, is to trust in God only and his mercy. ver. 8. Declares that
none of Gods enemies though they never so closely hide themselves shall escape
Gods power and judgments. ver. 9.10. Declare Gods horrible punishments, upon
the wicked and their posterity, the Lord punishing the sins of ungodly
fathers unto the third and fourth generation. ver. 11. Teaches the pride of
wicked men's hearts, who dare oppose themselves against God: it shows also
that all the counsels and purposes of the wicked shall be frustrate. ver. 12.
Shows that the ungodly shall not escape unpunished. ver. 13. Teaches us by
prayer to commend Gods cause and his own glory into his own hands, which when
he has once made manifest, it teaches us further, to praise him therefore.

Psalm. 22.
IT should appear, that when David made this Psalm, 1. unto the.8. In the
second he prays deliverance, promising himself, and provoking others to
praise the 19. to the end of the Psalm.

Some thing is in this title, which is not in others going before, Aijeleth,
Hashahar, which though some think to be the beginning of some common tune,
according to which this Psalm was song, and may well stand so, whereof somewhat
has been said in the title of Psalm. 7. Yet I take it otherwise, interpreting
the Hebrew words, in or at the dauning of the day, notwithstanding I know some
interpret the^, the hind of the morning, at which time it may appear, that the
priests and Leuits did sing Psalms. see 1. Chron. 9.33. also 1. Chron.
23.29.30. And compare these two places together. ver. 1. My God, my i. from
words that I utter with wonderful outcries, by reason of ye great 2. I cry [ i.
I pray earnestly, both day and night, yea I cease not] but thou hear not [
i. grantest not my petitions, and so forth in the rest of ye 3. But thou art
holy [ vz. in all thy ways and works, remaining always like unto thy self. q.d
though my prayers be not heard, yet thou art good, the fault is in me, and not
in thee.] The praises of Israel [i. the place where ye people of Israel sing
praises unto thee, meaning either Sion, or some other place, 5. Called upon
thee [ i. in faith prayed unto thee, meaning that seeing so often as they
called upon him, and trusted in him they were heard and delivered, he marueiled
much why he calling upon him, 6. But I am a worm [ i. I am accounted as a
thing of no value or price] and not a man [ vz. in ye judgment of ye wicked: he
means by these two speeches, that he was cast down below al men, and as it
were cut off from the number of beasts, so much went they about to debase him]
a shame of men [ i. one whom men are ashamed of to behold] and the contempt of
the people [ i. such a one, as all the people, and the basest amongst them,
contemn and despise. see Job. 30.9.10. etc.] Ver. 7. By making Mat. 27.39.] 8.
Are the words of the wicked: q.d. where is the God upon which he stayed
himselfe] let him save him [ i. deliver him out of our handes] seeing he
loves him [ i. seeing God bears a good will toward him as he says: q.d.
he thinks God loves him, but because he does not deliver him, he loves
him not at all. Satan has no dart more deadly, then this, when he goes about
by himself and his instruments, to spoil us of the hope we have in god,
turning 9. But thou etc. [by benefits past, he assures himself of
deliverance, from dangers present, and in time to come] did draw me out of
the womb [he means that by Gods special power and goodness he was borne]
thou gave me hope [ vz. that thou would nourish and defend me] at my
mothers breasts ( i. when I did suck, and could not 10. I was cast upon thee
( i. committed unto thy providence and protection) from the womb ( i. so soon
as I was borne and came into the world, not denying also but that by his goones
he was preserved continually before) thou art my God ( vz. that do defend
nourish, and succor me.) 11. Be not far etc. ( q.d. seeing I have heretofore
received so many benefits from thee, do not now depart from me, yea I so much
the more earnestly crave thy help and presence now, first because affliction
is nigh, secondly because 12. Many (this word notes the multitude of his
enemies) young (this word notes their lustines and courage) bulls (this word
is well expounded in the Geneua note ( i. are before, and behind, and on every
side) by which we may see that his troubles were great, and almost impossible
for him to escape out of them) mighty (this word notes their force and
power) bulls of Bashan. (This is the name of the country, which did
apperteine to the people of the Jews: and was full of pastures, whereof
mention is made at large Deuteronomy. 3.1.2. etc. And by bulls of Bashan, he means
very fat and mighty ones, such as Bashan did feed, see Deuteronomy. 32.14.) 13. They
gape upon me etc. ( q.d. they come upon me with open mouth to devour me, even
as a devouring and roaring Lion does for his pray. see Amos. 3.4.) ver. 14.
Amend thus, I am powered out like water (he means by this manner of speech,
that he is as it were almost past al recovery, as of whom no more account is to
be made then of water spilt upon the ground) my bones are out of joint (in this
verse he does by large manner of speeches declare the greatness of the fear
and grief he was in as he did before Psa. 6.6.) Mine heart is like wax ( i.
soft and tender) it is molten in the midst of my bowels (he now shows in
what respect his heart is like wax, and by these words he describes 15. My
strength ( i. my natural moisture, whereby life and strength is maintained) is
dried up like a potsheard ( i. is wonderfully decayed, and there is almost no
more moisture left in me then in a potsheard] and my tongue cleaves to my
jaws [ i. I am brought very low and weak, so that I can not wagge my tongue
in my mouth, as it were] into the dust of death [by these words he means the
grave, and the earth of it, which is so called because none are there laid but
dead folks. His purpose is to declare, that through the vehemence of his
afflictions, all hope of his life in a manner was taken away.] ver. 16. For
dogs [before ver. 12.13. He compared his enemies to bulls and i. great
troops and multitudes] they pierced my hands and my feet [this is spoken of
David in respect of the dangers his enemies kept him in, as though he had had
no feet to flee away, nor hands to defend him self: but in Christ it was most
truly performed indeed, as appears. Ioh. 20.25. Where mention is made of
nails.] ver. 17. I may tell al my bones [ i. I am vz. with great pleasure and
joy, whereas if they had any compassion they should pity my case.] ver. 18.
They David, then he means, by garments other things that he possessed, noting
that they dealt with him and his goods, as they that in some victory had goteen
a pray: but if we refer it to Christ, then is it to be understood of his
ordinary apparel and garments in deed, as appears. Ioh. 19.23.24.] And cast
lottes [both to avoid contention, and that every one might know his share and
portion.] ver. 19. Far off [ vz. from 20. My soul [ i. my life, as we i.
from peril of violent and cruel death: understanding by the instrument that the
wicked uses to execute his rage and wrath by, the thing it self.] From the
power of the dog [ i. of mine enemies and wicked men see ver. 16. Of this
Psalm the singular number put 21. Lions mouth. [see ver. 13. of this Psalme]
and answer me [ i. graciously here me and grant my request] from the horns
of the Unicorns [ i. from the present and perilous dangers of mine
adversaries. It is David's manner as sufficiently appears in this Psalm, to
resemble his enemies to beasts. Unicorns are very wild beasts, and as some
write of them, will hardly or not at al be tamed.] ver. 22. Thy name [ i. thy
virtue, power and grace, 20.1.5.7.] Unto my brethren [ i. to the Israelites,
that are of the same nation and religion with me, see Romans 9.3.] In the midst
of the congregation [ i. openly and before thy people assembled to praise
thee.] ver. 23. Seed of Iaakob, Israel, he means the same thing, for Iaakob
was called, Iaakob, and Israel. If you refer it to David's time, then it
belongs to the Jews, If to Christ and his time, then to all the faithful.]
ver 24. The affliction of the poor [ i. the trouble and anguish that he vz. as
men are wont to do, who for lothsomnes as they say, but in nisenes in deed, can
not behold those that are in affliction] i. praied] he heard [ i. accepted him
and his prayers.] ver. ^5. My praise shall be of thee [ i. thou art and shall be
the cause of my foundation of my praises, by reason of the wonderful mercies
that I have received from thee.] In the great congregation [ i. when the
greatest multitude shall meet to praise thee, he notes that he will do it
publicly as before. ver. 22.] My vows [they were wont, when they were in any
danger to vow a peace offering to the Lord, to be performed after their
deliverance out of it, so did Iephte, which was done to testify their
thankful minds, for the benefits receiued] before them [ i. in their sight]
that fear him [ i. worship and serve him, meaning God, of whom he speaks now
in the third person, whereas in the beginning of this verse he 26. The poor
shall eat [he regards the manner that the people had, in banqueting at their
sacrifices of which you may see an example. 1. Sam. 1. In Helkanah, and his
family, in these sacrifices he promises to exerceise his charity toward
his godly brethren, whom he understands here, by poor showing that his
offerings shall be so plentiful, that every one shall be satisfied] they that
seek after the Lord [ vz. of a single heart to serve and worship him] your
heart [he changes the person] shall live for ever [ q.d. the hearts that had
been before, as it were dead through afflictions, shall through manifestation
of Gods grace and goodness be marueilously remoued] 27. is a prophecy of the
calling of the Gentiles. q.d. this grace shall stretch not to the Jews only
but to the Gentiles, who beholding the wonderful works that God has done for
his people, shall come to true religion, which they never tasted of: all the ends
of the world [ i. the people dwelling in the uttermost coasts of the earth,
putting the places containing, for the parts conteined] shall remember
themselves [ vz. how long they have been in blindness and superstition: and
where he speaks of al, he means of a very great nu^ber] and turn vz. from
their dead Idols, as S. Paul. 1. These. 1.9.] Ver. 28. For the kingdom [ q.d.
it can not be but that the gentiles shall come to the Lord, for he that has
the kingdom in his own hand, will draw them to his worship 29. The Prophet
declares that of al states some shall come to worship God with him, and be
partaker of those sacrifices which he would offer to the Lord [by them that be
fat in the earth, he means, the rich and mighty men] shall eat [ vz. of the
sacrifices] and worship [ vz. God by giving him thanks] al they that go down
into the dust [ i. such as are through affliction so humbled, that there
seems to be little odds between them and the grave, in the 15. ver. of this
Psalm he called it dust of death] shall bow before him [ i. serve and worship
him in his sight: the outward sign of worship, put for worship it selfe] even
he that can not quicken his own soul [first mark the changing of the number
from the plural to the singular, next understand by soul life, as before ver.
20. in this Psalm, thirdly by quickening of the soul understand, him that being
at deaths door, as it were, is not able to prolong his life one minute of an
hour: q.d. even those that seem to be as it were dead, and not able to do any
thing for themselves shall through god be restored again, and come to worship
him, with the rest of ye faithful.] ver. 30. their seed [ i. the godlies
posterity] Immanuel reads it, in every generation, meaning that these shall be
always called and counted the seed of God, and a people whom he will always
take care of, and delight in.] ver. 31. They shall come [ i. i. set out, and as
it were from hand to hand deliver ouer] his righteousness ( i. the faithfulness
that he uses in the defense of his, whereof David's deliverance gave certain
proof: for by delivering him out of dangers and violences, he showed himself
just) unto a people that shall be borne ( i. unto their posterity and stock)
because he has done it ( i. declared his righteousness and faithfulness in
delivering and preserving of me.

Ver. 1. Gods children are many times, in their afflictions, 2. God does not
always immediately hear, even the hearty prayers of his servants, ver. 3.
Shows that though God do not always hear the prayers of his servants, yet
he always remains holy and just. ver. 4. Good fathers are in good things to
be followed, also trust in God to be delivered out of danger, through him, as a
notable mean to obtain it, for God never destituteth his. ver. 5. Prayer is
necessary and meet in the time of affliction. ver. 6. Gods children are
wonderfully abased in the sight of wicked men. ver. 7. It is no new thing, that
the children of God, are made scoffing stocks to the people. ver. 8. The
ungodly do not only despite gods children, but even his own holy majesty.
ver. 9.10. Teach us to hang continualy upon God, in whom we live, move, and
have our being. ver. 11. The more that troubles increase, ye more need we have
to be earnest with God. ver. 12.13. Set out the rage and cruelty of the wicked.
ver. 14.15. Describe the pitiful state of gods children. ver. 19. In all our
distresses we must have recourse to the Lord. ver. 22.23. Teach not only to
be thankful our selves, but also to stir up others thereto. ver. 24. Sets
out Gods wonderful mercy, that never refuses his, no not in their greatest
misery. ver. 27. Is a prophecy of the vocation of the Gentiles. ver. 29. God
has of al sorts and conditions some that fear him. ver. 31. Teaches care for
posterity.

Psalm. 23.
THis Psalm has two parts, first he does darkly, 1. to the end of the 4. In
the second he declares the same thing 5. to the end of the Psalm.

This title is expounded before. Psalm. 4. Ver. 1. vz. any thing that he sees
to be good or needful for me.) ver. 2. He care over him, noting three things
to express it by: first the sweet and quiet rest he gives unto his, as
Psalm. 127.2. secondly plentifulnes of food, understood by these words, green
pastures: and thirdly co^modiousnes of place to drink at, and to refresh
himself meant by these words, the still waters, vz. void of dangers, and 3. He
restores my soul [ i. he brings my life, which through weakness was as it
were at deaths door, back againe] paths of righteousness [ i. in righteous
ways, and upright conuersation] for his names sake [ i. for his goodness and
mercy sake.] 4. Though I should walk [ vz. either through ignorance or
weakenes] through the valley of the shadow of death [ i. through most manifold
and manifest dangers, so that I were very nigh to death] I will fear no evil,
[ vz. that can come unto me] for thou art with me [ vz. by thy power and
presence to defend and comfort me] thy rod and thy staff [he puts the
instruments that shepherds did use having care over their flocks, for the
care that God had over him, and he joined the rod and staff together, because
some shepherds used a rod, and some a staff, but God used both: q.d. the care
that thou have over me, which far exceeds the care of a most watchful and
diligent shepherd, causes me that in the greatest dangers, I neither doubt
nor despair, but am wonderfully comforted. I make this difference between rod
and staff, that rod is put for some small wandes, wherewith shepherds use to
drive their sheep, and now and then strike them: and yet hurt them not, and
staff is put for shepherds staff that has his hook upon it, by which he
catches and rules the^ that sometimes 5. By table, understand al necessary
things for norishment to be set upon the table, which is a usual Metonymia: and
by anointing his head with oil, and the running over of his cup, understand
abundance of al things not only serving for necessity but pleasure, he alludeth
to the custom of those countries and times wherein he lived, which was not
only to use oil for finenes and co^lines sake, as Mat. 6.17. 2. Sam. 12.20.
but also at feasts and banquets: as Luke 7.36.37.38. For which cause also they
that mourned absteined from anointing 2. Sam. 14.2.] Ver. 6. Doubtless [this
notes ye prophets great assurance of Gods goodnes] kindenes and mercy [ vz.
from God] shall follow me [ i. be present with me and upon mee] a long season [
i. all the days of my life, as in this very verse before] in the house of the
Lord [ i. in the place where the tabernacle is, and God himself worshipped,
from which to be banished what a great grief it was, see Psalm, 84.1.2. etc.
and yet this hinders not but that it may be understood also of eternal life.

1. Teaches this, that if we be rightly persuaded of gods goodness and
providence, we shall want nothing, that is good and meet for us. ver. 2.
Shows that God is he alone yt gives us rest, plenty, and deliverance from
dangers. ver. 3. Declares, first that God has the issues of life and death
in his own hands: secondly that he is the author of al well doing in us, and
thirdly that he bestows these graces upon us, for his own mercies sake only.
ver. 4. Assured faith and confidence in gods goodness and almighty providence,
surmounteth all the difficulties of this life whatsoever. ver. 5. God gives
unto his cildren many times plenty of all things, not only for necessity but
also for pleasure. Ver. 6. declares that it is no presumption to be fully
assured of the continuance of Gods grace and favor toward us: it teaches us
also what delight we should have in the service of God.

Psalm 24.
THis Psalm has two principal parts. 1. to the end of the 6. In the second
part he prepares this 7. to the end of the Psalm.

The Title is expounded before. Ver. 1. 2. Founded it [ vz. the earth or the
world] upon the seas [ i. he has placed Genesis 1.9. Exodus 20.4. and so must the
latter part of this verse also be understood, by which means also the earth or
world is become habitable.] Ver. 3. mountain of the Lord [ i. Sion where the
ark was, Moriah, in which the Temple was builded by Solomon, and this is not
amiss also] in his holy place [ i. either the Court of the Tabernacle, or the
Temple when it was built, but I rather incline to the first sense.] Ver. 4.
innocent hands [ i. hands that have not ben given Isaiah 1.15.] and a pure heart
[ i. a heart purged from manifold corruptions, by these marks he discerns the
true Israelites from false and counterfeit, see Psalm. 12.2.] has not lift up
his mind [ i. has not gaped after, or attentively set his affection upon: it
seems to be a borrowed speech, taken from such as lift up their eyes, that
they may diligently behold a thing, see Psalm. 123.1.2.] vanity [ i. vain and
unprofitable things, or else (as it is also many times used in Scripture) for
wickedness and wicked thinges] nor sworn deceitfully [he means either in
respect of himself, vz. not taking an oath without an upright, reverent, and
sincere mind: or else, which I rather allow of, in respect of others, vz. to
deceive them as it were under pretense and religion of an oath.] Ver. 5.
Blessings put for a great and wonderful blessing: himself faithful and
righteous) salvation [this word is taken here not only for deliverance from
dangers as often times before, but for eternal life 6. this is the generation
[ i. those are the men and persons, for generation is here taken for men] that
seek him [ vz. with their hearts and unfeignedly, that they may worship him]
seek thy face [ i. have an earnest desire to behold thy loving countenance]
this is Iaakob (such kind of pepole are true Iaakob and true Israelits. for
Iaakob is not here put for the name of ye Patriarch: or for those only that
descended of him according to ye flesh, but for those that followed his faith
and obedience.] 7. Lift up your heads, ye gates (in this sense, the Prophet
speaks to the gates of the place, into which the ark should enter (whether it
were the temple or some other place it is not certain) but he bids the
gates lift up their heads, meaning by heads the uppermost posts of the gates,
that went over from one side to the other, and he calls these gates
everlasting doors, not that they should, or could continue for ever, but for a
long season, meaning by ye speech the stabilitie of the place or temple
wherinto the arc should be brought In doctrine ye faithful are hereby
admonished to prepare themselves to receive Christ, yt he may dwell in their
hearts by faith, their bodies being the temple of the holy spirit] king of glory
( i. a most glorious and renowned king, speaking it of 8. who is this, etc.
[the demand or question of the faithful people] the Lord strong and mighty
[this is an answer to the former question, whereby for the strengthening of
their faith they are admonished that God armed with invincible power, comes
to defend his people, and to beat down his enemies.] ver, 10. The Lord of
hosts ( i. he whom al hosts both heavenly and earthly do obey, and therefore
most strong and mighty] even in battle ( i. not only in warlike strength, but
in the very pinch and brunt of battle.

1. describes the largeness of Gods government, so that nothing is exempted
therfrom for though he speak only of the earth and things contained therein,
yet he minds not to exclude the heavenly creatures. Ver. 2. Sets out Gods
power and providence. Ver. 3. Teaches men to have regard to join themselves
to his church in this life, and to have a special care of etexnal life. Ver.
4, Teaches the brideling of our hands, the reformation of our hearts, the
subduing of the vain and wicked affections of our minds, and to take heed that
we abuse not an oath, so that to swear is not forbidden, as the Anabaptists
imagine, but to swear deceitfully and wrongfully. ver. 5. sets out gods
goodness, plentifully rewarding the holy endeavors of his children. ver. 6.
Teaches that care and zeal to worship God must be in his children. ver. 7.9.
Teaches men to be prepared to receive the Lord when he comes to them ver. 8.
and 10. is a particular description of Gods power and glory, which serves for
comfort to his children, because he will deliver them, and for terror to his
enemies, because he will punish them.

Psalm 25.
IN this Psalm, 1.2.3.15.16.17.18.19.20.21. sometimes he prays the Lord to
instruct and teach him, and others also in ye right way showing how God deals
with his children. ver. 4.5.6.8.9.10.12.13.14. and sometimes 7.11, 18.22.

The title is expounded before. Ver. 1. My soul [ i. 2. Let me not be
confounded ( vz. by receiving a repulse at thy hands) ver. 3. q.d. I pray not
only for my self, but for the rest of the faithful) that transgress [ vz.
against me in resisting my kingdom, and that without any cause on my behalf
given them, and so does the Chaldee paraphrase expound it] ver. 4 vz. by or in
which thou would have me to walk, meaning by ways ye order of life which God
himself prescribes, and the same he means by his paths as we have had it
before] ver. 5. Lead me forth ( vz. without danger i. as thou have promised to
shield me from them] and teach me [ vz. the same thy truth, teaching me to
find it and feel it by experience] the God of my salvation [ i. such a one as
I find a present help to save me from, and in all dangers] all the day [ i.
continually, and with an unwearied constancy] Ver. 6. Remember thy tender
mercies, that I may feel them 7. The sins of my youth i. those that I did
commit in my youth] nor my rebellions [ vz against thy maiestie] even for thy
goodness sake, q.d. though my sins deserve the withdrawing of thy favor, yet
think upon thy mercy, and not upon my iniquities.] ver. 8. Gracious and
righteous ( i. merciful to penitent persons, and vprighte in David uses these
terms to strike up himself thereby to praier] sinners [ i. all, one and other,
for none are without sin] in the way, or rather the way, for so it is in the
Hebrew text, meaning a conversation ye God himself allows of, for so it is
ver. 9. though al do not embrace it] 9. in judgment [ i. with a through
judgment, meaning thereby advisedly and rightly: it seems to be a metaphor
taken from them that guide others, and show 10. paths of the Lord (see ver. 4.
of this Psalm) are mercy and truth ( i. are most merciful and faithful,
because that in the^, God gives testimony unto the^ of his mercy and truth,
meaning by truth gods faithfulness in performing that which he promises) his
covenant and his testimonies [ i. his Law, which is called his covenant,
because that thereby God makes a covenant or bargayne as it were with us,
that we should keep his law, for testimonies 19.7.] Verse 11. For thy names
sake [ i. for thy glory and mercies sake, least otherwise by my iniquity, thy
glory might be called into question.] 12. The way [see verse 4. of this
Psalm.] Verse 13. His soul [ i. his 14. Secret of the Lord [ i. the law of
the Lord which is called secret, because we cannot understand it of our 15.
Mine eyes [ vz. not of my body only but of my faith and soule] are ever toward
the Lord [ i. are earnestly lifted up, and steadfastly fixed upon him, as Psalm
123. ver. 1.2.] my feet [ i. me my self, a part for the whole] out of the net
( i. out of the snares and dangers that mine 16. Turn thy face ( i. thy
favorable and loving countenance) for I am desolate ( i. utterly destitute
of help unless thou help, as Psalm, 22.11.20.) and poor ( i. maruailously
afflicted, and so have you this word sundry times used in the Book of
Psalms.) Ver. 17. The i. The greefes and sorrows that touch and possess of
my heart) are enlarged ( i. multiplied to a wonderful numbers, so that 19.
with cruel hatred ( i. with hatred that will never be appeased, but by
committing some crueltye 20. Soul put for whole man, as ver. 13. before in
this Psalm.) ver. 22. Israel put for the faithful Israelites, and Gods
church, as Psalm 14 7. Psalm. 125.5. Psalm. 131.3.

1. Teaches that prayer must ve made to GOD only. Verse 2. that service
cannot be performed but by trust in God. ver. 4. We are ignorant even the
best of us in Gods word, till the Lord lighten and teach us. ver. 5. We must
continuallye hang upon GOD, by an assured faith. ver. 6. Gods mercy is the
only thing that the faithful must cleave unto. verse 7. Our sins must be
confessed, and pardon thereof earnestly prayde for. verse 8. God calls all to
repentance and amendment. ver. 9. In those in whom God begins good things,
he will go forward with them unto the end. ver. 10. God is gracious and
faithful unto those, that walk in the obedience of his law. ver. 11. The
greater our sins be, the more need we have of mercy, and to come to the
Lord by prayer for the healing thereof. ver. 12. God will add blessing upon
blessing, and knowledge upon knowledge, to those that love and fear him. ver.
13. Yea the Lord will heap all manner of temporal blessings upon him. ver.
14. is the same which verse 12. ver. 15. We must continuallye wait upon the
Lord, and be certainly assured that he will deliver us from danger. ver. 16.
The more we are destitute of all worldly helps, the more need have we to come
to the Lord, and to learn to hang upon him alone. verse 18. Prayer for
remission of all sins is commended unto us, See Hosea 14.2. ver. 22. We
should faithfully remember in our Prayers, the state of Gods Church.

Psalm 26.
THis Psalm has two principal parts. In the first, Saul, declaring that he
was so far off from working wickedness, that he could not abide wicked men's
company, from ver. 1. to the end of the 5. In the 6. to the end of the Psalm.

The title is expounded before. Ver. 1. i. take knowledge of my cause, and
declare thy self to be my defender, against the slanders of mine enemies) in
mine innocence [ i. innocently and without doing hurt ( vz. to Saul, or these
my enemies that pursue me without cause, as Psalm. 7.5. Psalm. 15.3.] not slide [
vz. from that steadfast hope that I have, that God will defend me and my just
cause.] Ver. 2. Prove me [ vz. to know my innocence, and that I am unjustly
q.d. I desired thee before to be my judge, and now I willinglye offer the same]
and try me [ vz. whether there be any malice in me toward Saul, see Psalm.
7.8. Psalm. 17.3.] examine [ vz. even as goldsmiths do their most fine Gold,
for it is a metaphor taken from them] my reins and my heart [ i. my inward
affections and thoughts, as Psalm. 7.9.] Ver. 3. Mine eyes [ vz. of my i. lead
such a conversation as thy truth requires, meaning by truth Gods word, because
it alone comprehe^deth all truth.] Ver. 4. with vain persons [ i. wicked and
ungodly men which 24.4.] Ver. 5. of the evil [ vz. men, meaning such as
accustom 6. I will wash my hands i. I will endeavor to live most uprightly
and purelye toward thee and before men, see Job. 9.30.] and compass thine
altar [ i. offer abounda^ce of sacrifices unto thee, giving here two excellent
testimonies of his vprighte dealing: one good behavior toward men, and the
other sincere service of God.] ver. 7. that I may declare [ vz. thy goodness
toward me, and my obedience 8. The habitation of thy house [ i. even the very
place 9. gather i. when thou punishest the ungodly, destroy not me with them,
understanding by sinners, notorious sinners, as before psa. 1.5.] with the
bloody men [ i. them that give themselves to cruelty, murder, and 5.6.] Ver.
10. In whose hands is wickedness ( q.d. whatsoever they do is wickedness)
and their right hand is full of bribes [ i. they are most ready (for the right
hand is commonly more nimble then the other) for their own gain sake by
bribery or otherwise, to commit all naughtiness.] 11. I will walk [ i. behave
my selfe] in my innocence [ i. innocentlye and without hurt] see ver. 1. of
this Psalme] redeem me ( vz. from those slanderous 12. amend thus: my foot
standing upon plain ground ( i. when I shall be brought to a more sure and
safe condition (for in plain ground there is sure footing) in the
congregations ( vz. of thy people and saints assembled to praise thee.

1. Whosoever trusts in the Lord shall not be confounded. ver. 3. Gods
goodness toward us, should restrain us from doing evil to others. ver. 4.5.
Evil company is perilous, and therefore would be avoided, as Psalm. 1.1. Ver. 6.
Good dealing toward men, and zealous service of God must continuallye be
professed and practiced by his children. ver. 8. The place where God is served
and the exexcises of his religion, must be carefully freque^ted. ver. 9. It is
a good way to shun the punishments which light upon the ungodly, to avoid
their company and naughtiness. ver. 10. is a lively description of the
perverseness and naughtines of ungodly people. ver. 12. instructs us to be
thankful to God, and that openly before men for his benefits bestowed upon us.

Psalm 27.
1. to the end of the sixth. In the second 7. to the end of the Psalm.

1. my light ( i. he from whom alone I have in all things good success and
felicity] and my salvation [ i. he that delivers me from al dangers, using
light and salvation the things themselves for deliverance from afflictions
(which in the scriptures are many times meant by darkness) and al sorts of
dangers] whom shall I fear? [ q.d. none, for by such interrogations, the
Hebrews do wonderfully deny] the strength of my life [ i. the vpholder and
maintainer thereof, bringing good things to it, and putting evil 2. Came upon me
( vz. with violent and cruel minds] to eat up my flesh ( i. most cruelly to
devour and consume me, after ye manner of wild beasts.) They stumbled (even for
weakness and faynthartednesse) and fell ( vz. so yt they could not rise up
again to molest me, 3. though an host (see Psa. 3.6. it argues a notable
steadfast persuasion in ye Prophet, and he means by these words, host and
war, [euery thing that may be terrible and fearful in this worlde] in this
( i. that the Lord is my light, and my salvation, as verse 1. of this Psalm.)
ver. 4. Have I desired ( vz. by earnest prayer, that I will require ( vz.
again, q.d. I will never leave off, till I have obtained it) dwell in ye house
of the Lord (he uses the word dwelling for continual presence, and the house
of the Lord, for the sanctuary, or tabernacle, see psalm. 23.6.) the beautye of
the Lord ( i. the wonderful works he does, and the famous gifts he gives, by
which he is made beautiful and excellent, or his beauty is declared to the
sons of men) and to visit ( i. to be often present in) his temple ( i. the
place where ye ark was as Psalm. 5.7.) Ver. 5. He shall hide me ( i. keep me
safe and sound in his Tabernacle i. such a place as my enemies can not come too
to hurt me, meaning still his safety.) ver. 6. Lift up mine head i. exalt me,
see Psalm 3.9. sacrifices of joy ( i. sacrifices to testify my ioifulnesse
for my deliverance.) ver. 7. cry ( i. pray earnestly) hear me ( i. grant my
requests, 8. Seek ye my i. in distress come to me for favor and grace: so
that he makes Gods commandment, in the which also is closely comprehended a
promise, as Deuteronomy. 4.26. the ground of his praier] mine heart answered ( i.
yielded to that truth, and always thought upon it) unto thee ( i. thy sayings
and words.) verse 9. q.d. seeing I come, and that according to thy word and
promise) hyde not thy face (^. withdraw not thy favor, but make me sensibly to
feel, thy virtue and goodness in my deliverance) nor cast thy servant away
[ vz. without help and succour] in displeasure [ vz. against him] God of my
salvation (see Psalm. 18.46.] Ver. 10. My father and my mother [ i. not only my
parents, but all other whatsoever, yea all man's aid and comfort] forsake me [
i. destitute i. graciously receive me into his protection, and defense, see
Math. 23.37.] Ver. 11. Teach me (see Psalm. 25, 4.5.) right path i. righteous
conversation and upright dealing] because of mine enemies [see Psalm. 5.8. He
means such enemies as did look into his life, to see whether they could
find any thing blame worthy therein.] Ver. 12. Mende thus, for vz. if thou
should so deal with me, and so I might easily be cast away) speak cruellye
[ i. cruel and unjust things, that so by their speeches I might perish.] ver.
13. to see [ i. to feel and taste, i. such good things, as he has promised me]
in ye land of the living [ i. here in the world where men live, and I my self
have a portion of that life with them, see Psalm. 1^6.9. Isaiah 38.11] Ver. 14.
He exhorts himself specially, but yet also others wholly to depend

1. Assured faith in the Lord expels all fear of men. ver. 2. God
confounds the cruel purposes of the vngodle. ver. 4. It is a notable thing
to be present at the public assemblies and exercises of Gods Church.
Earnestnes also and continuance in prayer for good things is commended unto us.
ver. 5. God is an assured place of refuge for all his. Ver. 6. God graciously
rayseth his after they have been cast down: for the which it is their duty to
yield him hartye praise, Ver. 8. Gods commandment and promise, are two
principal spurs to prayer, yea the very ground thereof. Ver. 9. the godly
many times have such earnest affections in prayer, that they can hardly content
themselves with any words to express their mind withal. Ver. 10. God is more
sure and fast to his children, then all natural parents and friends
whatsoever. Verse 11. Prayer for upright conversation according to Gods word,
should be much used. ver. 12. We may pray to be delivered from the rage and
lust of our adversaries. ver. 13. If Gods promises were not, we should many
times sink down under the burden of our calamities. ver. 14. It is good for
us to stir up our selves and others, to a lively trust, and an assured hope
in the almighty, for we are all dull and weak.

Psalm. 28.
1. to the end of the fifth. In the second he prayseth the Lord for his
mercies, and declares also the assured persuasion he had in Gods mercy,
concluding with a prayer for the Church, from verse 6. to the end of the Psalm.

1. Do I cry [ i. pray earnestly] O my strength [ i. thou from whom all the
strength that I have commeth] be not deaf [ i. do not cast away and neglect
my prayers, either as though thou heardst not at all, or would not hear: for
as the deaf cannot hear, so there are some, that though they can, yet will
not] if thou answer me not [ i. grant not my petition] I be like the^ that
go down into the pit, [ i. like dead me^ that are buried, for he puts the
word Pit, here for the grave, meaning that he 2. When I hold up my hands
(the sign of prayer used for prayer, see Psalm. 141.2. Exodus 17.11.] toward
thine holy oracle [ i. toward the place where thy arc was, from whence thou
have promised help to them that call upon thee: it may be also taken for 3.
Draw me not away, etc. [ vz. to death, in the time that thou executest
vengeance against the ungodly, see Psalm. 26.9. Psalm. 27.12.] speak friendlye [
i. words that pretend friendship and goodwill] when malice is in their hearts i.
they imagine mischief though they speak fair, see Psalm. 12.2.] ver. 4. He
means that seeing they had multiplied iniquity, the Lord would in his justice
repay them home for it] their reward [ i. a reward meet for them and their
wickedness.] ver. 5. Works of the Lord ( i. his judgments against other
wickedness, vz. as men do old, rotten, and ruinous houses, for such a
metaphor is used here] and build them not up [ i. let them be without hope of
repayring or establishment. ver. 7. 18.2.) my heart trusted ( i. inwardly I was
fully persuaded and hoped rightly (for the heart is it that God specially
respects, and is the seat of all our affections good and euill] my heart shall
rejoice [ i. inwardly I will be glad] with my song will I praise him ( i.
openly also will I testify my joy and thankfulness.] ver. 8. Their strength (
vz. that i. the only worker of the deliuerances] of his anointed (that is
which his King has received, see Psalm. 18.50.] ver. 9. Save thy people [ vz.
from the rage of i. pour plenty of blessings upon that people, that thou have
chosen to be a peculiar inheritance unto thy selfe] feed them [ i. be as it
were their sheapheard, of which see psalm. 29.1. nothing his care and watchful
government of the^) and exalt the^ [ vz. above their enemies, as psa. 27.6. for
ever [ i. continually.

Ver. 1. When God seems not to hear, then must we be most earnest. ver. 2.
3. It is not good to partake in punishment with the wicked. We must learn also
to take heed of dissembling either in word or heart. ver. 4.5. We may pray
against the malicious contemners of God and his truth. Ver. 6. We ow
thankfulness to the Lord after that he has heard our prayers. ver. 7.
Consideration of Gods goodness toward us in former times, is a good mean of
hope in time to come. ver. 8. God blesses ye good, and those that take part
with the^. ver. 9. In all our prayers, we should be mindful of the prosperous
and good estate of the whole church.

Psalm 29.
THis Psalm has three parts. 3. to the 9. In the third 9. to the end of the
Psalm.

The title is expounded before. 1. Sons of the mighty ( i. Princes and noble
men, who many times by reason of their birth and wealth, swel as it were against
god) give unto the Lord [this doubling does note, first that this belongs
unto god alone, secondly how unwilling me^ are, to give him that which is his
right) glory and strength ( vz. even that which you your selves have, q.d.
acknowledge 2. due unto his name (which you do not, if you claim either the
whole or part, and by name he means god himself, and all that is in him, as
majesty, power, excellency, etc.) in ye glorious sanctuary ( i. in the
tabernacle of witness, in which god sundry times gave plain 3. The voice of the
Lord ( i. the thunder which is called his voice, because he alone sends it
out) is upon the waters ( i. as some expound it, is heard upon the waters, but
I suppose it would rather be turned thus, is above the waters, meaning the
waters that be vphelde in the firmament by Gods almighty power, because the
thunder is in a higher region of the air, than the clouds in which the water
are contained) the God of glory ( i. he to whom all glory is due) makes it to
thunder, ( i. is the author of it) The Lord, or better, the Lords voice is upon
the great waters, as before in this verse, and he calls the waters in the
clouds great, both because of the abundance of them, and also because of the
force thereof, as may appear in the universal flood, Genesis 9. and the reason
why I expound this verse, is because 10. God sits upon the flood.] Ver. 4.
Is mighty [ i. declares great might in his maiestie] is glorious [ i.
expresses his great 5. The voice [ i. the thunder and those things that either
go before it or follow it, as lightnings, the thunderbolt, storm, tempest,
etc.] the Cedars of Lebanon [i. most high and excellent Cedars, for that place
yields the best, 6. He makes them [ i. sundry mountains or places, whereof
he names two in this verse, it may also be understood of the shaking of the
trees] to leap [ i. to move and stir much up and downe] like a Calfe [ vz.
that is unruly, and for pastime, as you would say, can hardly stand still]
Lebanon also and Shirion [these are the names of two places for Shirion see
Deuteronomy. 3.8.9.] like a young Unicorn [ i. very lustily and nimblye, for the
Unicorns, but specially their young ones, be slender and light bodyed, 7.
Deuideth the flames of fire [ i. lightnings so called, because they seem to us
and are indeed flaming and fire, now the thunder deuideth them, because it
immediately follows one flash of 8. the wilderness to tremble [ i. after some,
the beasts of the wilderness, by Metonomya, or which I take to be more plain, by
reason of yt which follows, it makes ye very ground, and earth of ye
wilderness to shake as it were] the Lord [ vz. by his power and thu^dering
voice] the wilderness of Kadesh [i. that most great and horrible wilderness,
wherein ye children of Israel wandered xl. years before they came to ye land of
promise, of which, and of the Deuteronomy. 8.15.] ver. 9. Makes the hinds [who
naturally bring forth with great difficulty, as Job 39.4.5.6.] to calue [ vz.
before their time, which argues the thunder to be a very terrible thing]
discovers the forest [this place has three senses: some expound it thus, yt
by forests they understand ye beasts in the forests, which through thunder
even for very fear come out of their couertures: others understand by
forest, ye mere ground of the forest, which is laid open by the overthrow and
casting down of trees in thunder and tempest: others understand by discovering
ye forest, the laying of it even as it were, by taking away the leaves through
thuu^der and storm, and to this latter for mine own part do I incline] in his
temple [ i. in the place where he is publicly serued] does every man [ vz. of
his faithful seruants] speak of his glory [ vz. by beholding his excellency in
these his works, though ye ungodly will not acknowledge the same] ver. 10. The
Lord sits [ i. hears sway and i. Ruler and governor over all things
whatsoever,] ver. 11. Give strength [ i. indue them with might and strength to
defend themselves, and to annoy their enemies] bless his people with peace [
i. give them plentiful and prosperous succes in all things.

Out of ver. 1. we learn that great men ought to worship the Lord, i. in the
public places of Gods assemblies] yea the more great they are, the more
forward they should be in this, because their examples may very much prevail.
Out of ver. 3. and so forth to the 9, we learn to fear God in his works and
judgments: for if his creatures as ye thunder, etc. are so full of power, what
is his own majesty and being. ver. 9. It appertains to his children publicly
to set forth his praises. ver. 10. Sets out gods eternal providence and
continual government ver. 11. Contains two things vz. a promise of plentiful
blessings unto Gods people: it shows also further the fountain from whence
these good things flow, vz. God and his goodness.

Psalm 30.
IN the first part of this Psalm the Prophet not only promises 1. the end of
the 5. In the second he shows how sudden the fall 6. to the end of the Psalm.

The title is, David [ i. which David did sing at the dedication of his house [
vz. unto the Lord, i. to holiness acceptable and agreeable unto the Lord, for
before it had been defiled with Absalon his wickedness as appears 2. Sam.
16.22. thus do some expound it: but I rather take it to be made at the
dedication of the house of Ceder which he made: for it was a custom prescribed
by law, as appears Deuteronomy. 20.5. that at the setting up of new houses, this
order of dedication should be observed, in which thankfulness (as it should
seem) was yielded to the Lord for the work finished, and prayer made for the
continuance of his goodness) ver. 1. magnify thee [ i. greatly praise thee]
exalted i. lifted me up, and set me free, from wonderful dangers and deaths
door, as it were. It is a metaphor taken from them that fell into some pit or
ditche, 2. I cried unto thee, and thou, etc. ( q.d. So soon as I prayed, thou
graciously did grant my request] restored me [ vz. to my kingdom and
state, after some, but I rather take it to health and soundness 3. My soul [
i. Me and my life, who were at the graves brinke] thou have revived me from
the^ that go down into the pit [ q.d. I was even almost with them yt are
buried, but yet thou graciously broughtst me from their company, and restoredst
me to life. Pit is put 28.1.] ver. 4. Before, or as Immanuel reads, at ye
remembrance ( i. when you do remember his holiness and goodness toward you, for
the Lord makes himself to be had in remembrance by his works, and shows
himself praise worthy in the same: and therefore the Prophet would have the
remembrance of his holiness [ i. of al his goodness bestowed upon his children,
putting one excellent thing in god for all the rest, to be continual amongst
his 5. For he [ i. God] but a while in his anger [ i. his anger and wrath
toward his is very short] but in his favor is life [ i. not only length of
days here in this life, but all other good things whatsoever.] may abide [
vz. with his servant and children, and this is an exposition of that which
went before, vz. that his wrath was and is very short, to those that are his.]
6. In my prosperity [ i. when I had al things according to my mind, and in
mine own judgment seemed out of da^ger] I said [ i. I thought in my heart, as
Psalm. 14.1. for it is not likely that David would speak these words with his
vz. from this prosperous state.] ver. 7. my mountain to stand strong ( i. thou
establishest my kingly authority by thy power, and made it to stand, in my
judgment as steadfast as a mountaine] hidest thy face [ i. withdrawest thy
favor and presence] and I was troubled [ i. so soon as I perceived it 8. Then
( i. when I was 9. In my blood [ i. in my life, either already past or to come]
go down to the pit [ i. die and be burried, see ver. 3. of this Psalme] shall
the dust [ i. man dissolved into dust, see Psalm. 6.5.] thy truth [ i. thy
faithfulness 11. thou have turned ( vz. after prayer made unto thy majesty) my
sack ( i. sackcloth: which was a sign of mourning and heaviness, putting it
for heaviness and sorrow) girded me with gladness ( i. compassed me in on every
side with it, see the like phrase Psalm. 18.32. meaning that he had abundance of
joy.

1. God is to be praised for the defense of his servant, and the confusion of
his foes. ver. 2, the Lord is nigh to ye hearty prayers of his servants. ver. 3.
when we are in greatest distres, the^ does god most mercifully deliver, yt all
the glory may be given to him. ver. 4. we must provoke others to praise god for
his goodness. ver. 5. contains a difference between gods wrath and mercy, and
that even in respect of him. ver. 6, Men in prosperity may easily he deceived,
and puffed up in hope of assurance above measure. ver. 7. withdrawing of Gods
favor for a while, makes us see our wretchedness and misery. ver. 9. Desire of
life upon earth must be referred to the advancement of Gods glory upon the
same, or else it is not right. Ver. 10. in distress we must flee to the Lord
for succor only. ver. 11. God graciously hears the prayers of his servant,
and delivers them from all their greefes, ver. 12. teaches that we ought to
be continually thankful to God for his mercies.

Psalm 31.
THis Psalm has three principal parts. 1. to the end of the eight: in the
second part he 9. to the end of the 18. Thirdly he declares Gods wonderful
goodness toward 19. to the end of the Psalm.

The title is expounded before. Ver. 1. be confounded [ vz. i. according to thy
righteous promise, which is then declared to be righteous, when it is
performed.] ver. 2. a strong rock [ i. in steed of a strong rock and high, see
Psa. 27.5.] and an house of defense [ i. in steed of such a one and as sure]
to save me [ i. to defend and deliver me, vz. from the forces of mine
enemies.] ver. 3. Rock 18.2.] for thy names sake [ i. for thy own glory and
honor] direct me, and guide me [ vz. going before me, and showing me the way]
ver. 4 q.d. Without thee I can do nothing, neither trust 5. Into thine hand [
i. into thy mighty power and protection] I commend my spirit [ i. life, body,
soul, and all that I haue] thou have redeemed [ vz. out of distress and
bondage wherein I have bin heretofore] God of truth [ i. most true and faithful
God in performing yt which thou have promised] ver. 6. I have hated [ i.
wonderfully disliked and loathed] that i. that take delight, pleasure, and
trust in deceitful vanities, he means hy vanities any thing that may call men
from trust in God, and he calls them deceitful, because that though for a
time they may feed us with glorious oftentation, yet in fine they will deceive
vs] ver. 7. in thy mercy, a sudden changing vz. even unto this day.] ver. 8.
have not i. given me ouer] in the hand [ i. power and might, see psalm. 27.12.]
my feet [see Psalm 25.15. He means that the Lord had brought to pass,
that he might freely and without fear go in and out, see Psalm. 18.19.] Ver. 9.
Mine eye vz. brought dimnes to his eyes, as psalm. 6.7. and weakness to his
stomach for I take the word soul to be used here for ye power and part of
life, which desires food, see Psalm. 38.10. Psalm. 102.4. and by belly, he
means that part which should concoct meat: noting that he neither had
appetite to eat, nor strength to 10. he notes what great 11 he shows what he
endured from others) I was a reproach [ i. I was scorned of all, and forsaken of
them] and a fear [ i. I was a fear, meaning that al his acquaintance were 12.
I am forgotten, as a dead man out of mind [he meanrth not that they did not
think upon him, for all their imagination was how to work him mischief: but
this, he was even as a dead man, who has no familiarity nor acquaintance with
those that are alive, and of whom he could receive neither pleasure nor
profite] like a broken vessel [ i. of which, or of whom there is no regard
had, because it is esteemed unprofitable.] 13. Fear was on every side [ vz. of
me: he means that he was as 15. My times [ i. the days and years of my life]
are in thine hand [ i. are governed by thy power and providence, which is great
comfort to me, because they cannot destroy me, though they conspire against i.
power and force.] Ver. 16. Make thy face to shine ( i. show thy self favorable
unto, as Psalm. 4.6.] and save me ( i. deliver me out of these 17. and the
latter part amend thus: let the wicked be cut off when they are going down into
ye grave [ i. when they are ready to die, let them not be restored to life and
health again, as sundry men are, but let them then die and 18. Lips put for
mouth, yea and for the liers themselves: a part for 19. Laid up [ vz. as a most
excellent and rich treasure] even before the sons of men [these words may
have diverse senses. If you refer it to these words, Done to them, meaning
the godly, then they must be understood thus: that God openly, and in the
sight of me^ had poured forth great blessings upon them. If you refer it to
these words, That trust in thee, then it may have this sense, that the godly
make more account of God, then of the greatest and mightiest in the world, for
so had we these words used before, Psalm, 4.2. Lastly referring it to these
words, That trust in thee, it may have this sense, that Gods children are not
afraid or ashamed, to put their trust in God, and to 20. Privily [ vz. in
respect of men, and yet openly to God, for he says afterward in thy presence.
But by hiding them privily he means nothing, but sure keeping and defense,
and by presence, he understands Gods favor and loue] from the pride [ i.
from the effects that men's pride bring forth, though it be never so great, as
braulings, contentions, bloodshead, etc.] in thy tabernacle (see Psalm. 27.5.]
from the strife of tongues [ i. from brauling and quarrellers words, which
provoke strife, as 15.1,] Ver. 21. In a strong city, amend thus: placing me as
it were in a defenced city [wherby he means that God had set him safe and
sound from his enemies, as they that are in a most strong and safe city, that
can not be 22. in my have ( i. when I was moved to hastines through the
trouble of my spirit) I am cast out of thy sight [ i. thou made no more
account of me, then of one that was in thy dissauour.] Ver. 23. The faithful [
vz. those that trust unto him, and hold fast their faith given them.

Ver. 1. Those that trust in God shall never be confounded. Ver. 2. 3. Gods own
goodness is the only cause wherefore he does us good. Ver. 4. The wicked
privily imagine mischief against the godly. Ver. 5. Feeling of gods goodness
in time heretofore, should persuade us that we shall feel it hereafter. Ver. 6.
We must trust in nothing, but in the Lord only. ver. 7. It is no small comfort
to Gods children, that God has an eye over them, and their afflictions. ver.
8. God alone preserves his children from the rage of their enemies, and if
they come into thraldom, sets them at liberty when it pleases him. ver. 9.
the afflictions of Gods children in this life, are very long in respect of
time, and grievous in respect of greatness. ver. 11.12. It is no new thing,
that those which should most love men, do many times either for fear or
flattery of others, make less account of them. ver. 13. Great men are many
times enemies to Gods children, also Gods children have their passions of
fear, when they are in dangers ver. 14. It is a singular thing to have faith
in the heart, and true confession of God and his goodness in mouth. ver. 15. God
has numbered our days, and neither can we pass them, nor our enemies abridge
the^. ver. 16. Gods favor and mercy the only cause of deliverance from dangers
in this life, and of eternal salvation also. ver. 17. that we may sometimes
pray against the ungodly, and ver. 18. likewise. ver. 19. Sets out Gods
unspeakable goodness toward those that are his. ver. 20. It is God alone that
keeps his children safe, from the outrageous deeds and words of the
ungodly. ver. 21. Thanks must be given to God for benefits received. ver. 22
Many of Gods children in have, both think and speak that they should not as
Psalm. 30.6. Ver. 23. We must provoke others as well as our selves to praise the
Lord: there is also contained the unlikely reward of the faithful, and the
wicked. ver. 24. There is none that trusts so much in God, but he has need
of continual encouragement thereto.

Psalm 32.
THis Psalm has three parts. 3.4.5.6.7. In the third be exorteth all to live
godly, showing that they that live otherwise 8.9.10.11

The title, A Psalm of David to give instruction ( vz. 1. forgiven ( i. so
taken away, yt they are not any more thought upon, Ier. 31.33.34] is covered
(so that not so much as prints or steps much less 2. imputes not [ i. calls
not his sin or iniquity into an account, but burieth the same in perpetual
forgetfulnes] and in whose spirit [ i. soul and inward man] there is no guile
[ i. subteltie, he means by this speech, such men, as did of a sincere mind
turn unto God, and truly 3. when I held my tongue, from humble and sincere
confession of my sinnes] my bones [ i. my strength, which indeed consists in
the bones, for the bones uphold the body it self, and strengthen all the parts
therof] I consumed ( i. wasted and wear away) or when I roared, amend it thus,
in my roaring [ i. when I was carried away with the feeling of some present
adversity, though not with true touch of my sin, I cried and roared like a
wild beast, rather then poured forth gronings 4. For thine hand [ i. thy
judgment and mighty power] is heavy upon me [ i. in a manner presses me
downe] day and night [ i. continually, and without any ceasing almost) and my
moisture ( i. the natural moisture of my body, whereby life is mayntained) is
turned into the drought of Summer ( i. as in the time of summer, when the sun
is most hot, the moisture of the earth is dried up, so fares it with me,
meaning that Gods 5. I acknowledged ( i. confessed) hid I (as Adam, Job 31.33.
and as my natural corruption would teach me) for I thought ( vz. thus with my
self) against my self ( q.d. Yea though it be against my self) the punishment
(he means both ye punishment and the sin it self, for he respects ye
first verse of this Psalm, where he affirms not only sins to be forgiven,
but that it was well with such me^, and 6. When thou may be found, (which is
specially the time of need, as Psalm. 50.15. and mark that he says in the
beginning of this verse therefore: q.d. Because thou have showed thy self so
merciful to others, and namely to me, the godly shall repair unto thee by
prayer) great waters ( i. manifold dangers, as psalm. 18.16. psalm. 69.1.) him (
i. the faithful and godly man, 7, Thou art (this is the speech that the godly
shall use, when they pray unto the Lord) my secret place, ( vz. into which
I will withdraw my self, to be sure and safe from mine enemies, see Psalm.
18.45.) with joyful deliverance ( i. thou do bestow deliueraunces upon
me, which are joyful unto me, and minister matter of great 8. in the way (see
psalm 25.8. He means an upright way and godly life) I will guide thee with
mine eye ( i. I will not only teach thee, but also, ouerlooke or ouersee
thee, that thou may profit in goodness.] 9. He notes that rebellious
persons against God, be as brute beasts, see Isaiah 1.3.) and deuoyd of all
heavenly understanding be ye not, etc. ( i. Be ye not dull and brutish as
beasts, and he names some whom they had ye greatest use and experience of)
do bind ( i. rule and govern) come nere thee ( vz. with their mouth, to
hurt and harm thee, the Prophet means, that he would have them diligently
to apply themselves to the consideration of Gods gouernmente, and to profit
thereby, least otherwise going forward in their rebellion against God, they
enforce him to use the bridle of his might to tame their fearcenes.] ver. 10.
Many sorrows [ i. plagues and punishments sent vz. from God] shall compass
him [ vz. on every side, noting thereby the abundance thereof.] ver. 11. In the
Lord [ vz. because vz. toward God and man.]

Ver. 1.2. Teach that true felicity in this life, vz. forgiveness of sins,
and sanctification toward God and man. ver. 3. Shows that cloaking or close
keeping of sin, brings forth better fruits. ver. 5. Teaches humble and
unfeigned confession thereof, forgiveness always following it. ver. 6. Teaches
the faithful always to have recourse to God by prayer: also that God sundry
times delivers his children, from manifold dangers. ver. 7. God is al in all
unto his servants. ver. 8. Every faithful man, should have care and conscience
diligently to instruct others. ver. 9. Beware of stubbornes in sin for
besides that it makes men brutish, it draws Gods judgment upon them. ver.
10. The unlikely reward of the wicked and the ungodly from the Lord. ver. 11.
Exhortation, yea even to those that have made good proceedings in godliness, is
very necessary.

Psalm 33
THis Psalm has two special parts. 1. to the end of the 11. In the second,
he shows that all 12. to the end of the Psalm.

This Psalm has no title, such a one is Psalm. 10. Ver. 1. 32.11.] it
becomes [this is a reason to induce praises to God, set from their duty]
upright men [see Psalm. 32.11.] to be thankeful [ vz. to God, for all his
benefits.] ver. 2. instruments of ten strings [the proper name of this
instrument 3. A new song [ i. not a common song, but a very 4. Al his works [
i. whatsoever he doth] are faithful [ i. true i. he so favors, that he
performeth] righteousness, and judgment [I make this difference in this place
between these two terms, that righteousness should be referred to the good
people understanding thereby faithful performance of all his promises made to
them, and judgment, to the ungodly meaning the punishments that he will power
forth upon them: and yet, which I think also will not be a miss for this
place, in consideration, that judgment consists of two parts: vz. of
acquiting and clearing the intent, and of condemning the guilty, it may be
referred to the faithful also] is full [ i. has wonderful 6. Word of the
Lord [ i. his commandment or effectual speech, as Psalm. 148.5.] Heavens [ i.
not only heavens, but the earth and al creatures whatsoever: some creatures,
or a part of the workmanship, for the whole] and all the host of them [if you
refer it to the heavens alone, he means Sun, Moon, Stars etc. but if
you refer it to the whole work of creation, he means then all the
several creatures] the breath of his mouth [ i. by his word only, see Job.
15.30.] 7. He gathers [ i. he has sundred them, and appointed them their
place, as appears Gene. 1.9. and ever since has as it were kept them in that
compass and so will do, of all which he speaks in the present tense] the
depth [ i. the waters that seem to have no bottome] in his treasures [ i. he
has shut up the depths to be kept in a certain place, even as it were his
treasures, or amongst 8. All the earth [ i. all the people of the earth, by
Metonymia.] 9. He spoke etc. q.d. he did with a beck, as a man would say,
create al things, see ver. 6. of this Psalm.] It was done [ i. all the work of
his creation] vz. firm, sure, and immovable.] ver. 11. the counsel of the
Lord [ i. whatsoever he has purposed and decreed] stand [ vz. sure and
steadfast, yea never to be ouerthrowne] ye thoughts of his heart [the prophet
speaks hereof 12. Blessed is that nation [ q.d. seeing it is so, that man can
do nothing, and God is all in all, O blessed are that people, that has the
Lord for their God, that is, for 13. All the children of men [ i. all men
whatsoever, 15.] ver. 14. i. from heaven, as 1. king. 8.30.43.] ver. 15. He
fashioneth [ i. he not only made, but now directs and disposes their hearts
16. Is not saved [ i. delivered from danger, or gets the victory] by the
multitude of an host [ i. by an host consisting of very many people] delivered
[ vz. from the danger and power of his enemies] by great strength [ vz. of
himself, or others for him, teaching that all is done and 17. A horse is a
vain help [ q.d. a horse can not help) And we may understand by horse, al
aid and succor that man can have) deliver any) vz. that rides upon him) by
his great strength ( i. by any thing that Job. 39.22.23. etc.) ver. 18. The eye
of the Lord ( i. his favorable countenance and goodness) is (yea and shall be
continually.) 19. Their souls ( i. their lives from death ( i. from all manner
of danger and destruction that might bring death with it) and to preserve ( i.
feed and norish them alive, as he did Elijah, by ravens) in famine ( i. in the
time when other 20. Our soul ( i. our whole life and being, our inward, and
our outward man) wayteth for the Lord ( i. patiently taryeth the Lord, and his
leisure. q.d. seeing God does thus and thus for his children, as he had
declared before, ver. 18.19. This is it, that we do and will do, all the days
of our life, trust in him with patience) Our help ( i. he that helps us) and
our shield: see Psalm. 3.30. Psalm. 11.2. Ver. 28. Our heart (a principal q.d. we
will rejoice etc.) in his holy name ( i. in his virtue, power, and grace, as
Psalm. 29.1. And God is called holy, because there is nothing in him but
holiness, nay he can not away with wickedness, Psalm. 5.4.5.) Ver. 22. As we
trust in thee ( vz.

Ver. 1. The consideration of the duty we owe to God, 3. God loves
chearfulnes in all the exercises that are to be performed toward him. ver.
4. Whatsoever God does is righteous and good, and therefore they are to blame,
that will dislike of his doings. ver. 5. God gives plentiful testimonies of
his mercy to the end he might thereby provoke men to continual thankfulness.
ver. 6. Confirms this article of our faith, God is the maker of heaven and
earth. ver. 7. Gods providence guides al his creatures, and namely and
particularly the Seas and great waters. ver. 8. The consideration of Gods
providence and government, should strike a fear of his majesty into the hearts
of al people. ver. 9. The Lord needs not great power either to build up, or
destroy. ver. 10. There is no wit, nor wisdom of man can take place against
the Lord. ver. 12. True felicity consists in this, that God does love those
that are his, and defend the same. ver. 13.14. Declare that nothing can be hid
from Gods presence and knowledge, the same does ver. 15. Ver. 16.17. Teach that
we must only hang upon the Lord, and that no outward means, can do any
thing, without his special blessing. ver. 18. Sets out gods favor and
goodness toward his children, so does ver. 19. Ver. 20. Teaches us patiently
to abide the Lords leisure. ver. 21. Teaches us ioyfulnes and thankefulnes to
the Lord for his mercies. ver. 22. Teach us to pray for the continuance of Gods
mercy toward us, and others.

Psalm. 34.
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1. to the end of the 7. In the
second he exhorts 8. to the end of the 14. In the third, he declares the
exceeding good will of God toward 15. to the end of the Psalm.

David [ i. which David made] when he changed his behavior [ i. when being
wise and witty, he feigned himself to be mad, as 1. Sam. 21.13. Before
Abimelech [he is called in Samu. Achith, and named there king of Gath whiich
was a city of the Philistines: but here he calls him by a name common to all the kings of that country, as Pharao was to the Egiptians, and Caesar is to the
Emperors.] Who drove him away [ vz. from his presence 1. Always [ i. in the
time of prosperity or adversity: q.d. in what state soever I shall be, I will
praise him] his praise shall be in my mouth continually [ i. I will praise him
and that with my mouth [ i. the words 2. My soul [ i. my inward man, for he
had before said, that he would do it with his mouth: or else take it for the
whole man, a part put for the whole] shall glory [ i. much rejoice, and even as
it were boast] in the Lord [ i. of him, and the help that he has given me] and
be glad [ vz. not only for me, but also for themselves, because that by my
example, they shall conceive 3. He speaks to the humbled and faithful people,
willing them to join with him in the praise of God, that so 4. I sought [ i.
had recourse unto him by prayer, vz. in the time of my affliction] heard me [
i. yielded to my petition and granted it] out of al my fears [he puts the
effect for the cause, 5. They [ i. the humble and faithful of whom before ver.
2.] shall look unto him [ i. diligently and carefully attend for aid and
succor from him, see Psalm. 123.2.] And run to him [ vz. with have in their
troubles, and boldness in respect of obtaining] and their faces shall not be
ashamed [ i. they shall not hang down their heads and countenances for shame,
as they were wont to do, but shall lift up their heads, and look on high 6. The
Prophet shows what ground these good men shall have of their prayers, vz. his
particular example, and deliverances bestowed upon him.] This poor man [ vz.
David, in ye time of his greatest poverty and affliction] cried [ i. prayed
earnestly unto the Lord] i. delivered him, see ver. 4. of this Psalm.] ver. 7.
The Angel [ i. angels one number for an other. For the word Angel, is in this
place the name of the kind of them, as you would say, and therefore must not be
referred to one alone, but to many] pitcheth round about them [ i. does not
only watch diligently over them, and care for them, but defends and saves
them against ye force of al their foes, yea, and as he says in the last part
of this verse: delivers the^, vz out of their dangers: not that the Angels
have this of themselves, but because they are furnished with such power from
god, for the comfort of his children.] 8. Taste ye and see [ vz. with the mouth
of your mind, and the eyes of your faith for otherwise Gods goodness can not be
perceived: it is a metaphorical speech, from bodily to spiritual things.) ver.
9. Serve the Lord ( i. addict 11. of this Psalm.) For nothing wants ( vz.
that God who knows what is better for them, then they themselves, sees to
be meet and good for them.) ver. 10. The Lions, [or rather the young Lions
that are of great force, and ready i. many pine away and miserably perish]
seek the Lord [see ver. 4. of this psalm.] Ver. 11. He speaks unto vz. not
only with your outward ears, but with your mind embrace that sound doctrine,
that I shall propound unto you.] ver. 12. Desires life [ vz. good and blessed,
both i. long life, the days wherein men live being put for life it selfe] o
see i. to have experience, trial, and cast as it were of those things which may
make this life good and pleasant, a metaphor from one sense to an other.] ver
13. Keep thy tongue from evil vz. speech: he means that men should take
heed that they offend not with their mouth, nor words proceeding out of it, as
David in an other place faith of himself, he was utterly purposed that his
mouth should not offend: so that he means that men must beware of
backbiting, slandering, lying, filthy talking, and idle words] lips [he puts
tongue and lips, which are natural instruments, whereby the voice is framed,
for words uttered by them] no guilt^ [ i. no manner of disceate whatsoever,
nor for any cause.] ver. 14. Evil [ i. al manner i. carefully strive to perform
al good and holy duties] seek peace [ i. endeavor to live peaceably with all
men, as Romans 12.18.] And follow after it [ vz. if thou see it going away. q.d.
use all the means thou can to entertain and uphold it, yea pursue it, and
that with egernes, rather then lose it, or depart from it.] ver. 15. He
speaks of God according to vz. for their good, that so he may graciously
provide for them] their cry [ i. their earnest prayer.] ver. 17. see ver. 6. of
this Psalm.] Ver. 18. the Lord is near [ vz. by his vz. them that be
overwhelmed with evil, and as it were in extremity, so that they are in a
manner killed, as it were with the greatness of their calamity, and are at the
point of yielding up their life, in who^ notwithstanding these afflictions
work, that they are not of a lofty mind, either against God or man, but
humble rather and lowly. see Psalm. 51. ver. 17.] Save such [ i. deliver them
out of their dangers, and in fine bring them to eternal blessedness.] ver. 20.
He keeps all his bones [ i. God defends his in vz. without Gods will, as
Mat. 10.29.30. Meaning by broken, hurt or perished how little soever it be.]
ver. 21. But malice as Immanuel reads, affliction, vz. sent from the Lord
which I very well like of, for as he had showed in the other verse Gods care
over his: so here he shows his judgments, against the wicked, and so it is
an amplification by the contrary.) 22. Redeemeth [ i. from death, and al
dangers) the souls [ i. the lives.]

1. Because Gods goodness is continual, our thanks should be continual. ver.
2. Gods goodness toward us, and our thankfulness to God, should be means to
draw on others to a spiritual joy. ver. 3. It is good to exhort one an other to
holy duties, and to joy all together in the exercises of Gods service. ver. 4.
God graciously hears his childrens prayers, and mercifully delivers them
out of their dangers. ver. 5.6. Gods mercy to some one of his children, should
be not only a spur to provoke the rest to came to the Lord, but an argument
of assured hope that they shall obtain and receive deliverance at Gods hands,
ver. 7. The unspeakable goodness of God appears in that, that not only he
himself watches over us, which is all in all, but for the strengthening of our
faith, gives us a guard of Angels. ver. 8. Trust in God is the mean to true
blessedness. ver. 9. All good things belong to those, that sincerely serve the
Lord. ver. 10. Gods children, are many degrees in better case, then the wicked
and ungodly. ver. 11. We are to teach others according to the measure of
gifts that we have received. ver. 13. The tongue, lips, and words must be
rightly governed, and all subtilty must be avoided. ver. 14. All evil must
be shunned, and all good performed, and namely a peaceable and quiet
conversation must be pursued. ver. 15.18. Express Gods careful providence and
watching over his children. ver. 16.21. Set out his judgments against the
ungodly. ver. 17, God graciously hears the prayers of his servants. ver. 19.
Though this be the portion of Gods children to suffer many afflictions, yet
they need not to be discouraged for God stands by them, to deliver them out
of all. ver. 20. Expresses Gods providence over his. ver. 22. The way to avoid
al dangers, is steadfast trust in the Lord.

Psalm 35
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.17.18.19.22.23.24.25.26.27.28. Secondly a description of
the malicious and hard hearted nature of the wicked men, who neither for the
misery that the Prophet was in, nor for the kindness he had showed them, would
pity his case, but proceeded notwithstanding to al manner of outrage against
him. ver. 11.12.13.14.15.16.20.21.

1. He prays the Lord to defend him and 2. Lay hand upon thy shield [hee
speaks to God, as though he were a mighty warrier or captaine] for mine
help [ i. to defend and help me.] ver. 3. Stop i. let mine enemies that they
rush not in upon me, to do me outrage.] Say unto my soul, [ i. make me to
feel inwardly, by the mighty working of thy grace] salvation [see Psalm. 3.8.]
Ver. 4. After my soul [ i. life, vz. to take it away] let them be turned back
[as men that are discomfited in the 2.3.] Ver. 5. As chafe [see Psalm. 1.4.]
He means 34.7. For as God uses his Angels in the defense of his servants,
so he does exercise his judgments against the wicked by their ministry)
scatter them [ i. their persons and their mischievous practices.] ver. 6. Let
their way vz. wherein they should walk and by which they would think to
escape) be dark [so that they may not see, which way safly to flee] and
slippery [that they may not quickly and with speed fly away thinking to
escape] the Angel of the Lord [see ver. 5. of this Psalme] persecute them [ i.
pursue them with grievous punishments from thee, for persecute, is not here
taken in the il part as using a tyranny against them.] ver. 7. Without cause [
vz. on my behalfe] vz. which they dig to make me fall into.) And their nets [
vz. which they laid to snare and catch me withal, see Psalm. 7.15. Psalm. 10.9.]
for me [ i. to catch me in] for my soul [ i. life, vz. that they might take
it away.] ver. 8. Upon 7.15.16.] Ver. 9. My soul [ i. 103.1. In his salvation
[ i. in the deliverance that he works for me and mine, see Psalm. 3.8.] Ver.
10. 34.20. He had said before that in the inward man, now he says that in the
outward man also, he will be joyful in the Lord, and the great deliueraunces
that he has wrought for him, Psalm. 18.50.] Ver. 11. Cruel witnesses [ i.
such as exercised al crueltie] vz. against mee] they asked of me [ vz. by the
way of demand and questioning: he means that they did as it were examine,
and world have had him to have confessed, such things as he never knew, much
less did.] ver. 12. For good [ vz. which I did to them] to have spoiled my
soul q.d. so far their evil toward me extended, that they went about to
take away my life.] ver. 13. Yet I [ vz. behaved my self otherwise] when they
were sick [ i. in some grievous calamity, one kind vz. of sickness put for
many] clothed vz. in token of heaviness and mourning for them, see Psalm. 30.11.
Genesis 37.34.] I humbled my soul [ i. I afflicted my life by abstinence from
meats etc. Now fasting is called humbling, not because that every one that
fasted was humbled, but because it was an outward testimony, of that that
either was or should have been within) and my prayer was turned etc. amen^ it
thus, and my prayer returned into my bosom ( q.d. I did wish so well to them,
that I would gladly have my prayer to come to my self so that if I wished them
any evil, I did as it were pray that the same might fall upon mine 14. As to
my friend, or as to my brother [ i. I did al duties of courtesy to them in
their adversity, so that my dearest friend or brother, could not well have
looked for any more. I humbled my self [ i. afflicted my felf with mourning,
yea mourning as one that bewayleth his mother [ i. my mourning was so earnest
and vehement, as his is that is wont to bewail the death of his 15. The
abiects [ i. the ofscouring of the common people, see Job. 30.1.2.9.] I knew
not [ i. I did not so much as think of it, til it was performed] and ceased
not [ i. without 16. With the false scoffers [vnderstand the word that goes
before, vz. they gathered themselves together, or assembled themselves, with
the false scoffers etc.] gnashing their teeth against me [ i. raging against
me 17. Behold this [ vz. and let thou this their wickedness alone
vnpunished] my soul [ i. me my self, or my whole man] from their tumult [
vz. which they raise up against me, understanding by tumult, such things as fall
out commonly in tumults, as bloodshead, murder, etc.] my desolate soul. [see
Psa. 22.20.] From the Lions [ i. from cruel and ravenous men: Psalm. 34.10.
Psalm. 22.21.] 18. Great congregation [see Psalm. 22.25.] Ver. 19. Unjustly [ vz.
in respect of any thing, that I have done against them] wink with the eye [as
men sometimes do, when they rejoice in some thing. He means that he would
not have them made glad, by any evil, that should come unto him] without a
cause 7. of this Psalm.) ver. 20. Imagine ( vz. first in their hearts, and
afterward express them with their mouths) deceitful words [ i. words to
cloak and color their deceit) quiet of the land ( David speaks this of
himself and those that took his part, who were charged to be rebels and
disturbers of the peace, but he shows that they were otherwise, and by quiet,
he understands quiet people, 21. They gaped on me with their mouths ( i.
they did not only speak against me with an open mouth, that all men might
hear them, but also made mockes at me with their gapings and mowings, see Job.
16.10. Psalm. 22.7. Isaiah. 57.4.) Aha, Aha (these are words of rejoicing for
the having of that they desired.) One eye (eye put for eyes, unless we would
say, that all the wicked are so joined together, that they seem to have but one
eye, heart, head etc.) has seen) vz. his ruin, and destruction, and the
evils which we hoped and wished should come upon him: such supplies you shall
see made, though in an other sense, psalm. 54.7. Psalm. 59.10. Psalm. 118.7. And
in sundry others.) ver. 22. Seen it [ vz. their q.d. seeing thou art a judge,
sit not still, but prepare thy self to exercise judgment against them.) This
and that that follows. ver. 23.24. Are spoken of God, according 24. Rejoice
over me ( vz. by reason of some calamities and afflictions that thou shall lay
upon me. see Psalm. 30.1. Ver. 25. O our soul rejoice vz. because we have
that we desired.] Ver. 27. Love my righteousness [ i. 4.1.) Which loves ( i.
likes of, and furthereth by wonderful means) the prosperity ( i. the
prosperous estate in all respects.) Ver. 28. Shall utter ( i. speak of) thy
righteousness ( vz. which thou show to thine in defending them, and to the
ungodly i. continually, and without ceasing, as it were.

Ver. 1. When men deal unjustly it is good to go to the Lord for our defense,
2.3. If God be on our side, we need not care who be against us. ver. 4.5.6.
Teaches that we may pray against the enemies of Gods church, as also ver. 19.)
Ver. 7. Shows that such is the corruption of the godlies nature that though
they have no cause to work mischief, yet they must do it. Ver. 9. We may
rejoice in the overthrow of Gods enemies, and in the deliverance of his people.
Ver. 10. Gods power only works deliverance, and that then when things seem
to be most desperate. Ver. 11. Cruel and false witnesses are never wanting to
accuse Gods saints. Ver. 12. It is the nature of the wicked to requite good
with evil. Ver. 13.14. Gods children spare not to do good to al, yea to the
ungodly, ver. 15.16. Show that it is no new thing that the wicked of all sorts
consent and agree together against the good. Ver. 17. God sometimes deferreth
the punishment of the ungodly, that he may in the end pay them to the full.
Ver. 18. Gods benefits require at our hands thankfulness. Ver. 20. The
hypocrisy of the ungodly is set out. Ver. 22. God sees all things every
where. Ver. 23.24. Delivers the same doctrine that ver. 1. of this Psalm. does.
Ver. 25. The enemies of God will rejoice in the destruction of the good, when
they have performed it. Ver. 26. Is the same almost word for word with ver. 4.
Ver. 27. The godly should rejoice in one another prosperity, and praise the
Lord for it. Ver. 28. And that not in heart, but in mouth also, and that not
once only but continually as it were.

Psalm 36
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1. to the end of the 4. In the
second he sets out Gods great mercy 5. to the end of the 9. In the third he
prays for 10. to the end of the Psalm.

The title is expounded before, Psalm. 4. and Psalm. 18. Ver. 1. i. that heap of
wickedness which the ungodly man committeth] says to the wicked man [ i.
tells him, and others as well as him] even in my heart [ i. my heart and
confidence also, bearing me record of this: and this would be read by a
parenthisis] that there is no fear of God before his eyes [ i. that he
fears not the Lord in any thing he doth] q.d. by the wickednesses which the
ungodly commit, I judge verily that he has not any fear of God at all: and
that though sometimes he labor to come and disguise his ungodliness. yet I see
it so plainly, 2. For he flattereth himself [ i. allows and likes, yea
praises himselfe] in his own eyes [ i. in his own judgment, or else in the
things that he does: using the eyes which serve as directors in the performance
of things, for things performed: in both these senses you have the word eyes
used sundry times in scripture.] While [ i. whereas in the mean season] worthy
to be hated [ vz. for the greatness and notoriousnes thereof.] 3. Are iniquity
and deceit, [ i. instruments and means to perform iniquity and deceite] he
has left off to understand [ i. he burieth that light of knowledge and
judgment that he hath] and to do good [ i. he cease from doing 4. He
imagines mischief upon his bed [ i. he is so sharp set upon wickedness, that
he spares not to break his sleep to devise of it. [He sets himself [
vz. both in his counsel and practice: q.d. he indeuoureth by all the means he
can to do evil, yea though it be never so notorious.] Upon a way [ i. upon a
course of life, and 5. He hursteth forth into the commendation of gods goodness,
faithfulness, righteousness, and judgments, which he commends, for the
excellency, depth, infinitnes and vprightnes thereof, that notwithstanding all
things were so disordered amongst the wicked, as he had before rejected, yet
still God remained always like to himself.] Thy mercy [ i. the goodness and
kindness, that thou show to all] reaches unto the heavens [ i. is as high as
the heavens, so that if the ungodly would think they could stop it from others,
it is no more possible for them, then to reach to the heauens] and thy
faithfulness [ vz. which thou use in performing thy promises] unto the clouds
[expound 6. Thy righteousness [ vz. which thou exercisest toward al, both good
and bad, giving unto every man that which is due unto them] is like the mighty
mountains [ i. stable firm, and cannot be altered, or else thus, is excellent
and praise worthy as all things that come from thee are.] Thy judgments [ vz.
which thou executest upon all the earth, and namely upon the ungodly route] is
like a great deep [ i. are unsearchable, and beyond the reach and compass of
man's wit, as a depth without bottom can not be found. see Romans 11.33.] Do
save [ i. thou stretchest out thy providence not only over men, but over
beasts, and do deliver 1. Tim. 4.10.] Ver. 7. Children of men [ i. men and
their race or posterity.] Trust under the shadow of thy wings [ vz. to find
comfort, ease, and relief: by shadow of Gods wings, he understands Gods
protection and defense, alluding as it should seem, to young chickens, that
when the kyte houereth over them, commit themselves to the defense, of the hens
wings, by shrowding themselves under them, see Psalm. 17.8.] Ver. 8. i. the
godly] with the fatness [ i. the plentye and abundaunce of thine house [ i. of
thy tabernacle, he puts one benefit, which was a most evident sign of Gods
favor, for all his blessings, meaning that they should be filled, with the
abundance of al good things, that were reserved, and did appertain to gods
children that did hang wholly upon him] out of the river of thy pleasures [ i.
out of those pleasures which come most plentifully from thee as from a river
that never will be dry: all this verse is allegorical, understanding by
satisfiyng, fatnes, drinking, pleasures, and such like, abundance of al graces
both bodily and spiritual. Ver. 9. With thee [ i. in thy power, so that also
thou do communicate i. full and perfection of life: so that we see that
without him there is nothing but death: and he speaks not here only of
natural life, but also of a spiritual life, and eternal life else where] in
thy light [ vz. which thou bestowest upon us of knowledge and vnderstanding]
shall we see light [men then are altogether blind if they be not lightened by
this light.] Ver. 10. Know thee [ vz. by the light of thy 32.11.] Ver. 11.
Feet of pride [ i. the power and force of proud men, who are wont to i.
prevail over me] the hand [ i. the power and force] move me [ vz. from that
stayednes and stedfastnes that I have in thee.] Ver. 12. Shall not be able to
rise [ vz.

Ver. 1. 2. Ungodly me^ flatter themselves in their sin, and the things that
they do, calling good evil, and evil good: also it teaches that we should hate
sin in our selves and others. Ver. 9. The ungodly are full of hypocrisy,
they darken the light of knowledge that they have, and are strangers from
weldoings. Ver. 4. The ungodly spare no pain to perform wickedness. Ver.
5.6.7. Teach that it shall be good for us often to meditate upon his mercy, to
keep us from despair upon his faithfulness, to strengthen our hope and faith
in him, upon his righteousness, to provoke us to weldoing and upon his
judgments to discourage us from evil. Ver. 6. Teaches us to bridle our
curiosity, seeing Gods judgments are unsearchable, it teaches us also the
general providence and care that God has over al things. Ver. 7. Teaches us
to hang only upon the Lord, and to trust in him alone. Ver. 8. Gods children
shall have abundance of all both corporal and spiritual blessings. Ver. 9. Man
has neither ltfe nor light in himself, til it be communicated unto him from
God. Ver. 10. Teaches us that we ought to pray for Gods people. Ver. 11. That
we ought to pray against Gods enemies, and for our selves particularly. Ver.
12. Sets out the ruin of all the wicked and ungodly.

Psalm 37
1. to the end of the 11. In the second part he describes the wicked
practices of the ungodly against the righteous us noting with all Gods justice
in punishing the one, and his mercy in defending and blessing the other, from
Ver. 12. to the end of the 22. In the 23. to the end of the 33. In the 4.
because we can hardly tarry the Lords leisure, he repeateth again his
exhortation to patience: showing the sudden fall of the wicked, but the
prosperous and continual good estate of his children, from ver. 34. to the end
of the Psalm.

The title is expounded already. Ver. 1. Freat not thy self [ vz. against God,
or else be not grieued] because of the wicked men [ vz. that they flourish in
wealth.] Be envious [ vz. against them that are wicked and wealthy.] The
Prophet means that he would not have a godly man to freat against God, as
though he did not justly divide to every man his portion, or to grieve
himself, or to envy at others, for the abundance of wealth and riches that
other 2. For they shall soon be cut down, and this is a reason of the former
speech, meaning that neither they nor their prosperity shall long indure] like
grass [ vz. with a sith, and even at one blowe] as the green herb [ i.
suddenly consume and come to nothing, see Isaiah. 40.6. ] Ver. 3. Trust thou
in the Lord [in these words is contained the service of GOD] and do good [in
these are comprehended mutual duties one of us toward another] dwell in the
land [ vz. without looking so much at the wicked rich men, hanging always
upon God] be fed [ i. thou shall 4. Delight thy self [ i. take thy greatest,
yea and thy only pleasure] in the Lord [and the good things that he has
prepared for thee] thine hearts desire [ i. whatsoever thine heart 5. Thy way
[ i. thy self, life, and all thy affairs.] It to i. whatsoever thou
committest to him.] Ver. 6. Bring forth [ vz. to light and knowledge] thy
righteousness [ i. thy righteous causes, as Psalm. 4.1. And thy holy
conuersation] as the light [ vz. of the day when the sun is up.] and thy
judgment [ i. judgment pronounced on thy side, proving the vprightnes of thy
matters] as the noone day [ i. most clearly, for then is the day most bright.]
Ver. 7. Wayt patiently [ i. with patience tarry his time] for him [ i. at him,
or because of him: q.d. let not his wealth, be an occasion of grief and
fretting to thee] in his way [ i. in the things he takes in hand.] ver. 8.
Cease from anger [ vz. either against God as Jonah. 4.9. or against men] q.d.
let not thy freting carry thee to do that which thou may not do, see Ephesians.
4.26.] Ver. 9. Shall be cut of [ vz. from the earth, according vz. in hope and
patience, as ver. 7. of this Psalme] inherit the land [ i. shall live long in
this life, and afterward be made partakers of eternal life.] ver. 10. Yet a
little while [vnderstand, wait in hope vz. amongst men, because he shall be
taken away, as by experience he himself proved, ver. 36. of this Psalm.]
Look [ vz. to see, if thou can see or finde] his place [ i. the place where
he remained and dwelt] and he shall not be found [ vz. alive and amongst
men. see ver. 36. of this Psalm.] ver. 11. Meek [see Psalm. 25.9.] Possess
the earth, see ver. 9. vz. satisfied, as Psalm. 36.8) In the multitude of peace
[ i. with plenty and abundance of all good things, for so is peace many times
taken in the Scripture, God does in his word, many times promise unto his
children long life, abundance, and whatsoever may be wished, as it were in
this life.] ver. 12. Practices [ vz. all manner of mischiefe] and gnasheth
35.16.] ver. 13. Shall laugh him to scorn. [see Psalm. 2.4.] for i. the Lord
knoweth] that his day [ i. the day wherein he will take vengeance upon the
ungodly: which may be called Gods day, because he then visits, or the
wickeds day, because he is then punished, and he uses day for time of
visitation, as it is else where used in the Scripture.] ver. 14. By 7.12.13.]
Ver. 15. He shows that the weapons 17. The arms [ i. their strength, and
whatsoever they have to lean to, as wit, wealth, etc. shall be broken [ i.
destroyed and brought to naught.] Vpholdeth [ i. mainteineth and succoureth]
the just men. q.d. though they be never so weak.] ver. 18. Knows [ i. not
only foreseeth, but also allows, and makes 1.6.] The days [ i. the times
that he has allotted them, whether they be prosperous or adverse times] shall
be perpetual [ i. in this life shall be long, and in the life to come eternal.]
ver. 19. Not confounded vz. as though they were frustrate of their hope.] Have
enough, see Psalm. 84.10. Ver. 20. As the fat of Lambs [ i. clean consumed,
so that nothing i. as suddenly as the smoke shall they consume away so that
he notes by the first speech their utter destruction, and by the latter,
their sudden destruction.] ver. 21. Expresses what need the ungodly shall be
in, and what plenty 22. Inherit the land [see for the expounding 9. of this
Psalm.) Ver. 23. The paths of man ( i. the way, life directed by the Lord [ vz.
to his own honor, and the good of his children and though it be true that
this may be understood generally of al, yet for that which follows, it is to
be applied to the virtuous only.] For he loves [ i. God allows, likes of
and prospers, as Psalm. 35.27.] His way [ i. his fashion and manner of life
which is called his, not because man is the Author of it, but 24. Though he
fall [ vz. as one that were faint hearted] cast of [ vz. utterly or for ever
from God, 2. Corinthians. 4.9.] puts under his hand [ i. his power and might vz.
to uphold him from utter falling away, which we should quickly do, if God
were not 25. I have been young and now am old [ q.d. in all the time of my
life, from my childhoode unto my graye hears, I can not remember this one
thing] the righteous [ i. he that trusted in the Lord, and by prayer sought
succor at this hand] forsaken [ vz. of God, through any want that he felt]
nor his seed [[ i. his posterity, and those that come of him] begging bread [
i. things meet and necessary, for the norishment of his life, and note that
these temporal promises, are pronounced upon condition either expressed, or
necessarily to be understood, vz. so far forth, as God the giver of all good
things shall see them to be profitable for his glory, and the bettering of
his 26. Enjoys the blessing [ vz. that his father left behind him, through
Gods blessing: he means by blessing that portion of goods, that comes 27.
Flee from evil, see Psalm. 34.14.] for ever [ i. a long season, if you
understand of this life, but perpetually if you understand it of the life,
that shall be reueiled to the sons of God.] ver. 28. Loves 23. of this Psalm.]
Judgment [see Psalm. 36.6.] Forsakes see ver. 25. of this Psalm and note that
the rest of this verse, and that which follows in the 9.22.27.] Ver. 30. The
mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom [ i. very wise and excellent
thinges] talk of judgment [ i. matters that are upright and just: we may
understand it of gods wisdom and justice or else of such words and matters
as passing between man and man, savor of wisdom, and vprightnes and so bring
profit to others.] 31. In his heart [ vz. not only to know, but also to obey
the same, so far forth as god shall assist him, for he always carries with
him that holy purpose] and his steps [ i. his life and order of conuersation]
shall not slide [ vz. before men, and not before god, meaning that in respect of
men, he shall not be to be touched 32. Watches [see Psalm. 10.8.9.10.] Ver. 33.
in his hand [ i. in his power] nor condemn him [ vz. by pronouncing an unjust
sentence against him] when he is judged [ vz. of unjust and wicked men. The
Prophet means that as God will not awarde a wrong judgment like wicked men
of the world, so he will deliver his from such unjust sentences.] ver. 34.
Wait etc. [see ver. 7. of this Psalm.] and keep his way [ i. the way that he
vz. their destruction and overthrow.] ver. 35. Strong [ i. mighty and of great
authority like a green bay tree: q.d. so fresh as though he would never have
dyed, for the bay is always green: by green bay tree, he means a tree,
whose boughs and fruits are always green, and not dead: so that a man would
think the ungodly could not so soon decay, because green trees can not be
overthrown, but with greater labor then dry and withered] ver. 36. He [ i.
he and al his prosperity, see further for this verse, 10. of this Psalm.] Ver.
37. Is peace [ i. continual quietness here, and eternal felicity in the life to
come.] ver. 38. Destroyed together [ i. all, none of the^ 35.26.] And the end
of the wicked [ i. the end that they hoped and wished for] shall be cut off [ i.
they shall never have it.] ver. 39. Salvation i. deliverance from dangers in
this life, and eternal glory in the life to come] their strength [ vz. whereby
they should defend themselves and wound their enemies.

Ver. 1. 2. The wicked men's overthrow comes suddenly. ver. 3. We are taught
to perform duties to God, our brethren, and our selves, and for our better
encouragement, we have a promise annexed. ver. 4.5.6. Contain blessings to
them that walk uprightly before God. ver. 7. Teaches us in all things, and
namely in the execution of gods judgments, to tarry in patience the Lords
leisure. ver. 8. We must abstain from anger and wrath. ver. 9. Shows the
unlikely reward of the godly and the wicked. ver. 10. Sets out the sudden
destruction of the ungodly. ver. 11. Contains promise of blessings for the
good. ver. 12. Sets out the subtle and malicious nature of the ungodly
against the just, so does ver. 32. Ver. 13. Shows that the Lord will confirm
all the wickeds, both counsels and attempts. ver. 14. Delivers the same
doctrine that the 12. does, but yet somewhat more particularly. ver. 15. Shows
that the wickedness which the ungodly shall devise shall turn to their own hurt.
ver. 16. Teaches us co^tentednes, with that which God gives us, though it be
never so small. ver. 17.18.19. 20.21.22. Declare gods favor and love toward
those that are good, and his judgments against the ungodly. ver. 23.24.25.26.
Do teach not only how good God is to his: but with what good qualities also
the faithful should be endued, as pity, tenderheartednes etc. ver. 27.
Christian conversation consists of these two parts, hatred of that which is
evil, and an earnest care to perform good things. ver. 28. God never
destituteth his. ver. 30. Our talk should be continually of good things. ver.
3^. We should reverence gods law, and continually strive to godliness of life.
ver. 33. It skilleth not much how man judge, so God clear us. ver. 34. Is the
same with ver. 7. almost. ver. 35.36. notes the flourishing estate and the
sudden decay of the ungodly. ver. 37.38.39. Set out judgments against the
wicked, and mercies to the godly, to the end that by the one we may be
discouraged from wickedness, and by the other allured to virtue and weldoing.
ver. 40. God is always nigh to those that are his, also trust in the Lord, is
a notable mean of our deliverances from dangers.

Psalm. 38.
1.9.15.21.22. In the second he shows by manifold words and circumstances,
the great grief that he was in by reason of his sins. ver.
2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. In 11.12.13.14.16.17.18.19.20.

David, for remembrance ( i. which he made, not only as a mean to put him
in remembrance of his sin, and Gods chastisements upon him for the same, but
also to admonish him of the deliverance out 1. is expounded, Psalm. 6.1.) Ver.
2. Thine arrows ( i. plagues, diseases, and griefs, that thou have sent) have
light upon me ( vz. violently and with great force, as appears by that
which follows in this Psalm) and thy hand ( i. thy power and might, or else
heavy judgments exercised thereby) lies upon me ( vz. very sore and
grievously.) 3. There is nothing found in my flesh ( i. there is no part of my
body, but it is very much diseased) in my bones ( i. in the parts and members
of my body) because of my sin ( vz. committed against thee, and the plagues
and punishments, 4. For mine iniquities ( i. both my sins, and the
punishments upon me for the same) are gone over my head ( i. either are grown
to a great height: or else which I rather allow of, they ouerflowe me, and as
it were drown me, this being a metaphor taken from waters, as Psalm. 42.7.
Psalm. 88.17. Psalm. 124.4.) Meaning that he was drowned or overwhelmed in his
iniquities, and punishments for them, as one that were overwhelmed in a deep
water) and as a weighty burden (this is an other metaphor, taken from
burden, by which he notes the greatness and grieuousnesse of his sin) to
heavy for me ( vz. to bear, 5. My wounds ( i. the sores that I have, by
reason of thy correction and punishments upon me for my sins) are putrified
( i. are grown to be full of matter) and corrupt ( vz. so that they are
almost past me: no doubt the prophet means by these speeches to express
both the greatness of his grief, and length and continuance thereof) because of
my foolishnes ( i. because of my sin, in which respect also wicked men are
sundry times in Scripture called 6. I am bowed and crooked (he notes the
grieuousnes of his punishment, which by reason of length and bodily weakness
that he received by it, had as it were, bowed him together) very sore ( i. very
much) I go mourning al ye i. all the day long I do nothing but mourn.) ver.
7. My reins ( vz. of my back) are full of burning ( i. of wonderful great heat
which the Physicians take to be a sign of great sickness and dangerous
weakenesse] there is nothing, etc. [see ver. 3. of this Psalm.] Ver. 8. sore
broken [ vz. in my body, by reason of my 37.3.) for the grief of mine heart [
i. by reason or through the great grief that I sustayn ever in the inward man.)
ver. 9. I pour [ i. lay out] my whole desire [ i. whatsoever I wish or desire]
before q.d. All the things that I desire are manifest to thee, yea, the very
sighs and groans which I send out, sometimes in my prayers, and sometimes in
the grief of my mind, are naked in thy presence. But to what end speaks the
Prophet this? vz. To testifye his affection to Godward, and how ready he was
to come to him by prayer.] Ver. 10. And the light of mine eyes [ vz fails
6.7.] are not mine own [ vz. to use them, as I was wont to do: because the use
of them was not so clear and profitable unto him, as in former time they had
bin, he speaks as though he had lost them altogether.] ver. 11. i. by reason
of my plague and sickness, they estrange themselves from me, which thing Job
also complayneth of.] ver. 12. vz. to catch me] imagine deceit continually [
vz. against me, that they may by subteltie take me.] ver. 13. Heard not [ i.
made show as though I i. I replied not again upon them, but quietly and
patiently bare their words: and that this is the right sense may appear by
verse 14. and 15. following] 15. for on thee O Lord do I wayt [he shows a
reason of his silence, q.d. I am deaf and dumb also at the reproaches and
injuries that mine enemies lay upon me, because I hope that thou shortly wilt
hear my prayers, and deliver me from this calamity.] ver. 16. Least they
rejoice over me [a reason to move i. when I am but likely to fall] extol
themselves [ i. lift up themselves both in words and deedes] Ver. 17. Ready to
halt [ i. to slide and vz. for that and other causes) ever before me ( i.
continuallye upon me, and in my sight, so that I cannot forget it) verse 18.
Declare my pain ( i. 19. Are alive ( vz. to work mischief, whereas 2 terms
Mighty, and many, that they have power and number to perform the same.) ver.
20. reward evil (see Psalm. 35.12.) follow goodness ( i. allow and labor to

Ver. 1. Gods wrath and indignation, is much to be feared. ver. 2. 3. Sin
draws upon us wonderful judgments. Ver. 4. We are not able to bear the
multitude of our sins, much less to satisfy for them. ver. 5.6.7.8. show,
that sin and the punishments of God therefore, do bring upon Gods children
many times bodilye sicknesses, and wonderful infirmities. ver. 9. It is good
for us to lay out our causes before God. ver. 11. A man's enemies many times are
they of his own household, see Job 19.13.14.15. Ver. 12. Describes the malice
and subtilty of the ungodly. Ver. 13.14. Teaches us many times to bury evil
words uttered against us, and not to be ready to reprove every thing spoken
against us. ver. 15 In GOD alone must we trust in all distresses, ver. 16. Our
prayers to GOD must be effects of our hope: also the sliding of the Godly
opens the mouth of the wicked, and therefore we have need to pray that we
may stand. ver. 17. It is good to feel our own infirmities, but withal to
have recourse to GOD, for strength to stand. verse 18.19. Declare that the
more pain Gods children are in, the more do the wicked insult and grow up in
might and number. Verse 20. It is no new thing that Gods children receive evil
for good: also that the enemies hate them, not for evil, but for goodness
sake. Verse 21.22. Prayer to God, and to him alone, in the time of all our
distresses is highly commended unto us.

Psalm. 39.
1. to the end of the seventh. In 8. to the end of the Psalm.

Ieduthun. This is the name of one, who for his skill, was preferred before the
rest of his stock and family: See 1. Chron. 16.41. also chap. 25.3. but yet
he so names the chief man, that under the same he means also, those
excellent Musitions that were of his stock 1. I thought [ vz. in my self,
thus] to my ways [ i. to the whole order and course of my life, and namelye
that I sin not with my tongue [ vz. in uttering ill speeches, using the
tongue which is an instrumente of speech, for words or speech uttered
thereby] my mouth brideled [or mufled, it is a metaphor taken from wild
beasts, into whose mouths, or over whose mouths something is put, least they
should hurt, see Psalm 32.9.] while [ i. so long as] the wicked is in my sight
[ i. it pleases God by wicked men to exercise me, least if I should speak any
thing awry, they being present, they 2. I was dum [ vz. for the time as Psalm
38.13. or as a dumme man, q.d. I did not otherwise hold my tongue, then if I
had been dumme] even from God [ vz. words or matter: the Prophet means that
though he had a just defense, and an honest cause to complain, yet he put it
all up in silence, and bare it patiently, as you may see one particular, 2.
Samuel 16.5. etc.] and my sorrow was more stirred [ vz. by my silence
discoursing and dilating with my self, whether I were best to speak: meaning
that by that means, his grief was increased] others read it thus, when my
sorrow waxed raw, [ i. was not only not healed, but by reason of new
calamities, waxed more vehemente: the sense comes all to one, though the
words somewhat differ.

Verse 3. By heat of heart and fire kindled, the Prophet means not only 4.
Mine end [ i. the time vz. which I have to liue] What it is [ i. How long,
for by several words in this verse, the Prophet means all one thing [ vz to
know how long he should live in this World, q.d. Seeing thou handlest me so
sharply, let me at the least know how long I have yet to live, and endure
this pain? But this prayer was not good, because he required to know that
which the Lord had kept close in his own counsel.] Verse 5. My days [ i.
the days i. very short, as a measure of four fingers broade] yea mine age [
i. the time of my life] as nothing [vnderstande, is, or else, thou have made it
as nothing] in respect of thee [ i. if it be compared with thee, that art
altogether eternal, in whose sight a thousand years are but as one day: see
Psalm 90.4. 2. Peter 3.8.) in his best state ( i. that he either can be in
or imagine himself to be in touching this life) altogether vanity ( i.
nothing else but vain, brittle, and transitorye.) Verse 6. i. he and his
whole life) walks in a shadow ( i. has his conversation in this life
quicklye to pass away, as a shadow does, meaning that there is nothing
found in man's life certain, and that he has nothing but a vain show)
disquieteth himself ( vz. by heaping and getting up goods) in vain ( i.
without cause, the reason follows in this verse, because he knows not who
shall be his heir) shall gather, or rather receive them ( vz. from him, when
he shall depart from them.) Verse 7. q.d. Seeing that all men are so vain,
whom should I trust in, or whom do I hope in but in thee alone.] Verse 8. A
rebuke ( vz. i. Wicked men, as Psalm 14.1.) Verse 9. I should have been or
make, etc. q.d. In steed of reasoning and disputing the matter with thee, as
ver. 4. I should have bin silent toward thee, as I was toward others, ver. 2.
of this Psalm.) because thou did it (This is a reason, why he should have
borne his 10. Thy plague ( i. the punishmente and scourge that thou have laid
upon me) consumed ( i. as it were brought to nothing) by ye stroke of thine
hand [ i. by the punishment and affliction which by thy power thou have 11.
With rebukes ( i. plagues and punishments proceeding from thy wrath, which are
called rebukes, because that the Lord by them does as it were rebuke them for
their evil) for iniquity ( vz. committed either directly or indirectly
against thy majesty, and by these terms, he means not only sin, but a just
and full punishment, such as sin deserves) as a Moth (these words may have
a double sense, either that God should consume the wicked, as mothes do
precious garments, which best agrees with this translation: or else that the
beauty of all other excellent things in the ungodly, should be destroyed
through Gods judgments as Mothes, in killing of whom there needs no great
strength, as Job 4.19. and this agrees with Immanuel 12. At my tears ( q.d.
Let my tears mingled with my prayers, move thee to pity me) for I am a
stranger (another reason brought to move God to mercy, taken from his
miserable estate, see 1. Chron. 29.5. Psalm. 119.19. where you shall have almost
the same words (as all my Fathers (he means of the faithful and godly: The
sense of this verse is, q.d. Hearken O Lord unto my prayers by which I pray
thee, that I may be delivered from this great grief wherein I am: I ask this
at thy hands, not that I am very desirous of this life, but because I feel my
self unable of my self to abide such torments: for I am with thee, or before
thee, or thou being witness of the matter, a stranger on the earth, neither
do I acknowledge my country to be here, wherein I follow my Fathers Abraham,
Isaac, Iaakob, etc. who because they tended toward thee, were not taken with
this World, wherein they were conversant, but used themselves as strangers in
another 13. From me ( i. from plaguing me so grievously) my strength ( vz.
decayed, and as it were consumed through grief and vexation) before I go hence
( vz. out of this world, meaning before I dye) and be not ( vz. alive here on
the earth amongst men.

1. It is good to strive to the brideling of our speech, specially in the
presence of the wicked, who will insult over us, if we slip in our words.
Ver. 2. It is a hard matter to abstain from extremities, for if we are not too
much given to babbling, we be ouerflow tongued to good things. Ver. 3.
Impaciencye must be fought vgainst. ver. 4. Curiosity striving to know that
which does not appertain to us must be brideled. ver. 5.6. Describe ye vanity
and shortness of man's life, and the uncertainty of his actions. ver. 7. God only
is to be trusted unto. Ver. 8. Prayer for deliverance from sin, and
punishments due thereto, would be often made. Ver. 9. We should be well content
with whatsoever God does. Ver. 10. We are not able to endure the least of Gods
punishments. ver. 11. Sets out two things: Gods justice in correcting: and
man's sin that pulls correction and punishment from God, Ver. 12. God in
time of greatest affliction must be most earnestly and heartily called upon.
Ver, 13. If God with-holde not his wrath, we shall all be consumed for our
sins.

Psalm 40.
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1. to the end of the fourth. In
the second he shows the infiniteness 5. to the end of the tenth. In the
third part he prays for his own deliverance: wishing 11. to the end of the
Chapter.

The title is expounded before. ver. 1. For the Lord ( i. for him, i. showed
himself favorable, as they do that bow toward 2. Horrible pit ( i. pit, full
of fear and horror, meaning by that speech 69.2.) Set my feet upon the Rock (
i. has placed me where I may be safe from al injury, meaning a most safe
place) ordered my goings ( vz. in such sort, that I am sure from stumbling or
falling.) Verse 3. Has put into my mouth ( i. has given me an i. newly to
sing a song of praise unto him, or take new song for a singular and exquisite
song, see Psalm 33.3. Many shall see it ( i. many shall know the benefits
that God has bestowed on me) and fear ( vz. 4. Makes the Lord his trust [ i.
that trusts in him] regards not [ i. makes little or no account of, see
Psalm 15.4. as through their force to be brought to fear them more then God]
the proud [ vz. those that boast themselves of the things they haue] turn
aside [ vz. from the truth] to lies [ i. lying imaginations as before Psalm
4.2.] Verse 5. He ascrybeth vz. or before thee, that art the only dealer
therein] thy thoughts [this the Prophet attributes to God, that thereby he
might ye more easily set out Gods wonderful affection and love toward us and
over us.] Ver. 6. Sacrifice and offering [betweene these two words I make this
difference, vz. in respect of obedience, as 1. Samuel 15.22. for otherwise God
regards them as parts and pieces of his service which he himself prescribed,
but when hipocrites by cold ceremonies would think to appease god, without
true godliness, then does the Lord reject them, as Psalm 50.8.9. etc.] for
mine ears have thou prepared [or as Immanuel reads, have thou boare^
through. If you take the Geneua Text, there the note is good, if you follow
Immanuel, then he means acceptance and taking of him to be his faithful
Heb. 10.5.] Verse 7. Then said I: lo, I come [ vz. readilye and willingly,
when I understood thy will] in the roales of thy book [ i. in the law, and
this he speaks according to the Jews both in time heretofore and at this
day, who writ in parchment or paper, and afterward role them up, because they
will longer last roaled then folded] written i. concerning me.] Verse 8. Thy
Law is within my heart [ i. I do earnestlye, and from the bottom of my heart,
reverence, embrace, and Philip. 1.8.] Verse 9. Thy righteousness [ i. how
just and good thou art, in the performaunce of thy promises.] Refrain my
lips [ vz. from declaring that] O Lord thou know [ vz. that this is true
that I speak 10. Is very well expounded in the 11. He beseeches the Lord to
show his mercy and truth toward him, and to make him by effects to feel the
same.] Verse 12. Conteyneth vz. on every side, within and without] my sins [
i. both my sins, and the punishments that lie upon me for the same, see
Psalm 32.4. Psalm 38.2.3.4.] and he means by that which follows, that
they pressed him so down, that he was not able to lift up his head, or as a
man would say to behold the Heauens] then the hears of mine head [ i. they
are innumerable] my heart [ i. my courage, wit, counsel, etc. has failed me
[ i. has hene as it were consumed, vz. by 13. Let it please thee [Hee flies
to 38.21.22. Ver. 14. Let them be, etc. See Psalm 35. (4. and 26.) where you
have almost the same words.] Verse 15. For a reward [ i. as a meet and just
punishmente] of their shame [ i. of their filthye and shameful life, see
Psalm 28.4.] Aha, Aha, [see Psalm 35.21.] Verse 16. That seek thee [ vz.
with a sincere and vprighte heart, and that to serve thee] in thee [ i. for
thee, and for the gracious deliueraunces that thou bestowest upon them] that
love thy salvation [ i. like and rejoice in thy saving health and
deliueraunces] say always [ i. have always an occasion to say] the Lord be
praised [ vz. for the continual mercy and goodness, which he 17. Though I be
poor and needy [ i. destitute of all man's ayde] thinks on me [ vz. to do me
good, or else provides for me, and my matters] thou art my helper and my
deliverer [ q.d. I need not be proud, when I do any thing well, for I do it
by thy help who art wont to deliver me from troubles.

1. Patient abiding the Lords leisure is never unrecompensed. Ver. 2. God
shows himself then most nigh to his children, when they are in the greatest
danger. Verse. 3. By graces bestowed upon his children, GOD delivers two
doctrines, the one, that those that have received them should praise him, the
other that those that have not received them, should learn thereby to
reverence him, and put their trust in the truth of his promises. Verse 4. GOD
only must be trusted unto, as for proud and deceitful persons they are to be
abhorred. Verse 5. Gods works are past our reach. Verse 6. God prefers
obedience, specially in the heart, before outward Ceremonies. Verse 7.
Teaches us chearefully when we know Gods word, to obaye the same. Verse 8.
Teaches us to reverence the law and word of God above all. Verse 9.10. To set
forth Gods goodness, righteousness, and truth, to the uttermost of our
powers. Ver. 11. Continually to pray for the feeling of Gods mercy and truth.
Verse 12. Describes the greeuousnesse of sin, and the horrible effects of
the same. Verse 13.14.15.16. We learn to make prayer as for our selves, so for
others, and yet withal to pray against the malicious and obstinate enemies of
Gods truth. Verse 17. God rejects none for his poverty or need, but the more
he is in distress, the readier is the Lord to help him, if he be his.

Psalm 41.
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. David 1. to the end of the
fourth. In the second he describes the mischievous 5. to the end of the
ninth. In the third he prays unto the Lord for deliverance, and assuring 10.
to the end of the Psalm.

The Title is expounded before. Verse 2. vz. from ye violence and rage of his
enemies] preserve him alive [ vz. even here upon the earth i. he shall have
abundaunce of blessings powered forth upon him in this life) and thou ( vz. O
God, a sudden change of the person) unto the will ( vz. that they should do
with him what they list, see Psalm 27.12.) Ver. 3. Upon the bed of sorrow i.
when being sorrowful and grieved he does for very weakness keep his bed:
putting the place whereupon the heavy hearted party lies, for the party
himself, and his wonderful grief) thou have turned (a change of the person
as before ver. 2. and of the time, by turning he means changed) all his bed
( i. all the grief he had upon his bed) in his sickness ( i. in the time
of his sickness. The Prophet means yt God either had or would) for the
Prophets use to speak sundry times of things yt are to come, as though they
were already done) restore him from sickness to health, and from grief of mind
and body to sou^dnes both of body and soul.) ver. 4. Therefore I said ( vz.
because I saw thy goodness toward others) my soul ( i. me my self both in body
and soul, 5. Speak evil of me [ i. Wish evil to me, as may appear by that
which follows in this verse, They desired his death] and his name [ i. not
only his glory, but his remembraunce] perish [ vz. from amongst 6. He come [a
sudden change of the number, putting one either for some excellent one
amongst them, or for many] to see me [ vz. when I am sicke] he speaks lies
[because he has one thing in his mouth, and another thing in his heart, see
Psalm 35.15.] his heart heapeth iniquity within him [ i. he carries an
innumerable number of mischiefs in his heart against me, which he declares to
his mates so soon as he is departed from me, and laboreth to put the same in
execution] comes forth [ vz. from the place where he vz. to his companions.]
Verse 7. Whisper together [ i. hold their secret counsels and conspire against
me, for by whispering he means their secret speeches and practises] mine hurt
[ i. the hurt they 8. A mischief [ i. some great affliction, punishment, or
disease sent from God (which his enemies called a mischief prophanelye, as
profane men sometimes call it vengeance, Acts 28.4.) has light upon him and
taken such hold, that he that lies [ vz. grievously sick upon his bed, and in
it] shall no more rise [ vz. out of his bed, because they supposed he should
dye of 9. My familiar friend [this may be understood either of Absolon or
Achitophel, as 2. Sam. 15. or some other trustye one] which did eat of my
bread [ i. that came to my table, and did eat of the best vittails I had
there) has lifted up the heel against me [by heel we understand the whole
man, a part being put for the whole. The meaning of the Prophet is, that not
only he, whosoever he was, did set himself against him, but that also he
did it despightfully and contemptuously: for to lift up the heel or foot, to
the end to trample under feet or to spurn, argues contempt, despite, and
crueltye. Judas, John 13.18.] Verse 10. Raise me up [ vz. to my former strength
and glory) so shall I reward them ( vz. according to my kingly calling and
office, rendering unto them that they have deserved.) 11. He uses the present
tense for the future which is usual also in scripture, because of the certain
persuasion that they have, that the thing shall be performed, and therefore, I
know, is put for I shall know: and so, does not triumph, for, shall not
triumph, meaning it of those that be named before, or 12. Set me before thy
face ( i. have me not only in continual, but in merciful remembrance, as
those that are continually in the presence 13. Blessed ( i. Praised, so you
shall have this word often used in the Psalms) of Israel (i. of his faithful
people, see Psalm 14.7.) world without end ( i. for ever and ever.

1.2.3. Teach us to pity those that are afflicted, and for our better
encouragement therein, the Lord has set down certain promises, which he
will perform always unto us, so far forth as he shall see, to be for his
glory and our comfort. Ver. 4. Sin draws all judgments upon us, both in
soul and body. Ver. 5. The ungodly wish the death of the faithful. Ver. 6.
The ungodly are full of lying and hypocrisy. Verse 7. They craftily conspire
the hurt and destruction of the godly. Ver. 8. They rejoice and clap their
hands for joy in his misery and affliction. Ver. 9. A man's enemies are they of
his own household as it were, and it so falls out many times that where Gods
children assure themselves of greatest friendship, there they find least which
teaches us not to hang upon man. Verse 10. We must fly to the Lord only in
all our distresses. Ver. 11. Gods deliverance of his children, is a testimony
of his favor toward them. Verse 12. All our sufficiency to goodness, is from
God aloue, and that of his mercy only. Verse 13. God must be continually
praised for his loving kindness, and we must always give a through and earnest
consent thereto.

Psalm 42.
THis Psalm consists of two parts. 1. to the fifte. In the second he
runs to God praying 6. to the end of the Psalm.

The title, to him that excels [this is expounded before Psalm 4. 32]
committed to the sons of Korah [not only to be kept as a treasure, but to
be sung also by that posterity amongst whom it should seem that one Heman
was the chief, 1. Chron. 6.33. 1. Chron. 25.5.] Verse 1. Under a similitude of
the David sets out his earnest desire to serve GOD before the Arke] after
thee, O GOD [ i. after thy service and worship, and after the beholdinge of thy
Majesty, a visible token whereof thou show in thy Tabernacle: and the word
of parting would be marked, by which David shows, not only the great
pains that he had taken therefore, but even that that little breath which
he had yet left, he employed that way.] Verse 2. My soul i. I my self
whollye] thyrsteth [ i. earnestlye desires, even as those that be almost
overcome with thyrst, wish for drinke] even for the living God [This term he
uses, to put a difference between the God which he meant, and whom he served,
and the dead idols of the Gentiles] before the presence of GOD [hee means by
this the Tabernacle where God gave visible signs of his presence, and not as
though he were or could be at any time out of his sight, see Psalm 139.7.8.
etc.] Verse 3. The Prophet means, that be said to be fed as it were
therewith, see Psalm 80.5.] while they [ i. the Enemyes] thy GOD [ vz. in
whom heretofore thou did trust: this is 4. These things [ i. Both the
reproaches of the enemy, and my frequenting of the Tabernacle with the rest of
Gods people.] I poured out my heart [ i. my courage consumed as it were, and
my strength wasted away, see Job 30.16.] he means in this Verse, that he
was as it were half dead, when he remembered the enemies reproaches on the one
side, and on the other side, the wonderful pleasure which he took in the
holy assemblies, going before them as a Captain or ringleader to the rest]
that keeps a Feast [ vz. unto the Lord, wherein there was great mirth used,
as may appear by sundry places.] 5. Cast down [ vz. into doubting and
heauinesse] unquiet within me [ i. meaning by reason of greefe] the help of
his presence [ i. the aid and deliueraunce] which his presence [ i. his favor
and goodness has given us: For so is Gods presence often times used, and
namelye in these 6. From the Land of Jorden [i. I being in the Land of
Jorden, which is a place very much distaunt from Jerusalem, where thine Arc
is, or from the place where thou art served, so likewise is Hermonim, and the
mount Mizar, which some take to be a place unknown even to the Jews
themselues] whatsoever it is, this he means, that he was much grieved, being
in a country far from the place where GOD was served, to think that he was
deprived of the assemblyes of his Saints.] Verse 7. One deep [ i. One great
and grievous affliction] calls another deep [ i. exhorts as it were,
another to come, that by access thereof my afflictions may grow as it were
to infynitenesse, as Psalm 40.12.] by the noise [ i. in such manner, and with
such great noise, as] thy Waterspoutes [ i. thy Clouds send down the
rain, see Job 38.25. and he justly resembles the Clouds to Spoutes, because
they both pour down, and with hold again, as it pleases God to appoynte and
rule] all thy Waves and floudes [ i. great and grievous afflictions sent from
thee] are gone over me [ i. 38.4.] Verse 8. Will grant [ i. graciouslye give,
and make me to feele] the night [ vz. of the day before wherein I have felt
his goodnesse] of him [ i. both of him and his praises, meaning that he would
praise him] the God of my life [ i. the author of my life and 17.] Verse 9. My
rock [see Psalm. 18.2.] forgotten me [see Psalm 13.1.] Verse 10. He notes
what great grief he indureth by the vngodlies speeches. Ver. 11. Is expounded
before ver. 5. of this Psalm.

1.2. Teach what an earnest love and desire we should have to serve God in
the assembly of his Saints. Verse 3. declares what great grief we should
have to hear GOD reproched, the same does verse 4. Verse 5. that we should
labor to comfort our selves by all the lawful means we can. Verse 6. and
namely by having recourse unto our GOD, who is the God of all comfort, 2. Cor.
1. Verse 7. teaches two things, first that the latter end of one trouble with
Gods children is the beginning of an other: secondly that we should not
despair under the multitude of our afflictions. Ver. 8. We ought to be well and
assuredly persuaded that God will have mercy on us. All the rest is touched
before verse 3.5.

Psalm 43.
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts.

This Psalm has no Title, no more has Psalm 10. and also Psalm 33. 42.
was, vz. that being driven out of his Country by the violence of his enemies,
and wanting the use of Gods exercises, he prays deliverance from the one,
and restitution to the other. Verse 1. Judge me [ i. Pronounce sentence i. it
may be that he means Saul as the chief, but I rather take it to be the
singular number put for the plural, or else one most notorious, put for all
the rest of the ungodly: see for the more clear exposition of this verse, 1.
Samuel 24.9.10. and so forth to the end.] Verse 2. The GOD of my i. thou art
he from whom I have received all the strength I have, and by that strength and
power that thou haste given me, haste delivered me hitherto from all
daungers] Why haste thou put me away [ vz. from thee, he expressed this
Psalm 42.9. in these words: Why haste thou forgotten me? Thus flesh and
blood debateth the matter with GOD, when they are left some small time in
affliction] Why go I so, etc. [These words are word for word, Psalm 42.9.
He means, that notwithstanding the enemy did wonderfully trouble him, yet
he should have raised up himself, in the hope and comfort that he had or
might have, in the GOD of his strength.] Verse 3. Send [ vz. to mee] thy light
[ i. thy gracious i. Faythfulnesse, and true performing of that which he had
promised, q.d. of thy favor and goodness help them that are oppressed, and
by that succoure sent them from thee, make them to feel the truth of thy
promises] let them [ i. thy light and thy truth] lead me [ vz. to the
apprehension of thy goodness and mercye] and let them bring me unto thy
holy Mountain [ vz. where thy Arc is, which was then Kiriath Iearim, a
Town set upon a Mountain, as it should seem, 1. Samuel 6.21.] and to thy
Tabernacles [ i. to all the places where the shall be pitched for thy Arc,
for the temple was not builded till the reign of his son Solomon. Now the
Arc was sometimes at Shiloh 1. Samuel 1.3. Sometimes at Kiriath Iearim as 1.
Samuel 6.21. Sometimes at Nob, 1. Samuel 21.6.7. Sometimes at Gibion, 1. Kings
3.4. 2. Chron. 1.3. and this is the reason, why it is called here, and in other
places of the Psalms, as Psalm 84.1. Tabernacles in the plural number, vz.
because 4. Then [ i. When this shall be granted me from GOD] I will go [ vz
with Sacrifices and offerings] unto the altar of God [ vz. that I may offer
them thereon, in these words he promises, a willing, free, and thankful
service unto God] the God of my joy and gladness [ i. he that is the Author
thereof, as verse 2. of this Psalm, he is called the GOD of his strength: and
by doubling the words, joy and gladness, which mean all one thing, he
means the wonderful great and exceedinge joy that GOD either had, or would
give him] upon the Harp [hee adds this Instrumente, to be as it were a
testimonye outward, of his thankfulness, see Psalm 33.2.] Verse 5. Is
expounded before, Psalm 42.5.12. He is my present help [ i. ready at all
assayes to help me, and to give me wonderful deliueraunces.

1. We may at Gods hands by prayer beg, defense against, and deliverance
from cruel, subtle, and wicked persons. Verse 2. It is good, the more the
enemy rages to cheer our selves in God. Ver. 3. The feeling of Gods favor
and the truth of his promises, two notable points to comfort us in all our
distresses: also we must have an earnest desire to the holy and public
assemblies of GOD. Verse 4. Thankfulness both inwardlye and outwardlye, would
be rendered to God for his mercies bestowed upon us. Verse 5. It is good for us
to comfort our selves in our afflictions, and patiently to tarrye the Lords
leisure, who will never fail us, if we hang wholly and steadfastly upon him.

Psalm. 44.
17. to the end of the Psalm.

The Title is expounded before, Psalm 42. The author of this Psalm is
unknown, and the time to as of certaintye, wherein it should be written
notwithstanding there is some probable appearaunce, either after the return of
the people out of Babylon, or else in the time of their exyle. Verse 1. i.
assuredly and certainly hearde] our Fathers [ i. our Auncestors] have told us [
vz. both by words and writing] in their days [ i. in the times wherein they
liued] in the old time [ i. even long ago, that the people might the more move
God, to comfort them in their misery, they reckon up his great goodness
showed unto their forefathers.] Ver. 2. Driven out vz. of the land which they
possessed and inhabited] with thine hand [ i. by thy power and might, as sundry
times in the book of Psalmes] planted them [ i. surely set, and as it were
rooted them] to grow [ i. to multiplye and to increase wonderfully.] Verse 3.
Inherited not [ i. atteyned not to the inheritance i. by the weapons and
armor which they had] their own arm [ i. their own power and strength] save
them [ i. deliver them from danger and distresses] but thy right hand, and
thine arm [ i. thy strength, might, and power only] and the light of thy
countenance [ i. thy most merciful favor and presence, in which thou
wentest before them, and show thy self favorable unto them, See for the
proof of this Exodus 15.13. Ieoshu 24.12.13. etc.] Verse 4. Thou art my King
Iaakob [ i. unto the Israelites that came of Iaakob, the Father of the Nation,
for the Nation it self, see Psalm 14.7.] Verse 5. i. the might and strength
that thou have given vs] have we thrust back [ vz. as Beasts do with their
horns, for such a word he uses in this place, see Deutronom. 33.17. they
mean that they had beaten back and overthrown those that assaulted them) by
thy name ( i. by thy virtue, power, and grace, as Psalm 20.1.) have we trodden
down ( vz. under our feet, noting by this speech both the weakness of their
adversaries, and the overthrow that they gave them, despising them also as dust
under their feet.) Verse 6. 7. Saved us ( i. set us free, and delivered i.
from all their force and subtle practices) and haste put them to confusion (
vz. in defending us, and in overthrowing them.) Verse 8. i. thank, as often in
these Psalms and Luke 10.21.) thy name (see verse seven of this Psalm.) Verse
9. Far off ( vz. from helping i. make us ashamed, and that before thine and
our enemies, because thou do not help us) and go not forth ( vz to
battle, fighting for us, as thou was wont to do: and giving us victory
over all our enemies.) Verse 10. To turn back ( i. through faint hartednesse,
to flee before him) spoil ( vz. us, and our substance) Verse 11. Thou give
us [ vz. over to the rage and crueltye of our enimyes,] as Sheep to be eaten
[ i. which should be presentlye killed, and presentlye devoured, under
which similitude, they set out the great danger and extreamitye they were
in] and do scatter us among the Heathen [this was an other punishmente, and
that very grievous to be amongst a people, among whom GOD was blasphemed,
and they 12. Thou sellest thy people [by this manner of speech they mind to
declare, that GOD had them not in that estimation and regard that he had
their forefathers: q.d. We are vile and despised in thine eyes, because we are
sold to the enemies on every side of us, for a little or nothing, neither 13.
They mean, that GOD had given them over to their neighbors to be mocked, and
scorned, by all the means the ungodly could deuyse, as by ieasling speeches,
laughing countenaunces, and gestures that favored of scoffing.] 14. A Proverb
[ i. a common by-worde, meaning that they and their name, were in great
reproach among the Gentiles, and they had them continuallye in their mouths,
so that their common sentences and speeches, were not more rife in their
mouths, than the calamitye and myserie i. a continual skoffe and mocking
stock as it were, see Psalm 22, 7. 2. Kings 19, 21.] Verse 1. My confusion,
[marke the sudden changing of the number, see for this purpose also Verse 6.
of this Psalme] is daily before me [ i. I every day or continuallye behold,
and therefore can hardlye forget the confusion and shame that lies upon vs]
the shame of my face [ i. the shame wherewith my face is, as it were,
ouercouered, has wroughte this effect, that I am ashamed, 16. This verse
hangs upon the former, thus: q.d. I am altogether ashamed, by reason of the
opprobrious speeches of the enemyes] for the voice [ i. for the words which
they that slander us and rebuke us, utter against GOD and vs] and auenger [
vz. of themselves, and their own causes, meaning thereby the crueltye and
bloodinesse of these men: and this is to be noted, that they speak of all
their enemies under the name of one, and in the singular 17. They declare that
by no troubles, they could be drawn away from trust in GOD, and from that
truth of his Religion, which they had imbraced] yet do we not forget thee [
vz. as those that make little accounte of thee and thy Religion] neither deal
we falslye concerning thy covenant [ vz. made with us, they mean that they
had indeauoured to the 18. They declare what it is to break Gods covenant:
vz. in affection of mind to turn away from him, for that they mean by heart,
or in action or conversation openly to violate, understanding by steps,
outward behavior, and by Gods paths, the ways, words, and law which he
has appointed them to walk in, even as it were a path beaten way.] Verse 19.
Thou have smitten i. cast us down as it were with a blow. Mark how he
ascribes this to GOD, because the Chaldeans or other their enimyes, whosoever
they were, could do nothing without him] into the place of Dragons [ i. into
desolate and solitary places, for they delight to dwell there, or else into
countries, the inhabitants whereof are no less cruel then Dragons: or as
Immanuel reads, into the place of Whales, i. into the most deep Sea:
whatsoever it is, they mean, that they were cast into most horrible and
grievous daungers] and covered us [ i. overwhelmed vs] with the shadow of
death [ i. with most manifest dangers, which seem to bring nothing but death
with them, see Psalm 23.4.] Verse 20. If we i. made little account of, or
nothing at all regarded, as verse seventeen of this Psalme] the name of our
GOD [ i. his glory, honor, worship and Religion] and holden up our hands [
i. by prayer and supplication sought help of any other than of the true GOD,
whom we worship, they use the sign of one that worshippeth and seeks help,
for the thing it selfe] to a strange God [ i. to an Idol, either one or
many, now this verse is ended in the next verse.] Verse 21. Search this out
[ q.d. It 22. For thy sake [ i. for thy causes, as the vz. through the cruelty
of the enemies, we yet notwithstanding willingly and chearefully bearing the
same] as sheep [ vz appointed or made ready for the slaughter.] Verse 23. Up,
why sleep thou [in these verses following, they 121.4. but it is spoken of
God after the manner of men,] Ver. 24. Thy face [as those are wont to do, that
loath i. make as though thou had no care or regard of our misery and
affliction, and of us that are oppressed therewith.] Ver. 25. For i. the whole
man, but cheefely the life] is beaten down unto the dust [ i. is in wonderful
danger, and almost past hope of recovery, as they are that are returning into
dust out of which they were taken] our bellye cleaves unto the ground [ vz.
like those that are overthrown by their enemies in fight, and are so cast down
flat even upon their faces, that there is no hope as it were of their rising
again, because they seem to be as a man would say glued to the earth.] Ver.
26. For our succor [ i. to help and succor vs] and redeem us [ vz.

Ver. 1. It is good for Ancestors to declare to their posterity, and for the
posterity to mark Gods works diligently declared unto them, showing out either
his power or his mercy. Ver. 2. Declares that God is al in all, either in the
overthrow of his enemies, or in the upholding of his children. Ver. 3. It is
not any worldly force or means (though they may be used, but yet without trust
in them) but God alone that performs whatsoever pleases him. Ver. 4. We
must pray for the Church. Ver. 5. Gods power is the Buckler that the faithful
have to trust to for their own defense, and for the discomfiture of their
enemies. Ver. 6. Trust must not be reposed in any outward thing. Verse 7. God
alone is the worker of our deliueraunces. Ver. 8. And he only must be praised
therefore and that continually. Ver. 9. God many times leaves his children,
for a while, to the end that he may come to them again in greater mercy: also
if God guide not the army, all is nothing. Ver. 10. Fainthartednesse on the
one side, and courage and stomach on the other side, is from God. Ver.
11.12.13.14. tend all to one end, vz. to set out the poor and miserable
estate wherein Gods people are many times. Ver. 15.16. Teaches us that it is
no small grief to Gods children, to hear the words and to see and feel the
deeds of the ungodly. Ver. 17. teaches that though there be sin in Gods
children, why they should be punished, yet God does not always punish them
for their sin. Ver. 18. and 19. Teach us that no affliction should make us
shrink or fall away from God, but rather that our afflictions should draw us
more nigh unto him. Ver. 20.21. Teach that we should not have recourse for
succor to any, but to God alone. If we do that God beholds that, and all
other our wickedness in good time to punish it. Ver. 22. It is good to suffer
for well doing. Ver, 23.24. Teach us, not only to pray to God in our miseries,
but to be earnest with him, and not to leave off til we have obtained. Ver. 25.
Shows that the more our miseries are, the more need we have to repair to
God, yea even then when they seem to be past hope of recovery. Ver. 26. In our
prayers we must only look upon Gods mercy, and nothing at all in our selves.

Psalm. 45.
Solomon, from Verse 1. to the end of the ninth. In the second is contained
an admonition to Salomons wife, with great promises to be 10. to the end of
the Psalm.

Shoshannim, (which was an Instrument amongst the Jews, and had six
stringes upon it, for the word is derived from another Hebrew word, which
signifies six, as Kimcho shows) a Song of love (this is well expounded in
the Geneua Bible) all that follows in the Title is expounded before, Psalm.
32. and Psalm. 42, This one thing I would have noted, though David's name be
not here expressed, yet it is very likely that he was the Author thereof. In
deed it is not put down before many Psalms, and namely Psalm. 2. and Psalm.
66. and yet the holy ghost. Acts. 4.25. ascribes it to David.] Ver. 1. Will
utter vz. by the instrument of my tongue and pen.] A good matter [ i. an
excellent and profitable thing, excellent in respect of the party whom it
treats of, and profitable in regard of the people whom he shall rule ouer] in
my works [ i. in these verses following, which he calls works in the
plural number, not for the greatness, but for the exquisitnes of them.] My
tongue is as the pen of a swift writer [he means that his tongue shall be most
swift: q.d. I will most readily utter these things that I have in my mind: and
my tongue shall no less readily express the praises of the king, then he
that is most skillful in writing writes with a pen.] Ver. 2. Thou art fairer
[here he begins to praise Solomon: and in these words he praises him for
his beauty and comeliness which he says was more excellent in him, then in
any other person whatsoever for so much he means by children of men] grace [
i. words that obtain grace and favor from men] is powered in thy lips [ i.
is plentiful, and as it were ouerflowing in thy mouth: and in these words he
commends his eloquence] blessed thee [ vz. with abundance of excellent
giftes] for ever [this must be understood of Solomon, but it must have his true
verification in Christ, and that that I put down here, must be understood
throughout the whole Psalm. Ver. 3 i. take unto thee thy authority, he puts
the sign of authority, as the Apostle also does, Romans 13. for authority it
self, for kings obtain great praise, if they rightly use the sword] and when
he says upon thy thigh, he alludeth to the fashion that was common among the
Jews then, and is at this day used among the Turks, who hang their swoordes
so, that it lies upon the thigh, and hangs not on the side as ours do:
which thing also we our selves perform, though not in swords, yet in skeanes,
hangers, wood-kniues etc.] To wit, thy worship and thy glory [here he more
plainly shows what he meant by sword: vz. his great and excellent
authority, which he should make more famous by using it well.] Ver. 4. Amend
thus, and in thy i. being thus established and set vp] ride prosperously [ i.
fear not to attempt good and holy things] because of the word of truth [ i.
because the matter of truth, yea all truth it self requires this of thee:
and he understands by these three terms, three several things that ought
to be in kings: by truth, he means faithful dealing: by meekenes, mild
and courteous behavior: and by righteousness, upright execution of those things
that concern either the maintenance of good, or the punishment of vice: and if
we take it as it is read in the Geneua text, he seems then to resemble these
virtues to chariotes of triumph, upon which kings were wont to be carried,
specially after some great victories gotten: and he speaks of these virtues,
because that just and upright government, and not outrageous and violent,
gives credit and authority to princes.] So thy right hand [ i. thy power and
might, because that [in that hand it most consisteth] shall teach thee [ i.
shall enable thee to perform, as those that teach others, make them able.
[Terrible things [ i. such things as shall strike a terror and fear of thee
into the hearts of thine enemies, and a loving 5. Thine arrows are sharp [
i. the instruments and means that thou have to use against thy enemies are
persing, yea so persing, that] the heart [ i. the closest part, yea the
strongest, even that wherein life consists, shall be pierced thereby] of the
kings enemies [marke the change of the person, meaning thereby thy enemies
which art the king] shall fall under thee [ i. shall come into thy power and
subjection, as men are wont to fall, when they are stricken wish an arrowe so
that a man may do with them what he lists, he means nothing else, but that
Solomon should have instruments and darts to strike his enemies a far 6. Thy
throne [ i. thy kingdom, for he uses the throne where the Prince did use to
sit, that governed the kingdom, for the kingdom, rule, dominion, and
authority, that the king had.] O God [ Solomon is here called God, as kings
and magistrates are in other places of scripture] for ever and ever [ i.
indureth a long season] the scepter of thy kingdom [ i. the rule and authority
which was signified by the scepter] is a scepter of righteousness [ i. is just,
equal and upright, all this must after this sort be applied to Solomon: but
for as much as the Apostle, Heb. 18. does apply it to Christ, we must more
largely interpret it: vz. that the holy Ghost means to signify and to set
out unto us, not only the continuance and durablenes of Christ's kingdom, but
also the continual vprightnes 7. Apply this also to Solomon, and Christ, to the
one in figure, to the other in trueth] thou love [ i. allowest, likest of,
and performest] righteousness [ i. upright dealing and equity] and hate [ i.
can not at any hand away with] wickedness [ i. any manner of sin whatsoever:
he shows wherein vprightnes consists, vz. in the maintenance of equity and
in the sharp punishment of iniquity] has anointed thee [the Prophet speaks
after the manner of those days, wherein kings were anointed, which was a
visible sign of their entrance into the kingdome] with the oil of gladness [
i. with such oil as made not only Solomon glad but the people over whom he
should raigne] above thy fellows [ i. al thy brethren set aside, though they
were elder then thou: how this and other places of this Psalm, have 8. He
commends Solomon, for the glory of his garments, noting that they were, as it
were performed, with Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia, which were things not only of
good favor, but of great price, because they were set from far countries] iuory
palaces [ i. excellent, which the holy Ghost means, both by speaking in the
plural number, and also by calling them, or affirming them to be of iuory,
which was excellent and precious, as may appear Amos 6.4.] Where they [ i. thy
people and those that do thee seruices] have made thee glad, vz. by the
dutiful deeds, cheareful countenances and loving words that they have
declared toward thee.] Ver. 9. Kings daughters [ i. those that issued i. were
come unto thee among the rest, all which thou did honorably use, and
apparel sumptuously] of gold of Ophir [ i. most fine and pure gold, see Job.
28. ver. 16.] Ver. 10. He Pharao his daughter, who was Salomons chief wife,
and by marriage newly ingraffed into the body of the church, willingly to
hearken to Gods word and quite and clean to forget all carnal things
whatsoever. Mark the words of this admonition, first hearing, then
considering of that which is heard, and lastly embracing of that which is
heard, meant by inclining of the ear: and she is called daughter, not in
respect of her husband, but in respect she was become now a scholleresse [as
a man would say in Gods Church, as some were called children before, Psalm.
34.10. And by people and Fathers house, he means her own country, and all
the pleasures therein, as friends kindred, and whatsoever else she might be
delighted in.] Ver. 11. So shall the i. if thou do this, vz. embrace the
religion that he shall teach thee, thou shall be most acceptable unto him and
he shall love thee most tenderly] for he is thy Lord [ i. thy head and
governor, as 1. Corinthians. 11.3.] Reverence thou him [ q.d. therefore it
beseems thee to yield him all the obedience due to him.] Ver. 12. Daughter
of Tyrus [i. the city Tyrus, putting the place for the 9.14.] With the rich of
the people [q.d. even the richest, and not the meanest only] shall do homage
before thy face with presents [ i. shall in token of homage and as though they
were subjects bring openly presents unto thee.] Ver. 13. Kings daughter [shee
is so called, not as vz. in the kings palace, where she remains familiarly
with the king] her clothing is of broidered gold [ i. is most precious and
costly.] Ver. 14. She shall be brought unto the King [the Prophet alludeth to the
vz. that Queens might not come when they would to the king, but when they
were sent for, Hest. 4.11. Hest. 5.2.] In raiment of needle work [which is
very dear and precious: by this variety of apparel, the Prrphet minds to
set out the sumptuousnes of the king, and his wife] by that which follows
after, the Prophet means that she shall come with a great number of
handmaydes waiting upon her, which seems also to set out her glory: and
these handmaydes are called her companions, not because they were her equals,
but because they were continually in her company, as it were.] Ver. 15. He
shows after what sort this glorious troop shall come, vz. with joy i. with all
mirth that possible may be, see Psalm. 43.4.] Ver. 16. In steed i. thy
auncesters. q.d. there is no cause why thou should think upon them] for thou
shall have multitudes of children, and thy posterity shall be wonderfully
enlarged, yea advanced to great and wonderful honor, for that means he by
making them Princes, throughout all the earth, meaning by earth, the land of
Judah, which promise was not fulfilled in Solomon and his seed, not because
God was not able, but because the covenants and conditions 17. Are the words of
the Prophet contained, wherein he promises to publish, and that for a long
season, the glory and renown of Solomon and his kingdom: and that the people
shall for a great while, yield him praise, for his peaceable and quiet
government. For so must the word, Many generations world without end, be
understood, as referred to Solomon. And thus we see how it agrees to him,
now let us gather the doctrines out of it, and see how in truth it agrees
to our Savior and his time.

1. Teaches us first to take heed that we utter nothing, but good things, and
secondly to do that willingly and readily, lest we be prevented by death, or
some other occasion: and thirdly to dispose our selves with all the power we
have, to set forth holy marriage, specially that which is between Christ, and
his Church, of which see Hoshea. 2.19.20. Ver. 2. Is fulfilled in Christ, not
in man's judgment, as appears Isaiah. 53.2.3. But is to be seen by the eye
of faith only, whose glorious beauty and gift of persuasion may appear, that
he in the ministry of his Apostles, converted of all nations under the heaven
some, to embrace the Gospel: and when it is said that God has blessed him it
must be understood in respect of his humanity, for otherwise in respect of
his deity, he is God equal with his father. Ver. 3. Christ's sword is spiritual
and is in deed Gods word, of which see Isaiah. 11.4. Heb. 4.12. Reave. 1.16.
Wherein also stands his glory and worship, when he is served according to
that, and not as man deuiseth and in this verse Christ is called most mighty,
because he has all power both in heaven and in earth. Math. 28.18. And does
whatsoever pleases him. Ver. 4. Christ is admonished, in respect of his
humanity, to talk upon him, and to execute his government, seeing he is so
replenished with gifts, and is described like a triumphant conqueror, amiable
and comfortable to his own people, but terrible and fearful to rebels, as 2. Corinthians. 2.15.16. Ver. 5. He describes Christ's weapons, and the munition of
his kingdom, which are not carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down
holds, and imaginations and every high thing etc. see 2. Corinthians. 10.4.5.6. 6.
Sets out the euerlastingnes and equity of Christ's kingdom, Heb. 1.8. Ver.
7. First mark one manner of speech, which in the sense I have omitted, loving
one thing and hating another, which kind of rehearsing by the contraries the
Jews often use, and has in it great force, vz. to note the earnestnes and
soundnes of love toward righteousness and well doing, and the sincere hatred of
all sin and corruption. How this was verified in Christ we need not to
stand upon, God is called Christ's God, in respect of his manhood: and Christ
in that respect also is said to be anointed with the oil of gladness, because
he had the fulness of the spirit, so that of his fulness have we al received,
even grace for grace [ i. abundance of grace, as Ioh, 1.16. And by oil of
gladness is meant, the fulness and anointing of the spirit, through whom it
comes to pass that the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17. And by fellows, he means not equals, but
generally all Christians, who yet notwithstanding through faith are partakers
of his dignity. Ver. 8. Does allegorically set out the sweetness and pleasure,
John. 3.29. Ver. 9. Is described the glory of the church, which is but one
wife, if we respect it generally, or else many if we respect either 10. 11.
He shows what profit shall come to the Church by obedience to Christ. Ver.
12. Sets out the enlarging of Christ's kingdom, by the calling of the
Gentiles. Ver. 13. Shows that the glory of the Church stands not in outward
show and bravery. Ver. 14. Sets out the glory of the Church generally,
which is amplified by this circumstance, that particular Churches, which the
holy ghost resembles to handmaydes waiting upon her, shall adorn 15. Shows
the manner how the faithful should appear in the presence of God in his
assemblies. Ver. 16. Expresses the wonderful inlargment of Christ's kingdom,
which we have seen performed, and the great glory that his children shall
have, though not here, yet eternal 17. Teaches that the praises of our
Savior, who is the only head of the Church shall continue for ever, and that
there shall be no end of his kingdom, as Luke 1.33. Other good Lessons may
here and there be gathered, as ver. 2. that beauty and eloquence are good gifts
in a Prince. Ver. 3. That it becomes a magistrate, to be courageous. Ver. 4.
That he should profess and practice, truth, meekenes, and righteousness. Ver.
8. That sumptuousnes in apparel for Princes, is not altogether to be
condemned of Salomons apparel: fee what our Savior says, Matthew. 6.29. Ver.
10. That marriage requires forsaking of all, that the wife may cleave to the
husband, and the husband to the wife, Gene. 2.24. Ver. 17. That the faithful
generally, and every one of them particularly, should carefully endeavor to
advance and set forth the great glory of GOD, and of our Savior Christ.

Psalm 46
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of the 7. In 8. to
the end of the Psalm.

Alamoth [which I take to be the name of an instrument, see 1. Corinthians.
15.20.] Ver. 1. Our hope [ i. he, on whom we hope, or in whom we trust] and
strength, [ i. from whom the strength we have co^meth] and help [ i. he that
alone helps us in the time of troubles, and delivers us out of the same]
ready to be found q.d. he is not far off, neither yet needs 2. Will not
we fear [ i. be overcome with feare] though the earth should be moved [ q.d.
if it were possible that the whole world should be turned vpside down as it
were, much less would we fear less matters, as wars and such like]
mountains [either upon the earth, cast through earthquakes into the Sea, or
the mountains and rocks in the sea, should through the rage of the Sea be
ouertumbled, as in the next verse: by these manner of speeches, shaking of the
earth, and moving of mountains, he means most terrible tumults and
fearful things, which might strike wonderful great fear into a man that
wanted faith, but yet by reason of the full and assured 3. Thereof [ i. of the
sea] rage [ i. be very violent and vehement] and be troubled [ i. with the
rage, seems to have changed his color, by reason of being mingled with
dirt, clay, and mire, for so in our speech we do use to say, the fountain is
troubled] shake, [ vz. with the violence of the waves of the sea, he means
by this manner of speech, in this and the other verse before going, that though
all the world, and the whole course of nature, should be as it were turned
vpside down, yet still they will hang upon the Lord, being assured of 4. A
river [hee means no doubt, Gihon or Shiloach, which did flow to Jerusalem,
[whose streams also did fill sometimes the brook Kidron or Cedren spoken of
John 18.1. that compassed some part of the city of Ierusalem] shall make glad [
vz. in the time of their heauines] the City of God [ i. Jerusalem, which is so
called, because he was the defender thereof, and was there worshipped] even
the Sanctuary [hee puts the word sanctuary which was a part of the Arc, for
the place where the Arc was, that is Sion, whither the Arc was caried] of the
Tabernacles [that is of the whole land, which is called Tabernacles, because
the Arc was pitched in diverse parts of it, before it came to be placed in
Sion, see Psalm. 43. ver. 3.] Of the most high [ i. of God himselfe] all these
three verses, vz. 2.3.4. are allegorical, meaning that though the troubles and
hurliburlies were never so great yet, Gods favor (which he understands by
rivers and streams, as Psalm. 36.9.) is a sufficient stay to appease their
consciences in the midst of them all: and because Gods favor was no where
more plainly showed then in the City of Sion or Jerusalem, and the Arc there
5. In the midst of it [ vz. of that City, noting by being in the midst of
it, his presence. Mat. 18.20. John 20.26. and his ready favor to help it] not
be moved (therefore much less shall it fall, do the enemies against it what
they can) very early i. speedily and in good time before it be distressed.]
Ver. 6. When [ i. so soon as] the nations raged [ i. began to express their
fury] and the kingdoms [ i. the people divided into kingdomes] God thundered [
i. gave manifest signs and tokens of his wrath and judgment against them] and
the earth [ i. the people dwelling on the earth] melted [ i. consumed away as
snow before the Sun, or as wax before the fire: see Psalm. 68.2.] Ver. 7.
The Lord of 24.10.] is with us, [ i. on our side to defend vs] the God of Jacob
[i. of the Patriarch and all the people that came of him, toward whom the
Lord showed himself marvelous mighty and merciful as in Genesis, Exodus,
and other places appeareth] our refuge [ i. the place whereunto we commit our
selves, to be succored from our adversaries.] Verse 8. 9. Unto the ends of
the world [ i. even unto the furthest parts of the 10. Be still i. full of al
majesty and might, doing whatsoever pleases me both in heaven and in earth,] I
will be exalted among the heathen [ vz. whether they will yea or no, because
none of them can let me. Ver. 11. Is expounded before in the seventh

Ver. 1. In all troubles Gods people must hang upon God, 2. Notes the assured
persuasion that the faithful have of God and his goodness, notwithstanding the
great troubles that be in the world. Ver. 2.3.6. do allegorically and in
plain terms also express the rage and cruelty of the wicked, and the hard
brunts that Gods children must abide at their hands. Ver. 4. Declares that
notwithstanding all hurliburlies God will comfort his children in such sort as
shall be most for his glory and their good. Ver. 5. God is always present with
his children to help them in due time. Ver. 7. God is a sure place of refuge
for his children to fly to, for he will never put them back. Ver. 8.
Teaches us to admonish one an other, yea the very wicked: it sets out also,
as likewise the 9. verse does, Gods power against his enemies. Ver. 10. None
is able to withstand God, and his works, see ver. 11. see ver. 7.

Psalm 47
1. to 4. In the second is a description of Gods great power, majesty and glory
set out to this end, that the faithful might learn to trust in him alone,
from ver. 5. to the end of the Psalm.

42. Ver. 1. All people [ i. as well Jews as Gentile] clappe your hands [ vz.
for joy, as Nahum. 3. ver. 19. He puts the outward sign of joy, for
inward and outward ioyfulnes] sing loud unto God etc. [in this part of the
verse the Prophet requires of the people on the Lords behalf, willingness,
chearfulnes, and gladness, for in all services performed to him, he specially
regards these things, as 2, Corinth. 8.12. Ver. 2. Is high [ vz. not only
because he dwells in the high heavens, but also because he has highest,
yea all authoritie] and terrible [ i. fearful or meet to be feared, not
only of his children for their good, but of the wicked for their punishments]
a great king [ vz. as whose power no creature is able to resist] over all the
earth [ i. such a king, as to whose authority all the quarters and corners 3.
He [ i. God has subdued [ vz. by his word and spirit] the people [ i. of all
the people of the world some] under us, [ i. under the exercises of his
religion and service which we professe] putting the persons professing a
thing, for the thing professed] under our feet [by this manner of speech is
meant that ye gentiles should be scholars, and the Jews scholemasters as it were
to them, for to sit under the feet, or at the feet, is used in scripture, for
being a scholar or learning, as Act. 22.3. And not that the Jews had ever such
a large 4. May be the words, as it were both of the Jews and Gentiles
converted to Christ's kingdom, showing what graces he has bestowed upon them]
he [ q.d. he that knows what is better for us then we our selues] has
chosen [ i. not only laid out but also appointed, and that of his own good
will and mercy toward vs] our inheritance [ i. not only all things meet for
this life, as lands countries, possessions, etc. but even all other things
that concern the hope of a better life] even the glory of Iaakob [ i. even all
these excellent things that he gave and promised to Iaakob wherein he might
glory and rejoice. The faithful mean that they had as great, both abundance
and assurance of Gods grace and goodness, as Iaakob ever had.] 5. God, [ i. the
ark of God which was a true token of Gods presence, and so is the word Lord
also used, as Psalm. 132.5.] Is gone up [hee speaks this no doubt in respect
of bringing the Arc into the mount Sion of which see 2. Sam. 6. Throughout the
chapter] with triumph [ vz. against the enemies, which also was joyful to Gods
people] even the Lord with the sound of the trumpet [this is even the same that
was said in the first part of this verse: saving that here he adds the
instrument, which many times strikes terror into the enemies, and adds
courage to the faithful: and by this manner of speech he means to note out
the great glory of the Lord, and of the triumph and victories that our Savior
got, as Colos. 2.15. Ephesians. 4.8.] Ver. 6. The four q.d. let all your care
and study tend to this, to praise the Lord and his son Christ.] Ver. 7. For
God [this is a reason, why they should extol the Lorde] King of i. has power
over all, and exercises an Universal kingdom, the particulars and the
majesty whereof, he sets out in the next verse.] Ver. 8. Holy throne [hee
means either the Tabernacle, or else the heaven, Mat. 5.34. Matthew. 23.22.
Whatsoever it is, or howsoever it is to be taken, the Prophets purpose no doubt
is to describe God as a judge, ready to yield justice, both to good and bad,
according to their several causes.] 9. The Princes of the people [ q.d. not
only mean men from among the Gentiles, but even the mighty] are gathered [
vz. by the mighty woorking of Gods spirit, and the exercises of the word: the
Prophet means by this manner of speech that the Gentiles should make
profession of true godliness as well as Jews, and he speaks of it, as though
it were already performed, for the certainty of it] people of the God of
Abraham [ i. the Jews, for from Abraham they came according to the flesh: And
he calls him the God of Abraham, thereby to distinguish him, from all the
false Gods of the Idolatrous gentiles] the shields of the world [ i. the
defense and the protections of the whole earth: he uses shields, which are
good means of defense, for defense it selfe] belong to God [is his right. q.d.
seeing that the world is preserved and maintained by God, great cause is
there, why men should reverence, his so great and high majesty, and therefore
he addeth] he is greatly to be exalted [ i. feared and praised.]

Ver. 1. It becomes all sects of people to praise God: 2. Shows that we
ought to praise him for his majesty and power. Ver. 3. Declares, that it is
God alone that draws men's hearts to the embracing of his truth. Ver. 4.
Gods love is the first and only cause of all the graces we have. Ver. 5.
Sets out his majesty and might. Verse 6. Teaches how earnest we should be
in praising our God. Ver. 7. Shows that both our praises, and all the
services that we shall yield to the Lord, must proceed from an understanding
heart. Ver. 8. In that God is described as a judge it contains matter of
comfort to his children, and of terror to the wicked. Ver. 9. God calls of
all states some to the embracing of his truth: also God alone, is the defender
of the whole world, and of all the peoples therein, and that therefore he is
worthylie to be magnified.

Psalm 48.
Jerusalem, from Ver. 1. to the 4. to 8. In the third: the faithful set out
the assured persuasion that they had of Gods goodness toward them, praying for
the continuance thereof, both upon themselves and the whole Church, from verse
9. to the end of the Psalm.]

42. Ver. 1. Great is the Lord [ vz. in respect of his power and glory] and
greatly to be praised [ q.d. and therefore no small praise does belong to him]
in the city of our God [ i. in Jerusalem, which is called Gods City, because
God had given special tokens of his favor to that above the rest] even upon
his holy mountain [hee means mount Sion: which is therefore called holy,
because that the Arc being there placed, the most holy God, showed himself 2.
He does commend mount Sion, for the pleasant situation thereof because it
stood. Northward, or as you would say on the north side of Jerusalem, as
Isaiah. 14.13. We know that places situated Northward, are very wholesome by
reason of the cold, dry, and clear air, that comes out of that quarter,
see Job. 37.22.] It is the joy [ i. it is a place wherein the whole earth
should rejoice, because that the doctrine which came out of the same, brings
salvation to all the world, see Isaiah. 2.3.4.] Mich. 4.1.2. etc. Act. 2.
Titus 2.11.] and the City of the great king, he calls Sion the mount wherein
the temple was builded, and was a part of the City of Jerusalem, the city it
self, and by great king, he means God who is called great, because he has
all greatness in himself, which also serves to put a difference between
Matthew. 5.35.] Ver. 3. In the palaces thereof [ i. in the strong bulwarks and
defenced Towers of Jerusalem, which he calls palaces, for the excellency
and beauty thereof, because they were not only strong but also very sightly]
is known [ i. by trial taken and had] for a refuge [ i. for a place of most
assured safety, as who being with them, and on their side, they needed not care
who or how many were against them.] 4. The kings [ i. diverse and sundry
kings, as Shishake king of Egypt. 2. Chron. 12.9. Serah, king of Ethiopia. 2.
Chron. 14.9. Sanecherib king of Assiria. Isaiah. chap. 36. and chap. 37. and
this circumstaunce makes me to think that this Psalm was made long after
David's tyme] were gathered [ vz. together with all their forces against this
Citie] and went together [ vz. to destroy it, but could not, as follows, and
by this the faithful comfort themselves, that all the mischievous imaginations
of the wicked shall not prevail against it.] Ver. 5. When they [ i. the
enemies withal q.d. at the bare beholding of the Citie] they marueiled [ vz.
at the walls, Bulwarks, Towers, Ramparts and other munition thereof,] and
were astonished [ vz. not only with the excellency of the thing, but with great
feare] and suddenly driven back [ vz. for all their great warrelike forces,
and powers, they were put to flight, and every one glad to take them to their
heels as it were.] Verse 6. Fear came i. a very great fear seized them, and
took hold of them] there [ i. even as they were before Jerusalem, and as a
man would say ready to besiege it, this was chiefly verified upon Sanecherib
and his host as appears. 2. Kings 18.24. 2. Kings 19.35. 2. Chronic. 32.1.
Read the places throughout] and sorrow [ i. grief and great pain, so that
they were not only afraid but full of great griefe] as upon a woman in
travail [by this similitude the Prophet notes, first the sodainenes of their
sorrow, secondly the increase and continuance of it, as one throw comes in
an others neck, and thirdly that they should not escape it, no more then a
woman can her pain, see Thessalonians 5.3.] Ver. 7. He does by an other
Ierem. 18.17.] thou breakest [ vz. in pieces, and make them to suffer
shipwracke] the ships of Tarshish [i. goodly tall and strong ships and he
means by ships of Tarshish, not only ships appertaining to that Island,
but those that came in to the haven there, which was made very commodious for
them, see Jonah. 1.3.] Verse 8. As we have heard [ vz. by our forefathers,
Prophets vz. both with our eyes, and by experience also, the same things
fulfilled] in the City of the Lord of hosts [ i. Jerusalem, why GOD is
called the Lord of hosts, see Psalm 46.7.] will stablish it [ i. make it
firm and sure, and keep it safe and sound, from the force of the enemies]
for ever [ i. for a very long season, if we refer it to Jerusalem: but
worlds without end, if we refer it to Gods Church.] Ver. 9. We wait etc.
[ i. we quietly and patiently 10. According unto thy name [ i. as thy power,
might, and majesty is great, and spreads it self over the earth] so is thy
praise unto the worlds end [ i. it is all the world over, and shall continue
and abide for ever amongst thine, in what place or quarter of the world so
ever they be.] Thy right hand [ i. thy power, and the things that by thy
power thou do, for he puts the hand wherein power consists and by
which as by an instrument matters are performed, for power it self, and the
things done thereby] is full of righteousness [ i. not only righteous, but
free from suspicion or reprehension of 11. Let mount Sion rejoice [this is an
exhortation to stir up the faithful to thankefulnes. By mount Sion he
understands Jerusalem, as ver. 2. of this Psalm: putting also the place
containing the people, for the people contained therein.] Daughters of Judah
[i. other Cities and Towns of that Country, as Psalm. 9.14.] of thy judgments
[ i. which thou have exercised in defending us thy people, and punishing thy
enemies.] 12. Compass about Sion [the writer of the Psalms provoke the
citizens of Jerusalem, not only to consider the strength and situation of
their City, but also to see, whether that by the besieging of it, it were any
whit weakened, q.d. go about it, and about it again, view it well, and see
whether there have been any breaches made into it] tell the Towers thereof [
vz. to see whether any be wanting, defaced or thrown down.] Ver. 13. Mark
well the wall thereof [ vz. no whit at all impayred] behold her towers 3. of
this Psalm] that ye may tell your posterity [ vz. of this great and wonderful
deliverance, as our fathers have told us, verse 8. of this Psalm, and also
Psalm. 44. ver. 1.2. etc. and so by that means they have their faith also
strengthened 14. Is our God [ i. has declared himself so to be heretofore,
and at this present, and will do so continually] he shall be our guide [ i. we
will always take him for our leader and gouernour] unto the death [the
faithful mean not by affirming that God shall be their guide unto death, that
afterward he shall cease so to be, but this is their mind, that for as
much that death is the greatest and last enemy they have to deal withal in
this life, they assured themselves, that God would not only lead them thither,
but give them strength to overcome and get the victory also therein.]

1. Mean praises appertain not to so great a majesty as God is: whose praises
should found every where, but specially in Gods Church. Ver. 2. Under Sion and
Jerusalem, and the situation thereof, the Prophet sets out, but the beauty
of the Church, and the healthful and safe dwelling therein. Ver. 3. It is a
notable thing once to have felt and had trial of Gods goodness and power toward
his. Ver. 4. Shows that even the mightiest are many times enemies to the
Church. Ver. 5. Sets out the sudden destruction of the enemies of the
Church. Ver. 6. Notes the greatness of their grief, and the assurednes thereof.
Ver. 7. Declares their utter ruin and overthrow, whom the holy Ghost
resembles it to a shipwreck. Ver. 8. The faithful find God always
faithful in the performances of his promises. Ver. 9. Gods children must in
patience abide the Lords leisure for their deliverance. Ver. 10. God is holy
and just in all things he does, whatsoever the ungodly babble to the
contrary. Ver. 11. Gods people ought to rejoice, when God either overthrows
their enemies or delivers them. Ver. 12. The Lord will have all the senses
of his servants witnesses of his gracious deliueraunces, to the end that their
faith might be more confirmed. Ver. 13. Our posterity should be instructed
in Gods mercyes toward us, out of which also they should reap an argument of
comfort in distress. Ver. 14. We learn to hang upon God continually.

Psalm 49.
THis Psalm may be divided into three especial parts. exordium or entrance
into the matter, where the prophet prepares his people to attentiuenes,
commending also the matter that he will speak of, from Ver. 1. to the end of
the 4. In the second part is set out the vanity and 5. to the end of the 15.
In the third, the Prophet by his own example exhorts 16. to the end of the
Psalm.

For the title, and the exposition thereof see Psalm 42. Ver. 1. vz. not only
with the ears of the body, but also of the minde] this [ vz. that I shall
speak hereafter] give ear [in that the Prophet doubleth his speech, he
shows both how dull of heart, men are to conceive, and also how excellent
his doctrine is, that requires such attentiuenes] all ye that dwell in the
world [in these words he shows how large and general his doctrine is,
appertaining to all people then living, or afterward to come.] Ver. 2. He
declares 3. Of wisdom [in the Hebrewe text, it i. that, that I have within
me, which also I will express with my tongue] is of knowledge [in Hebrew,
knowledges, by which he notes the excellency, variety and abundance thereof,
commending also his doctrine by these speeches, 4. I will incline my ear [ i.
I my self will diligently mark consider and hearken unto these things, and
therefore you ought also to do the like, so that he makes himself an example
here, as appears in the next verse] to a parable [ vz. that follows in this
Psalm, meaning by one, sundry, the word signifies grave and sentencious
speeches, of matters of weight, such as in this Psalm are. ver. 12.20.] upon
the harp [ i. using a harp in the utterance thereof, that you may so much the
5. Wherefore should I fear [ q.d. there is no cause because I am certainly
persuaded of Gods goodness toward me] the reason of this is showed in ver.
14.15. of this Psalme] in the evil days [ i. in the days of affliction,
calamity, or death: which are called evil, not that they be so of themselves,
as sent from God, but because they are laid upon us, for the evil committed
against him, and so we account of them: for otherwise days are not evil, but
good] the last part of the verse mende thus: though the iniquity of my heels,
might compass me: by iniquity of the heels, he means not only the
iniquities, to the doing whereof he had been carried with his feet, putting
heels which are part of the feet, for the feet, but also whatsoever
calamity had fallen upon him for these sins: q.d. there is no cause why I
should be afraid, no though my sins, and the punishments for my sins,
were on every side upon me: for that assured persuasion that I have received
through faith and love in God, has banished 6. They trust: amend thus, of them
that trust] in their goods [ i. in the wealth and substance that they have
scraped together] and boast themselves [ vz. as though by their own wit and
labor they had obtained it] in the multitude [ i. in the great quantity and
abundaunce.] 7. Amend thus, not one can by any means redeem etc. and so knit
it to the sixth verse] by any means [ vz. which he has or can deuise] redeem
[ vz. from death and the power thereof, he means deliverance and freedom
from bodily or natural death] his brother [ i. any of his kindred, or dear
friend and acquaintaunce] his ransom [ i. ransom for him, vz. that he may
have a longer life] to GOD [there is a double reason of this, first because God
regards not these outward things, as silver, gold, honor etc. Secondly
because GOD is not subject to alteration or change, i. so dear, yea so hard a
matter, as in deed it can not be performed of men to Godwarde] of their
soul [ i. of their lives, he means that they should live longer upon the
earth] and the continuance thereof for ever, amend thus, yea it cease [ i.
purchase of a longer life, cease for ever: so that it is a dear thing, nay I
affirm it to be an impossible thing, which shall never be performed: and
all this 8. verse must be 9. That he may live still [ vz. amongst men upon
the earth] for ever [ i. a very long time, and so have his days prolonged] and
not see [not come unto, or try or feel, see Psalm. 16.10.] The grave [ i.
death, he puts that which insueth death, vz. burial in the grave, for
death it self, we may well turn the word, corruption, the grave being so
called in the Hebrewe tongue, because it corrupts that which is put into it.]
Ver. 10. For this word, for, read although, and so join this 10. and 11. i.
every man may and does see: for the Prophet uses the word, he, for the whole
state of men, though it seem to note but some particular person] that wise men
dye etc. [ i. that all without difference and respect of persons yield to
death, yea though their state and condition have been never so far differing
from others] and leave their riches [ vz. behind them on the earth] for others
[ vz. to possess.] Ver. 11. Yet they think [ q.d. all 12. Shall not continue
vz. long, howsoever he think to make his name sure] he is like beasts [see
Ecclesi. 3.19.] that die [by this speech he means not only that they die as
beasts, but also be unprofitable and serve to no use, but to be cast forth, as
beasts that dye not being killed, no man regards to any purpose, but it
goes to carrion.] Ver. 13. This their way [ i. this their manner of dealing and
behauiour] utters [i. bewrays that they have no heavenly wisdom at al, how
wise soever they be taken among men] yet their posterity [ q.d. notwithstanding
their folly appear, they that succeed them as heirs, for generally I take the
word posterity] delight in their talk [or rather approve and allow it,
understanding also by talk, not only the words that proceeded from them, but
the acts also they did, for many times men's deeds do speak. The Prophet
means, that these men do both allow of, and with delight follow the words
and deeds of their predecessors, touching having abundance of riches, building
houses, etc.] Ver. 14. Like sheep they lie in grave [the Prophet means q.d.
how brave and glorious so ever they be yet death shall take hold of the^, as
of a pray ready to be consumed, and they shall not escape] and the righteous [
i. good and godly people, who are so accounted, and not that they are so of
the^selues] shall have domination over the^ [I take the mind of the Prophet to
be thus: the wicked and the ungodly during the time of their life, did exercise
a tyranny over the good: but when it comes to pass that the ungodly are
once dead, then they shall not only be delivered from their cruelty, but then
it appears that they have, as a man would say gotten the victory against
them, and be as it were Lords over them, and whereas he addeth] in the
morning [I take his meaning to be thus. q.d. very suddenly the godly shall
prevail, when neither he himself, nor the wicked thinks of it, so that he
that ouernight, as a man would say, was Lord over the righteous, shall in the
morning become as it were his vassal, and he that was a servant ouernight,
shall in the morning be a Lord or ruler] their beauty [ i. their glory,
bravery, force, and whatsoever was excellent in them shall come to nothing]
from their house [see Ver. 11. of this Psalme] to grave [ i. the house
appointed for all the Job. 30.23.] Ver. 15. But God [in the other verse he
showed what was the end of the wicked: now he shows what their end shall be
that trust in god, confessing in deed, that he was subject to bodyly death as
others were, but for all that that God would preserve him in a better life] my
soul [ i. my whole man] from the power of the grave [the body entering into it,
til the general resurrection, at what time it shall be yielded up again, and
the soul coming into it: and in this place the Prophet takes upon him the
person of all the faithfull] for he will receive me [ vz. to himself, as
Eccle. 12.7. And as appears also, in the person of one of the thieves that
was crucified with our Savior, Luke 23.42.43.] Ver. 16. Be not thou afraid [
vz. either of thine own poor estate, or of the other man's flourishing, as
though that thereby he should overcome thee, or that thou thereby should be
drawn from God, or godlines] the glory of his house [ i. the renown of that
raze and stock from whence he came, together with the beauty of his building,
great rents and revenues etc. are increased, 17. He shall take nothing away
[common experience shows the truth of this, and Job has well well declared
it. chap. 1.21.] Neither shall his pomp [ i. glory, riches, wealth or
whatsoever else as may appear by two examples. Luke 12.16.17. etc. also Luke
16.19.20. etc.] vz. in to the grave.] Ver. 18. He rejoiced himself [ i. gave
himself to al manner of pleasures, neglecting or forgetting God, for so much do
the Hebrews understand by this phrase of blessing their own souls, which is
here turned rejoicing them selves, see Deuteronomy. ^9.19.] And men [besides that the
wicked deceive themselves, the world vpholdeth them in their folly, praising
and approving their wicked life, as though it were good, such kind of people ye
holy ghost reproves, Romans 1.32.] Praise thee [a sodame change of the person,
from the 3. to the 2.] when thou make much of thy self [ i. so feedest thy
self in all manner of delights and pleasures excessiuely: for otherwise to make
much of our selves, is not only not condemned but allowed, that thereby we may
be 19. Amend thus, though he may come to the age of his fathers [ i. though he
should live never so long, yea even as long as the oldest fathers were wont to
doe] yet they shall not enjoy light for ever [ i. yet their life must have an
end in this life, and they shall not enjoy the light of eternal life. The
Geneua translation also may have a good sense thus] he shall not enter into
the generation of his fathers [ i. he shall die, as his fathers have done
before him [for that is the way of all flesh) notwithstanding his great
pampering of himselfe] and they [he suddenly changes the number, from the
singular to the plural, meaning that though they be never so many, or never so
wealthy, yet they shall not escape death, nor enjoy life] for ever [ i. a long
season upon the earth.] Verse 20. Amend i. one, yea every one that God highly
aduaunceth, and yet understands not, vz. how to use the good things he has,
or that they all come from God alone] is like to brute beasts [ i. void of
true feeling, light and judgment, and in respect of Gods matters, may be
said to be as void of goodness, as brute beasts are of reason and
understanding.

Verse 1. Gods word must be diligently hearkened unto: also it is general, 2.
Yea to all sorts of people. Verse 3. We should learn always to speak the
words of edification. Verse 4. They that will teach others to hearken
diligently must be examples themselves of ye same things: also they must use
all lawful means to make the doctrine acceptable and gracious to the hearers.
Verse 5. Assured faith surmounteth all difficulties whatsoever. Verse 6. There
is a double iniquity in the ungodly rich: the one is, they make their goods
their God, and so commit idolatry: the other they wax proud, through the
abundaunce of their riches, and so sundry times oppress their brethren. Ver.
7. Sets out the insufficiency of riches: and that and verse 8. teach that
all money which has bin given for Masses Diriges, Trentals, etc. has been cast
away, seeing Christ is the only Redeemer. Ver. 9. Money can not prevent, or put
away death: neither can wit, wisdom, or policy. Verse 11. shows how vain
and deceitful men's minds and cogitations are, and how that all the means
that they can devise for the continuance of their name shall come to naught.
Ver. 12. Nothing that man has is certain. Verse 13. There is no wickedness
so plain and manifest but some either for pleasure or profit, will delight in
it and approve it. Verse 14. Nothing can deliver from the power of death. Verse
15. The faithful hanging assuredly upon God shall escape eternal judgment.
Verse 16. Other men's prosperity, or our own adversity, should not dismay us.
Verse 17. We brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry any thing
out. 1. Timoth. 6.7. Ver. 18. Epicures always pamper their bellies: besides
the rich are never without their flatterers. Verse 19. Death is the end of all
flesh. Verse 20. The more that a man has of worldly blessings, and the less
he has of spiritual and heavenly understanding, the greater is his
blockishnesse and misery.

Psalm 50.
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1. to the end of the 6. In the
second that no outward means, no though he himself prescribed them, can be
acceptable before God, but that it is a spiritual service that pleases him,
from 7. to the end of the 15. In the third he reproves the wicked and ungodly,
showing what fruits true worshippers should yield, from ver. 16. to the end of
the Psalm.

Asaph: I take it to be called Asaphs Psalm, not because he was the Author of
it but because it was committed to him, and his, 2. Chron. 25.2.] Verse 1. The
God of Gods [ i. he that is God to all the Rulers in the world, who are
called Gods, and to all the counterfeit idols of the Gentiles, who are also so
named, 1. Corinthians. 8.5.] even the Lord [he shows more plainly whom he
meaneth] has spoken [ vz. by his servants, as Moses and the rest, touching
his true worship and seruice] and called [ vz. to himself and his seruice] the
earth [ i. the people and inhabitants of the earth: this was verifyed in the
Gentiles by the works of creation, as Romans 1. and in the Jews by the
Creatures, and by the word also] from the rising up of the Sun unto the
going down thereof [ i. all the World over and through out the same, see
Malach. 1.11.] 2. Out of Syon [see Psalm 48.2.] which is the perfection of
beautye [ i. which is the most beautiful and fair place that can be, and
seems to be so glorious, that nothing can be added thereto] has GOD shyned,
[ i. made manifest himself by his works and by his word, in the exercises 3.
Our GOD [These be the words of the faithful people, assuring themselves of
gracious deliverance from the crueltye of the wicked, by the mighty power of
that God whom they feare] shall come [ i. certainlye and assuredlye shall
come, though he seem for a while to defer and put off his co^ming] and shall
not keep silence [as he has seemed to do heretofore, either in not hearing ye
prayers of his people, or in not punishing ye wicked and ungodly: see verse 21
of this Psalme] A fire shall devour before him [he compares Gods judgments
against the wicked to a consuming fire, which shall so eat them up, that
nothing shall remayne] and a mighty tempest [this is another similitude to
express Gods power and judgments by against the vngodly] round about him
[these words are added to take away hope of escape from the wicked, for if
judgment should be but before him, they would think to creep behind him,
but the Prophet shows, that whether they be before him or behind him, all
is one, for consumed they shall be, if not with the fire, yet with the tempest
or whirlewind, before which they should be but as chafe, Psalm 1.4. Such,
yea a more large description of Gods wrath against 18.7.8. etc.] Ver. 4. The
Heaven above [Heauen is here put for heaven and all the heavenly powers: which
the Lord will call forth not only as witnesses against the ungodly, but as
aids and helps also for the defense of his] and the earth [ i. not only the
earth it self, but all the powers therein] to judge [ i. to punish the wicked
and to defend the good, and maintain them] his people [ i. all both good and
bad, now the bad are called his people, not because he loves them with the
love of his people, but because they are at his commandment, to use them as
pleases him.] Verse 5. Gather my Saints [he commands the heaven and the
earth to bring vz. that they will serve me and none but mee] with Sacrifice
[hee means that the sacrifice slain was a sign and testimony of the
covenant between GOD and his people, see Exodus 24.6.7.8. He speaks this
according to the common custom for in old times covenants were made and
sealed as it were between parties with the death and slaughter of some
beasts.] Ver. 6. He shows how ready the heavens shall be to accomplish and
perform 4.] by righteousness he understands favor toward Gods children, and
judgment upon the wicked, see 2 Thessalonians. 1.6 7.] for god is Judge himself [
q.d. he that will not be corrupted, or judge 7. Hear, O my people, he
requires atte^tion, declaring that he has good occasion to deal with them,
because they had broken the covenant, some by standing only upon the outward
service, and these he deals with, till you come to the end of the 15 verse:
and othersome for their lewd life, and these he reproves from verse 16 to the
end of the Psalme] testify unto thee [ vz. in a solemn sort, and as it were
using witnesses] for I am God, even thy God [this is a reason why they should
hearken unto him: not only for that he has power in himself to punish the
contempt of his Word, but also because he has manifested that power for
their good.] Verse 8. I will not vz. so much for the neglect of sacrifices, as
for not referring the^ to their right end and use: for otherwise even the very
neglecte of them, was for that time a breach of Gods law, and therefore
iustlye deserved a reproofe] thy Sacrifices or burnt offringes [I take between
these two words this difference, that by Sacrifices he means all manner of
offringes except those that were offered for sin, and by burnte offringes
he means those that were offered for sin, which are called burnt offerings
because they were wholly burned: whereof some were daily offered, as two lambs
morning and evening every day] Ver. 9. I will take [ q.d. I have no need to
take] out of thine i. out of thy stall where thou did use to keep them as
in a house] nor Goats [he speaks here of two sorts which were usual in the
Sacrifices appointed by the law.] Ver. 10. For all the beasts [this is a reason
why ye Lord 11. I know [ vz. in such order that I can count them, and call
the^, when I lust] are mine [ vz. to do with them whatsoever I think good.]
Ver. 12. If I be hu^gry [he speaks this by supposal: q.d. if it were possible
yt I could be hu^gry] q.d. I have no need so to do for seeing al things are
mine, I can satisfye my self when I lust.] Ver. 13. Will I eat [ q.d. no, at
any hand: John 4. and need no such gross nourishment] Ver. 14. Offer unto
God praise [ q.d. This is it that God requires, that he be praised for his
goodness: and this is indeed his spiritual seruice] thy vows [ i. the
things which thou have vowed and promised, as testimonies of praises and
thanks 15. Call upon me [ i. pray unto me] in the day of trouble [ i. when
thou shall be in any kind of calamity or affliction: and it is called the
day of trouble, because in that day, or at that time trouble does sease upon
vs] glorify i. praise and thank me.] Verse 16. What have thou to do [ q.d.
Does it belong to thee? No, no: With what face then dare thou to speak of my
laws, or of that covenant that is between me and my people, seeing thy life
17. To be reformed [ vz. by the rule of righteousness which is Gods word] and
have cast my words behind thee [ i. Phillip. 3.13.] Ver. 18. Thou runnest with
him [ i. thou both take delight, and make great have to commit theft as he
doth] thou art partaker [ i. thou do not only enter into fellowship, but 19.
To evil [ i. to speak ill words, and to utter evil thinges] and with thy
tongue thou forgest deceit [ i. thou deceauest others with thy speech,
putting the tongue which is an instrument 20. Thou sit [ vz. with some
other in open places, as markets, judgment places, and such like] against thy
brother [ i. thy friends and kinsfolk, under one comprehending the rest] thy
mothers son [ i. even thine own brother by birth and nature, q.d. Such is
thy naughtiness, that thou regardest not friend, kinsman, or him that touches
21. And I held my tongue [ i. I did not by my judgments punish thee for the
same (for then God is said to hold his tongue when he executes not his
wrath) but did in long sufferaunce look for thy repentance, see Romans 2.3.4.
etc.] was like thee [ i. one that took pleasure in wickedness, as thou doest]
but I will reprove thee [ i. but thou shall find and feel the contrary, by
the punishments that I will power forth upon thee, and amongst the rest by
this] I will set them in order before thee [ i. I will in such order and so
particularly lay them out to thy face, that thou shalt see 22. Consider this [
vz. that I behold all things that men do, q.d. at the length know it, mark
it, and be persuaded of the truth of it] forget God [ i. himself and his
judgments against you for sinne] least I tear you in pieces [he uses a
metaphor taken from wild beasts, that cruelly rent in pieces the prays that
they have gotten, noting thereby the greatness of the punishment that shall
come upon the wicked] and there be none, etc. [He 23. He that offers praise [
i. he that in steed of sacrifices prayseth me, understanding by thanks giving
and praise, which is a part of Gods service and worship his whole religion]
shall glorify me [he means that he that from the heart prayseth the Lord,
does yield him most excellent honour] disposes his way arighte [ i. rightly
and holily ordreth his life] will I [ i. God himself speaking of himself: or
else his servant and Prophet] show the salvation of God [ i. If we refer it
to God: he means that he will show himself the savior of such a person:
but if we refer it to the Prophet, and take it to be his words, he means
that he will declare unto him excellent salvation (for so sometimes these
words of God are used) which he shall receive indeed from God, who will for
ever keep and save such persons, both the senses come almost to one.

Verse 1. Gods majesty appears excellently in his creatures. Verse 2. 3.
Gods judgments and power are terrible to his enemies, but comfortable to his
servant. Verse 4. All creatures are at Gods commandment. Verse 5. Gods
people are called saints even in this life, whom it becomes carefully to
keep the covenant of sanctifycation, that passes between them and their
God. Verse 6 It is comfortable to consider, that God who is justice it self,
shall judge. Verse 7 When God speaks, all ought to hear. Verse 8.9. God
regards not outward services, when inward is wanting. Verse 10. All things
in the world are Gods, and at his commandment. Verse 11. If he know the
creatures, then men likewise. Verse 12. God stands not any manner a way in
need of man. Verse 13. God being a spirit, needs not outward nurriture.
Verse 14. The sacrifice of thanks giving, is acceptable to God. Verse 15.
Adversity is a spur unto prayer, if we could rightly consider of it. Verse
16. Gods ordinances being holy and pure should not come into mouths given to
filthiness. Verse 17. To hate admonition and to despise Gods word, be two
grievous sins. Verse 18. Learn to beware of making have to wickedness, and
of communicating with other men in their sins. Verse 19. Our tongues and
mouths should be dedicated to goodness. ver. 20. To speak evil of, or to
slander any, much more our nighest kindred, is a horrible sin. Verse 21. Gods
mercy and long suffering works strange effects in the wicked, not of it
self, but because that they in the corruption of their own nature abuse it.
Verse 22. Gods judgments should strike a reverence and fear of his majesty
into our hearts. Verse 23. God delights in those that give themselves to
godliness and honesty.

Psalm 51.
THis Psalm propounds specially two things: 1. to the end of the 17. In the
second is comprehended

The Title, to him that excels, David (this has been expounded before) when
the Prophet Nathan came unto him [for the better understanding of this, read 2.
Sam. 11. and 12 Chapter throughout) after he had gone in to Bathsheba (the
scripture speaks chastely and purely, of a filthy fact: in other places it is
expressed by knowing her, in our speech we say, after he had 1. Contains
excellent words of a man, that does earnestly confess his sins: and he
doubleth as it were ye same matter in other words, that he might more
effectually declare his affection, he runs only to Gods mercy, and because
his sins were many and infinite, he prays the manifestation and feeling of
the infinite multitude of gods goodnesses] away mine iniquities [ vz. either as
they do that take spots out of apparel, or as they do that blot somewhat out
of debt books, for such a metaphor 2. Under the terms of washing and
cleansing, the Prophet alludeth to the outward purifyings and cleansings of
the law, yet so, yt he knows that all these outward things were nothing,
without ye Lord performed yt inwardly which was signified by these outward signs,
that is free pardon, and full forgiveness of al his 3. For I know [ i. feel
sensibly within my self, but yet so, yt I do withal confess it] is ever before
me [ i. is continually in my remembrance, and the very thought of it does
continually vex me: and by iniquitye and sin in the singular number, he
means not that he committed no more but one sin for we see there was
murder adjoined with his whordome and adulterye, but in confessing one as the
principal he acknowledges all the branches appertayning 4. Against thee,
against thee only etc [ David notes by this manner of speech, that he did so
cu^ningly cover his sin from men's eyes, that none saw it for the time, til it
was revealed, but God alone: so that we see, Against thee, does not only note
yt his sin was directly against God, which also he means by doubling ye
words against thee, against thee, but also that it was naked before him, as
appears by that which follows: and when he adds this word, only, he
means not, yt he had not offended against men also, for we see that he had
caused Vriah to be slain] but because God was he [whose law, both in respect of
the first and second table was broken, whom it did most especially touch] that
thou may be just [ i. declared to be just, for otherwise god is always just,
though the manifestation thereof appear not] and pure [i. sound and vpright]
when thou iudgest [ vz. others, for God is always just, but it then specially
appears, when he either pronou^ceth sentence against some, or 5. Behold [
q.d. I confess not only this sin of adultery and murder, but al other from the
time of my being, until this present hour, he speaks indeed specially of
original sin, but yet so, that under the same he comprehends al his other
sins whatsoever, original sin being the fountain from whence the rest
flow] and in sin has my mother conceived me [these words mean not that the
performaunce of marriage duties simply of themselves be evil, as some lewd
men have dreamed and taught, but that he having original sin from his
parents, was in that sinne] conceived [ i. fostred and norished in his mothers
womb, and brought forth in the same, for so largely do I take the word of
conceauing, the beginning of a thing, being put for the grouth, proceeding and
continuance of the same thing] Ver. 6. Thou love truth [ i. vprightnes and
soundnes, and a sincere good will to follow i. heavenly and right understanding
out of thy law. All this the Prophet alleges to aggrauate his own sin,
because that contrary to the knowledge and truth that God had manifested unto
him, he had committed gros iniquities.] Ver. 7. Purge me with Hysop [no doubt
he alludeth Leuit. 14.6.7. Leuit. 19.18. yet so that he would have the truth
also signified by these outward things, and he puts purging, and Hisope, and
washing, which were outward parts of the legal puristings, for a through, and
whole cleansing, as ver. 2.] and I shall be clean [ q.d. otherwise I cannot
be clean, unless thou O Lord perform it indeede] whiter then snow [See
Isaiah 1.16.18. for the understanding of this Verse.] Verse 8. Make me to hear
[ i. either to Nathan pronounced the same unto him 2. Samuel 12.13.] joy and
gladness [ i. that comfortable and joyful message, touching the free and full
pardon of my sins, that may make me joyful and glad indeede] that the bones
[ i. I my self both body and soul: he puts a part for the whole] which
thou have broken [ vz. by the horror of thy grievous judgments against me
for my sin, see Psalm 38.3.] may rejoice [ i. have matter of rejoicing
ministered unto them, and perform that joy indeed, whilst that they inioye
their former feelings.] Verse 9. Hide thy face from my sins [ i. bury them as
it were in 1. of this Psalme] all mine iniquities [one and other, for so long
as any sin presses us, the conscience can hardly be quiet.] Verse 10. Create
in me a clean heart [he prays, because the Matthew. 15.19. Genesis 6.5. Genesis 8.21.
That God would reform it, taking away that filthiness, and planting
goodness in it, which he calls creation] a right spirit [ i. a mind free
from all hypocrisy, and abhorring crooked ways, some read a steadfast spirit,
meaning a spirit and mind so well stayed, as might not in time afterward be
removed from his obedience.] Ver. 11. i. the effects and works of thy holy
spirit, for neither does the spirit substantiallye dwell in men, as some have
dreamed, neither is the pledge of the spirit so taken away, as some have
imagined, though it be hidden sometimes under the ashes of corruption,] Verse
12. Restore to i. make me to feel again that unspeakable comfort of
salvation, that I was wont to feere: so that it seems that David was almost
at the door of despair with the feeling of his sins, and the judgments of
God against him for the same] establish me [ i. make me strong and stedfast]
with thy free spirit, [the spirit of God is called free in diverse respects,
as because it is Gods effectual instrument to set us free from the bondage of
sin, for where the spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom, 2. Corinthians
3.17. because also thereby god works in us freeness and readiness to the
doing of those things which he commands: and lastly because it makes us
freelye and boldly to profess that we are Gods children, as Romans 8.15.16. some
read principal or princelike spirit, meaning thereby a most excellent
spirit, such as Kings and Princes have need of, that they may know how to
guide them 13. Thy ways [ i. thy mercies and loving kindness, which are called
Gods ways because he always shows them to true penitent sinners, q.d. If
thou will pardon me my sins, I will be thy instrumente to teach the^ yt shall
come to the like feeling of their transgressio^s, thy wonderful mercy and
goodnesse] and sinners shall be [ vz. by that meanes] converted unto thee [ vz.
from whom they have gone astray, he means that he will take pains to win
men to god, but that the profit thereof shall redounde to gods 14. From blood
[he means not only from the sin committed in shedding Vriahs blood, and
others with him, as 2. Sam. 11.17. but also the punishments that by that sin
he had drawn upon himself: whereof see Genesis 9.5.6.] God of my salvation
[see Psalm 18.46.] my tongue shall sing joyfully [ i. chearefully and aloude
prayse] thy righteousness [ i. thy goodness, faythfulnesse and truth, which
thou promisest and performest to the^, that crave 15. He prays the Lord not
only to give him an occasion, but also to enable him to thankfulness, and
then he will perform 16. Must be understood by the way of comparison, and not
supplye, for yet in his time sacrifices were to be used, and that by the
prescript of gods 50.8.9. etc. Isaiah 1.11.12, etc.] Verse 17. The sacrifices
of God [ i. such as he principally allows and accepteth] a contrite spirit [
i. a spirit bruised and broken as it were, with the feeling of the sin
committed, and the acknowledgement of his own weakness and unworthiness,
which as I take it, the Apostle calls godly sorrow 2. Cor. 7.10.11. Thou will
not despise [ i. thou will graciously and mercifully accept: for not refusing
or despising, with god 18. Be favorable [ i. notwithstanding my sin,
continue gracious, and heap up benefits upon benefits] unto Sion [i. unto thy
church and people: he puts the place where Gods people dwelt, and the
exercises of his religion were used, for gods people and Church, see Psalm
48.11.] for thy good pleasure [ i. for thine own goodness sake, and not for
any thing in them or me, for there is nothing in us that can procure that]
build the walls of Jerusalem [i. not only defend thy church by thy mighty power
and providence but give it all the means whereby it may resist the assaults of
thine enemies, as walls to a city are a good defense to save them from the
violences and 19. Sacrifices of righteousness [see Psalm. 4.5 q.d. When
sacrifices and burnt offerings shall be referred to a right end, God will allow
and like of them] then shall they [ i. thy people offer Calves upon thine
altar [ i. sacrifices of praises and thanksgiving, understanding no doubt by
Calves even the instruments of their lips to praise God withal, see Hosea
14.2. also Heb. 13.15.

Verse 1. When we are touched with the feeling of our sins, 2. We must pray
for pardon and full forgiveness of our sins, or else it is nothing as also
verse 9. of this Psalm. Verse 3. Confession of our sins, and the sight of
them are good means to bring us to repentance for them, and forgiveness of
them. Verse 4. God only is just in all his ways and words how vile soever
men be. Verse 5. Proves original sin, and yet not by imitation, as the
Pelagians imagine, but by natural corruption from our parents before we could
follow them. Verse 6. God specially regards the inward parts, as the heart
and mind. Verse 7. Unless God take away our sins, we can never be purged.
Verse 8. When we are afflicted with heaviness, it is good to pray that we may
feel spiritual comfort. Verse 9. We are not able to endure Gods presence,
much less his justice for our sins. Verse 10. God is he alone that must
alter and change the corruptions of our minds. Verse 11. To be banished out
of Gods favor, and to want the effects of the spirit, is extreme miserye.
Verse 12. Unless God uphold us, we shall easily fall. Verse 13. Our feelings
of Gods mercies, should be referred to other men's profits, and Gods glory.
Verse 14. We ought to pray for deliverance from sin, and the punishments due
thereto. Verse 15. All the members of our bodies should be referred to Gods
glory, but yet we can not perform that unless he give us strength and
grace. Ver. 16. God regards not outward services only, but the inward and the
outward must be both joined together. Ver. 17. Godly grief of heart for sin,
is an acceptable sacrifice to God. Ver. 18. We must pray for the Church, and
the prosperity thereof. Verse 19. It becomes Gods children after he has
heard their prayers, and granted them their requests, outwardly to show
themselves thankful.

Psalm 52.
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. 5. to the end of the Psalm.

The title, to him that excels. David to give instruction [this has been
expounded before, Psalm. 4. also Psalm. 32.] that which follows in ye title
declares the occasion wherefore David made this Psalm, for the more ample
understanding whereof, see 1. Sam. 21. from verse 1. to the 9. and Doeg is here
called an Edomite, not that I think he was so by nation or birth, but because
he Edom. Ver. 1. Why boastest thou thy self, etc. [ q.d. there is no cause why
thou should so do, if either thou consider thy self, or the matter that
thou art about to commit, or God himself, whose goodness continues toward
his children for ever, though he do for a time give them over to the vngodlies
lust, so that all thy labor is but lost, though thou brag never so much
thereof: for neither art thou able to assault God, though thou be never so
mighty, neither to hinder the course of his goodness 2. Thy tongue imagines
mischief [he attributes imagination to the tongue, which is proper to ye
mind, meaning thereby, expressing: q.d. thou do by thy words bewray what
mind thou had when thou wast with Ahimelech] like a sharp rasor [ vz. in
cutting, and that deeply: q.d. thou woundest and cuttest with thy tongue as a
rasor does, he means the slaughter committed, 1. Sam. 22.16.] that cutteth
deceitfully [as missing ye beard, and striking the throat, that is, not used
where it should be, and where it should not be used, there to be of great
force. Immanuel reads this verse otherwise, 3. Evil [ i. not only evil in
affection, but in act, meaning specially the murder committed at Nob] and
lies, [ vz. in falslye accusing Ahimelech, see 1. Samuel 22.7.8.9. etc. 4.
Thou love [ i. allowest and vsest] all words that may destroy [ i. such
speeches, as by the uttering of them may bring hurt and destruction to
others.] 5. So [ i. as thou have delighted to destroy others, vz. the Priests
of Nob, so shall God take pleasure in thy overthrow although for a while he
defer to punish thy traiterous and crafty dealing] destroy thee [O Doeg,
although thou think thy self to be very high and sure, yet shalt thou be
cast downe] for ever [ i. continually, and that so, that thou shall have no
hope of rising agayne] he shall take thee [ vz. away from amongst men, so
that thou shall not hurt any more] and pluck thee [ vz. by strong hand,
whether thou will yea or no, out of thy Tabernacle [ i. the place of thy
dwelling and abode, and all that thou had to maintain the same which thou
made account of, as though it had been perpetual, meaning that he would take
away from him Saules service, and whatsoever else he had to trust in] root
thee [ i. not only thine own person, but thy remembrance and posteritie] out
of the i. out of the world, and from the face of the earth.] Verse 6. Shall see
it [ i. the punishment that God shall lay upon thee, and such wicked ones as
thou art] and shall fear [ vz. God and his judgments, but yet with a
reverence and love also of his majesty, from which shall spring sincere
seruice] and shall laugh [ i. inwardly and outwardly reioyce] at him [ i. Doeg,
and such wicked men, not so much for that they are overthrown, as because
thereby it pleases God to manifest the care he has for his children, and the
judgments he 7. Behold the man [ q.d. they shall point at him as it were with
the finger, and will other men to look upon the heavy judgments that God
has executed against him] that took not God for his strength [ i. that did
not put his trust for his strength and all other things in God only] but
trusted unto the multitude of his riches [See Luke 12.15.16. etc. 1. Timothy
6.7.] and put his strength [ i. trusted that his strength should appeare] in
his malice [ vz. which he practiced against Ahimelech, and the rest of the
Priests at Nob.] Verse 8. But I [ David expresses the hope i. always fresh
and flourishing, and yielding fruit, for the Olive is very fruitful, and
never wants green Leaues] in the house of GOD [ i. in his Church and
Congregation, from which though David were at this present banished, yet in a
sure hope he persuades himself he shall in good time return thither, and
bring forth much fruite] for I trusted in the mercy of GOD [this is a reason
why he should continue and florish] for ever and ever [expounde this by verse
six, of Psalm 23.] Verse 9. I will always praise thee [ David promises
thankfulnes] i. I will trust in, and patiently wait for, thy virtue, power,
and grace, as Psalm 20.1. so that here he promises patience] because it is
good [ i. is found to be gracious, favorable, and ready to help afflicted
ones] before thy saints [ i. even in the very sight, judgment and experience
of thine own people. For this word Saints, see before Psalm. 50.5. also Psalm.
16.3.

The ungodly rejoice and glory in their sin and shame: 2.3.4. shows how
that the ungodly use all the means they can of words deeds, etc. to work
mischief and hurt by. Verse 5. sets out Gods judgments against the wicked,
and that the hope of the ungodly shall perish. Verse 6. Gods judgments upon
the wicked, strike two contrary passions as it were into the hearts of his
children, vz. fear and ioyfulnes. Ver. 7. shows how vain a thing it is to
trust in any thing save in God alone, and to take pleasure and delighte in
ungraciousness. Verse 8. describes the flourishing estate of the faithful.
Ver. 9. Teaches praising of God and patience.

Psalm 53.
THis Psalm is the same, not only in matter but in words almost, with Psalm
14. and therefore that, that has been said there, must be looked upon again
where it varieth, something shall be put down. In the title are these words on
Mahalath, which I take rather to be an instrument then a tune, and such an
instrument as was made to go with blowing or breath, by the reason of the
hollownesse of it, all the rest of the title has been expounded before, Psalm.
42. and else where.

1. For the word, Work, in Psalm 14. here is put down Wickedness, several
words tending all to one end, vz. to set out the naughtiness of 3. For all
are gone out of the way, Psalm 14. there is read: Here, every one is gone
back [ vz. from the obedyence of God and his commandments, whereof they
seemed to make some profession. 5. differs almost altogether from Psalm 14.
the Prophet declaring what great judgment the Lord brings upon the wicked,
though never so stout and courageous, noting that though they feared GOD no
whit at al, yea and they themselves were greatly feared of men, yet when they
thought least of it, and no cause of fear appeared, the Lord stirred up the
terrors and pricks of their own consciences to trouble them] scattered the
bones [ vz. being first broken as it were in pieces. By this manner of speech
the Prophet means that the Lord by his judgments enters and pierseth
even into their inward parts, and breaks and weakeneth all their force and
strength whatsoever, and you so shall have the word, bones, used for strength
before, Psalm 32.3.] of him that besieged thee [the Prophet speaks of Gods
people, as of one person, because of the unity that is or ought to be amongst
them, and of their fellowlike suffering: So also he speaks of the wicked, as
of one man, by reason of the consent that is in them to do mischief:
understanding also by the word, besieging, all the mischievous attemptes,
devices, and proceedings of the vngodly] thou have put them to confusion [this
may be referred either to the Church, as that the Church had gotten victory
against the wicked, because GOD would have it so: or else to Christ the head
of the Church, or GOD the Father, speaking to him and of him, in the first
place in the second person, and in the latter place, speaking of him in the
third person. I would rather refer it to the Church. All the rest see
before Psalm 14.

Psalm 54.
3. parts. 1. to the vz. 4.5. In the third he promises hartye thanksgiving
unto the Lord, and shows the cause thereof, and this is contained verse 6.7.

Se
The title to him that excels on Neginoth [see this expounded Psalm. 4. in the
title.] A Psalm. of David to give instruction [see this expounded Psalm. 32. in
the title,] when the Ziphims [i. diverse of the people that dwelt in Ziph: for
the expounding of this, and all that follows in this Title. See 1. Samuel 23.
verse 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, etc. also 1. Samuel 26. verse 1.2. etc.] Is not
David amongst us? [This demanding does more certainly affirm: q. d.
certaynelye and without all doubt he is in our country, and therefore we
come to tell it thee.

Verse 1. Save me [ i. deliver me, and set me free from these dangers wherein
69.1.] by thy name [or else for thy names sake: i. for thy strength, virtue,
power, and graces sake, as sundry times before, and namelye Psalm 20.1.] and
by thy power [ q.d. mine enymyes are strong, and I am weak, therefore I come
unto thee that art stronger than all,] Judge me, [ i. defend my right,
plead my cause, and set me free from the force and subtelties of mine
enemies.] Verse 2. Hear my prayer [ i. show by David doubted not, but that
the Lord heard him praying] unto the words of my mouth [ i. unto the prayer
which I utter with my mouth: for prayer specially is a lifting up of the
heart unto GOD, though words sundry times be not used or heard before men,
as Exodus 14.15. Also 1. Samuel 1. Verse 10.11.12.13.] Verse 3. For strangers [
i. the Ziphims and others taking part with Saul Israelites according to the
flesh and outward profession, yet by their deeds declared themselves to be
strangers from God, his religion and all humanity: for very humanity it self
would have taught the^, to have bin so far off from delivering the afflicted
into Tyrauntes hands, that they should rather have pittyed him] are risen up
against [ vz. both with bodily violence, and with their tongues to do me
euill] and tyraunts [ i. men not only of great might, but also of great
crueltye, like unto wild beastes] seek my soul [ i. diligently search after
my life to destroy it: See Matthew. 2.20. Soul is put here for life, as in other
places before, and also verse 4. of this Psalme] they have not set God before
them [ q.d. all this outrage against me springs from this fountain, to wit,
that they neglect God, as he is manifested and revealed unto them in his word,
neither take they counsel of him, but prefer their own judgments and
devises in all their attempts whatsoever.] Verse 4. Behold GOD is mine helper
[ q.d. notwithstanding i. takes their part and is on their side, as Romans
8.31. For otherwise GOD by his presence is with all his creatures, and no
doubt, he means not only those that fled away with him, but even Jonathan,
and such others, as even in Saules Court favored him and his cause] that
uphold my soul [ i. that bear me good affection, have care over my
safegarde, and take my part, and aid and help me, so far forth as GOD
inableth them, Soul is here put for life, as before in the third Verse not
that men are able to uphold either their own lives or other men's, otherwise
then as God makes them instruments to do the same.] Verse 5. i. God by
pouring forth his judgments upon them, shall in a just measure, recompense them
the mischief that they have devised and done against me: for evil here is put
for evil of punishment, as sundry times before] oh cut them off [ vz. either
from amongst men, rooting them out of the land of the living, or else from
power and means to perform their mischiefs by] in thy truth [ i. according as
thou truly have promised, so make me effectually to feel the performance
thereof, we have had the same phrase sundry times 6. Then will I sacrifice [ vz.
the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiuing] freely [ i. not only with free and
cheerful courage, but with great liberality also. So that he promises to
show himself after his deliverance every manner of way thankful to God] I
will praise thy name [ i. goodness, strength, power, etc. as before verse 1.
of this Psalme] because it is good [ i. merciful, almighty, etc. for so much
does the word God comprehend in this place.] 7. For he has delivered me [this
is the reason why he will give hartye thanks to the Lord, vz. because God has
set him free from wonderful dangers and troubles, for so much I take it he
means by all troubles, and not that he should not endure any more afterwards]
And mine eye has seen [ i. I have not only in my understanding perceived, but
with these bodily eyes of mine (for he puts one for both) I have beheld,
poured forth upon my enemies, the justice and judgments of God, which I prayed
for, or desired might fall upon them: which also we may do, to wit, holily
rejoice, in the execution of Gods justice upon the wicked, so that our eyes be
pure from all naughty affections, and our minds cleansed from desire of revenge.

1. Teaches us, not only in our distresses to pray unto God alone, but for the
strengthening of our faith to have recourse to his goodness and power. Verse
2. Teaches us in prayer to use both heart and voice. Ver. 3. Does not only set
out the cruelty of the ungodly against the good, but also notes the fountain
of all wickedness, that is, the neglect and contempt of God, and his will
revealed in his word. Verse 4. instructs the faithful, to assure themselves
of Gods present aid: who is merciful not only to them, but also to all those
that take their parts: and therefore we see it is not good to destitute Gods
servant, unless we will pluck God upon our own backs. Verse 5. sets out
Gods justice against the wicked, of which see Psalm. 18.26. it teaches also, to
make Gods faithful promises the grounds of al our supplications and prayers.
Verse 6. Teaches us both to give God thanks for his mercies, and also the
manner how we should yield it, that is willingly, chearefully, freely, and
plentifully. Verse 7. shows that it is God alone, that must set us free from
all dangers whatsoever, the doctrine of the latter part of this verse is put
down in the sense.

Psalm 55.
THis Psalm I take it, may well be divided into three parts. 1. to the end
of the 8. In the second he 9. to the end of the 15. In the third he returns
again to his prayers, both for himself and 16. to the end of the Psalm.

The Title is expounded before Psalm 4. and Psalm 32. David made this Psalm
when he was afflicted with the Rebellion of his son Abshalon. Othersome
understand it of that great and wonderful danger, wherein he was in the
City Keilah whether Saul came to besiege him, whereof see more at large 1.
Samuel 23.1.2. etc. And to this do I rather enclyne.

Verse 1. Hear my prayer [see Psalm 54.2.] hyde not thy self [ i. turn
6.18. Philip. 4.6. 1. Tim. 2.1. where by supplication the Apostle means,
requests made to God for deliverance from those things which trouble us: and by
prayers, requests which are made for benefits] Ver. 2. Harken unto me [ i. the
prayers that 54.2.] and answer me [ i. grant me my request, for those whom
we lovingly answer, we seem in some sort to grant vnto] I mourn [ i. I am
sorrowful and heavy harted] and make a noise, he means that by violence and
vehemence of his affliction, he was as it were enforced, sometimes to
heaviness of heart, and mournful bewailings, and sometimes again into most
pitiful outcries.] Ver. 3. For ye voice [ i. for ye hard and grievous threats
i. Saul, understanding, notwithstanding under him as ye principal, all those
yt cleave to him in these outrageous words and deeds against him] and for ye
vexation of ye wicked [ vz. which they do against me: and not which they
themselves suffer: for here the vexatio^ of the wicked is used actiuely, vz.
for the oppression wherewith they did afflict the innocent] because they [ i.
the enemies and wicked men: and mark here the sodayn change of the nu^ber] have
brought iniquity upon me [these words have diverse senses, some expound them
thus, they slaundered me, as though I had been a wicked man: some thus: they
imagined a wicked purpose against me, seeking by all means to bring me to
ruin and destruction: Some thus: They did unjustly and wrongfullye rushe in
upon me and against me to destroy me: some think it to be such a manner of
speech, as is Genesis 20. verse 19. For mine own part I take this to be the
Prophets meaning, that the ungodly did by all means, thoughts, words, and
deeds, seek his hurt and overthrow, which dealing of theirs, he calls
iniquitye, because they practiced it against him, without any cause on his
part given them, and that in no small measure, but in wonderful heaps, which
I take he means by these words, they brought upon mee] and furiously hate
me [hee notes in these words, the Fountain of all injustice, and hard
dealing, to wit, outrageous hatred: so that he shows in this verse four
causes, of his mourninges and outcries, their wicked speeches against him,
their great greefes done to him, the heaping of them up to a full measure
thereof, and their cruel and outrageous 4. My heart trembles within me [nowe
he shows what great fear possessed him, by reason of the mischiefs that the
wicked attempted against him. He says not without cause, any heart trembled,
meaning by that manner of speech, that courage and boldness, which have
their seat in the heart, were removed, and in steed thereof came all
trembling and fear.] And the terrors of Death [ i. most grievous terrors,
and as it were the pangues of death for bitterness and sharpenesse] are fallen
upon me [ i. have seized me and taken hold of me, and the reason thereof was
because he thought he should have fallen into the hands of his adversaries
to be murdered of them at their pleasure, which thing declares that
notwithstanding the faithful people have a wonderful trust in GOD, yet they
are not for all that insensible, or utterly void of fear, which also he
notes in the next verse.] 5. Fear and trembling are come upon me [this
verse is almost the same with the fourth. Between fear and trembling, I make
this difference, that fear is inward, and is as it were the cause of the
other: trembling is outward, and as it were the effect of feare] and an
horrible fear [ i. an extraordinarye and most terrible feare] has covered
me, [ i. besette me about on every side, and as it were overwhelmed me, 6.
And I said [ vz. in that great extremity, for in this verse and some others
following, he does amplifye his calamity and miserye, by wishing the avoiding
thereof, if it were possible: which thing declares that he was so compassed
in on every side, that he could hardlye hope to be delivered unless it
were myraculouslye, and that he could hardlye find any mean to save
himself, though he were ready and willing to forgo all that he had, and
to go into exile] Oh that I had wings like a Dove [true it is, that he uses
the word Dove in some respect to set out the miserable estate wherein he was
[as one has noted] because that it is a sielie and fearful bird, but yet I
suppose that he means rather in this place, to wish unto him self swiftnes,
that thereby he might avoid the dangers and troubles that his enemies intended
against him. Many fowls are more swift of flight then Pigeons or Doves are we
confess: but yet he that were able to fly from his enemies as fast as the
Pigeon, needed not much to fear all their forces] then would I fly away, [
vz. from their force and fury, he means that he would give place, to the
rage and fury of his enemies] and rest [ vz. in some place free from their
attempts and mischiefs.] Ver. 7. Seems to be of the same i. dwell, and as
it were make my aboad] in the wilderness [ i. in some place either uninhabited,
or else not so peopled, as other places are, so you have the word used, Matthew.
3.1. Whatsoever it is, he means that he would dwell in a place where he
might not be known of any, or at the least but only of those that should
wish him well.] Ver. 8. In the beginning, for he, read I, and so the sense Saul
and other his accomplices, made against him, for so much I think in a metaphor
he means, by stormy wind, and tempest.] Ver. 9. Destroy vz. them and their
counsels. The Hebrewe word signifies to swallow or suppe up, by which he
notes an utter ruin, that neither they nor their imaginations may any more
appear: and this kind of punishment was exercised, toward Dathan and Abiram.
Numeri. 16.31.32.] Divide their tongues [ vz. in such sort, that they may not
understand one another, which judgment was powered forth upon the builders
of Babel. Gene. 11.7. etc.] For I have seen cruelty and strife, [ i. all manner
of naughtines and disorder, he puts two sorts for all of what sort soever:
and when he says he has seen it, he means that he certainly knew of it,
the sense of the sight, being a notable instrument to engender knowledge of
things that be done before it] in the city [ i. in my judgment, not
Jerusalem, though in Saul's time all things were very disorderous there, but in
Keilah, of which see Joshua. 15.44. also, 1. Sam. 23.1.2. etc.] Ver. 10. Day
and night [ i. continually, as Psalm. 1.2.] They are about vz. cruelty, and
strife, of which before ver. 9. he notes the disorder that was there, to wit
in Keilah all justice, order and right being banished, and al cruelty, strife,
and all manner of naughtinues, being the principal and continual watchmen of
the Town, whose duty it was to go about the places where they watched, as
may appear Cantic. 3.3.] upon the walls thereof, [ i. in the highest and
chiefest places, for the walls in Towns besieged, are the most meet places
to keep watch and ward on. All that follows both in this verse, and in the
next verse, is nothing, but a particular recital of the iniquities that were
bolstered and practiced in this place, as unjust dealing, mischievous
practices, all manner of wickedness, and namely to their tyranny they joined
deceit and subtilty: If any man list to refer it to other Cities, subject to
Saul's kingdom, besides Keilah, I will not greatly contend: This always being
provided, that it must be principally understood thereof.] Ver. 12. Mine enemy
[ i. mine open enemy, or one that I had given any good cause unto, to be mine
enemy, for otherwise no doubt, he or they whosoever they were that put this in
practice against David, were his foes, and here note that though he seem to
speak but of one, yet no doubt, he means more, or else under one most
singular in that craft of dissimulation, he understands others: for he
means here, that by secret devises, which he could not prevent, he was
under the pretense of friendship almost cast away] did not diffame me [see
verse 3. of this Psalme] for I could have borne it [ vz. better then I do
now, because I look for nothing from mine enemy, but enemy like dealing,]
Exalt himself against me [ i. set himself against me by word or deed. All
this the Prophet speaks by the way of comparison, not denying but that his
foes did defame him, and oppose themselves against him: but if that were
compared with the hypocritical dealings of his counterfeit friends, it would
appear to be nothing, as a man would say, and this we call a denial by the
way of comparison] I would have hid me from him, [ i. I would have kept my
self close and safe, from him and his cruelties.] 13. He shows who it was
that wrought him this iniurie] my companion [ i. my equal, and of the
selfsame state and condition that I my self was of, by which we see that
this Psalm was made before he came to the kingdom: for when he was exalted
thither once, none was equal unto him] my guide, [ vz. in matters of counsel
and affairs that I had to doe] and my familiar [ i. my dear and tender
friend. He means no doubt some whom 14. Which delighted in consulting
together [ q.d. with whom I took wonderful pleasure to confer of many
matters, and namely of the exercises of Gods religion: which I suppose the
Prophet means by going into the house of God as companions, consulting as it
were together how they might prepare themselves to his service, and 15. Let
death sease upon them [ vz. not only suddenly, and or ever they beware, for
so much the Hebrewe word in a metaphor seems to import, but let it take such
hold of them, that it may never leave, till it have taken them away from
amongst men.] Let them go down quick into the grave [as Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram did Numb. 16.31. He means that he would have them dye of some
sudden death, no disease or sickness going before it] for wickedness [ i. all
manner of ungodliness: see before Psalm. 36.1.] In their dwellinges [ i. in
their congregations, assemblies, and fellowshippes, putting the places where
such wicked persons did meet, for their meetings] even in the midst of them
[ i. they norish 16. I will call unto God [ i. earnestly pray unto him] will
save me, [ i. deliver me from 54.1.] Verse 17. Evening and morning and at
noone, will I pray [ i. I will be importunate, and never cease, till I have
obtained: from hence and out of Daniel. 6.10. we may gather, that in those
days the faithful set themselves certain hours to pray in, thereby the
better to awake their sluggishnes.] And make a noise [ i. I will be fervent
and earnest in it: for many have prayed long, and yet have wanted feruency] and
he will hear my voice [ i. grant the petitions and prayers, that I shall
power forth before him, wherein we see how he assures him self of Gods
goodwill and mercy.] Verse 18. My soul [ i. i. safely and soundly, and with
great quietnes] from the battle that was against me, [ i. from the great
conflictes and dangers, wherein I should have been snared, because they were
laid and prepared against mee] for many were with me, [ q.d. though to see
too, we were but few, yet we had Gods Angels with us, to dismay our enemies,
and to comfort us, as 2. Kings 6.16.] Ver. 19. God vz. me and my prayers] and
afflict them [ i. whereas he showed mercy to me, he shall afflict them and
punish them] even he that reigns of old [ i. he which in nature, counsel
and judgment is eternal, and always like to himself: which thing the
Prophet expresses to give the wicked to understand, that there is no starting
holes to hyde them in from GOD] because they have no chaunges [ vz. from
wealth, honor, and credit, to poverty disgrace and misery, but always they
go forward in abundance of these outward blessinges] therefore they fear
not GOD [ i. they neither reverence him, nor his judgments, but abusing his
mercy, run riot to all wickedness and so in this verse he puts them out
for their hard hartednes in ungodliness.] Ver. 20. He lays his hand [first
i. not only such as lived quietly with him, but also loved him and so by that
meanes] he brake his covenant [ vz. which he had made with him, all this
David speaks principally of Saul, and himself, and of the covenant that
passed between them. See 1. Samuel. 24. from verse 17. to the end of the
Chapter] Verse 21. The words i. he made show in his words of nothing but
gentleness and mildenesse] yet war was in his heart [ i. inwardly he
imagines nothing but mischief and destruction, for so is the word war
used here, vz. put for things that commonly follow warres] his words were
more gentle then Oil [this I take to be but the same thing repeated in an
other metaphor: in sum, the Prophet touches him here for his perverse
hypocrisy, and wooluish mind as it were against him,] Verse 22. Cast thy
burden upon the Lord [ q.d. if there be any thing that troubles thee, or
that thou thy self stand in need, for so much I think he means, by the
word burden, commit all the care thereof into Gods hands and power, staying
thy self altogether upon his prouidence] and he shall nourish thee [ i.
undoubtedly thou shall not want: for God will play the part of a good Father
[whereunto in deed the Prophet in this place resembles him] giving unto every
one of his in measure, and as he shall see to be necessary for them, for so
much does the word import] he will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever
[ vz. into the wicked man's power, that he should 23. Shall bring them down [
vz. from the wealth, credit, and authority that now they are in, and this he
speaks of the ungodly and wicked] into the pit of corruption [ i. into the
grave, meaning thereby death, putting that which follows death, vz. the grave
and burial, for death it selfe] the blody and deceitful men [ i. the cruel
and crafty persons] shall not live half their days [Albeit this does not
commonly fall out, as is declared Job. 21.7. Yet we find it true, in many
particular examples] and when he says, half their days: he means not as
these years are numbered to them from God, for we know they can not pass
the^, but this he will, that they shall not live half so long, as they
themselves imagined they should, because in Gods justice they shall be taken
away for their sins: and he uses this word days for years, an usual
speech in scripture, because the year and years consist of days: see for this
purpose the inscription of the Prophets prophecies, and namely Isaiah. 1.1.
Hosea. 1.1.] but I will trust in thee [ q.d. whatsoever fall out upon the wicked,
I will always in a steadfast faith cleave unto thee and thy goodness.]

1.2. Teach us two things, first in our distresses to come to God by prayer,
and next to use feruency and earnestnes therein. Ver. 3.4.5. Teach us that the
mischievous minds of the ungodly, and our own fearful state and condition,
should be continual spurs in our sides to provoke us to earnest prayer. Ver.
6.7.8. Teach us sundry times to give place to the violence and rage of our
enemies, and that with some have and speed also, lest otherwise we be
overtaken and prevented. Ver. 9. Teaches that we may sundry times safely pray
against the enemies of Gods Church. Ver. 10.11. Teaches us, not to forbear
the displaying of sin in what place so ever we be, specially when it is
grown to so great a head, that in all places it ouerfloweth. Ver. 12. Teaches
us, that many good men, can better bear with vncurtesie from the wicked, then
from those that they make account of as friends, and that they can more safely
prevent dangers, from their open adversaries then otherwise. Ver. 13. Teaches
us, that it is no new thing, that a man's enemies should be they of his own
household. Ver. 14. Declares that the ungodly to atchieue their purposes, will
many times make profession of religion. Ver. 15. Shows that when God has
discovered some hipocrites, and we see them go forward from one sin to
another, we may then pray against them. Ver. 16. Teaches us, when we see all
out of order, to call upon the Lord, and to be rightly and assuredly
persuaded of his good will toward us. Ver. 17. Teaches us that for the
shaking off of our drousines, it shall be good for us to set unto our selves
some ordinary times of good exerise. Ver. 18. Sets out Gods favor and mercy
toward those that are his, and that by his own help, and sometimes by the
ministry of his servants and Angels. Ver. 19. Shows how gracious God is
toward the good, and how just in executing upon the wicked his heavy
judgments, it teaches further, that the ungodly abuse Gods mercies, to a
contempt of his majesty. Ver. 20. Declares the inhumanitie and unfaithfulness
of the ungodly. Ver. 21. Sets out their hypocrisy, dissimulation and
cruelty. Ver. 22. Teaches us in all things to hang upon the Lords power and
providence, with full hope and assurance that he will never destitute us, nor
forsake us. Ver. 23. Comprehends Gods sharp judgments against all the
wicked, and namely against bloody and deceitful men: it teaches the godly
also still to hang upon God, how perverse and settled in wickedness so ever the
ungodly be.

Psalm 56.
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1. to the end of the 4. In the
second he declares, 5. to the end of the 9. In the third he promises 10. to
the end of the Psalm.]

The title: to him that excels, a Psalm of David [see Psalm 4. Michtam,
which is either the name of a taken, as Psalm. 16. in the title, or else of some
musical instrument] concerning the dumb Dove [some take this to be the
beginning of a common song, after the tune that David would have this Psalm
sung, and then michtam must be taken not for a time, but for an instrument,
others think that these words must be applied to David by a metaphor, who
calls himself a dumb Dove, not only because he sought no revenge, but
also because committing all things to Gods will, he opened not his mouth to
answer the aduersaries] in a far country [ vz. from the land of Judea and
namely from the place where the services of God were practised] when the
Philistines took him in Gath [for the understanding of this, see 1. Samuel.
21. from ver. 10. to the end of the Chapter. Some I know read this title
thus. To the master of the harmony [that is all one in sense, with these
words, to him that excels.] A notable song of David [this answers in
sense to a Psalm of David in michtam, which word is sometimes used for gold,
as though that for the excellency of it, it should be as good as gold]
touching the soul that suffered violence [the reason of this variety is,
because the word in his proper and natural signification is sometimes used
for a Dove, sometimes used for a soul, but the sense is all one and this
agrees with that, concerning the dumb Doue] by a band of people that were
far of [ i. by a company or multitude of Philistines, as appears by that
which follows 1. For man [ i. great numbers of men, as when we say man can do
nothing against God: and no doubt he means both Saul and his accomplices,
together with the Philistines and other enemies of his] would swallow up [he
co^pareth his enemies to a whirlepoole, or ravenous beasts, meaning that they
had a mind utterly to destroy him except God put to his hand for his
deliuerance] he fights continually [ vz. against me as ver. 2. doing what he
can to overthrow me, and work me mischief at the least, which I suppose he
means 2. Is very plain, and is the same almost 3. When I was afraid [ i.
when any thing fell out, that might make me afraid] I trusted in thee [ q.d.
and so I will do still because I never 4. I will rejoice in God [ vz. in the
midst of al my troubles] because of his word [ i. for the certainty and
assurednes of his promise: putting the whole word, for a part thereof] and will
not fear [ vz. because I trust in him, see Psalm. 3.6.] What flesh can do unto
me [ i. any man whatsoever, as appears ver. 11. of this Psalm. and he calls
his enemies flesh, as it were in contempt, that he might put his adversaries in
remembrance of their pride, who forgetting themselves, did thrust in themselves
into 5. Mine own words grieve me daily [ q..d. besides my enemies, which much
trouble me, I feel the want of Gods favor in my affairs, which does also
much grieve me, he uses words for thoughts, purposes, speeches and deeds,
according to the propriety of his own tongue, which uses it many times so
generally] al their thoughts [ i. they do nothing else in a 6. They gather
together [ vz. to conspire and take counsel against me] and keep themselves
close [that their meetings, practices, and conclusions may not be known or
disclosed: and by this speech he means also their subtilties which they used
secretly to entrap him, see Psalm. 10.8.9.10.] They mark my steps [some expound
it thus: they follow me so nigh that they are as it were at my heels: but I
take this to be the simple sense: they pry into my life and conversation, to
see whether they can find any thing in it blame worthy: and so have you the
words used in sundry places. 1. Pet. 2.21. Heb. 12.13.] they wait for my soul
[soule is here put for life, as in sundry places before, and when he says
they wait for it, he notes their diligence and labor to kill him and to take
his life from 7. They shall escape [ vz. thy iudgments] by iniquity [ vz. which
they commit, the Prophet means that the wicked persuade themselves, not only
that they shall escape unpunished for their wickedness, but also that God will
bless them for it. See John 16.2.] Cast these people down [ vz. from the
height of pride and cruelty that they practice against thine] in thine anger [
i. at that 8. Thou have counted my wanderings [ i. thou know that all my life
has been nothing else, but a continual flight hither, and thither, as though
I were a vagabond, I never being assured in any certain place, nor having any
settled rest al my life long as it were, this he alleges to strengthen his
faith: that as God before, had had care over him, so he would continually after
that time] put my tears into thy bottle [ i. suffer them not to fall in vain
upon the earth, and to be like water spilt upon the ground, and this is
spoken according to man. By tears, he understands not only his weeping,
but also that great heap of afflictions that did make him shed his tears: and
by bottle, speaking after the manner of men, who reserve precious things sundry
times in such manner of vessels, he means Gods continual remembrance, or
as he says afterward in this verse, register: so that altogether come to
this much. q.d. Behold somewhat more nighly the afflictions that I endure, to
the end that thou may take pity upon me, and have me in continual
remembrance, suffer not my tears to fall to the ground, but esteem of them
I pray thee, as of a precious thing] are they not in thy register? [ q.d. yes
certainly they are, for by such demaundings they use most certainly to
affirm, as we have sundry times noted before, he means that the
remembrance of the tears of the faithful shall never be blotted out before
God] Ver. 9. When I cry [ i. when I pray earnestly, as 22.2. Psalm. 30.2.8.]
shall turn back [ vz. as though they were discomfited in the day of battle,
he means that they shall have no force or power to do him any hurt, but
that in the strength of God, he shall be able to wound them] this I know [
i. this I am fully persuaded of, see the word, know, so used, 2. Corin. 5.1.]
for God is with me, [ i. takes my part, see Psalm. 54.4. Psalm. 55.18. and this
he puts down as an assured reason of his persuasion.] Ver 10. Is the same
both in words and sense, with the first part 4. in this Psalm.] Ver. 11. Is
the same with the latter part of that q.d. although it may seem to men that
GOD does abuse me, withdrawing his aid from me, and keeping me in suspense,
yet I will never cease to trust in his promise, which shall be strong enough
to uphold me in all mine afflictions.] Verse 12. Thy vows [ i. the vows
that I have vowed vz. not only because I have vowed the same, but because it
parteineth unto me to perform them, and that upon pain of thy displeasure
and wrath] I will render praises unto thee, [hee shows that he will not be
unthankful for the benefit received from God: q.d. I bound my self unto
thee, by the vows that I made when I was in danger, which now I will pay unto
thee, because thou have delivered me: the particularities of which
deliverance he expresses in the next verse.] Ver. 13. My soul from i. my
body and life, which was in the danger of death, and as it were at deaths
door, by reason of the rage of our enemies] my feet from falling [ i. thou
have stayed me upright so, that notwithstanding all the grinnes and snares of
the enemies, I have not fallen or stumbled] that I may walk before God, [ i.
not only lead a holy, upright and virtuous life, but also commit my self and
my affairs to Gods providence and protection. See Gene. 17.1. Psalm ^^6 8.9.
and mark how he changes the person, from the second to the third] in the
light of the living, [ i. in this life, which is called the light of the living
because they here enjoy it.]

1. Teaches us two things, first to run to Gods mercy by earnest prayer in
our distresses. Secondly what is the outrageous and cruel nature of the
wicked, which thing also ver. 2. does set out unto us. Ver. 3. Teaches that
assured trust and confidence in God, is a ready way to overcome all fear. Ver.
4. Teaches two things: first that Gods promises are and ought to be the matter
of our mirth: secondly that if we be fully persuaded thereof, we need not
greatly fear what flesh and blood can do against us. Ver. 5. Teaches us to be
moved much and to learn to make our profit by it, when God crosses us in our
purposes and attempts, and the latter part of that ver. and Ver. 6. Do
marueilously paint out the mischievous imaginations, close conspiracies, narrow
markings, and crafty cruelty of the wicked, which may teach the godly two
things specially, first in all holy wisdom to labor the preventing of these
mischiefs that are meant against them: secondly, to strive to live a holy and
an upright life, because the eyes of the wicked are continually upon them. Ver.
7. Shows us how the wicked flatter themselves in their sin. Ver. 8.
Expresses the great care that God has over his children, and how dearly he
accompteth every thing that is done to them, or comes from them. Ver. 9.
Sets out the force and effect of fervent prayer. Ver. 10.11. Are the same
with ver. 4. of this Psalm. Ver. 12. Teaches us in care and conscience, to
perform the holy promises we have made unto God specially those that concern
praise and thanksgiving. Ver. 13. Teaches two things, first that it is God
alone that vpholdeth his children and delivers them from all dangers and
distresses: secondly that he does this to this end, that by holy life, and
godly conversation, we should glorify him before men.

Psalm 57
1. to the end of the 4. to the end of the 6. In the third part he shows his
readiness, and inforceth himself to yield thanks to the Lord for his mercy and
goodness toward him, from ver. 7. to the end of the Psalm.]

The title to him that excels, see Psalm. 4.] Destroy not [In these words is
declared the sum of those petitions, which are contained in Psalms that have
such titles as this is, as Psalm. 58. also Psalm. 59. It should appear that
David was in some wonderful fear of death and destruction: and therefore
prays the Lord not to destroy him [ i. not only not to suffer the wicked to
destroy him, but also because he alone had al power in his hands, not to lay
hands upon him, himself.] A Psalm. of David on Michtam, [see Psalm. 56 in the
title] when he fled from Saul, [the history hereof is put down at large. 1.
Sam. 22.1. and 1. Sam. 24.1.2.3. etc.] In the cave, [or rather into the cave.
He means either Adullam or else an other cave in En-gedi, for which see the
places before noted: so that in this title we may see the occasion of the
writing and making of this Psalm, vz. David's great danger and affliction.]
Ver. 1. Have mercy upon me, O i. thy sauegarde, providence, and protection:
it is a metaphor borrowed from chickens, who lie close under the hens wings,
till the kyte be passed over, see Psalm. 17.8.] Will I trust [ vz. because I have
heretofore found it good: the Prophet means that he had trusted, did, and
would continually trust in Gods almighty protection onely] till these
afflictions ouerpasse, [It appears that David had more troubles then one, yea
that he had as it were floods of them, which makes him here to rese^ble his
afflictions, to a storm or tempest: not meaning by the word, til, that when
the tempest was appeased, he would then cease to trust in God, but that he
would both then and for ever hang upon him: so have you the word, till, used
Psalm. 110. ver. 1.] Ver. 2. I will call [ i. I will pray vnto] the most high
God, vz. that god does faithfully perform his promises made him: for God never
uses to leave a work imperfect that he has begun, but always continues
his benefits and goodness toward those that are his.] Ver. 3. He will send
from heaven [ vz. either one or many Angels, rather the^ I should want help
and succour] and save me, [ i. deliver mee] from the reproof, [hee means by
this word, all that either closely or openly could be done or said against
him] of him [ i. not only of Saul, though he be the chief, but of those that
take part with him against mee] that would swallow me, [see Psalm. 56.1.] God
will send his mercy and his truth [this may serve to expound, by the way of
addition, these words, he will send from heaven, in the beginning of this
verse: or else we may expound them thus,] he will send, [ vz. unto me,
making me feel by experience, that which I have had heretofore but in
perswasion] his mercy and his truth [by mercy he means the manifestation of
his goodwill and grace toward him: and by truth he means the faithfulness
and true performance that God observes in keeping 4. My soul [ i. my whole
life and body] is among Lions [ i. greedy and cruel persons, see Psalm.
35.17. He means his enemies, whom he resembles to Lions, because they
were full of rage and cruelty, meaning also by this manner of speech and those
that follow in this verse, that he was in wonderful danger.] I lie among
the children of men [ i. such as have nothing more then that corruption which
they have brought from their fathers, which is nothing else but al manner of
naughtines and cruelty] that are set on fire [ vz. against me, and that
through the malice and mischief of their own hearts, without any cause on my
part giuen] whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword [by teeth and tongue which are the instruments whereby men speak, he
understands the false and hateful accusations, that Saul's flatterers made
against him: and in that he resembles them to spears, arrows, and swords,
he means that they were sharp, keen, and persing, even to the wounding of
him, see Psalm 120.4. also 55.21. also Psalm. 59.7.] Ver. 5. Exalt thy self O
God above the heaven, [hee provoke the Lord as it were by prayer to declare
his power. q.d. show thy might and power [which is far above the heauens]
here upon the earth, in overthrowing and confounding mine enemies] and let thy
glory be [ vz. made manifest and appeare] upon all the earth [ i. all the
earth over: to the end that thy glory may be extolled and magnified amongst
men: which can hardly be if I be oppressed, for that should be with the
dishonor of thy name.] 6. They [ vz. the wicked and ungodly my deadly enemies]
have laid a net for my steps [ i. have either narowly watched me in my
conversation, as before Psalm. 56.6. or else have laid snares in my way to
trappe me as I go, that I may thereby fall into their danger: and this latter
I rather allow of,] and my soul [ i. my life and body as sundry times before]
is pressed down [ vz. with their cruelty and mine own misery: the Prophet
means by this manner of speech, the great danger that he was in.] They have
dug a pit before me [ i. they have craftily devised ways and means to
intrappe me and that in the way, as I should walk [for I think that by
laying of nets, and digging of pits, the Prophet means to note their
subtilty] and are fallen into the midst of it [ i. the mischief and hurt
which they had prepared against me, is 7.15.16.] Ver. 7. My heart is prepared,
O God, my heart is prepared: [by doubling the speech, the Prophet notes, not
only how ready he was, but also how resolute a purpose he carried with him,
to praise God: and when he speaks of the heart, he sets it against
hypocrites, who have nothing in their heart but all in their mouths, see ver.
1. of this Psalme] I will sing [ vz. thy praises: and by singing he means
that he would publish them aloud with his tongue, as well as have them in his
heart] and vz. to thee, that art worthy all praise.] Verse 8. Awake my tongue
[hee stirs up the parts and members of his body, to a certain liuelines and
praising the Lord: see Psalm. 16.9.] Awake vial and harp [the better to
enforce himself to this great duty, he adds certain musical instruments
see Psalm. 32.2. also Psalm. 43.4.] I will awake early, [ vz. in the morning, q.
d. I will not be sluggish to praise GOD, yea I will break my sleep rather
then fail that duty.] Ver. 9. The Prophet means that he will spread
abroad 10. For thy mercy i. thy goodness and faithfulness fulfill the whole
world, so that all people in every place under heaven know thee to be
merciful and true in thy promises.] Ver. 11. Is the same with ver. 5. both in
words and meaning, in which the Prophet beseeches the Lord to declare his
power, not only in the country of Judea, but also to exercise his judgment
throughout the whole world, in succouring the innocent, and in punishing the
wicked.

Ver. 1. Teaches us in all our prayers to cleave to Gods mercy, 2. Gods power,
and Gods promise are two very good grounds of our prayers. Ver. 3. Teaches us
to be assured to obtain those things that we shall ask according to his
will. Ver. 4. Sets out the cruelty, outrage, and wonderful bitterness, both
of word and heart, that the wicked have. Ver. 5. Teaches us to pray for the
manifestation of Gods justice and glory. Ver. 6. Describes the mischievous
subtilty of the wicked against the ungodly, into which notwithstanding, through
Gods just judgment they themselves do fall. Ver. 7. Teaches to be ready and
willing to praise God. Ver. 8. Teaches us to enforce all the parts and members
of our body thereto, and to use al holy means, either inward or outward,
whereby we may be provoked to the performance of that duty. Ver. 9. Teaches us,
never to be ashamed to do it in every place, and before all persons, that other
men may be drawn by our examples to do the like. Ver. 10. Declares for what
causes we should praise God: vz. for his mercy and for his faythfulnes. Ver.
11. Is the same with verse 5. of this Psalm, both in sense and doctrine.

Psalm 58.
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of the fifth. In the
second he makes an earnest prayer against the wicked showing that in their
overthrow the godly shall have an occasion of mirth given them, and other men
shall be instructed in the justice and righteousness of God, and this reaches
from ver. 6. to the end of the Psalm.

57.] Ver. 1. Is it true? [ vz. that ye pretend and speak, that ye speak
justly, and deal uprightly. q.d. no. For by such interrogations they do
certainly deny the thing] O congregation [hee speaks no doubt of Saul's
counselors and courtiers against whom he inueigheth here] speak ye justly? [
vz. concerning me, and my causes, or do ye not rather for Saul's pleasure
flatter him, and flaunder me,] O sons of men [see this expounded before,
Psalm. 4.2.] Judge ye uprightly? [ vz. of me and my matters. q.d. no. The sense
of this verse together is this much. He directs this speech to his enemies
who were of Saul's court and counsel, as if he should say thus: I make you
judges whether under the shadow of assembling your selves, to consult for the
common wealth, and for a good and just matter, 2. Yea rather [ q.d. ye are so
far from that, that ye execute the contrary] in your heart [ i. secretly and
priuily] your hands execute cruelty] the Prophet charge them with two
things here: first diuising of wickedness, then practicing and performing of
the same: by hand he means not only the power they had to work wickedness,
but that they themselves with their own hands were the executioners of the
cruelty they had devised: see Micah 2.1.] upon the earth [ i. upon the people
inhabiting the earth: meaning also by this manner of speech 3. The wicked [in
this verse, and the other following, he sets out the cause why Saul's
courtiers commit al these things, first by reason of the natural corruption
which is in them, makes them to go astray from God, secondly because they
carry with the^ a fetled purpose to al manner of evil, and will not be reclaimed
from it by any means.] Are strangers, [ vz. from God and godliness, as with
whom they have no manner of acquaintance at al] from the womb [ vz. of their
mother] even from the belly [ vz. of their mother] have they erred [to wit,
from ye right way of holiness and goodness. q.d. it is not to be marueiled at
that they are so wicked, for it is no new thing, because they have had it eue^
from their birth.] Ver. 4. Their poison [ i. the malice of their hearts, and the
mischievous words that they vtter] like the poison of a serpent [ i. strong
and full of infection, able to kill the parties, upon whom it is cast, and
namely the venime of the Aspes, of which he speaks in this place, which is
incurable, unless the members touched therewith be immediately cut off, as
Pliny notes lib. 8. cap. 3.] like the deaf adder, [ i. the wicked are like
to it] when he says the adder or serpent is deaf, he means, that they make
themselves so, expressing thereby their subtilty against enchantments: of whom
some write, yt they stop both their ears after this sort, they lay the one of
the^ close and hard to the ground, and stop the other with their tail, so that
no sound can enter: and when he attributes ears unto these adders and
serpents: he means by that speech, those open parts of the head, whereby
they receive a sound and noise made.] Ver. 5. He notes that the most cunning
inchanter been made to lie still, and not able to hurt, is very manifest and
famous, by sundry examples, and yet at this day many in Germany do practice the
same: and I my self have seen it practiced upon a snake by a high Dutchman
yet alive as I take it in England: but neither these examples, nor this place,
do prove the lawfulnes of that art, as some do gather thereuppon, but rather
the contrary, for whereas the Jews call their charmers by a name, importing
having fellowshippe with an other, calling to their fellowship the devil
himself and his strength, to the practicing of these arts: David uses the
same word here: which also God himself condemns. Deutron. 18.11. Let us
rather see what the Prophets purpose is: he means to note, that his enemies
in subtilty and malice did surpass the most subtle serpents whatsoever, and
that they were so settled in their wickedness, that there was no way, nor hope of
their reclaiming.] Ver. 6. Break their teeth in their mouths, [he prays the
Lord here 10.13. saving that it is expressed in other words: meaning by
teeth, the cruel desire, or rather their desperate rage to hurt, wherewith they
were set on fire, as though they were raging to byte, see Psalm. 3.7.] break
the jaws of the young Lions, O Lord, [ i. overthrow the force and power, of
this cruel men who for their force and cruelty he resembles to young Lions.]
Ver. 7. Let them melt like the waters, [ vz. turned either into snow or vz.
very sodainely] when he shoots his arrows, [ i. when he goes about any
manner of mischief whatsoever, see Psalm. 11.2.] Let them be as broken [ i.
not able to wound or hurt, no more then a broken arrowe can: he prays the
overthrow of all their mischief and power] and mark both in this verse, and
in that that follows the sudden change of the number, from the plural to
the singular.] Ver. 8. vz. after that he is come out of his shell or house, for
them as Aristotle notes. Lib. 5. de historia animal. cap. 32. He waxes dull
and dies quickly, so that here he prays that the wicked might come to a
sudden ende] and like the untimely fruit of a woman [ i. like a child borne
long before the time. It appears by Job. 3.16. that there is two sorts of
this untimely fruit: one in which the form and liniaments of a body do not
yet distinctly appear: an other that has the parts and members of a body and
life it self, and yet dies either before the birth, or in the birth. I would
understand the Propet of both, but especially of the first part.] Verse 9. As
raw flesh [ q.d. let the ungodly be like raw flesh taken vz. both the
sudden vengeance of God against the wicked, which also he expresses
afterward by carrying him away in a whirlewind, and also the unprofitableness
of the wicked. For as raw flesh can not be meet food for man, so these
ungodly are such as the Lord takes no delight in at all] so let him, [ i.
God] carry them away [ i. destroy the wicked from amongst men: or else toss
them to and fro, as the whirlewinde does the chafe, dust, or any light thing:
and by the whirlewinde, he notes their sudden destruction: as by Gods wrath
he means the greatness thereof. I know other men read this ver. otherwise, and
give other senses, but me thinks this 10. The righteous [ i. those that are
accounted right, not that any are so of themselves, but that they are so
accounted for Christ's righteousness sake] shall rejoice [ i. not only be glad
for the wickeds overthrow, but give God the glory and praise therefore] when
he sees the vengeance [ vz. from God, executed upon the wicked and vngodly]
and this is not because the godly are carried forward with a desire of revenge,
that they so rejoice in the wickeds destruction and overthrow, but because
they conceive a wonderful joy when they see Gods judgments executed, whereby
they know that their life is precious before God, for as there is mildnes and
gentleness in faithful men's hearts, so being lead with a true zeal, they take
pleasure in the execution of Gods judgments: and these affections are pure and
right, because they are ruled according to Gods will] he shall wash his feet
in the blood of the wicked [the Prophet means hereby that Gods judgments
shall be so heavily executed upon the wicked, and there shall be so great a
slaughter and discomfiture of them, that the good shall even bathe their feet
[by a manner of 11. And men shall say [ vz. not only the good, but eue^ others,
yt in the great slaughter of the wicked shall remain aliue] shall say [not in
heart only, but also confess with their mouthes] verily there is fruit for
the righteous, [ i. certainly it is profitable and good, to strive to serve
God and to lead a holy life.] Doubtless there is a God [ vz. in heauen] that
judges in the earth, [ i. that governs the world though the wicked think
that he is idle in heaven, and regards not the things that are done here
below. See Mala. 2.17. also 3.14.

1. Teaches us charitably to debate matters with the wicked and ungodly: it
shows also that hypocrites pretend justice and judgment, whereas they
perform nothing less. Ver. 2. Declares how sin proceeds from imagination
in the mind to execution in act and deed. Ver. 3. Plainly proves original
sin: and notes the proceedings that the wicked make in ungodliness, so that
from their birth unto their death, there is nothing but sin and corruption.
Ver. 4.5. Teaches us first that the wicked are given to all manner of lying,
slaundering and backbiting, secondly that they are so settled in their sin,
that they are almost past hope of recovery. Verse 6.7.8.9. Teaches that we
may pray against the obstinate enemies of Gods Church and truth, that the Lord
God would (if he see it so good) shortly confound and speedely overthrow
them: which condition would be understood in all such prayers of David, though
he were excellently endued with the spirit of prophecy. Ver. 10. Teaches us
that the execution of Gods judgments upon the wicked, is a matter of great
comfort to the godly. Ver. 11. Teaches us that the execution of Gods
judgments upon the wicked, is likewise a matter of great instruction to
other people, wringing from them a sincere confession and acknowledgement of
Gods mercy toward the good, and of his justice toward the other, it
teaches also that the godly shall loose nothing by this that they have lead a
religious and holy life before men, in this life, see Isaiah. 3.10.

Psalm 59
THis Psalm as I take it may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of the
8. In the second he declares that God notwithstanding all their trecheries 9.
to the end of the Psalm.

The title for the most part is expounded before Psalm. 57. Saul sent, and they
did watch the house to kill him [see for this 1. Samuel 19. from verse 11. to
the end of the 17. where it appears how Michal his wife saved him from
those that Saul sent to slay him.] Ver. 1.2. He prays to be delivered from
his enemies, which were ready (as it were) to ouerwhelme him, by their wicked
attempts, cruel practices, and mischievous subtilties, who did nothing else as
a man would say but seek his destruction.] Verse 3. vz. both secretly and
openly] for my soul [ i. for my life (as sundry times before) that they might
take it away] the mighty men [ q.d. no small ones, and therefore the greater
danger am I in, but such as have will and power to perform what they lift,
unless thou preuent] nor for mine offense, nor for my sin [ vz. to themward,
for I have not done them any manner of evil, which also may appear by the next
verse following] O Lord [ q.d. even as thou that searchest al hearts know.]
Ver. 4. They run and prepare vz. toward them, as before ver. 3.] Arise
therefore [here he calls upon God, whom he imagines to be a sleep as it
were: and all this is spoken according to man: q.d. show thy power and might,
as he does that is waked out of his sleepe] to assist me [ i. to stand by
me, and to strengthen me against such a number of cruel enemies as I haue] and
behold [ vz. not only my wretchedness and weakness, but also the outrages and
mischievous matters, that they imagine and do against me.] Ver. 5. Eue^ thou,
O Lord of hosts, [hee more plainly describes the God, whom he called upon
for succor: and in these terms, Lord of hosts, he comprehends his power,
as who has infinite armies of all sorts of creatures in his hands, to punish
the wicked by, and to defend the good, and by these wordes] O God of Israel,
[he sets out his mercy, joining both together for the further stre^gthening
of his fayth] awake, [ i. declare thy power, as before verse 4. and show thy
self no less diligent to succor me, then they are to hurt me,] to visit [
i. to punish and correct, as Exodus 20.5.] All the heathen, [by heathen he
means the hypocritical and counterfeit Israelites who did as grievously
persecute David, for Saul's pleasure, as people estraunged from God, would have
done: and when he says, all, he means the greatest number, expressing also
under that term, the great multitude of his enemies, which were so many in
number, as though they had been whole swarms of the Gentiles coming together]
and be not merciful, [ i. show no manner of favor at all,] that transgress
maliciously [ i. of set purpose, and as it were for the satisfiyng of their
own mischievous minds, he minds not here to speak of any, but of the
reprobate, whose iniquity was altogether desperate: which as it should seem,
he did know through the spirit of prophecy. Here we must take heed 6. They
run to and fro [ i. they cease not to go and come so that they may execute
their enterprises: and this manner of speech notes their rage] in the evening
[ q.d. if they can do no evil in the day, they will not cease to employ the
night thereto, as being in deed a most convenient time to work mischief in:
and this sets out their diligence in committing euil] they bark like dogs
[ i. they pursue me egarly and that with open mouth, it is a metaphor taken
from dogs used in hunting, who sundry times follow their game barking and
opening their mouths wide as though they were ready to devour their pray: in
which respect he also compares them here to raging and hungry dogs] and go
about the city, [ vz. lest I might escape any manner of way, and this 55.10.]
Ver. 7. Behold they brag in their talk, [ i. they boast openly of that,
which they have wickedly devised and consulted on, yea they vomit out, and
discover all their wicked attempts without hyding or dissembling any thing, so
great is their impudency and shamelesnes] and swords are in their lips [ i.
the words that they speak are cruel, for they speak of nothing but
murdering, throatcutting, and spoiling, see Psalm 55.21.] for who, say they,
does hear [ vz. our words, or else perceive our deeds and attempts: and this
they say amongst themselves, meaning that neither God nor men do perceive them.
And here he teaches the outrageous blockishnes that reigns in the wicked,
when they persuade themselves that God regards not their wickednesses, for
being in possession and freedom to execute their wicked counsels they have no
shame of men, nor fear of 8. See expounded before Psalm. 2.4. and for the word
heathen, see ver. 5. of this Psalm. Whatsoever it is ye Prophet means, that
God will bring al their purposes to nothing, and that without making any great
ado, but even as it were playing and sporting.] Verse 9. He is strong [this
may be either understood of Saul who was in the kingdom, and had al at his
commandment, or q.d. notwithstanding his strength, I will patiently tarry
thy leisure, till thou overthrow him or deliver me] for God is my defense,
[marke the sudden change of the person, from the second to the third: and
this is a reason why he will wait the Lords leisure, because he is sure to be
defended, sith God takes his part.] Verse 10. My merciful God [ i. my God vz.
with his help and favor, yea and that many times before I ask or have need,
he means that Gods aid should always be ready to succoure him, and though
he deferred it for a time, yet he would not fail at neede] God will let me
see, [ i. through his goodness he will make me perceive the force of my
prayers, and the execution of his justice upon the wicked. For that which
follows in this verse, see before Psalm. 54.7.] Verse 11. Slay them not [ vz.
suddenly i. either these that are presently with me, or shall in time hereafter
come under my gouernment] but scatter them abroad [ i. cause them to wander up
and down, as troubled people that know not what they do: or else as people
that be grieved, and can find no place of their own or of other men's, to ease
themselves in, by reason of the evil that pincheth them, I suppose he alludeth
to the judgment that GOD pronounced against Kaine Genesis 4.12.] by thy power [
vz which they nor any other are able to resist] put them down [ vz. from their
estates and honorable degrees, whereunto they are exalted in Saules Court, that
their miseries may serve them as glasses to behold thy judgments in] O Lord
our shield [ i. our defender and succourer, see Psalm 18.2] Verse 12. For the
sin of their mouth, and the words of their i. for the slanderous and false
speeches that they have given out and spoken: the Prophet shows a cause why
the Lord should or would plague them by casting them down from their
honour] let them be taken, [ vz. by thy iudgement] in their pride [ i. when
they are at the height thereof, or most proud. For the more high a man falls,
the greater is his fall to him, and more noted of others] even for their
perjury and lies that they speak [by these words he touches two great
faults in them, the lesser of them being strong enough to draw Gods judgments
upon them] Verse 13. Consume them [ vz. 11.) and when the time shall come that
thou shall have sufficiently served thy self with them, as a most ^ayne
example of thy vengeance, verse 11. also of this Psalme] in thy wrath [which
is as it were fire, whereas they are but stubble] consume them [this doubling
of the words notes the earnestness of the Prophet in his prayer] that they
be no more [ vz. among men: he means that they might not live any longer,
see Ierem. 31.15. Math. 2.18.] and let them know [ vz. at the last, and that
by their own experience and feeling] that God rules [ i. not only governs
but also cares for] in Iaakob [i. in and for his Church: as Psalm 14.7.]
even unto the ends of the world, [this may be taken, either that it should
note the continual care and gouernmente of GOD, in and over his Church: or
else that it should set out the largeness of his government, as that it
should be stretched from the one side of the 14. And in the evening, etc. For
the understanding of these phrases and manners of speech, see before verse 6.
where the same words are repeated and expounded. In this place the Prophet
minds to mock them, for their endeavors and agreements, and says that after
they shall be much wearyed, and have trauayled all day long in removing
household stuff as it were, and trudging hither and thither to entangle him,
they shall be frustrate notwithstanding 15. They shall run here and there [
i. they shall be very paynefull and laborious] for meat [ i. to hurt and to
do mischief: for as the godly think it a nourishmente unto them to do
good, as our Savior says, John 4.32.34. also John 6.27. so the wicked take as
much delighte in doing ill as in their foode] and surely they shall not be
satisfied [ i. they shall certainlye miss of that they desired and sought for,
yea] though they tarry all night [ i. though they watch all night long, and
take never so much pains to atchieue it. I know others do otherwise expound
it, as though they should be pinched with famine, and hungerbitten, what toil
and labor soever they took, but the former sense likes me] 16. But I will
sing of thy power [ i. in my songs I will make mention of and set forth thy
power, made manifest in delivering me, and in punishing mine aduersaries] and
will praise thy mercy [ i. with a loud voice I will set it forth, that others
hearing it may rejoice with me and trust in the same] in the morning, he
means every morning and every day, putting a part for the whole: and yet
because the morning is the special time for that exercise of prayer and
thanksgiving, he makes special mention thereof] for thou haste been my
defense [ i. thou alone have defended me] and refuge [ i. the sure place
whereunto I fled, as to a high Mountain: see Psalm 11.1.] in the day [ i. in
the time or times, for he means not that he was troubled but one day only.]
17. Unto thee, O my strength [ i. unto thee O my GOD, that art the God of my
strength, and from whom alone I have the strength that I haue] will I sing [
vz. songs of praise and thanksgiuing] and my merciful God [ i. he that
vouchsafes me worthy of his mercy and by his mercy does protect and defend me.

1.2. Teach us to pray deliverance from our enemies, and that so much the more
earnestly, by how much they are many in number, or cruel in deeds, or great
dangers in multitude increase upon us. Verse 3. Sets out first the
subtlety of the wicked, secondlye that not the meanest many times but the
mightiest are enimyes to Gods children: and that not for any evil the godly
have done against them, but to satisfy their malicious minds, which may be
terrible to them: but comfortable to the godly. Verse 4. Sets out the
pains and diligence that the wicked take to perform mischief. Verse 5.
teaches, that God, even the God of power, must only lay too his hands, when
matters are as it were desperate, to restrain the rage of the malicious
multitude. Verse 6.7. show the crueltye, rage, diligence, boasting, and
carelessness of the ungodly. Verse 8. Teaches that God will make all the
mischievous attempts of the wicked frustrate. Verse 9. Teach us not so much
to regard the force and multitude of our enemies, as to look up to our GOD,
whose power is present with us. Verse 10. Teaches that GOD is more ready to
do for us, then we many times think of. Verse 11. Gods judgments justly
executed upon the wicked, should not be lightly let pass or slip out of our
remembrance. Verse 12. Teaches us to look to our words, to beware of pride,
and to take heed of perjury and lying, for they are such things as the Lord
can not away with. Verse 13. Gods just judgments executed upon the wicked, are
evident testimonies of his justice toward the ungodly, and of his mercy
toward his own children. Verse 14.15. Teaches that all the wicked purposes
and attempts of the ungodly shall be frustrate, whatsoever pain, toil and
diligence they shall take in the performaunce thereof. Verse 16. teaches us,
that Gods justice upon the wicked, and his goodness toward his own, should
enforce us, to yield continual praise and thanks to him both for the one and
for the other. Verse 17. Teaches that all our strength and sufficiency, is
from God alone.

Psalm 60
THis short Psalm may be divided, as I suppose, 1. to the end of the 5. In the
second he does by the spirit of Judea, but among the nations about him from
verse 6. unto the end of the 8. In the third he prays the Lord to strengthen
him against 9. to the end of the Psalm.

The title, Shushan Eduth. I take it to be the name either of some instrument,
which should be used in the singing of this Psalm: or else the beginning of
some song, according to the tune whereof David would have this Psalm sung] or
Michtam [q.d. It may be sung either upon the one instrument or tune: or upon
the other instrument or tune: of michtam we have spoken before, and namelye
Psalm 16. in the Title] a Psalm of David [ i. which David made] to teach [
vz. not only himself and those of his time, but others that should come after
him, what great care God has over his, though he afflict them for a little
while] when he fought against Aram Naharaim [this expresses the time of the
making of this Psalm: The history whereof you may see at large 2. Samuel 8.
through out, and namely verse 12.13. For Aram Naharaim what Country it was,
and why it was so called, see Genesis 24.10. and the note in that place] and
against Aram Zobah [he makes only mention of terrible people and such as are
far of, leaving to speak of the nations round about him, because the
discomfiture of those was as it were incredible: and yet God gave him the
victory both against the Aramites of Mesopotamia, and against the other
Aramites that inhabited Zobah] When Ioab returned, to wit, from the slaughter
of the Syrians, as 2. Samuel 8.13. where it is said, that David slew eyghteene
thousand: which we must understand thus because he was the chief of that
army, and therefore that is ascribed to him, which was performed by the people
that was subject to him: and in 1. Chronicles 18.12. It is said that Abishai
Ioabs brother flew the^: which must be understood, because he was the first
instrument that overthrew the Syrians, killing six thousand of them, which
victory his brother and the army that was with him pursued, and flew twelve
thousand more of them, of which mention is made in this place: read diligently
for the better understanding hereof, the places before alleged, vz. 2. Samuel
8. throughout, and 1. 18. through out.] Verse 1. No doubt he bewayleth the
miserable dispersion and long afflictions, that the people of Israel abode in
the time of the Judges and Saul, of which you may read in the book of
Judges, and the first of Samuel] thou have cast us out [ vz. either of thy
favor, or else of the land and dwelling places that thou have given us: of
which the story of Ruth yields an example] thou have scattered us [ vz.
amongst other peoples round about us: see more of this phrase Psalm 59.11.]
thou have bin angry [ vz. against us, evident signs of which thy wrath, have
bin our outcastinges and dispersions] turn again unto us [ q.d. behold our
misery and affliction, and once again look upon us in mercy and loving
favor, as thou have don sundry times heretofore: take not thy flight from us,
neither depart away from us in sury, but in mercy return to us, and abide with
us for ever.] Verse 2. Thou have made i. thou have stricken a wonderful fear
into the hearts and heads of thy people, by reason of foreign wars and
heavy troubles: or else thus: Thou have brought great disorders amongst the
people, even as confusion commonly and overthrowing of houses follows
earthquakes: but I allow rather of the former sense: whatsoever it be he does
by a metonymia, put the land for the people inhabiting the same] and thou have
made it to gape [ vz. not only as it were with an earthquake, but also as it
were with a most dry and parching summer: meaning thereby seditions and civil
discordes, when the people were divided among themselves, some following David
and some the house of Saul, as appears 2. Samuel from Chap. 1. to the
fourth] heal the breaches thereof [ i. remedy the disorders therein and cure ye
diseases like a good Physician, as in deed one to whom alone it belo^geth] for
it is shaken [ vz. greatly and grievously: with the calamities that it has
already endured, and is like to endure, unless thou redress it: q. d. It is
so laden with affliction and misery, that it can not long endure, even as if a
man had a burden on his back that were too heavy for him to bear.] Verse 3.
Thou have showed thy people i. thou have made that people whom thou did
dearly love, to feel and see things that might minister, and have ministered
great sorrow, and heaviness to them] thou have made us to drink the wine of
giddiness [he speaks of some venomous and infected drink, which takes from
men their sense and understanding, and as a man would say, bewitcheth people
and makes them drunk: q.d. Thou have made us dull and blockish in our evils,
even as drunkards are, or people that are inchaunted. Not that God was either
the author of evil or did the^ any injury, but that he had just cause thus to
plague the^ and give them over for their sins.] Verse 4. But now thou have
given a banner i. a plain sign of thy favor, and of good hope to us ward,
giving us by the change that is fallen out, matter and occasion of courage and
rejoicing, in hope that the dispersed shall be gathered together, and things
brought into good order, he means that God by the light of his promises, and
by his aid: and namely by the new victory he had given them, whereof mention
is made in this Psalm, would take into his guiding again the people whom he
had seemed before to forsake, and go before them now as it were, with a banner
displayde, see Psalm 20.5.] because of thy truth, because of thy most true and
assured promises, that thou have made to them in that behalf.] Verse 5. That
thy beloved [ i. those whom thou cariest a singular favor to] may be
delivered i. set from danger and distresse] help with thy right hand [ i.
with thy wonderful might and power, as sundry times before] and hear me [ i.
grant my request and prayer.] Verse 6. God has spoken [ vz. by his servant
and Prophet Samuel] in his holiness [some read it by his holiness: if we
read in his holiness, then he means thereby Gods sanctuary and Arc, which
is called his holiness, because he that is holiness it self, did dwell and
appear there. If we read by his holiness, it is as much as if he should
say, he has called his holiness to witness, and pawned it, as a man would
say, for the certainty and assurance of that which was promised him] I will
rejoice [ i. comfort my self in this, as good cause I have indeed so to
do.] I shall divide Shechem, and measure the valley of Succoth. Shechem was
the name of a place on this side the River Jordan as the valley of Succoth was
on the other side this river. He names some parts of the land, putting them
for the whole kingdom, in the full possession thereof though he were not, by
reason of the division between him and Saules house, yet he assured himself
upon the promise of God that he should enjoy the same in good time: and by
dividing and measuring, he means nothing but that they should come under his
subjection, as the other part of that land was, alluding to the manner of
dividing and measuring out lands by cords, the owners thereof being the
principal dealers most commonly in that matter, and it is as much as he
should say: I will not look to have my share measured out by others, but I
will divide it, and measure my self, and 7. Giliad shall be mine, and
Manasseth shall be mine [these are other parts of the kingdom which David
assures himself shall come into his possession] Ephraim also [ i. that whole
tribe and people] shall be the strength of mine head [ i. the stay and power of
my kingdom, because that this tribe was very mighty and well peopled: in so
much that the very name of it in the Prophets, is put for the whole kingdom
of Israell] Judah is my lawgiuer [ i. that Tribe obtayneth the right of
government and kingly authority amongst the people of GOD. See for the better
understanding of these two last speeches, Deutronom. 33.17. Genesis 49.10.]
Verse 8. Moah [i. the Moabites: and now he speaks of forrayne people] shall be
my Washpot [ i. so base and contemptible in my sight, that I will freelye
break them as a potshearde, and if I shall reserve any of them, I will put
them to filthye services, as 2. Samuel 8.2.] over Edom [i. the Edomites] will
I cast out my shoe [ i. I will boldlye tread them down, as altogether in
subjection to me, for I will bring them altogether under mine obedience, and
that with as much ease in a manner, as casting my Shoe over them] Palestina [i.
O ye Philistines] show thy self joyful for me [ q.d. at the least make
outward show, though thou have nothing inward, 9. Who will lead me [ i. me
and mine that are with me q.d. none can do this, but God alone] into the
strong City [ vz. of mine adversaries: and here he puts 10. Which had
cast us of [ vz. for a tyme] and did not go forth [ vz. to War, ayding
and strengthening the hands 11. Vain is the help of vz as it comes from
man.] Verse 12. Through GOD [ i. through the assurance we have of his succor
and aid, and by the strength that he shall give vs] we shall do valiauntly [
vz. against his and our enimies] for he [ vz. either by himself
extraordinarilye, or by our ministry, as by a mean: but whatsoever it is he
ascribes all to God] shall tread down our enemies [ vz. under his feet, and
under our feet, so that they shall not be able to rise up again.

1.2.3. Teach that God does sundry times, and in sundry sorts afflicte his
people, and that very sore. Verse 4 teaches that yet he does never utterly
take away his loving kindness and mercy from them, but that at the length he
gives them assured testimonies and signs of his favor. Verse 5. Teaches
that Gods power is all in all for the sauegarde and deliverance of his
Servant. Verse 6.7. Teaches Princes that it is GOD alone that tyeth the
hearts of their own people in holy affection fast unto them. Verse 8. shows
that it is God only that must subdue all enemies, both forrayne and at home.
Verse 9. Teaches that strong cities and peoples are nothing, when God will
have them subdued and sacked. Verse 10. delivers the same doctrines that
Verse 1.2.3. and 4. of this Psalm. Verse 11. Teaches two things, first
earnestly to pray to God in all our troubles, and secondly never to make
accounte of man otherwise then of man, that is as of a vain thing without God.
Verse 12. Teaches that God is our only strength, and that whatsoever victory
we get, we must ascribe it to him alone.

Psalm 61.
THis Psalm has three parts. 3.4.5. In the third he prophecieth of the
continuance 6.7.8.

The Title of this Psalm is expounded before Psalm 4.] Verse 1. i. grant my
earnest request: and the same is meant by, give ear unto my prayer: not that
David doubted whether God heard or no, but that he would feign with some speed
have had his suit yielded unto.] Verse 2. From the vz. of Israel, for David
flying fore fear of his son Abshalon [vpon which occasion I suppose this
Psalm was made, passed over Jordan to Mahanaim, whether also Abshalon followed
him, Samuel 17.24.] will I cry unto thee [ i. Pray earnestlye and feruently]
when my heart is oppressed [ vz. with sorrow and grief to see my son rise up
against me, and my people also to follow him] bring me unto the Rock [ i.
set me upon a very high and safe place, from whence I may behold my enemies
and be safe from their force] that is higher then I [ i. that is more sure and
safe, then I and all the forces I have, or am able to make.] Ver. 3. For thou
have bin mine hope [ i. he alone in whom I have hoped and trusted] and a strong
tower [ i. a most sure defense keeping me always safe and sound from 4. I shall
dwell in thy tabernacle [tabernacle is not put here for the Arc, but it is put
for a tent or pauilion, being have abiding in such a place, as where nothing
can hurt him, and this sense may appear to be right, by the other member of
this verse] for ever [ i. all the days of my life upon the earth, and ever
after when I shall be received to thee] and my trust shall be under the shadow
of thy wings [ q.d. This shall be my 17.8.] Ver. 5. Have heard my desires [
i. granted the things I prayde for] thou haste given an heritage [both in
this life, vz. the lawful inioying of earthly things, which do indeed
appertain to the only servant of God, and also in the life to come, prepared
for those] that fear his name [ i. that of a certain childlike reverence that
they have of his Majesty in their hearts, yield unto him that service in this
6. Thou shall give the King [ i. me, that am the King, speaking of himself in
the third person] a long life, his years shall be as many ages, [ vz of men
and their posterity laid together, he means nothing else but that he should
live and reign long. This was fulfilled certainly in David, who reigned King
forty years, but specially it is accomplished 7. He [Marke how he speaks
still of himself in the third person] shall dwell before God [ i. shall have
God always gracious and favorable unto him, by reason of his fatherly
providence and care that he has over his. For to dwell before God, is not only
to live in his presence, for the wicked are never removed from that, but to
find him gracious and loving, as those whom the Prince continually vouchsafes
his sight] for ever [ i. a long time, if you refer it to David, but
perpetually, if you refer it to Christ] prepare [ vz. for the King] mercy and
faithfulness [ i. by mercy, he means compassions that Magistrates use, as
when in pronouncing sentence against any, they show that they do it with a
tender heart: and by faythfulnesse, he means truth, equity, and upright
dealing, rendering to every man according to his cause] that they may preserve
him [ vz. in his kingdom, and make his reign and government sure. See
Proverbs 20.28. 29.14.] Verse 8. So will I always sing praise unto thy name, [
i. continually praise thy majesty, for inabling me to execute my office in
performing daily my vows [ q.d. by this means shall my praise and
thanksgiving appear, in that I will perform, as signs of my thankfulness
and obedience, the vows that I have made unto thee.

1. Teaches us so to be earnest in prayer with our God, not that he has need
thereof, but for our own cause, because it is a good means to cause us to
speed. Verse 2. Teaches that prayer is not tied to any place, as to think
that for the places sake, our prayers should be the better: it teaches also
that in the heaviness of our heart we should then specially pray, as also
James 5.13. Verse 3. Teaches that nothing can more forciblye cause us to hope
in God, then the unfeigned remembrance of the aid that we have received from
him. Verse 4. Teaches that God alone must be our refuge and protection. Verse
5. Shows that God graciously grants the holy prayers of his Servant: and
never destituteth those either of bodily or spiritual blessings, that call
upon him. Verse 6. Long life to all, and namely the long reigns of Kings and
Princes, is a special gift of God. Verse 7. Teaches that Magistrates know
not how to rule, unless the Lord apt them for it: it teaches also that
tender hartednesse and upright execution of justice, be the proppes and stays
of kingdoms and countries. Verse 8. Teaches Gods children thankfulness, yea
continual thankfulness, and the manifesting of that thankfulness, by the
exercises of Gods holy religion, and the fruits of obedience.

Psalm 62.
THis Psalm, though somewhat short, Exordium, wherein the Prophet shows
that he hangs only on God, and this is in the two first verses. In the second
he reproves 3.4. In the third part he propounds the doctrine of 5. to the
end of the 10. In the fourth he confirms his doctrine showing

The title of this Psalm is expounded before, Psalm. 39.1.] Ver. 1. q.d.
notwithstanding all the afflictions yt I have endured, my inward man, has
neither murmured against God, neither ceased at any time to trust in him: and
this is ye exordiu^ of the Psalm. beginning as it were somewhat abruptly, and
suddenly coming (as a man would say) in his imagination out of ye violence of
his crosses] keeps silence [ i. patiently bears, vz. the trials and
afflictions that are upon me, see Isai. 30.7. Zephani 1.7.] unto God [ i. him
and his doing, I never murmuring and repining against them, though through the
weakness and corruption of my flesh, I be sometimes provoked to murmuring and
dispayre] of him [ vz. alone] comes my salvation [ i. deliverances from
dangers and distresses, he means that the deliverance he has, he has from
God only. Ver. 2. Yet [ q.d. All i. al ye strength I have, I have from him] and
my salvation [ i. he that delivers me from danger and distres] and my defense
[ i. he that defends me from hurt and harme] therefore [ vz because I have so
good a proppe and stay] I shall not much be moved [he means not that he shall
not fall at all, but this, that if he stumble, yet he shall rise again, and
though he be shaken by manifold temptations, yet he shall have an issue and a
way out to escape, 1. Cor. 10.13.] Verse 3. How long i. against me speaking of
himself in the third person: see psalm. 4.3.] ye shall be al slain [ q.d. your
devising against me, shall profit you nothing: for you shall be slain, so
that one of you shall not escape] ye shall be as a bowed wall [by this speech
the Prophet means, both that they shall be suddenly destroyed, and that there
shall not be much ado to overthrow the^, no more then there is to cast down a
wall that is falling of it self see Isaiah 30.13.] or as a wall shaken [ vz.
either with earthquake, or violence of 4. Yet they consult [ q.d. though mine
enemies see that they get nothing by their dealings, but thrust themselves
headlong into destruction, yet they cease not to devise all that they can, to
hinder me from the roial dignity whereto god has called me, he speaks of
himself here in the third person: and by his dignity he understands that
maiesticall excellency, whereunto God either had or would indeed advance him, of
which see 1. Sam. 18. almost throughout] their delight is in lies [that is,
they take pleasure in lying, hypocrisy, etc. as may plainly appear by ye
chapter last aleadged] they bless [ i. speak well of, and wish well also]
with their mouths [ i. in their words, putting ye instrument whereby words
are uttered, for the words the^selues] but curse [ i. wish evil, and think and
imagine evil and mischief 2. of this psalm.] Ver. 5. Yet my soul [he speaks
to himself and comfort himself: q.d. notwithstanding all this their perverse
and crooked dealing, trust thou in the Lord without murmuring against him, as
before ver. 1. of this psalm. and he speaks unto his soul or inward man,
because if yt be comfortable and assured, we shall the easilier overcome ye
outward distresses of ye body] for my hope is in him [ i. I have fixed my full
assurance in him, who ca^ and 6. is the same with ver. 2. of this Psalm.] ver. 7.
In God is my salvation [ i. the deliverance yt I must have out of al dangers,
must come from him alone] and my glory [ i. the dignity and glory yt I either
have or shall have, has bin, is, and must be, his only gift] the rock of my
strength [ i. in him alone consists al ye strength I haue] in God is my trust
[see ver. 5. of this psalm, and these 8. Trust in him [ vz. alone, as may
appear by the next ver. following] always [ i. as well in adversity as in
prosperity, he means yt there should be no time wherein our hope and trust
should be removed from god, though it were never so little] ye people [ vz. of
Israel, meaning thereby ye faithful of al places whatsoeuer] pour out your hearts
before him [ i. discharge your selves in his presence of your cares and greefs
which hold your heart as it were shut up, for this we know, yt so long as our
hearts be ouerwhelmd with sorrow, our prayers have small freedom: q.d. if you
feel your selves sometimes oppressed, pray heartily before him, laying open in
his sight al ye care and greef of your mind, who in good time both ca^ and will
turn it into spiritual ioy] for god is our hope i. he in whom alone we hope and
trust] Ver. 9. Yet ye children of men are vanitye [ d.q. notwithstanding men
leave god, and cleave to me^, yet for all that they are vain, and able to help
nothing at al, by children of men he means those yt are borne of inferior
persons, or be base persons indeed, as may appear by these words following, the
cheifest men [ q.d. neither poor nor rich, are any thing yt way, as to be
trusted to: and by vanity he means vain things, or things yt can stand us in
no steed or purpose: as also by lies he means yt there is no more truth nor
assurance in the^, then in a false tale] to lay the^ upon bala^ce [ d.q. if a
man will make just trial of it, he shall easily perceive ye truth of this: yt
there is no more strength, stay or stedfastnes in man, the^ in a matter of
nothing] Ver. 10. Trust not [ vz. as me^ vz. either in your imaginations, or in
your outward behauiour] or else thus, give not over your selves to vain and
perishing things, as wealth, honor, etc.] If riches increase, set not your heart
thereon [ i. delight not in the^, little or much, lest thereby you have your
hearts stolen away from the hope of better things, or be puffed up in pride
above measure against your brethren: whereby we see yt he does not only forbid
overmuch coveting of riches, but also to lift up our selves in pride or
presumption by reason therof] Ver. 11. God spoke [ vz by his deed, word, and
prophets] i. sundry times, so yt no man needs to doubt thereof, he puts a
number certain, for an vncertain] I have heard it [ q.d. yea I my self can be
a witness of it] that power [ vz. to punish the wicked, and to defend ye good]
belongs to God [ vz alone, as who has it in his hands to do whatsoever
pleases him: all this is aleaged to confirm the doctrines, which he had before
expounded.] Ver. 12. And to thee O Lord, mercy [ vz. toward thine own people,
here is a i. toward ye good thou art merciful, and toward the wicked thou
declarest thy strength to consume them] this place and manner of words is often
repeated in scripture, and has been much abused to the mayntaynaunce of
merit. In sum, this is it that I have to say of it: first, that there is
great difference between reward and desert, as to any that will consider the
words may easily appear. Secondly that these words, his work, ought to have
this sense in respect of good and holy people, that they are said to be
theirs, not because they are the authors of them, but Gods instruments to do
them: so that when he rewards them for the doing of them, he does no more
but crown his own good works in them.

Ver. 1. Teaches us, never for all our assaults to murmur against god. 2
teaches us, yt if God be on our side, we need not care who be against us, also
that though afflictions cease us, yet none shall overcome us. Ver. 3. declares
what a general and sudden destruction the Lord in his justice brings upon ye
wicked ver. 4. teaches yt notwithstanding the threatenings of gods judgments,
ye wicked proceed in their mischievous imaginations, lyings, hypocrisy,
cursings and such like. Ver. 5. teaches us to cheer up our selves in god, in
our afflictions and crosses Ver. 6. teaches ye same doctrine yt ver. 2. does.
Ver. 7. Teaches us, yt whatsoever we have, we have it from our God. Ver. 8.
teaches us in all distresses and seasons whatsoever, to hang upon him alone,
and to deal plainlye with him in laying open our hearts before him, and then no
doubt we shall find ease and comfort. ver. 9. teaches us to cast of al trust in
flesh and blood, of what degree or calling soever they be of: it teaches us
also not to have other me^ nor our selves in so great regard as we have. Ver.
10. Teaches us to beware of oppression, robbery, and vanity: it teaches us
also not only to hate covetousness, but also to take heed, least through
abundance of riches, we be puffed up in pride. Ver. 11. shows that God is a
powerful God, against al rebellious people. Ver. 12. Teaches that he is a
merciful God to all those that are his: also that as he cannot away with
wickedness, because he rewards it, i. punishes it, so a holy life is very
acceptable in his sight, and therefore we should strive to it.

Psalm 63.
4. next verses, vz. 5.6.7.8. he shows what wonderful joy, safety and
assurance he shall be in, when God shall have graciously granted his requests.
3 last verses, vz. 9.10.11. he does in the spirit of prophecy foretell, the
great overthrow of his enemies, and his own wonderful deliverance.

David [vz. which he made] when he was (now he notes the time in which this
Psalm was made) in the wilderness of Judah, he means the wilderness of
Ziph, which is here called the wilderness of Judah because it was in that
portion of the land, which was given to the tribe of Judah See 1. Samuel
23.14.15. and this Psalm seems not to vary much in argument 54.] Verse 1. O
God, thou art my God [ i. he that hitherto by thy strength and power has
delivered me from mine enemies, that did pursue me: and therfore] early will I
seek thee [ i. betimes in the morning, will I call upon thee: for he means
seeking unto him by prayer: and the Prophet notes that he will do this
diligently and carefully, because he will as it were break his sleep to do
it] My soul [ i. my inward man] thirsts after thee [ i. desires thee
especially and above all other things: see Psalm 42.2.] my flesh [ i. even
my outward man also] longs greatly after thee [a notable metaphor, taken
from women with child, to express the earnest affection he had to Godward,
which also is very much increased by the Aduerb, greatly] in a barren and dry
land, without water [it was grievous to be in a barren place, and dry land: but
much more where Waters were wanting: but all this the Prophet speaks to set
out the miserye that he was in, while he was as a banished man, from the place
and exercises of Gods Religion: q.d. all the bodily penury and pinching that I
might have in this life, should not touch me so nigh as this, that I want
spiritual exercises.] Ver. 2. Thus I behold thee [ q.d. though Immanuel does
better translate it thus] to behold [ i. that I may behold and see, q.d. my
great longing and thirsting is for this, that I may see] thy strength [ i. the
arc, which was a sign of the presence of ye most mighty and strong God, see 1.
Chron. 16.11. 2. Chron. 6.41. Psalm. 78.61. where it is also called his power]
and thy glory [ i. either thine own glory, shining in the tabernacle, or else
the glory of thy Tabernacle or sanctuary, either may stand very well] as I did
[ vz. heretofore, when I was not thus persecuted] see thee [ i. thy Majesty
and glorye] in the sanctuary [ i. in the place where the arc was, from which
the Lord was wont to show evident testimonies of his power and presence] ver.
3. for thy i. thy mercy manifested to thy childre^] is better [ i. more
profitable comfortable and to be wished for] then life [we may understand it
thus, the^ al earthly means and ayds, by which men are vpholde^ in their
estate: or else thus, then even life it self, which without Gods favor both here
and else where, is nothing else but worse then a continual death] therefore my
lips shall praise thee [he means not only these instruments of nature, by
which ye words are uttered, but also the words themselves, q.d. with my words
will I set forth thy glory and praise.] Ver. 4. Thus [ vz. even as I purpose and
do at this prese^t] will I magnifye thee i. praise and extol thee and thy
workes] all my life [ vz. long, meaning so long as this life lasteth] and lift
up mine hands [ i. pray unto thee, he uses the sign of prayer for prayer it
self, 141.2. Also 1. Timothy 2.8.] in thy name [ i. as some expound it,
calling upon thy name: me thinks this is better, that for as much as Gods
name is in scripture used for Gods goodness and mercy, it should rather be
expounded thus: in thy name, i. cleaving to thy goodness and mercy.] Verse 5.
My soul shall be satisfied [ q.d. though now I be in great 42.2.] as with
marrow and fatness [ i. as though I had a heap or abundaunce of all sweet and
good things: see Psalm. 4.6.7.] and my mouth shall praise thee [ i. set out and
show forth thy praise, as Psalm 51.15.] with joyful lips [ i. with lips
that shall be glad and ready to perform that duety] Ver. 6. i. think upon thee
and thy goodness, being thereby provoked to call upon thee, and that as I lie
upon my bed] in the night watches [this is spoken according to the manner of the
people the^, who divided the night into certain watches, as Mat. 14.35. Mark.
13.35.] Verse 7. Because vz. at al assaies, and in all distresses] therefore
under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice [ i. being under thy protection,
I will be glad, and always trust in thee, see Psalm. 57.1. and other places.
Verse 8. My i. I my self both body and soule] cleaves unto thee [ vz. even as
if it were glued: and by this manner of speech he expresses the assured hope
and confidence that he had in god] for thy right hand [ i. thy great might and
power as we have had it sundry times before [vpholdeth me, vz. in all
distress, and against 9. Therefore [ i. because thou art on my side] they that
seek my soul [ i. my life, and that of a cruel hatred] to destroy it [ vz. as
much as in them lyeth] and to take it away from amongst men] shall go into the
lowest parts of the earth [ i. shall die and perish: he speaks this of Saul,
and the people that took part with him, the verification 1. Sam. 31.
throughout.] Ver. 10. They [ i. the Philistines] shall cast him down [ i.
overthrow Saul and his company, yea kill the] with the edge of the sword [ i.
with the force of warlike instruments, using one sort of them for the rest] and
they [ i. mine enemies, vz. Saul and his complices] shall be a portion for
foxes [ i. their bodies shall be devoured and torn in pieces by wild beasts, and
they shall not have the honor of burial: which was a very hateful thing to
hear of specially amongst the people of the Jews. True it is that this
oftentimes falls upon the good, as is declared, Psalm. 79.2. (for afflictions
11. But the king [ i. I my self, whom God has anointed by Samuel to be King,
speaking of himself in the third person, shall rejoice in God [ vz. for the
great help and deliverance yt he has wrought for me] all that swear by him [
i. God, meaning by this manner of speech, all that fear him and serve him,
with a right and reverent affection, putting a part of the service for the
whole, as Deutronom. 6.13.] shall rejoice [ i. be glad, because God in favor
has bestowed so good a king upon them] for the mouth of them that speak lies
[he sets these hipocrites, against the other sincere hearted people, and by
speaking of lies, he means not only false slaundering of David, but also
dissimulation and crafty dealing with God in his seruice] shall be stopped [he
means that the wicked shall be utterly removed and taken away from amongst men:
some by death as before ver. 10. and some by confusion and shame, as in this
verse.

1. Teaches that we should many times break our sleeps, to the end we might
pray to God: it teaches us also what an earnest hunger and thirste we ought to
have to his service and worship, with the assembly of his saints. Ver. 2.
Teaches that Gods power, majesty, glory, and goodness appears in no place
more, then in the congregations of his people. Ver. 3. Teaches yt Gods mercy
rightly felt, far surmounteth all treasures of this life whatsoever. Verse
4. Teaches that the feeling of Gods goodness should wring from us,
continual prayer and praising of his majesty. Verse 5. Our inward man, and
our outward man should delight in God and good things above al. Ver. 6.
teaches us continually to think upon god, both upon our beds, in our beds, and
all the night long when we can not sleep. Ver. 7. shows, that Gods providence
and protection is a sure safeguard to all the faithful, and the only matter in
deed that can minister true joy. Verse 8. Teaches that the persuasion we
have of God and in God, should not be wavering, but assured and constant. Verse
9. teaches that bloodthirsty men shall not escape unpunished. Verse 10.
Teaches that God sundry times stirs up one wicked company to plague and
overthrow another. Ver. 11. comprehends a doctrine of singular comfort, to
all sincere and true worshippers of Gods majesty.

Psalm 64
THis Psalm is the self same argument with that which goes next before, and
it may be divided into three parts. 6. In the third he foretells their ruin
and overthrow, showing what good shall come 7. to the end of the Psalm.

The title is expounded already in the fourth Psalme] Ver. 1. i. grant me
those requests yt in my prayers by my voice I lay out before thee: for hearing
is put for yielding unto, in this place, as sundry times before: for David
never doubted ye God heard him, though sometimes he deferred to grant his
petition] from fear of the enemy [ i. from that great peril, which I fear the
enemy goes about, and would gladly lay upon me] Ver. 2. Hide me [ vz. in some
assured place yt the flatterers of Saul's court which i. from these outrages and
cruelties, that ye wicked in their secret meetings have conspired and imagined
against me] and from the rage [ i. from the outward violence and oppression]
of the workers of iniquity [he means by this speech, those that delighted in
sin and unjust dealing, and sold themselves as it were for favor or
flattery, both to work wickedness, and that with greediness.] Verse 3. i.
they have sharpened it and prepared it to cut and pierse deepely] and shoot
forth their arrows, bitter wordes] he co^pareth their corrupt dealing against
him by words, to arrows shot out of a bow, which will gal and wound, and this
is an allegorical amplification, wherein the Prophet compares their false
slanders, with warlike weapons: see Psalm 5.9. Psalm. 11.2. Psalm. 57.4.] Ver.
4. At the upright [ i. me: and here he speaks i. closelye and priuilye, he
means it no doubt of the secret accusations they brought to Saul against
him] they shoot at him sodaynlye [ i. when he thinks not of it] and fear
not [ vz. Gods majesty, or the afterclaps that may ensue upon that mischief:
q.d. They are not with-helde, with any reverence or fear of God, or with any
humanity or courtesy of man.] Verse 5. They encourage themselves in an evil
purpose [ vz. to go forward in the performance thereof and of that wickedness
they have devised against me] they come together [ vz. closely and secretly
among themselues] to lay snares privily [ vz. to entangle and intrappe me] who
shall see them? [ q.d. They suppose that GOD perceives neither them, neither
the snares that they have laid against me, for I 6. They have sought out [
vz. very diligently] iniquities [ i. mischiefs and unjust dealing against me,]
and have accomplished that which they sought out [ vz. as they themselves
suppose, so blinded are men in sin, that they think a thing to be done, when
it is neither so nor so: or else it may be understood thus, that they thought
themselves so sure of it, as that it were impossible they should be deceived,
and that made them to make so full account of it as though they had done it
already] even every one his secret thoughts and the depth of his heart [ i.
whatsoever they or any of them had secretlye devised, and that in the depth of
their own hearts, they thought it was done, in the same sense as before 7. But
God will shoot an arrowe at them suddenly [ i. God by his judgments will
quickly dispatch them, for all the sure account they make of the performaunce
of their mischiefe] their strokes [ i. the blows, meaning the plagues that God
will lay upon them] shall be at once [ q.d. God will not be long in
dispatching of them, but will make a speedye riddaunce] 8. They shall cause [
vz. by their wickedness and vngodlinesse] their own tongue [ i. those things
which their own tongue has spoken against others] to fall upon them [ vz. from
God] and whosoever shall see them [ vz. when Gods hand and judgment is upon
them] shall flee away [ i. shall make haste from them, vz. seeing evident marks
and tokens of Gods judgments against them and upon them, for fear least they
should be partakers of their punishments: 10.] Ver. 9. And all men shall see it
[ vz. Gods judgments upon them: by which manner of speech the prophet notes
that it shall be a visible and manifest iudgement] and declare the work of God
[ vz. which he in his just judgment has executed upon ye wicked] and they
shall understand what he has wrought [ vz. against them for their 10. But the
righteous [ i. I my self, for he speaks of himself in the third person, as
before ver. 4. of this Psalme] shall be glad in the Lord [ vz. because of that
which he has done for my cause] and trust in him [for ever after] and all that
are upright of heart [ i. those that are void of hypocrisy and hang wholly
upon god] shall rejoice [ vz. not only for the aid that God has given me, but
also because in me they may behold that God will aid them, q.d. The overthrow
of mine enemies shall not only minister matter of joy to me, but to the rest of
Gods children wheresoever.

1. Teaches us, that when we are sore assaulted, earnest prayer made to God is
very necessary and profitable. Ver. 2. Teaches that unless God do keep us we
shall be made a pray to ye wicked. Ver. 3. describes ye wickeds profaning and
abusing of their tongue. Ver. 4. Sets out their close and sudden practicing
of wickedness: and that the fountain of all is, want of true fear. Ver. 5.
Shows that the wicked are bold in their mischiefs, because they imagine that
God regards not their doings. Ver. 6. Teaches us that the wicked are carried
away many times, with an idle conceit of their own, thinking they have
dispatched al, when it is neither so nor so. Ver. 7. Shows that the wicked
shall not escape unpunished: also that Gods judgments shall be swift and short
upon them, yet mighty enough to overthrow them. Ver. 8. Teaches that the
wicked many times are taken in the mischievous words of their own mouth: also
that Gods judgments upon them, shall cause others to fly from them. Ver. 9.
Teaches that Gods punishments powered upon the wicked, is an effectual mean to
make not only the parties punished but others to see their wickedness and his
justice. Ver. 10. Teaches that even those judgments provoke the good on the
other side to rejoicing and thankfulness.

Psalm 65
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1. to the end of the 4. In the
second is contained a notable 5. to the end of the 8. In the third is set out a
most comfortable 9. to the end of the Psalm.

For the title of this Psalm, see Psalm 48. and the title thereof.] Verse 1.
i. is not only due unto thee, but is ready now to be rendered to thee] in
Sion [i. in the Church, as Psalm. 51.18. He means that God commonly gives his
people occasion to praise him in his Church whither me^ assembled to praise
him, to thank him, to hear his word, and to serve him according to the same:
for so much he understands by the word prayse] and unto thee [ vz. alone]
shall the vow be performed [ i. the sacrifice of thanksgiving shall be offered
unto thee: which he calls a vow, because Gods people did commonly vow such
sacrifices unto the Lord.] Ver. 2. Because thou hear [ i. vz. of thy
faithful people] unto thee shall al flesh come [by flesh he understands man,
as Gene. 6.12. by the term, al, he means wonderful many, a phrase very
ordinary in scripture: meaning that that which was particular among the Jews (
vz. the service of God) should in time to come be common to every nation: and
this is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ: and when he says that they shall
come unto God, he means to present themselves before him to pray unto him.]
Ver. 3. Wicked deeds [ i. all manner of vngodlines] vz. thus far that they
have turned thy favor from me: he speaks here of himself, but yet so that
he shuts up others in the same sins imputing it to his own sins, and to
the sins of his people, that God who was accustomed to aid his people, did
for a while, withdraw his hand, and showed not himself favorable toward them]
but thou will be merciful unto our transgressions [ vz. freely and graciously
pardoning them all, and so removing them from us, show thy self merciful
unto us that 4. Whom thou chusest [ vz. to thy self, and to be of the number of
thine] and causest to come to thee [ i. not only to have access unto thy
sanctuary, there to call upon thee, but at all other times and in all places,]
he shall dwell in thy courts [ i. he shall live among holy and faithful
people in the midst of thy Churches here, and after the days of his
departure, with all the rest of the elect in heauen] and we shall be satisfied
[marke the sudden change both of the number and person, as before in this
Psalm. ver. 3.] with the pleasures of thine house [ i. the doctrine of the law,
the sacrifices and other ceremonies, but yet so that under them he means all
spiritual blessing] even of thine holy temple [hee more plainly expounds
what he meant by the house of God [ vz. the temple, which is called holy, not
in respect of any holiness it had in it self, but because that he that is
holiness did appear there, and make it holy by his presence. It is also called
his house: not because that God dwelt there, as enclosed within the walls, but
because from that place he manifested his residence and abode 5. O God of our
salvation [ i. he that delivers us from al dangers and distresses] thou will
answer us [ vz. when we call upon thee for our defence] with fearful signs
[ i. with such signs and tokens of thy presence, as shall strike fear into
the enemies] in thy righteousness [ i. according as thou have righteously
promised, and justly wilt perform.] O thou the hope of all the ends of the
earth [ i. thou whom all the faithful, wheresoever they be, steadfastly trust
in] and of them that are far of in the seas [ i. of those that inhabit
islands far of from Sion, or the land of promise which are compassed with the
sea. He puts the places inhabited, for the people dwelling therein: meaning
by all the ends of the earth, those that dwell in the continent or firm land,
6. He stablisheth the mountains by his power [ vz. in such sort, that they
neither move nor shake] and is girded about with strength [ q.d. he has al
strength 7. He appeaseth the noise of the Seas, [ vz. when they swell, rage,
and rore] and the tumults of the people [ vz. when they are in hurliburlie and
contentions among themselves, 8. They also that dwell in the uttermost parts
of the earth [ q.d. there shall be no people so far of or barbarous, but they
shall be stricken with feare] of thy signs [ vz. which thou shall show and
work: by signs he means the notable works of God, and such as are always
meet to be had in remembrance, wherein he has as it were engraven certain
marks of his glory.] Thou shall make the East and the West to rejoice [ i. the
people dwelling in these quarters.] Ver. 9. Thou visitest [ i. thou do not
only look upon it, but graciously performest that which thou promisest: as
Gene. 21.1.] the earth [ i. the land of Judea: by this circumstance it should
seem that David made this Psalm, after that the Lord delivered the people
from famine and pestilence, of which see 2. Sam. 21.14. and 2. Sam. 24.25.] and
waterest it [ vz. with rain and deaw from heauen] thou make it very rich [
i. plentiful and abundant in all fruits, and this thou do by thy mighty
power and blessing] the river of God] he means either the small river of
Shiloah, which passed through Jerusalem, of which see Psalm. 46.4. meaning by
graces powered upon one part of the land, mercies bestowed upon the whole: or
else the rain, which makes the ground fruitful: and is called the river of
God, both because it comes from God, and also from him in great abundance:
and to this latter exposition do I rather incline] thou preparest the^ corn
[by them we may understand al generally, but chiefly those that are spoken of
before in this Psalm. ver. 4. he means that the earth brings forth her
fruit, because that GOD minding to provide for men as a good father of an
household, has created it, that it might yield them nourishment] for so thou
appointest it vz. the earth, he means that God has appointed it in such
sort and to such end, to bring forth fruit for man's use, as Gene. 1.11.] Ver.
10. Thou vz. of the land of Judea, meaning by this manner of speech, and these
that follow, that God through abundance of showers made the land fruitful] thou
make it soft with showers [ vz. whereas before it was very hard, dry, and
parched, for want of rayne] thou blessest [ i. through thy blessing thou
causest to increase, grow and multiply, as Gene. 1.22.] the bud thereof [ i.
whatsoever began, as a man would say to sprout in the land, whether they
were grass, herbs, trees, plants etc.] Ver. 11. Thou i. thou adornest and
inrichest: a notable metaphor, signifying the great glory and plenty that God
bestowed upon the land, even as it were setting a crown upon the head
thereof] the year [ i. every year one after an other, putting one or the
first of them, for the rest that insued: he means that GOD declared his
goodness toward them, by every years course, making one year to exceed an
other in goodness, as he that is the king and wears the Crown upon his
head, passes all the people whatsoeuer] with thy goodness [ i. with abundance
of good things, which proceed only from thy goodness and mercy] and thy
steps [hee means by this speech under a similitude, the clouds (which God
is said to make his chariot, Psalm 104.3) and the rain also contained in the
clouds: which he expresses afterward by the word dropping, meaning the
falling of the rain out of the clouds, which also make the ground
fruitful, which he expresses under the word fatnes: for rain fatteneth the
earth as it were: In a word, this is the sense: that in what place, and on
what side soever it pleases the Lord to walk, there he manifests his
blessings, and bestows great fertility and plentifulnes of all things, see
Proverb. 3.20.] Ver. 12. They [ i. thy steps i. fall downe] upon the pastures
of the wilderness [ i. upon the places that are not tilled and manured, where
nothing grows, but wildnes as it were: q.d. not only fruitful places, as
furrows, valleis, and such like, but also barren places, as wildernesses,
mountains etc. shall be made plentifull] and the hills [ vz. which by reason of
their height, are in summer parched away with heat: and in winter killed with
cold] shall be compassed with gladness [ i. shall be replenished with abundaunce of
fruit, that shall make men's hearts and bodies glad: as Psalm. 4.7. Psalm.
104.14.15.] 13. The pastures are clad with sheep [the metaphor of clothing
expresses the great plenty and store, vz. that as a garment covers the whole
body, so shall sheep and other cattle (for by one sort he understands the
rest) cover the pastures] the valleies shall be also covered with corn [ vz. in
such sort that a man shall behold no void place: and this metaphor sets out
the abundance of corn that shall be in the land] therefore they [ i. other men
speaking of them indefinitely: or else the valleis and corn thereon, the
plenty whereof makes men glad: as we say the fields laugh, when through their
goodly show they make men's eyes ioyful] showte for joy, and sing [ i. conceive
and express abundance of joy: but I rather refer this in mine own judgment
to men, then to other creatures.

1. Teaches that praises and thanksgiving are due to God in the public
assemblies of his Saints. Ver. 2. Teaches that Gods readiness to grant his
childrens requests should provoke us to earnest and often prayer. Ver. 3.
Teaches that Gods mercy surmounteth all our iniquities, and that in the
multitude thereof he will do away al our sins. Ver. 4. Teaches that the
feeling of Gods favor is the best blessing that can come unto us in this
life.] Ver. 5. Declares that God has judgment and power in his own hands,
for his childrens defense, and the wickeds punishment. Ver. 6.7. Shows that
God by his power governs all things in heaven and earth Ver. 8. Gods
judgments executed upon some do many times strike terror and fear into
others. Ver. 9.10.11.12.13. Teach two things, first that abundance of all
earthly benefits proceed from the Lords blessing, which instructs his to
hang upon him: secondly that he performs these blessings by ordinary means,
which also teaches us to use holy and lawful means.

Psalm 66
1. to the end of the 7. In the second he declares that howsoever God
afflicts his for a time, yet in the end he will be gracious unto them, for
which he promises 8. to the end of the 15. In the third he frames his
speech to all the faithful, declaring what great things God had done for them,
to the end that in his example they might be comforted, from ver. 16. to the
end of the Psalm.

The title is expounded before Psalm. 4. and Psalm. 48. in the title. David,
because his name is not here expressed, but for this matter see Psalm. 45. in
the title. Likely it is, that this Psalm was written, and that by David
himself, when God had delivered the Israelites from the cruel tyranny of the
Philistines, and him from his manifold persecutions.] Ver. 3. Rejoice in God [
i. be thankful unto him, and that with great gladness for his benefits] all ye
inhabitants of the earth [ q.d. there is none of you all, but you have great
occasion given you from him so to do.] Ver. 2. Sing forth [ i. publish i.
either the glory, which is due unto his majesty, or else his glorious name, but
I like the first best] make his praise glorious [ i. let all your
thankesgiuings tend to this end, that his name and praises due thereto, may be
glorious continually: q.d. add praise to praise, and never cease praising.]
Ver. 3. Say unto God [ i. confess in i. reverend and fearful, vz. to the
good, who bear a loving fear toward thee: and to the wicked who fear him
for punishment and not for loue] in thy works [ i. in every thing that thou
doest] through the greatness of thy power [ vz. exercised heretofore against the
godly, whereof also thou have reserved store with thy self for them that shall
walk in such steppes] shall thine enemies [ i. those that any manner of way set
themselves against thee] shall be in subjection unto thee [ i. shall forge and
feign a subjection to thy majesty, but choose them whether they will do it
unfeignedly or no, into subjection they shall be brought, for none is able to
resist thy power.] Ver. 4. All the world [ i. all the 1. of this Psalm:
putting all for a very great number] shall worship thee [ vz. as thou have
prescribed, meaning that they should embrace his religion and seruice] and
sing unto thee [ i. praise thee for thy mercy and trueth] even sing of thy name
[hee notes what shall be the argument or matter of their song, that is Gods
majesty, power, goodness etc. as Psalm. 20.2.] Ver. 5. Come [ vz. with me, he
speaks even unto the best sort of i. deeply consider with all your
understanding and eyes, both of your bodies and minds] he is terrible [ i.
reverend, fearful, and wonderful] in his doings toward the sons of men [
vz. either for their defense, or for their punishment. The proof of this
plainly appears in the government of all creatures whatsoever, and
particularly in that he vpholdeth and maintains the estate of men.] Ver. 6.
i. the red sea] into dry land [so that this people passed through the same,
when they came out of Egypt, see Exodus 14.21.] They [ i. his own people of
Israel] pass [ i. passed, one time put for an other, because the greatness of
the work was as it were fresh in the remembrance of all the faithful] through
the river [ vz. of Iordan] on foot [and not in ships and boats, he notes
here the entrance of the people into the land of Canaan under the government
of Iehoshua, whereof see Iehosh. 3.14.15.16. etc.] Ver. 7. He [ i. God] rules
the world [ i. the people and all things else whatsoever therein conteined]
his eyes [see Psalm. 11.4.] behold [ i. deeply and carefully consider, as ver.
5. of this Psalm, all this is spoken of God according to man] the nations [ i.
not only the persons themselves, but the things they commit: q.d. the
special privilege that God then gave to the children of of Israel hindered
not God from continual casting his sight upon other nations that he might
nourish and maintain them, and repress them also, as occasion was offered]
the rebellious [ i. such as will not yield to him and his word, when he
calls them] shall not exalt themselves [ vz. any more as heretofore they have
done, the reason is, because they shall be cast down from their dignity and
estate: he means that they shall not prosper, because God will overthrow 8.
Praise our GOD O people [ q.d. all those that you imagine to be Gods, are
nothing: but glory and honor belongs to that God alone, whom we serue] and
make the voice of his praise to be heard [ vz. of others: q.d. sound it
abroad, as in this Psalm verse 2.] Ver. 9. Which holds our souls in life [
i. by whom alone, and from whom we have, even the very life that we have in
this life, as Act. 7.28.] and suffers not our feet to slip [ vz. into any
great danger, but was always in good time ready to help us, 10. For thou O
god [he changes the person from the third to the second] have proved us [ vz.
by afflictions and troubles] thou have tried us [a metaphor taken from metals,
brought to fining that the value and goodness of them might be knowne] as silver
[see Psalm. 12.6. He means that God has tried them to the quick, and in
good earnest: as we see silver put into the fire not only once, but many times
to purge it] is tried [ vz. by the goldsmith, siluersmith, or fyner.] 11. Thou
[ vz. O God: whereby we see that nothing is done without his providence and
appointment] into the snare [ vz. which our enemies laid for us: this is an
other metaphor taken from hunting, or fowling, meaning by snare, the troubles,
dangers and tyrannies, that were devised and prepared for the^] and laid a
strait chain [ i. thou have brought to pass, that we are come into our
enymies power, and are bound of them: see Psalm. 149.8. and it is a metaphor
either taken from captains and their bands, or else from horses that carry
packes girded to them with wantes, or such like, whatsoever it is, he means
that the burdens were very great, and did stick fast to them] upon our i.
upon us, putting a part of man for the whole.] Ver. 12. Thou have caused men to
ride over our heads [ i. thou have made us subject not only to great but to
base personages, who ruling over us have used great outrages and vilanies
against us, as if we had been poor bruit beasts] we went into fire and into
water [ i. we endured most hard dangers and sundry kinds of calamities and
afflictions, which he resembles to water and fire, because those two elements,
do quickly destroy and consume the things put into them: thee hardness of their
affliction may be noted by any one of the^ but the diversity thereof, by both
laid together] but thou broughtest us out [ i. thou did at the length
deliver us, vz. out of those dangers and distresses, and did bring vs] into
a wealthy place [ i. into a plentiful place free from penury, into a pleasant
place, void of sorrow, and into a safe place from dangers and distresses,
meaning thereby a blessed and joyful estate.] Ver. 13. I will go into thy house
[ i. into the place where thou art worshipped] i. with thankfulness of mind and
body, for he puts the signs that testified thanksgiving for the thing it
selfe] and will pay thee my vows [ vz. which I have vowed to thee as appears
by ye next ver. he means that he will holily and religiously serve him, and be
always thankful and obedient unto him.] Ver. 14. Which my lips have promised,
and my mouth has spoken [hee i. when I was in wonderful affliction and danger.
Ver. 15. I will offer unto thee [ vz. alone] burnt offerings of fat rams [he i.
with sweet perfumes, and smelling sauors which also were accustomed to be
offred] I will prepare [ vz. to offer in sacrifice unto thee] bullocks and goats
[ i. al manner of sacrifices prescribed: for he means that he will do service
and homage to God, according to his word, and the ordinance of 16. Come [ vz.
unto me] and hearken [ vz. diligently] all ye yt fear God [ i. worship him
according to the prescript rule of his word] I will tell you [ vz. as plainly as
I can] what he has done [ i. what great graces and goodness he has shewed] to
my soul [ i. to me, putting a part of himself for the whole 17. I called
unto him with my mouth [ i. in words I did earnestly pray unto him for help,
aid, and succor] and he was exalted [ i. greatly and highly praised] with my
tongue [ i. with my words, vz. after he had graciously granted 18. If I regard
wickedness [ i. delight in, or make account of it] in my heart [yea though it
were within me, and secretly] the Lord will not hear me [ i. grant me my
requests: he shows why God heard his prayers, vz. 19. But god has heard [ i.
yielded unto and granted] me [ i. my requests and prayers] and considered [ vz.
deeply and vprightly] the voice of my prayer [ i. the words I uttered in my
prayer: all serves to nothing else but to show that god had yielded 20. Which
has not put back [ vz. out of his presence or sight as though he were
displeased with it, or could not abide to look upon it or me] my prayer [ vz.
made to him] nor [vnderstand here, wtholde^] his mercy from me [but given me a
plain proof thereof, by granting my dema^ds.]

Ver. 1 2. Teach two things, 3. Teaches that there is no wisdom, power, nor
policy against the Lord. Ver. 4. Sets out the inlargment and increase of
Gods kingdom upon earth. Ver. 5. Teaches us yt gods works would be diligently
and deeply considered, otherwise they shall little profit us. Ver. 6. Teaches
that for the benefit of his children the Lord can and will inuert the nature
of things. Ver. 7. Teaches first that Gods power rules over all: secondly
that nothing can be hid from his presence: thirdly that the wicked how mighty
so ever they be shall never prevail against him. Ver. 8. Delivers the same
doctrines that ver. 1.2. do. Ver. 9. Teaches that in God we live, and move,
and have our being: also that it is he alone, that vpholdeth us, that we sink
not down under the burden of sin and calamities. Ver. 10.11.12. Teach yt
God sundry ways exercises the faith, and proves the patience of his children:
whereby also we learn that it is no new thing, that the godly are afflicted.
Ver. 12. And these words, but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place,
does teach that how great and grievous soever the afflictions of Gods saints
be, yet in the end he remembers and delivers them with an everlasting
mercy. Ver. 13. Teaches us to frequent the public assemblies of the Church,
and to show our selves thankeful to God, for his graces. Ver. 14. Teaches
that affliction is the time that makes us to draw nigh to God, both in word
and deed. Ver. 15. Teaches us to yield unto God such a service as he has
prescribed, and not as we devise. Ver. 16. Teaches us reverently and
diligently to hearken unto good things, that others speak to us: also that we
should declare to other the graces of God showed to us, that thereby their faith
might be increased. Ver. 17. Teaches that mother tongues, and all the members
that we have, should be earnestly occupied in hearty calling upon God. Ver.
18. Teaches that when we come to pray to God, we must labor to cast away
from us our wickedness and corruption. Ver. 19. Teaches that god is nigh to the
earnest supplications of his children. Ver. 20. Teaches us to yield humble and
hearty thanksgiving to our God, for all his mercies toward us.

Psalm 67.


vz. who by the means of sundry our infirmities stand in need of it] and
bless us [ vz. with all good things both bodily and spiritual] and cause his
face [ i. his fauour] to shine [ i. to appear, and be felt] among us [ vz.
though there be no cause on our parts why he should so do. The Church prays
that God would show not only lay aside, that wrath which he had exercised
upon it: but also that he would show himself gracious and favorable,
putting into their hearts, by the working of his holy spirit, a true taste and
feeling of his fatherly love.] Verse 2. That they [they change the person from
the first to the third: they vz. by thy word and spirite] thy way [ i. which
thou thy self have prescribed unto them in thy law to walk in] upon earth [
i. so long as they live here] and thy saving health [ i. that salvation and
deliverance which thou bestowest and give to men] among all nations [ vz. of
the world in what quarter soever they dwell.] Verse 3. Let the people [ vz. of
the earth, meaning chiefly the Gentiles] let all vz. if thou see it so good:
or else he puts all for an infinite number: which I take to be the more
simple sense.] Verse 4. Be glad and rejoice q.d. they have no cause of sorrow
that thou gouernest, but rather of unspeakable ioy] for thou shall judge the
people righteously [ i. with great equity and vprightnes shall thou rule and
bear sway after the manner of Judges and Kings: for we know that the people
of the Jews were a long time ruled by Judges and Kings: to which here he
alludeth] and govern the nations [or else as some read, which also I like
better, lead them out, vz. as sheepeheards does their flocks: noting thereby
Gods tender care toward his Church: and all that is here spoken of Gods
government, must be understood of the spiritual jurisdiction, which he
exercises in his Church, by the scepter of his word and discipline to bring
all peoples in obedience to him.] Ver. 5. Is vz. i. all manner of fruit, and
that in abundance, through Gods especial blessing] and God, even our God [ i.
the only true God] shall bless [ vz. with all good things both bodily and
spiritual, as ver. 1. of this Psalm.] Ver. 7. All the ends of the earth [ i.
people out of al parts and quarters of the world: he puts the places
inhabited, for the people inhabiting them: and this word, all, for the great
multitude that God will draw to himselfe] shall fear him [ i. embrace his
religion and service, and that either soundly in deed, or else in hypocrisy
and flauish fear.]

Verse 1. Gods mercy must be fled to, that when God is favorably reconciled
to his people, there can be no want of good things. Ver. 7. Teaches all to
have a care to embrace Gods religion, and to follow his worship.

Psalm 68
1.2.6.12.21.23.30. The mercy of God toward his servants, is
3.5.6.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.19.20.22.27.28. Exhortation, to humble
4.19.26.32.34. The rest of the verses of this Psalm, do for the most part
most excellently seek the majesty and power of God, as
7.8.17.18.24.25.27.28.29.31.33.35.

48.] of David [i. which David made. It should seem that David writ this
Psalm, after he had overcome the Philistines and Iebusits, and went about to
carry the Arc into Jerusalem, as 2. Sam. 6. and 1. Chronic. 13. and it is so
much the more confirmed Moses uses Numer. 10.31. When the Arc should remove.]
Ver. 1. God will arise [ i. God by effects will declare that he is not only
present with, but that also he takes care for his Church, by exercising his
power against the enemies therof] and his enemies [ i. those that molest and
trouble his people, and they are called his enemies, because he esteems any
thing done against the^, as done against himselfe] shall be scattered [ vz. like
chafe before the wind, see Psalm. 1.4. meaning that they shall not be able to
stand before him] they also that hate him [ vz. either himself or his people]
shall flee before him [ vz. as men discomfited 2. As the smoke vanishes [ i.
suddenly: for we see the smoke soon passes away: and this is one similitude
he uses, to set forth their hasty and present destruction] so shall thou
drive them [ vz. by violence, and that whether they will or no] away [ vz. from
the place of their aboade, and where they thought their nest was most sure] and
as wax melts before the fire [this is an other similitude, expressing their
sudden and assured destruction] so shall the wicked perish [ i. come to
naught, be overthrown and destroyed: as Psalm 1.6.] at the presence of God [
i. when God begins once 3. But the righteous [ i. good and holy men, who
have the righteousness of God imputed unto them] shall be glad and rejoice before
God [ i. shall show themselves joyful, because God declares himself terrible
to the wicked: which also is for their good, and the salvation of his Church]
yea they shall leap for joy [ i. they shall express the inward joy of their
heart, by outward gestures and signs.] Ver. 4. Sing unto i. to his power,
goodness, majesty and nature, for all these are his being and substance] exalt
him [ vz. with songs and prayses] that rides upon the heavens [ i. that has
an infinite power, and is lifted up far above all the world] in his name Iah
[ i. in his eternal nature, which is of it self, and is the cause that all
other things are, for so much the word Iah imports: and amongst other
names and titles of God, he takes that which is in deed most significant,
and for the which he is especially to be praised] rejoice before him [ vz. in
the place where he is worshipped, which was wheresoever the Arc was, till the
temple was builded.] Ver. 5. He [ i. God] is a father [ i. a gracious prouider
for and maintainer] i. of al those that be in affliction and misery, as Hosea.
14.3.] and a judge [ i. one that takes knowledge of and reuengeth injury
offred] to the widows [by these two, fatherles and widows, he means yt God
caryeth a singular affection toward those that are oppressed, which he will
maintain against all those that labor to put them down, and oppress them by
violence] in his holy habitation [hee means either heaven, or the tabernacle
of wicnesse. The sense is, that for as much as God had chose him a dwelling
place amongst men, the poor might have more bold assurance, when they
understood that they need not seek God far off.] Ver. 6. God makes the
solitary to dwell i. not so much to rejoice in company as others did, but also
because not having seed, they were as it were alone, in as much as they did
not increase the house or stock: and by dwelling in families, he means
blessing of them with children and posterity, see Psalm. 113.9.] and delivers
[ i. sets free from bands and the danger of their enemies power] them that
were prisoners in stocks [ i. those that were kept most straightly, and locked
most surely, as Paul and Silas Acts 16.24. See Psalm 107.10.13.14.16 also
Psalm 146. throughout] but the rebellious, [ vz. against GOD, and his truth]
shall dwell in a dried land [ i. a barren place, as Psalm 63.1. He means
that they shall be destitute of gods blessing, and in continual misery,
expressing one kind of affliction for all.] Ver. 7, O God when thou we^test
forth [ i. when thou did take the charge vz. of Israel, what time thou
causedst them to come up out of Egipt] when thou wentest [ vz. with them and
that forty years long] through the wilderness [see Psalm 95.8.9.10. also
Numb. 33.11.] Verse 8. The earth [ i. not only mount Sinai, but also the
ground about it, see Exodus 19.18. yea he means that all things gave place
unto from Exodus 7. Unto the 20. chapter] and the heavens dropped [ vz. either
manna, which God gave the people: or else rain and water: see Psalm. 18.7.11.]
at the presence of this God [ i. when this our god, would give us some taste of
his maiesty] even Sinai [q.d. that great, notable, and strong mountaine] was
moved [ i. 9. Thou O God did send [for so it must be: and not, sendest] a
gracious reign [he means that of his free and only goodwill did give the
land, which of it self was a land of mountains and valleis, as Deutrono.
11.11.] good store of rain, which here also he calls gracious, because it
proceeded of Gods only grace and goodwill] upon thine inheritance [ i. upon
the land of Canaan which he calls inheritance, because he gave the same for
an inheritance to his people] and thou did refresh it [ vz. with thy
gracious reign, or abundance thereof] when it was weary [ i. faint, and not
able to yield fruit, through drought, or some other 10. Thy congregation, [
i. thy people of Israel, which is called the Lords congregation, because he
had gathered it out of all the people of the world] dwelled [ vz. long ago,
and even at that present when this Psalm was made] therein [ i. in the land of
Canaan] have of thy goodness [ i. of thy mere mercy without any merit or
desert at all on men's behalfe] prepared it [ i. long ago appointed it] for the
poor [ i. for thine own people, as ver. 7. of this Psalm, not only to set
out the great goodness of God, who despised them not for that, but also because
they came of poor auncestry, and were in miserable case in Egypt, and when
they came out of it, see Deutron. 26.5.6.] 11. The Lord gave matter [ vz. not
only of speech, but also of praise and thankesgiuing] to the women [who were
wont amongst Gods people to sing songs after a victory gotten against the
enemies, as Exodus 15.20. Judge. 5.1. etc. Judge. 11.34. 1. Sam. 18.16.] to tell
[ i. to speak largely, and to set abroad] of the great army [ vz. overthrown,
and cast to the ground by 12. Kings of the armies [ i. Kings furnished with
mighty armies] coming out against Gods people, as Sihon king of the Amorits,
Og the king of Bashan etc.] did flee [ vz. away from the face and presence of
Gods people] they did flee [ i. they were in deed discomfited and not able to
stand: for the repetition of the word makes for the certainty of the thing]
and she that remained in the house [ i. weak women, who in deed should be
housekeepers, as appears 1. Timothy 5.13. Now he speaks of one
comprehending under her all the rest, who this was can hardly be determined:
but most likely it was to be Iael, of whom see Judges 5.24.] divided the
spoil [ i. either was an instrument that the spoil was divided amongst
others, by slaying Sisera: or else he means that the booty should be so
great, that even the weak women which 13. Though ye have lain among pots [ i.
have been in very great misery, and lived as it were in great deformity for
lack of trimming or looking too: for this is a metaphor taken from slaves or
skullions that follow camps, who in the night season labor in some sort to
keep themselves from wind and weather as we say, by sitting in chimney
corners, or lying on hearthes: and therefore commonly are all over black. Now
this is usual in Scripture, by blackenes to have adversity and affliction
signified] yet shall ye be [ vz. through the grace and favor that I will
show you] as the wings of a Dove [ i. ye shall shine and have a glorious
color, and shall be purged from all your blackenes] for ye shall be like to the
wings of a Dove, that is covered with silver [ i. ye shall be all white and
clean, and glittering, for so much he means by this similitude and that
which follows in this ver. and not that any Doves were covered over with
silver, or had golden feathers: but he speaks it thus: q.d. if it were
possible for a Dove either in wings or feathers, to have as goodly a show as
gold or silver, yet assure your self of this, that you shall come to as much
cleannes.] Ver. 14. Scattered kings [ i. 1. of this Psalme] in it [ i. in the
land of Canaan, which he gave to his people] it was white [ i. flourishing and
fresh, by reason of the slaughter of the enemies, and the great victory God had
given that people against them] as the snow in Zalmon [this was a mountain,
on this side Jordan. Judge. 9.48. Which some affirm, was wont to have snow
continually lying upon it, whether it were so or no, it is not much material: I
rather take it to be a part of the land of Canaan, put for the whole, meaning
that after the overthrow of these kings the land was as glorious and glittering
to behold to, as any snow could be.] Ver. 15. i. mount Sion, which is called
Gods mountain, because it pleased him, that in that place his worship should
be vsed] is like the mountain of Bashan [i. most fruitful and plentiful in
all blessings as Bashan is, but it exceeds it in spiritual graces] it is an
high mountain, as mount Bashan [q.d. there is nothing commendable or praise
worthy in Bashan, but a man Sion.] Ver. 16. Why leap ye [ i. why do ye
rejoice for joy, and lift up your self in pride] you high mountains [ vz.
because of your height. q.d. there is no cause why you should so do] as for
this mountain [ vz. of Sion] God delights to dwell in it [ vz. by his
spiritual presence, and the exercises of his religion] the Lord will dwell in it
for ever [ i. for a long season, as sundry times before we have had the word so
used q.d. GOD has not chosen you, or any of you, for all your height to that
purpose, and therefore good cause why you should leave of lifting up your self
in pride: and no doubt, but by Sion he signifies the estate of the kingdom of
the Messiah, and of his Church, which is far above all height in the world.]
Ver. 17. The chariots i. the armies that God has, or his power, putting the
things wherein men were carried for the men themselves, or else because in old
time they thought great strength to stand in chariots and horses, he uses
them for Gods might] are twenty thousand thousand Angels [ i. infinite and
innumerable Angels, a certain number for an uncertain: see 2. King. 6.17.]
and the Lord is among them [ vz. to command, order, direct and guide them,
that all things may be rightly done] as in the sanctuary of Sinai [i. in as
great glory, as he appears in the holy place or mount of Sinai] where the
law was given. The Prophet means that the majesty of God did show it self
no less forth in the sanctuary at Sion, then it did in the mountain at Sion
when the law was 18. Thou art gone up on high [the Prophet speaks unto God,
meaning that by the manifestatio^ of his power, he had obtained excellent
honour] thou have led captivity captive [hee puts captivity, for persons
in captivity, as prisoners, alluding to the custom of those days wherein the
princes after victory obtained, were wont to have the prisoners taken in wars
lead before them, in token of renown and victory: and mark in this verse,
that though in David's time, wars were made under his conducting,
notwithstanding the praise of the victory is wholly ascribed to God] and
received gifts [ vz. from thine enemies, not that they did willingly give them,
but that the Lord would have them whether they would, yea or no: and they are
called gifts not because they gave them, but that the Lord taking them as
spoils from the enemies, gave them to his people, which he means by these
terms following] for men [ i. that thine own people might enjoy and have the
same] yea even the rebellious have thou lead [ q.d. Thou have enforced them to
yield themselves as tributaries, and that not only those that willingly
yielded, but also those that could not otherwise be brought down but by
force] that the Lord God might dwell there [ i. amongst his people in the
sanctuary: and by dwelling he means both the manifestation of his power and
presence for their good, and also his continual aboade amonst them, as ver. 16.
of this Psalm. S. Paul Ephesians. 4. ascribes all this to Christ who is God
manifested in the flesh, i. meaning that our Savior was taken up into heaven,
when he had subdued and overcome the world, the flesh, sin, death and the
devil, see Coloss. 2.12.13. etc.] 19. Even the God of our salvation [ i. that
works gracious deliverances for us, as sundry times before] which ladeth us
daily [ i. which fills us continually: the metaphor expresses the abundance
of Gods benefites] with benefits [ i. with graces and blessings new and old.
q.d. he never cease to do us good, so that we have more benefits then we are
able to bear, as it were.] Ver. 20. Even the God that saves us [ i. that
works wonderful deliueraunces for vs] the issues of death [ i. both means
and ways to escape death, if we refer it to his children: and many ways
also to destroy the wicked, if we refer it to them: as we may without any
injury to the text refer it to both.] Ver. 21. Surely [ i. without all doubt]
God will wound [ vz. unto death] the head of his enemies [hee makes mention
of the head, because it is the principal part of the body, as wherein life is,
and from which it is derived, to the other members of the body, so that it is
as much as if he had said that the Lord would take away their life] and the
heary pate [hee means by this the stout enemies of God, because they that
would be fearful to others, did foster their hear: q.d. their stout
countinance and courage, shall nothing prevail them against God] that walks
in his sins [ i. continues in the same, without repentance.] Ver. 22. The
Lord has said [therefore it shall be performed] I will vz. safe and sound]
again from Bashan [i. from dangerous places and distresses, such as they were
in, before that Og king of Bashan was overthrown, see Numb. 21.33. and
Deutron. 3.1.2. etc.] I will bring them again from the depths of the Sea [ i.
from wonderful perils, wherewith they should have been as it were
overwhelmed, altogether is: q.d. I will work as excellent a work for this
people, as I did for those whom I delivered from the hands of Og king of
Bashan: and as I did for them that passed through the red Sea, 14.16.] Ver. 23.
That thy foot [ vz. O Israel, or my people] may be dipped in blood [ vz. of
the enemies slaine] and the tongue of thy dogs in the blood of the enemies
[by these words he notes what a great slaughter there shall be of the
enemies of GOD, in so much that not only the faithful shall have their feet
died in their blood, but their very dogs, should have their tongues made red,
and colored with the very licking therof] even in it [this repetition notes
also the certainetie of the great slaughter.] 24. They [ i. thine enemies, to
their great discouragement and overthrow, and thine own people, to their
wonderful comfort] thy goings [ vz. before thy people, and thy guiding of them
in the day of war, guiding them as a captain, and getting the victory for
them: and when he says that they had seen all this, he means that they
had had the certain trial and experience thereof] which art in the sanctuary
[ i. which give manifest signs and tokens of thy power and presence of thy
people there.] Ver. 25. The singers went before i. every one in their order did
publicly praise God, and pray unto him: see Exodus 15.1.2 etc. Numb. 21.17.1.
for the maids and women praising God after the victory, see ver. 11. of this
Psalm.] Ver. 26. Praise ye God in the i. openly] ye that are of the
fountain of Israel, [i. that come from Iaakob, as from a fountain, meaning
thereby all the Israelites: for he would have none excepted, as it may appear
by the next verse.] Verse 27. There i. in the public assemblies to praise God]
was little Benjamin [i. those of the tribe of Benjamin, which is called little,
either because it was one of the least in number, or else because they came of
Iaakob his youngest sonne] with their ruler, [ i. with some principal man, who
was captain and governor of that tribe] and the Princes of Judah [i. the
noble and great personages of the tribe of Iudah] with their assembly [ i. with
the people gathered unto the^: and in such sort must the words in this verse
following be expounded.] Ver. 28. Thy God has appointed thy strength [hee
speaks to the people: q.d. the God which thou seruest has beautified thee
with strength (because he has so appointed or commanded the same) to resist
thine enemies, showing that the power of this people was from God, and not of
it selfe] stablish [ i. strengthen and continue for euer] that which thou have
wrought in us [hereby he understands the graces and blessings of God, both
bestowed upon them, and their forefathers, praying the continuance of his
graces.] Ver. 29. Out of thy i. out of the place where the Arc was, as 1.
Samuel. 1.9. from whence it pleased the Lord many times to set forth the power
and majesty he had in him for the defense of his Church] upon Jerusalem [by
Jerusalem he means the Church of God, as Psalm. 51.18.] And kings shall
bring presents unto thee [ i. as some expound it, shall yield themselves
tributaries as it were and subjects: others to whom I incline, give this sense:
the Prophet speaks of himself, and of his successors, meaning that they
would with most thankful minds acknowledge him to be their God: speaking in
the third person of them altogether, and understanding by bringing presents,
which was a sign of thankfulness, 30. Destroy the company of the spear men [
i. overthrow both the multitude and the force of common soldiers,
understanding by spearemen, al others that used any weapon against them
whatsoever, under one sort comprehending all] and multitude of the mighty
bulls [ i. the great company of their captains and men of might, who for
their greatness, and cruelty, he compares to mighty bulls, see Psalm. 22.12.]
with the calves of the people [ i. those that can hardly be tamed and be full
of wantonness and sport as it were, such as calves be, when they are very fat]
that tread under feet [ i. that do contemn, despise, and set little by, as
Matthew. 7.6.] pieces of silver [thinges that ought to be regarded and esteemed:
putting one for all of the like sort] scatter [see ver. 1. of this Psalme] the
people that delight in war [ i. take pleasure and think 31. Then [ i. when
thou shall bestow these great graces upon thy children and overthrow thine
enemies] shall the Princes [ vz. moved partly through judgments, and partly by
thy mercy] come out of Egypt [vz. to yield obedience unto thee, and to submit
themselves to thy Lordship and gouernment] Ethiopia [i. the people inhabiting
that land] shall have [ i. make have and speede] to stretch her hands [ i. to
pray unto, or readily to offer gifts in sign of obedience and subjection:
putting the sign of prayer, or obedience, for the things themselues] unto God
i. unto thee speaking of God, and to God, in the third person.] Ver. 32. Sing
unto God [ vz. praise and thanksgiving, for your conversion and calling, for
these verses comprehend the calling of the Gentiles to the kingdom of Christ] O
ye kingdoms of the earth [ i. O ye people which inhabit the kingdoms of the
world: putting the places inhabited, for the persons inhabiting, as sundry
times before] sing praise unto the Lord [the saying is doubled, the more
earnestly 33. To him that rides upon the heavens [ i. to him that governs
them and their course, as he that rides upon the Horse does the Horse: this
is spoken of GOD according to man, and is nothing else as a man would say, but
a description of Gods excellent majesty: and when he sayth] most high heavens
[hee speaks it, also according to men, who are wont to make sundry heavens,
as the Philosophers yet do: not that there are so, for all that they babble of
that matter is vain, but that men so esteem it: and yet notwithstanding in
Scripture we see, that the word heaven, is sometimes used in Scripture for
the air, as when we say fowls of heaven: sometimes for the firmament: which
is also above the air: and so this place may be expounded thus, let men
imagine never so many heavens, yet God rules them all] which were from the
beginning [as appears Genesis 1.1. and so have since that time continued, and
still shall continue, al which tends to express the great power of almighty
God] behold he will send out by his voice a mighty sound [by Gods voice he
understands the thunder, the diverse effects whereof, see at large Psalm 29.
And by mighty sound he means not only large sound, but also great which even
shakes the earth as it were.] Verse 34. Ascribe the power to God [ i. give i.
is declared mightily toward his people, and Church, as Psalm 14.7.] and his
strength is in the clouds [ i. is not only made manifest in the same: but
also he uses the clouds and all other creatures whatsoever, to set out his
power.] Verse 35. O God, thou art terrible [ vz. to thine enemies and q.d. Thou
show evident testimonies and tokens thereof, out of thy tabernacle: and he
uses the plural number, holy places, either in respect that the arc was set
up in sundry places, before the temple was builded: or else in respect of the
distinct places of the arc, as Heb. 9.2.3. all which were called holy: or
else in respect of the heavenly holy place, and the earthly holy place, which
was a shadow of that heavenly one, as Heb. 10.19.] the God of Israel [ i. the
God of his Church and faithful people] is he [ vz. alone] that gives [ vz. of
his own goodness and mercy only, without any merit or desert of theirs]
strength and power [ vz. to defend themselves, and to beat back their enemies,
meaning by strength and power all the means whereby these great works may be
performed] unto the people [ vz. whom he has chosen: understanding the people
of Israel for that time, and the Church for euer] praised be God [ vz. for
that his mercy and great goodness toward them.

Verse 1. Teaches two things, Do
first that God has all power in his hand to destroy his enemies, second
that the enemies of the Church cannot prosper. Verse 2. Sets out the sudden
destruction of the wicked. Verse 3. shows, that when the wicked shall be
beaten down, Gods children shall be lifted up in spiritual joy and mirth.
Verse 4. teaches us continually to praise God, for his incomprehensible
majesty and power. Verse 5. Teaches us what great care God in mercy carries
toward the distressed persons. Verse 6. Teaches us, that fruitfulness of
body, deliverance of extreme dangers, and plagues and punishments, of what
sort soever upon the ungodly, come all from God. Verse 7. Teaches us to think
upon Gods graces performed of old, that thereby our faith may be strengthened to
escape dangers. Verse 8. Teaches that all creatures are not able to stand
before the presence and majesty of God. Verse 9. Teaches that plentifulnesse
and the means thereof, are all in Gods hands. Verse 10. Teaches that though
the wicked have a great portion of the earth in possession, yet that the Lord
has properlye prepared it for them that fear him. Verse 11. Teaches us that
we can not have our mouths open to speak, much less to speak well, til God
give both the matter and utterance: also that the weakest means, as women,
when God inableth them, shall be sufficient to express his praise. Verse 12.
teaches that neither multitude, strength nor authority, can prevail against
the Lord and his people, otherwise then he himself sees good. Verse 13.
Teaches that the afflictions of the godly, do no whit at al hinder the
beauty of the godly, but rather are the instruments which God does use to make
them more glorious. Verse 15. Sets out the excellency, beauty, and
continuance of Gods church. Ver. 16. Teaches that al congregations, though
outwardly never so glorious and glittering, in respect of it are nothing. Ver.
17. Shows that Gods power is invincible, and his armies to perform his
purpose, are innumerable. Verse 18. Shows that God will triumph over al: the
faithful willingly and unfeignedly subiecting themselves, and the other
whether they will or no. Verse 19 teaches us two things first to yield thanks
to God for his mercies, secondly that his goodness toward us never cease.
Verse 20 teaches us, that even in the greatest dangers, God delivers his
children, to the end all glory might be given to him therefore. Verse 21.
Shows that the wicked enemies of his Church shall not long escape unpunished.
Verse 22. teaches us, that Gods promises of deliverance, salvation, etc. are
the grounds of our consciences. Verse 23 Declares what great judgments God
will bring upon the wicked, and all for his chosen peoples sake. Verse 24.
Teaches that though the ungodly have had manifest demonstrations of his power
against them, and of his goodness toward his own people, yet they leave not
off to work what mischief they can against them. Verse 25. Teaches all to
be thankful to God for victories achieved through his goodness. Verse 26
teaches all but cheefely the faithful to praise God openly for his mercies.
Verse 27. Teaches that none, neither high nor low, should be exempted from
praising of God. Ver. 28. Teaches us to pray, for the continuance and
increase of Gods favor toward us, and the good things he has begun in us.
Verse 29. Teaches us that Gods favor does most plainly appear in his Church:
for which it beseems all, yea even the highest to show themselves thankful.
Verse 30 teaches us that we may sometimes pray against the multitude, the
rage, the cruelty, the vnbridelednesse and pride of the wicked, and namely of
those that take pleasure in continual contention. Verse 31. comprehends a
plain prophecy of the vocation of the Gentiles. Ver. 32. teaches us to
declare our selves joyful and thankful to God for his graces. Verse 33.
Shows that God is a God of gouernmente, majesty, and power. Ver. 34.
Teaches us that his government, majesty and power, is made manifest both in
heaven and in earth. Verse 35. Teaches us that God is terrible to his enemies,
but comfortable and powerful to and in his people: it teaches us also that
for these and other graces of his bestowed upon them, it behooves them to show
themselves continually thankful.

Psalm 69
David being moved with great grief, David shows his own misery and their
malice, ver. 2, 3, 4, Secondly, he prays for himself and against 1, 6, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 22.23, 24, 25, 27, 28. Thirdly he gathers comfort 29. to
the end of the Psalm.

The title of this Psalm is expounded before Psalm. 45. i. defend and deliver
me] O God [ q.d. There is none besides thee that can do it] for the waters are
entered even to my soul [ i. I am oppressed with most grievous afflictions: and
they so great, that I am as it were wounded therewith to ye heart, and in very
great danger of my life: for so I take the word, soul, to be used here.]
Verse 2. I stick fast in the deep mire [ vz. so that I cannot get out,
understanding q d. I am in a bottomless pit or quare-mire, whereof I shall be
swallowed vp] I am come into deep waters [ i. into most dangerous distresses,
and perils, for the more deep the waters are, the more dangers we think our
selves commonly to be in] and the streams run over me [he means that his
afflictions were many, and were full of anguishes and troubles, even as a man
ready to be drowned, and were past hope of recouery] Verse 3. I am wearye of
crying [ vz. for help unto God, because I see none vz. with crying and
calling] mine eyes fail [ i. the sight of mine eyes decays, and they are
become wonderful dim, see Psalm 31.9. also Psalm 38.10.] Whiles I wait [
vz. in faith and patience, notwithstanding these hasty speeches] for my God [
i. for help and succor from him that has promised, and I have found to be
my God.] Verse 4. They that hate me without cause [ vz. on my behalf given
them] are i. infinite and innumerable, but he means no doubt that there are
very great multitudes and numbers of them] they that would destroy me [ i. take
my life from me, and cut me off from being amongst men] and are mine enemies
falslye [ i. wrongfullye, meaning the same matter that he said before without
cause] are mighty [ vz. in subtiltye, power, and practise] so that I restored
that [ vz. by suffering punishmente, for the fault which I committed not: which
after some sort may be called restitution] which I took not [ vz. from them,
either by force, fraud, or any other way.] 5. My foolishness [ i. that
foolishnes which mine adversaries burden me withal: q.d. Thou know whether
I be such a one as mine enemies, by their wicked words publish me to be: so it
is called his foolishness not because he had committed it, but because they
unjustly had laid it upon him: and so must you understand these words] my
faults [ i. wherewith they charge me] are not hid from thee [ vz. because
nothing can be hid from his knowledge and sight: q.d. Thou know whether the
things be true yea or no that they lay against me] 6. Be ashamed [ vz. by
doubting of thy mercy, or dispayring of thy goodnesse] for me [ vz. by reason
of the misery and poor estate that I am in: q.d. Let them not fall from thy
majesty into distrust, because I seem to be forsaken: whereby the Prophet
testifies his wonderful love toward others] those that seek thee [ i. those
that pray unto thee, and call upon thee, and that according to thy will
revealed in thy word. The word of trust in the first part of this Verse,
respects hope, and this word seeking includes prayer, by which we see that
the faithful of Gods children is not idle because it provoke them to pray
unto God] be confounded through me [this has the same sense, that these words,
be ashamed for me, haue] O God of Israel [ i. of thy Church and faithful
people, 7. For thy sake [ vz. in following the vocation whereunto thou have
called me] have I suffered reproof [ vz. of mine adversaries, understanding by
that word, all the wicked sayings and doings, which they had practiced
against him] shame has covered my face [by this speech he means either the
abundaunce of reproaches which he had endured: q.d. I have sustained so many
that I am even full or laden therewith: or else he notes the effect which
those reproaches and opprobries had wrought in him, vz. that they made him as it
were for shame to hide his face: this latter I rather 8. I am become a
stranger unto my brethren [ i. even the dearest friends I have, have as it
were thrust me out of their familiarity, friendship and acquaintance] and even
an aliant [ i. as one that were utterly vnknowne] unto my mothers sons, [see
Psalm 50.20. he means nothing else, but that they who by nature were bound
to love him, did most hate and despise him, and therefore no marvel though
other did so, so that he was as it were forsaken of all.] Verse 9. For the
zeal of thine house [ i. the great and earnest affection that I have to John
2.17.] and the rebukes of them [ i. of the wicked] that rebuked thee [ vz.
unjustly and without cause: whereby the Prophet notes the vileness of the
ungodly, who spared not to lode the Lord with reproches] are fallen upon me [
i. have wounded me, even as though they had bin directed against 10. I wept [
vz. Seeing all things so disordred, and the name of God so reproched] and my
soul fasted [by soul he means either the body, as psalm 16.10. or else the
whole man, putting a part for the whole, fasting being an effectual instrument
to humble the same] but that was to my reproof [ q.d. mine enemies did so much
more mock and despise me therefore.] Verse 11 I put on sack also [ vz. in
sign of mourning, which was a common 35.13.] and I became a Proverb unto them
[ i. they made me and my doings a byword amongst them: q.d. when they would
note a contemptible person or thing, then they would name me and my matters.]
Verse 12. They i. the Judges, Counselors or magistrates: whose order it was to
sit there, that the people might have free access unto them: see Genesis 34.20.
Proverb. 22.22.] Spoke of me [ vz. in mockery, and scornefully] and ye
drunkards sang of me, [by drunkards he means those that haunted the places of
drunkenness, as Tauernes, Alehouses, etc. And by singing he means that they
made songs and ieasts against him: q.d. all persons both high and low
contemn me, and they utter their reproaches, both publikelye and privately.]
Verse 13. In an acceptable time [ i. in such a time as it shall please thee to
hear i. I come to make my prayer unto thee, trusting in that, and not in any
thing in my self: see Psalm 51.1.] hear me [ i. grant me my request, as
sundry times before] in the truth [ i. according to truth: the word, in, being
put for according] of thy salvation [ i. of that deliverance and succor, that
thou have promised to send me and all those that trust in thee.] Verse 14.
Deliver me out of the mire i. out of the afflictions, wherein I am] that I
sink not [ vz. under the burden or in the mire of those troubles that I
indure] and not of the deep waters, see verse 2. This verse and the next
following, is nothing but the same in sense with verse 1 of this Psalm. Verse
15. The pit shut her mouth upon me [by pit q.d. bring to pass that I perish
not in this trouble and great cross.] Verse 16. Hear me, O Lord, vz. in d.q.
I ask it for thy goodness sake only, and hope to obtain, because in goodness
thou deniest not thy children] turn unto me [ i. make it appear by effect,
that thou have heard my prayer, in giving me succour] according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies [see Psalm. 51.1.] Verse 17. And hide not thy
face [ i. thy favor vz. to help me] and hear me [ i. grant me my requests
and prayers.] Verse 18. Draw near unto my soul [ i. show that thou vz. from
the rage and violence of the enemies] deliver me [ vz. from dangers and
distresses] because of mine enemies, [ i. not only because mine enemies do
assault me, but also, least they should rejoice in my overthrow: or else that
being set free, I may rejoice over them] 19. My reproof, my shame, and my
dishonor [ i. the reproof, shame, and dishonor which I bear and suffer, see
ver. 5. of this Psalm, he uses 3. words signifying one thing, thereby to set
out the greatness of his reproch] are before i. naked and open in thy sight,
as al other things are, see Heb. 4.13.] Ver. 20. Reproof [ i. the slanders
and reproaches of mine enemies] has broken my heart [ i. has brought great
grief unto me, and as it were wounded me at the hart] and I am full of
heaviness [ vz. by reason thereof, i. of their reproaches and backbitings] but
there was none [ vz. that would pity me in my distresses] and i. I looked
also for some to comfort me, but I found none at al] Verse 21. For they [ i.
mine enemies] gave me gall [ i. most bitter things, such as were rebukes,
taunts, etc.] in my meat [ i. in steed of my meat, meaning by meat comfort]
and in my thirst [ i. in my great afflictions, putting thirst or want of drink
which is one, for many] they gave me viniger [ i. they added affliction to my
affliction, noting by this manner of speech, their hard hartednesse, and that
they did unto him the worst that possible they could: and note that this which
David here speaks of himself in figure, was playnelye and according Matt.
27.48.] Verse 22. Let their Table [meaning them that had dealte so wickedly and
ill with him: By Table and other Metaphors and similitudes which he uses, he
means al things that serve to this present life, and the commodities
thereof. He means, that all the good and prosperity they have, should be
turned to evil and to torment unto them: and this is the sense generallye, but
let us look upon it somewhat more particularly. By Table we may understand
their daynties set upon the Table: and by these words, Be a snare before
them, he means not only in their sight, but also to entangle and catch them:
q.d. Even in the midst of their daynties, let them perish: Nay let their
very daynties be turned into destruction to them] and their prosperity their
ruin [ i. let even those things that they supposed were wealth and defense
unto them, be their destruction and overthrow. David wishes not this, but in
respect that they were enemies to God and his Church, knowing also by the
spirit of Prophecy, that the Lord had given them over, as also S. Paul
himself alleges this place, Romans 11.9.] Ver. 23. Let their eyes be blinded
that they see not, and make their loins always to tremble [by eyes and
loins, principal parts of a man, we may understand the whole man, or else
thus, that the Prophet desires the blinding of them in their sight, and the
weakening of them in their loins, that so they might not be able to hurt him:
or else by wishing their eyes to be blinded, he means the depriving of them
of all reason and understanding, so that they may remain without judgment as
a blind man does without light: and by making their loins always to tremble he
understands the astonishing and weakening of their power and force: because
that in the loins and raines, man's strength does principallye consist.] 24.
Pour out [ vz. in great measure and abundaunce] take them [or else take hold
of them and that in such sort, that they may not escape, he desires the Lord
to punish them most sharply even as angry folks are wont to punish those that
are under their hands, and that they might be destroyde in ye Lords wrath.]
Ver. 25. Let their habitation [ i. not only the place where they dwell, but
1.20.] be void [ vz. by thy just taking of the^ away from amongst me^] and let
none [ vz. of their seed and posterity] dwell in their tents [ vz. that they
have dwelt in: he means that he would have them die without heir or issue.]
Ver. 26. Whom thou have smitten [ i. chastised, vz. with sorrow: by all this he
means that the wicked laid grievous affliction and punishments upon those,
whom god in fatherly love had chastised to humble them and to bring the^ to
amendme^t.] Ver. 27. lay iniquity [ i. punishment for iniquity: which is q.d.
plague the^ and punish the^ thoroughly for their sinne] and let the^ not come
into thy righteousness [ i. let them never perform such holiness of life as
thou allowest, or else let the^ not be reckned amongst such righteous persons
as thou acceptest: putting righteousness for righteous men, this latter seems
to be the beter sense by reason of that which follows.] Ver. 28. Let the^ be
put i. utterly blotted] out of the book of life [by this he understands the
eternal counsel of God, by which he ordeineth and predestinateth his own to
salvation, according to his good pleasure, he means not that ever they were
written there for good, but because they were hipocrites, and so seemed to be
elected, he prays the Lord to make it known unto all, that they are not of
the number of his elect, neither written in their Catalogue: and all this he
speaks according to man, as though God kept a book of names, see Exodus
32.32. Phil. 4.3. neither let them be written with the righteous [ i. let them
not be accounted, numbered, or esteemed as they, or with them.] Ver. 29. When I
am poor [ i. contemned vz. by reason of mine oppressions on every side] shall
exalte me [ vz. into a high and sure place, where I shall be free from the
force and rage of mine enemies.] Verse 30. I will praise [ vz. when I shall be
deliuered] the i. his might, majesty, power, goodness, etc. as Psalm 20.1.]
with a song [ vz. apt, meet, and made for that purpose,] and magnifye him [
i. extol and set him forth] with thanksgiving [ vz. for his loving kindness and
mercy toward me.] Ver. 31. This [ vz. praise, and thanks giving for i. be
acceptable in his sighte] better then a young Bullock that has horns and
hoofes [ i. which is apt and meet for his age to be offered in sacrifice:
meaning thereby also any other beast whatsoever, which the Lord had commanded
to be offered.] Verse 32. The humble [ i. the vz. Judgment of God upon the
wicked, and mercy to his own children] and they yt seek God [ i. those that
profess his religion, and call upon his name, as verse 6. of this Psalme]
shall be glad [ vz. for the execution and performaunce of yt judgment and mercy]
and your heart shall live [he suddenly changes the person, directing his
speech to the afflicted ones: q.d. you, that for the greatness of my
calamity, and your own misery, seemed as it were to be wounded at the heart,
shall have such great joy, that you shall seem as it were to be restored from
33. For the Lord hears the poor [ i. grants them that are afflicted their
petitions and requests] and despises not [ i. does not only not neglect, but
very greatly regards and highly esteemeth] his prisoners [ i. those that
suffer imprisonment, or any manner of calamity, for the mayntainaunce 34. Let
heaven and earth praise him, [ vz. after their manner and kind, and in such
sort as he inableth them] the seas and all that moves in them [he exhorts the
creatures to praise the Lord: but all that is done to provoke man to the same,
for the wonderful goodness of God 35. For God will save [ i. not only deliver
from dangers, but bring to eternal rest] Sion [i. his Church, as Psalm 51.18.]
and build the Cities of Judah [vz. which were decayed and thrown down by the
force of the adversaries: he means by these speeches that God will have a
care over his whole Church, and the particular congregations thereof] that men
may dwell there [ i. in the Church] and have it in possession [ vz. from the
stirs and 36. The seed also of his servants [ i. the godly and their
posterity, who are Gods seruaunts] shall inherit it [ i. the Church, and the
graces that God shall bestow upon the same, meaning that they shall be made
partakers of all good things] and they that love his name [ i. fear his
majesty, and serve him according to his will revealed in his word] shall dwell
therein [ i. in the Church and congregation of God.

1. Teaches us in time of great grief, to flee to God for succor. Ver. 2.
shows that the more troubles we endure, the more need have we to draw nigh
to God by prayer. Verse 3. Teaches us though we have prayed long, yet never to
leave off til God grant our requests. Verse 4. Sets out the multitude,
power, and oppression of the ungodly, not as to dismay us, but to teach us to
deny our selves, and to hang wholly upon God for deliverance. Ver. 5. Shows
that we need not much to regard what men say of us, so that we have a clear
conscience before the Lord. Verse 6. Teaches us two things, first the care
that we should have to pray for other men, that they fall not from God through
our afflictions, secondly that other men's troubles should not cause us to
revolt from the truth. Verse 7. Teaches that it is good to suffer for a good
cause. Verse 8. Shows that in afflictions both friends and kinsfolks do
many times forsake those to whom they are bound. Verse 9. Teaches us to be
earnestly moved for God and his glory. Verse 10. Shows the mischievous nature
of the wicked, who misconster every good thing that the godly do. Ver. 11.
Teaches us not to leave off mourning, when mourning is required, though the
wicked deride us for it. Ver. 12. Teaches us, that al for the most part, high
and low, good and bad, are enemies to Gods children. Verse 13 Teaches us first
to come to God by prayer in the time of our need: secondlye to do it, having
a trust in his abundance mercy: and thirdlye to cleave for the strengthening of
our prayers to the truth of Gods promises. Verse 14. teaches us to crave
deliverance out of troubles at Gods hands, who only can and will perform
the same for us. Verse 15. Teaches us the more that afflictions are
multiplied, the more earnestlye to call upon GOD. Ver. 16. Our prayers must
be grounded upon the wonderful and unspeakable mercies of our God toward
us. Verse 17. Teaches us that the feeling of Gods favor is no small comfort in
the time of our afflictions. Verse 18. teaches us to pray for deliverance,
and that least the enemies insulte over much. Verse 19. Teaches us that it is
no small comfort to us that God knows us and our afflictions, and our
adversaries and their dealinges. Ver. 20. Teaches us that it is no new thing
that the godly are many times destituted of those helps which they made
account of. Verse 21. Teaches us that the wicked are void of bowels of
compassion, adding affliction to miserye. Verse. 22. Teaches that the wicked
through Gods just judgments, may many times be snared in their pleasure and
prosperitye. Verse 23. Teaches that GOD sundry times in justice, depriueth
them of all judgment, and takes from them all strength and courage. Verse 24.
Shows that the wicked are not able to escape Gods wrath and displeasure.
Verse 27. That GOD also sometimes leaves them childlesse. Verse 26. Sets
out the hard hartednesse of the ungodly, who never pity any though in never
so great misery. Verse 27. Teaches that Gods judgments many times do
overtake the wicked in their transgressions. Verse 28. Shows that Hipocrites
are not within the compass of Gods election, howsoever they be admitted to
the societye of the Church. Verse 29. Teaches that GOD is all in all for his,
to deliver them from distress. Verse 30. Teaches us to praise and thank GOD
for his benefits bestowed upon us. Verse 31. Teaches us that spiritual
service is more acceptable to GOD, then all outward Sacrifices whatsoever.
Verse 32. Teaches us that great pleasure shall come unto Gods Children, by
consideration of the blessings that he bestows upon some of them. Verse
33. Teaches us the wonderful providence and care, that God has over those
that suffer any thing for his cause. Verse 34. Shows that if dumb Creatures
must praise the Lord, much more the reasonable are bound to it, and amongst
them, those that he accounts as his Sons and Servants. Verse 35. Teaches
not only Gods care and love for his Church, but that in the midst of all
miseries he will have a people that shall continuallye call upon him in
spirit and truth. Verse 36. Shows that incorporation into the Church
appertains unto the faithful and their posteritye after them.

Psalm 70
40. from verse 13. to the end of the Psalm: whether it shall be good to
look back again, for the more plain sense and understanding thereof: and
yet notwithstanding something shall be said here. First the Psalm it self may
fitly be divided into two parts: vz. 2.3.4.

4. and psalm 38. in the titles therof] Verse 1. To deliver me [ vz. from the
dangers and enemies, which do as it were ouerwhelme mee] make haste to help
me [ vz. out of this distress 2. Let them be confounded [ vz. among
themselves and in their own vnderstandinges] and put to shame [ vz. even in
the sight and presence of men before whom they think to attain great
glory, in banding themselves against mee] that seek my soul [ i. my life,
vz. to destroy it and take it awaye] let them be turned backwarde [ vz. as men
discomfyted in war, that flee before their enemies] and put to rebuke [ vz.
openly and before others] that desire mine hurt [ vz. either secretlye within
3. For a reward of their shame [ i. as a just recompense, of that shame and
ignominy, which they thought to bring upon me] which said [ vz. when I was
in trouble] Aha, aha [ i. did outwardlye by words and countenance testifye,
the great joy they had conceived 4. But let all those that seek thee [ i. call
upon thee in their afflictions, and that according to the rule of thy will,
set forth in thy worde] be joyful and glad in thee [ i. for thee, thy
power and great works, that thou performest on their behalfe] that love thy
salvation [ i. like of allow, and wish for, the great deliueraunces that thou
bestowest upon thy 5. Now I am poor and need^ [ i. I am destitute of aid,
help, and succour] make have to me [ i. to deliver or help me, as verse 1. of
this psalm] thou art mine helper [ vz. in time of danger and distress, and
that word, thou, imports as much, as if he should say thou alone] and my
deliverer [ vz. out of affliction and trouble] make no tarrying [ i. delay
not, or put not off to help me.

Do
Verse 1. Teaches us, that in extremity of danger, prayer to God is a notable
refuge. Ver. 2. Teaches us, first that we may sometimes pray against the
ungodly, secondly is points out the mischievous minds and nature of the
wicked, thirdly it teaches us, not so much as to wish evil, much less to
do evil to Gods children. Verse 3. Shows that God can and will sometimes in
his judgment, bring that shame upon the wicked that they had imagined against
the good: also it teaches us not to rejoice in the miseries and afflictions of
others. Verse 4. God and his goodness is the only matter of mirth and joy to
his children: also Gods children must always praise God, and be thankful to
him for his blessings upon them. Ver. 5. Teaches us, that the more we are in
distress, the more earnest we ought to be with the Lord in prayer, always
taking heed that we prescribe him not a time.

Psalm 71.
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of the 12. In the
second part he prays earnestly against his enemies, 13. to the end of the
Psalm.

This Psalm has no title: David made this Psalm when he was old, and fled
from the face of his son Absalon, both which may be gathered by plain words
and circumstances in this Psalm.] Ver. 1. In thee O Lord [ vz. alone, and in
none other] let me never be ashamed [whiche I shall be, if I be frustrated of
that hope I have in thee.] Ver. 2. Rescue me [ vz. from vz. from the perils and
dangers wherein I am] in thy righteousness [ i. according to thy goodness,
faithfulness, and truth which thou have promised to thine, and do then make
manifest when thou do deliver them] incline thine ear unto me [ vz.
praying unto thee: bowing of the ear is in this place attributed to GOD
according to man: for men, if they mind to be familiar and yield to suites,
will easilye bow their ears, to such as sue to them] and save me [ i. deliver
me from danger and distress.] Verse 3. Be thou my strong rock [ i. my
assured protection and defense. Canaan there was great store of rocks, into
which the people sundry times conuayed themselves for fear of the enemies,
and according to this he speaketh] always resort [ i. continuallye fly, both
in prosperity and aduersitie] thou have given commandment [ vz. not only to
thine Angels, but also to the rest of all thy creatures, that they should be
thy effectual instruments and meanes] to save me [ vz. in danger, and from
distresse] for thou art my rock and my fortress [see Psalm 18.2.] Verse 4.
Out of the i. from the power and force] of the wicked [he means in deed
Absalon as the chief, but yet so that he comprehends under him, al those yt
took part 5. For thou [ vz. and none other] even my trust [ i. he in whom I
have trusted] from my youth [ i. from the time of my 22.9.10.] Verse 6. Upon
thee have I been stayed from the womb [ i. thou have mayntayned, sustained,
and vphelde me, from the time of my conception and birth] thou art he that
took me out of my mothers bowels [ i. by thy providence, appointment and
power, was I borne into the world] my praise [ i. the praises that I shall
yeeld] shall be always of thee [ i. thou shall be the matter of them. He
means this much: that for as much as no part of his life, neither his
conception, birth, infancye, childhoode, etc. was void of Gods benefits, but
that he did continually furnish him as it were, with new matters and occasions
to praise him, that therefore 7. I am become, as it were a monster [this word
must not be taken here in the ill part, and therefore would rather be turned,
wonder, but in the good part meaning that GOD had in such great truth and power
defended him, that by the example, which God in him had showed unto them many
were drawn on to trust in God: and that this is indeed the very signification
of the Hebrew word [howsoeuer it have been otherwise here translated] all the
places of scripture, wherein it is used, and attributed to persons, do
sufficientlye prove it] my sure trust [ i. such a one, 8. Let my mouth be
filled with thy praise: and with thy glory every day [ i. deal so graciously
with me, that I may have nothing in my mouth, i. in my daily speech, but thy
benefits, giving continually praise and glory unto thee for the same. By
wyshing to have his mouth filled, he means plentifulnesse and abundaunce: and
by every day he understands continuance in the same, vz. in yielding 9.
Cast me not off [ vz. from thee and thy fauour] in the time of age [hee means
old age, which is full of great infirmities and bodily weakenesses] forsake
me not [ i. leave me not to my self, void of thy helpe] when my strength
fails [ i. when the natural vigor and force of my body decays: not that
David trusted therein any whit at all, but rather prays GOD to continue as
favorable unto him in his youth, so merciful unto him in his old age, to the
which that he might the more effectuallye induce the Lord, he sets
before him his old age and weakness, even as one that has great need of
his aid 10. Speak of me contemptuouslye and despitefullye, rejoicing greatly
in this, that I seem to be forsaken of thee] that lay wayt [ vz. closelye and
diligently, by all the means they canne] for my Soul, [ i. for my life, to
take it from mee] take their counsel together [the truth of this appears 2.
Samuel 16. ver. 20. etc. Also 2. Samuel 17. verse 1.2. 11. God has forsaken
him [ i. destituted him of aid and comfort] pursue [ vz. with the power you
haue] and take him [nowe while you have time, these are either the words of
them that consulted together, noting the easy dispatch that they might make of
him: or else the words of some captains to their soldiers, encouraging them to
the speedye pursuit of David and his apprehension] for there is none [ vz.
either in heaven or earth] to deliver him [ vz. out of our hands, we have him
in such a straight] Ver. 12. Go not far from vz. either in withholding or in
denying me thy full aid and succour] my God have thee to help me [see Psalm. 70.
ver. 1.5.] Ver. 13. Let them be confounded [see 70.2.] and consumed [ i. come
to naught, both they and their imaginations] that are against my soul [ i. my
life, as sundry times before] let them be covered [ vz. as with a garment,
meaning thereby the great shame and confusion that should fall upon them] that
seek mine hurt [ i. that endeavor to do me mischief.] Ver. 14. But I will wait
[ i. look for help and succor from thee, and that in vz. because thou
ministrest more and more arguments of praise unto me, by the particular
delyuerances that thou do bestow upon me.] Verse 15. My mouth shall daily
rehearse i. continually speak of] thy righteousness [ i. that righteousness
which thou exercisest toward the ungodly in punishing them] and thy salvation
[ i. the help and deliverance, that thou performest to thine when they are
oppressed. Some stretch the word righteousness further, as that it should
comprehe^d also Gods assured goodness in saving his: and that he ioineth the^
both together because we can not else where be certainly assured, but in this,
yt in as much as God is just and righteous, he maintains those that are his]
for I know not the number [that word, for, would better be rendered though: for
here is a modest correction of his former speech: q.d. I will declare
unspeakable things, not according to their excellency, but according to the
slender ability, that thou have bestowed upon me, I will do my endeavor to
set forth thy justice and salvation, though I must needs confess that thy
judgments exercised upon the wicked, and thy mercies toward thy children,
neither are known to me, neither can I reckon them: see Psalm. 40.5.] Verse 16.
I will go forward [ q.d. notwithstanding i. assisted and aided with strength and
ability from him to the performaunce thereof, which I am not able to do of my
self, and will make mention [ i. speak of with my mouth and lips, as before,
Ver. 15.] even of thine only [ vz. and of no others: q.d. that is sufficient,
and more then I can do.] Ver. 17. O vz. by thy judgments upon others, and thy
benefits toward me, he means that God had instructed him in his justice,
and in his salvation by those means, and had given him plain demonstrations
and evident proofs thereof: and that from his youth [ i. from the time of his
birth, as ver. 6. of this Psalme] therefore I will tell [ i. speak openly and
freely] of thy wondrous works [ i. in respect of man, as Psalm. 40.5.] Verse
18. Yea even unto i. even until I come to be very old, using graye head, or
hears, a sign of great age, for old age it self, as Leuit. 19.32. Genesis
42.38. This verse may either be joined to that that goes before, as it is in
the Geneua text with a comma: q.d. thou have taught me from my youth until now
yea even until that I am very aged: or else read by it self thus, taking away
the colon in the middle of this verse thus: yea even unto mine old age and gray
head forsake me not: q.d. as thou have continued merciful and favorable to me
heretofore, so I pray thee leave me not till I come even to extremity of old
age as it were, yea even until I have declared, etc. as it follows in this
verse: and this reading and sense I do approve as most fit] until I have
declared [ i. made manifest and set out both by deeds and wordes] thine arm [
i. the most great works and mighty power, and so is it expounded in the
words following] unto this generation [ vz. which is yet present and aliue]
that shall vz. after these, meaning that he would labor to publish it to
posterity.] Verse 19. I will exalt on high [ i. greatly praise the same,
because thou have given me particular trial thereof] for thou have done great
things [ i. thou alone without the help and assistaunce of any other] O God,
who is like unto thee? [ vz. either amongst the gods, as Psalm. 86, 8. or else
in heaven and earth, as psa. 73.25. and this question shows that none is any
manner of way comparable 20. Which have showed me [ i. made me to see and
feele] great troubles and adversities [ vz. both inwardly and outwardly] but
thou will return [ vz. from afflicting me, to thy accustomed love and favor,
as Psalm 6.4.] and revive me [who was it were almost dead through sorrow and
greef: q.d. thou will refresh me, and as it were call me back from death to
life] and will come again [ vz. after this departure and long absence of
thine from me] and take me up [ vz. safe and sound] from the depth of the earth
[ i. from very great 2. Thou will increase mine honor [which by the
conspiracye and rebellion of my son Absalon, was for a time, laid as it were
in the dust, see Psalm 3.3.] and return [ vz. unto me, being pleased with me
againe] and comfort me [ vz. with that comfort that belongs 22. Therefore
will I praise thee [he concludes with promise of thanksgiving: q.d. I will not
be unthankful to thee for thy mercies though I cannot be so tha^kful as I
should or would] for thy faithfulness [ i. just performaunce of thy promises
made to me] upon instrument and viol [he alludeth to the manner of that age, and
prescribes not a rule for us under the gospel as some imagine] O holy one of
Israel [ i. O God as Psalm. 8.41. Now he is called the holy one of Israel:
because that all the sanctification that either that people or his Church have,
they have it from that one 23. My lips will rejoice, when I sing unto thee
[the Prophet in these words expresses the great delight, that not only his
lips, but that all the parts and members of his outward man shall take in
praising the Lord: by lips one part, understanding all the rest] and my soul [
i. his inward affection, and all that is within him, as Psalm. 103.^] which thou
have delivered [ vz. from most dangerous distresses, yea from 24. My tongue
also shall talk of thy righteousness daily [ i. I will enforce my seife
continually to speak of thy righteousness, see verse 15.17 of this Psalme]
for they are confounded and brought unto shame, that seek my hurt [see Psalm
70.2. also verse 13. of this Psalm.

Verse 1. Teaches us to hang upon God only, 2. Teaches that Gods faithful
promises made unto us, or performed unto us, ought to be the grounds of our
supplications and prayers. Ver. 3. Sets out what great care God has over
his people, and what safety and assurance they are in that be under his
protection. Ver. 4. Teaches us to pray for deliverance from mischievous men
and cruel persons. Ver. 5. Teaches us that God must be trusted unto and hong
upon all the days of our life. Ver. 6. Teaches us that all that we have we have
from God, our being, birth, etc. and that we ought therefore continually to
praise him. Ver. 7. Howsoever men wonder at us or despise us, so that God be on
our side, we need not greatly care Verse 8. Teaches us to pray to God for the
continuance and increase of his goodness toward us, and that not for our own
profit and ease, but that he may thereby be more and more glorified of us.
Ver. 9. Teaches that the more weak and feeble we are, the more we stand in
need of Gods help, and to crave it by prayer. Ver. 10. Shows that the wicked
consult and speak against the good. Ver. 11, Shows that the wicked make sure
account of that many times which they are furthest off from. Ver. 12. Teaches
that Gods presence is sufficient to strengthen his people, and to discomfit
their enemies. Ver. 13. Teaches that to wish hurt to any, much more to Gods
children, and to seek the accomplishment of it, are grievous sins. Ver. 14.
Teaches that patience in affliction and thanksgiving are necessary and meet
for Gods children. Ver. 15. teaches us the right use of our mouth, vz. when it
is occupied in rehearsing gods goodness. Ver. 16. Teaches us, that though to
Godward, we can not do so much as we should or would: yet we ought to endeavor
the performance of that, that he shall enable us unto. Ver. 17. teaches that
the experience of Gods mercies, should bring forth in us these two effects:
first continually to hang upon him, secondly to praise and publish his great
power and goodness. Ver. 18. teaches what a care we should have to convey as
it were, Gods glory over to all posterities. Verse 19. Teaches us that none
is comparable with God. Ver. 20. teaches first that all afflictions come to
pass by Gods providence and appointment, secondly that he graciously
delivers his from their greatest dangers. Ver. 21. teaches us to be
certainly assured of Gods favor and goodness toward us. Ver. 22. teaches
us earnestly to praise God for his benefits, and to enforce our selves thereto,
by all the lawful means we can. Verse 23. Teaches us that al our parts
both inward and outward, should be ready to praise the Lord. Verse 24.
Teaches us, that though the enemies of Gods people prosper a while, yet their
end without repentance will be shame and confusion of face.

Psalm 72
David prays to God for himself and his son Solomon, that they in their
kingdom may be directed by him, which the Lord graciously perfourming, he
shows what good shall come to the whole land thereby, from verse 1. to the 8.
In the second he prophesies of the inlargemente of the kingdom, by subduing
many people unto it, and of the great plenty that shall be therein, all which
is but a figure of Christ's kingdom, and this reaches 9. to the end of the 17.
In the third part is comprised a notable praise that the Prophet yields unto
the Lord for his power and goodness, from verse 18. to the end of the Psalm.

Solomon [i. concerning him, or on his behalf, and not as though he were the
author thereof.] Ver. 1. Give thy judgments [ i. instruct the king with ye
spirit of wisdom and vprightnes, that he may rightly govern the people
committed to him, according to such laws and ordinances, as thou have
prescribed] and thy righteousness [ i. such righteousness as thou allowest, he
sets these two words, judgments and righteousness against the tirannous
abusing of kingly authoritie] to the kings son [ i. the kings posterity, but
chiefelye Solomon.] 2. Then [ vz. when thou shall give him these graces] shall
he judge [ i. conducte and gouerne] thy people [ i. the people that thou haste
chosen to be a people to thy selfe] in righteousness [ i. faithfully, truly,
and vprightly] and thy poor [ i. such as are afflicted for thy cause: or else
those whom thou have humbled: and he speaks specially of these, because that
for their defense Kings have the sword put into their hands] with equity [ i.
just and vprighte 3. The Mountains [ i. after some the most barren places:
others because the land of Judea was full of mountains, understand by mountains
the whole land: whatsoever it is, the Prophets meaning is this, by this
similitude taken from the plentifulnesse of the earth to note that no corner or
quarter of the land, shall be found void of Gods blessing] shall bring peace
[ i. shall yield or bring forth store and plentye of all manner of
blessings, for so do the Hebrews use this word, as is to be seen in many
places of scripture] by justice [ vz. rightlye administered, he means that
the kings good government, shall be a mean 4. he shall judge [ vz. vprightly]
the poor of the people [who most commonly are trodden under feete] he shall
save [ i. deliver, vz. from the oppressor and cruel man] the children of the
needy [ i. most needy persons, for the Father being needye, the child can
hardly be rich, he means that those that have no help or succoure, but
lie as a pray to the rich of the World, shall be revenged of, and delivered
from the hands of their enemies] and shall subdue [ vz. under his feet, but
yet through justice and equitie] the oppressor [ i. all oppressors,
understanding by one, al.] Ver. 5. They [ i. the people so gouerned] shall
fear thee [ i. shall carry i. for ever and ever.] Ver. 6. He [ i. the king]
shall come down [ vz. either personally from his kingly throne amongst his
people, or else in his holy and just gouernment] like the rain upon the mowen
grass. [These words mowen grass, may have a double sense, and both good:
either that we refer it to that which is cut for hay, upon which if some
rain fall presently after the cutting, men say it serves much for the
increase of good smell in it: or else to that that stands, which is much
subject to the heat of the sun and parching, when the other is removed: and
then as the rain falls upon it, and causes it to grow again, as it were:
so a righteous governor after the heat of tyranny adds as it were life
unto the people] and as the shewers [ vz. falling from heauen] that water the
earth [after some great drought. By these similitudes, he shows how
acceptable good government should be to the people.] Ver. 7. In i. in his
years, and while he reigns, see Isaiah. 1.1.] The righteous shall flourish [ i.
good men and of upright conscience, shall be advanced, for such as he is himself
will he labor to have in authority] and abundance of peace [ i. of all good
things and blessings, as ver. 3. of this Psalme] shall be [ vz. upon the people
of his land] so long as the moon indureth [ i. for ever, as ver. 5.17. of this
Psalm, also Psalm. 89.37. and this must be referred, as many other things also
in this Psalm, to Jesus Christ.] Ver. 8 From sea to sea [ i. from from the red
23.31. Deutron. 11.24. see also Numb. 34. from ver. 2. to the end of the 12.]
and from the river [ vz. of Euphrates or Perah, see Deutron. 11.24.] unto the
ends of the land [ vz. of promise, or Canaan, which reaches to the great
wilderness toward the mountain of Lebanon.] Ver. 9. They that dwell i. those
that dwell Southward from Jerusalem, and were furthest of from the land of
Canaan, meaning also barbarous, untamed and wild people] shall kneel before
him [ vz. in token of reverence and subjection, as though he were their own
natural Prince or king] and his enemies [ vz. though they be never so stoute]
shall lick the dust [by this manner of speech, he means a most lowly
subjection. q.d. they shall not only fall down before him, flat upon the
earth after the manner of the Eastern people, but shall as a man would say, as
much debase themselves as possible can be, in token of trustines, reverence,
and obedience.] Ver. 10. The kings of Tarshish [ i. those that and of the
Issles [ vz. which lie along the sea coast, from Cicilia to Grecia, as Cyprus,
Candie, and others which are compassed in with the Mediterranium sea] shall
bring presents [ vz. in token of homage and obedience, see Psalm. 45.12.] the
acco^plishment of this, see 1. king. 4.21.34. also 1. king. 10.25.] the kings [
i. ye rulers and magistrates, as before] of Sheba [ i. Arabia felix, putting
Sheba, which was but a part of it, for the whole, from this Country it
seems that the Queen came, who is mentioned. 1. king. 10. in the beginning
of the Chapter] and Seba [ i. as some expound it, Ethiopia but I take it to be
some other Country, as may appare, Isaiah. 43.3. These Countries seem to have
their names of two of the sons of Cush, who came of Ham as appears Gene.
10.7. whatsoever it is the Prophet myndeth nothing else but under the kingdom
of Solomon to set out the enlarging of Christ's kingdome] shall bring gifts [
i. gifts in sign of honor that they owe, testifying their subjection, for
11. Yea [ q.d. that in one word I may shut up the matter] all Kings shall
worship him: all nations shall fear him [if we understand this of Solomon,
then it must have this sense, many kings and nations, specially of those that
be about him, shall yield him homage and obedience: but if we refer it to
Christ, then it comprehends the enlargement of his kingdom, by mighty men
and nobles, and the calling 2.8. Isaiah. 49.23.] Verse 12. For he shall
deliver the poor [ vz. from him, that oppresses him] when he cries [ vz.
unto him, i. when he prays earnestly unto him for helpe] and him that has
no helper [ vz. amongst men: q.d. there is none so helpless, but God will be
an 13. He shall be merciful [ i. not only in compassion but in actio^] shall
preserve the souls [ i. the lives and bodies 14. He shall redeem [ i. deliver
and set free] their souls [ i. them themselves, putting a part of a man for
the whole man] from deceit and violence [ vz of the cut-throates that live
amongst men. Under these two words, he comprehends all manner of mischief
whatsoever, or howsoever performed, by deceit he means al those that are
craftily and closely wrought, and by violence all those that are performed
with open force] and dear [ i. precious, and of great regarde] shall their
blood be [ i. their life, as Genesis 9.5.6. or else by blood, he means that
blood of theirs, which the ungodly spill in tormenting them] in his sight [ i.
before him, and in his judgment, howsoever base and contemptible 15. Yea he
shall live [some refer this word, he, to the poor whom the King shall
redeem: but I rather, to the King: the Prophet meaning by this speech, that
he shall live a long and a prosperous raigne] and unto him [ i. unto the king]
shall they [ i. the poor that are redeemed from deceit and violence] give of
the gold of Sheba [ i. of precious and costly gold, as being far fet, Sheba
being a place far distant from the land of promise: whatsoever it is, he
means that the people shall willingly perform, with all the power that they
have, the duty and obedience, which they owe him, which was in times past
signified by giving of gifts, as may appear 1. Samuel 10.27.] pray for him [
i. for his health and welfare and for the good of the whole kingdome] and daily
bless him [ i. praise and commend him, as in deed he justly deserves, for
his upright gouernment] Verse 16. An handful of corn [ i. a small portion, no
more then a Salomon] even in the top of the mountains [which are very
unmeet places, by reason of their great drought in Summer, and of their great
cold in winter] and the fruit thereof [ i. of the corn sowen] shall shake
like the trees of Lebanon [ i. shall grow up into great height and abundaunce,
and shall be so flourishing, that they shall russell and make a noise, as it were
the trees of the forest of Lebanon: See Psalm 29.5. he means that there
shall be nothing so small amongst Gods people, but through Gods blessing, it
shall multiply to much, and bring forth abundaunce] and the children shall
flourish out of the City [ i. men shall be as plentiful both within and without
the City, all the land through] even as the grass of the earth [ i. in great
store and abundaunce.] Verse 17. His name [ i. his majesty, renown, and glory]
shall be for ever [ i. last a Solomon: but it shall be eternal, if we refer
it to Christ] and so must the words following be likewise expounded, see
verse 5. of this Psalm.] All nations [either expound it as before verse 11.
or else thus: all nations shall bless him [ i. speak well of him and praise
him, for his excellent and upright gouernement] and be blessed in him [this
must needs be referred to Christ, as Genesis 12.3.] Verse 18. Blessed be i.
praised be his maiesty] even the God of Israel [i. even the true GOD, who is
the defender of his Church and people] which only does marvelous things [
vz. both for his own people, and also against his enemies.] Verse 19.
Contemeth a plain and manifest prayer, for the manifestation David, vz. which
he made for his son Solomon: for otherwise there follow other prayers of
his in this booke] the son of Ishai [this conteyneth part of his Genealogy,
a further description whereof may be seen. Ruth. 4.1.19. etc.

Ver. 1. Teaches that unless God assist magistrates, 2. Teaches us that it
apperteineth to magistrates to render right to every one. Ver. 3. Shows that
where justice bears sway, there is abundaunce of all goodness. Ver. 4.
Teaches that the magistrates office consists of two parts, vz. in defending
the good, and punishing the evil Ver. 5. Teaches us that good magistrates
shall be continually reverenced and feared. Verse 6. Teaches us that good
governors are a great blessing to the people. Ver. 7. Teaches us, that good
governors make much of good men. Ver. 8. Shows that God will graciously
enlarge the dominion and borders of good Princes. Ver. 9. Declares that
barbarous people and al their enemies shall be subdued unto them. Ver. 10.
Teaches that other kings shall not only be glad of their friendship but
willingly submit themselves under their obedience. Ver. 12. Teaches us that
the magistrates are ordained to help them that can not help themselves. Ver.
13. Teaches that there is required of the magistrates, not only bowels of
compassion to the needy, but also merciful preservation and defense. Ver. 14.
Teaches magistrates to make good account of the lives and bodies of their
subjects. Ver. 15. Teaches subjects to pray continually for the prosperity of
their Prince. Ver. 16. Teaches us that where good Princes reign, there is
abundance of all blessings, and namely of people. Ver. 17. Teaches us that
good magistrates shall sit long in the seats of their kingdom. Ver. 18.
Teaches us to praise God continually for his mercy and power. Verse 19.
Teaches us to pray for the increase and enlargement of Gods kingdom.

Psalm 73
3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12. 1.2.3.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22. In the 23. to the
end of the Psalm.

50.] Ver. 1. Yet God is good to Israel [i. gracious, favorable, and full of
compassion to his Church, these beginnings ex abrupto, such a one as we had
before Psalm. 62. show the marvelous combats, the Prophet had in himself,
between the flesh and the spirit, out of which difficulties he suddenly
bursting, utters as it were disorderly this sentence: q.d. howsoever
calamities press good men, and my flesh would have me to say, that therefore
God is far from them, yet this is the truth of the Lord, and I will believe
it all the days of my life, that God in goodness is continually most nigh to
his own people] even to the pure in heart [ i. to them that have malice and
iniquity removed from the heart, and walk in roundnes and sincerity: and
this the Prophet adds more plainly to declare what he meant by Israel, that
is, such as are not hypocrites in the Church: see for Matthew. 5.8.] Ver. 2. My
feet [ i. I my self, putting a part for the whole, or else by feet we may
understand afflictions, as Psalm. 119.105. also Eccles. 4.17.] were almost gone
[ vz. from the right way, which thou prescribedst me to walk in, and the same
thing he means by that which follows in this verse.] Verse 3. For I
freated [ vz. even with grief of mind to i. at those that had not at any
fear of God, which is in deed the beginning of all true wisedome] when I saw
[ i. beheld, knew and considered] the prosperity of the wicked [ vz. which they
enjoy.] Ver. 4. There are no bands in their death [ i. they are not brought to
death tied i. the pangs and pains of death outwardly, are not bitter unto
them. Immanuel his text makes the first part of this verse more plain, saying
they have no bands until their death: q.d. they spend all the time before
their death, in iolitie and mirth having al manner of prosperity, and no manner
of grief, and this I take to be the best] they are lusty and strong [ i. they
have great health, and so by that means grow in strength, whereas the godly
by sundry sicknesses grow weak and feeble.] Ver. 5. They are not in trouble [
i. misery, affliction, and such like: he vz. with diseases, sicknesses etc.]
with other men [ i. when other men are, or in such measure as others are.] Ver.
6. Therefore pride is as a chain unto them vz. in their own imagination and
account, he means by this speech: that they please and flatter themselves,
as much in their pride, thinking it to (...) ornament and beauty unto them, as
other men do their chaines] and cruelty covers them as a garment [ i. they
are altogether given to cruelty and vy^lence, as Psalm. 71.13 also Psalm. 69.7.
and this voylence proceeds from pride, as the daughter from the mother.] Ver.
7. Their eyes stand out for fa^nes [hee vz. of worldly prosperity and wealth]
then heart can with [ i. the^^ they themselves in their own affections can
desire, see Psalm. 17.14.] Verse 8. i. they give themselves in their
conversation and behavior to al licentiousnes, doing whatsoever they
themselves like of] and speak wickedly of their oppression [hee means to
note their impudency and shamelesnes that not only did evil, but would with
wicked words publish the same abroad] and speak presumptuously [ i. fearcely
against men, and proudly against God as though they were not like other men.]
Ver. 9. They set their mouth [ i. i. against God chiefly that is in heaven,
and these blessed ones that are there with him] and their tongue [ i. their
speech and tongue is used here, as the word mouth was before in this verse]
walks through the earth [ i. they speak outrageous words also even against
men that inhabit the earth, and in these words, heaven and earth, there is
Met^^^mia.] Ver. 10. Therefore his people [ i. Gods people] turn [ vz. from
God] hither [ i. to wickedness and sin with the ungodly, the Prophet means
that many that were supposed to be faithful people, straied from the right way,
or else stood not so steadfastly therein, as some imagined they did] for waters
of a full cup are wrung out to them [the Prophet notes the cause of their
falling to be on the one side, the wickeds prosperity and abundance, and on
the other side, the plenty of their own afflictions, understanding by waters
of a full cup wrung out unto them, the abundance of calamities, that they see
daily prepared to fall upon 11. And they say [ i. the godly, or these that
have a show of godliness, and are ready to fall from it, by reason of the
wickeds prosperity, as verse 2. of this Psalme] how does God know it? [ vz.
their wickedness and vngodlines] is there knowledge [ vz. of their sins and
trasgressions. q.d. no surely, for if there were he must needs punish them,
or else deny his own nature: so far does fleshly weakness carry them, that
it makes them to doubt of Gods providence and government.] 12. Lo, these [
vz. that thus florishe] are the wicked [ vz. of the worlde] yet prosper they
always [see verse 4. and 5. of this Psalm, he means that whatsoever they
take in hand goes well forward, and besides are not afflicted as others are]
and increase in riches [ vz. even as much as their 13. Certainly. q.d. seeing
the case so stands, to what end have I striuen to do well: and note that the
Prophet expresses rather his assault, showing whereunto he was tempted, then
uttered his perswasion] I have cleansed mine heart [ i. I have labored to
remove corrupt and filthy affections from me, not meaning that he had power
in himself, but that God had given him a will to beginne] in vain [ i.
without any cause why, seeing that the wicked have more abundance many times
then the godly:] and washed my hands in innocensie [by hands he
understands works, performed by the hands as it were. q.d. I have in vain
been careful, that my works should be clean and just; meaning by purging
his heart, inward soundnes specially toward God, and by washing his hands,
outward behavior, specially toward men: q.d. I have without cause walked in
honest conversation before men, and performed duties of godliness toward
God, See Psalm. 26.6. also Job. 9.30.] Ver. 14. For daily have I been punished
[ i. continually afflicted with some one cross or other: for this is the
portion of Gods children, that in this life with them, the latter end of one
trouble is the beginning of an other] and vz. for my amendment and bettering.]
Ver. 15. If I say [ vz. to my self in my own heart and thought] I will judge
thus [ vz. of the wicked that they are good, and that thy providence bears
not such a sway as I have beleeued] behold the generation of thy children [ vz.
which shall convince me of vanitye and falsehood, because thou always preseruest
them to thy self what danger so ever come] I have trespassed [ q.d yea I must
further confess, 16. The^ thought I to know this [ i. I labored painfully to
come to this matter, and the depth of it, vz. whether matters were governed by
thy providence, yea, or no] but it was to paineful for me [ vz. to atteine
unto, and that by mine own natural wit and understanding, as may appear by
that which follows in the next verse.] Ver. 17. Until I entered [ vz. with
deep consideration, hearty prayer etc.] into i. into the word of God in which
his will is declared, putting the place where the word was most used for the
word it selfe] then [ i. after that I had looked into thy word] I understood [
vz. rightly and soundly] their end [ i. the wicked men's end: which is called
their end, not that it was in their choice to make what end they would, but
that it was that end, which GOD in his judgments laid upon them, even when
they thought him to have no care of their doings, and themselves in the
greatest safety.] Ver. 18. Surely i. in an uncertain and chaungable estate,
whereof they can have no more assurance then if they went upon ^se, or some
slippery matter, and from which they shall as easily and as soon fall, as they
have been exalted thereto] and castest them down into desolation [ i. thou
do so overthrow them, that they are utterly wasted and destroyed as may
appear by the next verse.] Verse 19. How suddenly are they destroyed vz. by
thy iudgements] perished [ vz. from among men] and horribly consumed [ vz. by
thy fearful judgments which by reason of the novelty and strangnes of them,
astonisheth them and brings them to naught.] Verse 20. As a vz. so pass the
wicked and their felicity away, he means that they suddenly vanish away: as
a dream is quickly forgotten yea many times know not what they dreamed, and
though they do, yet they find that it is nothing but a vain persuasion, and
so shall the wicked men's felicity bee] when thou raysest us up [ vz. either in
honor and estimation, for the lifting up of the good, is the depressing of the
wicked: or else in right and sound judgment. Immanuel reads, when thou
arisest up, referring it to GOD, i. when thou beginnest to execute thy power
upon them, which also is good sense] thou shall make their image despised [
vz. of the godly: by image he means either their outward show, which
blearing their eyes, vanish away as suddenly as an image that shows it self
in a glass: or else the men themselves: who are of no longer continuance then
an image or shadow, see Psalm. 39.6.] Verse 21. Verily my heart was vexed [ vz.
within me] and I i. in my most secret thoughts, as in this sentence God
searches the heart and reins, the Prophet shows what grief he had in
himself, for that he had taken upon him so to discourse against Gods
providence as it were.] Ver. 22. So foolish was I and ignorant [ vz. in
judging so, i. without understanding: q.d. all beasts can conceive nothing of
thee, no more could I in that matter] before thee [ i. in thy presence, sight,
and judgment, so that these two verses are as it were an humble confession of
his former sin.] Ver. 23. Yet I was always with thee [ q.d. notwithstanding
and restrained me.] Thou haste holden me by my right hand [ i. thou have
held me up, and been a proppe unto me that I have not fallen, in the
consideration 24. Thou will guide me [ vz. hereafter, though I have fallen
heretofore] by thy counsel [according to thy will reuersed in thy word, and
wilt not suffer me to follow the imagination of my own heart as I have done
heretofore] and afterward [ vz. after that thou have instructed me, and
taught me according to thy word] receive me to glory [he means by glory here
not only eternal life, but also all the blessings that God gives unto his in
this life, whether it be health, wealth, wisdom, etc. which the Lord gives
them sometimes here in this world, that they might in them 25. Uttered by the
way of an interrogation carries with it this sense, that the Prophet sought
all his joy and contentment, in God alone, and in no creature, whatsoever
earthly or heavenly.] 26. My flesh fails, and my heart also [ i. my outward
men have been and are many times wonderfully afflicted, so that I have failed
and fallen so low, that in man's judgment I am many times past recouery] but
God is the strength of my heart [ i. he that inwardly strengthens me: and he
puts the inward part for the whole, not only because it is the more
excellent, but also because if that be courageous, yt outward man can not
faile] and my portion [ i. the 27. Withdraw themselves from thee [ i. from thy
government, and walk not in the obedience of thy wayes] shall perish [ vz.
not only from amongst men, but also eternally] thou destroyest [ vz. in thy
just iudgement] that go a whoring from thee [ i. that put not their whole trust
in thee, and hang not altogether upon thee, whereby we see, that not only
gross idolatry is spiritual fornication, but also to withdraw the least part
of our assurance that can be from God.] 28. It is good [ i. most pleasant and
profitable for mee] to draw near to God [ vz. by faith and assured persuasion
hanging continually upon him] as may plainly appear, by the words following in
this verse] that I may declare [ i. publish and set abroad amongst men, and
that both by word and deede] all thy works [he means by all a very great
number, because otherwise it is impossible to comprehend them, and by works he
means specially the judgments that God executes upon the earth.

1. Teaches that Gods goodness toward his people, is more then flesh can
esteem of it. Ver. 2. Shows how weak even the best men are in the^ selves.
Ver. 3. Shows that it is no small temptation to the godly, to see the wicked
highly advanced, and themselves depressed and kept under. Ver. 4. and 5. teach
not only in what a prosperous estate the wicked many times are in this life:
but also that we should count no man blessed for his outward felicity. Ver.
6.7.8.9. Teach first the disposition and nature of the ungodly describing their
wicked qualities: secondly they show how that Gods forbearaunce and long
suffering and mercy is abused by them, to the increase of their transgressions.
Thirdly that for as much as they abuse their power, their wit, their wealth,
their utterance, and all that they have against God, themselves and other men
that therefore we should learn to use all his blessings in what quantity
soever they be bestowed upon us, to his glory, our own comfort, and the profit
of our brethren. Ver. 10. Teaches that Gods people have abundance of plagues
in this life, but yet that they should not fall away from God therefore. Ver. 11.
Teaches how far Gods children slide when they are left for a while unto
themselves, even to the denial of his providence. Ver. 12. Shows the
continual prosperity of the ungodly. Ver. 13.14. Show how far man's
presumption breaks forth, when he follows his own reason. Ver. 15. Teaches
us humble and unfeigned confession of our sins. Ver. 16. shows how unable
we are of our selves to behold Gods dealing and doings toward men. Ver. 17.
Shows that the frequenting of public assemblies, and the right use of
Church exercises, are very good means to work light and knowledge in us.
Verse 18. Teach that the wickeds seat is ticklish and uncertain. Ver. 19. and
20. Teach not only the sudden destruction of the wicked, but also that those
judgments are sent upon them from God. Ver. 21. Declarrth that even the godly
men have their affections though not so right as they should. Ver. 22. Shows
what blindness is in us, til God inlighten us. Ver. 23. God is the only
vpholder of all his children. Ver. 24. Teaches that without God guide us we go
out of the way to eternal destruction. Ver. 25. Teaches Gods children to hang
upon him alone. Ver. 26. Teaches that when al things quail, yet God alone
must be stuck to. Ver. 27. Contains Gods great judgments against the wicked
and ungodly. Ver. 28. Teaches that howsoever other men fall away, yet it
behooves Gods children to hang always upon him.

Psalm 74
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1. to the end of the 9. In the
second 10. to the end of the 17. In the third part is contained the faithfuls
prayer, which they 1. to the end of the Psalm.

For the title of this Psalm, see before Psalm 32. and Psalm. 50. 1. Why have
thou put us away [ vz. from thee, as though we were out of thy favor, and
thou in displeasure with vs] for ever [ i. for a long season: for God does
never utterly reject his, these demaundes proceed of the infirmity of the
flesh, and show, as on the one side an earnest desire that they had to have God
favorable to them, so on the other side some discontentednes of mind, with
the long absence of the Lord] why is thy wrath kindled [ i. not only made
manifest, but declared also to be exceeding hot and great] against the sheep
of thy pasture [ i. against the people whom thou have most dearly loved and
provided for, and made great account of, as men do the flocks of their
pasture, he means by this people, the people of Israel, whom God had chosen
from among all nations, placing them in the land of Canaan, as in a fruitful
feeding place.] 2. Think upon thy congregation [ i. declare by deed and effect
that thou forgettest not thy people: for otherwise god does not in deed forget
his] which thou have possessed [ vz. as thine own proper and peculiar
inheritance] of old [ i. even from the time that thou made a covenant with
Abraham and his seed] and on the rod of thine inheritance [ i. of that portion
of people, that thou have chosen to be an inheritance to thy self: and in
this place he speaks according to the usual custom of measuring out of
ground, putting the instrument, vz. the rod or staff wherewith the ground was
measured, for the ground it self, and by a metaphor translating it also, from
earthly inheritances, to spirituall] which thou have redeemed [ vz. unto thy
self, and that out of great dangers, as out of Egypt, and others, as the
book of Judges is full] and on this mount Sion [he means hereby chiefly the
temple but withal the whole city of Ierusalem] wherein thou have dwelt [ i.
wherein thou have showed manifest testimonies, of thy presence and goodness,
more then in other places, for otherwise god dwells not in any place as whom
the heaven, yea the heaven of heavens, is not able to contain.] Ver. 3. Lift
up thy strokes [ i. manifest thy strength and power, and lay it upon the
enemies of thy people] that thou may for ever destroy [ vz. from among men]
to the sanctuary [ i. not only to the temple, but to the city and the whole
land and the people thereof, as may appear by the verses following, the verse
is otherwise Immanuel, but the senses do not much differ.] Ver. 4. Thine
adversaries [ i. Gods enemies: and they are called his, because they did set
themselves against his majesty, religion and people] roar [ i. make a great
noise as having gotten a victory] in the midst of thy congregation [ i. in
the midst of thy people assembled to call upon thy name, others read it in
the plural number, congregations, sinagogues, or sanctuaries, speaking
according to the division of the sanctuary which had three parts: he court,
whither ye people might come: the sanctuary which was the place appointed for
the priests, and the sanctum sanctorum, where was the Arc of the covenant, and
whither the high Priest only might enter, see Hebrew. 9.1.2.] and set up their
banners for signs vz. of victory atchieued] despiting God thereby as it were
and profaning his temple, for the better understanding of this, the books of
Machabees, and Josephus lib. 12. Antiq. Iudai serve well. Verse 5. He [ i.
they, putting one for many] that lifted the axes upon the thick crees [ vz.
either to fell them when they were standing in the wood, or to square the^, and
to make them fit for the work] was renouned [ i. highly esteemed of others,
even as though he had done a most excellent and perfect thing, as appears by
that which follows, all this he alleges to abrogate the cruelty of the
enemies, that would not spare so excellent a building as the temple was.
Immanue. reads it far otherwise, and in an other sense, referring it still
to the enemies, of whom he had spoken verse 4. thus. Every one of them [ vz.
of the adversaries or enemies] was accounted Noble [ vz. of others] even as he
lifted up the axes against the carved wood [ q.d. the more of that costly work
they could deface, the better they liked themselves, and the more they were
esteemed of others: and so it agrees 6. For but, read also, and then the sense
goes well on still] now [ i. when they have cast down much] they break down
the carved work thereof, with axes and hammers [ q.d. they are not contented
to spoil it, but they do in hatred so deface it that they leave not one little
7. They have cast thy Sanctuary into the fire [ i. they have burnt thy temple,
with all things appertaining thereto, putting one part of the tabernarle of
witness which was placed in the temple, for the tabernacle it self, and the
whole temple] which may also appear in that which follows, because it is
said] and rased it to the ground [ i. they have made it equal. See for rasing,
Luke 21.5.6.] and have defiled [ vz. by their superstitions and idolatries, and
taking away and destroying such things as God had ordained. See 1. Machab.
1.23.57.] the dwelling place of thy name [ i. the temple wherein Gods majesty,
power, and goodness was wonderfully made manifest, and had as it were a
perpetual abode.] Ver. 8. They said in their hearts [ i. they carried this
purpose and persuasion inwardly with them, and encouraged themselves to the
performance thereof, see Psalm. 14.1. Let us destroy them altogether [ i.
utterly, so that not one of them may remaine] all the Synagogues of God [ i. all the places appointed for holy assemblies wherein they used to read and expound
the Prophets and to call upon Gods name] in the land [ i. that were in the
land, vz. of Judea. Immanuel reads it thus, casting them down to the
ground, noting thereby the utter destruction 9. We see not our signs [some
understand by signs, miracles and wonders which God had wrought for them in
time before, but now showed not the like. I take it more general, for all ye
testimonies of Gods grace and favor whatsoever, which he was wont to declare
toward the^ and amongst the rest for the ceremonies and sacrifices of the
law, which they wanted by reason of ye miserable destruction of their land:
and they are called their signs, not because they did the^, but because they
were wrought for their sakes: the^ when they say, we see not our signs, they
mean, q.d. we see not now ye testimonies and tokens of thy grace and favor,
which we were wont to behold hertofore in great ple^ty] there is not one prophet
more [ vz. amongst us to instruct us, and to teach us according to the law, and
in an ordinary ministry, for so I would take the word prophet in this place]
nor any [ vz. extraordinarily stirred vp] that knows [ vz. to tell vs] how
long [ vz. this calamity and misery of ours shall endure.] Ver. 10. reproach
thee [this is meant not only because ye wicked uttered reproaches against God
himself, but also because he succored not his people against their rage,
whose dishonor did after a sort redounde also to him] blaspheme thy name [ i.
speak evil of thy majesty and power, as though thou either could not, or
would not help vs] for ever [ i. a long time, or continually, or as it were
without 11, Why withdrawest thou thine hand [ i. why withholdest thou thy
power from delivering us, and plaguing thy enemies] even thy right hand [ i.
thy power full of might and strength to both effects: he speaks this of God
according to men, whose right hands are commonly more strong then the left]
draw it out of thy bosom [ i. declare by effects that thou have care over us,
and power to destroy them: it is a metaphor taken from slothful and sluggish
persons, as appears Proverb. 19.24. also 26.16.] and consume them [ vz. by
thy justice and 12. Even [I would rather read but, or yet. q.d. notwithstanding
these great distresses and dangers, I rest my self upon him that never will fail
me] God is my king [ i. one that cares for me, and receives me into his
protection, so that I shall not need to fear deliverance: and mark the
sudden change of the number, the faithful speaking in the person of one,
because all the rest were of that assured perswasion] of old [ i. al time
heretofore, and therefore he will not destitute us now] working salvation [ i.
deliverance out of danger, and that for his people] in the midst of the earth
[ i. openly, and in the sight of all the people of the world putting the earth
containing the people, for the people contained,] 13. Thou did divide the
sea [ i. the red Sea, when the people came out of Egypt, Exodus 14.21.] thou
brakest the heads [ i. did overthrow the power, yea, did take away the
life] of the Dragons or Whales: he means by this speech, Pharaohs men, whom
for their courage and cruelty, he compares to great Dragons or Whales] in the
waters [ vz. of the red Sea.] 14. Thou brakest the head [ i. ouerthrewest the
power, as before, verse 13.] of Liuiathan in pieces [what this beast was, See
Job. 40.20. also 41. throughout. See for the better understanding of this
place. Isaiah. 27. verse 1. etc. also Ezech. 29.3. from whence you shall have
great light] and gave him to be meat [ Immanuel reads this part of the
text far better thus: thou gave meat, to the people passing through the
wilderness, understanding it of manna, and quails of which see Exodus 16. and
Numbers 11. and this agrees better with that that goes before, ver. 12. when
they said, god had been their king of old, not only in punishing their
enemies, but in showing grace and favor to the^ also, and with that which
follows where other particular benefits are 15. Thou breakest up [ i. thou
causedst to break up, and that out of the ground a hard mountaine] the
fountain and river [ i. abundance of water, even as plentiful, as any
fountain or river could be, see Exodus 17. ver. 1.2. etc. also Numbers 20^.2.
etc.] thou driest up mighty rivers [as the red Sea spoken of before, and the
flood Jordan, as Joshua 3.14. etc. into which river also many other rivers
run or flow, and therefore he speaks 16. The day is thine [both because
he created it, and governs it according to his good pleasure] and the night
is thine [ i. at thy disposition and appointment, as before in this verse] thou
have prepared the light [ vz. of the night, as the moon and stars, see Gene.
1.14. etc.] and here by the word preparing, he understands, both creating,
appointing, and gouerning] and the sun [ vz. for the day, as the other for
the night: and he expressedly names this, because it is the principal
instrument whereby light is communicated to men.] Verse 17. Thou have set all the borders 1. verse 9.10.] thou have made Summer and Winter [ i. not only
created then, but appointed them: for these distinct times and seasons, 1.14.]
Ver. 18. Remember this [ q.d. though thou should forget thy old mercies,
and our great miseries, yet at the least think upon the blasphemies of thine
enemies] has approached the Lord [the third person put for the second: q.d.
reproched thee O Lord, which was done in that Gods children were cast down
into sclaunder and contempt] and the foolish people [ i. the wicked and
ungodly, as Psalm. 14.1.] blasphemed thy name [see ver. 10. of this Psalm.] Ver.
19. Give not the soul [ i. deliver not over the life, for otherwise the Matthew.
10.28.29. etc.] of thy turtle dove [ i. of thy Church, which is compared to a
turtle or dove, because it is small, weak, simple, and meek, as a turtle or
dove is, see Cantic. cap. 2.14. cap. 5.3. cap. 6.8. so also Mat. 10.16.] unto
the beast [ vz. which seeks to devour it and take it away: by beasts he
understands men of beastly conditions altogether given to ravening and
spoil, and by one he means many] and forget not [ i. seem not to forget,
for God in deed never forgets his] the congregation of thy poor [ i. the
company and multitude of them, that though they be afflicted from thee yet
suffer notwithstanding for thy cause] for ever [ i. for a long season, as we
have had the word sundry times before.] Ver. 20. Consider thy vz. which thou
have made with our fathers and us: q.d. the enemies suppose that thou think
not upon it, because thou give us over to their lust, and our own faith is
wonderfully shaken, because we are so afflicted on every side] for the dark
places of the earth are full of the habitations of the cruel.] Immanuel
reads this place far better, thus] for the dark places of the earth are
full [ vz. of the outrage and cruelty of the wicked. q.d. there is no place so
dark and secret, but the rage and tyranny of these wicked men will fetch men
out of it] they are very dens of violence [ vz. which they practice against
other men. q.d. the holes which men sought for refuge and defense, are by these
men's cruelties become very dens of outrage and violence.] Ver. 21. Oh let not
vz. by the injury and outrage of cruel men] return [ vz. from thy majesty,
specially seeing he prays unto thee] but let the poor and needy praise thy
name [ i. give them occasion to praise and extol thy power, by delivering 22.
Arise O God [ vz. to declare thy might upon thine enemies, and to help thine]
maintain [ vz. against the violence and rage of thine enemies] thine own
cause [ i. thine own glory, now hazarded in the person of thy people, and like
to be overthrown if thou lay not to thy hand: q.d. the enemies will say, that
either thou can not or wilt not help and so thy glory shall be defaced]
remember [this is spoken according to man, and not that God forgets, though
he seem so to doe] thy daily reproach [ i. the reproaches which thy enemies,
and the enemies of thy people do daily utter against thee] by the foolish man [
i. which the wicked man speaks, 14.1.] Verse 23. Forget not [this is spoken
as in the other ver. remember] the voice of thine enemies [ i. the roaring and
blasphemies that they cast out against thee, thy temple, and people, see ver.
4.6.7.8.10 verses of this Psalme] for the tumult [ i. the rage and outcries] of
them that rise against thee [ i. of thine enemies, and thy peoples enemies]
ascends [ vz. into thy sight and presence] continually [ q.d. thou can not
choose therefore, but remember and think upon the same, as in the beginning of
this very verse.]

1. Teaches that God many times lays grievous afflictions upon his children,
to the end he might thereby draw them nigh unto himself. Verse 2. Teaches
the faithful not only to have recourse to god by prayer, in the time of their
troubles, but to ground themselves upon that experience, which either they
themselves, or their forefathers have had of his goodness. Ver. 3. Teaches us
that we may safely pray against the enemies of the Church. Ver. 4.5.6.7.8. Do
lively paint out the rage and violence of the enemies of god, and that against
the outward marks of religion, which may teach Gods children hatred and zeal
against the monuments of idolatry and superstition. Ver. 9. Teaches us that
evident signs of Gods wrath and displeasure, as the want of his word, the
stopping of the true ministers mouths etc. should touch us to the quick. Ver.
10. Teaches us with patience to bear the Lords hand upon us, till it please
him to remove it, and yet notwithstanding to crave according to his will, the
taking of it from us. Ver. 11. Shows that Gods right hand and power is the
only assured mean of defense of his children, and the destruction of the
ungodly. Ver. 12. True taste and feeling of gods former deliverances, should
strengthen the hope of his servants, that they shall again be delivered out of
al their distresses. Ver. 13.14.15.16.17. are particular descriptions of the
might and power of God, in certain particular works of his, out of which we
learn to stay our selves wholly upon him, who has al power in his own hands,
and does whatsoever pleases him, both in heaven and in earth. Ver. 18. Sets
out the malice of the wicked, which reaches not only unto men on earth, but to
God in heaven. Ver. 19. Teaches us to have recourse to God by earnest prayer
in the midst of all our calamities and afflictions. Ver. 20. Teaches us that
Gods free covenant made with us, is not only a good ground for prayer, but also
a matter of great comfort to the conscience, because we know he will not go
back from that which he has promised. Ver. 21. Teaches that it is no small
comfort to the godly, when they feel by effects that their prayers are heard.
Ver. 22. Shows that God and his people be so linked together, that reproach
can not be offered to the one, but it is offered to the other. Ver. 23. Teaches
us that even the very outrage and cruelties of the wicked, are effectual
instruments to draw from God, as judgments against their own souls, so
deliverance to his people.

Psalm 75
IN the argument of this Psalm, I do somewhat differ from the Geneua Bible
taking it to be a Psalm made by David before that he bare rule over the
twelve tribes, what time there was such great wars between him and the house
of Saul, the Prophet promising here, that if God will establish him in the full
government, he will praise his name continually: for the better proof of this
my assertion, consider the words of the third verse of this Psalm. This Psalm.
specially expounds three things, 1.9. The second is a protestation what he
will do, when god shall 2.3.10. And the third is a loving 5.6.7.8.

For the exposition of the title of this Psalm, see Psalm 57. in the title:
48. in the title, and Psalm. 50. in the title out of al which laid together you
shall have these terms, destroy not, a Psalm and song, committed to Asaph
expounded, and as for these words to him that excels, they are declared
before Psalm 4. in the title. Ver. 1. We will praise thee O God [ vz. for thy
benefits David speaks in the person of the faithful, and in his own name
also] for thy name is near [ i. thy power and majesty, as Psalm. 20.1. meaning
that God by his power began to approach, for his good and profit] therefore they
[ i. not only I, but al other faithful and godly people] will declare [ i.
publish and set abroad, and that to all others] thy wonderful works [ i.
those works of thine, which thou do for those that are thine, and are in
deed for the excellency and greatness of them to be wondered at. Immanuel
reads the latter part of this ver. thus, for thy wonderful works declare
that thy name is nigh [ q.d. this shall be one cause of our praising thee,
because we perceive by thy wonderful works, that thou in power drawest nigh
to help us in these confusions and troubles: and this is in my mind, a very
good sense.] Ver. 2. When I [marke the sudden David speaks of himself, and
not of God, as the note in the Geneua Bible goeth] shall take [ i. obtain and
get] a convenient time [ i. that time which thou O God have appointed me for
the obteining of the full government: for that time only is convenient, which
God has set. Immanuel reads this part of the text better thus: when I shall
receive the covenant [ i. when I shall be admitted king over all Israel,
according to the covenants that the Israelites consented unto Abners Counsel:
see for this purpose. 2. Sam. 3.17. 2 Samuel 5.1.2.3. etc. also 1. Chronic. 11.3.
1. Chronic. 12.23. to the end of the Chapter] I will judge [ vz. the people,
and their causes] righteously [ i. with upright judgment, this saying, he will
do, means not that he had not done it before, but that then, though his
charge should be the greater, yet he would not be discouraged, but rather
encouraged thereby, to the faithful execution of his office, and though things
had passed under Saul's government very corruptlye, 3. The earth [ i. the land,
and kingdom and the state both of the Church and common wealth, as you would
say] and al in the inhabitants thereof [ i. all the people] are dissolved [ vz.
from their strength, glory and fruitfulnes, and that by civil wars,
slaughters, and dissentions, between the house of Saul and David.] But I will
establish the pillars of it [I will labor through Gods assistance, to repair
the ruin and decaies thereof, the Prophet uses in this verse two excellent
metaphors, the one to set out the ruin of the state, contained in this word
dissolved, as though it had been like water powered upon the ground, or like a
house out of frame, or a body out of joint in every particular member. The
other to express the restoring thereof, when he says he will set up the
pillars of it, meaning that he will look that the kingdom shall have a good
foundation and sure 4. I said unto the foolish [ i. unto the wicked men, the
Prophet shows what good counsel, he gave them] be not so foolish [ i. be
not so wicked, as to resist God, and set your selves against him] lift not up
the horn [ i. be not proud and fearce, it is a metaphor taken from wanton,
lusty, and butting beasts, understanding by horn, strength and power. q.d.
lift not up your selves in your 5. Lift not up your horn on high [this is the
same metaphor, that went before ver. 4. Immanuel reads it thus: lift not up
your horn against the high GOD: q.d. GOD is the author of my kingdom, as
appears 2. Samuel 3.18. so that you can not set your selves against me, but
you strive against him, and this I take to be the better sense] neither speak
[ vz. against me, and of your selues] with a stiff neck [ i. loftily and
proudly, as though you would wrestle and strive against Gods will: and it is a
metaphor taken from stubburne cattle that refuse 6. For to come to preferment [
i. to be exalted above other men, and to obtain the government of a
kingdome] is neither from the East to the West, nor from the South [ i. it
comes not from this place or that quarter of the world, out of the earth, as
other natural things do, but only from God, who as he shows in the next
verse, only bears sway in it. That word that we read South, in the Hebrew
text is Wilderness, and therefore Immanuel turns it, nor from the
Wilderness: that is from the North or from the South, for Judea was on both
these quarters compassed in with a wilderness: whatsoever it be, the sense is
all one, and this is nothing but a reason of his former speech.] Verse 7. q d.
it is he alone that rightly determines these causes] he makes low and he
makes hye [see Psalm 113.7.8. also 1. Sam. 2.7.8.] Verse 8. For in the hand
of the Lord [ i. in his might and power, as we have had i. judgment and
vengeance, and by saying it is in his hand, he notes also the readiness and
preparation thereof] and the wine [ vz. in the cuppe] is red [ i. strong and
pearsing, and that sodainlye to the brain. The redder the Wines are in these
eastern parts, the more pearsing they are both in respect of their own
nature, and in respect of the heat of the country. See Proverbs 23.31.32.
Immanuel reads for red, troubled, but me thinks that is the better] and is
full mixed [ i. full of mixture, he seems to allude to those that mingle
spices with their wines, to make them more hot and pearsing, noting by this
speech the greatness of Gods vengeance against the wicked] and he [ i. God]
pours out [ vz. in great abundaunce and plentye] of the same [ vz. Wine, that
is judgment and vengeance upon the wicked] surely [this word serves to note
the certainty of Gods plagues] all the wicked of the earth [ i. all they that
on the earth continue in their sins, and set themselves in it] shall wring
out, and drink the dregs thereof [this part would be better translated
thus, shall drink the dregs thereof, i. shall have it even every drop
poured upon their heads in despite of their teeth, understanding thereby the
great vengeance that God will take upon the wicked] which [ vz. dregges] they
have wrung out [ vz. against themselves, and that by their notoriousnesse and
setlednesse in sin. See Isaiah 51.17. and Iere. 25.15.16. etc.] Verse 9. But
I will declare [ vz. Gods wonderful works and excellent praises, Iaakob [ i.
the God of Israel, or of the Israelites, putting the name of the Father from
whom they came, for all his posterity: using it also as a difference between
him and all the false Gods, because he whom that people worshipped, was the
only true God, see 1. King. 18.31.] Verse 10. All the horns [ i. all the
forces, might, and power 4.5. of this Psalme] will I break [ vz. to pieces and
poulder, so that they shall have no hope to hurt the godlye] but the horns of
the righteous [ i. the strength and power of good men] shall be exalted [ i.
lifted up, and as it were daily more and more extolled by me. And all this
David speaks in his own person, showing what he will do, when God shall
have once advanced him to the quiet government of the kingdom.

Verse 1. 2. Teaches Gods people to purpose good things with themselves, and
to labor to perform the same. Verse 3. Teaches that no disorder or confusion
should hinder us from doing of that which God requires of us. Ver. 4.5 Teach
us to admonish and reprove the wicked, in and for their wickedness. Ver. 6.
shows us, that Fortune as men call it, is a wicked dotage of their own, yea
that all that man himself can do, to prefer himself is nothing. Verse 7.
Sets out Gods government, not in heaven only but in earth. Verse 8. Teaches
the grievous and great portion of vengeance that in Gods justice shall be
poured forth upon the wicked. Verse 9. Shows that even the highest are bound
to praise the Lord, yea even they much more then other men, because they have
received greater graces and favor. Verse 10. Does excellentlye describe Kings
duties, which consists in punishing the wicked, and defending the good, as
appears Romans 13.3.

Psalm 76.
1. to the end of the 4. In the second he shows how terrible he is in
executing his judgments against the wicked and ungodly, their enemies, from
verse 5. to the end of the tenth. In

Neginoth [see Psalm 4. in the Title] A Psalm or song [see Psalm 48. in the
title] committed to Asaph [see Psalm. 50. in the Title] Ver. 1. God is known [
vz. both by his works, word and spirit, for here he speaks of a special
knowledge, and not only of that general one that al have. Romans 1.20.21.] in
Judah [that is not only to that tribe, or that portion of the land of promise
that Judah and Benjamin inhabited, but to the rest of all the people, as may
appear by that which followeth] his name [ i. his power, majesty and might is
great [ i. is declared and found by experience to be great and mighty] in
Israel [i. amongst his faithful people, as sundry times before] 2. For in
Shalem [that is in Jerusalem which was called first Shalem, see Genesis 14.18.]
is his Tabernacle [ vz. wherein he would be worshipped, and which he appointed
Moses to build] and his dwelling in Sion [he means this of the temple, which
was builded upon part of Mount Sion. See Psalm. 48.1.2.] Ver. 3. i. at
Jerusalem, and Sion] brake the arrows of the bow [ i. God discomfited and
overthrew the sorce and power of al Saneheribs army, see Isaiah 37. thorowout:
and here he reckons up the weapons of war as the bows, arrows, shields,
swords, etc. understanding thereby not only the instruments themselves, but also
the parties yt shall use and handle the^. For weapons of themselves without me^
can do little hurt: and if the weapons had bin broken and the me^ spared, they
might either have had new, or repaired the old: yt we must needs understand it
both of 4. Thou art more bright and puissant [ i. more glorious and mighty, by
giving the Assyrians so great an overthrow, and this he speaks of God by
turning his speech unto him] the^ ye mountains of pray [ i. the^ al ye
Assiryans and their great Monarchy: whom he rese^bleth for the multitude of
their men, and for the great and wonderful spoils which they had gotten to
mountains that were full of wild beasts given to rapine and spoil: or else
because they had pitched their tents upon the mountains round about Jerusalem,
they carrying with the^ al ye prays and spoils yt they had gotten in the
wars. Immanuel reads by the mountains of prays, and then it must have
this sense, by ye overthrow of the Assyrians, whom he compares to mountains
of pray, for the causes before alleged.] Verse 5. The stout hearted [ i. the
men of might and courage, for vz. of the^ that were weak in respect of them,
or else as Immanuel reads it, yielded themselves for a pray: q.d.
notwithstanding their strength and courage, they were stricken with the
faintness of their heart, and glad to yield, for the sauegard of their lives:
and this must be understood of the men that remained after that great
judgment mentioned 2. King. 19.35. and also yt of the latter part of this
verse] they have slept their sleep [ i. they are dead, being slain by the
Angel, an usual thing in scripture, by sleep to understand death] and all the
men of strength [ i. all the strong men, vz. which were left alive after the
great slaughter mentioned before] have not found their hands [ i. had not use
of their power and strength, putting hands which are instruments to manifest
strength, for strength it self.] Verse 6. At thy rebuke [ i. when thou did 2.
King. 19. ver. 20.21. etc.] O god of Iaakob [see Psalm. 75.9.] both the chariot
and horse [ i. the men yt did ride in and upon both the one and the other,
meaning thereby, both Princes, nobles, and men of might, because they commonly
were carried so. See 2. Chron. 32.21.] are cast a sleep [ i. slain, as before
ver. 7. of this Psalm.] Ver. 7. Thou, even thou [ q.d. thou alone] vz. of al and
above all] and who shall stand [ vz. of himselfe] in thy sight [ i. before
thee] when thou art angrye [ vz. against men, and by this speech he notes
the weakness of the creatures, in respect of their Creator.] Verse 8. Thou
did cause thy judgment to be heard from heaven i. the people inhabiting
the world, and hearing of that great overthrow of the Assyrians] and stood
still [ vz. as people amassed, and without heart and courage, not being able to
devise, much less to perform any thing against gods servants.] Ver. 9. When
thou O god arose i. to execute judgment: he does in this and the former ver.
resemble God, to an earthly judge, speking of him according to man, as though
god did sit a long while deliberating what he would do, and when he had once
resolved should rise up, and pronounce sentence] to help [ vz. from danger and
distress of the enemies] all the meek [ i. all those that were afflicted,
meaning thereby, the faithful and good people of God] of the earth [he means
specially those that inhabited Judea, but yet so that it may comprehend all the
rest wheresoever 10. Surely [ q.d. it can not otherwise be, but that] the rage
of man [ i. even the very fierceness and cruelty, that men exercise against
thy servant, using the word man for mankind or the greatest part thereof]
shall turn to thy praise [not only because that when the godly shall see them
frustrated of their purposes, they shall have occasion to praise thee, but even
if thou could suffer and appoint them to prevail, yet even therein should
thou be glorified, because God will make all things work together, both for
his own glory, and to the good of those that love him] the remnant of thy rage
shall thou restrain [some expound it thus, those of the wicked that shall be
left alive, hoping that they shall be able to perform great matters, shall
thou so keep, as it were brideled, that they shall not be able to atchieue any
enterprise. I rather expound it thus] the remnaunt of the rage [that is such
good people as shall remain after the execution of the wickeds rage] shall
thou restrain [eyther from doing evil themselves, or else from the violence
and outrage of the wicked, which latter I like best of. And that makes
Immanuel to use for the word restrain, compass about, meaning shielding and
defending of them. See to this purpose 2. kings 19.30. so that in this verse he
declares two uses of gods judgment, the one is the praise and glory of God,
the other is the delivery of 11. Vow [ vz. as tokens and signs of your
thankfulness to God, for your enemies overthrow, and your own deliuerances]
and perform [ vz. your sacrifices vowed, testifying also thereby your
obedience and readiness in his seruice] unto the Lord [ vz. only and alone,
who also is] your God [ i. your defender and keeper] all ye that be round about
him [ i. both priests and people: the Leuits and Priests because they waited in
the Tabernacle: and the people because they could be no where but in his
presence] let them bring presents [that is, offerings and sacrifices, which
are called presents, because they presented them before the Lord, see the
accomplishmente of this 2. Chron. 32.23.] unto him that he ought to be feared [
vz. of all both high and low, of what state or condition soever they be, and
this is spoken of the almightye 12. He shall cut of the spirit of Princes [this
may be read better either in the present tense, or preterperfect tense, he
does it, or he has done it: meaning by cutting off, frustrating or taking
away, and by spirit, not only their understanding and purposes, but their
lives also, as appears 2. Chron. 32.21.] he is terrible [ vz. not in outward
show only: but in deed and effecte] to the kings of the earth [ i. even to
the mightiest Monarchies and all the Princes of the world, so that they need
not think that they shall be favored for their greatness, or have any power
to stand against him.

1. and 2. teach that God does specially manifest both his power and good will,
to the people that exercise his religion, and cast upon his name. ver. 3.
Teaches that neither armor or endeavor can prevail against the Church of God
further then he himself appoints. Verse 4. Teaches that he that is on the
faythfuls side is stronger then all. Verse 5. Teaches that there is no
wisdom, strength, power or policy able to withstand the Lord in his
purposes. Verse 6. Teaches that God needs not to make much ado to overthrow
for even a word or rebuke of his mouth shall cast them down to death. Verse 7.
Teaches that God only is to be feared and reverenced. Verse 8. Teaches us
specially then to have good regard to our selves, when God shows evident
testimonies and tokens of his judgments. Verse 9. shows that God will never
forget the afflicted that hang upon him. Verse 10 shows that even the very
sins of the ungodly shall serve to Gods great glory. Verse 11. Teaches us
both carefully to purpose and religiously to perform the exercises of the
worship and service of our God. Verse 12. Teaches us that it is God only, who
has the issues of the life and death of al men in his hands.

Psalm 77
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of the ninth. In the
second he declares, by 10. to the end of the Psalm.

The Title or inscription of this Psalm, would be amended thus: Ieduthun his
posterity, with Asaph, a Psalm [ i. a psalm appointed to that excellent
Musician whosoever he was, that was set over Ieduthun his posterity, and to
Asaph, see 1. Chron. 25.23.] Verse 1. My voice [ i. i. were directed unto him,
and appeared in his presence,] when I cried [ i. when I prayde earnestly in the
anguishe and bitterness of my soul,] and he heard me [ vz. making my
prayer unto him. And all this and that which follows the Prophet alleges
to strengthen as it were his faith and hope, that he that had bin heard of God
in the time of his former affliction, should likewise be heard now.] Verse 2.
In i. in the time wherein I was afflicted, for his grief lasted longer the^
one day doubtlesse] I sought the Lord [ vz. by earnest and hearty prayer] my
sore ran and seized not in the night [he means that his disease continued,
and that no remedy could diminish the same: and it seems to be a speech taken
from wounds and sores that bleed continually, or send forth corruption in
such sort, that they cannot be staunched. Immanuel has another reading and
another sense, but me thinks that this is as proportional with this text, and
better rather.] My soul [ i. I my self, putting a part for the whole man]
refused comfort [ q.d. My pain wrought in me such waywardness, 3. I did
think upon GOD [ vz. with my heart in my prayers and supplication] and was
trouble^ [ vz. because I conceived that GOD was angrye against me, in that I
prayed, and he granted me not my petition] I prayde [ vz. earnestly] and my
spirit [ i. my soul and inward man] was full of anguish [ i. grief and
sorrow, because I felt not the force of my prayers. Immanuel reads this
verse also otherwise, as he does the most part of this Psalm, but because this
text 4. Thou [ vz. by the greefs and sorrows which thou do continuallye
lay upon me] keep mine eyes waking [he sets out in this speech the
greatness and continuance of his grief, which took sleep from his eyes, and
speech from his tongue, as he says afterward in this verse] I was astonished
[ vz. by my greefs and sorrows yea so amassed that I could not speak. See Job.
2.13. also Job. 3.1. see also 38. almost through out, and Psalm 102. in the
beginning.] Ver. 5. Then [ i. in this great affliction and heaviness of mine]
I considered [ vz. deeply and diligently] the days of old [ i. the graces and
goodness which in former time I had received from thee, putting the days
wherein God had bestowed many graces upon him, for the graces themselues] and
the years of ancient time [he means not only the sorrows that God sent
him, but that he gave unto others also yt were distressed many times before
him, and this goodness of God toward himself and others, he set before him as a
mean to mittigate his grief, 6. I called to remembrance [ i. I thought upon
also] my song [ i. the song of thanksgiving, that I was wont to sing unto thee
for these graces. He means not that he had always one song for all kind of
benefits received: but this, that he received no benefits from the Lord, but
he testified his thankfulness by singing praises unto him] in the night [ i.
which I was wont to sing in the night: whereby also he shows the earnest care
he had to praise God, that when other slept, he would be occupied that way] I
communed with mine own heart [ i. secretly and within my self I disputed and
reasoned] and my spirit [ i. my soul, from whence proceed wit and
vnderstanding] searched diligently [ vz. the cause of my affliction, and the
end of my troubles: add here the word, saying, to join this and that which
follows together, and then the sense will be more 7. Will the Lord absent
himself [ vz from me, and by absenting he means withdrawing of his favor,
and the signs and testimonies thereof, as though he were angry with him] for
ever [ i. continually: q.d. Shall my afflictions never have end?] And will he
show no more favor? [ vz. to me amongste 8. Is his mercy [ vz. toward his
sons and servants that call upon him and seek unto him] clean gone for ever?
[ q.d. will he never show it again?] does his promise [ vz. which he has made
in his word: for in his promises made therein, is our good and salvation shut
up, as it were] fail for evermore? [ i. Shall they not be accomplished and
performed for ever?] Verse 9. Has God forgotten to be merciful? [ q.d. Is it
possible vz. from those that are his] his tender mercies [ i. his fatherly love
and affection, who is more tender hearted toward his, then parents are to their
children] in displeasure [ q.d. will he be so angry that he will not think
upon his mercy, see Psalm 103.8.9. The Prophet utters al these three verses,
not as a man in despair, but as one courageously wreastling against Satan's
assaults and his own corruptions, which would have carried him to that mischief
doubtless, had not the Lord graciouslye stayde him and strengthened his
faith.] Ver. 10. And I said [ vz. in this my great conflict and q.d. the want
of the feeling of Gods goodness, and mine own calamity will quickly finish my
course, as I persuade my selfe] yet I remembered [ q.d. notwithstanding these
grievous assaults I thought vpon] the years of the right hand [ i. the former
times wherein God has manifested his great power and goodness in my
deliverance, strengthening my hope in this, that he that had bin my God
before, would so continue, howsoever I were distressed for a while: and the
next verse confirms this sense: Imman. reads this verse otherwise, and
gives another meaning, but methinketh this is plain ynough] of the most high
[by this speech he means God, putting also hereby a difference between God
and al others how great and mighty soever they be, or are imagined to be.]
Verse 11. I remembered [ vz. in my meditations] the i. those works yt he had
done, and that for his own people] certainly I remembered [ q.d. it is very
true yt I thought vpon] thy wonders [ i. the maruailous things yt thou did
for thy people, as their deliverance out of Egypt and such like, which were
called wonders because ma^s reason could not conceive of the^] of old [ i. in
former time, or long ago, as Exodus Deuteronomy. and the Book of Judges do
sufficiently declare.] Ver. 12. I did always meditate [ i. vz. which thou have
made and don: because al Gods work and creatures are to his people testimonies
of his providence and goodness toward them] and did devise [he means by
this speech not only unward meditation of the heart, but also large discourse
of words that he made] of thine acts [ i. of those which thou had done,
for thy people: and he calls the^ Gods acts, because he was the author of
the^, though he used man's ministry in the performance thereof.] Ver. 13. Thy
way O God i. thy manner and order of government, and all thy counsels] is in
the sanctuary [some understand it of the tabernacle: some refer it to
heaven, as we have had the word used before: q.d. Thy ways are high and
excellent, whosoever will know them, must be lifted up to the Heavens. All
this I confess is true, but it agrees not so well with the Prophets purpose,
who minds to show that all that God does, he does rightly and iustlye: and
therefore Immanuel turns it well thus] thy way O God is in holiness [ i. is a
holy, just, and upright way: whatsoever comes from thee is good, though we
can not so well see and perceive the same] who is so great a God as our god?
q.d. None, see 1. Cor. 8.5.6.] Verse 14. Thou art the God [ q.d. thou alone]
that do wonders [ i. workest wonderful things] thou have declared [ vz. by
effect and deede] thy power [ i. thy majesty and might] among the people [this
may be understood, either of the people, upon whom and amongst whom God
exercised judgment for his own peoples sake, as the books of Genesis and
Exodus do plentifully declare: or else for his own people particularly. For
mine own part I would refer it to both, because the deliverance of the one is
the punishment of ye other, and the overthrow of the one is the establishing of
the other: and me thinks that which follows unto the end of the Psalm
seems well to confirm this, because he rehearses his mercies toward the
one, and 15. Thou have redeemed [ vz. out of the bondage of Egipt] thy people [
vz. of Israell] with thine arm [ i. by thine own might and power] even the
sons of Iaakob [now he more particularly shows, what he meant by the word
people, understanding by sons, the posterity of Iaakob, and not the twelve
Patriarchs, for they were dead long before] and Joseph [hee names Joseph for
honors sake, because that all Iaakobs stock was preserved in Egypt by his
means: putting also the name of the Father for his seed and posterity, or
else Joseph the whole man for a part of him [ vz. his bones which they brought
with them at their coming out of Egypt, but I like the former better. Immanuel
and others expound it otherwise, 16. The waters [ vz. of the red sea and
Jordan, as appears in Exodus and Iosua] saw thee O God [ i. did feel thy
majesty and power in turning the courses of them, for otherwise man can not
see or feel God, much less the waters, and he repeateth the same again, for
the more certayntie of the matter] and were afraid [ vz. at thy presence:
which he gathers, because they were divided and fled as a man would say
backward] yea the depths [ vz of the waters: and he allegeth these words to
express the greatness of Gods power, for though it fall out that the upper
parts of the water is many times troubled, yet the depths sieldome or never:
but this was done to the end the people might pass upon the dry ground.]
17. The clouds [ vz. in the firmament] poured out water [ vz. in great
abundaunce, for that does the word of pouring out note, see Eccle. 11.3. he
means that God had al creatures ready at his commandment to execute his
will, for the sauegard of his, and the punishment of the vngodly] the heavens [
i. the Firmament, and the regions of the air above vs] gave a sound [ vz. of
thunder and lightning, and wind and stormy tempest] thine arrows [ i. thy
thunderboltes, and other means to manifest thy wrath upon thy enemies] went
abroad [ i. did fly abroad in every place, striking fear into them. See
14.24.25.] Verse 18. The voice [ i. the sound or noise] of thy thunder [ i. of
the thunder that thou sendest forth] was round about [ vz. all thine enemies,
or else he means every quarter and region of the ayre] the lightnings [ vz.
which came from thee] lightened the world [ i. they were so great and many,
that they might have been seen all the world ouer] the earth [ i. this frame
of the world] trembled and shook [for fear of thy presence: All this is
nothing else but an excellent description of Gods eternal majesty and power.]
Ver. 19. Thy way is i. the way that thou preparedst for thy people of Israel]
is in the sea [ i. in the red sea, ascribing that unto God because he was the
author of it, which did belong to the Israelites. Some thus] thy way [ i. thy
counsels] is in the sea [ i. in dark and unsearchable places, known unto none
but to thee alone, making it the same with ver. 13. of this Psalm, but I like
the former better, by reason of that which follows in the last verse of this
Psalm.] thy paths [ vz. by which thou cariedst thy people, all the rest is well
expounded in the note of Geneua Bible.] Ver. 20. Thou did lead [ vz. out of
Egypt and through the wilderness toward the land of promise] thy people as
sheep [ i. tenderly, softly, and lovingly, for sheep may not be hurried] by
ye hand [ i. by the labor, diligence, and ministry of these two excellent
personages Moses and Aaron. And all this the Prophet alleges, that he might
raise up his hope, and comfort himself in the midst of those great assaults.

Verse 1 teaches that God is nigh to them that earnestly call upon him. 2
teaches that the more afflictions and miseries increase upon us, the more
earnest we should be with the Lord by prayer. Ver. 3 shows, that we through
our own corruption and satan's malice, use that in the time of prayer as a mean
to draw us back from earnestness of prayer, which should make us more
carefully to think upon God, I mean our greefs and afflictions. Ver. 4
teaches that nothing comes to Gods children, but by the special not only
sufferance but appointment and providence of God. Ver. 5 shows that Gods
goodness declared before, should comfort those yt are in affliction now. Ver. 6
teaches good men in the time of their heauinesses to comfort themselves in the
consideration of these good things that through Gods goodness they have felt
in themselves. Ver. 7.8.9. show the great conflict that the godly many times
have, wreastling mightily betwixt faith and despair. Verse 10 teaches us that
Gods power, and the true taste thereof, is a good proppe to our faith. Verse
11.12. teach us to record Gods works for the strengthening of our hope, and
to speak of them with delight and pleasure. Verse 13. teaches that God alone
is the only God, Verse 14. that whatsoever God does, he does it for the good of
his children, or the punishing of his adversaries. Verse 15 shows that God
cares for his people even when they be in their greatest distress. Verse 16,
17, 18, 19 teach yt God has all his creatures at his commandment, for the
manifesting of his glory and grace toward his, and for the declaring of his
justice toward the ungodly: which is comfortable to know, that the whole
course of nature shall stand on our side. Ver. 20. teaches Gods love and care
toward his people: which then also most manifestly appears when he provides
for them good Magistrates and Ministers.

Psalm 78.
Moses, and therefore cannot easily be divided. Notwithstanding methinketh it
specially Exordium or entrance into the matter, the Prophet laboring thereby
to make the people attentive, taken partly from the excellency 8, 9, 10, 11,
17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 41, 42, 56, 57, 58. Thirdelye he
sets out Gods great mercy, notwithstanding their manifold wickednesses and
rebellion against him, and this is comprised in verse 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
Lastly, he largely declares the exceeding great justice of GOD against sin
and ungodliness, which he shows by executing the same, partly upon his own
people, as appears verse 21, 30, 31, 33, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 67, and
partlye upon his and their enemies, as appears also verse 43, 44, 45, 46,
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 6^, 66. which may teach all men to drive away the vain
imagination that they have of Gods mercy only, never looking into the execution
of his justice and judgments against the world for sin.

73 also Psalm 50.] Verse 1. Hear [ vz. both with your outward ears, and
inward vnderstanding] my doctrine [ i. the doctrine yt I shall utter unto you:
which he calls his doctrine, not because he was ye Author of it, for that
properly appertains to God and Christ, Mat. 23.8. but because he was the
instrument to publish the same. See such a like speech, Romans 16, 25, also 2.
Tim. 2, 8.] O my people [ i. the people whom I have rule and gouernmente ouer]
incline your ears [this is the same that he spoke before, which he repeateth
the better to make them attentive, using also in this verse two circumstances
for the same purpose, the one taken from his own person, to whom it belonged to
instruct: the other from the person of the people, whose duty it was to
hear their Prince and Ruler speake] unto the words of my mouth [ i. unto the
speeches yt I shall 2. I will open my mouth [ i. I will now begin to speak, and
that freely and plainly, see Mat. 5.2. Act. 10.34.] in a parable [ i. examples
whereof, some are historical and true, being things done, such as are in this
Psalm recited, some devised, but yet very apt to teach, such as you may see
Judge. 9.8.9 etc. 2. Sam. 12.1.2. etc.] othersome are taken from common use, and
do not respect a History, such many are Mat. 13.2. and in sundry other places
of the Evangelist, some take it for grave and notable sentences, and so it
seems to be used, Job. 29.1. also Psalm. 49.4. but it is the best to take it
here for examples, and that examples of things don] I will declare [ i. I will
speak largely of, and plentifully pour out for it is a metaphor taken from
fou^tains yt spring apace and send forth their streams abundantly] high
sentences [some read, dark words, some secret things, what soever it be, this
is certain, that the Prophet prepares ye people to atte^tiuenes in this
commendation of his doctrine, affirming it to contain high, dark, and mistical
matter] of old [ i. of things that were done in former time long ago, and so in
this verse he commends his doctrine of two circumstances, yt one is of ye
excellency of it, the other of ye antiquity, the later of which he pursues
largely in the next verse] Ver. 3. Which [ vz. doctrine, or excellent things
set out by ye doctrine] vz. with our eares] and known [ vz. by practice and
experie^ce] and our fathers [ i. our Ancestors, as sons were taken before Psalm.
77.15. for posteritie] have told us [ vz. by committing it to writing, and
leaving it behind the^ to us.] Verse 4. We [ i. that live now] will not hide
them from their children [ i. q.d. seeing they have done so much for us, we will
convey it over to their seed and our seed together in like sort: and he
calls them their children, because they were the first of that stock, and
not as though they were not their own also] but to the generation to come [ i.
to the people which shall be after vs] we will show [ vz. by the Monumentes
and writings which we will leave behind vs] the praises of the Lord [ i.
the noble deeds for which the Lord is to be praysed] as may appear also by
that which followeth] his power also [ vz. manifested for our good] and his
wonderful works that he has done [ vz. for us, and against his and our
enemies.] Verse 5. How he established [ vz. with his people and this hangs
Iaakob [ i. amongst the people that came from Iaakob] and ordained a law [ vz.
as a rule and direction for them to walk by] in Israel [ i. amongst the
Israelites. Iaakob and Israel were the two names of the Patriarche, as Genesis
35.10. which here are applied to his posteritye, because they came of him]
which [ vz. sacraments, ceremonies and law] he commanded our Fathers [ i. all
our Ancestors] that they should teach their children [ i. their posterity,
from age to age, see Deuteronomy. 6.7.] Verse 6. That the posterity [ vz. which came
in all vz. of former parentes] should stand up [ i. should increase and
growe] and declare it to their children [to the end they might teach their
posterity, as they had been taught before: such care God had for the
conueyaunce or deliverance 7. That they [ i. every one of them, both the
fathers and the children] might set their hope on God [ i. might be instructed
and taught thereby to trust in him only, and in none other] and not forget [
vz. through dullness or negligence] the works of God [ i. the excellent things
that he had done in them and for them] but keep his commaundeme^ts [ vz. with
them, to ye end they might do them, which manner of speech is often used 8. And
not to be as their fathers [ i. like unto the^ in wickedness, sin and
rebellion against God] a disobedient and rebellious generation [adde here for
the more sense of the place, who were] a disobedient and rebellious generation
[ vz. against God himself and those ministers and Magistrates whom he placed
over them, as Moses, Aaron, etc.] that set not their heart arighte [ i. that
took no delight and pleasure in the right and good way (for that do the
Hebrews understand by setting their hearts upon a thing) but always turned
aside from God and goodnesse] and whose spirit [ i. whose heart, soul,
affection, and vnderstanding] was not faithful to God [ i. did not stedfastlye
believe God and his word, as appears ver. 19.20. of this Psalm, but were
inconstant also, never leaning unto GOD with an earnest and careful purpose,
36.37. of this Psalm.] Verse 9. The children of Ephraim, [in this verse he
puts down an example of their distruste in GOD, and of a just punishment
that GOD brought upon them for the same: q.d. As for example you may see in
the children of Ephraim: understanding by the children of Ephraim, not only
those that came of Ephraim, but also the rest of the Tribes, putting that Tribe
that was the greatest in number for the whole] being armed [ i. furnished and
appointed with all things necessary to the fielde] and shooting with the bow [
i. having force, courage and lustiness, and Weapons not only for their own
defense, but for the hurt of their enimies] turned back [ vz. from the force
and presence of their enemies: he means that they were put to flight] in the
day of battle [ i. when they came to fight with their Adversaries: Some
understand this of one battle, some of an other, but I refer it to that story
which is written Number. 14, 39 40, etc. to the end of the Chapter: also Deuteronomy. 1.
ver. 4. to the end of the chapter] 10. They kept not the covenant of God [ vz.
which he had made with the^, and they with him, promising to perform the
same? by covenant he means not only the rule of good life, but also the whole
service of God] they refused [this word amplifieth the greeuousnes of their
fault, because they sinned not through ignorance, but eue^ of set purpose as it
were] to walk in his law [ i. to be obedient to the same in their lives and
conversation, for so is the Metaphor of walking used 11. And forgot his acts [
i. the noble deeds which he had don for the^ against their enimies] that he had
showed them [ vz. both in the land of Egypt and in the wilderness, the
particulars whereof follow, unto the end of the 16 verse.] Verse 12. in the
sight of their fathers [so that their eyes were witnesses, and therefore could
pretend no ignorance or excuse] in the land of Egypt [as appears from Exodus
7. chapter, to the 13. chapter] even in the field of Zoan [i. even in a most
notorious place: for Zoan was one of the great and principal cities of Egypt,
so that the miracles which God wroughte, were not done in a dark place.] Ver.
13. He divided the red sea [ i. by his power he caused ye sea to 14.21.] and
led them through [ i. the Israelites, as upon dry land] he made also the
waters to stand as an heap [ vz. by his word and commandment at that time,
yt his people might have passage: and by standing as an heap, he means that
they stood still and moved not] Ver. 14. He led the^ i. by a cloud, the cloud
not only going before them, as appears Exodus 13.21. but also compassing them
in on every side, both to keep them from the parching heat of the sun, and
to save them from the sight and violence of their enimies] and all the night
[so that day and night he provided for them] with a light of fire [hee means
that pillar of fire which stood then in steed of a guide, whilste they were
in the wilderness Exodus 13.21.22.] Verse 15. He i. God, by the ministry of
his servant Moses] claue the rocks in the Wilderness [hee says well rocks
in the plural number, because that great work was twice done, as appears
Exodus 17. and Number. 20.] and gave them drink [ i. they and their Cattle, as
appears by the places before alleged, whereby we see, not only that the
thing was done, but the great plenty and store they had of water also, which he
notes by these wordes] as of the great depths [ q.d. The Rocks gave it so
plentifullye, as though the great depthes, and bottomless pits as it were, had
yielded up all their waters.] Verse 16. Is the 15. in sense and meaning, only
he amplifieth ye great fact of God by the use of sundry words, as stony
rocks, which expresses the hardness of the thing, and to descend like the
rivers, by which he notes the plentye and abundance as before.] Ver. 17. Yet [
q d. notwithstanding all these graces, and i. they continued in their rebellion
and disobedience, being nothing at al bettered by Gods goodnesse] and provoked
[ vz. to wrath, and that against themselves and their own soules] the highest
[ i. the almighty God (whose power no creature is able to resist) in ye
Wilderness [he notes the place for the more certainty of the history.] Ver.
18. And tempted i. endeavored to prove Gods power, of which they doubted, not
being contented with Manna, but demau^ding other meat tha^ that which God had
appointed them, and that was flesh forsooth] in their hearts [ i. secretly and
within themselves not yt they staid there, for afterward they expressed it in
words, as appears ver. 20. of this Psalm. but the Prophet notes the root and
beginning of their sin] in requiring meat [by requiring he means demanding
of it earnestly, with muttering and grudging if they had it not] for their lust
[ i. to satisfye their greedy and ravenous appetite, and not that they were
enforced thereto by famine, or want of meat.] Ver. 19. They spoke against god
also [ vz. in as much as they 11.4. etc.] can god [ q.d. Lies it in his power,
or is he able? if he be, let us see it, otherwise we will not believe it]
prepare a table [ vz. for us: and by preparing of a table, they mean,
furnishing and providing of the^ with all delicates and dainties, see Psalm.
23.5] in the Wilderness [ i. in such a barren and dry place as we are in.
This circumstaunce made the matter more hard in the judgment of the
Israelites, but God performing it, it made it more notable for his glory. And
this was their villainous and foul tempting of God, that they thought yt god
could not give the^ in the wilderness diverse sorts of meat as they had in
Egypt, neither 20. Behold etc. [these are still the words of the murmuring and
rebellious Israelites] he smote the Rock [ i. God by the ministry of his
servant Moses as verse 15.16. of this Psalme] that the water gushed out [ vz.
in great plenty and abundaunce] and the streams ouerflowed [ vz. the uppermost
face of the land, where the miracle was wrought] can he give bread also [ q.d.
if he can, let him show it: and by bread he understands all meat and
nourishment, as in this petition, Give us this day our daily bread] or prepare
flesh [ i. some extraordinary kind of flesh, for otherwise the people had
flesh, because they carried their cattaile out of Egypt with them] for his
people [ i. for the people that he has brought out of Egypt. And this their
propounding of the matter in the way of a Question, does not only note the
hardness of the things to do it, but expresses the hardness of their
belief, unless they could see it performed. 21. Therefore [ q.d. because
their rebellion and distrust was so great] the Lord heard [ i. now took
notice of it, as might appear by his judgments poured upon them, and not as
though God were ignorant of any thing, that either they thought, spoke, or
did] and was angry [ vz. against them for their sins, the effects of which
anger, are in this very verse expressed] and the fire [ vz. of his wrath and
judgments, see Numb. 11, 1] was kindled [ i. did not only begin, but was
executed] in Iaakob [ i. against Iaakobs posteritye] and also wrath came [ vz.
from GOD in his heavy iudgemente] upon 5 of this Psalm.] Verse 22. Because
they believed not in God [he shows the root of all their sin, vz.
Diffidence, and distrust in GOD and his power] and trusted not in his help [
vz. which he had promised to perform for them, which also makes their sin
the greater, because they believed not his promise: whereby we see that
incredulity is so deeply rooted in man's nature, that it is impossible to pull
it out, except God work miraculously 23. Yet he [ q.d. though God had bestowed
very great abundance and plenty] had commanded the clouds above [ i. by his
commandment had brought to pass that the clouds poured down Manna, as in ye
next verse] and had opened the doors of heaven [ i. had given them in great
plenty: an excellent Metaphor 24. And had rayned down Manna [see Exodus 15.
almost through out] and had given them of the Wheat of Heaven [he calls Manna
by this name, because God caused it in great plenty to come down from the
heaven: and by wheat you must understand a food, that had in it the 11.7.8.]
Ver. 25. Man [ i. men and every one of the people of Israel] did eat the bread
of Angels [ i. excellent bread, and such as Angels might use if they did eat:
and not that they do eat it, but because it came down from that place that
Angels inhabit, this is a usual phrase in scripture, by things attributed to
Angels, to understand very excellent things. See Acts 6.15. also 1. Cor. 13.1.]
he [ i. God] sent [ vz. from Heauen] meat enough [ i. strange and delicate
flesh enough, as may appear, ver. 28, 29, 30, 31, of this Psalm, also Exodus
16. and in other places.] Verse 26. i. he stirred it up in the air or the
Firmament. It is likely that he means that wind which is expressed Number.
11.31 which brought the Quails upon them, and that which follows in the next
verse seems to strengthen the same] and through his power he brought in the
south wind, meaning that God had al elements at his commandment for the
performaunce of his work whatsoever.] Ver. 27. He rayned [ i. he gave 24. of
this Psalm] flesh [ vz. of Quails, as may appear by the story Number. 11.] as
dust [ i. in such great abundaunce, and as thick (by a manner of speech) as
dust is upon the earth, see Genesis 13, 16, also Numbers 23.10. also 2.
Chronicles 1.9.] and feathered foul [ i. Quayles, for of them particularly he
speaks and meaneth] as the sand of the sea [ i. innumerable as it were, see
1. Sam. 13.5. Psalm 139. Verse 17.18.] Verse 28. And he made it vz. from the
heaven or the firmamente, meaning it also of the flesh of Quayles, or Quayles
themselues] in the midst of their Camp [ i. of the place where they camped,
and not of the tents or camps themselues] and round about their habitations [
i. the places where they dwelte for the time, see for this, Numb. 11.31. by
these speeches he means that they might with ease gather them, for they were
not far of.] Verse 29. So [ i. having these blessings vz. of Quails] and were
well filled [ i. satisfied with the flesh thereof] for he gave them their desire
[ i. god gave the^ that wc they longd and lusted after.] Ver. 30. They were not
turned from i. from the thing they longed after, and lusted for: q.d. they were
not weary of quails, though they had eaten the^ a whole mo^th together, see number.
11.20. and they were as a man would say ready to burst with fulnes] but ye meat [
i. ye flesh of quails which they had eaten] was yet in their mouths [ i. even
as they were eating of it, as may appear Number. 11.33.] Ver. 31 When ye wrath of
God [ i. punishment vz. as they were eating: and then gods wrath is said to
come upon any, when he takes judgment in hand against them, and executes the
same upon them] and flew the strongest of them [who no doubt had abused the
strong constitution of their body against God, thinking they were able to make
their party good with him] and smote down [ vz. to the ground by death] the
chosen men in Israel [i. the picked ones, as men of greatest hope: so yt we
see no man's strength or neatness can turn away Gods judgment from the^ which
by sin they have pulled upon themselves.] Ver. 32. For all this [ i.
notwithstanding the benefits God had i. they proceeded on in their iniquities,
murmuring continually against god, as appears Number. 14, 12. etc. number. 16.1.2.
etc. number. 17. almost thorowout, number. 20.2.3. etc.] and believed not his
wondrous works [ i. had not their persuasion strengthened, by the maruailous
things that God did for them, but did as much doubt of his power and good
will, as though he had showed no sign or miracle at al] 33. Therefore [ i. for
their sins, and namely not profiting by his corrections] their days [ i. the
days and times of their life appointed unto them] did he consume in vanity [
i. God made them to pass away, as vain, transitory and unprofitable things:
some expound it thus: he caused the^ to die: some thus God through his curse
upon them, cut off the time of their life, so yt they lived not out half their
days, nor brought the^ into the land of promise, but laid their Karkases in
the wilderness, see Number. 14.28.29. al comes to one sence] and their years
hastily [he means yt they died hastilye, sodainlye, or when they thought 3.
of this Psalm.] Ver. 34. And when he slew them [ i. when he did not only
destroy them by his judgments, but also when soever he laid any affliction
upon them] they sought him [ vz. in hypocrisy and counterfeiting as appears
ver. 36.37. of this Psalm.] so that they did but seem only to seek him, or
made as though they would seek him] and they returned [ vz. from their evil
ways, but this was in outward show only, and not from the heart, as Judas is
said to repent Matthew. 27.3.] and sought God [ vz. by hypocritical and
dissembled prayers, such as are mentioned Isaiah 29.13.] early [ vz. in the
morning, pretending that they would spare no labor or pain.] Ver. 35. And they
remembered that God was their strength [ i. he that strongly defended them from
their enemies, and gave them strength to encounter with them] and the most high
God their redeemer [ vz. from al distresses, trouble and danger.] 36. But they
flattered him with their mouth [ i. they went about by words and fair
speeches to deceive God as it were: and this was, not only because they did not
unfeignedly confess their offenses, but also did not truly and rightly glorify
god] and dissembled with him with their tongue [ i. they spoke one thing and
thought an other, and these words flattering and dissembling must be taken
thus, that the Israelites did indeed perform these wickedness, and carried with
the^ this persuasion to flatter, dissemble and deceive God, if they could, and
not as though God were overtaken with this their lewdness, for he can not be
deceived.] 37. For their heart [ i. their affection and mind] was not upright
with him [ i. was not sincere and sound toward him, and his services
whatsoever they pretended] neither were they faithful in his covenant [ i. they
did not faithfully keep ye covenant which he had made with the^, vz. that he
would be their God, 38. Yet [ q.d. Notwithstanding all their sins, and namely
their sin of hypocrisy and dissimulation] he being merciful [ i. not
delighting in the death and destruction of sinners, but rather that they should
liue] forgave their iniquity [ i. pardoned their sin, and removed the
punishment due unto them for the same, as appears by yt which followeth] and
destroyde them not [ vz. in his wrath and judgment, but did beat them with
the rods of his children, to their amendment] but oftentimes called back his
anger [ i. the testimonies and signs of his wrath and displeasure, even then
when it was ready to be powered forth upon them, as if a father ready to strike
should hold his hand] and did not stir up all his wrath [for then they
should have been utterly consumed, he means by this speech that God
declared not himself, so wrathful against them, as he could have done, and
might have done, if it had pleased him, and their sins justly deserved.] Ver.
39. For i. God considered and knew full well, he renders in this verse a
reason, why God forbear them, and laid not all his judgments upon them] that
they were flesh [ i. by nature mortal, and subject to death, and therefore he
should not need to power heavy judgments upon them, seeing that of their
own nature, they were inclined to corruption, see Gene. 6.3. also Psalm.
103.14.] yea a wind that passes and comes not again [ i. not only a thing
mutable and inconstant as the wind, but also vanishing and flitting away, not
continuing long in one state. see Job. 14.1.2. and in this verse he respects
the state of this earthly life, that passes away as a wind, and being passed,
returns not again in his former condition.] Verse 40. How often did they [ i.
the Israelits i. God] in the wilderness [ i. all that forty year, that they
were in the wilderness? and the propounding of it by the way of interrogation,
is q.d. who is able to utter so many and so grievous rebellions, as they
provoked god by in that time of their travail, see Numb. 14.22. also Psalm.
95.9.10.] and grieve him [ vz. by their murmuring: and this is the same that
was spoken before.] Ver. 41. Yea they returned [ vz. from their feigned
repentance, to their former i. meant to try what he was able to do, not being
contented with the experience of his might and power which he had showed unto
them] and limit [ vz. as it were within certain bounds? it is a notable
metaphor, to express the peruersenes of his people, who took so much upon
them, that they would set Gods infinite power, some hedges, either larger or
narrower, at their pleasure sometimes desiring things to be performed as they
would have them, sometimes denying that he could do them, as the books of
Exodus, Numbers, Deutronomie, do in many places declare] the holy one of
Israel [i. he that does sanctify Israel, and whom Israel ought to sanctify,
because he is the only true God.] Ver. 42. They remembered not [ i. they quite
and clean forgate] i. his might and power, meaning, that power and strength yt
God had showed for them: so we have heard the word, hand, sundry times used
before] nor the day [ i. the times and seasons] when he delivered them [ i. set
them free] from the enemy [ i. from all their enemies, and their mischievous
attempts against them, under one meaning all, but yet so, that he means
that, by ye chiefest, and that was Pharaoh, and the Egiptians, who afflicted
them, and this sense is warranted by that which follows in this Psalm. Ver.
43. Nor him Egypt [this is a description of God and his power meaning by
setting his signs in Egypt, giving a testimony, as of his goodness toward his
children, so of his wrath toward the Egiptians] and his wonders [ i. the
wonderful things he did] in the field of Zoan [see ver. 12. of this Psalm.]
Ver. 44. And turned [ i. when he turned, for now he begins a particular
enumeration of his wonders done for them against their enemies] their rivers [
i. the Egiptia^s rivers of waters] and their floods [he means that neither
their small brooks nor great floods were free from this plague. See Exodus
7.20.21.] That they could not drink [ vz. the Egiptians, which circumstance
also proves 45. He [ i. God by the ministry of his servants Moses and Aaron]
sent a swarm of flies amongst the^ [ i. an innumerable multitude,
understanding by flies, not only flies, but flying serpents, and venomous
beasts, whose poison and sting did even corrupt the land. Exodus 8.24.] Which
devoured the^ [ i. destroyed many of ye Egiptians] and frogs which destroyed
the^ [this is set out Exodus 8. ver. 6. whereby we see that the holy 46. He gave
also [ i. the Lord gave ouer] their fruits [ i. those fruits that their land by
the labor of their hands did yeeld] unto the caterpiller [ vz. to be consumed,
eaten up and destroyed by them, putting one for the whole number that God sent
Exodus 13. They are said to be grasshoppers: the places laid together show, that
ye plague was both of grasshoppers and caterpillars, grasshoppers not annoying ye
trees as these did. Exodus 13.15.] And their labor [ i. all that which they had
labored 47. He destroyed their vines [ i. he did utterly mar, all the increase
of their earth and plants what soever, whether they were sown or vnsowen, high
or low, tender or well grown natural or wild, as appears by that which
follows in this ver. and Exodus 9.25.] with the hailestone [he means an
other kind of hailestone then yt which is ordinary and common. Immanuel
reads this latter part thus: and their wild fig trees with fire, which in
what place soever it abode should consume: and this text I like well, not only
because the Etimologie of the compound Hebrew word yields it, but also, by
reason of that which follows in the next ver. touching thunderbolts, and is
written also, Exodus 9.23. touching lightning joined 48. He gave their cattle
also to the hail [ i. to that same great and extraordinary hail, mentioned
in the other ver. to the end yt the cattle thereby might be destroyed] and
their flocks [ vz. of sheep and their droues of beasts] to the thu^derbolts
[or after some to burning or kindled coals the sense comes al to one, he
means destruction of them. See Exodus 9.25.] 49. He cast upon them [ i. upon
the Egiptians, and the word of casting notes the greatness of his wrath also]
the fiercenes of his anger, indignation, and wrath [all these terms tend but
to one end, to express the greatness of Gods wrath against the^] and vexation [
vz. not of body only, but in mind and soule] by the sending out [ vz. against
them] evil Angels, I like the note in the Geneua Bible well upon this place.
Immanuel reads it thus, by sending the^ messengers of evil tidings, meaning
it of Moses and Aaron, by whose ministry all the plagues expressed here and
in Exodus against the Egiptians, were not only 50. He made a way to his anger
[ i. he executed the same, and took away every let that might hinder it, as
men remove those things that might hinder them in their courses or goings] he
spared not their soul from death [ i. he slew the^, and took their life from
them] but gave their life to the pestilence [he declares by what means God
took life from them, vz. by the plague and pestilence. See Exodus 12.29.] Ver.
51. And smote all the first borne in Egypt, [vz. both of man and beast] 49.3.]
in the tabernacles [ i. in ye dwelling places, so that there was neither town,
house nor field, but there was one dead in it. See Exodus 12.30. of Ham [i. of
the Egiptians, putting the name of the first man, from whom they came, for the
people that came of him, for the Egiptians came of Mizraim the second son of
Ham. See Gene. 10.6. of whom Egypt is so called in the Scripture the land of
Mizraim.] Ver. 52. But he made his people to go out vz. of Egipt] like sheep
[see Psalm. 77. ver. 20. q.d. but he dealt most mercifully with his own
people. It may be understood thus also, but for as much as they seely people
had neither counscll nor mean in themselves to maintain themselves, it would
have gone wrong with them, if God had not been in steed of a shepherd unto
them] and lead them in the wilderness like a flock [ i. heedely and tenderly,
caring for them, and providing their food. See Gene. 33. ver. 13.] Ver. 53.
And he carried them out [ vz. of Egypt] safely [ i. without any manner of i.
they had no occasion to fear, vz. their enemies and aduersaries] and in the
sea covered their enemies [ i. the Egiptians their enemies were drowned in the
red Sea, Exodus 15.13.27.28.] Ver. 54. i. the people of Jsrael, and that in a
mighty hand and stretched out arme] unto the borders of his sanctuary [ i.
unto the land of Canaan, which he had assigned to his people, and dedicated to
himself: meaning by borders, which are the uttermost parts of the land, not
only those parts them selves, as though God had left them there, and would
have gone no further with them, but the whole land, putting the first part that
they entered into, for the whole, and he calls that land his sanctuary,
because God had sanctified ye same for his people, and for his own service, as
being the place where he would most manifest his aboad] even to this mountain
[ i. the mountain of Sion, wherein Jerusalem stood, and the temple it self was
to be builded] with his right hand [ i. his power and might] purchased [ i.
obtained and got, that out of the hands 55. He cast out the heathen also [ i.
the Canaanites, and other inhabitants of that land] before them [ i. in their
sights and for their sakes. See Gene. 2.18.] and caused them [ i. their land
and all that they had, putting the persons for the things they possessed, for,
for the men they might not spare the] to fall to the lot of his inheritance [ i.
to come to the people of God [whom he calls here the Lords inheritance] as it
were by casting the lot, by which also the Prophet notes, that the Israelits
did lawfully and rightly possess these things] and made the tribes of Israel
to dwell in their tabernacles, [ i. in their possessions, as land, cities,
houses etc. putting one for all.] Ver. 56. q.d. notwithstanding all these
judgments upon their enemies, and graces toward them, for all that] they
tempted [ vz. God, see for tempting, verse 8. of this Psalme] and provoked the
most high God [ vz. to wrath against them selues] and kept not [either in word
or deede] his testimonies [ i. commandments, which are testimonies or
witnesses, as it were of his will, see Psalm. 19.7.8.] 57. But turned back [
vz. from well doing pretended, to their former evils practised] and dealt
falsely [ i. dissemblingly, and that with God, meaning that they labored what
they could to have deceived God.] like their fathers [ i. as their fathers did,
and ancestors that were before them who came out of Egypt and dealt
disse^blingly with him, as appears ver. 36. of this Psalm.] and turned [ vz.
aside out of the right way] like a deceitful bow [ vz. that turns back
into belly as we say. I know there are many senses given of this similitude,
some expound it thus, the Israelites did for a time make show of faith and
repentance, but suddenly they became unprofitable, as a bow suddenly marred by
some occasion deceives ye expectation of the shooter: some expound it this
way, and some that, but methinketh mine own sense is most simple, see Hosea
7.16.] Ver. 58. And they provoked him to anger [ vz. against themselves, and
their own soules] with their high places [ i. with the altars which they had
erected and set up in high places, as mountains and hills, so he shows the
cause why God was angry with them, vz. for their strange and new kind of
worshippings] and moved him to wrath [all this is spoken of God according to
man] with their graven images [ vz. which they had made, set up, and worshipped
20.4.5.] Ver. 59. God heard [ i. knew, because by hearing things come to
knowledge and understanding, and this is attributed to God according to man's
capacity, as other things are] this [ i. the wicked words and works which the
Israelites used, in their idolatrous seruices] and was wroth [ vz. against them
for their sinne] and greatly abhorred Jsrael [vz. for their iniquities and
transgressions committed against 60. So that he forsook the habitation of
Shilo [he shows by effect that God was angry with them, because he deprived
them of his testimonies of his presence and grace: meaning that the Lord as a
sign of his wrath refused to let his Arc be any longer in Shilo [in which
arc the Lord did as it were dwell] but gave it into the hands of the
Philistines as appears 1. Samuel 4.] even the tabernacle where he dwelt
among men [hee does in these words make plain the former part of this
verse, for God in his tabernacle, 61. And delivered [ vz. willingly and freely
because it was prophesied of those that were his people in name] his power [ i.
his Arc 1. Chronic. 16.11. which is called his power, not because his power
was enclosed in it, but because it was a testimony unto the children of
Israel, of that his power and might which he had many times manifested for
their defense against their enemies, and because he was wont out of the same to
declare his power and strength] into captivity [ vz. amongst the Philistines as
appears 1. Sam. 4.11.] and his beauty [this is an other title attributed to
the Arc, and signifies as much as glory: because that when the arc was
present, God manifested his beauty or glory, which otherwise was and is
invisible, and never could be seen: and therefore GOD gave them the arc, that
in it as in a glass, they might behold his majesty.] Ver. 62. And he gave up
his people to the sword [ vz. of their enemies, meaning vz. for their sins
and transgressions sake, and he calls the people the Lords inheritance,
but because it pleased him to vouchsafe to choose them to that honor, and not
otherwise.] Ver. 63. The fire vz. of Gods wrath, and not that the Lord used
fire to destroy them, but rather warrelike force, which destroys and licketh
up al things, even as fire does the things that are before it] devoured their
chose^ men [ i. quickly did consume and eat up, the sodainenes also of it is
noted in the word, fire, and by chosen men, he understands the strongest,
mightiest, and as it were the flower of the people. See 1. Sam. 4.10.] and
their maids were not praised [ vz. by marriage songs, which the Grecians called
Epithalamia, and were sung, by the tender and dear friends of the bridegroom,
and bride, and this was not only in use, among ye Gentiles, but also amongst
the Jews, Gods people, as may appear Psalm. 45. throughout. Ierem. 7.34.
Ierem. 16.9. Ierem. 25.10. So that, by not being praised, he means they were
not married, but by death through Gods just judgment, were taken away before
they could come to that honor.] Ver. 64. Their Priests [ i. Hophni and
Phinehas 1. Samu. 4.11.] fell by the i. were killed by the battle, by the
weapons of their enemies] and their widows [ i. both the Priests and the
peoples wiues] lamented not [ i. did not mourn for the misery that was fallen
upon them, and this was, not because they were either hard hearted, or might
not mourn, but because by death they were taken away from perfourming of that
duty, as amongst the rest appears in Phinehas his wife. 1. Sam. 4.19.20.
etc] Ver. 65. But the Lord [ q.d. vz. at the length] as one out of sleep [
q.d. though he seemed for a season to have no care of his people [as men that
are in sleep care for nothing, yet at length he rose up, and revenged his,
and their aduersaries] and as a strong man that after his wine [ i. after his
strong drink that has made him somewhat sleepie] cries out [ vz. for his
armor and weapons, meaning by crying out, an earnest preparing of himself
against his enemies, these similitudes do nothing derogate from the glory of
God, but are used to wake the dulnes and heaviness of the people. And though
this text and sense be good, yet I rather allow Immanuels both text and sense
here, he reads it thus.] Afterward [ i. after al these miseries laid upon
his people by the Philistines] God awaked [ i. took upon him to set upon his
peoples adversaries, this is spoken of God according to man's capacitie] who [
i. which almighty God] was thought [ vz. both by the Philistines, yea and his
own people] to be as one that sleeps [ i. idle and negligent doing nothing
against the one, nor any thing for the other, no more then a sleeping man
does, which also may appear by their scoffing at God, 1. Samuel 4.7.8.] or as
a mighty man, singing through wine [ i. as one that were careless and made no
account but of mirth, thus the idolaters attribute fond things to God, and so
commit 66. And smote his enemies [ i. the Philistines, who are called his
enemies because they were enemies to his people] in the hinder parts [these
words have a double sense, first this: God caused the Philistines to turn
their backs upon their enemies, and so by flying to be wounded and slain:
secondly this: that the Lord struck the Philistines with Emerods, which was a
very sore punishment, and turned them to great grief, this latter I allow of,
by reason of that which is written, 1. Sam. 5. ver. 6.9.12.] And put them to a
perpetual shame [ i. cast upon the Philistines, a shame that should stick by
them for ever if they could see it, which was the casting down of their Dagon
and breaking him in pieces. 1. Sam. 5.4.] Ver. 67. Yet he refused the
tabernacle of Joseph [ q.d. as God plagued his enemies, so he spared not
altogether his own people, but refused to let the Arc which was a testimony
of his presence remaine] in the tabernacle of Joseph [ i. in the place that it
was in, in the tribe of Ephraim, who was the son of Joseph, for as it
appears 1. Samuel 4. the Arc was in Shilo, which was a part of the land
given to Ephraim, and his tribe who came of Joseph, but God refused that place,
and removed the Arc to an other, as appears in the next ver. and that is
usual in the Scriptures to put the father from whom the tribe came, for the
tribe it selfe] and chose not the tribe of Ephraim [this does more plainly and
particularly declare that which went before, and is as it were an 68. But chose
the tribe of Judah [i. chose a place for the Arc to rest in, in the tribe of
Iudah] and mount Sion [i. even the mount Sion which he loved [ i. which he
carried a special favor unto: not that God is tied more to one place then to
an other: but to show that it lies in him to appoint 69. And he built his
sanctuary [ i. the place of his dwelling and abiding] as an high palace [ i.
easily to be seen, and glorious in beholding, as these places and palaces,
that are build on high hills and mountaines] like the earth, which he
stablished for ever [vnderstande, and like the earth, for this is an other
similitude expressing the firmitie and continuance of the Church] which shall
endure upon the earth unto the coming of Christ, and afterward for ever 70.
He chose David also his servant [after that he had spoken of the Arc,
religion, and service of God, he comes to speak of the kingdom and
politic government, for these two things were principal signs of Gods
goodness and grace] and took him from the sheepefoldes [ i. from a poor and
mean estate, for he was no better then a sheephearde, as it 71. Even from
behind the ewes with young [ i. as he followed the ewes, either ready to eane,
or having eaned all ready, for the word I take it may be referred to both] to
feed his people in Iaakob [i. to rule and govern his people Iaakob, vz. those
that came of Iaakob] and his inheritance in Israel [ i. the Israelits which
were his inheritance. I know these words, in Iaakob, and in Israel, may have
an other sense, as though he put the names of the father of the people
inhabiting the place, for the place it self: but me thinks the other is
more simple.] Verse 72. So he fed them [ i. ruled and governed i. as he was of
a single mind, so he governed justly and holyly] and guided them [ i. went in
and out before them, exercising holy and lawful government over them] by the
discretion of his hands [ i. by most just rule, and government, for the word
hand, is in many places of Scripture, by metonimia, put for work rule and
government, because kings in their hands did use to bear their Scepter, a
sign and seal of their government. All this serves to show, that David did
not unadvisedly handle the things that he was to pass through, but did that
which apperteined to his office, through wisdom, advisedly also and with
judgment.

Verse 1. Teaches us to bring attentive ears with us, 2. That the more dark
and high the things are that are propounded, the more diligent should we be in
hearing and meditating thereof, and not discouraged, as many men are with the
hardness.] Ver. 3. Teaches that the works and word of GOD, which either we
our selves have tried, or other in truth have told us of, should be great
grounds of strength to our consciences and persuasions. Ver. 4. Teaches us to
have a care for posterity, that the word and works of God may in truth and
sincerity continue with us and our seed for ever. Ver. 5. Shows that Gods
word bestowed upon any people, is no small sign or token of his favor or love
toward them.] Ver. 6. Shows that God gives his word, to the end that the
people present, and they that should come after, might be instructed in sound
knowledge of his truth. Ver. 7. Teaches that Gods word is ordained to two
especial purposes the one is, to increase hope in the hearts of his children,
and the other is to work obedience. Verse 8. Teaches that fathers are not
always to be followed, and therefore that they say nothing, that say they
will tread in the steps of their fathers. Verse 9. Teaches that weapon and
armor are nothing where GOD his strength and favor is not joined with them.
Verse 10. Teaches that disobedience and rebellion against GOD is a grievous
sin. Verse 11. Teaches us how foul a sin forgetfulness of Gods goodness
is. Verse 12.13.14.15.16. Sets out Gods great love toward his people, who
makes things against nature to provide for them, rather then they should be
hurt or want any thing that were good, and all this he does, to the end that
they might have their faith steadfastly stayed upon him, and his goodness. Verse
17. Teaches that sin against GOD after benefits received, is very horrible
and monstrous. Verse 18. Teaches us that evil motions of the heart are sin.
Verse 19. Teaches that there can no greater dishonor be offered to God, then
to call his power and will into question. Verse 20. Shows how the wicked
pervert those things that God does for them so the increase of their distrust
and infidelity. Ver. 21. Teaches two things, first that the Lord sees the
thoughts of the hearts, and hears the words of men's mouths conceived or
spoken against him: secondly that sin shall never be unpunished. Verse 22.
Teaches that distrust in God, is a most heinous and grievous offense. Verse
23.24.25.26.27.28.29. Express Gods great love in giving the people, whatsoever
they desired, and that in wonderful plenty and abundaunce, to the end that by
that means he might bring them to amendment. Ver. 30. Teaches that the wicked
are not drawn to repentance by Gods benefits, but rather go on forward more
and more in their sin. Ver. 31. Teaches that the abuse of Gods goodness and
mercy shall never be left unpunished: also that God respects no persons in
the execution of his justice, but he that has offended of what countenance
soever he be, shall smart for it. Ver. 32. Teaches that there are a sort of
people so settled in their sins, that no graces of God will pull the^ out of
them. Ver. 33. Teaches that hasty and sudden destruction oftentimes
ouertaketh the wicked. Ver. 34. Lively painteth out the nature of hypocrites,
and their counterfeite repentance, so does verse 35.36.37. Ver. 36. Teaches
that the abuse of men's mouths and tongues must be answered to the Lord. Verse
37. Shows that God specially regards an upright heart. Ver. 38. Does
wonderfully commend the riches of Gods grace and goodness. Ver. 39. Does
marueilously set out the vanity and frailty of man in all his glory. Ver. 40.
Teaches how the ungodly cease not sinning, but proceed from one iniquity to
another. Ver. 41. Teaches that to set god his bounds is a grievous
transgression. Ver. 42. Teaches that the forgetfulness of gods benefits
toward his children, or of his justice upon his and their enemies, is a
grievous transgression. In that description of gods wrath executed upon the
wicked Egiptians, and comprehended Ver. 43.44.45.46.47.48.49.50.51. We may
learn many things, first that the enemies of gods people shall never escape
unpunished, which also expresses gods justice against persecutours, Secondly
we see the mighty power of the Lord, who will arm the least of his creatures
with such might as all the Monarchies in the world shall not be able to
resist, Thirdly in that there are so diverse and sundry punishments reckoned up,
we learn that the Lord has all his creatures at commandment, to use them for
the manifesting of his glory, either in the maintenance of his servants, or for
the punishing of the wicked. Ver. 52.53. Do not only express gods great love
toward his children, but also they teach how that in the midst of
judgments, which fall upon others, they are safely delivered. Ver. 54.
Shows that the Lord is faithful in all his promises accomplishing the same:
the same is taught also in Ver. 55. Which serves wonderfully to the
strengthening of our faith. Ver. 56. Sets out the nature of desperate wicked
ones, who neither for gods heavy judgments executed upon others, nor for his
mercies bestowed upon them, are any whit at all bettered. Ver. 57. Teaches
that evil children tread in the steps many times of their evil fathers,
and therefore fathers not so much to be stickt to. Verse 58. Teaches that
idolatry and idols do greatly provoke Gods wrath against them, that make,
use, allow, or maintain the same. Ver. 59. Shows that all sin is naked
before God, also that out sins separate between God and us, which is
confirmed also in the 60. verse following. Verse 61. Teaches that sin
brings in the subversion of religion as it were. Verse 62. Shows that sin
also destroys the politic state. Verse 63.6^ Declare that God in the
execution of his judgments, spares no persons or condition that has
transgressed. Ver. 65. Declares that God will not always afflict his
children, and let his enemies triumph over them. Verse 66. Sets out Gods
judgments upon the enemies of his people. Verse 67. Shows that for the
exercises of his service and worship, is not tied to men or places. Verse 68.
Teaches that look what place or what manner God appoints for his worship,
that ought only to be observed. Verse 69. Sets out the excellency and
perpetuity as it were of the Church. Verse 70. Teaches that God chooses not as
man chooses, the great, but the weak and feeble persons, to the end that all
the glory might be given unto him. See 1. Corinthians. 1.26.27. etc. Verse 71.
Does excellently describe the duty of godly and faithful Magistrates. Verse
72. Teaches all by David's example, painefully and wisely to travail, in the
offices, castinges, and places, that the Lord sets them in.

Psalm 79.
THis Psalm, 1. to the end of the 4. In the second 5. to the end of the 8.
verse. In the third they allege certain reasons as it were, to move 9. to
the end of the Psalm.

The title has been sundry times expounded before, and namely Psalm. 50. 1. O
God, the heathen [either the Babylonians or Assyrians, See 2. Chronic.
36.17.18.19. or else the people, that came with Antiochus, who marueilously
profaned the temple as appears 1. Machab. 1.46.47. etc. also in Joseph,
Antiq. Iudais lib. 12. cap. 7. For of both these it may be vnderstood] are
come [ vz. with outrage and cruelty] into thine inheritance [ i. the land of
Canaan, afterward called the land of Judah or Israel, and as a principal
part of that land, the City of Jerusalem, which GOD also had chosen to be the
place of his aboade.] Thy holy temple [ vz. which was at Jerusalem, and was
called holy, because the holy GOD gave testimonies of his presence there, and
because holy exercises were used there] have they desiled, [both by spoiling
it, sheadding blood in it, and by bringing into it, all profane and wicked
things, contrary to the law, See the places before noted] and m^^e Jerusalem
heaps of stones [ i. have defaced the buildinges thereof, 2. The dead bodies
of thy servants [ vz. which were slain by the rage and cruelty of their
enemies, yielding a constant confession to thy truth, and withstanding their
pollutions] have they given to be meat unto the fowls of heaven [ i. they
have cast them here, and there, to the end that they might be rauened of the
fowls of the air, for by heaven he means the air in this place: and here
he secteth out the cruelty of the enemies, who would not show them so much
favor as to let them be buried. This in deed is reckoned among the curses of
Gods law. Deutronom. 28.26. But yet for all that we may not condemn the
faithful, who in respect of the afflictions of this life, do differ little or
nothing from the vnbeleeuers] and the flesh of thy Saints [ vz. they have cast
or given, and he calls Gods people Saints, because the Lord accounted them
holy, and by his spirit had prepared and apted them to the works of
sanctification] unto the beasts of the earth [ i. unto the wild beasts, that
live as it were by dead carrion: or to the dogs, to be devoured of them, as
was the flesh of that wicked Iezabel. 2. Kings 9. verse. 36. This is added but
to aggrauate their cruelty 3. Their blood [ vz. of the Saints and good people]
have they [ i. the enemies and aduersaries] shed like waters [ i. plentifully
and in great abundaunce: or else thus, the enemies made no more account of men's
lives and bloods, then they did of water: both senses are good, but I rather
allow the former] round about Jerusalem [hee means both without the City and
within: without the city, before the enemies came thither, and within after
they had taken the City: q.d. there was no place free from their cruelty and
violence] and there was none [ vz. either of their own nation that durst, or
of 4. We are a reproach unto our neighbors [ vz. by the means of the misery
which they see us in, they thereby taking an occasion to reproach and upbraid
us: and by neighbors he understands the people, that bordered upon their
country, as the Ammonits, Moabites, etc. which also may appear by that
following in the verse] unto them that are round about us [ vz. dwelling, which
word inserted after, are, will make the sense plain. And note, that the
faithful do not here complain of the mockeries that were directed against
their own persons, but of those also which after a sort did redound to the
dishonor of God, and the 5. Lord how long will thou be angry, for ever [
q.d. will thou never put an end to our miseries, which are testimonies of thy
heavy wrath and continual anger against us? Immanuel reads this part of the
verse better thus] how long? [ vz. will thou withhold help and aid from us,
and set the wicked insult over us as they do? and then he adds an other
interrogation thus] will thou be angry for ever [ q.d. shall there be no end of
thy wrath against us?] shall thy gelousie [ vz. over thine own glory and us
also, even for our good, if we could see it] burn like fire [ i. consume us
utterly, as the fire does every thing that is before it.] Ver. 6. Power out thy
wrath [ i. lay the abundance vz. according to thy will reueiled in thy word,
for otherwise the Gentiles had a knowledge of God, as appears, Romans 1. ver.
21.] And upon the kingdoms [ vz. of the earth or world] that have not called
upon thy name [ i. made profession of thy religion and service, See Gene.
4.26. also 2. Tim. 2.19. And note that the faithful are not in this place
carried away with carnal affections, but only as having respect to the public
salvation of Gods Church.] Verse 7. For [this very reason shows i. the
enemies have cruelly and greedily like brute beasts dealt with] Iaakob [i.
the people of Israel, who descended or came from Iaakob [and so have we had
this word used, sundry times before] and made his dwelling place [ i. the
whole land of Judea, which was assigned him by God to dwell in] desolate [ i.
waste and void, as it were of inhabitants.] Ver. 8. Remember not against us i.
think not upon, as means to provoke thee to wrath against us; and to destroy
vs] the former iniquities [ vz. which we, continuing also in the evil step^ of
our ancestors, have committed against thee] but make haste [ vz. to help and
succor us in these distresses, and to deliver us from the same] and let thy
tender mercy prevent us [ vz. before we sink down under the burdens of our
afflictions] for we are in great miseries [ q.d. unless thou put to thy
helping hand, we perish utterly.] Ver. 9. Help us O God of our salvation [ i.
thou that 3.8.] help us and deliver us now, as thou have done sundry time
heretofore] for the glory of thy name [ i. that thy majesty, might, and power
may be glorified of vs] (for name is used here as it is Psalm. 20.1.) which
otherwise shall be somewhat obscured and darkened] and deliver us [ vz. from
troubles and out of the hands and powers of our enemies] and be merciful unto
our sinners [ i. forget and forgive them, taking away also the punishments from
us, which by them we have pulled upon vs] for thy names sake [ i. for thy
glory and goodness sake, as before.] Verse 10. Wherefore should the heathen say
q.d. why should they have an occasion to say, as they will not spare to speak
it, if thou help not] where is their GOD [ vz. the God that the Israelites
serve. q.d. give not occasion to the enemies to rejoice over us and mock us,
because we have trusted in thee, as though thou had forsaken us in the
time of need, They show how that the aid which God shall give them, shall
turn to his glory: q.d. if thou help, the ungodly people shall have no cause
to say, that we have in vain trusted in a GOD, that forsakes us in our
troubles, but they and we shall feel by effects, that thou have a singular
care over vs] let him [I would rather read let it [ vz. our gracious
deliverance from these distresses] be known [ i. opened and made manifest]
among the heathen [ vz. who are our enemies, and otherwise would insult over
vs] in our sight [ i. we living, seeing, and diligently beholding the same,
that thou art always presence with thine] by the vengeance of the blood [ i.
by the punishment that thou will take, and lay upon them, for the blood] of
thy servants [hee calls them Gods servants, who notwithstanding
confessed, that they were justly punished for their sins, because GOD when
he chastises us, testifies that he has care of our saluation] that is shed
[ vz. by their cruelty and rage: by blood and shedding of the same, he means
the godlies life, and the death that the wicked did 11. Let the sighing of the
prisoners [ i. of them that are taken prisoners by the enemies, and ready to
be carried away or put to death: understanding by the sighing of these men,
their earnest prayers, pitiful complaints, tears, outcries etc.] come before
thee [ i. into thy presence, and let it appear by effect that thou regardest
and acceptest of them] according to thy mighty arm [ q.d. as thy power is most
large and infinite, for he uses this word arm for power, so preserve and
defend thy people] preserve [ vz. from outrage, violence, and death] the
children of death [ i. them that be in very great danger, at deaths door,
as it were, and ready to be slain, so that death seems to have as much
authority over them, as 12. And render to our neighbors [ i. to them that are
round about us, as before ver. 4.] seven fold [ i. most grievous punishments:
a number, finite, for an infinite. see Gene. 4.15.] in to their bosom [ i.
largely and plentifully, as appears Isaiah. 65.6.7. Ierem. 32.18. it is a
metaphor taken from them that power things without number, into the lap or
bosom as it were of those to whom they give them] their reproach [ i. the
blasphemous and wicked words that they have used against thee, which is 13. So
we thy people [ i. the people that thou have chosen, seperating us from other
nations: see Psalm. 74.1.2.] and sheep of thy pasture [ i. people whom thou
feedest as tenderly and carest as much for, as shepheardes do their pasture
sheepe] shall praise thee [ vz. for thy grace and goodness toward us in
delivering vs] and from generation to generation we will set forth thy praise
[ vz. to others: q.d. we will be instruments to publish thy praise, and
occasions of thy glory to all posterity.]

1. Teaches that God many times, for the punishment of his peoples sins,
appoints the wicked to prevail so far against them, that even his own
glory seems as it were to be laid in the dust. Verse 2.3. Set out the
monstrous cruelty and barbarousnesse of the wicked and ungodly people, whose
cursed nature is, the more they prevail, the more outrage and violence to
offer and do. Ver. 4. Teaches that the miseries of Gods children, should
provoke them to earnest and hearty calling upon his name. Ver. 5. Teaches that
the consciences of the godly can hardly be quieted, so long as they feel Gods
wrath and anger against them. Ver. 6. Teaches that we may safely pray against
the malicious enemies of Gods Church. Ver. 7. Sets out the rage and cruelty
of the wicked against the Lords people and inheritance. Verse 8. Teaches
first that our sins are cart-ropes as it were, to pull upon us, Gods heavy
judgments, Secondly that God of his mercy, and not for any desert of ours
(for we have none) does and will help us, thirdly that the more our miseries
are, the more earnest should we be, with the Lord in prayer. Verse 9.
Teaches us that Gods own glory is an effectual reason to persuade his
majesty to deliver his people, Secondly that Gods mercies only do cover and
cure all our transgressions. Ver. 10. Teaches us that we may pray against the
enemies of the Church, always provided that we intermingle not our own
corrupt affections, or hatred against the persons therewith. Verse 11. Teaches
us that the sighs and groans of Gods poor afflicted servants, shall not be
sent forth, without fruit or profit. Verse 12. Teaches us that we may
lawfully pray against the enemies of Gods Church, as before ver. 6.10. of this
Psalm. Ver. 13. Teaches us two things: first that we should give hearty
thanks to almighty God, for benefits and graces bestowed upon us: secondly
that we should be instruments to publish the praises, and to convey them over
so far forth, as we can to all posterity.

Psalm 80
THis Psalm as it should seem, both by the words and matter was made, either
about that time, that the people were carried captive into Babylon, or at the
time of their being there. It may be divided into three parts, 1. to the end
of the 7. The second contains 8. to the end of the 13. In the third part
they return to prayer again, beseeching the Lord graciously 14. to the end
of the Psalm.

The title, Shoshannim Eduth [this is expounded before Psalm 45. also Psalm
60. in the titles, as also is that that follows in sundry Psalms. Immanuel
adds, after this word, A Psalm of witness, which for any thing I see, is not
in the Hebrew text: he himself expounds it thus] of witness [ i. by which
the Church beseeching God, did testify their faith they had in GOD touching
the deliverance promised after seventy years, 29.10.] Verse 1. Hear [ vz.
the supplications and prayers of us thy poor servants praying for our selves
and thy whole Church: and by hearing, they mean granting of their requests,
and not as though GOD, either did not or would not hear,] O thou sheephearde
[ i. thou that have governed, guided, and delivered thy people heretofore] of
Jsrael, [i. of all thy people: and not of the ten tribes alone, as the note
in the Geneua Bible goeth] thou that leads Joseph like sheep [ i. tenderly
and warely, as Psalm 78.52. understanding by Joseph the same that he meant by
Israel before: and all this is nothing else, but a description as it were of
Gods tender care, favor and love, toward his people] show thy brightness [
vz. of thy power and might, as Deutronom. 33.2. q.d. show thy self in thy
accustomed glory and majesty, to our great comfort, and the terror of our
enemyes] thou that sit between the Cherubins [this is not spoken as though
GOD were tied to a place, but because it pleased him out of that place for a
time, to show forth his power and might, therefore do the people after 25.
verse 22.] Verse 2. Before Ephraim, etc. [ i. in the sight and presence of the
men of that and other tribes, who claue to the kingdom of Judah, and kept thy
religion and worship sound with them, See 1. Chronic. 9. verse 1.2.3.]
Stir up thy strength [ vz. which seems to have been heavy, and as it
were a sleep: q.d. now declare it and make it manifest] and come to help us
[ vz. out of the dangers, 3. Turn us again [ vz. out of the bondage and
captivity wherein we now are [as our Ancestors were in Egipt] into our own
Country and to thy worship. q.d. set us in our former state and condition]
cause thy face to shine [ i. make manifest thy favor toward us, which has
been kept from us by the clouds of affliction. See Psalm 4.6. also Psalm.
67.1.] that we may be saved [ i. delivered out of these dangers and
distresses wherein we are. Immanuel reads, so shall we be saved. 4. How
long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people [ i. how long will thou reject the prayer that thy people make unto thee, as though thou were
angry with them and it: this the faithful speak, and that of infirmity, when
5. Thou have fed them with the bread of tears [ i. thou have given them
tears in steed of meat, See Psalm 42.3.] and given them tears to drink
with great measure [ q.d. they are so full of griefs and vexations, that they
are able to endure no more, he signifies by these speeches, both the
abundaunce and 6. Thou have made us a strife unto our neighbors [ i. thou have
caused all those that are round about our land, with whom friendship and
peace were to be fostered, to move continual strifes and iarres against these
of our brethren, that remain behind in the land of Judah, The truth of this,
See 2. King. 25. ver. 25. Ierem. 37. chapt. and so forward almost to the end
of his Prophecie] and our enemies laugh at us [ vz. being in this affliction
and misery that we are] among them selves [ i. to make themselves merry with
all, when they meet together.] Verse 7. 3. of this Psalm.] Verse 8. Thou
broughtest a vine out of Egypt [by vine he means the people Israel, by which
comparison he shows how greatly God regarded them (for which see John 15.
verse 1.2.) because a vine is a most noble, both possession and fruit, and is
a very tender thing, as experience teaches. It is an usual thing in Scripture
to resemble Gods people to a vine, see Isaiah. 5.1.2. etc. and other places]
thou have cast out [ vz. of the land of Canaan] the heathen [ vz. the
Ammonites, Hittits etc.] and planted it [ vz. in their place, he continues in
his metaphor of a vine, and planting, meaning that God had established his
people in the room of these nations.] Verse 9. Thou made room for it vz. by
dispatching their enemies, and casting them out before them, See Exodus
23.27.28.29. Iehosh. 24.12.] and did cause it to take root [hee means by
the first, that is root taking, their flourishing and prospering in that lande]
and it filled the land [ i. it increased and grew mightily, in number,
greatness, and glory.] Verse 10. The mountains were covered with the shadow
Israel, was so mightily multiplied and increased throughout the land of
Canaan, that not only the valleis, which are for the most part fruitful, but
the mountains which are commonly barren, were well inhabited and peopled, See
Matthew. 3.1. Luke 1.39.] and the boughs thereof [ i. the young people, that came
of that root or stocke] were like the goodly Cedars [ i. beautiful to
behold, as tall, straight, strong, etc.] Ver. 11. She stretched out her
branches i. she replenished the land with inhabitants] unto the Sea [ vz.
Mediterranium] and her boughs unto the river [ vz. of Euphrates: he does
describe the breadth of the land of Canaan, and how far Gods people had
extended their government, see Psalm. 72. verse 8. and they reckon up Gods
benefits toward them in times past, that they might presently the more
easily obtain his favor and goodness.] Verse 12. Why have thou then broken
down her hedges [ i. why 31.17. also Isaiah. 5.5.] so that all they which
pass by the way, have plucked her [ i. spoiled and destroyed her: he means
by this manner of speech the gap as it were that GOD made and gave, to the
enemies, to afflict his people by.] Verse 13. The wild Bore [ i. the most
unclean and ravenous Gentiles, 11.7.] has destroyed it [ i. has utterly
rooted it up by the roots, as though it would find some thing hidden under
it: for the word that he uses here is a compounde word, and signifies to
dig up some thing that is hidden, as Treasure or such like] and the wild
beasts of the fields have eaten it up [ i. it was given for a pray, to all
sorts of beasts both of the forrestes and of the fields, he means that
their neighbors nigh about them, and others far off them, did grievously
afflict the people of Jsrael, which enemies of theirs he compares 14. Return
we beseech thee [ vz. to thy former love and grace. q.d. set aside thy wrath,
and be merciful unto us, as thou have been heretofore] O GOD of hosts [this
properly respects his power whereby we see that they made his might one
ground of their prayers] look down [ vz. upon this vine] from heaven [ q.d.
though thou dwell on high, yet look upon us below, in favor and mercy] and
behold and visit this vine [ i. not only remember it, but perform
deliverance unto it, as thou have promised: see the word visiting so 21.
verse 1.] Verse 15. And the vineyarde [ i. the whole body of the people,
putting the thing containing, for the thing conteined] that thy right hand
has planted [ i. which thy mighty power has not only brought out of Egypt,
but settled fast in this lande] and the young vine [so he calls the people,
either because they were small and few at the beginning, or else because that
in the time of these troubles, they were become as it were but a handfull]
which thou made strong for thy self [ i. to which thou gave 16. It is
burnt with fire and cut down [ i. it is destroyed by fire and swoorde, noting
by these two terms, of fire and cutting down, all the ways and means that
the wicked used to destroy the children of GOD with all] and they perish [ i.
all thy people of Israel and Iudah] at the rebuke of thy countenance [ i. when
thou show by thy countenance, that thou do rebuke them, and art angry
with them: q.d. the force of the enemy need not confound them, for the very
sign and 17. Let thy hand [ i. thy power, might, grace, and goodnes] he upon [
i. be present with, in effect and feeling] the man of thy right hand [he
puts the word man, for men and people, one for many: and by man of right
hand, he means those that God did so tenderly love, and for their sakes,
he continually manifested his mighty power in leading and governing them] and
upon the son [sonne is here put for sons or posterity, as man, for men
before] whom thou made strong [ i. whom thou gave might and power unto, not
only to defense themselves, but to wound their enemies] for thine own self
[ i. for thine honor and glory that 18. So will not we [ q.d. if thou show us
the favor prayed for, we will continue always in thy obedience. This must be
understood, not as though they conditioned with God, but allege their purposed
obedience, as a reason to move the Lord to pity them] go back from thee [ vz.
to false and strange worships devised by men, but will keep our selves fast to
that service that thou have prescribed by thy word] revive thou us [ i. take
from us the great heaviness that hangs upon us, by reason of our sorrows and
afflictions, and quicken us, and so] we shall call upon thy name [ i. profes thy
religion sincerely, and pray unto thee only.] Ver. 19. is the very same in
words 3 and verse 7 of this Psalm.

Verse 1 teaches us to have recourse in all our afflictions to God by prayer,
2 teaches that not only the feeling, but the manifesting of Gods strength and
power is comfortable to his saints. Ver. 3 teaches that Gods favor is the
only cause of all goodness toward us. Verse 4 declares that it is no small
affliction of conscience to Gods children, to feel that their prayers are not
forcible. Verse 5, 6 teach first that all the afflictions of Gods children come
by his providence and appointment: secondly that he brings them very low
even in this life, to the end that they may have their hearts and souls the
more lifted up to him. Verse 7 shows that we cannot know till the Lord turn
us, and so is stong against free will. Verse 8 sets out Gods great and
unspeakable love toward his Church, and his plaguing and punishing of the
wicked for their sakes. Verse 9 shows that the beginning, increase and
continuance of the Church, and of every particular member of it, is from the
Lord. Verse 10, 11 do under excellent Metaphors set out the glory and
enlargement of the Church. Verse 12. Shows that the enemies of the Church can
do nothing further then the Lord appoints them. Verse 13 does paynt out the
cruelty and rage of the enemies of the church. Verse 14 teaches us to pray the
Lord in mercy to behold the poor and afflicted state of his Church. Verse 15
teaches us, that the taste and trial of GOD his power before, should
strengthen our hope for the feeling of the same in time to come. Verse 16
describes the wonderful Majesty of GOD, and the greatness of his power,
which is so mighty, that even the very manifesting thereof (though it be not
executed) is sufficient to consume all. Verse 17. teaches us to pray for the
Church, and the particular members of it: also that we have no strength of our
selves, but that then we are strong, when the Lord makes us strong: and
lastly that strength, and whatsoever else we have is given us, that he only in
the same might be glorified. Verse 18 teaches the faithful to carry with them
a full purpose to stick fast to the Lord, and to call upon him. Verse 19
delivers the same doctrine that verse 3 and 7. of this Psalm do.

Psalm 81
THis Psalm being made as it should seem, Samuel or David restored Gods
worship, may be divided into two principal parts. In the first the Prophet 1.
to the end of the 7. In the second he takes upon him the person of God,
instructing the people how to walk, showing withal their disobedience, by
which not only Gods love was contemned, but they themselves deprived of
wonderful benefits, from verse 8, to the end of the Psalm.

8. and Psalm. 73.] Verse 1. Sing joyfully [ i. chearefully and with a good
courage: q.d. praise him by all the means ye can, and in all places, specially
in the holy and public assemblies, and that for the benefits you have
received from him] unto God our strength [ i. unto him who alone gives us
strength, to do the things we doe] sing loud [ vz. that all may see and
hear, as it were] unto the God of Iaakob [i. unto him that is a good and
gracious God, to al his faithful people that come of Iaakob: putting the name
of the father both for himself and all 2. Take [ vz. unto you, or into your
mouthes] the song [ vz. of praise and thanksgiving: q.d. sing praises to God]
and bring forth [ vz. to be playde vpon] the Timbrell, the pleasant harp, with
the violl [vnder the law they used musical instruments to express their joy
withal, see Judges 11, 34. and some other places: under this scholemastership
it pleased the Lord to keep his people till Christ's coming: and by these
three he means all of the like: q.d. With all Instruments of Music express
and set out the gladness of your 3. Blow the Trumpet in the new Moon [ q.d.
be as earnest to serve GOD now, as if it were at any time of our solemn
Feasts: See Leuitticus 25, 15. Number. 10, 10. and by one feast he understands
all, and so must 4. For this [ vz. to sing rejoice and to use musical
instruments, is testimony of thankfulness, as also the observation of feasts]
is a statute [ vz. that God himself has appointed, as appears Exodus 23,
ver. 14, 15, etc, see also Numb. 28. and 29. chap. almost through out] for
Israel [ vz. to observe and keepe] and a law of the God of Iaakob [i. a law
which he that is the God of Iaakob has published.] Verse 5. vz. God] set this
[ i. ordained and appointed this kind of service and worship as verse 4. of
this Psalme] in Joseph [i. amongst the Israelites: putting Joseph the father of
Ephraim and Manasses, two excellent Tribes, for all the tribes, and this he
does as I suppose for two causes, not only because that Joseph's stock was
counted ye chief (before that Judah was preferred) because he was the means
yt al their fathers were maintained in Egypt in the time of the famine, but
also because they had the largest possessions in ye whole land of Canaan as
appears Iehosh. chap. 16. and 17] for a testimony [ i. in steed of a
testimony and witness unto them how he would be serued] when he [this word, he,
may be referred either to God or to the people, but I rather refer it to God,
who is said to come out of the land of Egypt not only in the person of his
people, but also because he brought them thence in a mighty hand, and
outstretched arm, manifesting in the same his mighty power] where I heard a
language that I understood not [ i. in which place, vz. of Egypt, I was a
stranger, for this is a speech usual enough in the scriptures, to note and
signifye a stranger by, and this suddenly altering the person (which also would
be marked) from the third to the first, must be understood of God, not yt god
knew not their tongues, or understood not their language, for he knows all
things: but he shows, to the end he might testifye his good will, that his
peoples wantes were as his own, and all this he does to the end he might
amplify the benefit of their deliverance, which was so much the greater, by
how much it is very grievous to remain amongst those whose lips and language
we understand not.] Ver. 6. I [ vz. the Lord] have withdrawn his shoulder
from the burden i. from most hard bondage, of which, see Exodus 1, 14. and
chap. 6. ver. 9. and he names the word shoulder, because men commonly carry
burdens upon it] and his hands have left the pots [ i. the making of pots of
earthlye claye: and by making of pots, which was one piece of their slauerye,
he understands all the rest, as setting up of buildinges: making of Tyle or
Brick, gathering of Straw, see Exodus 5. verse 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. See also
Exodus 1. verse 11, and 12.] Verse 7. Thou calledst [ i. prayedst, vz. unto me]
in affliction [ i. in 2, 23.] and I delivered thee [ vz. out of that hard
bondage wherein thou wast: and mark how he speaks of the people, as of one
person, because they were all but one bodye] and answered thee [ i. showed the
testimonies and signs of my favor, in granting thee thy requestes] in the
secret of the thunder [ i. after a secret and wonderful fashion, but yet in
such sort notwithstanding, that they had very manifest signs, by which they
knew that GOD succored them, some refer to that which is written. Exodus 14,
24. but I take it more generallye] I proved thee [ i. by experience I knew,
what a one thou wast, not that GOD was ignorant of it before] at the waters of
Meribah, See Exodus 15, 22, 23, etc. Psalm 95, 8.] Verse 8. vz. me speaking
unto thee, by my word and law manifested unto thee] O my people [ i. the people
whom I have so tenderlye loued] and I will protest unto thee [ i. I will not
only open my will unto thee, but also make a solemn contracte with thee, to the
end that my words may have the greater weighte and authoritie] if thou will
hearken unto me [ vz. speakinge unto 9. Let there be no strange God in thee
[ i. let there be no idols or images in all thy Land: he calls them
strange Gods, because strangers from the couenaunte, i. other people besides
the Jews, did worship them: and he calls them Gods, not because they were
so, but because the Idolaters supposed them to be so, or that there was a
certain Deitye enclosed within them, See 1. Corinthians. 8. ver. 5.6.] neither
worship thou any strange God [ q.d. be content with me alone. I expound
this verse thus, that in the first part he forbids the occasion of
idolatry, which are images, idols, etc. and in the second he forbids the
thing it self.] Ver. 10. For I am the Lord thy God [here he q.d. there is no
other but I, and I am God alone, see Isaiah 45, verse 5. and he labors in
this part of the verse, not only to prove himself to be the true God, but
also to strengthen their faith, first by Gods eternity, noted in these words, I
am the Lord, secondly by the covenant which he made with the^, noted in these
words, Thy God, and thirdly by the works which he did for the^, noted in these
words, Which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, understanding by one
singular work all the rest of the graces that God had at any time bestowed
upon them] open thy mouth wide [ i. largely and abundauntly ask even
whatsoever thou will according to my will, standing fast in my service and
religion. The Hebrews understand by this speech boldness, trust, liberty,
and importunity in prayer, and not amisse] and I will fill [ i. I will give
thee whatsoever thou shall ask (see Ioh. 15. ver. 16.) and besides put songs
of praise into thy mouth for benefits received.] Verse 11. But my people would
not hear my voice [ i. would not obey the things that by my word I commanded
them. Whereby we see that to hear, and not to perform, is as much as in
contempt not to hear at all] and Israel would none of me [ vz. in deed and
truth, though they made a show as though they reverenced and loved me alone,
the truth of this appears in Exodus, Leuiticus, 12. So I gave the^ up [ q.d.
seeing nothing I could do for them or to them, could reclaim them or bring
them to goodness, I laid the bridle as it were in their own necks, and let
them run their full swinge to wickednesse] unto the hardness of their heart [
i. unto all licentiousness and iniquity that their hard hearts settled in
sin could deuise] and they have walked [ i. their conversation has bin] in
their own counsels [ i. according to their own devises and imaginations, and
not according 13. O that my people had hearkened unto me [ i. had obeyed my
voice and laws given unto them, and this God speaks after the manner of men,
testifying what a great love he had to them, and how acceptable their obedience
should have bin, see Deutron. 5. verse 29. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Isaiah 48.18] and
Israel had walked in my ways [ i. had ordered his conversation according to my
commandments: which he calls ways, because they are as paths or beaten
ways that we are to tread in all the days 14. I would soon [ i. very
quickly: q.d. then my power should have suddenly appeared, to their comfort,
but specially for judgment upon the wicked] have humbled [ i. cast down and
overthrown: it is a metaphor taken from the^, that in humbleness throw
themselves down at others feet, meaning that God in judgment would have
brought them very low] their enemies [ i. al their enemies, of what state
condition or multitude soever they had ben] and turned [ vz. from mine own
people, unto their aduersaries] mine hand [ i. my power and might, executing
judgment and vengeance: q.d. My power and fierce wrath should have lighted
upon 15. The haters of the Lord [ i. the wicked and ungodly people, which
sundry times oppressed them, as appears in the book of Iudges] should have
bin subject [ vz. either willinglye or constreinedly, choose them whether: it is
true that the word signifies a counterfeit subjection, by which he notes the
hypocrisy of the enemies] unto him [ i. to the people of God, speaking of them
all in one person as it were, of which see verse 6, 7 of this Psalme] and
their time [ i. the time of their prosperity and flourishing: and mark here the
sudden change of the number, and here he speaks of the people of God]
should have moured for ever [ i. continued and abode in that state continually,
according to Gods promise made unto them.] Ver. 16. i. nourished and maintained
his people, with the fat of Wheat [ i. with the best and picked wheat: for you
shall have the word fat and fatness so used sundry times in scripture,
understanding by wheat also not only corn, but also whatsoever else was
necessary for the maintainaunce of life, see Deutronom. 32. verse 14.] and with
honey out of the Rock would I have satisfied thee [ q.d. rather than they
should have wanted, I would have made barren places such as Rocks are,
plentiful, and that even with things not only for profit, but for delight
and pleasure, noting by this manner of speech, that they should have had all
things both pleasant and profitable for the maintaynaunce of their life, if
their naughtiness had not stopped the course of his goodness and mercy.

Ver. 1.2.3 teach that we should not be only thankful to God, 4 teaches that
Gods commaundment is the only ground and warrant unto us, that the services
which we render unto him are acceptable in his sight. Ver. 5. teaches first
that Gods revealing of his will and word to any people is a plain testimonye of
his grace and favor, also yt Gods accounts the afflictions of his people as
his own. Ver. 6. teaches that God alone is he that delivers his people from
all dangers and distresses. Ver. 7 teaches yt the Lord is nigh to earnest
supplicatio^s and requests of his poor afflicted ones. Ver. 8.9 teaches that
our obedience to God is no better manifested by any means then by removing al
idolatry, and all the occasions thereof whatsoever. Ver. 10. sets out Gods
large liberality toward his people, who many times gives more then they do
ask. Ver. 11. describes the malice, corruption and stubbornness of man's heart.
Verse 12. shows how God iustlye punishes sin by sin, and that there are
no ways so hurtful to man, as those which he himself deuiseth. Verse 13
expresses Gods singular care and love, that he has to man and his salvation.
Ver. 14.15. teach that obedience faithfully performed to the Lord, not only
draws from him judgments against all the enemies of his people, but
continual favor and flourishing to themselves. Ver. 16. teaches that those
that fear and serve the Lord shall want nothing that is good, and that rather
then Gods children shall want, the Lord will extraordinarily nourish and
maintain them with abundaunce of al things both profitable and pleasant.

Psalm 82.
1. to the end of the fourth. In the second he sets out their carelessness,
and pronounces 5. to the end of the Psalm.

50. in the Title thereof.] Verse 1. GOD stands [ vz. as the thief and
principal, to see what matters pass, and how they passe] in the assemblye of
Gods [ i. in every Session or sitting of Princes, Magistrates, or Judges, whom
he calls Gods, because in them appears some special part of Gods Majesty,
now when God is present with them it is not as an inferior, but as the Lord of
Magistrates, and the Author of all just judgments, see Deutron. 1. 17. also
2. Chronic. 19. verse 6.] he judges among Gods [ i. he keeps his authority
and pre-eminence, above all the Judges and Governors of this world.] Verse 2.
How long will ye judge unjustly [ q.d. Will ye go still on forward in
corruption and naughtiness? shall not Gods forbearing of you, bring you to
amendment?] and accepted the persons of the wicked [ i. pervert 3. Do right
[nowe he teaches them what they should do indeede] to the poor and
fatherless [ i. to those that are in misery and distress, and not able by any
mean of man to help themselves, or their causes, see Hosea 14, 3.] do justice
[ i. perform that with justice and equity requires at your hands: and this
is the same matter expressed 4. Deliver the poor and needy [ vz. from the
outrage and injury that the mighty men offer them] save them [ i. set them
free, safe and sounde] from the hand [ i. from the might and power of the
ungodly.] 5. They [ i. these wicked and ungodly judges or Magistrates] know not
[ i. approve not, neither allow or perform good things: for otherwise it is
not to be doubted but they had knowledge sufficient, see Matthew. 7.23.]
understand nothing [ vz. of right and judgment, to put the same in execution
and practice, for it must not be understood as though yt they were sencelesse]
they walk in darkness [ i. they take even delight and pleasure as it were to
bleare their own judgments and light: and then how great is that darkness,
Mat. 6.23. albeit all the foundations of the earth be moved [ q.d. all the
troubles and confusions of the land proceed from this iniquitye of theirs: and
yet they, though all things be out of order, sit still and take their ease,
never seeking redress. David was of another mind, as appears Psalm. 75.3.
upon which look, for the better understanding of these words, foundations of
the earth.] Ver. 6. I have said [we may refer these words either to God or the
Prophet: but I rather refer them to the Prophet: q.d. I have before, vz.
verse 1. confessed you to be Gods] year Gods [ i. not only excellent and great
personages, but such as exercise the very judgments of God when you do your
office rightly, 2. Chron. 19.6, and such as to whom God has given his word,
John 10.34, 35. and such as to whom God has communicated part of his power,
Romans 13.1.2. etc.] and ye are all children of the most high [ vz, not in name
only because he has communicated unto you some of his Titles, but because you
do by his appointment succeed into some part of his judicial authority,
which he has committed to you, as princely parents do to their children.]
Ver. 7. But [ q.d. for all your glorious titles, and i. a common and ordinary
death: q.d. death shall no more fear you then other men, see Psalm. 49. almost
thorowout] and ye Princes [ vz. of the people, for all your great state and
pompe] shall fall [ vz. by death] like others [ vz. of the common sort of people:
some expound it thus] like others [ vz. Princes and mighty men which have gone
before you, I would not greatly contend, but me thinks the other sense is
plain enough.] Verse 8. O God [the Prophet seeing justice to be perished from
the earth, prays vz. to judge justly seeing men are so negligent and
carelesse] judge [ vz. with justice and equitye] the earth [ i. the people
inhabiting the earth. He prays that God would bring things, which amongst men
were confused, into good order] for thou shalt inherit al nations [ q.d.
Thou, whether they will yea or no, shall have power and government over al
people: and therefore seeing that office belongs unto thee, take into thine own
hand, seeing men neglect the duties and charges that thou have committed unto
them.

The first verse teaches two things, 2. teaches how wicked men abuse good
things to their own condemnation, and other men's hurt. Ver. 3. and 4. set out
very lively the Magistrates duty, which consists of two parts, in
maintaining the good and punishing the evil. Romans 13.3. Ver. 5. Simple
ignorance or malicious ignorance, or both in Magistrates be the very nurses of
all confusions in common wealths and kingdoms. Ver. 6 teaches us to give just
titles and honors, even to unjust magistrates, always reserving that which
belongs to God, sound and safe to him. Ver. 7. teaches that no man's honor or
office can prevent or put away death. Verse 8 instructs us, in the midst of
all confusions and disorders amongst men earnestly to pray to the Lord for the
redress of them, for he alone is he, that can and will in good time reform
the same.

Psalm 83.
IT appears that this Psalm was made in some time that the enemies of the
Church conspired the overthrow of it. Hezekiah, wherein Saneherib came up
against Jerusalem and uttered outrageous blasphemies against God and his
people. see 2. Kings 18. and 19. chapiters. The Psalm as I take it may be
divided into two parts. In the first 1 to the end of the eight. In the second
part they pray earnestly 9, to the end of the Psalm.

See the Title of this Psalm expounded in the title of Psalm 48.] Verse 1.
Keep not thou silence O God [ vz. at our prayers, q.d. Make no longer show as
though thou caredst not for us, but by granting our petitions, and punishing
our enemies, show thy self to have care over vs] be not still [they repeat ye
same matter in other words to note the earnestness of their prayers] and cease
not [ vz. to help us in our distresses.] Verse 2. For lo, thine enemies [ i.
they that in us professing thy vz. not only in gathering great multitudes
together, but also in loud and lofty speeches, as verse 4. of this Psalm,
making a great noyse] they that hate thee [ i. they that testify their hatred
against thy majesty, by pursuing and persecuting vs] have lifted up ye head [
vz. against thy majesty, and us thy poor servant: and by lifting up the
head he means that they had not only set all fear aside, but that with
bold and proud minds, they prepared themselves, staying upon their own 3.
They have taken crafty counsel [ i. they have both divised with themselves and
consulted with others] against thy people [ vz. how they might hurt and
destroy them] and have consulted [ vz. with themselves and others] against thy
secret ones [ i. thy faithful people: and he calls them Gods secret ones,
not only because they were Gods chief treasure Exodus 19.5. which he would
keep closely for himself, but because he would and did, under the shadow of
his wings as it were, keep them safe and sound from all injury and
oppression, 17.8. Psalm 27.5.] Verse 4. They have said [ i. the enemies
amongst themselves, as it were to exhort and encourage one another, have
uttered these speeches] Come and let us cut them from being a Nation [ i. let
us utterly destroy them, that they may no more remain a people upon the
earth: and that word, them, is spoken contemptuouslye of the Jews or
Israelites, as though they would not vouchsafe to name the persons they were so
base: and for the expounding of this speech, from being a Nation, see Esai 7,
verse 8. where he utters a prophecy against the ten tribes] and let the
name of Israel be no more in remembrance [ i. let this people so utterly
perrish, that neither person, name or remembrance thereof may be thought upon.
By Israel he means that part of the Israelites which remained under the
government of the kingdom of Judah, to whom he gives this name because they
came of Iaakob or Israel, as well as the others.] Verse 5. For they have
consulted [ i. i. not only closely and secretly as before ver. 3. but also
courageously and boldly as it were, and they seem to be al of one mind as it
were to our destruction] and have made a league [ vz. amongst themselves and
that by solemn oath and ceremony as it were, that they might be the more
straightly bound to work their mischiefe] against thee [he says against God,
because that the quarrel which the enemies had against this people, was for
religions cause, which was the very cause of God himself.] Ver. 6 Esau, Genesis
36.9.] and the Ismaelites [adde, and of the Ismaelites: meaning that their
troops, Tabernacles or Tents came, who carried also a hateful mind toward
Gods people: and it should seem that these came of Ismaell the son of Agar,
by Abraham: see Genesis 25.12.] Moab [ i. the Moabites: putting the name of the
Father, for all the people that came of him, he was the eldest Son of Lot,
borne by incest, see Genesis 19.37.] and the Agarims [I would rather read it
Hagarims, with an H, or aspiration, first it should be read as appears by
the Hebrew Text: the Prophet mynding to note them that came of Hagar the
mother of Ismaell, of this people, see 1. Chronic. 5. verse 19.20.] Verse 7.
Geball [from whom this people 1. Kings 5.18.] and Ammon [this was the other
son of Lot conceived and borne in Incest, of which see Genesis 19.38.
putting in all these the name of the first Father of them, for all the people
thee came of them] and Amelech [these came of Eliphaz Esaus son, as appears
Gene. 36.12] the Philistines [these came of Ham the Son of Noah, as appears
Genesis 10.14.] with the inhabitants of Tyrus [this is the name of a City
situate upon the Sea, as appears Isaiah 23. thorowout] Verse 8. Ashur i. the
people of Assyria, who came also of Ham Noah's Son as it should seem Genesis
10.11.] is joined with them [ vz. in this conspiracy and mischief that they
mind to do: for in these verses he does nothing but note out the multitudes
of the enemies which Gods Church hath] they have bin an arm [ i. they have
ministered courage aid and strength by the league that they have made] to the
children of Lot [ i. to the Moabites, and Ammonites that came of Lot, of whom
before.] Verse 9. Do thou to them as to the Midianites [ i. destroy them
utterly and overthrow them for all their force and multitude, this story is
written Judges 7. Chapter] as to Sisera [ i. confound and overthrow them. See
Judges 4. Chapter] and as to Iabin who was the King of Canaan, and Sisera was
his chief Captain, in whose discomfiture and overthrow, stood also the Kings
discomfiture and overthrow, See Judges 4.2.] at the River of Kishon [hee
names the place for the more certainty of the Historye, see Judges 4, 7, and
it may be understood, that at the 10. They [ i. Sisera, and the Midianites
with them] perished [ i. were ouerthrown, confounded, and destroyed] at Endor
[which is the name of a place nigh to Taanach, and the waters of Megido, as
appears Judge. 5.19.] and were dung for the earth [ i. were not only trodden
under feet as mire, but also left unburied, upon the upper face of the 11.
Make them [ vz. the enemies, that now come to assault vs] even the Princes [
q.d. the best and mightiest men amongst them: and he prays against them,
because in the dismay, confusion and overthrow of the Prince, stands for the
most part the discourageme^t and overthrow of the people] like Oreb, and like
Zeeb [ i. destroy them and overthrow them by death: of both these see Judges
7.25.] yea all their Princes [ i. all their men of might and power, that they
being discouraged, the rest might be confounded] like Zebah and like Zalmana
[these were two great Kings or Princes of Midian, whom Gideon slew, see Judges
8. verse 5.21.] 12. Which [ vz. enemies of thine and ours, whose great number
he had reckoned up before, ver. 6.7.8.] have said [ vz. even in our hearing,
or as a man would say, even yet do speak thus] let us take [ vz. by force and
conquest] for our possession [ i. to be a possession to us and oures] the
habitations of God [no doubt he means Judea and the Cities thereof, wherein
God was worshipped, but especially Jerusalem, where the temple and tabernacle
was, and in which places God gave most manifest testimonies of his presence and
dwelling. 13. O my God [this speak the faithful, as it were but one man, or
else some particular person amongst them in the name of the rest] make them
like unto a wheel [hee prays that they and their counses may be unstable and
inconstant, so that wandering in their consultations and imaginations, they may
not hurt thy people] and as the stubble before the wind [ vz. which is tossed
hither and thither: an other similitude which he uses to express their 1,
4.] Verse 14. As the fire [ vz. put into the Forrest] burns the forest [ vz.
if men mind to consume and destroy it after that sort, for fire eats up all
before it] and as the flame [ vz. of that fire so kindled and burning] sets
the Mountains on fire [ i. causes the very mountains to melt as it were, and
burn before it.] 15. So persecute them [ i. pursue and overtake them, for it
must not be understood, as though God by laying these judgments upon them,
did offer them injury or wrong] with thy Tempest [ i. with thy sudden and
fierce judgments, as tempests are wont to come sodaynelye and fiercelye]
make them afraid [ i. cause them not only to quake or shake for fear, but
astonishe them, and take away from them all use of wit and reason, that they
may be even as it were dead men] with thy Storm [by storm, he means the
same that he did by tempest: under these two Metaphors, noting Gods fierce
wrath and judgment. Whatsoever it be, this is his meaning, to pray the Lord
that the wicked may be enforced, even in despighte of their heads as it were,
to acknowledge through the multitude of punishments that shall fall upon them,
that they do in vain set themselves against God and his people, and shall in
the end be confounded and overthrown.] Ver. 16. i. pour forth upon them such
abundance of shame and confusion, by destituting them of their hopes, that they
may be ashamed as it were to show their faces] that they may seek thy name, O
Lord, [eyther this word, they, must be referred to the faithful either then
living, or afterward to come, who in the confusion of the enemies, should have
a good ground offered them continually to hang upon Gods power: or else the
Text must be mended thus, after Immanuel, that thy name may be sought, O God,
making this as it were one end of their delivery, that God might afterward be
prayde unto and praised for it: for in my judgment it can at no hand be
referred (as the Geneua note goes) to the enemies.] Verse. 17. Let them be
confounded vz. by thy judgments which thou shall execute upon them] and
troubled [ vz. in their minds and bodies, that through disquietnesse in both of
them, they may be hindered from doing any evil thing against thine] for ever
[ i. all the days of their life, and as long as they shall liue] yea let them
be put to shame [ vz. before men, and openly in their sight] and perish [ vz.
from amongst men] Ver. 18. That they [ i. thine and our enemies] may know [ i.
feel inwardlye and Jehovah [see for the expounding of this name Exodus 6.3.]
art alone [contrary to that opinion which the Gentiles have, that their idols
are Gods] even the most high over all the earth [ i. that do whatsoever
pleases thee in earth.

Ver. 1. teaches that the more our dangers and miseries be, 2. shows how the
enemies of Gods people, in great multitudes, with great noise, and very
proudlye set themselves against the Lord, and those that are his. Verse 3.
teaches also that they do it, not rashly, but aduisedlye and with great
craft and subteltie. Verse 4 sets out both the words and purposes of the
wicked, who carrye continuallye with them a heart to root out good and godly
men from off the earth. Ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. teach principally two things, the one
is the great multitude of enemies that Gods people have: the other is, how
that all the wicked, though otherwise at iarres, can yet notwithstanding
consent together to destroy Gods chosen. They show also that they who by
nature and kindred, as it were should favor them, do many times become their
deadly enemies, as the Edomites came of Esau, Iaakobs brother, and the
Ammonites and Moabites of Lot, Abraham his nigh kinsman. Verse 9.10.11. teach
that we may pray against the enemies of Gods Church: also that judgments
executed upon former enemies, should be grounds to strengthen our hope, that
God will do the like to ours, if he see it may serve for his glory and our
comfort. Verse 13. and all the rest unto the end of the Psalm, teach that we
may lawfully pray against the enemies of Gods Church: that in their
overthrow, the children of God, may be encouraged to pray unto him, and to
praise him for it, and this is contained in verse 16. also that he himself and
his power may thereby be glorified, in that the wicked whether they will or no,
must of necessity confess his might, and this is in verse 18.

Psalm 84
1. to the end of the 7. In the second he makes his request to God for his
return, assuring himself that God in good time will graciously look upon him
for his good, concluding that they are blessed that stay upon the Lord, from
verse 8. to the end of the Psalm.

8. and Psalm. 45. in their titles Ver. 1. O Lord of hosts [ i. O mighty God
which have al things at thy commandment, as armies or hosts to execute thy
will] how amiable [ i. not only sweet and pleasant, but most tenderly
beloved of me] are thy tabernacles [by this word he understands both the
places where the holy asse^blies were made from whence he was banished through
the cruelty of his enemies, and also ye people there assembled and namely and
principally Jerusalem, and the temple, and the asse^blies 2. My soul [ i. I my
self both body and soul, putting one part for the whole] longs [ i.
vehemently and earnestly desires: we apply this speech to women with child,
who if they have not the thing they lust for, are in great daunger] yea and
faynteth [ i. with desiring of it, and not obtaining of it, I languish away,
and am as it were dead, or entering into a swoone] for the courts of the Lord
[he does expreslye use this word, Courts, because he might not go further
unless he had bin a Priest] for mine heart and my flesh [ i. both my inward
and outward man] rejoice in the living God [ i. take pleasure in him and his
services, who alone is the only true God: for by the term living he separateth
him from all the dead idols and dum images of the Gentiles.] 3. Yea the sparrow
has found her a house [ vz. in which she may rest and take her pleasure] and
the Swallowe a neast for her [ i. a place of ease both for her self and young
ones, as may appear by that which followeth] even by thine altars, [ i. not
very far from them: by many he means only one, for it was not lawful to
have many Altars to offer Sacrafice upon: Immanuel reads the latter part of
the second verse, and this verse otherwise, joining them together thus: My
heart and my flesh cry out, with desire to come to the mighty living God,
unto thine Altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God: yea the Sparrow has
found a house, and the swallowe a neast for herself wherein she may lay her
young ones: but the sense varieth not much.] Verse 4. Blessed are they that
dwell in thine house [this he means 1. Samuel 3.2. etc.] they will ever
praise thee [ i. they will be continually occupied in praising thee for thy
goodness and truth.] Verse 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee [
i. who renounceth i. that have a desire and purpose to walk according to thine
ordinances, and namelye in visiting thy Temple, and repayring to the exercises
of thy Religion: And by the word, Man, he understands many, or that number
of good men, who used that course.] Verse 6. They [Marke the sudden change of
the number] going through the Baca [of this valey read 2. Samuel 5.23.24, and
it should appear to be a very dry place, because of the Mulberry trees
therein, which thrive best in dry places] make Wells therein [ i. make
accounte of the dryness of the place, as though they had abundaunce of water,
for the pleasure that they take in Gods service mittigateth the great thirst of
this dry place] the rain also [ vz. which falls from heauen] covers the
pooles [ i. falls upon the upper parts of the waters of the pooles
increasing them: But for mine own part I would have all this verse wholly
referred out of Immanuel thus. Blessed [ i. in good case] are they, that going
through the valey of Baca, or Mulberrye Trees [of which somewhat is said before]
make it a well [ i. make that account of it, as of a Well or of a most
pleasant place wherein are wells and springes] whom also [ i. which men the
rain of blessings [ i. rain that comes from God, and is bestowed upon the
earth as a blessing of God to make the same fruitfull] and by rain of
blessings he understands also abundaunce of raine] covers [ i. falls much
upon them, and yet hinders them not from going to the exercises of god. This
then is his meaning, in these three verses 4, 5, 6, that not only the Priests
and Levites are in better case then he, but the common people that travail
through many dangers and distresses, to come to the place of Gods service, from
which he was shut by reason of his exile, and whether he would have come with
as great payns as they, if he might safely have done it.] Verse 7. They [ i.
the people that thus repair to the exercises of God and his i. the Lord
indueth them with all manner of strength, so that they feel no weakness or
feeblenesse] til every one appear [ i. come and place himself: not denying
but that afterward also, the Lord does graciously strengthen them] before God
[ vz. according to the law, Exodus 23.17 meaning also by this speech, the arc
of the covenant, which to the children of Israel was a testimony of Gods
presence] in Sion [vz. which was ye place wherein the arc was, and the service
of God used, when David did write this Psalm.] 8. O Lord god of hosts [this is
sundry times expounded before] hear my prayer [ i. grant my requests and
petitions that I make unto thee] hearken [ i. yield to my suite] O God of
Iaakob [i. of the faithful ones, putting the name of the father from whom they
came, for his holy posteritie] Ver. 9. Behold [ vz. in mercy, our languishing
and fainting for the exercises of thy word, and so look upon us that we may be
restored thereto: for here David prays both for him self, and others that
were with him in the like case] O God our shield [ i. protector and defender,
who keeps us many degrees better then shields and tergats are, see Psalm.
18.2.] look upon the face [ i. graciously accept the persons and prayers of
thine anointed [ i. of him that was by thy commandment anointed 1. Samuel
16.12.13.] Verse 10. For a day [ i. one day only and no more: and this verse
comprehends a reason of his prayers] in thy Courts [see verse 2. of this
Psalm, putting Courts also for the places of public meetings and assemblies]
is better [ i. is more sweet, comfortable, and profitable to me] then a
thousand [ vz. dayes] otherwhere [yea though the place it self were never so
delightful and pleasaunt] I had rather be a door keeper [ i. I would prefer
the basest place and calling in the Churche] in the house of my God [ i. in the
place where my God, who is the only true God is serued] then to dwell in the
tabernacles [ i. in the most pleasant and gorgeous houses] of wickedness [ i.
wherein wickedness is practiced and professed: or it may be, that he puts
wickedness for wicked men: whatsoever it be, he means that he had rather be
of the meanest account in the Church of God and amongst good men, then to be in
the highest room out of the church, where nothing reigns but profaneness
11. For the Lord God is the sun and shield, [he means that God is the only
author of all excellent good things, and the deliverer from all evil, for even
as the sun by his heat and brightness quickens, maintains, and makes
the creatures joyful, so the gracious countenance of the Lord fills men's
hearts with joy and gladness: and as a shield is an instrument, to put back
darts and dangers, so it is he alone that defends us in all distresses: see
before verse 9. of this Psalme] the Lord will [ vz. in his own good time, and
when it pleases him] give grace [ i. show favor and mercy to me and others
that are now cast downe] and glory [ i. he will advance me to that honor and
estimation which he has prepared for me: he means the kingdome] and no good
thing will he withhold from them [ i. he will give them all good and necessary
things for his glory, and their comforte] that walk uprightly [ i. lead a
holy and upright life void of hypocrisy, and being 17.1.] Verse 12. O Lord
of hosts [ i. O God of al might and power, who haste all creatures in thy
hands as armies to commaund] blessed is the man [ q.d. certainly howsoever it
goes with other men of wit, wealth, etc. he is in good case] that trusts [
vz. alwayes] in thee [ vz. alone] I take it that the Prophet comfort
himself by this speech, that though it were a great grief unto him, in
respect of bodily presence to be absent from the exercises of holy
assemblies, yet this was his comfort, that in soul, spirit, and faith, he
did communicate with the Church and beheld the Lord who was worshipped
amongste them, See Psalm 2.2.12.

Ver. 1.2. 3 shows that absence from holy assemblies, should pinch us to the
heart, howsoever little account men of the world make of them. Ver. 4 teaches
two things: the first is, that though worldly men judge such as serve God
miserable and wretched, yet they are indeed truly blessed: the second
shows the duty of them that profess God, that they should be continually
occupied in his service. Ver. 5. teaches that true blessedness belongs to
true believers only, and that to such as express their faith by the fruits
thereof, vz. by purpose of heart to well doing, and practice thereof so
farforth, as God shall enable them. Ver. 6. teaches us that no want or weather
should hinder us from the exercises of God. Ver. 7. teaches that God will
furnish those that are his with all ability to perform his will. Ver. 8.
teaches us in the time of our sorrows to have our recourse to God by earnest
prayer. Ver. 9 teaches us in our prayers and supplications to look to the
mercies of God: and also to present our prayers unto him in the mediation of
Christ Jesus only, who is that in truth to us, that David was in figure. Ver.
10. teaches us to prefer godliness, and godly men's company, before all the
pleasures and profits of this life whatsoever. Ver. 11. teaches us Gods
providence toward his servant: which appears in this, that he will
comfort and defend them in danger, that he will exalt them to dignity after
distress, and that he will mercifully minister unto them all things
necessary. It teaches us also our duty in care and conscience without
hypocrisy to walk before him all the days of our life. Verse 12 teaches us
that sure trust and confidence in God only makes us blessed.

Psalm 85
THe Psalm may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of the seventh. In the
second is comprehended Antiochus his tyranny, at which time it should seem
that this Psalm was made, and this reaches from verse 8. to the end of the
Psalm.

4. and Psalm. 45. in their titles.] Ver. 1, Lord thou have bin [ vz. in times
past, and therefore we hope thou will be now] favorable [ i. haste showed
mercy every way: so that they make his free love and mercy toward them, the
cause of all their goodnesse] unto thy Land [ i. unto thy people inhabiting the
land of Canaan, which he calls Gods land because GOD had chosen it, and
appointed it especially for them.] Thou [ vz. alone, and none but thou] have
brought again [ vz. out of Egypt, or else out of Babylon, for it may be
understood of either of them, but specially in my judgment of Babylon, as
which was the greater matter, see Ierem. 16. verse 14.15.] the captivity of
Iaakob [ i. such of Iaakobs posteritye as were Captives: putting the thing,
wherein they were held, for the persons: as Psalm 84, 10. Wickedness put for
wicked 2. Thou have forgiven [ vz. freelye and of thine own accord, without
any merit or deserte of theirs at all] the iniquity [ i. the sins and
transgressions, understanding by one, many which they had committed against
him] of thy people [ i. of those whom thou chosest to be a peculiar people
unto thy selfe] and covered [ vz. from thy iudgement] all their sins,
[whatsoeuer, whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever committed: for concerning of
sins, see Psalm 32.1.] Verse 3. Thou have withdrawn [ vz. from thy people]
all thine anger [ vz. which they had pulled upon them justly by their sins,
and thou in mercy haste either utterly withholden it: or else laying some
signs of thy wrath upon them, have removed from their shoulders the heavy
weighte of thy iudgementes] and have turned back [ vz. in pity and
compassion, as though it were better, weying thine own mercy and our miserye]
from the fierceness of thy wrath [or else we had bin consumed thereby. They
mean that GOD kindled not his wrath to the vttermoste against them, either as
in justice he might, or in wickedness 4. Turn us, [ vz. unto thee by faith
and repentaince as Lamentation 5.21. or else, from that miserable captivity
and bondage wherein we are, to our former liberty and freedom in our own
lande] O GOD of our salvation [ i. thou that workest our deliverance from
dangers and distress: so salvation is taken Psalm 3.8.] and release thine
anger toward us [ i. free us from that wrath of thine, and the testimonies
thereof 5. Will thou be angry with us for ever? [ q.d. we hope no: for that is
the force of the interrogations, meaning that Gods wrath should not always
continue upon them] and will thou prolong thy wrath [ vz. which is now
presently upon vs] from one generation to an other [ i. upon us and our
posterities, q.d. shall it continually abide 6. Will thou not turn again [ vz.
in love, mercy, favor, and presence toward vs] and quicken us [who seem as it
were to be dead, see Ezechiel 37.1.2, etc.] that thy people [ i. the people
whom thou haste chosen to thy self may be delivered and set free, and so have
an occasion to] rejoice in thee [ i. to praise thee and to magnify thee for
thy goodness toward them: he seems to note two ends of their
deliverance: one, the good and benefit of the people: the other Gods glory.]
Ver. 7. Show us O Lord thy mercy i. make us by effect to see and feel thy
goodnes] and grant us [ i. graciously and freely bestow upon vs] thy
salvation [ i. the deliverance which freely and only must come from thee. For
the acception of this word salvation, see before ver. 4. of this Psalm.] Ver.
8. I [this the faithful together speak, as though they i. not only diligently
hearken unto, but patiently look for] what the Lord God will say [ i. what he
will either speak or perform, for the word of God, is as it were the deed of
god, see Psalm. 148.5.] for he will speak [ i. promise and perform in deed: and
this is a reason why he will in patience attend the Lord and his worke] peace
[ i. al goodness and prosperity after that their calamities be once ended: See
Gene. 43.23.] unto his people [ i. unto his faithful ones, putting by this
mark a difference between Gods people in deed, and those that have but the
bare title only] and to his Saints [ i. to those whom he has sanctified: see
Psalm. 16.3.] that they turn not again [ vz. to their old filthiness, of
idolatry, distrust, and such like, whereunto Antiochus labored to bring them]
to folly [ i. to all manner of wickedness: and in this respect the ungodly are
generally through the 14.1.] Ver. 9. Surely [ q.d. without all doubt: it can
not otherwise be] his salvation [ i. succor, delivery, and aid from God, see
ver. 7. of this Psalme] is near [ i. even as it were at the doors and will
come upon them quickly] to them that fear him [ vz. with holy fear, and all
their hearts, leading also their lives according to the rule of
righteousness, which he has prescribed] that glory [ i. the sincere service,
and worship of God and all goodness, as may appear by all the verses following
in this Psalme] may dwell [ i. may have continual abode, notwithstanding the
mischievous devises of the vngodly] in our land [ i. amongst the people that
inhabit this land 1. of this Psalm.] Ver. 10. Mercy [ vz. from God] and truth [
i. simple and sincere dealing, vz. from men] shall meet [ vz. joyfully and
chearefully together. q.d. God will turn his own justice toward his people
into mercy, and their hypocritical hearts and hands into sound and sincere
ones] righteousness [ vz. from God, meaning by righteousness also the faithful
execution of his promises] and peace [ vz. of conscience in men, an effectual
worker whereof is Gods faithful performance of his promises] shall kiss one an
other [ vz. in token of true friendship, and reconciliation: for by these
manner of speeches and metaphors, the holy ghost minds to note the
reconciliation and agreement which shall be made between 11. Truth [ vz. from
men, as before ver. 10.] shall bud [ i. by effects shall show forth it self
and yield fruit, as the bud in the spring time appears, which also is an
argument of hope that fruit will followe] out of the earth [ i. out of the
minds and souls of the godly: putting earth containing them, by the figure
Metonimia, for they themselves therein contained] and righteousness [ i. the
just performance of Gods merciful promises, as before verse 10.] shall look
down [ i. shall manifest and declare it selfe] from heaven i. from the
almighty, whose dwelling is in the heaven.] Ver. 12. Yea the Lord shall give [
vz. freely, and of his own goodness, for so much does the word import generally
throughout the Scriptures] good things [ i. heaps and abundance of al
goodness: whether they be spiritual graces, mentioned ver. 10. and 11. or bodyly
blessings mentioned in the last part of this verse] and our land [ i. the land
appointed to us from God, and wherein we dwel] shall give her increase i. shall
plentifully yield it, the same being made fruitful by the mighty power of God.]
Ver. 13. Righteousness shall go before him [ q.d. when God shall show these graces
unto his people, then God will bring to pass that upright dealing, shall have
free passage amongst men: for so I take righteousness to be used in this
place] and shall set her steps in the way [ vz. so that a man shall walk no
way but there shall appear certain printes as it were of his footing.
Immanuel reads this verse otherwise, but methinketh this sense is plain.

1. Teaches that the feeling of Gods favor in former time should minister
hope unto his servants, that they should afterward feel it in like sort
when they are in any distress. Verse 2. Teaches that it is God alone that
does and must forgive all the sins of his people. Verse 3. Shows that
unless the Lord in the midst of his wrath, remember his mercy, we should
be all consumed. Verse 4. Teaches that unless GOD work in us repentance,
we shall never repent. Verse 5. Teaches that Gods wrath indureth not always,
See Psalm 30.5. Verse 6. Teaches two things, the first is, that unless GOD
quicken us, we are but as dead people, the second that God in delivery of his
servants, does not only manifest his own glory, but also provoke them
thereby to be thankful unto him. Verse 7. Teaches that Gods mercy is the
cause of all goodness to us ward, and namely of our deliueraunces from danger.
Verse 8. Teaches first in diligence and patience to wait the Lords good
will: secondly to stay our selves upon Gods mercy and goodness toward us,
Thirdly that the name, Saint, may be given to them that be living, which the
Papists deny, appropriating it only to the dead: fourthly that Gods mercy and
goodness showed unto his people, ought to be an effectual mean to restrain
them from former folly and sin. Verse 9. Teaches us that the ready way to
be assured to have GOD on our side, is to have a reverent fear of his majesty
in our hearts, and sincere fruits of the same fear in our conversation.
Verse 10. Teaches that the chief cause of the reconciliation between God and
man, and of peace in men's consciences, and of faithful dealing toward men,
is Gods great goodness and mercy, and the faithful perfourmaunce of his
promises to us. Verse 11. Teaches that it becomes Gods children, even by the
example of their heavenly father (who shows himself most righteous in his
promises toward them) to deal faithfully and vprightlye one with an other.
Verse 12. Teaches that not only all good things come from GOD, as James
1.17. but that they are bestowed upon all, and namely upon his children, of
his mere liberality only. Verse. 13. Teaches that where God bears sway,
there all justice shall manifestly appear, and be openly practiced.

Psalm 86.
I Suppose that this Psalm of David full of very earnest affections and
prayers may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of the 10. In the
second he prays for light and knowledge, desiring 11. to the end of the
Psalm.

The title, David [ i. a prayer that David made in the time of some grievous
affliction, that he was in, the holy Ghost leaving the same in record, for us
to see it or the like.] Verse 1, Incline thine ear O Lord [ vz. unto my
prayers and supplications which I make before thee: and this is spoken of god
according to men, who if they be disposed to grant suites and requests will
as a token thereof, be ready to hearken to the suppliaunts voyce] and hear me
[ i. grant me such things, as I praying unto thee, do according to thy will
ask at thy hands, for otherwise it is not to be denied, but that god
continually hears and sees al thinges] for I am poor [ i. miserable and in
great distresse] and needy [ i. stand in need of thy favor and aid, he
alleges his afflictions, weakness, and misery, to the end thereby to move god
the more to favor him, for this is proper to his nature, to succor the
miserable, Hosea 14.3.] Ver. 2. Preserve thou my soul [ i. keep thou ^ay life
and whole man, either from vz. not only toward them that be in misery, but
even to my very enemies: and he speaks thus, not as though he would claim
somewhat, for his dignity or worthiness, but to make his enemies more hateful,
as it were, to God, because they persecuted him that always behaved himself
courteously toward them, and therefore they had the less cause to persecute
him. Immanuel reads it thus: for I am he, whom thou pursuest with goodness [
i. I am he, whom thou tenderly love, and therefore hope that thou will
defend and keep me, even as the apple of thine eye, both the senses are good]
my God [ David speaks not this, as though god were his god only, but to
testify the particular apprehension, that he had in his persuasion of GOD and
his goodnes] save thou thy servant [ i. deliver him from his present dangers,
distresses, and afflictions] that trusts in thee [ vz. alone, and in none 3.
Be merciful unto me [ vz. that am thus distressed, and compassed in on every
side: out of which I can not get, unless thou show great mercy] for I cry upon
thee [ i. I do earnestly call and pray unto thee] continually [ i. daily and
without ceasing: setting out here two things in his prayers, the one is
earnestnes and vehemence understood by crying: the other is perseueraunce, 4.
Rejoice [ i. give an occasion of joy unto me, by keeping me from mine
enemies, by delivering me from the heaviness wherein I am, and by granting my
requestes] the soul [ i. the whole man, but specially the inward and mortal
part sore afflicted with continual assaults, and stricken into heaviness and
sorrow] of thy servant [ i. of me whom thou have vouchsaued to call to this
honor, to make thy servant: and mark here how he speaks of him self in
the third person, presently changing in the other part of this verse to the
first] for unto thee O Lord [ vz. alone, and to no other but thee] do I lift up
my soul [ i. I pray thy help and that not 5. For thou Lord art good [ vz. to
all, and therefore much more to thine own servants and sonnes] and merciful [
vz. to those that turn unto thee, after they have strayed from thee, meaning
that God pardons them their sins and transgressions] and of great kindness [
i. of wonderful and unspeakable mercy] unto al them [ vz. of what condition or
state soever they be] that call upon thee [ i. that pray unto thee, vz. alone:
6. Give ear O Lord [ vz. I beseech thee: and not as though David commanded
God] unto my prayer [ i. unto my prayer which now I make unto thee] and hearken
to the voice [ i. yield to the words] of my supplications [ i. which I use in
my supplication: meaning by all this, the granting of his requests, and it
seems to be the same almost with ver. 1. of this 7. In the day of my trouble
[ i. at what soever time, I shall be in my trouble, affliction, or miserie] I
will call upon thee [ i. I will pray unto thee only: Immanuel reads it in
the present tense, I call upon thee. q.d. now that I am in trouble, I pray unto
thee, and in deed it better agrees with the circumstance of the place and
person] for thou hear me [ i. I know that thou either do grant or wilt
grant me my request, whereby the Prophet shows what 8. Among the Gods vz. of
the Gentiles, and which they worship, as Gods, but yet are not so] there is
none like thee O Lord [ vz. in any respect: he shows that the Gentiles gods
are false and counterfeit because they have no testimony of their might and
power, See Psalm. 115.2.3.4. etc. See also against the vanity of them Isaiah.
44. almost throughout] and there is none [ vz. amongst either them, or amongst
all the creatures in the world, no all the creatures set together] that can
do like thy works [ i. can do such works as thou have done and daily do:
for all that they do, they do by thee, as in whom they live, move, and have
their being: whereas thou do that of thy self only, whatsoever pleases 9.
All nations [ vz. of the earth] whom thou have made [ vz. by thy mighty power,
for without thee, they were not, neither can be] shall come [ vz. either
willingly, or by constraint] and worship [ i. either truly or hipocritically
serve thee] before thee [ i. in thy presence, at thy presence, and in the
assembly of thy Saints] and shall glorify thy name [ i. shall either soundly,
or else for fashion sake acknowledge thy might, majesty, and power, for so is
name taken here, as Psalm. 20.1. Some understand this of the calling of the
Gentiles, I will not greatly contend: but methinketh it were better to be
understood of a constremed and counterfeit confession: such as you shall see in
Abimilech Gene. 20. throughout and in Pharaohs. Exodus 9.27. and in some other
chapiters of that book.] Ver. 10. For thou art great [ vz. above all and vz.
daily and continually] wondrous things [ i. matter far beyond the reach and
compass of man's wit and reason, and therefore very wonderful] thou art God
alone [ q.d. though many have the name of God, yet in deed both the thing and
the name does only belong to thee.] Verse 11. q.d. I am blind and ignorant,
and therefore humbly crave thy instruction] thy way, O Lord [ i. the way that
thou thy self have prescribed, and is the only way and manner to live well
and vprightly] and I will [ vz. through thy goodness, assistaunce and strength,
for otherwise I can do nothing of my selfe] walk [ i. frame and fashion my
conuersation] in thy truth [ i. according to that rule of truth and
righteousness, which thou thy self have prescribed in thy worde] knit [ vz.
fast and sure] mine heart [ i. the affection and persuasion of my heart] unto
thee [ vz. and the truth of thy promises. q.d. bring to pass that my heart
being freed from all fear and care of my enemies it may rest wholly in thy
fear. This manner of speech declares, that man's heart is distracted, and as
it were divided into sundry parts, till God have driven it to himself, and
held it fast in his obedience, wherefore by this word he means that even
they that are well affected, are yet notwithstanding subject to so many
stu^blings, that they should quickly vanish, and be spilt as water, were it
not that god stre^gtened them with constancy] that I may fear thy name [ i. bear
a loving reverence to thy majesty and truth.] Ver. 12. I will praise thee O
Lord my god vz. when thou shall have taught me thy truth, and delivered me
from mine enemies] with all my heart [ i. unfeignedly, and not outwardly in
words only but also inwardly in deed, and trueth] yea I will glorify thy name
[ i. set forth the praise of thy majesty, might, and power] for ever [ i. both
in this life, and in the world to come, or else it may be taken for
continually.] Verse 13. For great i. thou have and do by effect declare the
riches of thy goodness toward mee] and thou have delivered my soul [ i. thou
have set my life or whole man free [for otherwise nothing can touch the soule]
from the lowest grave [ i. from most great, deep, and extreme dangers, it is a
metaphor as they that are buried seem in man's judgment past hope of life, and
yet God notwithstanding will raise them up again, so when David seemed to be
past all recovery, by reason of his distresses, then did the Lord most
mightily deliver 14. O God the proud [ vz. persons of the world, who are not
provoked by any wrong I have done them, but only by their own pride, for so
much I suppose the Hebrewe word importeth] are risen against me [ vz. with
great force, multitude, and counsel, thinking to destroy me] and the assemblies
[ i. great troops and multitudes, of violent men] the Hebrewe word in deed
imports them that trust in their own strength, who are said to be mighty or
violent, because with a certain violent outrage, they trouble all, and labor
to destroy every thing: experience teaches the truth of this, for we see that
there is no measure kept, where pride and violence, or outrage preuaileth] have
sought [ vz. very diligently] my soul [ i. my life, to wit, that they might
take it from me, see Matthew. 2.20.] and have not set thee [ vz. who see and
know all wickedness, and wilt in good time punish the same] before them [hee
means that they had no fear or regard of God at all, but supposed that God
did not behold them, which is a manifest token of extreme licenciousnes and
impiety] 15. But thou O Lord art a pitiful God, and merciful [ vz. to them
that turn to thee, and call upon thee in truth] slow to anger [ vz. against
any though never so wicked, looking by long suffering for their amendment] and
great in kindness [ i. of wonderful great kindness and love specially to thy
seruants] and truth [he means by truth, the faithful accomplishment of all
Gods promises, and this verse is a certain description of the nature of God,
and seems 34.6.] Ver. 16. Turn [ vz. thy favorable and loving countenance]
unto me [ vz. which am distressed on every side, he prays that he may in
this his misery, feel Gods goodness and mercy] and have mercy upon me [ i. make
thy mercy appear toward me, in delivering me from the power of these
violent men] give thy strength [by this speech he means not to crave all the
strength and power of God, but to entreat the Lord, to give him strength and
ability to pass through all the brunts he should indure] unto thy servant [
i. unto him whom thou have chosen, to be thy servant: true it is the word
imports slave, or bond servant, which word the Prophet also uses to move the
Lord to mercy] and save [ i. deliver from danger and distresse] the son of
thy handmayd [ i. such a one, as has been begotten of faithful parents, and
brought up in the covenant, and is as it were a household servant of the
116.16.] Verse 17. Show a token of thy goodness toward me [ i. declare by some
one sign or other, whatsoever pleases thee, that thou will be good and
merciful unto mee] that they which hate me [ vz. without a cause] may see it
[ i. plainly perceive, acknowledge and confess the same] and be ashamed [
vz. in themselves, and of that which they have purposed against me, seeing
that I have not without cause trusted in thee] because thou O Lord [ vz. only
and no other] have helped me [ vz. out of all my dangers and distresses] and
comforted me [ vz. in the time of misery and trouble.]

1. Teaches that the more our need, misery, and wretchedness is, the greater
occasion we have, with earnestnes and speed to repair unto God by prayer.]
Ver. 2. Teaches that unless God keep us, we shall utterly perish: also that
we ought to have a steadfast trust in Gods mercy and goodness. Verse 3. Teaches
us importunity in prayer, and not to leave of, though God grant not our
requests at the first: also that in our prayers, we must flee to Gods mercy
only, and not to any thing in our selves. Ver. 4. Teaches us that unless God
make us joyful, we can never be rightly glad: also that the heart as well as
the mouth must consent in prayer, or else our prayers are nothing. Ver. 5.
Teaches us that Gods mercy rightly considered and felt, is an excellent spur
to provoke us to prayer. Ver. 6. Teaches that God only is to be prayed unto.
Ver. 7. Teaches us in our afflictions to run unto God, and to comfort our
selves in this, that if he have once heard us, he will hear us again. Ver. 8.
Expresses the vanity of al idols and images whatsoever. Ver. 9. Sets forth
Gods power in all, and over all, so that none is exempted from it. Ver. 10. Is
a plain proof of the unity of the godhead. Ver. 11. Shows that unless God
do teach us what is good, we are utterly blind: also that unless he hold us
in obedience and fear of his majesty, we shall easily decline, and run
aside. Ver. 12. Teaches us not only to carry with us a purpose to praise the
Lord, but also unfeignedly and continually to do it. Ver. 13. Teaches that
then God works the deliverance of his, when there seems otherwise no way
for them. Verse 14. Does not only set out the mischievous minds of proud
and outrageous persons, but also declares the fountain of all their sins,
vz. forgetfulness and contempt of god. Ver. 15. Is the same almost with verse
5. of this Psalm, and is a verse of great comfort, as in many respects, so
namely in this, that it sets before us, not only Gods goodness, but also the
faithful and assured perfourmaunce of all his promises. Ver. 16 Teaches us
that Gods favorable and loving countenance, is the only matter of mirth,
strength and deliverance to his servants. Ver. 17. Shows that in the
delivery and safe keeping of Gods Saints, not only Gods glory and power is
manifested, and the good are thereby conforted, but also the enemies confounded
and ashamed.

Psalm 87
THe whole Psalm it self, consisting only of seven verses, 1. Sometimes of
gods love toward it. Ver. 2. Sometimes of ye glorious report that it has
abroad even among the enemies thereof. Ver. 3.4. Sometimes for the fruitfulnes
of it. Verse 5. Sometimes of the delight and comfort that the faithful have in
it. Ver. 7. And sometimes for one cause, and sometimes for an other which the
diligent reader may observe.

The title, a Psalm and song [see Psalm. 48. Korah [this is sundry times
expounded before.] Ver. 1. God laid his foundations [ i. GOD established and
set his Church, See 1. Tim. 3.15. where the Church is called the pillar and
ground of trueth] among the holy mountains [hee calls the mountains holy,
not that they were so of them selves, but because God that was holy, had chosen
them to a holy end: and it is not to be doubted, but that he speaks here of
ye land of Canaan, which was a hilly Country, see Exodus 15. ver. 13.17. and
amongst other parts of that land, the hill of Sion, where the ark was placed in
the days of David, and the hill Moriah, where the temple was builded by Solomon,
and so by consequent also, of Jerusalem, see Psalm. 125.1.2.] Verse 2. The Lord
loves [ vz. with a singular and wonderful loue] the gates of Sion [i. the
meanest places of his temple or tabernacle: some think that he puts Sion
for Jerusalem, and these words gates, for the enclosure thereof, whatsoever it
be, this we are to note, that this love of God proceeded from his free
election, and not from any worthiness of the place] above all the habitants of
Iaakob [ i. above all the places wherein Iaakob and his posterity dwelt: the
reason, because in Jerusalem where his tabernacle and temple was, he gave most
manifest declaration of his power, 12. ver. 5. etc.] Ver. 3. Glorious things [
i. things tending to thy great glory and prayse] are spoken of thee [ vz. both
by them that appertain unto thee, and by others as may appear by the verses
following] O city of God [ i. O Jerusalem: which is called Gods City of God,
because the Lord chose it, as a peculiar place for him to dwell in: See 48.
almost throughout, and Matthew. 5.35.] Verse 4. I will make mention [this the
Prophet speaks in the name of the Church as it were, noting the enlargement
and increase thereof: q.d. by occasion of them that shall be joined unto me, I
will speak of them, to those that are already knit to me] of Rahab [i. of
Egypt, putting some part of the land, for the whole, and the people therein
contained: See Psalm. 89.10. also Isaiah. 51.9.] and Babel [ i. the people
inhabiting Babel the City of Assyria, of which see Gene. 10.10.] among the^
that know me [ i amongst them that allow of me, and are become my familiar
friends and Citizens as it were] behold [ q.d. look upon a wonderful thing]
Palestina [ i. the people inhabiting that Country called Philistines, see
Psalm. 83.7.] Tyrus [ i. the people dwelling in that citie] Ethiopia [ i. the
people possessing that land, vz. shall be joined unto me: for he means
that the people which were enemies and strangers to Gods people, shall be joined
unto them, and become Citizens of the same City] there [ vz. in the bosom of
the church as it were] is he [ i. every one of the faithful people converted,
understanding by one, al of the like sort] borne [ vz. by a new kind of birth,
and that according to 5. And of Sion [ i. of the Church of God] it shall be said
[ vz. to her great praise and commendation] many are borne in her [ vz. by
spiritual regeneration and new birth] and he [ vz. this also shall be said of
her that hee] even the most highest [ i. the almighty God] shall stablishe her
[ i. make her so strong and steadfast that the gates of hell shall not Matthew.
16.18.] Ver. 6. The Lord shall count [ i. accept and allow of those that be his]
when he writes the people [ i. when he inroleth and inregistreth them as it
were, all this is spoken of God according to man's capacity: as that also which
is so often mentioned in scripture, touching the book of life] he [ i. many,
as before ver. 4. of this Psalm.] was borne there [ vz. in the bosom of the
Church, and that by spiritual regeneration or new birth: altogether is as much:
q.d. when the Lord shall take an account of people, he shall make the^, whom he
will greatly honor, Citizens of Jerusalem, and of his Church.] Ver. 7. As well
the singers, as the plaiers on instruments shall praise thee [ q.d. the i. all the pleasure and delights that I haue] are in thee [ i. are set upon the Church
of God, others expound it otherwise, but methinketh the sense is simple and
plain. Immanuel reads it thus: wherefore all the fountains of my life, sing
and rejoice also concerning thee [there is no difference in the sense saving
that he refers it to the Prophet alone, and the other text to others with
the Prophet.]

Ver. 1. Sets out the firmity and stedfastnes of the Church, 2. Declares
that Gods free love toward his Church, is the cause of the stayednes thereof,
and of all other good things to it. Ver. 3. Teaches that howsoever vile and
contemptible the Church seem in the eyes of the world, yet it is true, that
she, and the things appertaining unto her, are glorious. Verse. 4. Expresses
both the increase of the Church, and also the calling of the Gentiles. Verse 5.
Teaches us that the Lord who is greater then all, is the stay and strength of
the Church. Ver. 6. Teaches us what a strange stay, Gods election is to the
Church: and also what great grace, he does bestow upon us, when in the same
by the ministry of his word, he does beget us again unto himself. Verse 7.
Teaches the faithful, what great delight and pleasure they ought to take in
the Church, and in the graces, that she has in her.

Psalm 88.
THis Psalm (as I take it) may be divided into two parts. Heman the Ezrahite,
beseeches the Lord to hear his prayers, setting out the great miseries wherein
he was, as arguments to move the Lord in pity and compassion, from ver. 1. to
the end of the 9. In the second he does as it were expostulate 9. to the end
of the Psalm.

The title, a song and Psalm [see Psalm. 48.] of Heman, who was a very wise
man, as appears 1. king. 4.31. and the brother of Ethan (who made the next
Psalm following) as appears 1. Chrome. 2.6.] the Hezrahite [this I take to
be a name derived by transposition of letters, from Zerah his father, of whom
see also 1. Chron. 2.6. and he is so called according to the manner of the
Jews, who use to name the race or stock, by the name of the first father
thereof] to give instruction [ vz. how to behave themselves even toward God
in the time of their afflictions: see Psalm. 42. in the title] committed to the
sons of Korah [ vz. to be sung by them: see Psalm. 42. in the title] for him
that excels [ q.d. yea even to the chiefest musition amongst them because
of the excellency of the Psalm, and the matter contained therein: see Psalm. 4.
in the title] upon Malath Leannoth [some take it to be the beginning of a
song, by the tune whereof he would have this Psalm to be sung: some take it
for the name of an instrument, upon which he would have the tune of this
Psalm. played, when it was sung. The Jews themselves who either were or should
be best acquainted with these matters, do freely and plainly confess, that
they knew not what these things mean, and therefore we need not stand much
about 1. O Lord God of my salvation [ i. thou that heretofore have delivered
me, and from whom I presently hope of delivery, out of all the distresses
wherein I am] I cry [ i. I pray earnestly] day and night [ i. continually also,
and without ceasing as it were] before thee [ i. not only in thy presence,
before whom 2. Let my prayer enter into thy presence [ i. let it find grace,
favor, and acceptatio^ in thy sight, for otherwise the Prophet doubted not but
that God did see it and hear it] incline thine ear [ i. show thy self ready
not only to hearken unto, but also to grant and i. to my earnest supplication
and prayer.] Ver. 3. For my soul [ i. my whole man, and my very life, putting
a part for the whole] is filled with evils [ i. has nothing in it, but heaps
of miseries: See Job. 14 1. but here he speaks of some extraordinary grief
as it were, and my life draws near to the grave [ q.d. my afflictions and
griefs are so great that I am become 4. I am accounted vz. not only by them
that hate, but even by my friends yea in mine own iudgment] among them that go
down into the pit [ i. I am like unto them that be dead and buried, of whom
there is (as a man would say) no more hope of life] and as a man without
strength [ q.d. certainly, and in deed my griefs have so prevailed upon me,
that I have no strength at all in bones, 5. Free among the dead [ Immanuel
reads this part of the ver. better and more plainly, by repeating the word,
I am accounted, thus] I am counted among the dead [ i. men have no other
account or regard of me, then of a dead man: and then he addeth] shut out [ vz.
from others: wherein he alludeth to the ceremony of the old law, by which they
that were infected with the leprosy, were shut out of the camp. Leuit. 14.3.
and afterward when the people came to a settled state, they were sent out of
the cities into houses prepared for them. 2. king. 15, 5. 2 Chro. 26.21. Like
the slain lying in the grave [ q.d. I am as a dead man, for he uses but many
words here to signify one thing] whom thou remembrest no more [he means
not that God, has no regard at al of them that are dead, but that he seems
so as it were unto men: and this he speaks as a man grievously afflicted,
and as one carried away with the vehemence of his grief] and they are cut off [
i. they seem to be cut off and remoued] from thy hand [ i. from thy care and
custody. Restore this whole ver. out of Immanuel thus: I am counted among the
dead I am shut out, as the slain, lying in the grave, whom thou reme^brest no
more: who are cut off by thy hand, i. by thy power and judgment: and so the
sense 6. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit [ i. in most great dangers and
extreme perils, see Psalm. 86.13.] in darkness and in the deep [by all these
words he signifies but one thing, vz. greatness of grief, and extreme
anguish, see Psalm. 130.1. for deep, and that darkness is so used many places
of scripture show: and here the proportion would be considered: for dark
places are full of horror and fear, and horror and fear do by consequent
engender sorrow and grief: deep waters or places are very dangerous for men in
the^, that 7. Thine indignation [ i. sure testimonies and signs of thy heavy
wrath] lies vz. sore upon me] thou have vexed me [ i. grieved me, and that
inwardly and outwardly] with all thy waves [ i. with all thy wrath and judgments
which thou have laid upon me, and overwhelmed me with, as the waves of a great
flood or sea, ouerwhelme somewhat.] Ver. 8. Thou have i. thou have made me
destitute of al man's aid, and succor, for eue^ they that should have pitied my
case, have through thy appointment, their hearts hardened against me, see Psalm.
38.11.] and made me to be abhorred of them [ i. lothed, and as it were hated of
them, Job complains also of this, Chap. 19. almost throughout] I am shut up [
vz. in dangers and troubles even as a bird in a cage, so that I can not get
out] and can not get forth [ i. I see no way, as it were, how to be delivered
from the^, or how to escape.] 9. Mine eye is sorrowful through my affliction [
i. my afflictions are so grievous, that the very signs thereof appear in mine
eyes and countenance: yea his very sight decayed thereby. Psalm. 38.10.] Lord I
call daily upon thee [ q.d. yet I do not for all this, discourage my self, but
call upon thee] daily [ i. not only one day after an other, but all the day
long as it were, noting his importunity.] I stretch out mine hands unto thee [
vz. as one that would be glad to receive some favor and succor from thee, he
puts in these words, the sign of prayer, 10. Will thou show a miracle to
the dead [ i. to me who am as it were dead? q.d. it shall be very strange if
thou restore me, and all this he speaks setting out one while the greatness
of his misery: an other while the weakness of his faith: and an other while
provoking GOD thereby to hasten his aid, otherwise that he should not come in
time] or shall the dead [ i. and others that seem to be dead by reason of our
afflictions] rise [ vz. out of the great dangers and distresses, wherein they
are] and praise thee [ vz. for thy deliverance and mercy: q.d. there is little
or no hope that we shall so do, for I do not understand this of the
resurrection 37. which I think well waied, would serve also for the clearing of
the sense of this place.] Verse 11. Shall thy loving kindness [ vz. which thou
art wont to show to them] be declared in the grave [ i. either in great
distress or extremity, or else putting it for the persons, vz. for them that
be at the last push, meaning it of himself or others: q.d. when I look upon
the hugenes of my afflictions and griefs, there is little or no hope thereof]
or thy faithfulness [ vz. which thou use in keeping and performing thy
promises, so that we may see, the faith of Gods children, is many times
wonderfully shaken] in destruction [ i. in them that are appointed to
destruction, 12. Shall thy wondrous works be known [ i. made manifest] in the
dark [ vz. places, putting it for afflictions, as before ver. 6. of this
Psalm.] and thy righteousness [ vz. which thou show toward thine, when thou
give them that which thou have promised them] in the land of obliuio^ [or
forgetfulness, i. in the grave, which he calls the land of forgetfulness,
because that they which are dead are soon forgotten: and all this he speaks
by the way of a continual metaphor, as it were to express the greatness 13 But
unto thee [ q.d. notwithstanding all my afflictions, and the great combats that
I have endured between faith and dispaire] unto thee [ vz. alone, and none
other besides thee] have I cried O Lord [ i. powered forth mine earnest and
hearty supplications] and early [ q.d. yea and though thou shall not hear me
at the first, yet I will not leave of prayer] and early [ vz. in the morning,
see Psalm. 5.3.] shall my prayer come before thee [ i. I will pray unto thee: not
meaning as though either God or he were tied to that time, but because he
would use that time wherein 14. Lord, why do thou reject my soul [ i. why
do thou seem to despise and neglect me: understanding by soul, which is a
part of man, the whole man] and hydest thy face from me [ q.d. what is the
cause, that thou turnest thy countenance from me, as though thou were angry
with me, and did despise both me and my prayers: all this is spoken of
God according to man's capacity, and after the judgment of 15. I am afflicted [
vz. greatly, and on every side: the Prophet fetches an argument from his
misery, to move the Lord with speed to pity and help him] and at the point
of death [ i. ready even to dye, and as it were at the last gasp, unless thou
aid and strengthen me] from my youth [ i. continually, the Prophet notes his
daily grief and continual exercises] I suffer thy terrors [ i. such
punishments and troubles as thou laiest upon me, which do wonderfully pierce me
with terror and feare] doubting of my life [ i. doubting what shall become of my
life, vz. whether I shall dye presently, I know not, or whether these vexations
shall continue longer upon me, I know not, even al ye days of my life.] 16.
Thine indignation [ i. thy manifold wrath and very many signs and tokens of
the same, for he speaks in the plural number] go over me [ i. oppress me
and ouerwhelme me, as waters do the drowned body] and thy fear [ i. the fears
that have been wrought in me, by the troubles and afflictions, which thou
have laid upon mee] have cut me of [ vz. from living in this world, or from
being amongst men, he means that they had even utterly as it were destroyed
him.] Ver. 17. They [ i. the assured testimonies and tokens of thy wrath] i.
compassed me in on every side, so that there was no way to escape or get out,
yea, they take hold of me, both inwardly and outwardly] daily [ i. continually,
and without ceasing as it were] like water [ i. in great abundance, and with
great force, as surges or waves that would swallowe me up, see ver. 7. of this
Psalm] and compassed me together [ i. even at one time, as it were, and with all their violence, they set upon me.] Ver. 18. This is the same 8. of this
Psalm, he means that none of those which were linked to him either by
nature or kindred, would come out for to help him.

Ver. 1. Teaches us to be earnest and continual in prayer unto our God. 2.
Teaches us to pray to the Lord to make us feel us the effects and force of
our prayers. Ver. 3. Teaches two things: first that very great heaps of
afflictions are the ordinary portion of Gods children in this life: secondly
that the more miseries we have, the more speed we should make to God by prayer
for the redress of them. Ver. 4. Shows in what regard, the wicked of the
world have Gods children, in the time of their affliction. Ver. 5.6.7. Teach
that Gods hand lies very sore many times upon his dearest children, and yet
for all that, he loves them never a whit the worse.] Ver. 8. Teaches us that
even the loss of our friends falls out according to Gods appointment, which
rightly considered, should minister no small comfort to Gods children. Ver. 9.
Teaches us that as our miseries increase or continue, so our prayers to God
should increase or continue. Ver. 10.11.12. Show how sharply the faith of gods
children is in their afflictions assaulted, so that many times there seems to
be little difference between hope and despair. Ver. 13. Teaches that
howsoever the godliness faith be expressed for a time, yet it is not utterly
overcome, but bursteth forth into victory at the length, and to earnest
prayer. Ver. 14. Shows that nothing greeueth Gods children so much, as to
feel a separation between God and them selves. Ver. 15. Teaches that the
afflictions of Gods children are continual even from youth to old age, and
from the day of our life unto the hour of our death. Ver. 16.17. Declare that
Gods children are not slenderly tried with some mean cross, but that still the
latter end of one trouble with them is the beginning of an other, and as one
flood or wave comes thick and threefold in an others neck, so do
afflictions assault them. Ver. 18. Delivers the same doctrine that ver. 8.
does: also it teaches us that we should not be much dismayed, when we see our
friends and acquaintance forsake us in our miseries, for as much as David and
many other of Gods Saints have felt the same.

Psalm 89
Ethan the Ezraite sets out and prayseth Gods goodness, which he manifests
by many things, but especially by the description of his works and power, and
of his mercy 1. to the end of the 7. In the second part he makes express
mention of Gods covenant made in David, and his seed (a singular testimony no
doubt of his unspeakable mercy) showing that he will establish it for ever,
and yet 18. to the end of the 37. In the third part, he seems to bewail
the want of performance of that mercy promised, praying the Lord, to look,
and that in time, upon the great desolations of the Land, concluding in hope
of deliuerye with a thanksgiving unto the Lord, and this reaches from verse
38. to the end of the Psalm.

88.] Ver. 1. I will sing [ i. I will by song set foorth] the mercies of the
Lord [ i. his manifold and sundry mercies: q.d. we have tasted of more then
of one of his mercies, yea we have felt all his mercyes, and therefore I will
praise the same] for ever [ i. all the days of my life, See Psalm 146.1.]
with my mouth will I declare [ i. I will openly speak of in my words and with
my voice: for he puts the word, mouth, which is an instrument to frame the
voice by, for the voice and words themselues] thy truth [ i. the
faithfulness and constancy that thou have in all things, and namely in
keeping thy promises] from generation to generation [ i. to al posterities:
meaning that by leaving it in writing behind him, he would be an instrument
as it were to convey it from hand to hand 2. For I said [ i. I believed it in
my heart, and spoke it with my tongue, as Psalm 116.10. by which he shows
the assurance of faith that he had in his heart, out of the abundaunce whereof
the mouth did speak. Matthew. 12.34.] mercy [ vz. of God] shall be set up [ i.
shall be exalted, builded and continue, as a very fair, strong, and artificial
house] thy truth [ i. the steadfastness and stay of thy promises] shall thou [
vz. O God] establish [ i. ratify and confirme] in the very heavens [ i. even
the place appointed for the elect, see for this sense, Luke 10.20. Others
expound the whole verse thus: the promise of God shall be as certain, as the
state of heaven: understanding thereby not the visible firmament, but the place
of eternal joy, which is exempt from all 3. I have made a covenant [a sudden
change of the person from his own to Gods, for this and the next verse are
spoken in the person of God] with my chosen [ i. with David, whom I have chosen,
and preferred before al others even his own brethren, to be king over the
people of Israel] I have sworn [not as though there were any distrust to be
had in Gods word, but for the more strengthening of the covenant in David's
heart, see ver. 49. of this Psalm, also Psalm. 132.11.] and this is to be
understood, that God by an oath had promised the performance of those things
that follow, vz. that his seed should continue] to David my servant [ i. to
him whom I have appointed and chosen to be my servant, and to serve me and my
people, in the government of the kingdom. Ver. 4. Thy seed [ i. those that
shall come of thee, as thy posterity and successors] vz. in the kingdome] for
ever [ i. for a long time, if you refer it to the outward government: but if
you refer it to Christ, it signifies perpetuity and euerlastingnes of time]
and set up [ vz. to continue and abyde] thy throne [ i. thy kingdom, putting
a part of the kingdom for the whole] from generation to generation [see ver. 1.
of this Psalm, there are two parts of this promise: the one is heirs and
successors: the other, is the kingdom: See Genesis 15.3.4.5. where the like
order is observed in promising two things.] Ver. 5. O Lord even the heavens [
i. either the firmament it self and the things 148.1.2.3. etc.] shall praise
thy wondrous works [ i. they shall magnify that great power of thine, by
which thou do, as it were miraculously uphold thy Church] yea [ vz. they
shall praise and set out] thy truth [ i. thy faythfulnes, in keeping and
perfourming promises made] in the congregation of the Saints [ i. in the
society, fellowship, and assembly of the children of God in the Church, meaning
that the Angels and heavenly spirits, should be Gods instruments, to publish
the same unto men, and to show them also matter of praising God.] Ver. 6. For
who is equal [ vz. vz. the only God] in the heavens [ i. amongst all that
glorious company of Angels and blessed spirits, which are in the heavens,
putting the thing containing, for the things contained, q.d. not one of them,
no not all of them together, are in any respect equal to him] and who is like
to the Lord [ vz. in power, majesty, might etc] among the sons of the Gods
[some understand this Angels: who in deed may be so named, because they have
not their beginning from the earth, neither clothed with a corruptible body,
but are heavenly spirits, beautified with divine glory: for mine own part I
would rather turn it thus: amongst the sons of the mighty, i. amongst the
most mightiest of the earth, of what state or condition soever they be: and so
have you the word used before Psalm 29.1. also Ezech. 17, 13. and chapter.
32.21. and then it may be the same in sense with that which is Psalm 73.25.]
Verse 7. GOD is very terrible [ i. he 5. of this Psalm is called the
congregation of the Saints: but I would take it rather in the latter sense,
because of that which follows in this verse: the Prophet meaning in my mind,
that GOD is terrible both to men and angels] and to be reverenced above all [
i. more to be feared then all Angels or whatsoever else] that are about him [
i. Angels, or heavenly creatures whatsoever who are said after the manner of
men, to be about as those that are always ready to execute his commandment:
Neither does the holy ghost mean, in saying, that God is to be reverenced
above all, that therefore the Angels and dead Saints may have a service and
reverence dedicated unto them, for if they will refer it to them, why then
should not the Sun and Moon (which the gentiles also worshipped, as well as
the Papists do Angels, and dead Saints) 8. O Lord God of hosts [ i. thou God
who have all thy creatures, even as it were so many armies, to execute thy will
and commaundement] who is like unto thee [ q.d. surely none] for the Hebrews
use by such interrogations, strongly to deny] which art a mighty Lord [ vz. a
most mighty Lord, and an eternal being, for he uses the name of God Iah in
this place] and thy truth [ i. thy faithfulness and constancy in all things,
and namely in perfourmaunce of thy promises] is about thee [ i. compasses thee
in on every q.d. thou art full of all faithfulness and truth.] Verse 9. Thou
rulest [ i. thou stillest and make calm as appears by that which follows
in this ver.] the raging of the Sea [ i. the mighty waves thereof, which rage,
and roar, and make a fearful noyse] when the waves thereof arise [ vz. by
some great wind i. thou make them calm and still.] Verse 10. Thou have
beaten down [ vz. to the ground, and that by thy might and power.] Rahab [ i.
Egypt, as before Psalm. 87.4. and here he touches the deliverance of the
people out of Egypt, of which see Exodus 14.15. etc.] as a man slain [ vz. with
the sword, he means that God by the waves of the Sea, destroyed the
Egiptians, as one man does an other by the edge of the swoorde] thou have
scattered thine enemies [ i. thou have discomfited them, as men put to flight
in a battle, run some hither, and some thither, and so being out of array,
lie open to be wounded and slain of their enemies] with thy mighty arm [ i.
with thy great force, power, and strength: so we have had army used sundry
times before.] 11. The heavens [ i. the things themselves, and all other
things whatsoever therein conteined] are thine [ i. at thy commandment, to be
used, when, where and howsoever it shall please thee] the earth also [ vz. with all things therein conteined] is thine [ i. is at thy commandment as before,
he means that all things both in heaven and earth, are at his commandment,
which seems wonderfully to express the great majesty and power of God] thou
have laid [ vz. by thy almighty power] the foundations of the world [ vz. in
such sort, that it shall not be mooued] and all that therein is [ vz. thou
have created 12, Thou have created the North and the South [ i. the whole
world, putting these two parts of it for the whole] Tabor [it is the name of
a mountain toward the West, of this mention is made Josh. 19.22.] and Hermon
[this is the name of a mountain toward the East, of which mention is made
Deuteronomy. 3.8.9. and they are two high mountains in Judea, by which no doubt he
means the whole land of Canaan] shall rejoice in thy name [ i. shall praise
thy great power and majesty.] Vere 13. Thou have a mighty arm [ i. thou art
of great power, might and force] strong is thy hand [ vz. vz. in greatness
and might] is thy right hand [ i. thy mighty power and the full manifestation
thereof.] Verse 14. Righteousness and equity q.d. although thou art mighty
in all manner of power yet thou gouernest not by power or strength only, but in
all uprightness, justly rendering unto thine enemies that they have deserved,
and faithfully perfourming to thy servant that which thou haste graciously
promised] are the stablishment of thy throne [ i. are such as uphold and
magnifye thy kingdom: using throne as verse 4. of this Psalm. I suppose he
speaks of God according to men's manners, who have certain supporters as it
were of their arms, or of their kinglye Charrets, see 1. Kings 10, 18, 19,
20,] mercy and truth [ i. grace and faithful performaunce of thy promises,
which proceeds from grace,] go before thy face [ i. are continually with
thee and in thy presence.] Ver. 15. Blessed is the q.d. O indeed, howsoever
they are condemned of the world, yet they are in best case] that can rejoice
in thee [ i. that find such taste in thy blessings and benefits bestowed upon
them, that they are thereby provoked to praise and thank thee] they shall walk
[ vz. the days of their pilgrimage here, and that with peace and quietness of
conscience] in the light of thy countenance [ i. in thy favor and goodness,
hanging continuallye upon thy providence.] Verse 16. They [ i. such people]
shall rejoice [ i. both in word and deed show i. for thy great majesty,
goodness, might and power, as Psalm 20.10.] and in thy righteousness [ vz.
practiced and performed, partly toward them, and partly toward their enemies]
shall they exalt themselves [ i. lift up themselves, and that with praise unto
thee, not as any thing rejoicing in themselves, but as giving all the honor unto
thee to whom alone it belongs.] Verse 17. For thou art the glory [ i. thou
art he q d. if thou with draw thy hand, in steed of glory they shall have
weakness and confusion] and by thy favor [ i. of thy free goodness and not
by our desertes] our horns [ i. our estate, kingdom, authority, gouernmente,
force, power, might, etc. as 1. Sam. 2.1. see verse 24. of this Psalme] shall
be exalted [ vz. above our enemies, and we shall prevail against them.] Verse
18. For our shield [ i. our defense and vz. only: q.d. the help and defense
that we have, is from him alone] and our King [ vz. David, whom the Lord has
appointed to be our King, and by whose hand and power as by a mean, we must
be defended] to the holy one of Israel [ vz. belongs: q.d. he and all the
kingly authority he 19. Then [ vz. O God: for here he speaks either of God,
or to God] speak thou [ vz. when David was appointed King] in a vision [this
was then one of the ordinary means, whereby God in old time appeared and
manifested his will to the fathers: see numb. 12.6.] unto thine holy one [ i.
Samuel the Prophet, see 1. Samuel 16. and Samuel is here called Gods holy one,
not only because he was sanctified by the spirit, as others his children
are: but also because he was appointed to an holy office, vz. of Priest and
Prophet, see 1. Samuel 3.20] and saydest [ vz. then and at that time] I have
laid help upon one that is mighty [ i. I have appointed David (to whom also I
have given force and strength) to be an help and aid to deliver my people
from their opressors, and have given him graces meet for the gouernmente and
kingdome] I have exalted [ vz. to the height of the kingdom and gouernment]
one chosen out of the people [ i. one of mean state and condition, as Psalm
78, 70, 71, and yet notwithstanding through my goodness apted and advanced, to
that high calling.] Ver. 20. I have found [ vz. out from amongst the rest, or
else thus] I have found [ i. I have provided for me and my people, as 1.
Samuel 16.1.] David my Servant [ i. David whom I have chosen to serve me and
my people in the government of the kingdome] with my holy oil [ i. with the
oil which I have appointed to such holy uses, in which respect also it is
called holy oyle] have I anointed him [ i. appointed him to be King over my
people, see Psalm 45.7.] 21. Therefore [ i. because I have thus chosen him] my
hand shall be established with him [ i. he shall have my power and might, as a
sure foundation to stay himself vpon] and mine arm [ i. my force and
strength] shall strengthen him [ vz. against all his enemies, so that I will
keep and preserve him from all dangers: and mark that under hand and arm,
which are several terms, 22. The enemy [ i. whatsoever enemy he hath] shall
not oppress [ vz. for any long time, and that either by fraud or by force]
him [ vz. whom I have appointed] neither shall the wicked [ i. he that is given
over to wickedness, how desperate and bold soever he be in his ungodly
attempts] hurt him [ vz. any manner of 23. But I will destroy [ vz. by my might
and power, and that in justice and iudgemente] his foes [ i. all his foes,
whether they be open or secret] before his face [ i. openly, he seeing and
beholding the same, and being mine instrumente to perform that great worke]
and plague them [ vz. with death and destruction] that hate him [ vz. any manner
of way, either inwardly, or testify their hatred outwardely.] 24. My truth
also [ i. my faithfulness in performance of promises] and my mercy [ i. great
goodness, he notes the cause of his promises, and the performance thereof]
shall be [ vz. present and in effect] with him [ vz. continuallye] q.d. I will
always show my self faithful and merciful toward him] and in my name [
i. through my goodness, strength and power, as Psalm, 20.1.] shall his horn [
i. his majesty, glory, power and might, as before ver. 17. of this Psalme]
shall be exalted [ i. lifted up and advanced to great heighte and reverence.]
Verse 25. I will set his hand also in the sea [some expound it thus: I will vz.
the almighty Lord] will set [ i. stretche out] his hand [ i. his might, power,
government and kingdome] in the sea [ i. even unto the red sea, and the sea
mediterraneum: and this was promised Exodus 23, 31. and was accomplished 2.
Samuel chapter 8. and 10] and his right hand in the floods [ vz. of Euphrates,
Nylus, Jordan, and others.] Ver. 26. He [ vz. David my seruant] shall cry unto
me [ i. i. one that has a most loving, tender, and provident care over me] my
God [ i. my strength and power] and the Rock [ i. the assured stay that I
have, see Psalm 18.2,] of my salvation [ i. that I shall be delivered from all
the dangers and distresses wherein I am, see Psalm. 3.8. all that is here spoken
of David, ought in truth also to be referred to Christ.] Verse 27. I will make
him [ i. I will have him in that regard vz. that first borne children are wont
to be had in, whom the scripture shows to have had great privileges and
honor, and estimation: q.d. I will greatly advance and honor him] higher [ i. I
will advance him higher] then all the Kings of the earth [ i. he shall be the most
excellent among them al, by the favor that I will show him, and the graces that
I will give him. And mark, that this cannot appertain to David, but only so
far forth as he was a figure of Christ: and this we must further mark, that
when David, Solomon, and others are set out as figures of Christ, sometimes
that which is spoken agrees to the figure only, sometimes to Christ only,
who is figured by them, and sometimes to both, vz. the figure and the thing
fygured, so that it behooves the Reader to have a diligent regard thereto, of
this somewhat has been said before, Psalm 2, and also Psalm 45.] Ver. 28. My
mercy will I keep i. I will never utterly destitute him of my loving kindness
and mercy, howsoever I seem for a time to withdraw it] and my covenant [ i.
the covenant yt I have made with him] shall stand fast [ vz. for ever: q.d. I
will faithfullye perform whatsoever I have promised] with him [ i. between him
and me.] Verse 29. His seed also [ i. his posterity] will I make to endure [
vz. in the i. for a very long time: if you refer it to David. But if to
Christ and those children that through him are brought and begotten to God by
the sanctification of the spirit, of which see Heb. 2.10. then it signifies
euerlastingnesse of time] and his throne [ i. his kingdom and state, see verse
4. of this Psalm, here must be repeated, I will make] as the days of Heaven
[ i. perpetual and continual: Heaven is here put for that state of eternal
glory preserved for the faithful, which shall never decay.] Verse 30. If his
children [ i. if his seed and posteritie] forsake my i. depart away from it,
and that rule of righteousness which it prescribes them to walk in, in their
conuersation] and walk not [ i. frame not their life, as Psalm. 1.1. Ephesians.
4.17.] in my judgments [ i. according to those rules of justice and judgment,
which I have prescribed: he means nothing 31. Is the same altogether in
sense, though it differ somewhat in words with verse 30.] If they break [ vz.
either through ignorance or knowledge] my statutes [ i. the things that I have
ordained them to walk in] and keep not [ vz. in thought word and deede] my
commandments [ i. the things that I have commanded 32. Then [ i. when they
shall have dealt thus wickedly with me] will I visit [ i. correct and punish,
see Psalm 59.5. Isaiah 26.21.] their transgressyons [ vz. which they have
committed against me] with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes [ i. I will
punish them for their sins committed against me, meant by transgressions, as
before, and against men understood by ye word iniquity] with the rod and with
strokes [ i. with sundry kinds of punishments and all to bring them home to my
self by repentance and amendment.] Ver. 33. Yet [ q.d. for all my threats and
punishments] my loving kindness, [ i. my rich and unspeakable mercy] will I
not take from him [ vz. continuallye, or for ever: q.d. I will not utterly or
altogether reject him] neither will I falsify my truth [ vz. promised and
sworn unto him: q.d. I will not fail or break in 34, My covenant [ i. the
covenant which I of mercy have made with him] will I not break [but stand
steadfastly to the performaunce of it, and every part thereof] nor alter the
thing [ i. change the sentence or matter] that is gone out of my lips [ i.
which I have uttered and spoken [ q.d. I will not be inconstant, for I 35 I
have sworn [this is spoken in the person of God: and the Lords oath is added
not for any insufficiency that is in him, but to ratifye the matter more
sufficiently in the mind of David and his posterity. Gods oath is to promise by
an oath, see Heb. 6. from verse 13. to the end of the 18.] once [and therefore
will not go back from it: This word imports that Gods oath was irreuocable]
by mine holiness [ i. by my self, because he had no greater to swear by, as
Heb. 6 13. and not as some expound it, by the sanctuary, wherein Gods Majesty
did visibly appeare] that I will not fail David [i. disappoint him, vz. in any
thing that I have promised him.] Ver. 36. His seed shall endure for ever [ i.
his posterity 29. of this Psalme] and his throne [ i. his kingdom, putting
the sign of a kingdom for a kingdom, see ver. 4.29. of this Psalme] shall be
as the Sun [ i. shall continue as long as the Sun: and he alleges the
Sun, and verse 37. the Moon, as a witness of the continuance of David's
kingdom, not because these creatures are eternal, but because they have more
steadfastness then the earth, the air, etc. which i. in my presence and
sight.] Ver. 37 He [ vz. in his own person, and the person of his seede] shall
be established [ vz. in the seat of the kingdome] for evermore [how this is to
be understood of David and Christ, see before verse 29. of this Psalme] as the
Moon [see verse 36. of this Psalme] as the Moon [see verse 36. of this
Psalme] and as a faithful witness [ i. as the faithful witnesses, meaning the
stars, Planets, etc. putting also the singular for the plural number] in the
Heaven [ i. in the Firmament, for the Lord has there placed the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, etc. as witnesses faithfully to distinguish between time and
time, see Genesis 1. verse 14. etc. he means nothing else but that David's
kingdom and posteritye shall have a long continuance, as the Sun, Moon,
and Stars etc. have.] Verse 38. i. cast away, and that from thy favor as it
should seem q.d. thou that have promised to be so gracious to David and his
seed, seem now to have no care of either of them. And this he speaks not
as accusing God, either of inconstancye or lying, but either using the words
and expressing the mind of the enemies of God and his people, or else speaking
it according to the present affection and feeling of the flesh, resting
notwithstanding resolved, howsoever his faith were shaken for a time, yet that
god will graciously perform his promises. These words also (which is to be
marked) are verified in David and Christ: in Christ because God for a season
forsook him, as may appear when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Matthew. 27.46. and in David when it seemed unto him that Gods
promise should take no place, and that God had as it were vnsayd the same: and
when he was driven out of his kingdom by Abshalon his son, see Psalm 3.
through out] and abhorred [ i. loathed and despised him, as it were] thou have
been angrye [which thing also thou have declared by effects, as appears in
the verses following] with thine anointed [ i. with the King whom thou thy
self have anointed and chosen to that room, see Psalm 18, 5,] Verse 39.
Thou have broken i. it seems unto us so in the eye of flesh, and to our
enimies] the covenant of thy servant [ i. the covenant which thou haste made
with thy servant: and it is called his covenant, not because he made it, or
was the chief in it, but because he was one to whom and with whom it was
made] and profaned his crown [ i. brought it to great dishonor and contempt,
specially among ye profane people, as the Gentiles, etc. and by crown he
means his kingly dignitie] casting it on the ground [ i. overthrowing it,
taking it as it were from his head and setting it upon the ground, whether he
spoke it of David's abiection by the hand of his son Abshalon: or of the
renting of the kingdom in ye days of Rehoboan: or of their captivity, under
Salmanazder, and Nebuchadnezar, it is not certain. I suppose that without any
injury to Gods spirit, a man may well apply it to them all.] Verse 40. Thou
have broken down [ vz. and i. all the walls of his kingdom: meaning by walls,
not only all the strong places thereof: but all the instruments and means
that he had, either for his own defense, or for the annoyaunce of his enemies,
for to those two ends do walls serue] thou have laid his fortresses in ruin
[ i. thou have utterly ruinated and destroyed, and as a man would say, made
even with the ground all his strong holds.] Verse 41. All that go by the q.d.
he and his kingdom is so weakened, that even way faring men, can easily spoil
them: there needs no soldiers or men ofwarre to do it] spoil him [ vz. and
his people, meaning that they take away from them even what they list, see
Psalm. 80.12.] he [ i. he, his people, kingdom and all] is a rebuke [ i. is
such a one, as his neighbors, that is, those that are round about him, rebuke,
79. verse 4.] Verse 42. Thou have set up the right hand of his enemies [ i.
thou have advanced their power and strength, so that they are not only become
more mighty then he and his, but in that might have also prevailed against
them] and made all his adversaries to rejoice [ vz. because of the victory
they have achieved, and the overthrow 43. Thou have also turned the edge of
his sword [ i. thou haste blunted it in such sort that it could not wound and
hurt his adversaries: meaning by this manner of speech, that even the very
means they had, of weapons, as swords, spears, etc. to defend themselves,
and to annoy their enemies, were utterly unprofitable unto them] and haste not
made him [ i. him and his people] to stand [ vz. steadfastly, and in the face of
the enemies, and against them, but to flee and fall before them] in the
battle i. at what time the enemies and they came to join battle together.]
Ver. 44 Thou have caused his dignity [ i. the great honor and advancement
that thou have laid upon him] to decay [ vz. in the presence of men, and in
the sight of his aduersaries] and cast his throne [ i. his majesty and Kingly
gouernmente, see verse 36 of this Psalme] to the ground [ i. rased it and laid
it flat with the 39 of this Psalm.] Verse 45. The days of his youth have
thou shortned] this the Prophet speaks of the king and the state of the
kingdom both together: meaning that the Lord has brought both the king and
the kingdom to a very poor and weak estate, before either of them came to
their perfection as it were, as if a man should before he came to the flower
of his age, or his ripe yeares] and covered him with shame [ i. have altogether
made him a reproach and shame: for the word covering, and what it imports,
44.19.] Verse 46. Lord [the Prophet joining this prayer with his complaynts
shows that howsoever his faith was shaken, yet he did not despair of the
truth of Gods promises] how long will thou hide thy self [ vz. from us,
meaning by hyding of himself, showing them no sign of favor and grace] for
ever [ q.d. Will thou do this for ever?] shall thy wrath [ vz. against us,
our King, Land, and people] burn like fire [ vz. to consume us, quite and
clean, who are as it were but stubble before fire, in respect 47. Remember of
what time I am [ i. think how short the time of my life is: and this is an
argument taken from his own estate, to move the Lord to pity him and his]
Wherefore should thou create in vain [ i. to little or no purpose at all]
all the children of men, [ i. all men and their posterity: In these words he
uses an other Argument to move GOD to compassion, taken even from the end
of his creation. And this he speaks, because that if in this life we feel
not some taste of Gods goodness, it should seem, that he had in vain created
us, seeing that this is one end of our creation even in this life to feel and
find his liberality toward us.] Verse 48. What man lives [ vz. at this
presence, or i. taste of Death, or dye: q.d. There is no man but he must pass
that way, see Hebrews 9.27.] shall he deliver his soul [ i. his body and
life: soul put for body, as Psalm 16.10.] from the hand of the grave [ i.
from the power of Death: putting the grave which follows death, for Death it
self: q.d. Both the one, vz. to live, and not to die, and the other, vz. to
be freede from the force of death is utterly impossible, see Psalm 49.
almost through ou^e: and all this is: q.d. Seeing man's life is so short, if
thou do not in good time show thy self a Father toward them, thou shalt
have no more occasion to make them feel thy favor in this life.] Verse 49.
Lord where are thy former vz. which thou have showed in former time unto our
Fathers] which [ vz. also] thou swarest unto David in thy truth [ i. which
faithfully and truly thou promisedst, and that by an oath adjoined to thy
promise, to perform to him and his seed, see verse 35 of this Psalm. In the
other two verses, vz. verse 47.48. he took arguments from the vanity of men
and their life, to move the Lord to pity them. In this verse he takes an
argument, from the faythfulnesse which GOD uses toward his servant, to
induce him thereto: and in the two next verses, vz. 50, 51. he takes an
argument from the person of their enemies.] Verse 50. Remember O Lord [ i.
earnestly think upon, i. the tauntes and rebukes wherewith thy servant are
laded by their enemies, see Psalm 123.4] which I bear in my bosom [ i. which
I suffer most quietly and patiently loving them, as it were, and making so much
of them, as though I fostred them in my bosom, because I know they come from
thee] of all the mighty people [ i. which all the mighty people cast upon me, so
the Prophet shows who were his enemies, vz. not only the meaner sort, but the
most mighty of all.] Ver. 51. Thine enemies [ vz. and ours for thy sake] have
reproched thee O Lord [ vz. because thou have not helped us, saying where is
now their god, Psalm. 79.10.] because they have reproched [ i. blasphemed and
spoken evil of with taunts and rebukes] the footesteps of thine anointed [ i.
the good conversation and behavior of him whom thou have appointed to be King,
if you refer it to David. If to Christ then it has this sense: that they
speak evil of the doctrine and profession of Christ, vpbraiding them also
that waited for his coming. Understanding by footesteps the feet themselves,
because with our feet we make our steps, and by feet, coming, as Isaiah
52.7.] Ver. 52. Praised be the Lord for evermore Job 1, 21.] So be it, even so
be it, [this is a consent yielded to the same thanks giving, and the doubling
makes both for the earnestness and certainty of it, See Psalm 72.19.

Ver. 1 teaches that it behooves Gods saints continually to praise god for his
mercy, also that their thanksgiving must not be inward in the heart only, but
outward also in the mouth. Verse 2. teaches that the true taste and feeling of
Gods mercy and truth, are two principal proppes to our consciences. Verse 3
teaches Gods goodness and mercy, who for the further strengthening of our
faith, and not for any inconstancy in him, makes an oath for the performaunce
of his promises. Verse 4. teaches that Kings and their posterity can not
endure, without the Lord uphold them and bless them. Verse 5. teaches men
even by the example of heavenly creatures to praise the Lord. Verse 6 teaches
that none neither in heaven nor earth, is any way matchable with God. Ver. 7 is
a notable place against invocation or prayer to Saints. Verse 8 shows that it
is no small comfort to the consciences of Gods children, rightly to consider
his great power. Verse. 9. teaches that Gods power and providence bears a
sway in the stilling of the sea and waves thereof, which otherwise seem to go
by natural course. Verse 10 teaches us that the overthrow of Gods enemies is
not from man but from the Lord himself and his mighty power. Verse 11
shows that God is Lord over all things, and that the firmity or stayednesse
which the world has, it has it not of it self, but from the Lord, who in
his power and providence vpholdeth the same. Verse 12 proves that God created
the earth, and that therefore it is not eternal, as Philosophy affirms:
also although all the earth belong to the Lord, as over which he has a
general care, yet specially that part which the faithful inhabit. Verse 13
sets out Gods mighty strength and power, which is so great as none is able
to resist. Verse 14 sets out Gods justice mercy and truth, as matters not
only of great comfort to his servant, but of great instruction also to teach
them to strive to the like in their behavior and dealings. Verse 15 teaches
first, that only Gods people are indeed blessed: secondly that there is no
matter of mirth or joy but in the Lord only: thirdly that Gods free favor and
mercy is the only vpholder of our bodily and spiritual life. Verse 16
teaches that the faithful never rejoice in themselves, but in the Lord and in
his strength, and in the faithful accomplishment of his promises. Ver. 17.
teaches that all the glory, strength and power that the godly have, is from
the Lord only. Ver. 18. teaches that neither King nor people, nor weapons,
etc. are any thing without the Lord. Verse 19 teaches that Gods word in the
mouth of his ministers is a good both warrante and comfort to those that are
his: also that it is the Lord that rayseth up one and pulls down an other.
Verse 20 teaches us that he is in deed approved whom the Lord approves, how
much soever otherwise he be rejected of men. Verse 21 teaches that all the
strength and power that Princes have, they have it from the Lord alone. Verse
22 shows Gods care over his children and how mightily he will defend them, it
teaches also that the wicked cannot do what they list. Ver. 23 teaches that
the overthrow of the ungodly is from the Lord, whatsoever instruments he uses
to the performance thereof. Verse 24. teaches that Gods truth, mercy and power
are the proppes of all common wealths and kingdoms. Ver. 25. teaches, that it
is the Lord alone who inlargeth kingdoms. Ver. 26 teaches not only how earnest
Gods children should be in their prayers, but also with what a particular
apprehension and feeling of his mercy and power, they ought to repair unto him
Ver. 27. teaches that mean men, and high men, are so much as God accounts
of them indeed, and no more. Ver. 28 teaches that Gods mercy and the
steadfastness of his covenant, be singular comforts to the consciences of his
servant. Ver. 29. teaches that God will be the God of the faithful, and of
their seed after them. Ver. 30.31. do evidently declare what sin is, vz.
the breach of the law, and not observing Gods commandments. Ver. 32.
teaches that God will chastise his for their sins, to the end that thereby they
may come to amendment. Verse 33 teaches that God in the midst of his
punishments remembers his mercy toward his, secondly that God will never
utterly forsake those that are his, howsoever it pleases him to afflict them
for a time. Verse 34. shows that God is free from all change or shadow of
turning, James 1.17. which is a singular comfort to the afflicted foul. Verse
35 expresses Gods love toward us, who swears for the further strengthening
of our faith in the truth of his promises. Verse 36 Teaches us that posterity
and the continuance thereof, is a special blessing from the Lord, the same
thing does verse 37. teach. Ver. 38, 39, 40, show, that no affliction comes
to Gods children, without his special providence and appointment, which is
comfortable to consider, not only because he that does chastise us is our
father, but also our enemies can go no further then he has appointed them.
Ver. 41 teaches us that God many times brings his children to a low ebb,
and yet graciouslye afterward delivers them out of al their fear, Ver. 42.
teaches that the wicked and ungodly can not do what they list, nor go beyond
the bonds which god has set them. Ver. 43. teaches that al munition and aid
of men is vain unless it please God to bless them and give them force. Ver.
44 teaches that it is God alone that pulls down and sets up. Ver. 45.
teaches, that ye days of our life are in Gods hands to be disposed of as
pleases him. Ver. 46. Teaches us in the midst of our greatest heaviness to
have recourse to God by prayer, and to crave the removing of his rods. Ver. 47.
teaches the vanity and shortness of man's life. Ver. 48 teaches that death
spares none, but that all must taste thereof. Verse 49 teaches us to think
upon Gods former graces, that they may assure our consciences of mercy to be
afterward showed. Ver. 50 teaches us in our affliction to repair unto God:
also that not the meanest sort of the people only, but the cheifest are enemies
to Gods faynts. Ver. 52 teaches us that the injuries and opprobries offered to
Gods people, are as done against his own majesty and person. Ver. 52. teaches
us in all estates, and at al times to be continually thankful to God: and also
to yield both to thanksgiving and prayer, an earnest consent.

Psalm 90
3. to the end of the 11. In the third is contained a prayer for grace and
comfort in all heauinesses and distresses of this life whatsoever, from verse
12. to the end of the Psalm.

Moses [i. a prayer which Moses made unto God for himself and the people, at
that time (as it should seem) that the spies came back again, and the people
murmured against God, for which things sake the Lord threatened them that they
should not enter into the land of promise, see Number. 13.14. thorowout] the man
of God [ i. not only an excellent man but a Prophet, and one called to some
public office: see Deuteronomy. 33.1. also 1. Kings 18.24.] 1. Lord thou [ vz. alone
and no other] have bin [at al times heretofore and specially all the while of
our travail, in the great and huge wildernesse] our habitation [ i. thou art
he alone under whose defense we dwell safe and sound see Deuteronomy. 33.27. and this
he speaks of himself and of the people that were with him, and of all their
ancestors gone before them, comprehending them under that term, our,] from
generation to generation [ i. even from the beginning of the world unto this
present time, and in this verse he sets out the wonderful government and
grace of God toward his people, as in the next verse, the eternal purpose
and counsel of God proceeding from the pleasure of his good will: and this he
does specially for two causes: the one is that he might publish Gods glory, in
setting out his mercy: the other that he might by laying forth former mercies
move the Lord to have mercy upon them now in that distress.] 2. Before the
mountains were made [ vz. by thy almightye power and word] and before thou
had formed the earth and the world [ vz. for men to dwell in: understanding
by forming, not only the fashioning of it, but even the very creating of it,
see Genesis 1, 1, 2, and these two sentences laid together be as much: q.d.
before the world or any part or piece of it were made] eue^ from everlasting to
everlasting [ i. from al eternity, and so for ever here after] thou art our God
[ i. thou art he that have chosen us to be a people to thy self: and that
will we take also as an argument to instruct us to hang upon 3. Thou
turnest man [ i. thou causest man to return, and that by thy word onlye] to
destruction [ i. to Death: which is called destruction, not because it
destroys in deed, but because it seems unto us to destroy. Othersome
understand by destruction, dust and power, and the dissolution of the body:
both senses are good] again thou say [ i. also thou do but speak the
word only, and then it is done] return [ vz. in respect of your body, into the
earth out of which it was taken, Genesis 3.19. and in respect of your soul to
God who gave it, Eccle. 12.7.] ye sons of men, [ i. ye mortal creatures: for
this word expresses the miserable and frail condition of men] and in these
words he shows how brittle, frail, and short man's life is, he compares the
course of our life to a race in a Tilt or Turney, where we quicklye run to the
end of the race as it were, and then return back again.] Ver. 4. For a
thousand years [ vz. of man's life: q.d. though it were possible i. before thee
and in respect of thee are as yesterdaye when it is past [ i. yea they are
soon passed over in respect of thee, as one day only in respect of us: or
else as Saint Peter expounds it in his second Epistle, Chapter 3 verse 8,
that a thousand years are with the Lord as one daye] or as a Watch in the
night [ i. of very short continuance: for a watch in the night, was but
three hours long: the people of the Jews in old time dividing the night into
four Watches, and appoynting also to every watch three hours. Matthew. 14.35.
Luke 12.38.] Verse 5. Thou haste ouerflowed them [ vz. by thy judgments, i.
when man is in his force and strength] he grows like the grass [ i. he is
flourishing and lusty: and mark the sudden change of the number, from the
singular to the plural, understanding by this word, he every man.] Verse 6. In
the morning [ i. before vz. toward the declining of the sun, at which time
husbandmen suppose the grass will cut better, and the mowers (the heat of
the day being somewhat spent) are the better able to endure labour] it is cut
down [ vz. by ye mower with his sythe] and withers [ vz. somewhat that night
before the sun set, and so is more and more withered with the heat of the
sun the day or days following: q.d. Even so fares it with man's life, for
by this similitude he notes the brevity and shortness thereof, a very usual
thing in the scripture, Isaiah 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.24. Iam. 1.10.11.] Ver. 7. For we
are consumed by thine anger [he seems 14. q.d. Our case, by reason of thy
judgment sore upon us, is more grievous then other men's cases are] and by thy
wrath [ vz. against us for our sinnes] we are troubled [ vz. very sore, and
on every side stricken as it were with great fear.] Verse 8. Thou have set
our iniquities vz. that so thou might remember them, and punish us for
them] and [ vz. thou have set] our secret sins [ i. the sins which we our
selves though not of, and therefore supposed were hidden before thee] in the i.
openly in thy sight and before thy face.] Ver. 9. For all our days [ i. all the
days of our life] are past [ vz. already, so that they cannot be called back
agayn] in thine anger [ vz. against us for our sinnes] we have spent our years
[ i. the years of our life are gone] as a thought [ i. suddenly as a thought
comes into our minds, and passes away again, so suddenly are our days
passed: some read as a word or a tale that is told: whatsoever it be the sense
comes all to one end, vz. to note the vanity and shortness of man's life.]
10. The time of our life is threescore years and ten [ i. ordinarilye and
commonly men live not beyond it: yea if there be one that reaches unto it,
there are a hundred which dye before] and if they be of strength [ i. if either
the days of our life or the parties themselves, have through Gods blessing more
strength then other men haue] four skore years [ vz. at the vttermoste: q.d.
That is the greatest age which almost they come vnto] yet their strength [ q.d.
that strength and excellency whereof commonly they brag and boast] is but labor
and sorrow [ i. contains nothing in it but al manner of affliction, toil and
grief, daily experience of the most aged men does sufficientlye prove the
same unto vs] for it is cut off [ i. that same excellent strength and force of
men which they brag of, is by death through Gods appoyntmente made nothing,
and that] quicklye [ vz. in the twinkling of an eye, or in the turning of a
hande] and we [ vz. mortal men that were] fly away [ i. we quicklye
depart out of 11. Who knows the power of thy wrath? [ q.d. None at all,
though thy hand be heavy upon vs] or of thine anger according to thy fear
[ i. who stands in awe of thine anger so much, as thou and it ought to be
feared: for so must the latter part of this verse be read out of Immanuel. As
for that in the Geneua text, for according to thy fear is thine anger, i. men
feel thine anger according to the fear that they have conceived of thee,
caryeth with it, as little or no sense in regard of the place, so less truth,
because Gods judgments do many times lie heavy upon those 12. Teach us so
to number our days [ i. make us so to understand how short a space we have to
liue] that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom [ i. that we may thereby become
more circumspecte and heedye, how we spend even that short time 13. Return
[ vz. to us in mercy and love, i. show some signs of thy favor and grace:
q.d. hitherto thou haste been angrye against us, now at the length show some
favor toward vs] O Lord how long [ vz. will thou be angrye with us, and
show us the testimonies of thy wrath] and be pacifyed toward thy servants
[ i. take pleasure gentlye and graciously to handle us, whom thou haste
vouchsafed worthy 14. Fill us with thy mercy [ i. make us feel thy goodness
in great abundaunce and plentifullye] in the morning [ i. either in the flower
of our age, as ver. 5. of this Psalm, or else in time convenient, as sundry
times before, some take it to be put for continually] so shall we rejoice and
be glad [ i. so we shall not only have occasion of rejoicing and gladness, but
we will also perform praises unto thee for the same] al our days [ i. all the
days of our life, or so long as we live, see Psalm 146.1.] Verse 15. Comfort [
vz. with thy grace goodness and fauour] us [ vz. now afflicted] vz. in Egypt,
as may appear from Exodus 1. to the 12. chapter: q.d. grant that the comfort
which we shall receive from thee, may be equal (yea more) with the calamities
which we have indured] and according to the years [ i. let thy comfort be
aunswerable to the multitude of yeares] that we have seen evil [ i. wherein
we have suffered and borne affliction or punishmente. For evil is used here,
as Amos 3, 6. no doubt in consyderation of the weakness and corruption of
their own nature, and of the multitude of afflictions that commonly lie upon
them, and of the hardness to apply Gods favor and goodness toward them,
the godly had need to pray that Gods graces may rather exceed their miseries
then be equal with them or like unto them] Ver. 16. More plainly the i. let
that which thou will do for thy servant (for under one he means all the
rest of the people) appear and be made manifest before men: understanding by
the word, Work, some singular protection, sauegarde, and delyueraunce that
GOD should work for his people] and thy glory [ i. and let thy glory also
appear, not only upon them or toward them, but also] upon their children [
i. upon their whole race and posterity: so that there are two ends touched
in this verse, the one is Gods glory, the other is the sauegard of Gods
people, and the defense of their seed.] Verse 17. And let the q.d. Show us thy
favor, that not only we our selves may thereby be comforted in our selves,
but also that thereby we may have the great credit, glory, and estimation
which we were wont to have with other people] direct [ i. order, guide, and
prosper] the work of our hands [ i. whatsoever we shall take in hande] upon
us [ i. amongst us, in us, and to us: q.d. give a good success and blessed
issue to al our enterprises: he means that nothing we take in hand can come
to good end, except that GOD guide us by his holy spirite] even direct the
work of our hands [hee repeateth the same request again, not only to set
forth his own earnestness in prayer, but also to declare how necessary and
needful the thing it self is, for which he prays.

Verse 1. teaches that it is no small comfort of conscience, 2. teaches that
the true taste and feeling of Gods eternal election, is an excellent proppe for
men to stay themselves on in all assaults. Verse 3 teaches that the issues
both of life and death, are in Gods own power. Verse 4 teaches that the
longest days and years of man's life, in respect of God who is all eternity,
are nothing. In the 5, and 6, verses by two similitudes, vz. of floods and
flowers, he notes the shortness and vanity of the life of all men, of what
state or condition soever they be. Ver. 7 teaches that the apprehension and
feeling of Gods wrath works grievous effects in the minds and bodies of
those that be indeed touched therewith. Ver. 8 that the matter of all Gods wrath
against us is within our selves, vz. both our open and secret transgressions
against God and man. Ver. 9 teaches that man's life is nothing how long soever
it be amongst men, when the wrath and judgment of God is upon it. Ver. 10
teaches that all the days of ye strongest man's life, is nothing else but
sorrow and vexation of spirit. Ver. 11. teaches how hard a thing it is, and
how few there are, that do rightlye and reverently think of Gods fearful
wrath. Verse 12 teaches us to pray to God to give us grace to think upon the
shortness of our lives, and to remember the last end, a matter which we very
easilye and much forget. Verse 13 teaches that nothing is so comfortable to
Gods servant as his favor and love, and as when in the same they feel him
reconciled unto them. Verse 14.15. teaches us, that if we respect our
wretchedness, miserye and affliction, we have great need to pray for the
abundaunce and riches of Gods mercy to be showed upon us, and when we have felt
it to show our selves unfeignedly thankful to him for the same. Verse 16
teaches in our prayers always to respect Gods glory, and the salvation of
his people. Verse 17. teaches that nothing that we do can come to a good
end, unless the Lord does begin, continue, and finish the same.

Psalm 91.
1. to the end of the 13. In the second he brings in god speaking as a
sufficient witness to confirm and perform the truth of all that he had
said, from verse 14. to the end of the Psalm.

Moses penned it, but that is not much material: this is to be marked,
whosoever he was that writ it, did show himself to have a very singular
feeling of Gods power 1. Who so [ i. Whosoever he be, of what state and
condition he be that] dwells [ i. has his most usual abode] in the
secret of the most high [ i. under the providence and protection of the most
high GOD] shall abide [ q.d. Such a one need not doubt, but that he shall
always continue] in the shadow of the almighty [ i. under the pleasant and
assured defense of GOD. The Prophet shows what care the Lord has over his
faithful people, into whatsoever dangers they fall, and therefore exhorts
them to continue sure and steadfast to him, because they that be in his keeping
shall not be in danger of blows, but shall dwell in a sure, quiet, and
pleasant place, which I suppose he means by secret and shadow. Verse 2. I [
vz. being thus assured of his fatherlye protection] vz. at all times, in what
case or distress souer I bee] unto the Lord [ vz. upon whom I do thus
depend by fayth] O mine hope [ i. thou whom alone I hope and trust in] and my
Fortress [see Psalm 18.2.] he [ vz. alone, and none other but hee] is my GOD
[ i. my defender and safe keeper] in him will I trust [ vz. all the days of my
life, even for ever and ever. Immanuel reads these two verses otherwise, and
makes an other sense [which indeed I better allow of thus.] Verse 1. To him [
vz. whosoever he bee] that dwells [ i. that hangs continually by a steadfast
fayth] in the secret of the most high [ i. upon the providence of the Lord,
whether it appear toward him or no] and unto him that lodges all night
under the shadow of the almighty. By dwelling and lodging, and all the rest of
the words, the Prophet means nothing else but this, he that day and night
by a liuelye faith stays himself upon GOD and his providence, neither
cares much for any worldly casualtie, (as men term it) shall in deed be
safe (for that must we understand) even as Chickens are under the Hens
wings. Let then the first verse go thus: To him that dwells in the secret
of the most high, and unto him that lodges all night under the shadow of the
almighty.] Ver. 2. Do I say [ vz. in mine own experience and example] in the
Lord is my hope [ q.d. and by my example I would have him to hope in him
likewise] and my fortress [ i. the place of my sure defense, against all mine
aduersaries] he is my GOD, in whom I trust [ i. I trust unto him, and to no
other but him, who both can and will defend me.] Verse 3. Surely [ q.d.
vz. which has all will and power in himself, and never deceaueth anye] will
deliver thee [ i. either keep thee altogether from it, or else, if thou fall
into it, set thee free] from the snare [ i. from destruction priuilye and
closelye prepared for thee as snares are to catch the beastes] of the hunter [
i. of him that hunteth and seeks after thee to destroy thee] and from the
noisome pestilence [ i. from the pestilence that brings with it hurt,
danger, and destruction. By snares and pestilence he means all manner of
evils, whether they come from men or be laid upon us by GOD, giving us to
understand that God will succor us, in whatsoever danger we be, because he
has infinite means to deliver us out of the same.] Ver. 4. He [ vz. God] will
i. will have singular care of thee and thy safety: this is a similitude taken
from birds, and namely from hens, meaning that god by his providence and
protection would safelye defend him] and thou shall be sure [ vz. from the
rage and force of all thine enemyes] under his feathers [ i. under his
protection and sauegarde: he repeateth the same thing ( i. the assurance that
the faithful are in, being under Gods gouernmente) in other words and termes]
his truth [ i. his faithful promise keeping] shall be thy Shield and Buckler
[ i. shall be unto thee in steed of a shield and Buckler to defend thy self
in all dangers, because he has promised, and therefore will 5. Thou shall
not be afraid [ i. thou shalt not need to fear, seeing thou hangest wholye
upon the Lord. Immanuel reads it in the Imperative Mood, fear not: but
methinketh the former is the better] of the fear of the night [ i. of any,
though never so great fear, he speaks this, because that the darkness of
the night it self (much more occasions of fear in the same darkness)
makes men fearefull] nor of the arrow that flies by day [by arrowe flying in
the day, he means some sudden mischief that comes upon a man or ever he
be ware. We may also give this sense, that because he speaks of night and
day, he means that the godly shall have no need to fear either in secret
or open mischiefs pretended against them, because that loving the Lord, and
trusting only 6. Nor of the pestilence [ vz. sent from God upon people for
their sinnes] that walks [ i. that is forcible and strong to kill] in the
darkness [ i. in the night: not that he tieth it only to that time, no more
then he does it to the noonetide in the next part of the verse] nor of the
plague [ vz. of mortalitye and death] that destroys [ vz. all sorts of
people indifferently] at noone day [hee means by these manner of speeches
that the godly need not to fear any manner of evil, whether it have 7. A
thousand [ i. a very great number, putting a number certain for an vncertain]
shall fall [ vz. by the ordinance and appointment of God, through diseases and
plagues] at thy side [ i. at one of thy sides, meaning indeed the left side,
as may appear by this, that afterward he makes mention of the right hande]
and ten thousand [ i. an innumerable number as it were, a number certain
for an uncertain as before] at thy right hand [ i. at thy other side] but it
[ vz. Pestilence, Destruction, or any manner of evil, for of these had he
spoken before] shall not come near thee [ vz. to hurt or harm thee: the
reason is, because GOD will have such a special care of thee, that though all
the rest of the World be destroyed, yet thou shalt be safe. Mark here two
things: that under the Word, he, which includes but one man, as it were, he
means all the faithful whatsoever, or wheresoever. Secondly, that these
temporal blessings are conditionally promised (though the condition be not
here expressed) vz. so far forth as the accomplishmente thereof 8. Doubtless
with thine eyes [ vz. of faith principallye, though it must be understood
also of the bodilye eyes] shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked
[ i. that great judgment, which God will power forth upon them as a reward of
their sin. q.d. the godly shall know by experience that GOD is ^ just judge
against the world, punishing the wicked thereof.] Ver. 9. For thou vz. in a
steadfast and assured perswasion] the Lord is mine hope [ i. he alone in whom
I will put my hope and confidence] thou have set the most high [ i. thou have
accounted and made the eternal God] for thy refuge [ i. a sure place for thee
to flee unto and to dwell in, as Psalm 90. ver. 1. to be kept safe from all
the mischiefs of the wicked.] Verse 10. There shall no evil [ i. manner vz.
from the almighty, as to hurt thee] neither shall any plague [ i. affliction,
cross, or calamitie] come near thy tabernacle [ i. the place where thou
dwell, putting the place or house for the people therein contained: q.d.
both thou and thy whole household or family shall be safe and sound.] Ver. 11.
For he [ i. God himselfe] shall give his angels charge over q.d. not only he
himself will care for thy defense, but also when need shall be, he will
appoint his heavenly messengers to preserve thee: not that the Angels help is
greater then Gods, but to teach us that we shall have God him self and all
the heavenly armies at his commandment, to defend vs] to keep thee [ vz. safe
and sound, from all hurts and daunger] in all thy ways [ i. in every thing
that thou shall take in hand according to thy calling, for Gods glory and thy
neighbors good, staying thy self continually upon him by faith which things
the devil cunningly dissembled, when he tempted Christ, Matthew. 4.6.] Ver. 12.
They [ i. the Angels Gods ministers] shall bear thee in i. shall carefully
look unto thee, as men do to those things which they have in their hands:
and not that Angels have hands, or any other part or member of a man's body,
for they are spiritual and invisible creatures] that thou hurt not thy foot
against a stone [ q.d. the care shall be so great, that even the lowest and
basest member as it were shall be preserved, much more the more principal and
excellent: see Psalm. 34.20. he means that God, will uphold men from
stumbling or falling, understanding by the word, stone, all the hinderaunces
that Satan casts in our ways to let us in the course of salvation.] Ver.
13. Thou [ vz. which steadfastly trustest in the Lorde] shall walk [ vz. with
i. upon the cruel and venomous beasts: for under one of either sort, he
comprehends the rest of the like] the young lion, [ vz. which by reason of his
youth, is fearce, mighty, and raging] and the Dragon [or flying serpent, as it
were, this is an other kind of most noisome and hurtful beast] shall thou
tread under thy feet [ i. shall thou overcome, and they themselves shall
yield obedience unto thee, under these speeches, the Prophet means that they
shall be delivered from all deadly dangers which commonly men are subject unto,
such like things as these are foretold of the kingdom of Christ. Isaiah,
11.6.7.8. Hosea. 2.18. Mark. 16.18. [Verse 14. Because he has loved me [these
are Gods own words, making an assured q.d. because the faithful people have
in a reverent love depended on me and trusted in me, to the end that their
faith and love might not be void, and I be found inconstant in my promises]
therefore will I deliver him [ i. set him free, vz. from all dangers,
troubles, and fears: and note that this, and all that follows unto the end of
the Psalm. the Prophet speaks in the person of God] I will exalt him [ i. lift
him up and that into a very high and safe place, meaning hereby that he will
deliver him and set him free from all danger and distresse] because he has
known my name [ i. because he has experience of my power and might, feeling
by trial what succor is to be found in me, and so has learned to approve
the same and trust in it.] 15. He shall call upon me [ i. pray unto me, and
that in the time of his distress and heauinesse] and I will hear him [ i.
graciously grant him his request] I will be with him in trouble [ vz. not
only to comfort him, that affliction ouerwhelme him not, but also to deliver
him out of the same, as it follows in this verse] and gloryfie him [ i. I will
advance him to great glory and estimation: q.d. I will cause my glory for the
love that I bear him, to shine in him, and that shall be both matter and
occasion, why other shall esteem him 16. With long life, will I satisfy him [
q.d. if he wish or desire long life, I will give it him, and that in great
measure] and will show him my salvation [ i. I will make him feel by effect
that I am his savior and deliverer, and I suppose that a man may take it
further, referring it to eternal life, meaning by long life, all the benefits
and blessings which concern this life, and by salvation, eternal life and
glory: q.d. he shall be sure, to have both the one and the other.

1. Teaches us always in a stestfast faith, to hang upon the Lord Ver. 2.
Teaches them, that have had feeling of his goodness, to labor to bring other
to a steadfast persuasion therein. Ver. 3. Teaches that if God deliver us not
from dangers, we shall daily and hourly fall into the same. Ver. 4. Teaches
that they which feel themselves comprised under gods providence, and within
the compass of his gracious promises, shall never miscary. Ver. 5.6.7. Teach
that a steadfast persuasion of gods power and goodness, surmounteth al ye noisome
dangers and distresses of this life whatsoever. Ver. 7. Teaches that in ye
midst of the greatest confusion and destruction that can be, the Lord will
provide for the safety of his: as appears in the example of Noah and Lot.
Ver. 8. Teaches that it is no small comfort to the godly sensibly and plainly
to perceive, the judgments of God upon the wicked, and their utter
overthrow. Ver. 9. Teaches that whosoever steadfastly believes the Lord
only to be his defense, shall never quail in his afflictions. Ver. 10.
Teaches that God mercifully preserves the faithful and all that belongs to
them. Ver. 11. Teaches us first in that God uses Angels, as means for our
defense, that therefore we should use the means (not yet trusting in the
means) that the Lord has given us to perform any thing by: secondly that God
guides those that are his in all their purposes and attempts. Ver. 12.
Teaches Gods care, not only over man himself, but also over every member and
part of him, yea the meanest part, as the foot: also it teaches that unless
the Lord uphold us, we shall do nothing else but stumble and fall. Ver. 13.
Teaches us, that God will subdue all things unto his elect and faithful people.
The Papists have done great injury to this text, in appropriating it to the
Pope only, to whom it can no otherwise appertain, then to any other christian,
if he were a christian, but for as much as he renounceth Christ, and is the
very Antichrist indeed, this does no whit at all belong unto him. Ver. 14.
Teaches two things: first, that the love the faithful bear to the Lord is
never lost, but the Lord does reward a thousand fold: secondly that this is
a ready way to be rid from danger and fear in steadfast faith to hang upon
the Lord, and his mighty power. Verse 15. Contains first a singular spur
to prayer, in that the Lord promises to grant the supplication of his
servants: secondly a notable comfort in distress, for that the Lord
promises, not only to be present with his in their trouble, but also to
deliver them out of the same, yea, which is more, to advance them to great
glory and safety. Verse 16. Teaches that they which vnfeignedlye serve God,
shall have abundaunce of all blessings both concerning this life, and the life
to come.

Psalm 92
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts: 1. to the end of the 5. In the
second he declares 6. to the end of the 11. In the third, he Prophecieth
of the great blessedness, that GOD will bestow 12. to the end of the Psalm.

The title, A Psalm. and song [see Psalm. 48. in the title] for the Sabbath day,
i. to be sung in the assembly upon the Sabbath day, upon which day the people
met for the public exercises of the Church.] Ver. 1. It is a good thing [ vz.
because it has the promise of this life, and of the life to come] to praise
the Lord [ vz. i. by praises and thanksgiuings unto thy majesty, to set forth
the greatness of thy excellency and power] O most high [this term has been
sundry times expounded before.] Ver. 2. To declare [ vz. by all the means that
we can] thy loving kindness [ i. the i. not only in that time which is very
convenient for prayer or thanksgiving, but he means thereby every morning,
yea continuance in the action of thanksgiving, as shall afterward appeare]
and thy truth [ i. thy faithfulness in performaunce of thy promises] in the
night [ i. every night: by these two words morning and night, he means
continual thanksgiving, for as his goodness and truth abides toward us
continually, so it behooves us to give continual 3. Upon an instrument of ten
stringes, and upon the viole [see before Psalm. 33.2.] with the song upon the
harp [hee means that the song, and the tune of the song played upon the harp
should both go together. And in this verse he speaks not only according to
the use that was then under the law, at what times musical instruments and
songs were a part of the tutorshippe of the Jews, but meaning somewhat
further, vz. that men should enforce themselves, what in them lay, to praise
the Lord 4. For thou Lord have made me glad [ vz. both inwardly and
outwardly, so that both my soul and my body reioyce] by thy works [ i. by the
contemplation, and consideration of thy works, in which thou set forth thy
great majesty, mercy, power, wisdom, etc. and even thy whole self as it
were] and I will rejoice [ q.d. seeing thou have given me so great and so good
an occasion I will not fail but be glad therein] in the works of thine hands
[ i. in the excellent things that thou thy self have by thy almighty power
created and made: he attributes hands to God, because he speaks of him
according to man's capacity, and not that he has any hands at all.] Ver. 5. O
Lord how glorious are thy works? [ q.d. they are so great i. thy counsels,
purposes, and manners of doing, are incomprehensible, and pass al
understanding of men. The interrogation and exclamation, which the Prophet
uses in this place, do sufficiently declare, that God otherwise governs
mankind, 6. An unwise man [ i. a wicked man, which also he understands by
fool afterward: the word, which he uses, signifies brutish as a beast,
meaning him that gives himself over to his sensuality and pleasure
beastlike, not regarding either Gods works or his word: see Psalm. 28.5. so
that we see, what account he is of before God, vz. esteemed as a bruit beast]
knows it not [ i. neither co^sidereth neither approves the excellency of thy
works and iudgements] and a fool [ i. a wicked and ungodly person as Psalm.
14.1. and also generally throughout the whole book of Prouerbs] does not
understand this [ vz. which follows, vz. that the wicked and ungodly, for all
their flourishing state, shall come to perpetual ruin and decay: no they
understand it not, though it please thee (O Lord) in other men's persons, to
give them daily experience and trial thereof.] Ver. 7. When the i. increase,
and flourish, prosper and triumph] as the grass [hee means hereby not only
their flourishing estate, but withal secretly he sets out their quick and
flitting estate, of which see before Psalm. 90.5.6.] and all the workers of
wickedness [ i. all they that work wickedness, with greediness, delight, and
pleasure] do flourish [ vz. in this world: and here mark, that if the
parenthesis in the Geneua text were left out, the sense would be very plaine]
that they shall be destroyed [ vz. from amongst men, and that through Gods
iudgements] for ever [yea and for ever meaning the eternal punishment that
shall light upon them.] Ver. 8. But thou O Lord art most high for evermore
Immanuels translation which reads it thus: And that thou, O most high, art
the Lord for evermore [ q.d. this is an other thing beside the former, which
the wicked forget, vz. that thou rulest and gouernest all things according to
the good pleasure of thine own will and power.] Ver. 9. For lo thine enemies
i. those that set themselves against thee] for lo, thine enemies O Lord shall
perish [ vz. through thy mighty judgments: and this repeating of the thing
twice, together with that term, lo, doubled, do note the certainty and
assurednes thereof] all the workers of iniquity [see before ver. 7. of this
Psalm. and these words, all the workers of wickednes] shall be destroyed [ vz. as
things broken into pieces, and shall vanish away, as matters of no regard.
Verse 10. i. thou shall not only increase, but also cause to be reverenced my
strength] like the unicorns [ vz. either horn or strength, whose horn how
greatly it is esteemed experience teaches: and for the strength of it you may
see, Deuteronomy. 33.17. Number. 24.8.] and I shall be anointed [he speaks this
according to the manner of the country wherein he lived, understanding by
anointing, pouring forth, vz. of gifts, and having also the same gifts,
bestowed upon him] with fresh oil [ vz. which has not lost his strength
and power, he means that he shall not only inioye but be adorned also,
with the graces and benefits of GOD: see Psalm. 23.5.] Verse 11. vz.
executed] against mine enemies [hee means that he should behold his enemies
plagued and punished: understanding by the word enemies, such as looked
narrowly to his behavior, and hoped to see destruction come upon him, the same
word is used. Psalm. 5.8. and when he speaks here of desires and wishes: he
means not, such hasty and rash wishes, as we are provoked to, through the
corruption and malice of our own hearts: neither as though he desired any
thing against Gods will: but being thoroughly persuaded of the obstinate malice
of the ungodly on the one side, and Gods judgments ready to be powered forth
upon them on the other side, for their sins, he utters these speeches] and
mine ears shall hear [ vz. by true and faithful report: q.d. my hearing, as
well as my feeling shall be satisfied] my wish [ vz. accomplished and performed]
against the wicked that rise up against me [ vz. with all their force and power.
q.d. I shall see them ouerthrown.] Ver. 12. i. he whom God accepts as
righteous, and frames to righteousnes] shall flourish [ vz. through Gods grace
and goodness toward him] like a palm tree [some think the just to be
compared to a palm tree, for the sweetness of the fruit, which for mine own
part I see no reason of. The Rabbines, and amongst the rest, Abeu Ezra, think
them to be compared to palm trees, for their lastingnes. All know this, and
Pliny also makes mention of it, that the nature of this tree is, though when
weight is laid upon, it bend and bow somewhat, yet the weight being removed,
it stands upright again, and spreads it self: so the faithful,
notwithstanding their affliction, shall when their miseries are removed,
recover new strength, and come to more force then they have had before] and
shall grow [ vz. in height, greatness, and strength] like a Cedar of Lebanon [of
these Cedar trees we have heard before, Psalm. 28.5. and in other places.]
Verse 13. Such as be planted [ i. such as have taken deep root, and be well
settled: for he speaks not here of hypocrites, which keep or occupy a place
only in the Church, but of all faithful people] in the house of the Lord [ i.
in the Church, as 1. Timothy 3.15. and it is called Gods house, both because
that GOD takes a delight, to dwell there, as it were, and also because his
exercises are there observed, and he shows him self more familiarly to that
company, then to the rest beside] shall florishe [ i. shall yield great store
of fruit through Gods blessing] in the Courts of our GOD [ i. even in the
Church or assembly of the Saints, he speaks of Courts, because both the
tabernacle had sundry Courts, and also afterward vz. one for the Priests
and Levites: and an other for the people.] Ver. 14. They shall bring forth [ vz.
through Gods blessing and great goodnes] fruit [ i. abundaunce and store of
fruite] in their age [ i. even in their old age. q.d. although they be never
so old, yet they shall not be barren, but shall plentifully yield forth
fruits of righteousness, being watered thereto, through the working of the
spirit, what these fruits are, he shows in the next verse] they shall be fat
and flourishing [vnder these metaphores, he means that they shall be not only
in good liking, but courageous, and apt, to all good 15. To declare [ vz.
abroad, in every place and to all men] that the Lord my rock [ i. that the
Lord, who is my sure defense: see Psalm. 18.2.] is righteous [ vz. in all his
ways, and namely when he blesses the good, and powers vengeance upon the
vngodly] and that no iniquity [ vz. at all] is in him [ vz. either in respect
of his being or doings, so that he shows that this is one excellent fruit,
which the godly yield, to confess gods justice, and righteousness.

1. Teaches us that it is profitable even for us, to praise GOD for his mercy
and might. Ver. 2. Teaches us to yield thanksgiving continually unto God.
Ver. 3. Teaches us to use all lawful means to enforce our selves to that,
whereunto we are so dull and backwarde. Ver. 4. Teaches us that even the very
beholding and consideration of Gods works, ministers great joy unto many of
Gods children. Ver. 5. Teaches two things, first the excellent majesty of
God, which in some measure appears in his works: secondly that Gods
judgments and ways are a bottomless depth unto man. Ver. 6. Teaches that
the wicked have very little or no regard at al of Gods judgments, works, or
words.] Ver. 7. Teaches two things, first that the wicked and ungodly have in
this life great prosperity: secondly that they shall come to a perpetual and
sudden destruction. Ver. 8. Teaches that though man be weak and wavering,
yet the Lord is full of power and always like unto himself. Ver. 9. Shows
not only what great plagues shall fall upon the enemies of God and his truth,
but also how assuredly they shall fall upon them. Ver. 10. Teaches that
howsoever God punishes ye wicked, yet he will remember his own with an
everlasting mercy. Ver. 11. Shows that God will execute judgments upon the
wicked, to the end the godly may be strengthened, in the assured persuasions
which they have in the truth of his promises. Verse 12. Sets out the
glorious and prosperous estate of the faithful. Verse 13. Teaches that it is
a good thing, to join our selves to ye assemblies of Gods Saints, for there is
the place of all godly and plentiful fruits. Ver. 14. Teaches that Gods
children are not void of the fruits of faith. Ver. 15. Teaches that this is
one excellent fruit of faith, vz. to set out and praise the strength, power,
goodness, and justice of almighty God.

Psalm 93
THe faithful in this Psalm, 3.4. thirdly of the singular regard

This Psalm has no title, and of this sort are Psalm. 1.2.10. 1. The Lord
reigns [ vz. over all the earth, but specially amongst his own people: and
that not only in ruling and governing the course of nature, but specially by
his doctrine, and word: so you shall see the word reigning taken. Psalm. 96.
verse 10. Psalm. 97.1. Psalm 99.1.] and is clothed with majesty [ i. decked
with great glory, which by effect is declared in every place, maintaining
mankind, with a wonderful power, justice and wisdom, yet we must note,
that this word clothed, signifies not any thing that comes from an other to
him, for he has the fullness of all things in his own power and possession,
but he speaks in this and the next verse following of GOD, according to the
manner of earthly Kings, who bear rule amongst men, and for their great
majesty are clothed with the most costly apparel and rich iewels] the Lord is
clothed and girded with power [ vz. both to withstand his enemies, and defend
his children, he means by the word clothing, that the Lord has power
continually with him as a garment: and by the word, girding, that he has it
on every side, and in a readiness, to make it manifest, as pleases him] the
world also [ vz. which he has created and made, understanding thereby al
things in the world whatsoeuer] shall be established [ i. preserved and
maintained in the right government thereof, though men labor to disturb it]
that it can not be moved [ vz. by any thing, that man can imagine or do
against it, he commends in this verse Gods great power, which has so
established the earth, and all things therein, that men can not so much as
shake the 2. Thy throne [ i. thy kingdom and the government thereof. See Psalm.
89.4. putting a part of the kingdom for the kingdom and government it selfe]
is established of old [ i. was not only settled the^, but has from that time
hitherto endured, and so shall for ever and ever, and that word which we term
of old, is in Hebrewe, before them [ i. before there was any certain or set
time, of which men might pronounce this word, then: see Proverb. 8.22.] thou
art from everlasting [ vz. and so shall continue for ever and ever.] 3. The
floods [ i. all floods of the seas and waters] have lifted up their voice [
i. have made a great noise, as men do when they enforce themselves to speak
or sing loud, some understand by this manner of speech: the enemies, who with
great violence did break in upon gods people, as the sea and floods do, when
they gain upon the land: but this in my judgment, is the more simple sense,
that he means, that though the noise of the floods and sea [vnderstanding
thereby, if you will, all the hurliburlies of the earth] be very great and
forcible, yea evident testimonies of Gods power and might, yet if they be
compared with Gods own majesty and might, they are as much as nothing: and
this sense is confirmed by that which follows in the next verse] the floods
lift up their waves [ vz. and make a great and fearful noise: and this
expounds 4. The waves of the sea are marvelous [ vz. considered in
themselves, if a man mark their goinges, greatness, and the noise of them, but
yet more marvelous are they, in the respects before alleadged] through the
noise of many waters [ vz. which fall into them and ioyn with them, see Ecclesi.
1.7. and so by that means the waves and noise of the floodes are greater] yet
the Lord on high [ vz. in heauen] is more mighty [ vz. then them al as who has
the ordering, disposing, and governing of them al, at his good pleasure, q.d.
though it be true, that the sea and floods make a great noise, and so express
a great power, yet that is nothing if they be compared to God, by whose
appointment they do that which 5. Thy testimonies [ i. thy word, and all
things therein contained, as Psalm. 19.7. specially thy promises made unto thy
seruants] are very sure [ vz. so that they can not be altered at any time, or
by any way] holiness [ i. thy holiness, or such holiness, as thou both appointest
and giuest] becomes thine house [ i. adorneth and beautifieth thy Church and
congregation] for ever [ i. continually.]

1. Teaches sundry things, first Gods great power and majesty, the
consideration whereof is terrible to the wicked, and comfortable to his
children, secondly it sets out, not only the great care that God has over
the earth, and the things therein so that they can not be shaken, but also, how
little, or nothing at all man's Counsel can prevail, to hurt, or hinder, much
less to undo any thing that the Lord will have to remain steadfast and sure.
Ver. 2. Sets out the eternity and euerlastingnes of almighty God. Ver. 3.
Teaches that the very creatures may manifest unto us some part and piece of
Gods excellencye and power, the same thing does Verse 4. Teach, but yet so,
that it shows further, that all that we can behold in them, is not so much
as a shadow, to the truth, if it be compared with the Creator himself.
Verse 5. Is comfortable to the consciences of the godly, because it assures
them of the certainty of Gods word and promises, also it shows, that the
holiness of Gods Church is from GOD himself, and not from the Church.

Psalm 94
THis Psalm in my judgment may very aptly be divided into two parts. 1. to
the end of the 11. In the second part he does especially show, in what a good
and blessed case they are whose God is the Lord, interlasing notwithstanding
the attempts of the wicked, all which the Lord will for his peoples sake,
frustrate and bring to naught, and this reaches from ver. 12. to the end of
the Psalm.

This Psalm, is without title, as the Psalm next going before is,
95.96.97.99. Ver. 1. O Lord GOD, the auenger, O God the auenger [ i. O God, to
whom alone, it belongs to punish the wicked, Roman. 12.19.] show thy self
clearly [ i. openly manifest thy power and might, by punishing the wicked, and
defending the good, See Deutron. 33.2. q.d. punish the ungodly openly and in
the sight of all men.] Verse 2. Exalt thy self [ i. do not only show thy
self unto the ungodly, q.d. lift up thy self, not only above them, but
oppose and set thy self in thy power and might against them] O Judge of the
world [ i. O thou, to whom the judgment of al men and matter appertain: See
Genesis 18.25. Psalm 82.7.] Render a reward to the proud [ vz. for their
pride against thee and men. q.d. pay them home, and punish them, for that they
have proudlye set themselves against thee and thy people.] Verse 3. Lord how
long shall the wicked [this he speaks vz. in their pride and mirth, against
thee and thy people: and by this manner of speech he means a certain kind
of gladness, full of outrage and boasting, 4. They prate [ vz. with an open
and full mouth, not being ashamed of their speaches] and speak [ vz. rashly,
and that without any fear of thy majesty, or modesty toward men] fearcely [
i. not only rough and hard things, but proudly and presumptuously, See 1.
Samuel 2.3.] all the workers of iniquity [ i. all they that give over
themselves to commit sin with greedinesse] vaunt them selves [ vz. in
themselves and their transgressions, making that 5. They smite down [ vz by
their force and might, and that unto the ground: meaning by this speech, all
manner of affliction, that the wicked lay upon them] thy people [ i. that
people, whom thou have chosen for thine owne] and trouble [ vz. very much,
with sundry sorts of crosses and afflictions] thine heritage [ i. that people,
whom thou have chosen to be a peculiar inheritance unto thy self, See
Psalm. 28.9.] 6. They slay [ vz. through extortion, ravening, and violence] the
widow and the stranger [ i. all manner of persons, that even in courtesy
should be fauoured] and murder [ vz. cruellye, and without any remourse of
conscience, or tenderness of heart] the fatherles [ i. them that be destitute
of help and comfort. See Hosea. 14.3. q.d. they in their cruelty and rage
spare none.] Ver. 7. Yet. q.d. for all this wickedness that they commit] they
say [ vz. not so much in their words, as in their persuasion and by their
factes: See Psalm. 14.1. He means that without any check or controlement,
of their own hearts, or words, they gave themselves over to commit evil,
casting behind them the fear of God, and persuading themselves, that he
regarded not things done upon the earth] the Lord shall not see [ vz. the
iniquity and sin, that we commit against him: q.d. we have means to bleare
his eyes, and to stop up his sight] neither will the God of Iaakob regard it [
q.d. he will make no great account of our transgressions: so the wicked are
carried away into sin, persuading 8. Understand [ vz. how far, ye go
astray, and deceive your selves. q.d. now at the length, be of a better
mynde] ye unwise [ i. ye wicked and ungodly men, as Psalm. 92.6.] among the
people [hee means by this speech, not only that they committed sin in the
sight of the people, but were, as a man would say, the ringleaders of the
rest] and ye fools [ i. O ye wicked people, as generally you shall have that
word so used, throughout the Proverbs, when will ye be wise [ i. when will
ye return, and be of a better mind, for that is true 9. He that planted
the ear [ vz. in the head and that place of the head, meaning thereby the
creating and making of it] shall he not hear? [ q.d. it can not be, but he
must needs heare] or he that formed the eye [ i. he that not only gave
shape but substance also and being unto it] shall he not see? [ q.d. it can
not be avoided but he must needs see, and therefore that is a vain
persuasion which you have, to think that he does not behold and mark your
words and deeds, and this is a reason taken from the very order of nature.
q.d. if GOD give men power to hear and see, can any thing then be hidden from
him, as you suppose? no in deed See such a like argument used Exodus 4.11.]
Verse 10. Or he that chastises vz. with his punishments and iudgments] the
nations [ i. whole peoples, countries, yea and the whole world, as in the
general flood] shall he not correct [ vz. you and that with the same or like
punishments] q.d. you may assure your selves, that he will come upon you, in
severe justice and judgment. And this is an argument taken from the more to
the less. q.d. if GOD chastise and correct all people, without partialty or
respect of persons, will he leave some few men unpunished, no in deed] he that
teaches man [ i. all mankind, and every man that has any thing] knowledge [
i. any knowledge, or understanding that he hath] shall not he know? [ vz.
the sins and iniquyties which you commit against him, either openly, or
secretlye. q.d. assure 11. The Lord [ q.d. whatsoever you imagine, yet this is
certain that hee] knows [ i. hears, sees, corrects, yea and pronounces
judgment of] the thoughts of man [ i. not only the things that man thinks,
but also the words he speaks, and the works he does, putting thought
which is the beginning of every thing, for the pursuit and perfourmaunce of
the things themselues] that they are vanitye [ i. that they are vain and
shall come to no end, as by the judgment which he will execute upon them
shall appear.] Verse 12. i. certainly he is in good case howsoever the world
deem of him. And mark, how after he had reproved the wicked, he comes to
comfort the good] whom thou chastisest [ vz. for a small while, and that
either by the ministry of wicked and ungodly men, as verse 5. and 6. of this
Psalm. or else by thine own hand, and crosses of tryall] and teach him, [
vz. to walk [in thy law [ i. according to the rules prescribed in the same.]
Verse 13. That thou may give him rest [ vz. after some short and small 30.5.
understanding by rest, deliverance, from all dangers, and distresses, and
peace, after the same deliueraunce] from the days of evil [ i. from the time
wherein he was exercised with affliction and aduersitie] while the pit is
dug for the wicked [ i. not only while the ungodly is afflicted, as though
he meant that the good being delivered the ungodly should be punished in this
life, but also, death and destruction from the Lord, is prepared for them, and
comes upon them. See 2. Thessalonians 1. ver. 5.6.7. Understanding by pit,
death and destruction, 14. Surely the Lord will not fail his people [ i.
deceive, or disappoint them in any thing] neither will he forsake his
inheritance [ vz. utterly or for ever, he here labors to stay the
faithful upon the assured love and truth 15. for judgment [ i. Gods
judgments which in this world, is rather executed upon the good then upon
the badde] shall return to justice [ i. shall be brought to full and assured
justice every man having yielded to him his right, vz. affliction to them that
afflict, and to the afflicted Gods kingdom for which they suffer. See 2.
Thessalonians 16.7.8. not as though Gods judgments executed in this life were
unjust, for he is just in all his works, and holy in all his ways, but
because we have in this life, but the beginning of them, and in the great day
the full measure of justice shall be made manifest] and all the upright in heart
[ i. all that are soundly and sincerely, without hypocrisy given to
godlinesse] shall follow after it [ vz. chearefully, meaning by the word
following, not only the approving of it, but also a holy desire to see and
embrace the same.] 16. Who will rise up with me [ i. for mee] against the
wicked [hee means that none would defend him and his cause against the
wicked] or who will take my part against the workers of iniquity [ q.d. none
save God only, by this the Prophet shows in his own example, that unless
GOD had helped him, he had been utterly cast away, so much was he despised
17. If the Lord had not helped me [ vz. in the time of my distress and
fear: by the word, helped, he means plentiful help and deliueraunce] my
soul had almost dwelt in silence [ i. I should have been dead and buried,
he puts the word, soul, for life, as sundry times before, and dwelling in
silence for lying in the grave, which is called the place of silence, not only
because the dead have no feeling, force, speaking, etc, but also because they
have no power as then to praise GOD. See Psalm 6.5. also Psalm 115.17. and by
the word, almost, he means not that he should have escaped death, but
that he should shortly have dyed.] 18. When I said [ vz. either in words,
or thought in my heart, that which followeth] my foot slydeth [ i. I am come
now into some one danger or other, and I seem thereby to be cast away, and
even at deaths door as it were. If any man list to to take it of small
dangers, because slyding or slipping of the foot, is no great matter, I will
not gainesay it] thy mercy, O Lord, stayed me [ vz. from falling, either
into danger or peril of 19. In the multitude of my thoughts in my heart [ i.
while I did secretly and within my self think upon many things, he calls
these perilous and doubtful cares which he had in his thoughts, which no
doubt would have overwhelmed him, if the comfortes of God, of which he
speaks afterward had not refreshed him] thy comfortes [ i. those comfortes
that by thy spirit I receive, from thy nature and worde] have rejoiced [ i.
have caused to rejoice, or have made glade] my soul [ i. my life, and whole
man, distressed with sundry sorts of heauinesses.] 20. Has the throne of
iniquity [ i. has unjust judgment and sentence, he puts a wicked place,
for wicked matter and judgment pronounced out of that place] fellowshippe with
thee [ i. do thou judge unjustly, as wicked judges do. See Gene. 18.25.]
which forgeth wrong for a law [ i. which deuiseth, frames, and performs
cruelty, as though it were right, and according to the law and justice, and
mark that he calls it the throne of iniquity, both because unjust men sit
there, and unjust sentences are pronounced there, the whole verse together is.
q.d. thou in thy dealings O Lord, have nothing common with unjust judgment
seats, with unjust judges, or unjust sentences, all which do nothing else,
but oppress other men with injury and wrong, and that many times under the
pretense of law and right.] Ver. 21. They [ i. the wicked and vngodly] gather
them together vz. in troops, and great companies, and all to take counsell]
against the soul of the righteous [ i. against the life of the good man, how
they may take it away from him, and spoil him of all that he hath] and condemn
[ vz. unjustly and without cause] the innocent blood [ i. the man that has
done them no harm, putting blood a part of man, for man himself, and his
whole life.] Verse 22. q.d. notwithstanding the mischievous malice of the
ungodly mentioned verse 21. yea the rather for that] is my refuge [ i. a sure
place whereunto I will flee, to be preserved from mine enemies] and my God [
i. he that has always showed himself careful for me, and gracious to mee]
is the rock of my hope [ i. is the sure stay and foundation of the hope that I
have: q.d. I assuredly stay my self in none but in him alone.] Ver. 23. And
vz. which they have committed against him and others: meaning by this manner of
speech that he will give them the wages and hire which is due to so great
transgression] and destroy them [ i. utterly overthrow them and bring them to
naught] in their own malice [ i. in the mischief and evil, that they have
devised against the good: meaning that their evil devises shall fall upon
their own heads, and they shall be taken in the mischiefs, wherein they
thought to intrappe the good] yea the Lord our God shall destroy them [ q.d.
he will certainly destroy them, and that by his great and sudden judgments:
the repeating of the same words, notes nothing else, but the assured
persuasion of the faithful, and the certain destruction of the wicked.

Verse 1. Teaches that it is comfortable to Gods children, 2. Teaches that
we may safely pray, against the malicious and insolent enemies of Gods
truth. Verse 3. Teaches us not to be dismayed, though the wicked prevail
much and long, neither to prescribe GOD a time of deliverance, but with
patience to bear, and by earnest prayer to labor the removing of those
crosses and trials. Verse 4. Describes the proud and cruel both words and
gestures of the ungodly. Verse 5. Sets out their cruel and outrageous
deeds against Gods servants. Verse 6. Shows that they grow to such a height
and hard heartednes and cruelty, that they pity not them, whom nature and
courtesy would show compassion to. Verse 7. Shows not only that the
ungodly flatter themselves in their sins, but also that they imagine, that
either God will not behold their iniquity, or if he do, that he will not
greatly regard to punish them for it. Verse 8. Teaches us to have a care to
instruct, even those that are most desperately wicked. Verse 9. Teaches us
that nothing, that we do or speak, can be hid from Gods eyes or ear. Verse
10. Teaches us that God is no respecter of persons, and that therefore we
should not flatter our selves, as though he would forbear us. Verse 11.
Teaches that man and all his devises are nothing in respect of the Lord.
Verse 12. Teaches that Gods corrections, are to Gods children seals of his
blessing upon them: also that this is a singular benefit, to have Gods will
and word made manifest unto us. Verse 13. Shows two things, first that GOD
will deliver his out of all their distresses: Secondly, that the wicked shall
be overtaken, in the mischiefs of their own hearts. Verse 14. Teaches that
how slippery or inconstant soever, man be to man, yet GOD is always fast and
sure to those that are his. Verse 15. Teaches that howsoever GOD seem for a
time to defer the execution of full and perfect judgment, yet he will in
the end perform it in deed, and the godly shall rejoice therein. Verse 16.
Teaches that the number of those which boldly defend Gods servants is very
small. Ver. 17. Teaches that unless God keep us, every step that we step
is a step unto death. Verse 18. Is very comfortable, teaching us that GOD is
always present with his, to preserve them from all evil. Ver. 19. Teaches
that nothing can more glad men in this life, in the midst of their
heauinesses, then to have an eye to the comfortes which GOD has set down in
his word. Verse 20. Sets out the uprightness of GOD, and of all his
judgments, so that though men be never so corrupt, yet he is always just and
holy in all his works. Verse 21. Paynteth out, the conspiracye and crueltye of
the wicked against the godly. Verse 22. Teaches us in the midst of all these
mischiefs to hang upon the Lord only, by an assured and steadfast faith.
Verse 23. Sets out the certaintye of that destruction and judgment of the
ungodly, with which they shall be overtaken from the Lord.

Psalm 95.
vz. for the government of the world, which is general, and for the choosing
of his Church which is particular. Verse 3.4.5.7. In the third part, the
better to bring them unto the 8. to the end of the Psalm.

Though this Psalm have no title, yet it appears, Hebre. 4.7. David was the
author thereof and did write it.] Ver. 1. Come [these are the words of the
Prophet exhorting others with him to praise the Lord, See Isaiah. 2.3.] let us
rejoice [ vz. together, and that from the heart singing praises: by which the
Prophet shows, that the outward service of God consists not, in dead
ceremonies but especially in the sacrifices of praises and thankesgiuing] unto
the Lord [ vz. our God] let us sing aloude [ i. with a clear and high voice,
even as if it were with a trumpet] unto the rock of our salvation [ i. unto
him yt is the assured groundwork and foundation, as it were of our delivery,
meaning by this speech god who is unto his people, in steed of a rock of
defense, and delivery, 2. Let us come [ vz. quickly, and chearefully] before
his face [ i. not only into his presence (for men can be in no place, but
they are in his sight) but also to the tabernacle of witness, in which place,
the Lord gave glorious testimonies of his presence and fauor] with praise [ i.
with songs containing his praise for the benefits which we daily receceiue 1.
of this Psalm.] unto him [ vz. alone, and to none other but him] with Psalms [
vz. containing his praises, and our thanksgiving, for the blessings which he
continually bestows upon us.] Ver. 3. For the Lord [ vz. which we serve, and
who gives us these graces] is a great God [ i. is the God of al power and
might, who has both will and strength, to do what soever pleases him] and a
great king above al Gods [ i. he is more mighty and excellent then any thing,
or all the things, that have the name of god given unto it whether they be
Angels, or idols, or magistrates, to all which, Gods name is attributed in one
respect or other in the Scripture, see Psalm. 82.1. Psalm. 86.8. Psalm. 89.6.
Ioh. 10.34.35. 1. Cor. 8.5.] Ver. 4. In whose hand [ i. under whose power, i.
the most high mou^tains are his [ vz. to guide and govern the^, as him likes
best: q.d. God according to his good pleasure rules, both the most secret and
the most mighty things, 5. To whom the sea belongs [ vz. to be guided and
governed according to his will] for he made it [ vz. by gathering the waters
together into one place, see Gene. 1.9.10.] and his hands formed [ i. his
almighty power, gave form, and being to the earth] the dry land [ i. that part
of the earth, which is dry, and separated from the water: which he calls
dry 6. Come [ vz. together with me, see ver. 1. of this Psalm] let us worship
[ vz. by all the means we can, this Lord our God] and fall down [the word
signifies to bow the head to the earth, as they were wont to do which
received either a blessing, or some good turn from others: q.d. let us by all
means testify the hu^bling of us before god: which also he means by the
word, kneeling, afterward put downe] before the Lord our maker [ i. he that
has made us. This word, maker, containing a double argument, to move men to
his worship and service: the one taken from Gods excellency, who is the
creator: and the other from our baseness, who are his workmanship, made of
the dust of the earth, Gene. 3.19.] Verse 7. vz. alone, and no other but hee]
is our God [ i. our vpholder, maintainer, and defender, and therefore good
cause we have to serve him] and we are the people of his pasture [ i. such a
people as he with a special and fatherlye care nourishes and defends, and
to whom he gives all sorts of blessings. True it is that this word, sheep,
should agree better to pasture, but yet the holy ghost has used the word,
people, that he might the better expound the metaphor] and the sheep of his
hand [ i. the tender ones (for so are sheep) which he guides and governs,
by his Fatherly providence and power: meaning also by that word, his, that GOD
himself takes care over them, and commits them not to an other.] To day,
if ye will hear his voice [ vz. speaking unto you out of his word: q.d. If
ye mind as yet to yield obedience unto his truth, then harden not your
hearts, as follows in the next 8. Harden not your hearts [ i. be not
obstinate and settled in your sin, by this word, he generally means, al
contempt offered to Gods word] as [ vz. your fathers, and ancestors did many
times striving against God and namely] in Meribah [this history is largely
handled. Number. 14.] and as in the day of Massah [this history is put down, Exodus
17. See also Numb. 20. and confer all these three chapters together, for
though it should seem out of Exodus 17. ver. 7. that Massah, and Meribah, were
al one place, yet by comparison of the chapters, and the matters together we
shall find, that they tempted the Lord more then once, and more then in one
place] in the wilderness [the holy ghost observes these circumstances of
place, time, persons, manner of doing, etc. for ye certainty of the history.]
Ver. 9. Where i. not only in the wilderness, though that were a principal place
but in the other places also] your fathers [ i. your ancestors and
progenitors, of whose stock you come, see Psalm. 78.3.] tempted me [ i. would
have more experience and trial of my power, then I thought meet and good for
them] and proved me [ vz. what I could do, through my power and might] though
they had seen my work [ vz. which I did before them, and in their sight:
understanding by the word, work, in the singular number, manifold works: q.d.
although they had had sufficient testimonies of my power and might, and knew
well enough what I was able to do, yet 10. Forty years [ vz. long and
together] have I contended [ vz. striuen by diverse punishments, yea death it
self, as appears Numb. 14.33. and yet have nothing profited or preuailed]
with this generation [I will rather read, that, noting the rebellious people,
which perished in the wildernesse] and [ vz. I haue] said [ vz. by reason of
their continual wickednesse] they are a people [ i. such a people] that err
in heart [ i. not only without judgment and reason, but also outragiously
following sin and vngodlinesse] for they have not known [ i. neither allowed
loved, nor walked in] my ways [ i. either my doctrine and law, or the known
miracles which I have done for their sakes.] Verse 11. Wherefore [ vz. by vz.
unto them: q.d. I tied my self by the virtue of an oth] in my wrath [ vz.
against them, he means by this speech, being angry with them] saying [ vz. in
such sort, that they might both hear it and know it] surely they [ i. this
wicked and rebellious people] shall not enter [ vz. at all] into my rest [ i.
into the land of Canaan, where they should rest after their long trauayles: and
he calls it Gods rest, both because God promised it, and also after forty
years, by the ministry of Iehoshua performed it: under which David meant that
there was another rest signified and prepared for Gods people, see Heb. 4. ver.
8.9.

Verse 1 teaches us not only to praise God our selves, 2 teach us to yield
praise unto him, publicly, chearefully, and with an unfeigned heart. Ver. 3
teaches that none in heaven or earth, no not all of them together, are in any
respect to be compared with the God whom the faithful serve. Ver. 4.5. teach
that Gods power and providence govern all things whatsoever in heaven, earth,
the water, etc. Ver. 6. teach us with all outward reverence, to humble our
selves in prayers and thanksgiving unto the Lord. Ver. 7. teaches us two
things: first that in respect of God, and of our selves, we ought to yield him
service and obedience: secondlye that when he speaks unto us out of his
word, we ought with reverence to harken unto the same.] Verse 8. teaches us,
to cast away and to purge from us al hard hartednesse and obstinacy when God
speaks unto us: it teaches also to set before us the example of other men's
wickedness, and Gods justice upon them for the same, that we may learn in the
sight of them to avoid them. Ver. 9. teaches that it is not always safe and
good to follow the steps of our forefathers, also that the more works God
shows of his power and providence, the more we should have our faith
strengthened in the truth of his promises, not demanding every day new
miracles for the strengthening of our faith. Verse 10. teaches us, that God
bears long with a people before he punishes them: Also, that he uses many
means to bring men to amendmente, if it would be. Verse 11 teaches us that
sin and rebellion against God, shuts us utterly out of the heavenly
kingdom.

Psalm 96.
TRue it is that this Psalm does cheefely contain an exhortation directed to
the people, 1.2.3. In the second he shows causes wherefore they should do
it, verse 4.5.6. In the third he does again (because men are dull) provoke
them to that duty of praising God, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. In the fourth he
desires, or rather indeed prophecieth of the good things and blessings that
the godly shall have, from verse 11. to the end of the Psalm.

1. Chronic. 16. from verse 23. to the end of the 33. verse.] Verse 1. Sing [
vz. with heart and voyce] unto the Lord [ vz. our good and gracious God] a new
song [ i. not only new in respect of making, but an exquisite one, and more
then a common song, by reason not only of a new grace showed us from God, but
one that is more then accustomed, yea extraordinary: see Psalm 33, 3.] sing
unto the Lord [vndersta^d it as before, in the beginning of this verse] all the
earth [ i. all the people inhabiting the earth: meaning specially the people of
the Jews, understanding 2. Sing unto the Lord [expound this as it was
expounded before ver. 1. of this Psalm.] and praise his name [ i. set forth his
majesty, power, etc. (as Psalm 20, 1.) with songs of praise and thanksgiuing]
declare [ vz. in your songs, and with your words] his salvation [ i. the
gracious deliverance which he performs for his people] from day to day [ i.
continually and without ceasing, as ye day never cease. True it is yt god
never cease to pour upon us new and continual benefits, but yet the meaning
of the Prophet is not in this place to set forth that, but to show rather ye
faithful, 3. Declare [ vz. by your words and deeds] his glory [ i. the things
which he has don for you, getting there by glory unto himselfe] among al
nations [ vz. of the earth, meaning that the people of the Jews should
travail what in the^ lay to make known his works even to the Gentils] and his
wonders [ vz. which he has done for you, and vz. of the whole world: q.d.
sound and send them abroad, that other may hear the same and fear.] Ver. 4.
For the Lord is great [ vz. in strength, might and power] and much to be
praised [ vz. of all men, but specially of his own children and servant, for
the graces he bestows upon them] he is to be feared [ vz. with a reverent and
holy feare] above al Gods [ i. more then all the idols of the Gentiles, for of
them he speaks 5 for all the Gods of the people [ i. all those things which
the people esteem as Gods, but yet are not so in deed, as appears 1. Cor.
8.5. and Psalm. 115.4.5. etc.] are idols [ i. vanities and matters of nothing,
as appears 1. Corinthians. 8, 4. whereof also in this place, and Leuit. 19.4.
they have their names, as the etymology of the Hebrew word very well
declareth] but the Lord [ vz. our God, which we serue] made [ vz. in the
beginning, and that of nothing] the heavens [ i. al things whatsoever, heaven,
earth, etc. putting one part of the creation 6. strength [ vz. to strike his
enemies, and to defend his own people] and glory [ vz. for those whom he loves
and liketh] are before him [ i. are continually in his sight, and in a
readiness at his commandment as it were to go whether soever it pleases
him] power and beauty [ vz. most excellent and glorious] are in his sanctuary [
i. in the place of his abode and worship, the Prophet means as I take it,
that though the Lord manifest his great power and glory in many places, yet
specially do they appear in his sanctuary or Tabernacle.] Verse 7. Give unto
the Lord [ vz. only, and to none other but him] vz. of God: the Prophet
speaking this according to the custom of the Jews, who were divided first
into tribes, and then into families, Iehoshua 7.17.18. 1. Sam. 9.21. which
makes me also to dissent from Immanuel, who refers it generally to al
people of the earth: which also is confuted by that which follows in this
Psalm ver. 10. where they are commanded to speak to the Gentils] give unto the
Lord [ vz. only as before] glory and power [ i. al glory and power, for unto
him only it is due, see Psalm. 115. verse 1.] 8. Give unto the Lord the glory of
his name [ i. that glory and honor which is due and meet for his name: q.d.
Strive to glorify God, as much as in you lies, even according to his
excellency] bring an offering [ vz. unto him, in token that you do unfeignedly
worship and serve him: this and that which follows, he speaks according
unto the law, by which the people were appointed to perform these things] and
enter into his Courts [ vz. to praise, serve and worship him. For this word
Courts, see Psalm 84. verse 2.10.] Verse 9, vz. according to the rule of his
word] the Lord [ vz. only, as many times before] in the glorious sanctuary [
i. in the Tabernacle of witness, where his glory appears most liuely]
tremble before him [ vz. in token of a loving and reuerente feare] all the
earth [see verse 1. of this Psalm.] Verse 10. Say [ i. speak aloude, declare
and publish that which followeth] among i. the other peoples of the world,
meaning thereby the Gentiles] The Lord reigns [see Psalm 93.1.] surely the
world shall be stable [ i. the whole earth and the people therein, shall
continue in good order and peace, though the wicked labor to disturb the
same. He notes this as an excellent fruit of Gods gouernmente] and not move [
vz. for all that the wicked can imagine or do, and note that this amplyfying by
the contrary, as that on the one side it shall be stable, and on the other side
it shall not move, serves for the greater certayntye and assurance thereof:
as John 1, 20. Romans 9.1. 1. Timothy 2.7.] and she shall judge the people [
i. govern and guide them, putting one part of gouernmente for the whole] in
righteousness [ i. vprightlye and iustlye, without any partiality or respect
of persons, or without fear, favor, or flatterye.] Verse 11. Let the heavens
rejoice [some read q.d. This grace of GOD is so great, that even the dumb
creatures, have thereby an occasion offered them as it were to rejoice and be
glad, take whether of these senses you shall think good, yet for mine own
part I allow rather the latter, because of that which follows, Psalm
98.7.8. Which also Immanuel turns as exhorting the creatures to rejoice in
it, though he do not so in this place] let the heavens rejoice [ vz. for this
great goodness of god ruling and gouerning] and let the earth be glad [ vz.
for the same occasion] let the sea roar [ vz. in token and testimonye of
reioycing] and all that therein is i. every thing that lives and moves in the
same.] Verse 12. Let the field [ i. the fields: putting one for many, as
Psalm 95.9. work, is put for workes] be joyful [ vz. for the causes before
alleaged] and all that is in it [ i. whatsoever grows and flourishes in the
same fieldes] let all the Trees of the Wood [ i. al trees of what kind soever
that grows in the Woods] then rejoice [ vz. when the Lord shall begin this
government: here for the better understanding of this of these two verses, we
are specially to mark these two things: first that the Prophet lays not
this duty upon the insensible creatures, otherwise then they in their kind
are able to perform it, and to no other end but that thereby he may provoke
men, who have the use of reason, and the light of the word, to do the same.
Secondly that he lays it not only upon them whom he here names: but that by
these which he puts down, he understands 13. Before the Lord [ i. in his
presence and openly: for this as plainly appears, must be joined to the end
of the other verse] for he comes, for he comes [ i. he will certainly come,
the certainty is noted not only in the doubling of the word, but also in that
he says, he comes, as though he were already present, putting the present
tense for the future] to judge [ i. to rule and govern, as before verse 10. of
this Psalm.] the earth [ i. the people inhabiting the earth] he will judge [
q.d. howsoever others rule yet he will gouerne] the world [ i. the people of
the world, both great and smal] with righteousness [ i. uprightly and justly,
as ver. 10 of this Psalm.] and the people in his truth [ i. in exactness and
perfection of truth and uprightness, for that word, his, has a force in this
place, as discerning between men and him, how truly and uprightly soever they
deal.

1. teaches us to strive what in us lies, to make our praises aunswerable to
Gods graces, though in deed we can not perform the same. Verse 2. teaches us
that our praises and speakinges of his glory ought to be continual. Verse 3
teaches us that we should publish it before al men and in all places. Verse 4.
Sets out the excellent power, glory, and majesty of the Lord our God. Verse
5 paynteth out the vanity and unprofitableness of all counterfeyte Gods and
idols. Verse 6 teaches that all honor, glory, strength, etc. are due only to
the Lord. Ver. 7 teaches the faithful to ascribe also and yield unto him the
same, seeing they belong to him, and to none other but to him. Verse 8 teaches
Gods people, carefullye to exercise themselves in the service and worship of
him that is so gracious a God to them. Verse 9 teaches us not only to
frequent the places of public exercises, but also there and every where to
show forth assured testimonies of a reverent fear that we carry to his
Majesty. Verse 10 teaches us to have a care to publish Gods government
amongst others, that they also may be subjected to the same. It teaches us
further that the ungodly can not, unless the Lord so appoint it, make any
hurliburlies or stirs in the World. Verse 11.12. teach us in the example of
insensible creatures to show our selves thankful to God, for all his graces,
and namelye for his excellent government and providence. Verse 13 teaches that
howsoever men be corrupted in their judgments and government, yet God is not,
see Psalm. 94. verse 20.

Psalm 97
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1 to the end of the sixte. In the
second is declared that this power of his is terrible to the 7 to the end of
the Psalm.

This Psalm has no Title (as sundry both before it and after it have not
likewise) and therefore we cannot determine, either who was the Author of it,
1. The Lord reigns [see Psalm 93.1.] let i. people inhabiting the earth, as
Psalm 96.1. q.d. Let the people be exceedingly glad, even in that respect,
that the Lords power bears a sway] Let the multitude of the Isles [ i. the
multitude of people inhabyting the Ilandes] be glad [ vz. for the same cause,
and occasion.] Ver. 2. Clouds i. most fearful and terrible majesty and
power, see Psalm 18.11. And he does thus describe God, that he might more
lively touch men's hearts to yield him reverence and honour] are round about him
[ i. compass him in on every side, meaning that he has both plenty of them
and in a readiness also to perform whatsoever pleases him] righteousness [
i. all uprightness and equitie] and judgment [ i. true and right judgment,
and this the holy Ghost adds as it were to prevent that which the wicked
might object, as though gods power and majesty were full of iniustice] are the
foundation of his throne [ i. are so tied to his kingdom, that they can no more
be separated from his kingdom, then the foundation of his building.
Understanding by throne the sign of a 3. There shall go a fire before him [he
understands by the word fire the wrath and vengeance of God] and burn up
his enemies round about [ i. it shall utterly consume those that set
themselves against him, and that on every side, before him and behind him on
the left hand, and on the right hand, so that none shall escape.] 4. His
lightninges [ i. the lightnings that come from him, and are sent by his
appoyntment] gave light unto the world [ i. were so great that all the World
might see them] the earth [ i. the people dwelling on the earth] saw [ vz.
with their bodilye eyes and sensiblye] it [ i. those lightninges, one number
put for an other] and was afraid [ vz. of his great power and majesty which
appeared therein. By this and the third verse before going, and the next
verse following it, the holy Ghost myndeth nothing but to show the greatness
of almightye Gods power, in so much that nothing though it be never so 5. The
Mountains [ vz. though they were never so great, strong and mighty] melted
like wax [ vz. held against the fire, or the heat of the Sun. He means
by this Metaphor that they quickly consumed] at the presence of the Lord [ i.
so soon as the Lord gave some show of his presence or maiestie] at the
presence of the Lord of the whole earth [ i. of him that rules the earth and
all things therein 6. The Heavens declare his righteousness [ i. even those
things which are done in the Firmament, as fire, hayle, thunder, lightning,
the Lord thereby plaguing the wicked, do sufficientlye declare him to be
upright and just in all his wayes] and all the people [ vz. of the earth] see [
i. plainlye and sensiblye perceive, by the things done there] his glory [ i.
his great power and might. In this verse the Prophet minds to declare that
God is most glorious, manifest tokens of whose glory and justice appear in the
very heavens, and are set out before men's eyes to make them without excuse, see
19.1. Romans 1, 20.] Verse 7. Confounded [ vz. through the mighty power and
judgment of almightye GOD] be all they [ vz. of what state or condition
soever they be: q.d. let them be confounded and ouerthrowne] that serve [ vz.
any manner of way, or with any sort of worship] graven Images [ i. images or
pictures made, framed, and graven, by the hand, art, and cunning of man] and
that glory [ i. either boaste of, or speak of them, as to allow them any
manner of waye] in Idols [see before Psalm 96, 5. Leuiticus 19.4.] Worship [
vz. according to the prescripte rule of his worde] him [ vz. onelye] all ye
Gods [ i. not only mighty men and Magistrates of the world, but all things
that in the world is esteemed as God. The Prophet meaning that either they
should do it willinglye, and of a good mind, or else by constraynt and
inforcemente, because 8. Sion [ i. the Church, as Psalm 48.11.12.] heard [
vz. by thy works and by thy worde] of it [ vz. that goes before i. the
confusion and overthrow of the idolatrers] and was glad [ vz. for the just
execution of thy judgments upon them] and the Daughters of Judah [ i. not
only the Cittyes and Towns of that Land, in which sense, you shall sundry
times have the word, Daughters, taken, but the people inhabiting the same
places, meaning notwithstadding the particular members of the Church] rejoiced
[ i. were exceedinglye glad] because of thy judgments, O Lord [ vz. executed
upon the wicked, and ungodly by which also it has pleased thee to provide
for their deliverance and safety.] Verse 9. For thou Lord [ vz. i. art
greater in power and might then all things in the earth, because that they,
whatsoever they be are subject to thy authority and power] Thou art much
exalted [ vz. in thy justice and iudgementes] above all Gods [see Psalm 95,
3.] Verse 10. Ye that love the Lord [ vz. indeed, vnfeignedlye, and i.
detest and abhor from the bottom of your hearts: see Romans 12.9.] Evil [
i. whatsoever is sin and transgression before him, or inclining that way:
see 1. Thessalonians 5.22.] he preserves [ i. God mayntayneth, defends and
keepeth] the souls [ i the life and whole person] of his Saints [ i. of those
whom he has framed to holiness and inflamed with the love thereof] he will
deliver them [ i. set them safe and sounde] from the hand [ i. from the cruel
power and outrage] of the wicked [ vz. that seek to destroy them.] Verse 11.
Light [ i. joy, prosperity, and Ester 8, 16. as by the contrary, vz.
darkness, is signified myserye] is sown [ i. is prepared and laid up, and
yet lies hid as it were seed committed to the earth, which shall in good time
come forth, see Colossians 3.3.4. 1. Cor. 12.12.1. John. 3.2. The Metaphor that
he uses in this place is excellent: q.d. Even as wheat or other seed cast
into the earth, dies and lies hid, for a certain while, before it wax
green and bring forth fruit: so the just suffer many things, before they
feel joy, but their joy shall in good time be made manifest, and they
shall have great increase and store thereof, as of one grain cast into the
ground, comes plenty and abundaunce of Corne] for the righteous [ i. for
them whom GOD frames to righteousness of life, and holy conuersation] and
joy [this shows plainly what he meant by light, vz. joy both in this life,
and in the life to come] for the vprighte in heart [ i. for them, that are
void of hypocrisy and dissymulation, See Psalm 33 1.] Verse 12. Rejoice ye
q.d. Let him be the matter of your joy, that does such great things for
you] and give thanks [ vz. unto him onelye] for his holy remembrance [these
words may have a double sense: either thus] for his holy remembrance [ i.
for that it pleases him that is holy, to think upon and to remember you: or
else thus] for his holy remembrance [ i. for that you have good and often
occasion given you, by his continual graces bestowed upon you to remember and
think upon him that is holy and just, and this latter I take to be the more
simple.

Verse 1. Teaches us that it is a matter of great joy, 2. teaches us what
great power and justice is in the Lord. Verse 3. teaches us that the wicked
and ungodly shall not escape unpunished. Verse 4. teaches us, that the least
of Gods creatures is able to terrify all the world. Verse 5 shows that
nothing is able to withstand the Lord in his purposes, and that the strongest
and gretest things are as nothing before him. Verse 6. teaches us that Gods
goodness and uprightness are so clear even in his creatures, as none can
pretend ignorance. Verse 7 teaches two things, first that we may pray against
idols and Idolaters: secondlye it shows what great judgments shall
overtake them. Verse 8 teaches the godly to rejoice, even in Gods judgments
executed upon the wicked. Verse 9 sets out the excellency, majesty, and
almighty power of God. Verse 10 teaches first that our hatred and lothing of
evil, must be a seal of the law of God in our hearts, secondlye that God has
more then a fatherly care over the lives of those that be his: and thirdly the
wicked for all their power can not do what they would against Gods children.
Verse 11. teaches that howsoever the good be afflicted for a time, yet is
abundaunce of joy laid up for them. Verse 12 teaches the faithful to show
themselves always thankful to God.

Psalm 98
1.2.3. In the second 4.5.6. In the 7.8.9.

3. 4 in the title.] Verse 1. Sing unto the Lord a new song [see for this,
Psalm 96. verse 1.] for he [ vz. alone] has done [ vz. by his power and
might] marvelous things [ i. matters to be wondered at, and far passing the
reach of man] his right hand [ vz. alone: meaning by right hand, his almightye
strength and power] and his holy arm [ i. the arm of him that is holy, yea
holiness it self: understanding by arm the same thing he did by hand, vz.
might and strength] has gotten him [ i. him, himself, and in him his Church]
the victory [ vz. against all his and their enemies. The Prophet means, that
God delivered his Church from the enemies thereof, not by the means of man, or
any accustomed order, but by his own power and strength: see Psalm 44, 2.3.
also Isaiah 59, 16. and again Isaiah 63.5.] Ver. 2. The Lord declared [ vz. by
the marvelous and great works which he has done] his salvation [ i. his
gracious deliverance of his Church out of al dangers and distresses: and this
is called his salvation, because he is the only worker of it, and does freely
bestow the same upon his people] and his righteousness [ i. his faithful
and vprighte executing of justice and iudgemente] has he revealed [ vz. in
his mighty and marvelous workes] in the sight of the Nations [ i. openly,
not only before the Jews, but before all other Nations of the world.] Verse
3. He has remembered [ i. he has not only thought i. his gracious goodness
and his faithful promises made] toward the house of Israel [ i. to the
people of the Jews, whom he calls the house of Israel, because they
proceeded from Iaakob who was also called Israel, and came from him as from
one stock or Fountayne] all the ends of the earth [ i. all the parts and
quarters of the world and some people inhabiting the same] have seen [ vz.
plainly and sensibly: meaning by this speech that they have bin made partakers
of] ye saluations [ vz. mercifully promised, and graciously to be performed in
Christ] of our GOD [ i. of that true and ever living GOD whom we serve. He
speaks here no doubt of the calling of the Gentiles, and of those gracious
promises expressed Genesis 12.3. Genesis 22.18.] Verse 4. i. all people
inhabiting the earth: q.d. Consider this great benefyte every one of you, and
chearefullye praise the Lord for it] sing ye loud [ i. praise him willinglye
and openlye] unto the Lord [ vz. who has bestowed these great graces upon
you] cry out [ q.d. enforce your self to praise him] and rejoice [ vz. for
the mercies which you have receaued] and sing praises [ vz. continually and
that to the Lord, who has dealt so fauourablye with you, as to make you of no
people, a people unto himself. The Prophet repeateth one and the self same
things under diverse terms, not only to express his own earnestness, but
also to declare men's dullness in the performaunce thereof: and with all to
express that the things themselves given from God, and received of us, are so
excellent, that we can never be sufficient thankful for the same.] Ver. 5.
Sing praise [ vz. for the vz. who has freely given the same] upon the Harp [
i. upon musical instruments: understanding by one many or all. This he
speaks according to the law then in force: see Psalm 33, 2. and not to tie
us to the use of the same] even upon the Harp [he repeateth the same thing
again: d.q. use all the means you may, the better to provoke you to perform
that dutie] with a singing voice [ d.q. join to your Musical instruments,
songs expressed and uttered with your own voices, because that without them
the sound of the Harp, or any other musical instrument is to little or no
purpose.] Verse 6. With shalmes and sounds i. blow them up chearefully and
courageously, and make them to give a loud noise or sound for I rather
refer this to the musical Instruments, then to men's voyces] before the
Lord the King [ i. before the Lord whom we serve, who is King and ruler over
all the World.] Verse 7. Let the Sea roar [ vz. in token of joy and
thankefulnesse] and all that therein is [see Psalm 96. verse 11.] the World [
q.d. Let the World [ i. the frame of the world, as the heavens, earth, etc.]
rejoice and be glad also] and they [ i. all creatures whatsoeuer] that dwell
therein [ i. have their living, 8. Let the floudes [ vz. of the earth, he
means by this word either the standing water or the running rivers which
are different from the sea] clappe their hands [ vz. for joy and gladness,
meaning by the sign of gladness the thing it self, and not that floods have
handes] and let the Mountains [ i. the great and huge hils] rejoice together
[ i. testifye also their ioyfulnesse and gladness, with the rest of the
creatures. In that he ascribes this rejoicing to dumb and insensible
creatures, it is q.d. Let every one enforce himself, as much as he can or
will, and yet he shall never yield praises sufficientlye aunswering the 9,
Before the Lord [for the sense of this whole verse, see before Psalm 96.13.
where you shall find it almost word for word.

De.
Verse 1 teaches us, to be thankful to God, for his great works and power,
also that the Lord alone, without any help or aid of man is he, that
defends his Church. Verse 2 teaches that God does his works openly, not
only to the end that no man might pretend ignorance thereof, but also that
thereby every man might be provoked to praise him. Verse 3 shows that God in
deed is ever as good as his word, whether it be in respect of particular
persons or general persons. Verse 4 teaches us to enforce our selves by all
the means we can to praise the Lord. Verse 5.6. deliver the same doctrine unto
us. Verse 7.8. teach us even by the example of insensible creatures, to be
stirred up to perform the same. Ver. 9. teaches that Gods justice and
judgment is always upright, howsoever corrupt man's is.

Psalm 99
1. to the end of the 5. In the second he expresses Gods love toward 6 to
the end of the Psalm.

1. The Lord reigns [see Psalm. 93. ver. 1.] and he means specially amongst
his people, the people of the Iewes] let the people [ vz. which border round
about them, and other their enemies. though they be never so far of] tremble [
vz. even for fear of this Lord, who will defend his own, and punish them] he [
vz. that rules and governs al thing according to his good pleasure] sits
between the Cherubins [this is a description of god: q.d. even that God, which
has showed himself familiarly to Israel, he it is that rules and bears the
sway: see Exodus 25.22.] let ye earth be moved [ i. tremble and be afraid as it
were, at his presence: q.d. Let al creatures having life, or without life,
stricken with his presence and Majesty, yield him singular reverence and
honor.] Ver. 2. The Lord is great [ i. has declared himself to be mighty and
Sion [i. amongst his own people: amongst whom he has showed the greatest
testimonies of his power, putting Sion the principal place of their abode for
ye people themselues] and he is high above all the people [ vz. of the world:
he means not by this that he rules and governs them for ^^eir salvation,
but that he is exalted over them, to scatter their counsels, and to beat down
and overthrow their enterprises.] Verse 3. They i. the faithful and godly
people] shall praise [ vz. both in word and deede] thy great and fearful name
[ i. thy Majesty and power, which is full of might and feare] for it is holy
[and therefore meet to be praised and magnifyed.] Verse 4. And the Kings
power [ q.d. yea they shall praise the power of ye great i. that not only
likes and allows but also executes upright judgment: and mark that after
he had as it were set up God in his seat, he speaks of the manner of his
government, affirming that God is in such sort mighty and strong, that yet
notwithstanding he has not a tyrannous force with him, but that his power is
joined with his justice and vprightnes] for thou [ vz. O Lord: a sudden change
of the person from the third to the second] have prepared equity [ i. have
appointed and established amongst thy people, a good and upright form of
government, which is a very good rule to live well and righteously one with
another] thou have executed [ vz. faithfully, and with all vprightnesse]
judgment and justice [ i. true judgment and sound iustice] in Iaakob [i
amongst the people of Israel who descended from Iaakob, meaning no doubt
further under these terms, a just and holy government of the Church and people
of God.] Verse 5. Exalt [ vz. with your songs i. the Lord whom we his people
serve, who is indeed the only true God, John 17.3.] and fall down [ vz.
before him, and that in token of true reverence and worship, see Psalm 95.6.]
before his footstool [ye Chaldean paraphrase expounds it thus: before his
footestoole, i. in his Temple, others thus: Before his Footestoole, i. before
the Arc of Covenant: which is therefore, as they suppose, called God his
Footestoole, because the Jews should not stay too much upon the outward
sign, but should lift up their heart to Heaven, that they might there
behold the incomprehensible glory of God. I would expound it thus, Before his
Footestoole, i. fall down even unto the ground or pauement of the Temple,
upon which GOD should as it were set his feet, see 1. Chronicles 28.2.] for he
[ vz. alone] is holy, and therefore meet to be worshipped.] Verse 6. and
Aaron were [ vz. as chief and principall] among his Priests [ i. among them
whom he has appointed to offer sacrifices, and to expound the Law] and Samuel
[ vz. the Prophet, was as chief and principall] among such as call [ i.
called] upon his name [ i. professed his religion, and made prayers unto him:
see 1. Samuel 7. almost through out] these [ vz. before rehearsed, and many
other such like] called upon the Lord [ i. prayed unto him with earnestness
and continuaunce] and he heard them [ i. graciouslye granted them their
requests, as he does all them that call upon him in truth. The Prophet
alleges these men, that by their example he might provoke the people to the
worship and service of God: and he names rather these three then other,
because to their faith and custody specially was committed the keeping of the
covenant that God had made with his people. For the truth of this verse, see
Exodus 32.31, etc. to the end of the Chapter, 1 Samuel 12, 20, etc.] Verse 7.
He, vz. God, whom they serued] spoke [ vz. plainlye and audiblie] unto them [
vz. Moses and Aaron] in the cloudye pillar [ i. in or out of the Cloud, which
seemed to have the form of an upright pillar: see Exodus 14, 19. see also Number.
17.5.] they kept [ vz. themselves, and caused others what in them lay to keepe]
his testimonies [ i. his commandments, which God gave his people as a
testimony that he was their God, see Psalm 19.7.] and the law that he [ vz.
the Lord himselfe] gave them [ vz. as a rule of their life, and to be a light
unto their feet, and a Lantern unto their steps.] 8. Thou heardest them [
vz. quickly] when they prayed unto thee: for the Lords hearing, see verse 6. of
this Psalme] O Lord our God [a sudden, but yet an emphatical turning of his
speech unto God, by which the Prophet shows, that the Lord took pity upon
that people in respect of the truth of his Covenant, and of his grace only,
without any other cause] thou wast a favorable God unto them [ vz. not only
when they prayed unto thee, but continually, specially when thou pardonest
their sinnes] though thou did take vengeance [ i. though thou did
fatherlye punish and correct them] for their inventions [ i. for deuyses of
their own, by which they procured thee to wrath against them. I know others
expound it otherwise, but yet me thinks 9. Exalte the Lord our GOD, and
fall down [see before verse 5. of this Psalme] before his holy Mountain [hee
means no doubt the Mountain of Moriah, upon which the Temple was builded,
see Genesis 22, 2. meaning by this manner of speech, that he would have the
people to worship the Lord in his Temple] all the rest of this verse is
expounded before verse 5, of this present Psalm.

1. Teaches us that even to know ye God rules and governs in his Church is
sufficient to strike terror into all the enemies of all Gods people. Verse 2
teaches us that though Gods glory appear every where, yet in no place more
plainly the^ in his church. Ver. 3 teaches yt it becomes ye righteous to
praise Gods great power and might. Ver. 4 teaches us not only what great
vprightnes is in ye Lord in all his judgments, but also how just and faithful
he is to his people. Ver. 5 teaches us that it is not only our duty in
respects of benefits received to praise god, but that we are bound thereto also,
in respect of the holiness of his majesty and person: also that it is a good
thing to do it publicly with the rest of the Church. Ver. 6 teaches us that
the prayers of Gods faithful people, are never frustrate. Verse 7 teaches us
that familiaritye with the Lord, and knowledge of his majesty requires at
our hands, obedience to his truth, and performaunce of it. Verse 8 Is full of
great comfort, teaching us these points, first that the Lord chastises and
corrects those, whom he loves most tenderlye: secondly that though he do
correct them, yet those punishments do no whit at al lessen his favor and good
will toward them. Verse 9 is the same with verse 5, and delivers the same
doctrines.

Psalm 100
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. In the one part, 1, 2, 3. In the
second he uses vz. for his free election, and the continuance of his mercy.
verse 3, 5.

The Title, i. a Psalm penned and appointed to stir up the people to praise
the Lord: and not so much for that the Psalm. it self does comprehend the
praises of God] sing ye loud unto the Lord [for the meaning of these words
see Psalm 98, 4.] all the earth [ i. all the people of God inhabiting the
promised land, for I suppose that he puts the word earth here, for that
part of the earth.] Verse 2. Serve [ vz. according to the rule of his vz. only:
for unto him all honor is due] with gladness [ i. readily and joyfully: because
in such kind of worships the Lord takes great delight and pleasure] come
before him [ i. appear before the arc, which was the place of his worship
and seruice] with ioyfulnesse [ vz. both inward and outward, of the heart
and of the body, meaning thereby great and singular rejoicing.] Verse 3. Know
i. profess this much, and yield him this honor (for he speaks not here
of inward knowledge only) to disreaue him from all false Gods, and such as
man's fantasy has forged] that even the Lord [ vz. which we serve and that
no other but hee] is GOD [ i. our GOD, and the only author of that covenant
which is between him and vs] he has made us [marke that he speaks not
here of the common creation of men only, for in that respect the godly have
no greater privilege than the wicked have, but of spiritual regeneration,
wherein by the ministerye of his word, and the working of his spirit, he
begets men again to his own image, to the end that they may serve him in
newness of life] and not we our selves [ i. we have not neither in respect of
the body nor of the soul and spiritual regeneration framed and fashioned our
selves: no, no, righteousness of our own has advanced us to this dignitye,
but we are made his sons and servants by his only free goodness, see
Deutronomie 7, 7, 8.] also Deutronomie 9, 4.] we are his people [ i. the people
whom he of mercy has chosen to serve him and to bring forth much fruite] and
the sheep of his pasture [see Psalm 95, verse 7.] meaning by this manner of
speech, that GOD of his free goodness chooses men to be a peculiar
inheritance to himself, to the end he may always maintain them under the
shadow of his wings.] Verse 4. Enter [ q.d. Because he has adopted you,
therefore strive to serve him] into his Gates [ i. into the Gates of his Temple
or Tabernacle, he puts a part for the whole, and the beginning of Gods
service, vz. repayring to the public place for the execution of that service
and Worshippe] with praise [ vz. unto his name, for that and many other his
great goodnesses and mercy, and into his Courts [hee speaks according to
the number of Courts in the Tabernacle, meaning as before, the places of
public assemblies, and Gods service, see Psalm 94.2.10.] with rejoicing [ vz.
for the blessings and benefits which he has bestowed upon you] praise him [
vz. for his great goodness and kindness toward you [and bless his name [ i.
thank his majesty and power for those his mercies: see the word blessing so
used Mat. ] Verse 5. For the Lord is good [ vz. toward all, but specially
to his own people, meaning by the word, good, favorable, loving, and
gracious] his mercy [ vz. toward his sons and seruauntes] is everlasting [
i. indureth and lasts for ever, and is never subject to alteration nor
change, see Psalm 136. through out] and his truth [ i. the truth and
steadfastness of his promises made unto his servants, for so does the Hebrew
word used in this place always signifye] is from generation to generation [
i. is continual, and never decays, even as one generation succeeds an
other: not meaning but that Gods mercy shall endure when all carnal
generations of men shall fail.

1 teaches us that it becomes Gods people, never to be ashamed to praise the
Lord. Verse 2 teaches us to yield that service which we perform to God
chearefully and with a good heart. Verse 3 teaches us that we have neither our
bodily creation nor our spiritual regeneration of our selves, but all from the
Lord only. Verse 4 teaches us that Gods children should show them selves in
public assemblies publicly thankful for public benefits received, at his
merciful hands. Verse 5. Teaches us that howsoever man be variable in his
love and promise, yet God in goodness and truth abides always faithful to
his.

Psalm 101
THis Psalm as I take it, may be divided into two parts. David declares what
he will 1 to the end of the 4, In the second he shows what he vz. punish
the wicked and foster the good, from verse 5 to the end of the Psalm.

The Title, a Psalm of David [ i. a Psalm that David made, 1. I will sing [ i.
I will both speak of and practice, see Isaiah 5.1.] mercy [ i. favor and
maintenance toward my good subiects] and judgment [ i. execution of
punishmente upon the wicked, in which 2 parts consists the Magistrates duty,
as appears Romans 13. see for the performaunce of this promise 2. Sam. 9.1.]
unto thee O Lord will I sing, the Prophet means not only that he will praise
God for aduauncing him to the kingdom, but that even for his sake: and in
repect of his own office, he will perform these matters.] Ver. 2 I will do
wisely [ i. I will behave i. in the gouernmente of my kingdom, and the
execution of my office, which he calls a perfect way, because there is
prescribed in Gods word a perfect rule therof] til thou come to me [ vz. to
take me out of this life and to call me to an account for the discharge of my
dutie] I will walk in the vprightnes of my heart [ i. I will behave my self
uprightly and soundly so that mine own heart and conscience shall witness unto me
my good dealing and holy co^uersation] in the midst of mine house [ i.
privately and within mine own walls as it were, yea in the eyes and sight of
my whole family: the Prophet in this verse promises two things as I take it:
in the first part of a faithful executing of his public charge, and in the
second a godly conversation privately.] Verse 3. I will set no wicked thing
before mine eyes [ vz. vz. earnestly and from the bottom of my hart] the work
of them that fall away [ vz. from thy truth, and from that right way, that
thou have prescribed, meaning by the word work, not only that defection of
theirs, which is ye principal, but al other transgressions whatsoever, putting
one for ye whole] it [ i. such manner of dealing] shall not cleave unto me [ i.
either reign or dwell in me, this the Prophet speaks as assuring himself of
gods strength to continue ye profession of his truth.] Verse 4. A froward heart
[ i. a perverse and vz. through Gods goodness and strength] depart from me [ vz.
far off: he means by this speech, that he will endeavor to put of the old
man with the lusts thereof, Ephe. 4, 22] I will know none evil [ q. d. as I will
be far from performing wickedness in act, so I will not allow or like of the
same in my judgment, or understanding, for so is the word knowing, used in
this place as in sundry other places 5. Him that privily slaundereth [he
means not that he will spare them yt shall do it openly: for if he punish the
less offense thus, he will not spare the greater, which is open slaunder] his
neighbor [ i. any, whether he dwell nigh or far from him, for so generally
and largely do I take this word, see Psalm 15.3.] will I destroy [ i. most
sharply punish, and that even by death if the hainousnes of the offense require
it] him that has a proud look [ i. he that is lofty and proud, for pride
appears many times even in the very eye brees, and eyes themselves, when they
be lifted vp] and high heart [or as it is in the Hebrew text, large in heart,
meaning by that manner of speech, one that has a mind to aspire to great
matters, and therefore is puffed up with ouerweening of himself] I cannot
suffer [ vz. or endure at any hand, he means by these speeches, 6. Mine eyes
shall be [ i. I will carefully look unto, and have special regard of] unto the
faithful of the land [ i. unto the good and godly peo-people that dwell in the
land, wheresouer it be] that they may dwell with me [ i. continue and abide
with me, not only as my counselors and household servant, but as friends and
familiars being always in my favor, for I take it that the Prophet means
two things here: the one is that he will have a great care generallye over
all the people of the land: the other is, that out of that good people he
will choose the best, to be continually about him] he that walks in a
perfect way [ i. he that is vprighte in his dealinges, and of good
conscience and holy conversation: and he calls this way perfect, not
because men walk perfectly in it, but because it is perfect of it self, and
leads to perfection in the other life] he [ q.d. he and no other, for so
much I take it the doubling of the word meaneth] shall serve me [ vz. both in
the public offices of my kingdom, and in the particular offices of my private
affairs, and 7. There shall no deceitful person dwell within my house [this
must be understood so far forth as David could know or understand, q.d. If I
might know it, there should none such remain in my service: not but that good
men many times have wicked Servants, yea and that those Servants which make
the fairest show of goodness are many times deep dissemblers] he that
tells lies [ i. gives himself over either to tell them or to hear them, see
Revel. 22.15.] shall not remain [ vz. long] in my sight [he means by this
speech 8. Betimes [ i. not only in good season and quickly, but also
continually] will I destroy [see before verse 5 of this Psalm.] all the wicked
of the land [ i. all the ungodly that inhabit it. David means that he will
not be negligent or slothful to execute good, quick, and continual justice,
against all malefacters, of whose transgressions he shall have knowledge] that
I may cut off [ i. remove and take away, vz. by execution of just
iudgement] all the woorkers of iniquity [ i. them that give over themselves to
commit sinne] from the City of the Lord [ i. from Jerusalem, but yet so, that
therein he comprehends the whole kingdom, because if the chief place be
reformed, it is very likely the other will follow.

Ver 1. Teaches magistrates, to have a great care to foster the good, 2.
Teaches magistrates three things, first to have an eye to the faithful
execution of public justice and judgment: Secondly to endeavor with care and
conscience good dealing privately: and thirdly to continue, and that unto the
last gasp, in all good dealing both public and private, that so they may have
peace in their own conscience, and the Lord find them well occupied. Ver. 3.
Teaches all men, but specially magistrates, so to loathe evil, that they can
never behold it, but with great grief: also to carry with them this holy
purpose, that howsoever other men fall away from God, yet that in his strength,
they will stick fast unto him. Ver. 4. Teaches al, but specially magistrates,
more and more to endeavor the crucifiyng of the old man, with the works
thereof: and never to allow of any thing that is evil. Ver. 5. Teaches
magistrates to punish malefacters according to the notoriousnes of their
offense: it also shows how grievous both before God and man backbitings and
pride are. Ver. 6. Teaches magistrates to have a special regard for the
defense and preferment of the good: also it teaches all both high and low to
make choice of the best men they can get, to be their officers and servants.
Ver. 7. Teaches magistrates and masters, that when the sins of their
inferiors or servant are once laid open, they should not bear with them
in the same. Verse 8. Teaches magistrates, in time to cut off sin and
iniquity, lest the infection thereof grow so great, that when they would
they shall not be able to do it.

Psalm 102
THis Psalm being an earnest prayer of an afflicted soul, 1. to the end of
the 11. In the second he shows by what arguments as vz. because he was
assured of his goodness, power, etc. and this recheth from ver. 12. to the end
of the 23. In the third part he returns to his prayer again, assuring
himself 24. to the end of the Psalm.]

The title] a prayer [ vz. to be vsed] of the afflicted [ i. when he shall be
in distress [ vz. any manner of way either inward or outward] and power
forth his meditation before the Lord [ i shall in prayer unto the Lord
express that with his mouth, which he has meditated on in his heart, note
that the holy ghost myndeth not to tie us in our afflictions only to this
form. And though we can not certainly determine, who should write this
Psalm, or about what time it was penned: yet it is very likely that either
Daniel or some other holy Prophet did write it, about the time that the people
of the Jews were carried captives into Babylon.] Verse 1. O Lord hear my
prayer [ i. graciously grant the request which I make unto thee now] and let
my cry [ i. mine earnest supplication] come unto thee [ i. appear in thy
sight as well accepted and allowed of: q.d. let it have free and bold access
unto 88.1.2.] Verse 2. Hyde not thy face [ i. withdraw not thy favor and
goodnes] from me [ vz. as though thou were offended with me, he speaks this
of God after the manner of men, who when they are not disposed to show favor,
will turn their faces from others, or keep them out of the way, signifiyng unto
them, by withholding the sign of favor, that they cannot have favor it self
showed the^] in the time of my trouble [ i. at what time I am any manner of way
troubled, either inwardly or outwardly] incline thine ears unto me [ q.d.
show thy self ready to hear and grant my petition. see Psalm. 86.1. and
note that ears are attributed to God, not that he has them, but that we
might the better conceive somewhat of his maiesty] when I call [ vz. upon thee
by prayer] make haste to hear me [ i. graciously and quickly grant me my
request: the Prophet utters not this as appointing God a time, but in respect
of his own great misery and want as may appear by that which 3. For my days
[ i. the days and time of my life] are consumed [ i. vanish and wear away]
like smoke [ i. quickly. q.d. even as suddenly as smoke vanishes away in the
ayre] and my bones [ i. the strength of my body, because that specially the
strength consisted in the bones] are burnt like an hearth [ i. are even utterly
consumed away through drought, and for want of natural moisture: See Psalm.
38.3.4. etc. These large manner of speeches declare how much the desolation of
the Church, should wound al good men's hearts.] 4. Mine heart is smitten [ vz.
with grief, and heauinesse] and withers like grass [ vz. through the same
sorrow, meaning that it was as it were shrunk and dried up, and then in what
case could the body bee] because I forgate to eat my bread [ i. mine ordinary
vitaile and food. The Prophet in these words, does not only note the cause
why his heart was dried up, but 5. For the voice of my groaning [ i. through my
great and continual groaning and sighing] my bones do cleave to my skin [ i.
my bones and skin do cleave together, and I am utterly consumed as it were,
so that there is nothing, but skin and bone left, See Job. 19.20.] Ver. 6. I
[ vz. in this distress and heauinesse] am like a Pelicane of the wilderness [
i. to Pelicane that abides continually in the wildernes] and like an owl of
the deserts [ i. that keeps himself continually in desert and solitary
places. Either the Prophet, or the faithful people under the name of one,
choose you whether, does in a double respect resemble himself to these fowls
or birds: vz. both in respect of his mourning, these birds mourning rather
then singing in deed. I mean it of the Pellicane and of the owl: and also in
respect of his solitaries, all birds flying these birds companies, specially
the owls, as to which they never come or repair, but to keep a wondering at
her.] Verse 7. I watch [ i. I do with i. like a sparrowe, deprived of all her
company: meaning by this manner of speech also his solitariness, whom in
deed all men did as it were forsake.] Verse 8. Mine vz. both by word and
deede] daily [ i. day, by day, or one day after another, meaning
continually, and as though they never ceased] and they that rage against me [
vz. with all manner of crueltye and madness as it were] have sworn against
me [ vz. to take away my life: q.d. they have bound themselves by an oath
that they will kill me. Immanuel and others read it thus, swear by me, and
gives this sense of it, they make a certain form, of an oath or course of
my name, and alleges Numb. 5.27. and Isaiah. 65.15. but I see no great
reason, neither of the sense, nor of the allegation of the places.] Verse 9.
Surely I have i. I have shed abundaunce of tears, in so much that I could
not abstain, no not when I have been drinking.] Verse 10. Because of thine
indignation vz. against me. q.d. all these heauinesses and griefs have fallen
upon me, because I perceived and felt that thou wast angry against mee]
because thou have heaued me up [ vz. very high] and cast me down [hee
means by this that the Lord did correct him very strongly and grievously.
It is a metaphor borrowed from men, who if they will throw any thing in their
hands vyolentlye against the ground, they stretch out their arms, and lift
them up on high, that they may do it the more forcible: q.d. even so has the
Lord dealt with me, and this must be understood, not as though he accused
God of hard dealing, with him, but that he might thereby the better express,
the greatness of his grief Ver. 11. My i. the days of my life] are like a
shadow that fades [ vz. away quickly and here mark, that when he speaks of
a shadow, he means it of those shadows which go immediately before the
sun set: seeming in deed then to be very long and great, but by and by the
sun goes away, and then they no more appear: such a thing says he is my
life, it vanishes away suddenly, yea even then when it seems to be
greatest, much more in this state of mine affliction] and I am withered like
grass [ i. for want of natural moisture, my bones and body are dried away,
and therefore have no hope of my life.] Verse 12. But thou O Lord [ q.d.
though man's life be never so brittle and inconstant yet thou remainest steadfast
and unchangeable, which is no small comfort to thy afflicted seruants] do
remain [ vz. like unto thy self, and free from all alteration or shadow of
turning] for ever [ vz. and euer] and thy remembrance [ vz. which either thou
have of thy servants, or else thy servants have of thee] from generation to
generation [see Psalm. 100.5.] Ver. 13. Thou will arise [ vz. vz. according to
thy accustomed goodness, and gracious promise] upon Sion, [i. upon thy Church,
as Psalm. 51.18.] for the time [ i. the due and fit time] to have mercy thereon
[ i. to show mercy and compassion vnto] for the appointed time [ i. the time
which thou thy self did appoint and set. See 2. Chro. 36.21. Ierem. 25.12.
Ierem. 29.10.] is come [and therefore we hope that thou will in mercy look upon
us, and deliver 14. For thy servants [ vz. distressed in afflictions, and yet
notwithstanding remaining faithful to thee: and not Cyrus and Darius, as some
suppose] delight [ vz. greatly and much] in the stones thereof [ q.d. they more
esteem, even that disordered form, that remained after the ruin and
overthrow of the temple, then all the excellent pleasures of Babylon, or of
the whole world besides] and have pity on the dust thereof [ i. in a pitiful
love they lament over it, and yet notwithstanding do esteem it, and have it in
great regard.] Ver. 15. Then [ vz. when thou shall perform this grace to thy
people] i. all other nations besides thine own people, for so they used to
call all besides the Iewes] shall fear the name of the Lord [ i. shall tremble
at his great power and majesty, though not with the reverent and right fear
thereof, which his own children only haue] and all the kings of the earth [
q.d. this fear shall not only sease the hearts of their common people, but
even of their greatest and mightiest princes] thy glory [ i. they shall fear
thy majesty and 16. When the Lord [hee notes the time of the trembling of the
kings and people shall build up Sion [i. his Church, vz. decayed and cast
down: he uses this word Sion generally, for the place of Gods service,
because that sometime the arc of covenant was placed there] and shall appear
in his glory [ i. shall show himself glorious and triumphant, which shall no
doubt be comfortable to his 17. And shall turn [ vz. his gracious and loving
countenance, meaning by this speech, yielding or graunting] unto the prayer [
i. to the hearty supplications and requests] of the desolate [ i. of the^ that
are forsaken of all, whom, though they stand in need of every man's help, yet
no man helps. The word properly signifies a kind of shrubble, which
grows in untilled places, as a brier, or such like, by which he notes also,
the people, that were in the captivity of Babylon, as in a deserte and wild
place] and not despise their prayer [ vz. which they make unto him in their
affliction, he speaks one thing twice, as it were, of which sundry times
before, and not as though god did ever despise the supplications of his poor
servants.] Ver. 18. This [ vz. gracious hearing of his poor servants prayers,
and delivery of vz. as an excellent thing, and worthy of continual remembrance]
for the generation to come [ vz. that they thereby may be instructed both of the
power of God, and his faithfulness and truth in performing his promises] and
the people [ vz. of Israel and Iudah] which shall be created [ i. which shall
return out of the captivity of Babylon, which he compares to be a second
birth or creation, as it were, because they seemed therein to be as dead, See
Ezech 37. from ver. 1. to the end of the 14. of which also for the greatness of
it, it is sundry times said in the Prophets: It shall be no more said the Lord
lives, that brought the people out of Egypt, but that brought the people from
the land of the North] shall praise the Lord [ vz. for his great goodness and
mercy toward them.] Ver. 19. For he has looked down [ vz. i. even from the
very heavens, as he seems to expound it, even in this verse] out of the
heaven [which is the throne of his maiesty] did the Lord behold the earth [ i.
not only the earth it self, but specially and chiefly men inhabiting the
earth, and amongst the rest his own people, as may appear in the verses
following.] Verse. 20. That he might vz. and so take pity of] the mourning [
i. the sighings, gronings and lamentable cryes] of the prisoner [ i. of the
prisoners, one number put for an other, meaning those that were bound and held
as captives in Babilon] and deliver [ vz. out of danger, distress, and all
manner of feare] the children of death [ i. them that were at deaths door, or
appointed to death as it were. See Psalm. 79.11.] Ver. 21. That they [ vz. so
delivered: noting also the end why god i. set out and publish, and that both by
word and deede] the name of the Lord [ i. his power, majesty, goodness, etc. as
Psalm. 21.1.] in Sion [i. in his Church] and his praise [ i. the praise which is
due unto him for the same: not that any is able to praise him sufficiently for
his power and goodnes] in Jerusalem, [i. in the Church as before: Sion and
Jerusalem being the principal places of his worship put for his whole
Church, and the public assemblies and congregations thereof: see Psalm. 2.6.]
Ver. 22. When the people [ vz. which are now in captivity and dispersed
abroad, vz. to serve the Lord in these places, and after that sort which he
himself has prescribed] and the kingdoms [ vz. of the earth, meaning hereby
the calling of other people besides the Iewes] to serve the Lord [ vz.
according to the prescript rule of his word. The Prophet notes two things
specially in this verse: the one is the returning of the people out of Babylon,
the other is, the calling of the Gentiles, to the religion and service 23. He [
i. the Lorde] abated [ vz. by outward and inward afflictions] my strength [ i.
whatsoever seemed excellent in me, putting one excellent thing for many] in
the way [ vz. wherein I walked, meaning the days and course of his life, as
may appear by that which follows in this verse] and shortened [ vz. in mine
own judgment and as I supposed, for otherwise in respect of God, our days are
certainly numbred] my days [ i. the days of my 24. And I said [ vz. in that
great affliction and griefe] O my God, take me not away [ vz. out of this
life: q.d. let me not vanishe away, but show me thy favor, in continuing
my life] in the midst of my days [ i. before I come to the full end of my
race: and all this, and that in the former verse the Prophet speaks, not
only in his own person, but in the name of the rest of the faithful] thy
years endure from generation to generation [ i. thou continuest and abidest
for ever, and art always one, make me therefore, q.d. 25. Thou [ vz. O GOD]
have before time [ vz. in the beginning] laid the foundation of the earth [ i.
created and maintained the earth and all things therein, he shows Gods
eternity, because he was before all things created, and was the maker of all
things whatsoeuer] and the heavens [ vz. and all things therein conteined]
are the work of thine hands [ i. thou have made them: hands attributed to
GOD for our 26. They [ vz. the heaven, the earth, and all things therein]
shall perish [ vz. not in respect of their substance, but in respect of their
qualities: see Isaiah. 65.17. Isaiah. 66.22. Reuelat. 21.1. 2. Peter 3.12.13.
and this perishing, he calls afterward in this verse, a chaunging] but
thou shall endure [ vz. free from any alteration or change, as James 1.17. and
that for ever and ever, he here commends Gods eternity, by comparison] even
they all [ q.d. not one of them accepted] shall wax old as does a garment [
i. shall through continuance of time decay, as does a garment] as a vesture
shall thou change them [this is a metaphor taken from men, who changing their
garments from worse to better of which change of the creatures the Apostle
speaks Roman. 8.19.20.21.22. verses. Now if any will demand to what use the
creatures shall be employed, I answer, that for as much as GOD in his word,
has not reueiled that, it is more then curiosity to ask the same] and they
shall be changed [ i. they shall certainly, and without fail be changed, for
so much does the 27. But thou art the same [ i. always one and the self
same, without any shadow of changing: q.d. howsoever the creatures be
variable, yet thou the creator art always vnchaungeable] and thy years [ i.
the time of thy essence and beeing] shall not fail [ vz. for ever and ever:
q.d. thou art and have been from everlasting, 28. The children of thy
servants [ i. thy godly ones, and their godly posterity] shall continue [ vz.
steadfast and sure, always safe under thy almighty defense, whatsoever great
alteration shall be in heaven or earth] and their seed [ i. their race and
posteritie] shall stand fast [ vz. so that they shall not be moved for euer]
in thy sight [ i. before thee, he means that GOD will care for, and preserve
for ever the godly.

Ver. 1. Teaches us to be earnest with the Lord to grant us our holy requests.
2. Shows that in the time of affliction nothing is more grievous to Gods
children, then to perceive God any long time absent.] Ver. 3.4.5. Do declare,
what great affliction the godly are in, for their sins and the wrath of God
upon them, for the same. Verse 6.7. Show that it is no new thing to see the
children of God forsaken of men, Verse 8. Notes two things, the one is how
that the godly are subject to the vile both words and deeds of the ungodly:
the other that the wicked give themselves a full swinge to all manner of
outrage both in word and deed. Verse 9. Teaches that so long as we feel
Gods wrath upon us for our sins, our meat and drink is not pleasant and
delightful unto us. Verse 10. Teaches us three things: first, how much we
should stand in awe of the fearce wrath and indignation of the Lord:
Secondly, that in this life Gods children have no durable estate: and thirdly
that their exaltation and depressing, is not by fortune as they say, but from
the Lord only. Verse 11. Sets out the shortness and troublesomnesse of
man's life. Verse 12. Sets out the eternity and continuance of the
almighty. Verse 13. Teaches us to have an assured trust, that God will look
graciously upon the afflictions of his Church. Verse 14. Teaches Gods
children two things, first to delight more, even in the very ruins of the
Church, then in the palaces of the ungodly: secondly to pity and pray for the
reforming of the desolations thereof. Ver. 15. and 16. Teach us, that Gods
favor showed to his Church, shall be matter of sufficient terror to the wicked
and ungodly. Ver. 17. Is comfortable, showing that the prayers of Gods poor
people, shall never return empty from the Lord. Ver. 18. Teaches the
faithful to have a care for their posterity, that both Gods mercy toward them,
and his judgments upon the wicked, might be conveyed to their children. Ver.
19. Teaches that God beholds al things done upon the earth, contrary to the
imagination of them, who suppose him to sit as idle in heaven. Ver. 20.
Teaches that God takes special regard of those that be his, and namely when
they are in the greatest distress. Ver. 21. Teaches that god does deliver his
people out of al their fears, specially to this end, that they might publish
his praise for the same, in the Church. Ver. 22. Teaches that our assemblies
should be, for the service and glory of god. Ver. 23. Teaches that God for the
trial of his children, lays manifold afflictions upon them in this life.
Verse. 24. Teaches us that we may pray for long life, but yet so, that that
life may be referred to Gods glory. Verse 25. Teaches that God is the maker
of heaven and earth. Verse. 26. Teaches the variableness of the creature,
which should instruct us, so to use the world as though we used it not, and
no otherwise, but as it may further us to the hope of a better life. Ver. 27.
Teaches that howsoever variable the creature is, yet the creator is altogether
unchangeable. Ver. 28. Sets out to the comfort of the godly, their
continuance.

Psalm 103.
3. to the end of the 19. In the last part he exhorts even all creatures to
praise the Lord, for the largenes of his goodness, from ver. 20. to the end of
the Psalm.

1. My soul [hee exhorts the soul, to this great work, because if that be
ready, the other cannot be much backward: and the word, soul, is used here for
the seat of understanding and afflictions] praise thou ye Lord [ vz. for his
great mercies] and all that is within me [as my thought, my heart, and all the
powers both of the one and the other, and he means all inward things,
because those parts specially does the Lord regard, as Psalm. 51.17. Ioh.
4.23. praise his holy name [ i. set forth the glory that apperteineth to his
20.3.] Ver. 2. My soul, praise thou the Lord [this is expounded before ver. 1.
and forget not [ vz. through negligence or otherwise, but earnestly think upon
to the uttermost of thy power] al his benefits [ i. not only all, but any one
of them, as possible thou can: and by this means he prepares himself a way
to speak of the blessings, 3. Which [ vz. alone] forgiueth thee [freely, vz.
and of his own mercy only, without any merits or deserts of thine at all]
all thine iniquity [ vz. committed either against God or man, either of
ignorance or of knowledge: and he begins with the free forgiveness of
sins, because it is as it were the fountain from which al other blessings
flow: many whereof he reckons up afterward, which are nothing else, but
the effects of that reconciliation] and heals [ vz. of his great goodness, and
his mighty power] all thine infirmities [ vz. bodily, or spiritual, outward,
or inward.] 4. Which [ vz. alone, as before ver. 3.] redeemeth [ vz. by his
great and mighty power] thy life [ i. thy whole man, both body and soul,
putting a part for the whole] from the grave [ i. from death and destruction,
See Psalm. 16.10. putting that which follows death, for death it selfe] and
crowns thee [ i. adorneth and compasses thee about: as the crown is a
testimony of glory and honor, and compasses the whole head round about] with
mercyes and compassions [ i. with great abundaunce and varietye of mercies,
which appears both in that he uses two words signifiying almost both one
thing, and also because he puts the latter in the plural number.] Verse 5.
Which satisfies i. which fills thine affection and appetyte, See Psalm.
81.10. he seems to alude to men, which take great license to themselves, in
eating and drinking, meaning that God will abundauntly satisfy us, and give us
all that we can wish] with good things [ i. with all manner of good things,
so that nothing should be wanting] and thy youth [ i. the days and times of
thine age, yea even though thou be old, yet shall it be as youth] is renewed
[ vz. through the special blessing and goodness of GOD] as the Egles [which
live long, and dye not but through want of ability to take in their meat, as
Aristotle, and Pliny both show.] Verse 6. The Lord [ vz. himself vz. both
in word and deed, specially when men are negligent] righteousness and
judgment [ i. such sentence, as are righteous and just, See Psalm. 97.2.] to
all [ vz. of his children and seruauntes] that are oppressed [ vz. by wicked
and ungodly men.] Verse. 7. He [ vz. God the Lorde] made his Egypt, and all
that he did for them, till he brought them into the land of Canaan, but even
his whole lawe] unto Moses [ vz. first and before others: and afterward by
him to all his people] and his works [ i. the excellent and noble works which
he did, and that for their sakes] unto the children of Israel [vz. which he
had chosen to be a peculiar people to himself.] Verse 8. The Lord is full of
compassion and mercy [ vz. to them vz. though men by their wickednesses
provoke him much thereto] and of great kindness [ vz. toward them that turn
unto him, this sentence seems to be taken out of Exodus 34.6. where the
nature of GOD is so far set forth unto us, as is profitable for us to know:
and seems to be the same, with Nehe. 9, 17. Psalm. 86.15.] Verse 9. He vz.
with men, and specially with his children] neither keep his anger for ever [
vz. toward them, See Leuitic. 19.18.] Ver. 10. i. he has not punished us,
according to the greatness and grieuousnesse of our sinnes] nor regarded us [
vz. in his justice and judgments: hear we see what rewards we may look
for, from the Lord in respect of our selues] according to our iniquities [ vz.
committed against him and our brethren.] Verse 11. For as high as the heaven
q.d. look what distaunce there is between heaven and earth, which is very
great and wonderful, yea infinite as it were] so great is his mercy [ i. the
mercy which he shows: for if he had it in himself, and powered it not
forth upon others, it were to little purpose] toward them that fear him [
vz. with an unfeigned heart, putting the fear of GOD, for care, conscience and
obedience to his truth.] Verse 12. As far as the East vz. which we know to
be so far asunder, that they shall never come together] so far [yea and
further to, if further possible can be: he means by this comparison, that
the Lord has utterly removed our iniquities from vs] has he removed our
sins [ i. the sins that we have committed] from us [ i. who were the doers
thereof.] Verse 13. As a Father [ vz. earthly or naturall] has compassion on
his children [notwithstanding that many times they do provoke him to
displeasure] so [yea and in far greater measure, by how much GOD is greater
then man, and his afflictions more certain and sure] has the Lord compassion
[ i. he vouchsaueth them mercy, notwithstanding they deserve it not] on them
that fear him. [See verse 11. of this Psalm.] 14. For he knows [ vz. by
many degrees, better then we our selues] whereof we be made [ i. of how
brittle a matter we are created, for so much does the Hebrewe word import,
which sense also may be gathered by that which follows in this verse] he
remembers [though men many times forget it] that we are but dust [and that
into 3.19.] Verse 15. The days of man [ i. the course of his years and age,
or the time of his life] are as grass [ vz. which is cut down, withered,
and quickly consumed: he means by this speech, the breuitye and shortness
of man's lyfe] as a flower of the field so florisheth he [ i. he is now
flourishing, and by and by withered: and note that he speaks of a flower of
the field, rather then of a garden flower, because that field flowers, are
more subject to storms, tempest, heat, etc. then the garden which have more
shelture and couerture.] 16. For the wind [ vz. sent from GOD, meaning by
wind, which is one mean to mar the beautye of blossoms and flowers, all
other whatsoeuer] goes over it [ vz. with violence, and so ^ppeth it, either
with extreme cold as the Easternewynde, or with partching heat, as the
Western wynde] and it is gone [ vz. out of men's sight: he means that it is
decayed] and the place thereof [ i. the ground wherein it grewe] shall know
it no more [ vz. in man's judgment, meaning also by the word, it, the self
same, and not any other of the same kind. In these two last verses he does
nothing else, but by a similitude set out the shortness and vanitye of man's
life, which is no better, then an herb or grass, subject to cutting down,
weather, wind, and such 17. But the loving kindness of the Lord [ vz.
toward his sons and seruauntes] indureth for ever and ever [the reason is
because those whom the Lord loves he loves for euer] upon them [ i.
playnelye testified toward them, and plentifullye powered forth upon them]
that fear him [See verse 11. and 13. of this Psalme] and his righteousness [
i. his just and faithful keeping of his promise, and the succor and aid, by
which he maynteyneth and preserves his] upon childrens children [ i. to all
posteritye.] Verse 18. Unto them that keep [ vz. in their behavior and
conuersation] his covenant [ i. his Law, which is called a covenant, because
it conteyneth the conditions of bargayne, as it were, between GOD, and his
people] and think upon them [ vz. in their deep thoughts and secret heart]
his commandementes [ i. the matters which he has commaunded] to do them [
vz. in their outward conversation and dealing.] Verse 19. The Lord has i.
he has a kingdom and exercises the same even in heaven, and yet that
lets not, but that his iurisdiction] rules our all [ vz. what soever either
in heaven, or in earth. And this verse conteyneth one cause amongst many why
men should praise GOD, vz. for his gracious and large government.] Verse 20.
Praise vz. all other creatures: understanding also by strength, whatsoever is
excellent in them, so have you the word used before Psalm 102.23.] that do
his commandment [ i. the things he commands you] in obeying the voice
of his word [ q.d. you are so ready in obeying, that so 21. Praise the Lord
all ye his hosts [some refer this word generallye to all his creatures,
because the Lord has them at commandment, as a Captain has his armed men,
and Soldiers to use them, as pleases him: some only to Angels: but I allow
rather the former reason by that which is written, Genesis 2.1.] Ye his
Servants that do his pleasure [ i. what pleases him, before he called his
creatures hosts, for the multitude of them: Now he calls them Servant,
because he has them at commandment.] Verse 22. Praise the vz. for his
unspeakable goodnesse] all ye his works [ i. all his creatures, of what
order or condition so ever ye bee] in all places of his dominion [ i. every
where, because he rules every where, and does whatsoever pleases him both
in heaven, and in earth] my soul praise thou the Lord [hee shuts up the
Psalm with the same sentence he began it, and therefore, See verse 1. of
this Psalm. And this is very ryfe to begin and end a Psalm with one and
the selfsame sentence: See Psalm 106. verse 1. and last, also Psalm 147.
verse 1. and last. Psalm 148. and Psalm 150. verse 1. and last.

Verse 1. Teaches us, first to enforce our selves, 2. Teaches also two
things: the first is that we should strive in an earnest and deep
meditation, to remember so nigh as we can all the benefits and blessings of
almighty GOD: Secondly that they rightly thought upon, are strong arguments,
to provoke thankfulness from us. Ver. 3.4. He teaches us for what causes and
graces, we should be thankful, vz. both for spiritual and bodily
blessings: they teach also, that all the graces which we have, we receive
only from the Lord, but yet let us somewhat more particularly consider them.
Verse 3. Teaches us that God alone forgiueth sins: secondly that he does
it of his own mercy only, which overthrows man's merits: thirdly, that in
the abundaunce of his goodness he freely pardons al of them, original,
actual, etc. by which we see that Papists are deceived, who suppose original
sin only to be taken away by Christ, and as for actual sins committed
after baptism, men must satisfy for them. Lastly it teaches, that even the
infirmities and weakness of our flesh can not be cured, no though we use
all means, unless the Lord put his hands to that great work. Verse 4.
Teaches, first that the issues of life and death, are in Gods own hand:
Secondly that if a man escape danger or distress it is by the Lord only,
and not by his own strength, or any thing in him: Thirdly, that the Lord is
not skant, or pinching in his goodness, but plentifullye powers it forth,
upon those that are his. Verse 5. Teaches us, that those which fear the
Lord can want nothing that good is: Secondly that he graciously brings his
children to a good old age, and makes them to pass through the miseries
thereof with as great joy, as in the days of their youth. Verse 6. Teaches
that howsoever men deal unjustly, yet the Lord will deal uprightly, which
is a great comfort unto his children. Verse 7. Teaches that it is a singular
grace of GOD to have his word, and that declared also unto men by faithful
ministers. Verse 8. Teaches us to set against our own wretchedness and
miserye, the abundaunt riches of Gods eternal mercy. Verse 9. Teaches us,
that this is no small comfort, that Gods anger indureth not long toward his
children: See Psalm. 30.5. Verse 10. Teaches us that howesoeuer our sins
deserve eternal death: yet GOD does but beat us in this life, to the end
we might be saved in the life to come. Verse 11. Teaches us, that Gods
mercy is infinyte, and incomprehensible. Verse 12. Teaches us that sin and
iniquity shall never be laid to the charge of Gods elect. Verse 13. Sets
out the exceeding love of GOD, toward his sons and servants. Verse 14.
Teaches that even our own miserable state and condition, does move the Lord
in mercy to deal with us. Verse 15.16. Under the similitude of the grass,
flower, wind etc. do set forth, not only the shortness, but also the miseries
and troubles of man's life in this life. Verse. 17. Teaches that though man be
subject to change, yet God is always like unto himself: and that there is no
end or measure of his goodness toward them that fear him. Ver. 18.
Teaches us, that there must be joined with the knowledge of Gods word,
practice and obedience: also that man must diligently meditate in the law of
the Lord, and his commandments, to the end they may perform the things
prescribed in the same. Verse 19. Sets out the largeness of Gods kingdom,
which is comfortable to the godly, because thereby we see that devils and
wicked men can not do what they list. Verse 20. In the Angels examples we
learn willing obedience, to the voice and word of the Lord. Verse 21.22.
Teach us that if all Gods creatures should praise the Lord, much more man that
excellent creature, not only because that for his sake all things were
created, but also because he has received infinite numbers of benefits above
the rest. Ver. 22. And these words, in all places of his dominion, teach Gods
children, never to be ashamed in any place to set forth the praises of their
loving GOD: and in that he does end the Psalm, with the same sentence, that
he did begin it, he does not only show, how excellent a thing the
Sacrifice of thanksgiving is, but also how dull men are thereto, and that
makes him in this Psalm, to double and treble that sentence, that so he
might the better stir them up to the perfourmaunce of that great duty.

Psalm 104
THe Psalm of it self comprehends diverse and sundry matters, and therefore
can not easily and fitly be divided. 1. to the end of the 10. In the second
he painteth out the singular providence of 11. to the end of the 23. And in
the third part he does 24. to the end of the Psalm.

This Psalm has no title, as many other Psalms have not: 1. My soul praise
thou the Lord 103.1.] O Lord my GOD [ i. the only true God, whom I thy
poor servant worshippe] thou art exceeding great [ vz. in majesty, power
glory, etc. as may appear by that which followeth] thou art clothed with glory
and honor [ i. thou art compassed about on every side with it, and haste it in
great abundaunce: and all this as many other things in this Psalm, are spoken
of GOD according to man's capacity.] Verse 2. Which covers himself with light
as with a garment [ i. his honor and glory does greatly appear, even in the
creation of the light: so that though GOD be invisible in respect of his own
nature, yet his glory is sufficiently manifested and shining forth,
throughout the worlde] and spreads out the heavens like a curtain [ i.
lays them abroad, so that they may euidentlye be seen, as a thing spread
out: by heavens he understands the firmament, which also has his name in the
Hebrewe tongue of stretching out or ouerspreading, it should seem that in
this ver. he means that which is expressed, Genesis 1.3.6. And mark how in
this verse and the rest following, 3. Which lays the beams of his chambers
in the waters [ i. whose government stretches even unto the very deapthes of
the waters. The speech is somewhat dark, but it is uttered to bring men into
the greater admiration, meaning that we need not to ascend so high as heaven
to find GOD out, for if we look below, we shall find lively portraitures
of his glorye] and makes the clouds his chariotes [hee means that GOD the
governor of the world, turns the clouds, winds etc. according to his good
pleasure, even as easily as the cocheman does his chariot] and walks [ vz.
as a ruler and gouernour] upon the wings of the wind [hee means that he
governs 18.10.11. Also Isaiah. 19.1.] Verse 4. Which makes the spirits his
messengers [ i. he uses the winds and fire, as messengers, ministers and
executioners of his will and judgments: so that in respect of their obedience,
they have even the name of Angels, as it were, given unto them] and a flaming
fire his ministers [ i. he sends forth thundringes, lightninges, and such
other like strange things in the air, both to terrify men, and to perform
whatsoever he appoints them. The Apostle, Hebrews 1.7. applies this to
Angels and ministering spirits.] Ver. 5. He set the earth upon her foundations
[ i. by his virtue and power, he has made it firm, stable, and sure, even as
a frame set upon a good foundation stands fast] so that it shall never move
[ vz. ordinarilye, and in a continual course, otherwise this place lets
not, but that through Gods special appointment there may be terrible and
fearful earthquakes. And that word, never, must be understood, so long as
the world indureth: and also having respect unto other creatures: which by
reason of 6. Thou [ vz. O Lord: observe the sudden change of the person]
coueredst it [ vz. the earth] with the deep [ vz. waters. This may be
understood, either of that which is spoken Genesis 1.2. or of the general
flood, at both which times all the earth was ouercouered with waters] as with a
garment [ i. every where, and in every place] the waters will stand [ vz. even
at this day] above the mountains [ vz. unless they were kept through thy
power and providence within the bounds and borders which thou have set them.]
Verse 7. q.d. even at thy bare word, and angry countenance only] they flee [
vz. backewarde, even as though they were discomfited, so that we see they can
not rage whither they would: and by that means they are in steed of an
ornament and beautifying unto the earth: some, and that not amiss neither,
refer it to the parting of the waters from the dry land, mentioned Genesis
1.6.] at the voice of thy thunder [by rebuke before, and thunder in this place,
he means nothing but that commandment of GOD, by which he represseth the
raging of the Seas] they haste away [ vz. into the places that thou have
appointed them.] Verse 8. And the mountains ascend i. appear and show
forth themselves after the departure of the waters] and the valleis descend [
i. are made manifest also] to the place which thou have established for them [
i. they lie and are settled in those places, which thou have appointed them.
Though this sense carry with it some probabilitye, yet by reason of that which
goes before, spoken of the waters and floods, and by reason of that which
follows in the next verse spoken of them also, I would this verse wholly
restored out of Immanuel thus.] They [ vz. the waters] went up by the hills,
and went down through the valleis, in to the place, which thou had
establisted for them. q.d. thou had no sooner spoken the word, but they
made a way for themselves, even through thick and thin as we would say,
sparing nothing, till they came to the place that thou had appointed and
set for them: so that neither the high mountains could hinder them, nor the
low valleys contain, but of necessity, to that place they must go, which
thou had set for them.] Verse 9. Thou [ vz. O Lord only, and none vz. by
thy almightye word, and commandment: as Job. 38.10.] them [ i. all waters,
either of Seas, or otherwise] a bond [ i. a certain compass and course] which
they shall not pass [ vz. though they do what they can and rage never so
sore. See Job. 38.10.11. also Jeremy 5.22.] They [ i. the waters generallye]
shall not return [ vz. by any strength they have of themselves or otherwise]
to cover the earth [ vz. as they have done heretofore. Genesis 1. verse 2.6.9.
or else as they did in the time of the flood. Genesis 7.19. etc. it may well
be referred to both: to the former, because GOD by creation has set them an
ordinary course, and to the latter, because he has promised he will never
destroy the world with water again, Genesis 9.15.] Verse 10. He [ i. vz. by
his eternal appointment and power] the springs into the valleys [the Prophet
means, that by Gods decree and appointment, the fountains and springes keep
their course, even in those places, that he has assigned them, that is in the
vales and lenelles of the lande] which [ vz. fountains or springes run
between the mountains [ q.d. not withstanding that they seem to be little
things, yet God does sometimes so increase them, that they rise as high as
some part of the mountains. This serves to set out Gods power in the
ordinarye government: even of his creatures also.] Ver. 11. They [ i. the
waters and springes] shall give drink [ vz. in great plenty and abundance] to
all the beasts of the field [ vz. so that not one of any kind shall be
excepted, and he speaks rather of beasts then of men, the better to set out
the grace of GOD, not only in that he provides for brute beasts, but also in
that he gives them, which drink more then men, such great abundaunce of it]
and the wild asses, shall quench their thirst [ q.d. even the beasts that
drink most, by reason of their heat shall not only be satisfied, but leave
abundaunce beside: of the wild ass, See Job. 39. ver. 8.9. ] Ver. 12. By
these springes [ vz. spoken of before] shall the fowls of the heaven [ i. the
birds of the air: heaven put for the air, See Matthew. 6.26.] dwell [ i. abide
and continue, and that with delight, which he expresses afterwardes] and
shall sing [ vz. for joy and pleasure that they shall take therein] among the
branches [ vz. of the trees, that stand along by the rivers sides.] 13. He [
i. God] waters the mountains [ i. powers down abundance of waters upon
the mountains, so that by reason of the rain which he sends, he makes,
the mountains otherwise barren, very fruitfull] from his chambers [ i. from
the clouds: which are said to be Gods chambers, because it seems to us,
that the Lord dwells in and above them, so that chambers is taken in an
other sense here, then in verse 3. of this Psalme] and the earth [ i. the whole
world so that there is no part exempted, no nor no creature either man or
beast, as may appear by that which follows in this Psalme] is filled [ vz.
plentifully, and in very great abundaunce] with the fruit of thy works [ i.
with those fruits which by thy works thou do graciously minister unto
them: which fruits also through thy blessing and commandment the earth it
self does yield. And mark the sudden change of the 14. He [ i. God]
causes [ vz. by his almighty power, as the first cause, and by rain and dew
from heaven, as the second cause] grass to grow [ vz. upon the earth] for
the cattle [ i. for the use of cattle, that it may be meat unto them] and
herb [ i. every green thing, see Genesis 1, 29.] for the use of man [ i. for
man to use either necessarily or of pleasure] that he [ vz. man, being
strengthened by the use of the herbs, trees, etc.] may bring forth [ vz. by
his ordinary labor and trauayle] bread [though the Prophet mean it
principally of bread, yet he understands also thereby all manner of
sustenaunce] out of the earth [ vz. labored and tilled, in the sweat of man's
face, Genesis 3.18.19. Immanuel reads the latter part of the ver. thus] that
they [ i. both man and beast, reading it in the plural number] may fet meat out
of the earth [ i. may have al manner of food ministered unto them out of the
earth, for the maintaynaunce of their life: whatsoever it be, all comes to
one end, vz. to show that God by his power does this and does that.] Verse 15.
And wine [ vz. God giueth] that makes glad the heart of man [ i. makes
31.6.7.] and oil to make the face to shine [ i. to make him seem to have a
merry and cheerful countenance: he speaks this according to the manner of
those hot countries, wherein men used with savors and oyntmentes, both to
strengthen and refresh themselues] and bread [ vz. he gives also understanding
by bread, as before verse 14] that strengthens man's heart [ i. which is a
good mean to ad strength and courage to a man's stomach. And mark the Prophets
course: he shows in this place that God plentifullye gives unto all his
creatures, and namely unto man, not only life, but al things necessary for the
maintaynaunce thereof. Whether they be things necessary, as bread and food,
or profitable as wine and drink, or serving to pleasure, delighte, or
comeliness of the body, as oil and ointments, etc.] Verse 16. The high Trees
vz. with moisture, dew, and rain, sent from the Lord to make them grow and
increase] even the Cedars of Lebanon [see Psalm 29, 5.] which he has planted
[ i. which the Lord himself has caused to grow: which sort of Trees must
needs excel them that are set by Art.] Verse 17. That the birds [ vz. of the
Woods and Forests, yea the very fowls vz. in those trees, because they are so
great, high and mighty. The Prophet does not mean only as I take it, that God
ordained the Trees to this end, that birds might build their neasts therein,
but also to show the greatness of Gods power in creating such great trees, as
are able to receive the Fowls of the ayre] the storke dwells in the Fur
trees] he means not only that they build their neasts there for their young
ones 18. The high Mountains [ vz. otherwise barren and bare, are yet
notwithstanding good and profitable] are for the Goats [ vz. good to feed on
and to live in] the Rocks are a refuge for the Conies [ vz. to keep them safe
in, as it were from al distress and 19. He [ vz. God] appointed [ vz. by the
order which he himself set in creation] the Moon [ i. that glorious and
excellent creature] for certain seasons [ i. not only to distinguish the night
from the day, and other times spoken of, Gene. 1.14. etc. as months, years,
etc. but also for some principal feasts observed in the lawe] and the sun [
i. that other great and excellent creature] knows [ vz. by the bounds and
orders which God has set out] his going down [ i. in what part it should
set, according to the several quarters of the year.] Verse 20. Thou make
darkness [ i. thou causest darkness to come in an ordinarye course. And not
as though GOD did every night make new darkness, for he did once create the
same, Gene. 1.2. to continue as the rest of his creatures] and it is night [ i.
night comes presently, for none is able to let or withstand it] wherein [ i.
in which darkness and night] all the beasts of the forest [ i. a great
number of ravening and devouring beasts, which in the day time durst not
for fear of man show their heads: amongst these he reckons up the Lion in
the next verse] creep forth [ vz. out of their holes and dens, where they
21. The Lions [ i. even the young, lusty, and strong Lyons] roar [ vz. in that
darkness and nighte] after their pray [ i. after a pray that they would
gladlye get and obtain, to satisfye their hunger withall] and seek their
meat at GOD [the Prophet means not that they stay themselves upon the care
which GOD has over them, for that they cannot do, but he shows that GOD
does myraculouslye give meat to the Lions and other devouring beasts, yea
although they live by spoil and ravening, which serves wonderfullye to set
forth God his power and providence, which is the special mark, 22. When the
Sun ryseth [the Prophet shows that GOD so distributeth the time, that the
day belongs unto man, and the night to ravenous beasts: whose cruelty is
in part also restrained by the light of the Sun or day: so that they are
thereby as it were constrained, to keep themselves in their dens to the end
that man may more safelye go about his businesse] they retire [ i. those
ravenous Beasts of the Forrestes] and couche in their Dens [ i. lie still
and quietlye there, without annoying 23. Then [ i. at the Sun rising, and
when the wild beasts are in their Caves and holes] goes man forth, [ i.
mankind or the people which inhabit the earth] to his work and to his
labor [ i. to the affairs and businesses which thou haste appointed him to
do: which is called his, because he is Gods Instrumente in the performaunce
thereof] until the evening [whiche time thou of thy goodness, 24. O Lord
[the Prophet in this sentence uses both an exclamation, and a wondering, after
that he had, as before, spoken of the merueylous uses of GOD his gouernmente]
how manifold [ i. not only diverse in respect of kind, but innumerable in
respect of multitude] are thy works [ i. the things that thou haste created
and made] in wisdom [ i. in such great and excellent wisdom haste thou
made them all [ vz. generally and particularlye, as none is able to control
either the whole, or any part thereof. The Prophet means, that Gods
workemanshippe is so exquisite, that there is no confusion either in the whole
or in part: some expound it thus] In wisdom have thou made them all [ i. by
wisdom, meaning his eternal Son, as Proverbs 8, verse 22, etc. unto the
end of the Chapter, but notwithstanding I like the former sense better] the
earth [ i. the whole world, and the people that dwell therein] is full of thy
riches [ i. is plentifullye replenished with varyetie of thy greatness, which
are great testimonies 25. So is the Sea [ q.d. as the earth is filled with thy
riches, so is the Sea likewise, from the testimonies of Gods grace and
goodness upon the Land, he comes to the Sea which he sets out as it
were a new glass, wherein men may behold Gods power and wisedome] great and
wide [hee attributes two Titles to the Sea: the one noting the force thereof,
the other the largeness, both yet tending to manifest Gods power, which had
replenished so huge a place with such wonderful store and varietye of
creatures] for therein [ i. in the Sea] are things, [ vz. which thou haste
created] creeping [ vz. according to the order which thou haste set: meaning
by this term, swimming, and living in the Waters] innumerable [hee shows
that the creatures of GOD in the Sea can not be numbered, much less can those
in Heaven, and these in earth, and altogether] both small Beasts and great [
q.d. There is not only innumerable store, but varietye of kinds also, all
which sets forth still Gods mighty power.] Verse 26. There [ i. in that
Sea] go the Ships [ i. they q.d. Even that same great monstrous Fish is in
the Sea also, see Job. 40. verse 20. to the end of the Chapter, and Job 41.
throughout] whom thou have made to play therein [ i. to swim up and down at
his pleasure: q.d. This only Sea beast, does sufficyently set out unto us
the fearful power of GOD, whose styrring though it trouble the seas, yet is
it nothing but sport in respect of GOD.] Verse 27. All these [ vz. thy
creatures, whether they be in the vz. not only to have food and sustenaunce
as follows, but to be disposed of even as shall please thee, without whom
they can do nothing] that thou [ vz. through thy providence and appoyntment]
may give them [ vz. of thy gracious goodness and mercy] food [ vz to eat
upon and lay by] in due season [ i. in that time wherein thou thy self haste
appointed with thy self to bestow it upon them.] Verse 28. Thou give it [
vz. graciously and plentifullye] vz. when they are in need and wante] and they
gather it [ vz. to their comfort and sustentation] thou openest thine hand
[hee seems here to resemble GOD to a good Father or Master of a householde,
who many times with holds from his children and Servants, to the end that
they might learn to set a better price upon them, which when he seems then
inclined unto, then he bestows these things upon them] and they are filled
with good things [ vz. from thee: by opening of the hand, he means Gods
great liberalitye: and by filling with good things he understands the
effect of that grace.] Verse 29. But if i. if thou show not thy self
favorable and merciful unto them but leave them. He shows that even GOD
his very countenance gives even being and moving, and life unto all
things.] they are troubled [ vz. beyond all measure, so that they even seem
to be without all life or being.] If thou take away their breath [ i. that
kind of life which thou have given them, see Genesis 1, verse 24.] they die
and return to their dust [ vz. out of which they were taken: and not that it
30. Again, if thou [ vz. O Lord: the Prophets mind is to show, that the
death and life of all creatures is in the Lords power only] send forth thy
spirit [ i. thy quickening and lively power: some refer it to the holy Ghost,
I suppose both senses may very well stand, provided also that we fall not into
the error of some who supposed that the spirit did essentially dwell in men and
other creatures] they are created [ i. not only restored into their former
state, by thy favorable countenance, after they have been troubled by
withholding thy goodness from them, as verse 29 of this Psalm, but also by
propagation of seed and offspring, they are as it were anew, through ye strength
of thy commandment and blessing, Genesis 1. in sundry places created] and thou
renuest the face of the earth [ i. though thou seem to man, by reason of the
death which falls upon creatures to be a wonderful decay of earthly
creatures, yet by raising up the like in their rooms, upon the upper part of
the earth, thou give as it were a new face and countenance again unto the
same.] Verse 31. i. take singular delight and pleasure] in his works [ i. in
the works and creatures which he has made. The Prophet adds unto his
former praising of God for his power and goodness, a prayer to the Lord for
the continuance of the same toward his creatures. I know others expound it
otherwise, but me thinks this is a 32. He [ vz. God] looks [ vz. with his
angry countenance as it were] on the earth [ i. on the world it self, and all
things therein contayned] and it trembles [ vz. for fear and reverence of his
maiestie] he touches the mountains and they smoke [ q.d. the Lord needs
not to do much to testify his wrath, for even the very Mountains by touching
them shall burn and consume. All this is nothing else but a consideration of
the great power 18, 7, 8, 9. etc.] Verse 33. I will sing unto the Lord [ i. I
will praise him, pray unto him, and serve him, for he puts one part of Gods
service for the whole: q.d. Even the greatness of his power and majesty,
shall be one mean to draw me on to the service and obedience of him, and that
not for a small time only, but all my life long] I will praise my God while I
live [this is the same with that which went before, the doubling of it notes
the resolute purpose which the Prophet had to perform 34. Let my words be
acceptable unto him [hee promised before praise and thanksgiving: and now he
desires that that service may be pleasant in his sight. I understand by
words not only the words of his prayers, though them cheefely indeed, but all
his other speeches whatsoever, see Psalm 19, 14.] I will rejoice in the Lord
[ q.d. I will remove all my thoughts, from the pleasures and profits of this
life, to the end I may stay 35. Let the sinners [ i. the notorious wicked
men see Psalm 1. ver. 1.5.] be consumed [ vz. utterly, lest they should infect
others, and stay from the ye godly abundance of graces and blessings] out of
the earth [ vz. wherein they dwell: and thus he prays against the ungodly,
whom the Lord had sealed up against the day of his wrath] and the wicked [ vz.
men of the world, meaning by wicked men, them that foster and food themselves
in wickednesse] till there be no more [ vz. of them left upon the earth: he
desires an utter taking away of the ungodly, both of their persons and
memories] O my soul praise thou the Lord [see verse 1. of this Psalm, where
you have the same words. In these words he provoke himself to praise the
Lord, as in these words following] praise ye the Lord [he provoke the
rest of the godly and faithful to do the like. And thus much for the sense
of this Psalm: the doctrines follow in order.

Verse 1 teaches us, to stir up our selves to the praises of God: De.
it teaches us also that Gods power and glory, does after a sort crave the
same at our hands. Verse 2 shows that even in Gods creatures, we have
evident glasses wherein to behold his Majesty, power, etc. the self same
thing does ver. 3 and and many other verses in this Psalm teach. Verse 3
teaches that God by his power rules the waters, the clouds, the winds, etc.
the same doctrine does verse 4 deliver. Verse 5 teaches that whatsoever
firmity the earth has, it has it from the Lord, and not of it self. Verse 6,
7, teach that neither the waters nor any other creature can go further then the
Lord appoynteth them: and that his only word without any deed as it were, is
sufficient to stay the rage of them all. Verse 8, and 9. teach the self same
doctrine: see Proverbs 8.29. Verse 10.11, teach that all blessings whatsoever,
yea and the abundaunce of them come from the Lord only. Verse 12 teaches that
God has made his creatures not only profitable for man, but one of them
joyful and delightful to another. Verse 13 teaches that God can by moisture
as a mean, make barren places plentiful: also that there is no place of the
world wherein there is not to be seen abundaunce of his blessings, though in
some places more then in other some, as must be confessed. Verse 14 teaches
what care God has over his creatures, in giving them all things necessary
for the mayntainaunce of life. Verse 15 sets out Gods large liberality, who
gives us all things of pleasure, as well as of profit, contrary to the
assertion of Anabaptists, who would have us use nothing for necessity only.
Verse 16 teaches that which god does, far excels all done by art or
wit of man. Verse 17, 18. show that God has made all creatures one of them
to be delightful and profitable to an other, see before verse 12. Verse 19
does not only express Gods power and providence in the Sun and Moon, but
their obedience also to that course set them: which should teach us to
walk with care and conscience before him. Verse 20.21.22.23. set forth Gods
great care for man and beast, who has distributed to either of them times for
their labor, and times for their rest, which also teaches us to beware that
we turn not the day into night, nor the night into day, without some very
special and urgent occasion. Verse 24 teaches us that the variety and plentye
of GOD his creatures, should not only draw us into a maruayling at them and
their Creator, but also into a praising of him for the same. Verse 25 teaches
us that even the Sea as well as the Land, does lively express the greatness
of GOD his power and goodness. The same in particularitye does verse 26.
which verse 25 did generallye. Verse 27 does not only set out the largeness
of Gods providence, which stretches it self to all creatures: but also it
teaches us with patience to attend for every thing necessary, from the
Lords hand in due season. Verse 28 teaches that Gods free and only
liberalitye, is the very cause of all goodness toward all his creatures.
Verse 29 teaches us that the want of feeling of Gods favor, is the fountain
of all woe, disquietnesse, death, etc. Verse 30 teaches us that the
continuance of Creatures is not only by an ordinary course of nature, but
specially by the commandment and blessing of almighty GOD. Verse 31 teaches
us to praise GOD continually for his mercy, and to pray for the continuance
thereof. Verse 32 teaches us to stand in awe of so great a Majesty, as can
do whatsoever pleases him both in heaven and in earth. Verse 33 teaches us
to carrye with us holy purposes to serve the Lord as long as we live, and
carefully to labor the performance thereof. Verse 34 teaches us to pray that
even our prayers may be regarded in Gods sight. Verse 35 teaches us that we
may sometimes pray against the wicked and ungodly: also that we should
carefully stir up both our selves and others to praise the Lord.

Psalm 105
26. In the third he sets out both what judgments GOD brings upon
their enemies for their sakes, and also what mercies he shows them after
their delivery from verse 27 to the end of the Psalm.

1. Chronic. 16.7.8. etc. that David made it, and committed it to Asaph and his
brethren to sing it. And it hangs well with the other Psalms before going, vz.
Psalm 103. and Psalm 104. and also with Psalm 106.107. following, al being
Psalms to stir up the Church to praise God: partly for his graces toward the
Church, Psalm 103, and generallye toward all creatures, Psalm 104: and
partly for benefits upon the faithful even by trying and correcting them,
Psalm 105, 106. and lastly for graces toward all men, Psalm 107.] Verse 1.
Praise the Lord [ vz. all ye good and faithful people, i. fear his Majesty,
but specially pray unto him, putting one part of Gods service for the whole]
declare [ vz. openly and plainly and that in every place] his works [ i. the
maruaylous things that he has done] among the people [ vz. not only of
Judea, but of the whole earth.] Verse 2. Sing unto him, sing praise unto vz.
alone: the doubling of the word serves both to stir us up, and also to note
the excellency of that Sacrifice of thanksgiving. Some make this difference
between the two words, that the first singing should be with the mouth,
and the latter singing with musical Instruments according to the Lawe] and
talk [ vz. amongst your selves, openly and every where] of all his wondrous
works vz. which he has done for you, and your Fathers: so that we should
as near as we can call to remembrance all Gods graces and mercyes bestowed
upon us.] Verse 3. Rejoice i. show your selves glad in that great power
and Majesty of his: which besides the excellencye thereof, contains in it
holiness also] let the heart [ i. the inward affection, as well as the
outward behauiour] of them that seek the Lord [ vz. vnfeignedlye and with a
good heart, understanding by seeking of the Lord, serving of him according to
his will revealed in his worde] rejoice [ vz. in the Lord, and be glad even
for this, that he gives them grace to seek and serve him.] Verse 4. Seek
the Lord [ vz. earnestlye, and that even now while he may be found, as
Isaiah 55.6,] and his strength [ 1. the Arc of the Couenaunte, from whence the
Lord gave euidente testimonye of his power and might: See 2. Chronicles 6.
verse 41. also Psalm 78. verse 61.] seek his face [ i. the arc of
couenaunte, which is also called Gods face, because from thence GOD gave
plain testimonies of his favor and goodness toward his people] continually
[ i. so long as you live: q.d. Be never wearye of doing that duty.] Verse 5.
Remember [ i. deeply and diligently think upon, i. the great and wonderful
things which he has don for his people: and he calls the^ maruailous,
because ye Gods marvelous power declared it self in the^, even so yt a man
might easily judge yt they came from him] that he has done [ vz. in time
heretofore, and that for you and your fathers] his wonders [ i. the strange
things which he has done, far beyond the reach and compass of man's wit] and
the judgments of his mouth [ i both the punishments which he has threatened
against others, and also the law and word he has given unto you, for I would
refer it to both these.] Verse 6. Ye seed of Abraham i. O ye that come of
Abraham and his posterity according unto the flesh] his servant [ i. that
served GOD: he sets before them their Fathers example, the better to draw
them on to the performaunce of that great dutye] ye children of Iaakob [ i. O
ye that come of Iaakob] which are his elect [ i. which he has freely chosen from
amongst al other nations: and here he uses another 7. He [ vz. alone, and
none other but he is the Lord our God [ i. he that governs us, and upon whom
we our selves depend] his judgments [ vz. against sin and ungodliness,
meaning by judgments, punishments] are through all the earth [ i. are made
manifest in all the world, though perhaps men have not eyes to see the same: or
else we may take judgments for rule, guiding and government: so you have the
word, to judge, used Psalm 98, 9. meaning that Gods government 8. He has always
remembered his covenant and promise [ vz. made with his sons and servant:
mening by remembered not only thinking upon it, but also the execution and
performaunce of it] that he made [ vz. of his own accord and free goodnesse]
to a thousand generations [ i. not only to infinite numbers of people, putting
a number certain for an uncertain, but also to last and endure for ever.
Verse 9. Even vz. couenaunt] which he made with Abraham [ vz. our Father, see
Genesis 12, 2, 3] and his oath unto Isaak [see Genesis 26.3.4. etc. and he
uses the word, oath, to note the certainty and assuredness of the couenaunte
passed 10. And since [ vz. the time of Abraham and Izaak, meaning after their
death] has confirmed it [ vz. both by word and deede] to Iaakob [Isaaks son,
yet so, that he understands under him his posterity also] for a law [ i. as a
thing that should continue and abide without any alteration or chaunge] and to
Israel [ i. unto Iaakob, for he had two names, as appears Genesis 32, 28.]
for an everlasting covenant [ i. referred to Iaakob and his posterity, to
last and continue for a long while, see Genesis 28, 13, 14, 15, for his seed
has not always possessed that land: but referred to Christ 11. Saying [the
Prophet recites Gods own wordes] unto thee [ vz. and thy posterity after
thee, but he names him as the cheefest] will I give [ vz. of my free goodness
and mercy onlye] the land of Canaan [he means the whole Country wherein
dwelt seven nations greater and mightier then the Jews, see for this promise
also Genesis 35.12] the lotte of your inheritance [ q.d. which land falls for
your inheritance, as it were by lot, see Deuteronomy. 32, 9. the word that we turn
lot, is in the Hebrewe text cord or line, because that by cords or lines in
those days they used to measure out inheritaunces: see Psalm 16. verse 6.]
and that word, your inheritance, that God made his covenant in that respect
with the whole people generally.] 12. Albeit they were few in number [ q.d. in
this gracious covenant making, as the multitude did not move him, as Deuteronomy. 7,
7. so the paucitie or fewness of them did not discourage him] yea very few
[and as a man would say, scarce two persons in respect, see Genesis 34, 30.]
and strangers vz. which he had promised them and they possessed.] Verse 13.
And walked about [ vz. so uncertain was their estate, being enforced so to
do, sometimes by occasion of famine, and sometimes through other means: see Genesis
chap. 12, 10, also chap. 20, 1, 2. etc. chap. 26.1. etc. see also chap. 46.
throughout] from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people [he
means that they had no long continuance in any place, but were still flitting
and removing too and fro, sometimes here, sometimes there.] Ver. 14. Yet [ q.d.
for all their distresses Sarah, the deflowring of Dinah, and such like, were
all iniuryes] but reproved Kings for their sake [as appears Genesis 12.17. also
20.3.] Verse 15. Touch not [ vz. to their hurt or hinderaunce] mine anointed,
i. those whom I have anointed to my self with the graces of the holy spirit:
and he means ye holy fathers under this name, because he had peculiarly
consecrated them unto himself, or as it were sanctified them for his special
inheritance] and do my Prophets no harm [he calls ye Fathers Prophets, not
only because God did sundry ways declare himself unto the^, but also because
they were his instruments faithfully to spread abroad ye heavenly doctrine, yt
the remembrance thereof might be in force among their posterity: see Genesis 18.19.
Genesis 20.7. and compare the^ with this place] Ver. 16. Moreover [ d.q. besides
their wa^dring 13. of this Psalm and as he did not destitute the^ in that, so
not in this famine.] he called [ i. by his mighty word and power he caused to
come: see 2. Kin. 8.1. Hagg. 1.11] a famine [which was as ye minister and
messenger of his wrath to the wicked, so a rod of trial to the good] upon the
land [ i. upon the people of the land: meaning also yt he did strike ye land
with barre^nes, which was ye cause of famine amongst the people: see this
history Genesis 42 in the beginning] and utterly brake [ i. took away, so that it
was of no force] the staff of bread [ i. ye strength of food and sustenance.
I take this prase in this place to mean, not only ye God did withdraw the
secret force and power that bread has by his appointmente to nourish and
maintain man's life, which is threatened in the Law Leuit. 26. ver. 26. because
men leave upon bread for their maintenance, as they do upon a staff for
their defense and upholding, but also, yea and rather this then the other, yt
God sent a grievous famine upon the^, so that they had little or nothing to
^at.] Ver. 17. But he [ vz. God: q.d. He did not for all that famine forsake
them] sent a man [ vz. an excellent and singular man] before the^ [ vz. into
Egypt to provide both for himself and them, that they should not perish by
famine, see Genesis 45.5. This declares yt whatsoever fell upon this people was
guided by the hand and counsel of god] Joseph [now he names that excellent
ma^] was sold [ vz. even by his brethren] for a slave [ i. to be a slave, and
not as though he were changed for a slave read this history Genesis 37, 28.] Ver.
18. They [ i. either the Egiptians through i. kept him a long while in prison,
and dealt hardly with him, as though he had bin guilty of some deadly crime,
see Genesis 39.20.] and he was laid in yrons [ i. he was hardly and roughly
handled.] Ver. 19. until his appointed i. until the time which the Lord had
appointed for Joseph's delivery was fulfilled. But it shall be good to amend it
out of Imma. thus] until the time, in which his word [ i. gods word] should
come [ vz. to be fulfilled and performed by god himself, who had in a dream
showed to Joseph what should come unto him, Genesis 37, 7, 9] and the council of
ye Lord had tried him [ vz. so far forth as to him seemed good: he means by
this speech, al yt which god had ordained 20. The King [ vz. Pharaoh] sent [
vz. his servants and messengers] and losed him [ vz. out of prison, meaning yt
by special commandment, he appointed him to be set at liberty] even ye ruler
of ye people delivered vz. out of prison and danger, see Genesis 41, 14.] Ver. 21.
He [ i. ye King of Egipt] made him [i. Ioseph] Lord of his house [ i. governor
of all both men and things in his family] and ruler of al his substance [ i. of
al yt he had, whether it were 41.40.] Ver. 22. That he [i. Ioseph] should bind
his Princes [ i. Pharaohs noble men and gouernors] unto his will [ i. to ye
execution and performance of that, yt Joseph himself would have and command: in
these words, he notes the largenes of government which Pharaoh gave to Joseph,
so yt all (the King himself only excepted) was at his beck, see Genesis 41.44]
teach his antie^ts wisdom [as he did Genesis 41, 33, 34, etc. understanding by
ancients, al his wise noble 23. The^ [ vz. after that god had thus adua^ced
Ioseph] Israel [i. Iaakob and al his people, for he puts ye principal man of
ye familye for ye whole] came to Egypt [ vz. not only to see Joseph, but also
to tarry and abide there, see Genesis 46.1, etc.] and Iaakob [ i. he and his
posterity] was a stranger [ i. dwelt and soiorned as a stranger] in the land of
Ham [ i. in Egypt, which is called the land of Ham, because they came of Ham,
Noah's second son, as appears Genesis 10.6. see before Psalm. 78, 51. and ver. 27.
of this Psalm.] 24. And [for this word read, where, and then the sense will be
more plaine] he [ i. God] increased [ vz. through his especial blessing] his
people [ vz. of Israel] exceedingly [ vz. into an infinite multitude and number
in respect of them which went down into Egipt] and made them stronger [ vz. both
in power and might] then their oppressors [ i. then ye Egyptians who oppressed
them, and by reason of their multitude and increasing of the^ stood in fear of
the^, see for this Exodus 1.7, 8, etc.] 25. He [ vz. God] turned their hearts [
i. the hearts of the posterity of ye king and the people of Egypt, as appears
also Exodus 1.8, etc.] to that his people [wheras their predecessors loved and
favored the] and to deal craftily [he means by this speech ye subtle, wicked
and cruel devises, that the Egiptians had, to keep the people of Israel under,
mentioned Exodus 1. ver. 8, 10, 11, etc.] with his servants [ i. with those whom
the Lord had chosen and called to serve him. These speeches in outward show
seem to make god ye author and cause of sin: but we must note that the
Prophet means not any such thing thereby, but to declare yt in that the
Egiptians hated and dealt cruelly with the children of Israel, it was not don
without Gods providence and counsel, yet so that the root and seed of malice,
corruption, and cruelty was wholly in the Egyptians, and that no 26. Then [ i.
when the Egiptians did deal so wickedly and cruelly against his people] sent
he [ vz. of mercy and goodness pitying their misery] Moses his servant [ i.
that excellent man, whom he had appointed to serve his turn in the delivery of
his people] and Aaron whom he had chosen [ vz. to go with Moses and to be his
mouth, in that great business: see for this matter, Exodus chapt. 3 and 4
thorowout.] Ver. 27. i. Moses and Aaron] showed [ vz. by the power that God had
given them, and according to his commaundement] among them [ i the Egiptians
and the Israelits both, but cheefely ye Egiptians] the message of his signs
[euident demonstrations and proofs, that the signs and wonders which they
wrought, they did by his power, and not otherwise] and wonders [ i. wonderful
things, meaning that they did them, a particular resitall whereof follows in
the next verses] in the land of Ham [ i. in Egipt] see before verse 23 of this
Psalm.] Verse 28. He i. God: true it is that it may be referred to Moses or
God, but I rather understand it of God, without whom Moses could do nothing,
and by whom alone Moses was enabled to do yt which he did] sent darkness [
vz. amongst the Egyptians] and made it dark [ i. made the whole land dark, so
yt nothing in it could behold any light: see this story Exodus 10.21. where you
shall find it to be one of the last plagues though here the Psalmist reckon
it up first, by which we see yt the holy Ghost is not greatly curious of order]
and they [ i. as some think, Moses and Aaron, othersome understand it of ye
signs and wonders] were not disobedient to his commission [ i. they did perform
those things which he had enioined and laid upon the^. It is not much material
whether we refer it to the men, or to the signs, but I had rather refer it to
the wonders themselves: q.d. They did readily perform that which god had
enjoined, they were not vneffectual, but were performed even as Moses had
said.] Ver. 29. He [ i. God, by i. the waters of the Egiptians] into blood [so
that they could not drink the^] and slew their fish [ vz. which were in ye
waters, see Exodus 7, 20, 21] Ver. 30. Their la^d [ i. Egypt, brought vz. in
great abundance and multitude, and that by gods specyal appointme^t] eue^ in
their kings chambers [ q.d. there was no place free from the^: Kings is here a
word of the plural number, which we must not understand as though Egypt had
many Kings, for we know it had but one, but he means thereby either the
King and the Nobles of his kingdom, who joined with him, were as it were
little Kings, or else the Kings children, who were nourished and brought up
in the hope of the kingdom. See this more largely set out Exodus 8, verse 5,
6, etc.] Ver. 31. He spoke [ q.d. The vz. immediately being sent from God]
swarms of Flies [ i. wonderful abundaunce, so that men could not say it was
natural: and the word which we turn swarms of Flies, does in deed signifye
troops of all sorts of creatures, which served also to make the miracle so
much the more straunge] and lice [ vz. he sent, and that in great store and
aboundaunce] in all their quarters [ i. in all the quarters of the land of
Egypt, see Exodus 8, verse 17, etc. unto the end of the chapeer.] Verse 32. he
gave them hail for rain [ i. whereas by reason of the drouth of ye country
they did much desire rain, the Lord gave them in steed thereof terrible and
fearful hail] and flames of fire [ vz. sent from heauen] in their land [ i made
manifest in ye land 9, 23, 24, etc.] Ver. 33. He smote their vines also, and
their fig trees [ vz. with that hail, thunder, lightning, etc. sent from
heauen] and brake down [ vz. even to peeces] the trees in their coasts [ i. the
trees that 9, 25.] Ver. 34. He spoke [ i. so soon as he spoke, see verse 31 of
this Psalme] and the grasshoppers came [ vz. in great number sent from him] and
caterpillars innumerable [ vz. to 35. And did eat up [ vz. the grasshoppers and
caterpillars did even consume and deuour] all the gras [ i. all the green and
flourishing things yt were sprouted forth] in their land [ i. in the land of
Egypt, and devoured the fruit of their ground [ i. did also consume and 10, 13,
14, etc.] Ver. 36. He smote also [ vz. in his wrath and anger, and yt not with
pain and sickness only, but even with death] all the first born in the land [
vz. both of man and beast: see Psalm. 136.6. also Psa. 78.51. Exodus 12.29.] even
the beginning of al their strength [this is another Peraphrasis of their first
born or eldest: and they are so named because their parents are of principal
force, then in the beginning of them, and their force does specially then
appear, see Genesis 49.3. Psalm. 78.51. See this story 12.29.30, etc.] Ver. 37. He
[ i. the Lord by the ministry of his servant Moses] brought them [ vz. the
people of Israell] forth [ vz. out of the land of Egypt, and yt with a mighty
hand and outstretched arm] also [ i. even as well as punished ye Egiptians: I
suppose yt the word may note ye time when god performed it, vz. after yt he had
plagued and punished ye Egiptians] with silver and gold [ vz. even as it were
faden, they had such great abundance of it, which they took from the
Egiptians: see Exodus 12.35, 36.] and there was none feeble among their tribes [
q.d. they came al out of Egypt safe and found free from al, not only outward
but inward hinderaunces, as the Lord had promised Exodus 11.7.] Ver. 38. Egypt [
i. the Egiptians putting the land for the inhabitants] was glad at their
departure [ vz. from amongst them] for the fear of them [ i. of the
Israelites: meaning yt God then had made the^ terrible and fearful to their
enemies, who but a little before did cruelly oppres them] had fallen upon them
[ i. had seized, taken hold of and possessed the hearts of the Egiptians, see
Exodus 11.8. 12.33.] Verse 39. He spread a cloud [ vz. in the day time] to be a
covering [ vz. unto his people of Israel, and that to keep them from the heat
of the sunne] and fire [ i. a pillar of fire] to give light in the night [ vz.
to lead them 13, 21.] Ver. 40. They [ i. the Israelites] asked [ vz. of god,
and yt temptingly, as Psalm. 78.18.] and he brought quails [ i. most dainty
and delicate things, so gracious was God unto them] and he filled the^ with ye
bread of heaven [ i. with Ma^na which is called the bread of heaven, because it
came from the Firmament, see for this Exodus 16. through out, also 78. verse
23.24, etc.] Ver. 41. He opened [ vz. by his almighty power] the rock [ vz. in
the Wildenesse: and he puts rock for rocks, for this miracle was performed
more then once, as may appear Exodus 17, 6, and Number. 20, 11, and by diligent
co^paring of these two places together] and the waters flowed out [ vz. in
great abundance] and ran in the dry places [ vz. where there was no water
before] like a river [ i. in great plenty and abundance, so that both men and
beasts were satisfied therewith, as Number. 20, 11. see also Psalm 78, 15, 16.]
Verse 42. For he remembered vz. even to perform it, see verse 8. of this
Psalme] his holy promise [ vz. which he had made, and the promise is called
holy, both because it came from him that is holiness it self, and also because
it contains holy things] to Abraham his servant [see ver. 6 of this Psalm. Now
he made him this promise, when he promised to bring his seed into ye land of
Canaan after 400 years: see Genesis 15, 13, etc. also Josh. 24.4, 5, etc.] Ver.
43. And he [ vz. God] brought forth [ vz. after that he had plagued ye
Egyptians] his people [ vz. of Israel] with joy [ vz. both i. that people whom
he had chosen] with gladness [ i. with mirth and singing, the truth of this
appears Exo. 15.1. etc. also, Number. 33, 3] Ver. 44. And gave them [ vz. freely
11. of this Psalme] the lands of the heathen [ i. the lands that the heathen
did inhabit and dwell in: understanding by Heathen the Amonites, Hittites, and
other people that dwelt in the land of Canaan] And they [ vz. the Israelites]
took [ vz. unto themselues] the labors of the people [ i. those things that
ye people, by great labor and travail had got unto themselues] in possession
[ i. to be a possession or inheritance for the^.] Ver. 45. That they [ vz. the
Israelites] might vz. with all their harts] his statutes [ i. Gods
co^mandements] and observe [ vz. in thought, word, and deed] his laws [ i.
those things which by his laws he commanded them to do. So that here he
notes the end wherefore God gave them those graces] praise ye the Lord [see the
last verse of Psalm 104.

Verse 1 teaches us to praise God for his mercies, 2 teaches us, both with
heart and mouth to glorify our god, and that this should be one piece of our
speech to set forth his wonderful works. Ver. 3 teaches us, that we can not
rightly rejoice in any thing, but in the power and goodness of God: it
teaches us also that none can in deed rejoice but those that love and fear the
Lord: Ver. 4 teaches us to ioin our selves to the public asse^blies of gods
church, for there ye Lord is to be found, also it teaches us the doctrine of
perseverance, that we should never be weary of well doing. Ver. 5 teaches us
that in our meditations it is good for us to ioyn Gods works and his word
together, because all the life and light that the works have, they have it from
the word. Ver. 6 teaches that chiefly and only indeed it appertains to the
faithful and their seed to praise God. Ver. 7 teaches the faithful to comfort
themselves in this, yt God is their God, and that they are under his
government. Ver. 8 shows that this is very comfortable to Gods children, that
he thinks always upon his mercies promised them to perform the same. Ver. 9,
10 sets out Gods great goodness who for the strengthening of our faith in the
truth of his promises, does not only oftentimes repeat and confirm the same,
but as it were tieth himself unto us by an oath. Ver. 11 teaches yt whatsoever
benefits either outward or inward God bestows upon his servants, he gives
the^ of his mere liberality and goodness only. Ver. 12 teaches us yt God
respects not the person of men, nor their multitude. Ver. 13 shows yt Gods
children are upon the earth strangers and pilgrims. Ver. 14 teaches yt God
does never destitute his in any distres. Ver. 15 teaches how dear Gods
children are unto him, and what care he has over them, so yt he will not have
them so much as once touched. Ver. 16 teaches that God many times even by
outward things exercises ye faith of his dearest servants. Verse 17 teaches
that he does not at any time for all that, fail the^ of any thing that is meet
for the^, it teaches also yt nothing is done without gods providence. ver. 18
sets out the hard hartednes of the wicked, and the miserable estate that the
Godly many times are brought unto. Ver. 19 shows yt there is a time set with
God, wherein he will deliver his out of danger, and clear the^ from al false
and slanderous accusations, which time it behooves the^ with patience to wait
for. Ver. 20 shows that God will make even Princes to pity his poor servants.
Verse 21 shows that after long humbling God will exalt his servants very
highly: the same lesson does ver. 22 deliver. Ver. 23 shows that God has
many ways to bring his purposes to pass as for ye delivery of his people out
of Egypt, which he had promised, to bring them into Egypt by the means of the
famine and Joseph's being there. Verse 24 teaches iij. things: first yt al
increase is of ye Lord: secondly, that do men what they can to hinder Gods
purposes, they cannot prevail: thirdly yt even the^ when men strive most
against God and his people, then does he make them principally to flourish.
Ver. 25 teaches that gods providence and counsel enters even unto wicked men's
hearts, and that they cannot hate or love the good, without Gods sufferance, and
the power that he gives the^ thereto, and yet he remains pure from al evil,
holy, and as it were an excellent workman, who in performing his work,
brings good out of evil, and light out of darkness. Ver. 26 teaches yt God
does by means work the deliverance of his people which should teach us to use
means: secondly it shows yt none should take upon them any office, but they
yt are sent of God, as was Moses and Aaron. Ver. 27 Teaches men faithfully to
do those things yt God has given them in charge to perform. Ver. 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, teach especially two things: First that nothing is don
either in heaven or earth, but by the very finger and power of almighty god,
secondly yt God has al his creatures at commandment, to use the^ at his
pleasure for ye plaguing and punishing of the ungodly. Besides this, Ver. 30.
teaches that God in pouring forth his judgments is not partial to any person
sparing kings or Princes. Ver. 31.34 declare yt even Gods word, is his deed,
for when he speaks any thing it is done as appears in the creation Genesis 1.
Ver. 37.38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, teach, first that God makes al his
creatures to serve, for the good of his children: secondly that every good
thing they have, they have from the Lord only. But more particularly. Verse 37
teaches us, that silver, gold, strength, etc. are the Lords gifts. Ver. 38
shows that God can make the very name and countenances of his servant,
fearful to them which had oppressed them. Ver. 39 teaches what a continual
care and watchfulnes ye Lord has over his servants, to keep the^ from dangers
and things yt might annoy them. Ver. 42 teaches us that Gods free promises are
the cause of all our goodness and blessedness both in this life and the life to
come. Ver. 45 teaches us yt the end, wherefore God bestows al blessings upon
us, is, that we should employ our selves more diligently and faithfully in his
service, which if we do, we shall be sure of his graces in great abundaunce and
continuance: which if we do not, we may for a time have and enjoy many outward
things, as the ungodly have, but the very having of them, will be in the end to
our great judgment.

Psalm 106
THis Psalm may be divided into three especial parts. 1 to the end of the
6. In the second part he does largely resite, as the singular graces and
goodness of 7. to the end of the 46. Now gods mercies are resited, ver. 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 15, 21, 22, 30, 31, 43, 44, 45, 46. Their sins, ver. 7, 13, 14,
16, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 28, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Their
punishments verse 15, 17, 18, 23, 26, 27, 29, 32, 40, 41, 42. In the third
part, he

The title is, praise ye ye Lord [by this we may see that it was a Psalm.
appointed 104. and also in some measure to comfort themselves with the
consideration of gods former graces. Ver. 1. Praise ye [ vz. O ye faithful and
good people] the Lord [ vz. only and none vz. toward al, but specially toward
you] for his mercy endures for ever, [this is another cause why they should
praise the Lord, because his mercy toward his is perpetual, and never shall
have end] Ver. 2. Who [ vz. amongst al his creatures] can express [ i. is able
either by thought i. the great and singular works of creation, preservation,
etc. of all his creatures, more particularly of men, but most specially of his
children] or show all his praise [ i. the praise that he does deserve for the
same. The Prophet utters not this as though he would have us utterly leave
off to praise God, because we cannot thoroughly and sufficiently perform it: but
that considering on the one side our own weakness, we should earnestly pray the
Lord to strengthen us thereto: and on the other side the excellency of his
works, should endeavor what we may to praise him therefore, knowing that he
accepts us according to that we have, 3. Blessed are they that keep
judgment, Imman. reads it in my mind better thus] that keep this order [
vz. of praising and magnifying God for his graces, though they cannot do that
which either they would or should] and do righteousness at al times [ i. that do
continually frame their life as an evident pattern, and a constant and
perpetual example of the praise of God: for so I suppose righteousness in
this place, to be used.] 4. Remember me [ vz. thy poor and unworthy Servant:
he means not that God does at any time forget those that are his: but rather
he prays the Lord to show by effect that he has care over him: see Genesis
8, 1.] O Lord [ vz. in whom alone I put my trust, and therefore as a sure
testimony thereof call upon them] with the favor of thy people [ i. with that
favor, that thou have promised and art wont to show to thy people: he calls
that free love and mercy which God carries toward his, the favor of his
people] visit [ vz. with mercy and goodness: for to visit in this place is
taken in the good part, even for the accomplishment of Gods gracious promises
toward his servants, see Genesis 21.1.] me [ vz. oppressed with mine own
grief, and the grief of my people] with thy salvation [ i. with gracious
favor and deliverance from thee, so you have had the word salvation sundry
times used before, and namely Psalm. 3.8.] ver. 5. That I may see [ vz. not only
with my bodily and spiritual eyes, but also possess and enjoy, see Psalm.
34.12. fight put for inioying] the felicity of thy chosen [ i. the blessedness
and goodness that thou bestowest upon them whom thou have chosen to thy self]
and rejoice in the joy of thy people [ i. have an occasion given me to rejoice
as thy saints and servant doe] and glory [ vz. not in my self, but in thee]
with thine inheritance [ i. with thy people, whom thou have elected 28.9.]
Ver. 6. We have sinned [ vz. against thy Maiesty] with our fathers [ i. as our
fathers have done also [ q.d. we and they also have sinned: not as though they
had both sinned at one time, but that they were al culpable of sin against him]
understanding by fathers, al their ancestors] we have committed [ vz.
continally and without ceasing] iniquity, and done wickedly [ vz. both against
God and man. The Prophet cannot content himself with any words, to set forth
ye notoriousnes of his own sins, and the sins of his 7. Our Fathers [ i. our
ancestors, as before ver. 6. of this Psalm.] understood not [ i. did not rightly
or wisely consider of] thy wonders in Egypt [ i. those great works that thou
did for their sake in that land] neither remembered they [ vz. as they
should have don, to have provoked the^ to thankfulness toward thee for ye same]
ye multitude of thy mereies [ vz. showed eue^ from the time of Abraham's
calling, unto this present, but specially those things that were done in
Egypt before their eyes] but rebelled [ vz. against thee] at the sea, even at
the red sea [for the more assurance he names the sea. And this may be
understood, either of their rebellion, Exodus 14.11. before they passed through
the sea: or else of their murmuring and rebellion after they came through the
sea. Exodus 16.2. etc. q.d. they were no sooner passed the sea but immediately
they began to rebel: or of both of them together. Immanuel reads it far
otherwise, and gives an other sense, but methinketh this is plain.] Ver. 8.
Nevertheless q.d. notwithstanding all their sinnes] he saved them [ i. he
delivered them from dangers and distress, as sundry times before] for his
names sake [ i. because he would not have his majesty, goodness and power ill
spoken of amongst the Heathen] that he might make his power to be known [
vz. thereby, and that even among all his and their enemies.] Ver. 9. 104.7.]
and it was dried up [ up. in that place through which the people had passage,
for otherwise the waters were as a wall unto them, on their right hand, and on
their left, see Exodus 14.21.22.] and he led them [ vz. safely] in the deep [
vz. of the red Sea: meaning that God carried them between two heaps of
waters, which waters gave place unto the Israelites by Gods appointment, as if
that the place it self had been by nature dry, see Exodus 15.5.] as in the
wilderness [ i. as upon the dry land, in a safe and plain way.] Ver. 10. And he
saved them [ i. delivered them, vz. the Israelites] from the adversaries hand [
i. from the power and force of them, that pursued them with a deadly hatred,
meaning the Egiptians] and delivered them from the hand of the enemy [ i. set
them free, from the power and rage of the Egiptians, counting them all but as
one enemy, because they were all of one heart and mind to do mischief to Gods
people.] Ver. 11. and the waters vz. of the red sea] covered their oppressors [
i. over whelmed and drowned them] so that not one of them was left [ vz. alive,
to carry back any tydinges, See Exodus 14.28.] Ver. 12. Then [ vz. when they
had seen, al these great things] vz. for his great mercies practiced toward
them. See the history of ver. 9.10.11.12. in the 14. and 15. chapters of the
book of Exodus.] Ver. 13. But incontinently [ i. they were almost no vz. which
he had done for them, he means not by forgetting, that the remembrance of
them, was utterly rased out of all their minds, but that they had them not in
that due and reverent regard, they should have had for the strengthening of
their faith: see for their sudden change, Exodus 15 22.23.] and waited not [
vz. with patience] for his counsel [ i. for the things, which in his eternal
counsel he had purposed to bestow upon them: his purpose is to note, that as
they would not be governed by god, suffering him to do all according to his
good pleasure, but would follow the devises of their own heads and hearts:
so they did it, though the remembrance of gods benefits were fresh before
them, which circumstance aggrauated their 14. But lusted with concupiscence [by
doubling the word, the Prophet minds not only to note the sin of their
lust, but the very burning and rage of that sin of theirs] in the wilderness
[he notes also the place, for the more certainety of the story] and tempted
God in the desert [to tempt God, is in this place, put for not staying
themselves upon Gods will, but laying the raynes in their necks, and
following their own concupiscences, to ask more of God, then he would give
them, and when he speaks of lusting and tempting we must understand, that
they did it more then once, as may appear, Exodus 15.24. Exodus 16. throughout.
Exodus 17.2. etc. Numb. 11.1. Numb. 20.3. etc.] Ver. 15. Then he gave them their
desire [ i. the things which they desired and demanded, so gracious was God,
howsoever rebellious they were] and sent leanenes into their soul [ i. into
their body, one part being put for an other: or else thus] he sent leauenes
into the soul [ i. he punishes, and that with pining away their whole man,
understanding by a part the whole, whatsoever it is, the Prophet means that
God in such sort yielded unto the desire of this people, that yet
notwithstanding in the midst of his benefits he plagued and punished them 16.
They [ i. the people of Israel, but specially Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. See
Number. 16.1.2. etc.] envied Moses in the tents [I suppose that the Prophet
means, that these rebels did secretly murmr at Moses in their tents, and
that afterward their rebellion and sins burst forth as at ye noone tyde] and
Aaron the holy one of the Lord [ i. him. whom the Lord had sanctified and
separated to serve him in the ministry and Priesthood declaring also in deed
that he was holy: See Numb. 16.5.7.] Ver. 17. Therefore [ i. for this their
great sinne] the earth opened [ vz. her mouth as it were, and that by Gods
appoyntment] and swallowed up Dathan [ vz. aliue] and covered the company of
Abiram [ i. he, and all those that took part 16.31.32.33. Deuteronomy. 11.6. Ver. 18.
And the fire [ vz. sent out from the presence of the Lord] was kindled in their
assembly [ i. began with Corahs co^pany] the flame [ vz. of that fire sent from
God] burnt up the wicked [ i. consumed them utterly: he shows how they that
took part with Korah, were punished, otherwise then Dathan and Abiram and
their companies: see 16.35.] Ver. 19. They [ vz. the Israelites] made a calfe [
i. caused a calfe to be made, which they might worship in steed of God] in
Horeb [he notes the place, for the certainty of the history] and worshipped [
vz. with outward reverence of the body, and speech of the mouth] the molten
image of a calfe, which Aaron to make, in the absence of Moses. see Exodus 32.
throughout.] Ver. 20. Thus [ i. by this means] they turned [ vz. foolishly and
wickedly] their glory [ i. God himself, who, so long as they served him only
was glorious unto them, but when they worshipped others besides him, they were
naked and lay open to their enemies, See Exodus. 32.25. The Prophet means,
that they forsook the true God, who was their only glory and honor in deed]
into the similitude of a bullock that eats grass [hee notes the grosenes
of their idolatry, not only for that they worship somewhat besides the true
God, but for that also it was not a lively and quick thing. see Romans 1.23.]
Verse 21. vz. quickly, as before, ver. 13. of this Psalme] God their savior [
i. he that had saved and delivered them, from manifold dangers, so you shall
have the word savior used. 1. Tim. 4.10.] which had done great things in Egypt
[vz. for them and their sake, a short sum whereof you may see, psalm.
105.28.29. etc.] Ver. 22. Wondrous works in the land of Ham [ i. in Egypt as
before psalm. 78.51. 105.23.27.] and fearful things [ vz. both to them and
their enemies, but specially to their enemies] by the red Sea [ i. when they
were at the sea, and passed through it: I suppose that both in it, and on this
side of it, and on the further side, the Lord showed terrible things for his
peoples sake, some particulars see Exodus 14.21.24.25. Exodus 16. ver. 1. etc.]
Ver. 23. Therefore [ i. for these their vz. utterly, and to have left none but
Moses, as should appear Exodus 32.10.31. etc.] had not Moses his chosen [ i.
had not Moses whom he had chosen to be his ruler and leader of that people,
See Psalm. 105.26.] stood in the breach before him [this is a metaphor taken
from warrefare or battry: meaning that Moses did so oppose himself against
wrath, by earnest and hearty prayer made on their behalf that the Lord would
not destroy them, even as after a rupture or breach is made in the wall of a
City or Town, those that are within, run immediately to put back them that
would give the assault: See verse 30. of this Psalm concerning Phinehas: also
Ezech. 13.5.] to turn away his wrath [ vz. ready to be powered forth upon
that people for their sinnes] lest he should destroy them [ vz. utterly in
that his great judgment.] Verse 24. Also [ q.d. besides other i. not only had
not in right regard, but reviled and spoke evil of] that pleasant land [
vz. of Canaan, which GOD had given and appointed unto them, to the end that
therein they might be nourished as in his fatherly lap, and have as it were
a gage of the heavenly inheritance: and he calls it a pleasant or
desirable land, because it abounded with all fruitfulness: See Deutronomie
8.7. also Deutronomie 11.10. in which respect also it is called in scripture, a
land that flows with milk and hony] and believed not his word [ i. the
promises that he had made them, both for the goodness and possession of that
land, See for this history, Numbers, Chapters 13. and 14. throughout] Ver. 25.
vz. against GOD, and his Servants, Moses, Joshua, Caleb, etc. i. secretly and
closely as before verse 16. of this Psalm, yet so, that this brake forth into
an open sin, as appears in the chapters before alleaged] and hearkened not
[ vz. to do and perform, for otherwise they could not choose but hear, that
which the Lord spoke unto them, in that respect] unto the voice of the Lord [
i. unto Gods commandment, which is expressed 1.21.] Ver. 26. Therefore [ vz.
because they would not yield obedience unto this his commandement] he lifted
up his hand against them [to lift up the hand in the scripture, is taken for
swearing, because it was a sign ceremony and gesture, used in swearing. See
Gene. 14.22. Numb. 14.30. Nehe. 9.15. and never used in the scripture (so
farreforth as I remember) for to punish: besides that the punishment follows
in this verse presently: and therefore I take the latter part of the note in
the Geneua Bible to be superfluous: it is then q.d. he certainly swear against
them] to destroy them in the wilderness [ i. that would overthrow them there,
and that they should not enter into the land: 2.13.14. etc.] Verse. 27. And
to destroy their seed [ i. their posterity: this is an other part or parcel as
it were of Gods othe] among the nations [ i. in the midst of them, and by
their force and might: the threatening of this, See Numb. 14.33. Ezech. 20.23.
and the perfourmance thereof you may behold. Numb. 14.45. Numb. 21.1. Deuteronomy.
1.44.] and to scatter them [ vz. by reason of captivity and bondage into which
they should fall] through out the countries [hee means strange countries,
which either lay nigh about 28. They joined themselves [ vz. even as it were
two oxen in one yoke: such a metaphor also the Apostle uses. 2. Corinthians. 6.14.
he notes hereby the straigth conjunction that was between the idol, and the
idolater] unto Baalpeor [this was the idol of the Moabits as appears Number.
25.3. meaning that they worshipped the idols and gods, that idolatrous people
worshipped] and did eat [ vz. with the idolaters] the offringes of the dead [
i. such things as were offered to their idols, whom he here calls dead, not
because they were at any time living, but because they never had life or breath
in them. of the vanity of idols, See Psalm. 115.45. etc. and of meats
consecrated to idols, see 1. Corinthians. 8. throughout, and 1. Corinthians. 10. in
sundry 29. Thus [ vz. in manner before rehearsed, ver. ^8.] they provoked him
unto anger [ vz. against themselves and their soules] with their own inventions
[ i. with those things that they themselves had devised, both in his service,
and for the satisfiyng of their own lusts: for so largely would I take the
word, inventions, in this place] and the plague [ vz. sent from God] brake in
upon them [ i. did vehemently and violently destroy sundry of them as a breach
in a battry does, for such a metaphor I suppose he uses in this place.] Verse
30. But Phinehas [who was Aarons sonne] stood up [ vz. being moved with
the vileness of the peoples sinne] and executed judgment [ vz. upon Zimri and
Cozbi and the plague [ vz. sent from God, wherein there dyed 24. thousand] was
stayed [ i. ceased Phinehas did this, by a secret, particular, and
extraordinary motion of Gods spirit, being assured in his conscience, that
though he had no public power of the sword in his hand, yet he ought to do
it: the like did Moses in slaying the Egiptian: but these particulars ought not
to be drawn into examples.] Ver. 31. And it [ vz. that fact of slaying Zimri
and Cozbi] vz. through Gods free goodness: he means not that Phinehas was
justified by this work, for no man can be justified by the works of the law,
unless he perfectly accomplish them, but that this work was imputed unto him
for righteousness, as the work of the faithful people are, not for any merit
that is in them, but of his free mercy only. See for this phrase Gene. 15.6.]
from generation to generation for ever [ i. always and continually, he means
that both God and men approved Phinehas for his fact. See for this story Numb.
25. throughout.] Ver. 32. They [ i. the Israel] angered him [ i. God: meaning by
the word, angered, provoking of him to fearce wrath against them] also [ i.
besides their other sins before recited] at the waters of Meribah [hee
means the place for the more certainetie of the history: and they are called
the waters of Meribah, that is the waters of strife and contention, because
there, for want of waters, they contended with the Lord, and with Moses] so
that Moses [ vz. so notable a Prophet, and so excellent a man of God, see Psalm.
90. in the title] was punished [ vz. grievously, for he was not only rebuked,
but deprived of entrance into the land of promise] for their sake [hee means
not that God punished him for their sin, for that had been injustice, but
because he did after a sort doubt with them, he was punished for that
transgression.] Ver. 33. Because they vexed his spirit so i. they so troubled
him with their continual murmuringes and rebellions] that he spoke unadvisedly
[ vz. of God and his power] with his lips [ i. openly, not only conceiving
it in his heart, but uttering it with his mouth. All this history is largely
described, Numb. 20. from ver. 1. to the end of the 13.] Ver. 34. Neither
destroyed they the people [ vz. which inhabited the land of Canaan 1. even to
the end of the 21. also Judges 2. and 3. chapters throughout] as the Lord had
commanded them [ vz. by his faithful servant Moses. See Deuteronomy. 7.1.2.3. etc.]
Ver. 35. But were vz. not only in that they dwelt among them but also in that
they matched with them in marriages, and were sundry times brought into
captivity by them, as the book of Judges does plainly declare] and learned
their works [ i. they did not only know, but also practiced all the wickedness
of the Gentiles, as may appear by the verses following.] Ver. 36. i.
worshipped the same images and counterfeited gods, that the heathen did which
were their ruin [hee means that their strange worships and idolatries, were
the cause not only of their sinning, as God had foretold. Exodus 23.33. but
also of their destruction, as appears in the very same 37. Yea [ q.d. they
proceed to such height of iniquitie] they offered [and that against Gods
commandment, Leuit. 20.2. Deuteronomy. 12.31. Deuteronomy. 18.10.] their sons and their
daughters [ i. such was their rage to idolatry, that they spared not that
which was most deare] unto devils [see Deuteronomy. 32.17.1. Cor. 10.20. and specially
he means Molech, as may appear 2. king. 23.10.] Verse 38. And shed innocent
blood [he calls it innocent blood, both because they had not done evil, to
deserve death, and also because it was shed, as without cause, so without
warrant of a sufficient and lawful magistrate] eue^ the blood of their sons
and of their daughters] he shows in these two verses a monstrous kind of
idolatry, because the people carried with a rage, spared not their own
children, but defiled their own hands, and the whole land also, with innocent
blood] whom they offered [ vz. as burnt sacrifices or offrings] unto the idols
of Canaan [i. unto the idols which were worshipped in the land of Canaan, by
ye inhabitants thereof] and the land [ vz. of Canaan, wherein they dwelt] was
defiled vz. shed guiltlesly and without cause, See Number. 35.33.] Ver. 39. Thus
were they steyned [ i. foully defiled, and had received such spots and blots as
hardly could be gotten away] with their own works [ i. with the sins and
iniquities which they themselves had devised and done] and went a whoring [ i.
leaving the marriage duty which they ought to God, they chose, rather to follow
any thing, according to the lust of their own hearts, then God himself, see
Numb. 15.39. The Prophet means, that they brake their faith given unto God,
as if a wife should break her faith in committing whoredom, for this is
spiritual chastity to cleave wholly to God and his word, 2. Corinthians. 11.2.]
with their own inventions [ i. with the idols and Gods which they themselves
had devised to themselves, meaning also, by whoring, that they followed 40.
Therefore [ vz. for their great and grievous sinnes] was the wrath of the Lord
kindled [ vz. very hot, meaning by kindling, the preparing of it] against his
people [ i. against that people that he had chosen to be his owne] and he
abhorred [ i. lothed and hated as it were, and that for their sins sake] his
own inheritance [ i. both the land and the people, 41. And he gave them [ vz.
for their great sins committed against him] into the land of the Heathen [
i. into their power and possession] and they that hated them [ i. the gentiles,
who could at no hand away with them, because they came to enjoy their lande]
were Lords over them [ i. ruled them at their own pleasure: see for this
speech: Isaiah. 26.13. and for the truth of the matter, the whole book of
Judges 2.14.] Ver. 42. Their enemies also oppressed thm [ vz. sore and hardly,
and many times] and they were humbled [ i. subjected, and that sundry tymes]
under their hand [ i. unto their power and authority.] Ver. 43. Many vz. God]
deliver them [ vz. out of the hand and power of their enemies] but [ vz.
notwithstanding these great graces] they provoked him [ vz. to wrath against
them, and that sundry times also] by their counsels [ i. by those things which
they themselves had gravely and as it were in counsel, concluded and resolved
upon to perfourme] therefore they were brought down [ vz. from that high
state of liberty and freedom, wherein God had set them, to miserable captivity
and bondage] by their iniquity [ vz. committed against 44. Yet he saw [ q.d.
notwithstanding these grievous sins of theirs, he did not only behold them
afflicted, but pitied them] when they were in affliction [ i. in any trouble]
and he heard their cry [ i. granted them al things they prayed for, when they
prayed, which was a sure token of compassion toward them.] Verse 45. And he
remembered his covenant vz. which he had made with their Fathers and them: the
Prophet in these two verses, notes two means, whereby God was moved to do
good to this people: the one was his free mercy, and the other was his gracious
couenant] toward them [ i. for their good, and on their behalfe] and repented
[ vz. of the punishments, that he had purposed to bring upon them: meaning
hereby that God after a sort, changed as it were his purpose: not that God is
subject to alteration or change, but because pardoning both the fault and the
punishment he seems unto us to change: and this manner of speech is applied
to the weakness of our capacity, See Gene. 6.6.] according to the multitude of
his mercies [ q.d. even as he is inclined to show abundance of favor so he
showed them the riches of his grace.] Ver. 46. And gave them favor [ i. made
45.14.] in the sight of all them that led them captives [the Lord who has the
disposing of all men's hearts, so inclined their hearts to his people.] Ver.
47. Save us O Lord our God [ i. deliver Saul, many people were out of their
own country, he prays the Lord, as for himself, to reduce and bring them
back agayne] that we may praise thy holy name [ i. thy majesty, power,
goodness, etc.] which is full also of all holinesse] and glory in thy praise
[ i. rejoice and boast as it were of this, that we have him for our GOD, who
alone is worthy all praise and glory.] Verse 48. Blessed [ i. praysed] be the
Lord GOD of Israel [ i. he that is the defender of the people of Israel, who
Iaakob, otherwise called Israell] for ever and ever, and let all the people
say, so be it, [ i. let all young and old, one and other, acknowledge that
he alone is woorthye praise, and give their free and willing consent unto it,
for so much he means, by, so be it] praise ye the Lord [See Psalm 104.
and 105. in the end.

Ver. 1. Teaches us that the greatness of Gods goodness, 2. Teaches, first
that Gods graces and works are infinite: Secondly that though we can not so
sufficiently praise him as we should, yet we should not for all that leave
off to do that which he has given us grace to do. Verse 3. Teaches us to
deal well, and to continue in well doing, and that so we shall in the end
atteine true blessedness. Ver. 4. Teaches us in distress to call upon the
Lord. Ver. 4. and 5. Teach us to set before us Gods mercies toward his
children, that we may assure our selves in hope to receive the like. Ver. 6.
Teaches us, humbly, unfeignedly, and fully confess to our sins. Ver. 7.
Teaches us that forgetfulness of Gods graces, is the high way to all rebellion
and sin: it teaches us also, that forefathers are not always to be followed.
Verse 8 teaches, that though the sins of his children be very great, yet
they do not always set or hinder, the rivers of his mercies toward them.
Ver. 9. Teaches first that for the benefit of his children, he will make
things go contrary to their natural course: Secondly, that when his children in
men's eyes seem to be in the greatest dangers, he will lead them as safely,
as though they were in none at all. Ver. 10. Shows that al manner of
deliverances come from the Lord only and his power. Ver. 11. Teaches that the
same things that God makes to give place to his children, shall serve, to the
utter destruction of his and their enemies. Ver. 12. Teaches us always to
believe the truth of Gods word, yea though we see no mean how it can be
performed: secondly that we should continually praise God for his mercies.
Ver. 13. Teaches that it is a very easy thing to fall into sin: it teaches
also that forgetfulness of gods graces, is as it were the nurse and mother of
many other transgressions: also that we should tarry the Lords leisure, for the
accomplishing of that which he has appointed us. Ver. 14. Teaches that lust
or concupiscence is sin also, also that we should not tempt or try ye Lord:
Ver. 15. Teaches that God bestowing h^^ benefits upon the wicked, does many
times with all lay punishments upon them. Ver. 16. Teaches us to love and
reverence the godly magistrates and ministers, which the Lord gives us. Ver.
17.18. Teach us that God does fearfully punish rebels and contentious persons
of what state or calling soever they be. Ver. 19.20. See out the dotage and
blockishnes of idolaters, who suppose the Godhead can be fashioned or resembled
by any outward thing. Ver. 21.22. Teaches that the forgetfulness of God, his
benefits and works, is the high way to all manner of sin and iniquity.
Ver. 23. Teaches two things, first that our sins do pull destruction from the
Lord upon us: Secondly, how forcible the prayers of Gods children are, both
for themselves and others. Ver. 24. Teaches that contempt of Gods graces
offered and given, and distrust in the truth of his promises, are two horrible
and grievous iniquities. Ver. 25. Sets out what great sins, murmuring and
rebellion against the Lord are. Ver. 26.27. Declare that neither these nor any
other sins, shall escape unpunished, in the parties that do them, whether
they be fathers or sons. Ver. 28. Shows man's readiness and earnest affection
to commit idolatry. Ver. 29. Shows that man's inventions, specially in the
worship and service of God, provoke Gods angers, and bring a plague upon them.
Ver. 30. Teaches us in the example of Phinehas, to loathe and abhor sin.
Ver. 31. Teaches us that God graciously accepts the deeds and words of his
servants, though many ways fraught with great defectes. Ver. 32. Teaches us
how perverse and froward man's nature is, though the Lord deal never so
plentifully and mercifully, with him: it teaches also that God spares no man
for his person sake in that he punished Moses. Ver. 33. Teaches three things,
first that other men's perverseness should not make us sin against God:
secondly though it do, yet we shall not escape unpunished, thirdly that rash
and unadvised speeches are sin against the Lord. Ver. 34. Teaches us to
strike, and not to spare, where the Lord will have us to destroy, for then we
must not be lead, by our own fond affections. Verse. 35. Teaches us that ill
company is a shrewde mean, to peruerte men from goodness. Ver. 36. Teaches us
that to serve any besides the Lord, is the next way to come to destruction
both in this life, and in the life to come. Ver. 37. Sets out the rage of
idolaters, who spare nothing, no not the dearest things they have. Verse 38.
Teaches us that the shedding of innocent blood, slays the whole land, and
that therefore murder, should not only, not be pardoned, but sharply
punished. Verse 39. Teaches us that there is nothing that hurts man more,
then in ouerwening of his own devises. Verse 40. Teaches us that our sins
turn Gods love and favor into hatred and displeasure. Ver. 41.42. Teach us
that sin does draw even all temporal punishments upon us, as foreign
government, oppression, captivity, etc. Verse 43. Teaches us that God does
not once only, but sundry times deliver his people: Secondlye that many, the
more graces they have from God, the more they are puffed up in their own
devises: Thirdly that sin against God is not only a cause to humble us, but
does in deed humble us, though perhaps wicked men will not see it or feel
it. Verse 44. Teaches us, first that GOD has a tender eye over the afflicted
ones, Secondly that he never forsakes them if they call earnestly upon him.
Verse 45. Teaches us that Gods free covenant and eternal mercy, without any
thing of ours at all, are sufficient enough to move him, to take pity upon
us, in our afflictions. Ver. 46. Teaches that GOD only has the touching of
men's hearts, to bow them hither or thither, according to his good pleasure.
Verse 47. Teaches us to pray for other, and even Gods dispersed members, as
for our selves: also that our own ease, and prosperity, or preferment, should
not so far prevail with us, as to make us to forget them. Verse 48. Teaches
all men continually to praise the Lord, and to provoke others thereto what in
them lies.

Psalm 107
I Would divide this Psalm into two parts. 1. to the end of the 10. In the
second, he provoke them to praise the Lord, for his general power,
providence and goodness toward others, from ver. 21. to the end of the Psalm.

1. Is the same both in word and sense that verse 1. of this Psalm 106. is,
and therefore see that.] Ver. 2. Let them which have been redeemed of the Lord
[ vz. out of bondage, captivity, and dispersion. q.d. let them that have
received this benefit at the Lords hands, to be set at liberty, when they
were in bondage, praise him] show [ vz. openly and to others] how [ vz.
graciously and mightily] he [ vz. alone, and none but hee] has delivered them
[ i. freed them being sore oppressed, through the cruelty and tyranny of them
that held them vnder] from the hand [ i. from the power and might] of the
oppressor [ i. of them that oppressed them: he puts 3. And gathered them [
vz. again and together, and that by his mighty power] out of the lands [ vz.
round about them, into which they were dispersed for their transgressions
sake] from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South [ i.
from all quarters whereunto they were dispersed, that word that we turn,
South, signifies also, Sea, and so shall you find it translated in sundry
textes, but the meaning is, because the red Sea lay southwarde from the land 4.
When they wandered [ vz. a long time, up and downe] in the desert and
wilderness, out of the way [hee means out of the right way, which did lead
them whither they would have come, for GOD for their disobedience, made them
to wander forty years, in the wilderness, that so they might die, and not come
into the land of Canaan] and found no City [ vz. all that while of their
wandering] to dwell in [ i. to stay and refresh them 5. Both hungry and thirsty
[hee means that whylest they were in the wilderness, they suffered many
times great want of bread and drink, yea, so much that] their soul faynted in
them [ i. their life was ready to decay, and there seemed to be but little
difference between death and 6. Then they [ vz. being in this great distress
and affliction] cried unto the Lord in their trouble [ i. prayed earnestly unto
him] and he delivered them [ i. set them free] from their distress [ i. from
the distress that they 7. And led them forth [ vz. of the wilderness, and
that safe and sounde] by the right way [ vz. into the promised lande] that they
might go [ vz. through his good direction] to a City of habitation [ i. not
only to a city inhabited, but to a City whose inhabitauntes being cast out
of it, they themselves, might possess enjoy and dwell in, the Prophet means
not, that they that were dead, could amongst men praise the Lord for these
things, but in as much, as the benefit thereof did reach unto their
posterity, he exhorts their seed being alive, to acknowledge Gods mercyes
8. Let them [ i. their posterity after them] therefore [ i. for the benefits
and blessings before rehearsed] confess [ i. praise and magnify God] before
the Lord [ i. in his presence and from a good heart, whether it be secretly
in their own selves, or openly before the Arc, according to the custom of
those dayes] his loving kindness [ vz. freely and plentifully bestowed upon
them] and his wonderful works [ i. the wonderful works that he has done
for his people] before the sons of men [ i. openly in men's sight, and to them
and their posterity.] Ver. 9. For he satisfied [ vz. with abundaunce of all
good thinges] the thirsty soul i. him that stood in need of any good thing:
putting the word, soul, a principal part of man for the whole person] and
filled the hungry soul [ i. the hungry man] with goodness [ i. with abundance
of good things.] Ver. 10. i. such as were kept prisoners in dark places] and
in the shadow of death [ i. in great extremity of death and danger, See
Psalm 23.4. Isaiah. 9.1.2.] being bound in misery and iron [ i. being kept in
miserable and hard bondage, he begins here to recite, how many sorts of
people, afflicted with diverse afflictions, have always found the Lord
merciful and favorable, specially when they came unto him.] Verse 11. Because
they rebelled [ vz. both in thought, word, and deede] vz. manifested and put
down in his Lawe] and despised [ i. regarded not, and set naught by] the
counsel of the most high [ i. the purpose, ready inclination and power that
the Lord had to do them good, if they had yielded obedience unto him, he
shows in this verse the cause of men's correction, that he might thereby
deliver Gods justice from men's slanders and reprehension: And withal he
teaches, that the only rule of good life, is to follow Gods commandment.]
Verse 12. When he [ i. God] humbled [ vz. though not rightly and truly: not
2. Kings. 21.29.] their heart with heaviness [ i. he made them heavy,
sorrowful and sadde] there they fell down [ vz. before their enemies] and
there was no helper [ i. there was none that would help them. This is the
Prophets meaning: when they were wounded with a worldly sorrow in their
hearts, and by means thereof, their courages and stomachs, were decayed,
then they lay as an open pray to their adversaries, and none pitied their
cases, or were able to help them.] Verse 13. Then [ vz. when they were thus i.
they called earnestly upon him: this and all that follows in the verse, is
the same both in words and sense with verse 6. of this Psalm.] Verse 14. i.
GOD] brought them [ vz. by his almighty power] out of darkness and out of
the shaddowe of death [ i. out of affliction, oppression, anguish, etc. See
before verse 10. of this Psalm.] And brake their bands [ i. the bands
wherewith they were bound, whether they were the bands of affliction,
captivity, etc.] a sunder [ i. in pieces, and so set them at liberty. For the
better understanding of this speech. See Sampsons story. Judges 15.13.14. also
Judges 16.11.12.] Verse 15. 8. before going.]

Ver. 16. For he [ vz. the Lorde] has broken [ vz. by his almighty power]
the gates of brass, and brast the bars of iron a sunder [ vz. for his
peoples sake, understanding by brazen gates and bars of iron, either most
strait bands and prisons, See Acts 12.10. or else the bands of cruel and
perpetual bondage. In which respect also Egypt is called in the Scripture, a
house 17. Fools [ i. wicked and ungodly men, as may appear throughout all the
book of the Proverbs, and Psalm. 53.1.] by reason of their transgression [
vz. committed against GOD] and because of their iniquities [ vz. against men]
are afflicted [ vz. by the Lord, and that with sundry sorts of his judgments.
And he calls them fools because they have no fear of God before them,
which is the beginning of wisdom Proverbs. 1.7. So that we may perceive,
that he means not, that wicked men, who are here called fools, fall through
ignorance or error only, but that their affections 18. Their soul abhors
all meat [ i. they themselves, putting one part of man, for an other, and not
as though the soul were fed with bodyly food, he means that they are
without all appetite, and loathe even the very sight of meat, a punishment
wherewithal GOD many times plagueth the gluttonous persons] and they are
brought to deaths door [ i. they are even ready to dye: he speaks in this
place of incurable diseases, and of which seldom few or none at all escape,
for deaths door, See Psalm. 9.13. where he speaks 19. Is the same with
verse 6.13. of this Psalm, both in words and meaning: and there is no
difference, saving that 20. He sends his word [ i. he commands, or
speaks but the word only. Matthew. 8.8.] and heals them [ vz. of all their
infirmities, and diseases] and delivers them [ vz. through his great
goodness and almighty power] from their graves [ i. from present death and
the grave made ready as it 21. Is the 8. and 15. of this Psalm.] Verse 22. And
let them offer [ vz. unto GOD for these his graces] the sacrifices of praise [
i. not only of praising, but also of thanksgiving: See Hebrews 13.15.] and
declare his works [ vz. which he has graciously done for them] with
rejoicing [ vz. both to himwarde, and chearefully and gladly in respect of 23.
They that do come into the Sea by ships [ i. the mariners, for I take it to
be a special periphrasis of them] and occupy [ vz. into diverse quarters and
countreyes] by the great waters [ vz. of the Sea. This I do especially refer
to merchants: q.d. whether they be mariners or merchants, trading by Sea,
or the arms thereof, and that word of going down into the Sea would be
marked, because the waters seem to be below the earth.] 24. They see [ vz.
sensibly and plainly, and that with bodyly eyes, if they have any grace to
behold it] the works of the Lord [ i. the great works that he does in the
time of their navigations and trade] and his wonders [ i. the wnnderful things,
that both he has placed and does sundry times perfourme] in the deep [ i. in
the deep and bottomless waters, as it were of the sea.] Ver. 25. For he
commands, and rayseth the stormy wind [ i. the tempest q.d. if he do but
speak, the tempest is suddenly moved even at his only commandment: so that
men can not rightly attribute it to fortune, or any natural cause whatsoeuer]
and it [ vz. the tempest and storm so raised by his commaundement] lifts up
the waves thereof [ vz. of the Sea, he means that the storm sent from God,
causes the sea to swell, rage, and roar.] Ver. 26. They [ i. the mariners and
merchants in the ship, or the ships wherein vz. being forced and carried by
the waves of the Sea] into heaven [ i. very high] and descend to the deep [
vz. of the waters, he means that they are sometimes aloft and sometimes
again very low, by reason of the going of the waves and surges] so that their
soul melts, [ i. their courage fails, and they are ready to yield up the
ghost as it were, being brought through lothsomnesse and tossing, to vomiting,
even as though they should presently give up their life, and power out their
soul, as some thin matter with vomiting] for trouble [ i. through the
trouble and anguish which they endure.] Ver. 27. They [ i. the ships, and the
men in them] are tossed to vz. upon the Sea, by reason of the storm and
tempest] and stagger like a drunken man [ i. reele hither and thither, without
any government or stay of themselues] and all their cunning [ vz. in navigations
or sailing, yea their very wit and judgment. q.d. they are in such sort
astonished, that their art and knowledge stands them in little or no steede]
is gone [ vz. from them because they have no use of it, he means that they
can not tell what to do, so that in respect of man they do utterly despair
of their safety.] Ver. 28. Is the same 19. of this Psalm.] Ver. 29. He [ i.
God] vz. by his almighty power] the storm [ vz. which made the Sea to rage,
so taking away the cause, the effect ceaseth] to calm [ vz. weather] so that [
vz. thereby] the waves thereof [ i. of the Sea, raised up by the tempest] are
still [ i. quiet and neither rage nor roar.] Verse 30. When they [ i. the vz.
through Gods power, and of his great goodness toward the trauilers] they [ i.
the mariners, merchants, trauaylers, etc.] are glad [ vz. exceedingly] and he
[ i. God of his goodnesse] brings them [ vz. safe and sound] unto the haven
where they would be [ i. unto a place of rest, refreshing, and quietness,
where they long wished and desired to be. Verse 31. Is the same in words and
sense with verse 21. of 32. And let them [ vz. so delivered and brought to the
i. praise God, and show themselves thankful unto him] in the congregation of
the people [ i. openly and in the assemblies of Gods Saints: declaring that
such great and so many benefits should be acknowledged not only
particularly, or privately, but also deserve to be magnified in all places]
and praise him [ vz. for that his mercy and goodnes] in the assembly of the
elders [ i. in the meetings of such as had the government of the people: q.d.
they should perform it, not only before the people, but also before the
magistrate, because that as men have more experience and wisdom one then an
other, so they might be more fit hearers 33. He turns [ vz. in his power
and justice against the vngodly] the floodes into a wilderness [ i. he dries
up great floods] and the springs of waters [which a man would think, would
never be dried vp] in to drienes [ vz. so that there is scarce a drop to be
found there.] 34. And a fruitful land [ i. a land that bare great store of
fruit, by reason of his special blessing, or through abundance of floods,
waters and springs] into barrenness [or as the Hebrewe word also imports,
into saltness: because by saltnes the land is made barren. See Luke 14.34.35.
he means yt the land should be altogether barren, as though a man had
sowed salt there, because there is nothing more barren then salt: but yet here
he sets forth Gods providence, in the fruitfulness and barrennes of
ground, because the most plentiful are dried up, and the barren take as it
were a new nature upon them] for the wickedness of them that dwell therein [
i. for the sins that 35. Again he turns [ vz. by his almighty power] the
wilderness [which is as it were consumed with drought and barennesse] into
pooles of water [ i. into abundaunce of water] and the dry land [ vz. where no
water was before] into water springs [ i. into plenty of water: this is the
direct contrary to verse 33. by which the Prophet shows that the Lord does
and can do, whatsoever pleases him] 36. And there [ vz. in these fruitful
and plentiful places] he places the hungry [ i. such as were enforced to
forsake their own Country and to go to another place, to seek maintenance
for their life] and they [ vz. which were so poor before, grow to that
strength and greatness, that they] build a City [ vz. in that place or lande]
to dwell in [ vz. safe and sound, from the 37. And sow the fields [ vz. with
corn and grain to give them bread] and plant vineyardes [to minister unto
them, wine and drinke] which [ vz. fields and vineyardes] bring forth [ vz.
through Gods blessing, men travailing and tilling the same according to Gods
ordinaunce] fruitful increase [ i. store and abundaunce of fruit or
increase: In this verse he declares with what great plentifulnes, God makes
the land, that before was barren to abound: q.d. good men being brought into
that land to inhabit it: they will dress and till, the barren fields
thereof, and yet they shall not do it in vain, for through Gods blessing the
38. For he blesses them [ i. they themselves, their labors, and whatsoever
belongs to them: and that with his favor and goodnes] and they multiply
exceedingly [ vz. through his blessing] and he diminishes not [ i. he does
greatly increase] their cattle [ i. not only their beasts, but all their
goods: putting one sort, for all sorts.] Verse 39. Again [ q.d. behold on
the other side Gods vz. both in number, force and substaunce] and brought low
[ vz. before men, specially when GOD curses them] by oppression, evil, and
sorrow [ vz. laid upon them by others and the grief and anguish of their
own hearts.] Verse 40. He powers i. he makes them plentifully to be
contemned and despised: this the Prophet adds, least men should think it
did meet with none, but the poor sort] and causes them to err [ vz. for
shame of men, and want of things necessary, understanding by erring, wandering
up and down] in desert places out of the way [ i. in wildernesses, which have
no ordinary or common way in them, and all this they do, because they would
fly the sight of men.] Verse 41. Yet [ q.d. though he deal thus hardly with
wicked and ungodly vz. into honor, wealth, estimation, riches, etc. See Psalm.
13.7.] the poor [ i. him that stands in need of his help and grace, and
feels that want of his owne] out of misery [ vz. wherein he is or lyeth] and
makes him families [ i. increases his housholdes, stocks, and ofspring] like
a flock of sheep [ i. in very great number: for sheep do yield a great
increase, and a flock of sheep, comprehends many in number.] Verse 42. The
righteous [ i. such good vz. both with their bodily and spiritual eyes] it [
vz. the effects and testimonies of Gods providence spoken of before in this
Psalme] and rejoice [ vz. greatly in the Lord, who does the same, whereas the
ungodly, being blind in their understanding, not knowing that the world is
governed by Gods providence, but by blind fortune, as they imagine, shall
remain blind, confounded, and dumb in themselves, not having any thing to
say against this] and al iniquity [ i. every man given to iniquity, naming
the person by the thing, by reason of the abundance which is in the man. See
Job 5.16.] shall stop her mouth [ i. he or they shall have nothing to say
against this great work of Gods providence. [Verse 43. Who is wise [ vz. vz.
in his understanding and heart, and that diligently and deepely] these things
[ i. these great and excellent matters which the Lord works: the Prophet
means both that the number of them that behold Gods works with earnest
consideration is very small, and also that by reason of the excellency of them,
a man had need to imploye, all the power of his body and mind, to the
comprehension thereof: See Hosea 14.9.] for they shall understand [ i.
sensibly perceive and feele] the loving kindness of the Lord [ vz. toward
them, that be his, the Prophet adds this reason as an encouragement unto men
to provoke them diligently to look into Gods wonderful works, showing that
then men in deed begin to be wise, when they begin to apply themselves
rightly to way Gods works.

1. Teaches us, both in our own persons, and to provoke others also, to
praise God for his mercies toward us, and for the continuance of the same.
Verse 2. Shows that they especially are bound to publish Gods praises, which
have received greatest testimonies of his favor. Ver. 3. Shows Gods mercies
toward his people, in gathering together, those that were dispersed. Verse 4.
and 5. Show that then are Gods mercies most sweet when men are in greatest
distress and misery. Verse. 6. Teaches, first that afflictions and wantes are
notable spurs to earnest prayer: Secondly that the Lord only is to be
called upon: Thirdly that he refuses none that call upon him, specially if
it be in spirit and truth. Verse 7. Teaches that when God is our guide, we
shall go right, and prosper in those things, which we take in hand. Ver. 8.
Teaches us, that Gods mercies bestowed upon us require at our hands, both a
private and a public or open confession thereof. Verse 9. Teaches that God
alone is he, who relieueth the need of his, and that with all goodness. Ver.
10.11. Teach that contempt of Gods word, and rebellion against his majesty, is
the occasion of all misery, bondage etc. Ver. 12. Teaches first, that when God
forsakes a people, then they must needs come to ruin: Secondly, that for the
sins of the people, he stops up the bowels and compassion of those that
might help them. Verse 13. Conteyneth the same doctrines that ver. 6. does,
as it is the same in words and sense. Verse 14. Teaches that God alone is he,
that delivers out of captivity or distress, whatsoever means he uses
therein. Verse 15. Delivers the fame doctrines, that verse 8. does. Ver. 16.
Teaches that there is no thing or creature able to withstand Gods power, or
to let his purpose. Ver. 17. Teaches that all wisdom and wife men without
godliness is nothing but folly: also that inquities, are as strong as cartropes
to pull upon us all manner of punishments. Verse 18. Teaches us that even
appetite to our meat is a good gift of the Lord: also that when men are in
greatest extremity, then is GOD most commonly nigh unto them. Verse 19.
Teaches the same doctrines that verse 6. does. Verse 20. Teaches that Gods
only word, is of power sufficient, to do whatsoever it shall please him. Verse
21. Sets out the same doctrines with verse 8. Verse 22. Teaches us, not
only to publish Gods great works, but also to do it chearefully, gladly,
and willingly. Verse 23. Teaches that navigations, the calling of a mariner,
and the trade of mar^haundife, are not of themselves things unlawful. Verse
24. Shows that Gods power and glory appears, as well on the Sea as on the
Land. Verse 25. Shows that storms, tempests, and the swelling of the Sea
arise not by fortune, or upon natural causes only, but by the special
commandment and appointment of God. Verse 26. Does not only set forth gods
great power, that works such great things: but shows that men are not
blocks, and void of affection as the Stoickes imagined, but have their
passions, which of themselves in some respect are not evil, but the extremity
of them only. Verse 27. teaches that there is no policy, wisdom wit or
cunning against the Lord. Verse 28 is the same in words, meaning and doctrines,
with verse 6. Verse 29 teaches that God only makes the weather and seas
calm, see Mat. 8, 26, 27. Verse 30 teaches that men delivered from some
peril, may and ought to rejoice: also that God graciously grants men even
the things they desire and many times more then they wish also. Verse 31
contains the same doctrines that verse 8 does. Ver. 32 teaches us, that no
place or people should hinder us from praising of God for his graces: nay the
more and the greater men the rather we should do it, to the end that they by
our examples might be drawn on to the like, Ver. 33 teaches first that God
guides and governs things here below, whatsoever a company of dizy headed
men dream to the contrary: secondly yt he does upon the earth even whatsoever
pleases him. Ver. 34 teaches that sin and ungodliness is the mean to turn al
plenty into poverty, and al blessings into cursings. Verse 35 teaches us that
fruitfulness of ground, and plenty of al things is Gods only gift. Ver. 36
teaches that God in great mercy prepares abundance for them that want, and
gives them safety and shilter from al their enemies. Ver. 37. Teaches Gods
children even in ye midst of Gods blessings and abundance, yet
notwithstanding to employ themselves in ordinary travail and labor. Ver. 38
teaches us, that it is not ye travail of man, but Gods blessing that makes
men rich, see Psalm. 127.2. Verse 39 teaches that afflictions are good means to
bring men to ye right knowledge of God and themselves. Verse 40 teaches that
the estate of Princes and great men is not so sure as they commonly fantasy.
Ver. 41 teaches us that preferment comes not from the east nor weast, but
from the Lord only, see Psalm 75, 6. Verse 42 teaches that godly men may
rejoice as in the benefits of God bestowed upon others, so in his judgments
poured forth upon the wicked: it teaches also that Gods mercies upon his
children, and his punishments upon the ungodly, bring forth an other effect in
the wicked, that is, takes from them all sense, so that they neither have
hearts to conceive, nor mouths to speak, either with or against god in his
dealings. Ver. 43 teaches, first that men ought deeply to weigh Gods wonderful
works: secondly that the number of the^ that do so in deed is very small, in
respect of the other: thirdly that the consideration of his works is one good
means to make us see and feel, not his power and prouidenee only, but also his
eternal goodness, and incomprehensible mercy.

Psalm 108
THis Psalm, as I take it, may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of
the 6 verse. In the second the Prophet assuring himself by reason makes his
prayer unto God for strength to perform it. And this part reaches from verse
7 to the end of the Psalm.

David [see before Psalm. 48. in the title, and in that it is said here a Psalm
of David, it is evident that he was the author of it. Though it be true yt this
Psalm. be made of two Psalms before going, that is of Psalm. 57 from ver. 7 to
the end of the Psalm. and of Psalm. 60 from verse 5. to the end of the Psalm. from
whence also the sense and doctrines might very well be fet, yet notwithstanding
because there is some difference, somewhat shall be said in this 1. O God mine
heart [ i. my inward man] is prepared [ vz. to praise thee for thy mercies] so
is my tongue [ i. mine outward man also, putting a part for ye whole: q.d. I am
ready both in the inward man and outward man to magnify thee for thy graces] I
[ vz. my self, and none other for me] will sing and give praise vz. unto thee
alone.] Ver. 2. Awake Viol and Harp [he incourageth not only himself, but also
his instruments to praise God, that even thereby he himself might be the
better provoked thereto] I will awake [ vz. from my sleep, and rise up from my
bed] early [ vz. in the morning: the Prophet means that he 3, I will praise
thee O Lord [ vz. for thy mercies great and vnspeakeable] among the people [
vz. whom thou have chosen unto thy selfe] and I will sing unto thee [ vz.
praises and thanksgiuing] amongst the nations [ vz. round about us: the Prophet
means that he would so publish Gods praises, that even the Gentiles 4. For
thy mercy [ vz. toward all men but specially toward thy sons and
seruaunts] is great [ i. is so great, that it is] above the heavens [ i. higher
then the heavens themselves: so that as the space between heaven and earth is
infinite, so is thy mercy] and thy truth [ vz. reaches: he understands by
truth, Gods faythfulnesse, in making, keeping, and performing promise] unto the
Clouds [by these manner of speeches, he means nothing else but that Gods
mercy is unmeasurable, and incomprehensible 5. Exalt thy self O GOD [ vz. by
thy might and power] above the heavens [ i. above the highest things that may
be: not that he means that God was not then, and always is exalted, but that
he prays the Lord by effect to show it amongste men] and let thy glory [ i.
the praise that appertains unto thy glory] be [ vz. dispersed far and wide]
upon all the earth [ i. in every place of the world. The Prophet shows in
this verse, that the first thing that moved him to make this request, is Gods
glory. In the next Verse he shows that an other 6. That thy beloved [ vz.
people, that is, such people, as thou fauourest and love of thine own
mercy only, without any merits of theirs] may be delivered [ vz. out of the
great dangers, distresses, and fears, wherein they are] help [ vz. both them
and me, and every one of us in this case: for it should seem that David made
this Psalm at the beginning of his Kingdom, when thinking upon his enemies
and his own weakness, it was time to crave help at the Lords hands for
himself and his people] with thy right hand [ i. with thy mighty power and
strength, that so thereby I may overcome these enemies] and hear me [ vz.
praying unto thee for my self, and my people, understanding by hearing,
granting his requests.] Verse 7. vz. himselfe] has spoken [ vz. openly and
plainly, and that by his holy Prophet Samuel, that he will establshe and
enlarge the kingdom in my hand, yea he has spoken it] in his holiness [ i.
he has holilye, and assuredly promised it me, so that I need not doubt any
more of it, then of his holinesse] therefore [ vz. for this his mercye] I will
rejoice [ vz. greatly, for seeing he has promised me, I know that] I shall
divide [ vz. as the right owner and possessor of it] Shechem [Shechem is the
name of a place on this side Jordan, as the valley of Succoth was beyond
Jordan. He names certain places of the land, which by reason of Saules
stock, and those that took part with him, as Abner and such like, he had not
at the entrance into his Kingdom in his possession, and yet notwithstanding
assured himself that he should have them] and measure [ vz. to every man his
portion as Joshua did, by which the prophet notes his government and kingdom
over it] the valley of Succoth [this is expounded already before, even in this
verse] Verse 8. Gilead [ i. the whole land and country of Gilead, with the
people inhabiting i. subject to my power and authority] and Manasseh [ i. the
whole tribe of Manasseh] shall be mine [ i. subject to me, though now for a while
they follow the house of Saul] Ephraim also [ i. the tribe of Ephraim] shall be
the strength of mine head [ i. shall be a principal proppe and stay of my
kingdom: and this the Prophet speaks, not only for any affiaunce he had in
yt tribe, but also and chiefly because that tribe was mighty and much people:
and when he says the strength of his head, he uses a Metaphor taken from
beasts with horns, who use also to defend themselves therewith, q.d. Ephraim
shall be one of my principal means of defence] Judah [ i. the tribe of Judah,
or the place where that Tribe dwelt] is my lawgiuer [ i. is the place or
people, from whence, or from whom my laws and ordinances proceed.] Verse 9.
Moab [ i. q.d. not only the Israelites, but even the Gentiles, shall be added to
my kingdome] shall be my washpot [ vz. wherein I will wash my feet, meaning hereby
yt he would handle them more hardly, and make les account of them then of ye
Israelites, because they were uncircumcised: q.d. I will make no more account of
them then of an earthen pot under my feet, and yet if I will reserve any of
them, I will use them in base services, see 2. Sam. 8.2.] over Edom [ i. over
the Edomites and their lande] I will cast my shoe [ i. I will ouercom them, and
when they are cast down tread upon the^, as it were, meaning nothing else, but
that he would bring the^, even easily into his subjection and obedie^ce] upon
Palestina [ i the country it self, and the people inhabiting it, who were
called Philistines] will I triumph [ vz. boldly and cheerfully: q.d. whereas
they were wont ieastingly and scoffingly to triumph over us, as appears
Judges 16, 25. 1. Samuel 4.7.8.9. Now we will do the like unto them, as
though he should say, now let them brag that they have vanquished us
heretofore, if they 10. Who [ vz. besides God: q.d. there is none able but he
alone, as may appear by the next verse following] will lead me [ vz. the right
and ready way] into the strong City [ vz. of mine enemies: he puts one
city for many, and he calls the^ strong because they that possessed the^,
thought them so to be, and not that they were able any manner of way to resist
Gods power in him] who will bring me to Edom [ vz. to vanquish and subdue it,
and 11. Wilt not thou O God? [ q.d. I am sure thou will, for so significant is
the interrogatio^ in this place] which had [ vz. heretofore] forsaken us [
vz. utterly leaving us in the hands of our aduersaries] and did not go
forth [ vz. as thou wast wont to do in favor and loue] with our armies [ i.
with those armies which we sent out against our enemies: q.d. Though heretofore
we have received a repulse, yet now we persuade our 12 Give us? [ vz. through
thy mercy and goodness only, for we crave it as a gift] help [ i. aid,
strength, grace, etc.] against trouble [ i. against al trouble that we shall
endure, either outward or inwarde] for vain is the help of man [ i. the aid
that man can give or bring, is to little 13. Through God [ i. through the aid and
strength we have of him, and in that assurance that we have of his succor and
assistance] we shall do valiauntly [ vz. against his and our enemies, howsoever
men be not able to aid vs] for he [ vz. alone, without the help of any other]
shall tread down [ vz. under our feet, meaning by that speech vanquishing and
subduing of them] our enemies [ i. all that shall rise up against us, either at
home or abroad.

1. teaches to come to Gods service with purpose and preparation: also to
serve him with our inward and outward man both. Verse 2 does teach us two
things, first to use all the means that may provoke to the service and worship
of God, secondly to forgo some part of our pleasures and profits to perform
it. Verse 3 teaches us to praise God so, that other men may know it, and by
our example be stirred up to do the like. Verse 4 teaches us that Gods mercy
and truth, and the greatness and assuredness thereof, are two singular
comforts to the consciences of his children. Verse 5 teaches us in all our
prayers to set before us Gods glory as the special mark to aim at. Ver. 6
teaches us also in our prayers to remember the safety and deliverance of our
brethren. Verse 7 teaches us that Gods word and promise is ground sufficient
enough for the stay of his childrens persuasion. Verse 8 teaches us, that if
the Lord have promised us a thing, we should make as certain account of it, as
though we had it in possession. Verse 9 teaches us, that no enemies
whatsoever, shall be able to resist Gods purpose in his servants, but that he
will both with ease and in assurance cast them down. Ver. 10 teaches, that the
overthrow of cities and peoples, is from God only, though he use sundry means
for the performance thereof. Verse 11 teaches that though God seem to
destitute his children for a while, yet he will not forsake them for ever. Ver.
12 shows that all man's aid, help, counsel and countenance, is as much
without God, as nothing. Ver. 13 teaches that all the strength, power and
victory that God his servant have, is from the Lord only.

Psalm 109
THis Psalm as I take it, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 21, 22, and so forth to the end of
the Psalm. In the second he prays 6, unto the end of the 20 verse.

The title of this Psalm is all one with Psalm. 13. and Psalm. 14. in their
titles, David made this Psalm, at some one time or other, while Saul was king,
in whose days all the things were out of order, and if we compare the second
verse of this Psalm with 1. Samuel. 26.19, it shall appear it was not made
long before Saules death.] Verse 1. Hold not thy tongue [ vz. at these things
which the ungodly practice against me, lest thou should be thought either
not to see, or else not to regard the injuries that they lay upon me, when
they falsely accuse me before Saul: the Prophet desires God to show by effect,
that he does utterly disallow, that wicked dealing of the ungodly, as Psalm
28? ver. 1. He prays the Lord that he would not be deafe] O God of my
praise [ i. thou O God that art the argument and matter of my praises: or else
thus, thou O God in whom all my praise consists, because thou mayntainest and
vpholdest me in my just cause, whereas all the rest besides as it were, do
oppress me by false slanders, and every one accou^teth me for a wicked man,
but I do better like of the former sense,] Ver. 2. i. wicked and deceitful
men, with their wicked and deceitful words] are opened upon me [ vz. ready to
devour and ouerwhelme me with the great waters of unjust reports which they cast
out against me: see 1. Sam. 24.10. 1. Sam. 26.18. Psalm. 12.2] they have spoken
to me with a lying tongue [ i. they have spoken me fair in words, when they
carried swords in their hearts.] Ver. 3. They compassed me about also with i.
they did not only dissemble with me one while, but an other while they vttred
hateful speeches against me] and fought against me [ vz. both by words and
deedes] without a cause [ i. when I gave them no cause either of the one or
other.] Verse 4. For my friendship [ vz. showed toward the] i. they wrought me
much evil and hurt] but I [ vz. in these afflictions and distresses] gave my
self [ vz. readily, earnestly, and diligently] to prayer [ vz. not only for my
self, that I might patiently bear al 35.13.] Ver. 5. And they [ vz. in ye
unkindness and frowardnes of their own harts] have rewarded me evil for good [
i. have don me much mischeef, for ye good yt I have performed toward them] and
hatred for my friendship [ i. for my good will: the Prophet means, 6. Set
thou the wicked [ i. a more ungodly and wicked man then he himself is] over him
[ i. to bear rule over him. It is likely that under one wicked man, he means
many: but whatsoever it be, the prophet means yt he would have ye Lord to
cast him down, under most hard and tira^nous gouernment] and let the adversary
[ i. his adversary, or adversaries, some refer it to the devil and his angels]
stand at his right hand [ i. be continually present with him, to vex, pursue,
and grieve him, 31 of this Psalm.] Ver. 7. When he shall be judged [ i. when he
shall come before a Judge to have causes of his heard, or else his own person
to stand in iudgement] let him be condemned [ vz. as a wicked and ungodly man,
and punished without pity and compassion] and let his prayer [ i. the suit and
supplication which he makes to the judge for fauour] be turned into sin [ i.
serve to increase and aggrauate his offense, rather the^ to lesse^ it any ways:
the prophet means, yt look whatsoever ye ungodly should use in his own
defense, either as to clear himself, or to move others to pity him that al yt
should stand in steed more and more to burden 8. Let his days [ i. the days
of the life yt he has to liue] be few [ vz. in number, and in respect of the^
that live long, and not as though men's days could be shortened in regard of yt
time which the Lord has allotted them] and let another man take [ vz. to
execute and perform it] his charge [ i. ye charge Peter Act. 1.10. applies
this to Judah.] Ver. 9. Let his children [ i. the children he has and shall
leave behind him in ye world] be fatherles, and his wife a widow [ i. let him
die, and let the punishment of his death light not only upon him, but upon his
wife and children, as a thing most grievous unto 10. Let his children [ i. his
posteritie] be vagabondes [ vz. upon the earth, and without dwelling place,
see Genesis 4.14.] and beg [ vz. of other men, having nothing of their own,
neither any man in pity to give them any thing, as follows afterward verse
12.] and seek [ vz. greedily, and that at other men's hands, who shall not pity
the^] bread [ i. al manner of maintenance for their life] coming out of their
places destroid [by places he means both their dwelling houses and whole
stock: q.d. after yt they, and all that belongs unto the^, have been destroyed,
let the^ run up and down a begging, etc. and in this and the other verse, vz.
9. he prays against the wickeds race and posteritye, as verse 6, 7, 8, he
prayed against the ungodly man himself.] Ver. 11. Let the extortioner [ i. the
covetous and cruel man or usurer, into whose debt he is falne] catch all that
he has [ vz. remaining of his substance, yet unspent, or unwasted. The
Metaphor of catching would be marked, for it is taken from nets or snares out
of which birds or any thing caught in them, cannot only not escape, but also be
in continual danger of death] and let the strangers [ vz. which are wont to
show no pity and compassion, for one natural countreiman will show affection
to another, whereas Foreiners are given altogether to rapine and spoyling]
spoil [ vz. without pity or compassion, or giving him any thing back agayn]
his labor [ i. the things that he has travailed for, how good, or how bad
soever they be. The stranger when he comes once to rifling, refuses almost
nothing.] Ver. 12. Let there be none [ vz. found amongst me^] to extend mercy
unto vz. in the time of his distres and affliction] neither let there be any
to show mercy upon his fatherles children [whose case is pitiful as has bin
sundry times showed before, and whom we ought to tender, because God comme^deth
them the widows and the stranger unto us.] Ver. 13. Let his posterity [ i.
those vz. from amongst men, meaning ye cutting of the^ of, or the rasing or
rooting of the^ out of reme^brance] and in the generation following [ i. in ye
very next age] let their name [ i. the glory and renown, both of ye wicked
fathers and their children] be put out [ vz. of man's remembrance: q.d. let
there be no more any remembrance of him or his seede] Ver. 14. Let the
iniquities of his fathers be had in remembrance i. let him be punished for the
sins of his father and his mother, whose ungodliness he has followed: and so
must both this place and the threat contained in the second commandment be
understood: and when he sayth] be had in remembrance with the Lord [he means
not yt God forgets any sin committed against him, but yt he would have the
Lord by effect, i. by punishments to show, yt he thinks upon the wicked ma^s
vngodlinesse] and let not the sin of his mother be done away [ vz. out of ye
Lords sight, but let it stand fast there, as to crave continual punishment upon
her children, resting in ye like.] Ver. 15. But let the^ [ i. their sins and
transgressio^s] always be before ye Lord [ i. let ye Lord continually vz. in his
justice and iudgeme^t] their memorial [ i. both they themselves, and al other
things that might bring them to reme^brance] from the earth [ i. not only from
ye place where they dwell, which cannot properly be said to have any remembrance of
the^, but chiefly and specially from the people inhabiting those places, or
that part of ye world.] Ver. 16. Because [now he begins to show some causes
of his prayer, and of gods iudgeme^t] he [ i. the wicked ma^] remembered not i.
did of purpose forget, and put out ye remembrance of it in himself] to show
mercy [ i. to have pity and compassion upon others distressed] but persecuted [
vz. with great rage and egernes] ye afflicted and poor man [ i. him whom the
Lord had cast down and brought to the state of need] and the sorrowful hearted
[ i. him, yt was wounded and pierced with sorrow at his heart, for the calamities
and miseries yt he was in] to slay him [ vz. in his heat and rage of
persecutio^] Ver. 17. As he loved cursing [ vz. of other me^: understanding by
cursing al manner of wickedness yt the ungodly was given to] so shall it come unto
him [ vz. from ye Lord: the Prophet means, yt the ungodly multiplying sins
against the lord, shall from ye Lord receive abundance of plagues, which are so
many curses sent from the Lord] and as he loved not blessing [ i. good and holy
dealing generally: for so you have the word bless used Mat. 5.44.] so shall it
[ i. blessing from the Lord, and goodness from the God of Iaakob] be far from
him [ vz. so far, that it shall never come nigh him, nor he in any hope, to
18. As he clothed himself with cursing, like a raiment [ i. even as he loved
cursing as many men do their costlye apparel, and as he was covered both
within and without as it were, and wrapped up and trussed in cursing] so shall
it [ i. cursing] come [ vz. being sent from God in his iustice] into his bowels
[ i. into his inward parts, understanding thereby even the soul and mind
also] like water [ i. great abundaunce] and like oil into his bones [ i. it
shall come plentifully upon him. By water he understands their usual drink:
and by Oil their oyntmentes: q.d. as men, when they are thirsty, drink
much: and when they are full of pains, and aches use much ointment, so let
fulness and abundance of cursing fall upon the ungodly. This is well known,
that water was an usual drink in those days, 21.19.] Ver. 19. Let it [ i. the
cursing which he has uttered and used against good men] be unto him [ i.
unto the wicked and vngodly] as a garment to cover him [ i. let it stick and
cleave as fast unto him, as men's garments do to their bodies] and for a girdle
wherewith he shall be always girded [hee means by this, let it never
depart from him, but let it daily stick closer and closer unto him, as
men's garments do when their gyrdles are about them. This Verse differs but
a little from the former, saving that it seems to be a prophecy, and this a
prayer, this also further noting the continuance of cursing upon the wicked.]
20. Let this [ i. all the punishments before reckoned] be the reward of mine
adversaries [ vz. for their iniquities against the Lord and me] from the Lord
[ i. laid and sent upon them, from him by his mighty power and iustice] and of
them [ i. let such punishments also light upon them] that speak evil [hee
means under this word, devising, uttering and performing of crueltye] against
my soul [ i. against my life, for otherwise wicked men can not touch the
soul, as appears Matthew. 10.28. All these imprecations David makes in a
spiritual wisdom, and by the motion of the holy Ghost. Under the name of his
adversaries, a man may understand Christ's adversaries, for whom al cursing is
prepared, and against whom the Church may use such like prayers, because 21.
But thou O Lord my God [ vz. in whom I put my trust only] deal [ vz.
according to thy accustomed goodnesse] with me [ vz. so sore distressed]
according unto thy name [ i. according to that power, majesty, goodness, etc.
as Psalm 20.1. which thou art wont to show, and thy servant have felt]
deliver me [ vz. out of all my dangers and feares] for thy mercy [ vz. toward
thy children] is good [ i. comfortable, profitable, and exceeding great: And
this is the first reason that David would move the Lord by, to pity him in
his calamities: and an other reason follows in the next verse] Verse 22.
Because I am poor and needy [ q.d. I am most miserable and void of all hope:
this is a second reason taken from his calamities, see Psalm. 86.1.] and mine
heart is wounded within me [ vz. by the reason of the greefes that I endure: He
means by his heart wounded, that he was almost dead, because they yt be
wounded at the heart, can hardly escape, so yt that metaphor expresses the
great danger he was in.] Ver. 23. I depart [ vz. from vz. very swiftly and
suddenly, for so soon as a cloud takes away the sun the shadow is presently
gone: it may be referred also to these long shadows that appear commonly
before the sun set, which seems to be very great and huge, and yet when ye
sun is down, they suddenly vanish away, and appear no more] and I am shaken
off [ vz. from place to place, he means by this speech yt he was wonderfully
tossed from post to piller] as ye grasshopper [wch leapeth hither and thither,
and continues not long in a place: how true yt was in David, see 1. Sam. from
chap. 18. til ye come almost to ye end of ye book, and namely chap. 23.26.]
Ver. 24. My knees are weak through fasting [he means by fasting, not an
abstinence willingly laid upon q.d. I have so long abstained from meat and
nourishment, yt even my knees and legs which should bear me, are not able to
bear up my body] and my flesh has lost all fatnes [ i. I am very lean and low
brought, he means some great grief and extremity, by means whereof, natural
force and comlines was decayed in him.] Ver. 25. vz. thus in misery, became
also a rebuke unto the^ [ i. to ye wicked and ungodly: he means yt the wicked
did tauntingly and scornfully rebuke him] they yt looked upon me [ vz. in my
misery] shaked their heads [ vz. at me, and that in sign of mockery and
contempt: see 2. King. 19.21. and this verified in Christ, as appears Mat.
27.39.] Ver. 26. Help me [ vz. in these distresses] O Lord my God [ q.d. unless
thou i. deliver me, from the power of the wicked] according to thy mercy [ vz.
promised to thy servants and performed to many of them.] Ver. 27. And they [ i.
even the very wicked and vngodly] shall know [ i. feel vz. my deliverance and
help] is thine hand [ i. is done and wrought by thy mighty power] and that thou
Lord [ vz. alone, and none other with thee] have done it [ vz. for my good and
safety.] Ver. 28. Though they [ i. the wicked] i. speak and do all manner of
evil against me] yet thou will bless [ vz. me, meaning by blessing a plentiful
giving of al graces, this the Prophet speaks in the assured persuasion of
Gods mercy, and in contempt of his adversaries enterprises: q.d. let the^ curse
as much as they will or can, yet this is my comfort, that thou will bless me
with thy fauour] they shall arise [ vz. up, and that to do mischeef against me]
and be confounded [ vz. by thy mighty power in their wicked enterprises] but
thy servants shall rejoice [ vz. in thy goodness toward him, and the
destruction of his and thine enemies: and mark that in these 3. verses, 26,
27, 28. He prays for his own safety and deliverance, as in the next for his
enemies overthrow.] Ver. 29. Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame [ i.
let sentence serves, not only to note the Prophets earnestness, but also to
set out the abundance and continuance of shame to be poured forth upon the
wicked.] 30. I [ vz. being thus delivered from the vngodlies power] will give
thanks unto the Lord greatly [ i. will often and as it were continually praise
his name for it] with my mouth [ i. openly and before others: q.d. I will not do
it inwardly only in my heart but openly with my mouth and tongue, putting ye
word mouth, whereby voices are uttered, for ye very words of praise and
thanksgiuing] and praise him [ vz. for his great power, goodness, and mercy
toward me] among vz. of his people assembled also for to praise him.] Ver. 31.
For he [ i. the Lord] will stand [ vz. continually] at the right hand of the
poor [ i. hard by him that is afflicted, meaning by standing at the right
hand, the continual power, providence and goodness of God, watching over those
yt are his] to save him [ i. to deliver him and set him free: and though he
speak but of one, yet he means all the faithful: for yt which God is to one
of his, he is to all of them] from them yt would condemn his soul [ i. from
the^ that would condemn him to death. By soul he understands the whole man:
and by the word, condemn, he shows that he had to do with the King and other
mighty enemies.

Ver. 1 teaches us earnestly to commend our selves and our causes into gods
hands by prayer. 2 sets out the deceit, hypocrisy and lying of ye ungodly.
Verse 3 shows how ye wicked spare not, to speak and do evil also, though
they have no cause given them. Ver. 4 shows yt the wicked many times
recompense good with evil: it teaches ye faithful also in ye midst of
alco^fusion to betake themselves to prayer. Ver. 5 shows yt it is a portion
allotted to Gods children in this life to be many times molested of them of whom
they have best deserved, ye Lord working this, because he would thereby bring
them out of love with this life, and teach the^ not to hang to much upon men.
Ver. 6, 7. etc. teach first that we may pray against the malicious and
obstinate enemies of Gods people. Ver. 6 teaches further, yt it is a sign god
is very angry, when he causes one wicked man to punish another. Ver. 7 shows
yt god will sometimes make ye very entreaty of ye wicked serve to his own hurt.
Ver. 8.9.10 teach, yt it is many times a token of Gods wrath, to be cut off in
the midst of our days, to have our offices given to other, and to leave
behind us poor fatherles children and widows. I say many times, because it is
not always so. Ver. 11 does lively describe the nature of the hard hearted
extortioner, and cruel stranger. Ver. 12 teaches, yt it should be no small
grief unto us, if men's bowels and compassion be shut up against us. Ver. 13
shows yt God in his iudgmenes does many times root out men and their rases.
Ver. 14 teaches yt god punishes ye sins of ungodly fathers, in their wicked
children walking in the same ways. Ver. 15 teaches yt it should deeply wound
us to know yt God beholds al our sins. Ver. 16 teaches yt God in his justice
does punish men with those sins yt they have committed against other. Ver. 17
teaches us yt they which delighte and continue in evil, shall from the Lord have
abundance of evil poured upon them. The same thing does verse 18, 19 teach.
Ver. 20. teaches yt al punishments poured upon ye wicked proceed from the
Lord. Ver. 21 teaches yt when men see or know that God will deal in punishment
against the wicked, it then behooves yt godly to fly to his mercy by prayer.
Ver. 22 teaches us yt eue^ our own miseries should move us to make hearty
supplication unto the Lord. Ver. 23, 24 show into what pitiful estate, Gods
children are many times brought. Ver. 25 teaches, that it is no new thing for
ye wicked to scoff and skorn at ye godly. Ver. 26 teaches us in all our
prayers to fly to Gods mercy. Ver. 27 teaches yt the very wicked shall be
constrained to confess gods hand in their punishment, and the deliverance of
his children, so did Pharaoh and the Egiptians. Ver. 28 teaches yt man's
cursing cannot hurt, where God has promised his blessing. Ver. 29 teaches us
that we may pray against ye wicked: and in yt the Prophet doubleth his prayer,
he teaches us yt we should do so, specially then when Satan bewraieth his
subtilties and crafts. Ver. 30 teaches us both secretly and openly to give
thanks to the Lord for his mercies. Ver. 31 teaches yt God is nigh to his
children even to deliver them in their greatest distresses and fears.

Psalm 110.
THis Psalm being principally a prophecy of the kingdom and priesthood of
Christ, consists especially of two parts. David in figure, but to Christ in
truth, from ver. 1 to the end of the 5. In ye second David and Christ shall do,
according to ye several offices committed to the^, and this is comprehended in
the 2. last verses of this Psalm.

The Title is, David [i. a Psalm which David in the spirit of Prophecy made,
as appears Mat. 22.43.] Verse 1. The Lord [ i. God the father] said [ vz. in
the truth of his word] unto my Lord [ i. unto Christ the Messiah, who is called
David's Lord by right both of creation and redemption, as who is God eternal
with the father and the holy Ghost, and yet became man, at the fullness of
time, Galat. 4.4. If we refer it to David, then it must have this sense:
either that David speaks of himself, calling himself a Lord, because God had
advanced him to the kingdom of Israel, or else penneth it, as though some
other should speak it of him. We cannot offend in referring it to Christ,
because Christ does account it as a prophecy of his kingdom, Mat. 22, 43, etc.
and the Apostle also Heb. 1.13.] sit thou at my right hand [ i. receive cheef
rule and authority from me, and exercise jurisdiction and power over al. And
this is spoken according to men's use, specially Kings, who are accustomed to
set them on their right hand, whom they will highly advance, see 1, King. 2.19.
also Psalm 45.9. and this is the right sense of that article, he sits at
the right hand of God] until I make thine enemies thy footestoole [ i. til I
make the^ that oppose themselves against thee obedient and wholly subject unto
thee. He speaks this specially of ye reprobate, who will they, or nil they,
must be brought down, 2. Cor. 10.5. these words are largely expounded 1.
Corinthians 15.25, etc. The word, until, does not here note a piece of time,
but a perpetuity, for Christ shall be as he has always ben, God coequal and
coeternal with his father, see the word, until, so used 2. Sam. 6.23. and in
the new testament, Mat. 5.26. Mat. 28.10,] Ver. 2. The Lord [ i. God the father
as before ver. 1.] shall send [ vz. forth abroad i. thy powerful and mighty
rod, or the rod and scepter whereby thou declarest thy power and might,
notwithstanding all the resistance of thine enemies, see for the better
understanding of this word, rod, Psalm 2, 9 and by this rod no doubt he means
specially the preaching of the word, which is the mighty power of God to
salvation, to al yt believe, Romans 1.16. and is able to cast down strong holds
and every hie thing, 2. Cor. 10.5,] out of Sion [ i. out of the Church of the
Jews, yet so that it shall be spread abroad even amongst the Gentiles also,
see Isai. 2, 3. Micah. 4, 2.] be thou ruler [ vz. by thy word and spirit in
thine own children, and by thy mighty judgments amongst the wicked] in the
midst of thine enemies [ i. even where their greatest force is. He means
that the kingdom of Christ shall be always assaulted by the enemies, but yet
all that notwithstanding, he shall rule 3. Thy people [ i. the people that thou
shalt beget unto thy self, and shall be subdued unto thee] shall come
willinglye [ i. shall freely and of their own accord present themselves before
thee, to yield al obedience unto thee] at the time of assembling [ i. at yt
time when by the exercises of thy word, and working of thy spirit, thou shall
assemble and gather people unto thy self] thine army [ i. great troops of thy
children, vz. shall come before thee, and appear in thy presence] in holy
beauty, [ i. either in such comeliness, as shall carrye holiness with it: or
else thus: in holy beautye [ i. in thy Temple, which is called holy beautye,
because that holiness and glory of God, did most plainly appear in the same:
and therefore it is called a glorious sanctuarye also Psalm 29, 2] the youth
of thy womb [ i. the people that thou shalt beget and bring forth] shall be as
the morning dew [ i. not only pleasant and delightful to thee, as the dew is
to the ground, but also plentiful and aboundaunt, as there is most store of
dew in the morning, and as the Philosophers say, great abundaunce falls
after the appearing of the day star. Immanuel reads this verse otherwise,
and makes another sense of it, but 4. The Lord has sworn [ vz. by himself as
Heb. 6.13.] and will not repent [ vz. himself, of the thing yt he has promised
and sworn to perform: he means by all this to assure us that god will not
change his purpose] thou [ vz. O my sonne] art a Priest for ever [ i. an
eternal Priest, to put a difference between him and the Priests in the lawe]
after the order of Melchizedech [what his priesthood was appears Genesis 14.
verse 18. read also for this matter Hebrews chapter 5, and also chapt. 7. The
Prophet means that that was truly fulfilled in Christ which was figured in
Melchizedech, to wit, that the eternal priesthood, and the crown and royal
seat was joined together in one person, which otherwise could not be as
appears 2. Chronicles 26, 21. but by some special commandment from 5. The
Lord that is at thy right hand [ i. Christ, of whom is spoken before ver. 1 of
this Psalm.] shall wound [ vz. by his mighty power understanding by wounding, ye
debasing and throwing of the^ down, some after one sort, and some after an
other] Kings [ i. the greatest and mightiest enemies yt can be] in the day of
his wrath [ i. in yt time, wherein he shall be provoked to wrath and manifest the
same. He describes in this place ye power of Christ, against his most great
adversaries and enemies, upon whom he will in good time pour forth ye testimony
of his wrath.] Ver. 6. He [ i. Christ the Lord and Messiah] shall be judge [ i.
ruler and 96.13.] among the Heathen [ vz. and not only amongste the Jews, he
prophecieth of the enlargement of Christ's kingdom even unto ye ge^tils] he
shall fill all [ vz. places] with dead bodies [ i. with the bodies of his
enemies and adversaries being deade] and smite [ vz. with his power and might]
the head [ i. the chief ruler and governor, by one understanding many,
unless we would understand it of the whole body of Antichrist, whom the Lord
shall destroy with the spirit of his mouth, 2. Thessal. 2.8.] over great
countries [ i. over large and many lands. In this verse the Prophet sets
out Christ as a valiant conqueror over his enemies.] Ver. 7. He shall drink of
the brook in the i. the Messiah] shall drink of the brook [ vz. which shall
be made by the blood of them which shall be slain: q.d. there shall be so much
blood shead, that the conqueror may drink as it were of a river of blood] in
the way [ vz. as he pursues his enemies: or else it is a similitude taken from
valiant and mighty captains, who egerly pursuing their enemies, stay not upon
dainties or pleasures, but content themselves with floods and brooks which
they find in the way, as they follow the chase] therefore shall he [ i. God the
Father] lift up his head [ i. Christ's head: meaning by this phrase, that he
shall give him a full victory, and advance him to exceeding glory, for this
phrase or manner of speech, see Genesis 40.13.20.

Ver. 1 teaches many things: 2 teaches that Gods word is as it were the reed
and scepter of Christ's kingdom: secondly yt he shall rule notwithstanding all the
force and power of his adversaries. Verse 3 teaches that gods people shall come
willingly to Christ: also that Gods people, are not only a great number, but
also a holy and sanctified sort. Ver. 4 teaches us that God is certain and
sure in all his promises and purposes: also it does lively and effectually
describe the eternal priesthood of our Savior Christ. Ver. 5 teaches that
there is no power or might able to withstand the power of Christ's kingdom.
Ver. 6 sets out, first the enlarging of the bands of Christ's kingdom:
secondly the confusion of his malicious enemies: and thirdly the utter ruin
and overthrow of Antichrist and all his supposes. Ver. 7 describes not only ye
readiness of our savior Christ in pursuing the victory upon his enemies, but
also how that though he be for a while debased, yet he shall in the end maugre
their heads, rise up to great glory.

Psalm 111.
1 to the end of the 4. In the second he shows his graces and goodness
particularly toward his church: and this reaches from verse 5 to the end of
the 9. The third is a commendation of Gods fear, and reason alleged to move
men to embrace it: and this is comprehended in the last verse.

106. which is the same with this, and the two next following] This Psalm and
that which follows was in ye verses written according to the order of the
Alphabet, every verse beginning in the first and second part of it, with the
letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The Jews suppose that the Psalms which begin
so, are very excellent, as Psa. 25. also Psalm. 119. etc. and I take it to be
true, but I suppose there may be another cause added, and that is to help
memory.] Ver. 1. I will praise ye Lord [ vz. for his graces and mercies bestowed
upon me, with my whole heart [ i. earnestly, and with a sincere affection,
meaning also yt he would do it privately, and as it were within himself as by
the next words, he notes yt he will do it openly] in ye assembly and
congregation of the just [ q.d. yea I will perform it, not inwardly only, but
outwardly and openly also, and that in these meetings which the faithful use,
wherein 2. The works of the Lord [ i. the things yt the Lord has done] are
great [ i. conteyne in them great matter to move me^ to praise God for the
same] and ought to be sought out [ i. should diligently be looked unto and
considered of, not yt the things themselves are so hard, as to note what men's
duty is in yt behalf] of al the^ that love them [ i. 3. His work [ i. all the
creatures of God both generally and particularly, and every thing that he has
don, whatsoever it be: and he shuts them al up as it were, under one,
because with the Lord it is alone, to make one or many or all] is beautiful
and glorious [ i. is full of comlines, majesty, excellency, etc. so yt nothing
can be added thereto, to make it more maiestical] and his righteousness [ i. the
upright and faithful dealing, which God uses toward al his creatures]
indureth for ever [ i. is always like unto itself, and free from alteration or
change.] Ver. 4. He [ i. God] vz. by the excellency and wonderfulnes of them]
to be had in remembrance [ vz. amongst men: q.d. God has done such excellent
and notable things as are not only worthy to be remembered, but such as the
remembrence thereof indeed shall never perish] the Lord is merciful and full
of compassion [ vz. generally toward all, but especially toward his own
86.5.15.] Verse 5. He has given [ vz. of his rich and large liberality] a
portion [ i. a plentiful and just measure of mercy, eue^ so much as he thought
good to be needful and necessary] unto them ye fear him [ i. unto them ye
worship and serve him acording to his will revealed in his word, this he
speaks specially of ye Jews, because they at yt time were his only people]
he will ever be mindful [ vz. not only to think upon, but also to performe] of
his covenant [ vz. made with his people: he means of the covenant it self,
and of the things contained therein.] Ver. 6. He has showed [ vz. in deed,
effect, and truth] i. to that people whom he has peculiarly chosen to be his
own: for otherwise all the people of the world are his] the power of his works
[ i. how mighty and powerful his works are, who does whatsoever pleases him]
in giving [ vz. of his free mercy] unto them [ i. unto his own people] the
heritage of the heathen [ i. that land which the heathen did possess and
inhabit as their own inheritance: And this he speaks of the land of Canaan,
wherein dwelte the Ammorits, the Hinnits etc.] Ver. 7. The works of his hands [
i. the works that i. faithfulness and mercy, and yt toward his children] and
judgment [ i. punishment, vz toward the wicked] al his statutes [ i. the laws
and commandments yt he has prescribed] are true [ i. not only faithful, but
constant also and durable: so yt they are never called back of him, neither ca^
any escape the^ by shifts and starting holes] Ver. 8. They are established [
vz. in the heaven, and i. to last and endure for euer] and are done [ i.
ordained made and ratifyed] in truth and equity [ i. in all vprightnes so that
they cannot be charged with injustice or vnfaithfulnes] Ver. 9. He [ i. the vz.
by ye hands of Moses and Aaron, meaning by the word sending, bestowing or
giuing] redemption [ i. deliverance, vz. out of Egipt] to his people [ vz.
Israel, when they were bo^dslaues and captiues] he has commanded his covenant
[ vz. to remain sure and certain] for ever [ i. continually] holy, and
fearful is his name [ i. his majesty, goodness, power, etc. is full of
holiness, fear, reverence, etc. The Prophet means yt God in delivering his
people, was not a father unto them for one day only, but established his grace,
and confirmed his covenant made with Abraham, to the end that the hope of
eternal life, and the reverent fear of his Majesty might remain continually
in his church: and he adds these words, holy and fearful is his name, not
only to discern between him and al counterfeit Gods whatsoever, but also to
teach his children thereby to walk in the obedience of his majesty.] Ver. 10.
The beginning of wisdom [ i. i. a right and a reverent fear of gods majesty
imprinted in men's hearts, he means not by beginning ye A, B, C, as it were,
but ye top and height as it were, of all holy and heavenly wisdom, see Deuteronomy.
4.6. and under ye word, fear, he contains al piety, and the service of God:
q.d. They yt have not gods fear, and order themselves according to his law,
are altogether brutish. Now we may try whether the fear of God be in us by
this touchstone, to wit, whether we willingly receive his yoke, and suffer our
selves to be governed by his word] al they that observe the^ [ i. his
commandments or statutes, as before ver. 7 of this Psalm.] have good
understanding [ i. are truly wise indeed, whereas without these, there is
nothing else but foolishnes] his praise indureth for ever [ i. the praise that
is due unto God, for his goodness and mercy indureth, yea and ought to endure
amongste his to al posterities.

1 teaches us, first to thank God for his benefits: secondly to do it
unfeignedly, and with all our affection: and thirdly to do it both privately and
openly. Ver. 2 teaches us yt Gods children ought to exercise themselves in
deep meditation of Gods works. Ver. 3 teaches us that al gods works do
wonderfully set forth his glory and majesty. Ver. 4 teaches us first yt we
cannot deface ye excellency of gods works though we would: secondly it
describes the excellency of love and mercy that is in the Lord, specially
toward those that are his. Ver. 5 teaches us, that God gives his children
whatsoever he feeth good and meet for them, also that God promises nothing to
his, but he performs it. Verse 6 shows yt though gods power be known to al
yet chiefly to those yt are his people. Ver. 7 teaches us that al yt God does,
he does in mercy to his servant, and in judgment to his enemies. Verse 8
notes the certainty, assuredness, and continuance of gods word. Ver. 9
teaches that God in ye midst of their greatest miseries remembers and
delivers his own people. Ver. 10 teaches us that this is true wisdom, to
yield God that service only that he requires at our hands: also that it is not
enough to know, but that we are bound to do Gods commaundeme^ts.

Psalm 112.
1 to the end of the 4. In the second he shows certain qualities or notes
whereby to discern good men, and describes all the cursed estate of the wicked.
From ver. 5 to the end of ye Psalm. For the title of this Psalm. 106. in the
title.] Ver. 1 Blessed is the man [ i. fulness of blessings is to him, of what
sex or state soever he be, see Psalm. 1.1] that fears the Lord [ vz.
unfeignedly and with his whole heart. Under this word, fears the Lord, he
comprehe^deth all the whole worship and service of God] and delights greatly [
i. takes much and continual pleasure, as Psalm. 1.2.] in his commandments [ i.
in the co^mandeme^ts which God has prescribed] 2. His seed [ i. the household,
race and posterity of such a good man] shall be mighty [ i. shall grow not only
to a great increase, but also to strength and continuance that shall not rot
away] upon earth [ i. in this earth, yt the Lord has given to the sons of
men] the generation of the righteous [ i. the godly race and posterity of good
men continuing in their fathers goodnesse] shall be blessed [ vz. with plentiful
blessings, and that from the Lord.] Ver, 3. Riches and treasures [ i. al manner
2 words, signifying almost one thing, and also because he speaks of them in
the plural nu^ber] shall be in his house [ i. in his possession and use to serve
his own turn and the turn of all those that any manner of way depend upon
him] and his righteousness [ i. his vprightnes and goodness, both toward God and
men] indureth for ever [ i. shall never decay. q.d. though many rich men
through deceitefulnes of riches, fall away from their former goodness, yet this
good man never shall do so, because he is vpholden in the same, by the
strength of God, and his spirit, yea and withal he shows what difference
there is between the good and the bad: wicked men's riches go away by and by,
but good men's righteousness continues for ever. True it is that the good are
oftentimes poor, but the Prophet herein specially magnifieth the grace of god,
that the godly content themselves with mediocritie, and that on the other side,
the profane men are never satisfied, 4. Unto the righteous [ i. unto the^ that
strive, to a righteous life, and holy conuersation] arises [ vz. through Gods
special appointment, gift, and grace] light [ i. all manner of prosperity and
blessedness both inward, and outward] in darkness [ i. in the greatest
distress, misery, and adversity, that can come upon him: the Prophet
means, that God makes them to feel his grace and goodness, which are upright
in heart, in the midst of their greatest afflictions, they knowing this, that
all that is laid upon them shall turn to their good] he [ i. the godly and
faithful man] is merciful and full of compassion [ vz. toward such, as are
in need and distresse] and righteous [ i. upright and faithful in all his
dealings with other. Some refer this to God, but methinke the other is the
more apt sense.] Ver. 5. A good man [ i. one whom God has framed to goodness,
for otherwise none Mark. 10.18.] is merciful [ vz. to the poor and needy,
understanding by merciful, courteous in speech and ready in deed to perform
what in him lyeth] and lends [ vz. unto another that wants yea he lends
freely, looking for nothing again, Luke 6.35. This is a fruit of mercy, the
usurer lends also, but that is to suck away the wealth of an other] and
measures his affairs [ i. orders and disposes the things he has to do,
not doing any thing rashly, or yet forslowing the occasion when he may do a
thing well, not being prodigal on the one side, or miserable on the other
side, but in all his dealings, observes the rule of equity and right] by
judgment [ i. by 6. Surely he shall never be moved [ vz. utterly or
altogether: q.d. he shall remain always steadfast and sound, what soever
adversities come unto him: See 2. Corinthians. 4.8.] but [I would rather read,
and,] the righteous [see before ver. 4. of this Psalm] shall be had in
everlasting remembrance [ vz. before God, and his Angels and amongst all the
company of good and godly people.] Ver. 7. He will not be afraid of evil
tidings i. of any evil tidings how heavy soever they be, which shall be
brought to him, by evil tidings he means reports of some evil or mischief,
that seems to draw nigh, or hang over men's heads] for his heart is fixed [
vz. steadfastly upon God and his prouidence] and believes [ vz. with all his
heart] in the Lord [ vz. who is able, and will also in good time deliver him:
q.d. whatsoever evil news he may hear, he will not be afraid, but will
always remain quiet in his spirit: the reason is, because he has wholly
reposed himself, upon Gods fatherly providence and care even as though he
were in his bosom or 8. His heart [ i. the persuasion of his heart] is
stablished [ i. surely and firmly set, upon God and the truth of his
promises] therefore he will not fear [ vz. any thing, whatsoever that man can
do against him. See Psalm. 118.6.] until he see his desire upon his enemies
[ i. until he see them through Gods might and power overthrown, as he
himself has wished: by the word, until, he means not that when they are
overthrown, then he should be afraid, for that were to fear, where no
fear is, but, until, is used here for perpetuity 110.1. q.d. he shall never
fear.] Ver. 9. He [ i. the good and righteous man] has distributed [ vz.
unto others, the things he had, and that not slenderly, or niggardly, but
freely, and as every man's necessity requires, and his power able to
perfourme] and given [ vz. of his own, and that freely and liberally] to the
poor [ i. to the needy, and such as wanted] his righteousness remains for
ever [ i. he shall continually have a mean and ability to do well, it may
be also understood, of the fruit of righteousness: See before ver. 3. of
this Psalme] his horn [ i. his head, as 1. Sam. 2.1.10. understanding also
thereby his force, strength, state, dignity, prosperity, and whatsoever was
excellent in him] shall be exalted [ vz. mightily and greatly] with glory [ i.
with abundance of glory: q.d. he shall increase and grow from 10. The wicked
shall see [ vz. both with his mind and eyes] it [ i. the felicity and the
prosperity of the good] and be angry [ i. grieve, despite, and freate at it]
he shall gnash with his teeth [ vz. even not only for anger, as the Bore which
whetteth his tushues, but also for grief and pain as Matthew. 8.12.] and
consume away [ vz. out of this life, and from amongst men, and that through
despite and enuy] and the desire of the wicked shall perish [ i. the wicked
shall not attain and perform that which they wish and desire, but shall be
frustrated of their hope: by desire, he understands their wicked thoughts,
counsels, endeavors, labors and attempts, against the good: and by perishing,
he means that they shall be made frustrate and come to nothing, see Psalm. 146.4.

1. Teaches first that the way to attain true blessedness is to serve the
Lord according to his word: Secondly that Gods servants should have a very
great and continual delight in his law. Ver. 2. Teaches first yt Gods people
shall both inwardly, and outwardly grow much even in this life, secondly that
the riches of Gods blessings, reaches not only to the godly, but also to
their godly seed and posterity. Verse 3. Teaches us, first that riches are
not evil, because they are reckoned amongst Gods blessings: secondly that we
can not have them, unless it please him in favor to bestow the same upon us,
thirdly that the godly through the strength and power of GOD, continue steadfast
in goodness unto the end. Ver. 4. Teaches us, first that the godly shall be (...)
midst of their greatest heaviness: secondly that godly men (...) hearted,
and ^^ithful in all their dealings. Ver. 5. Teaches men that are able to lend
freely, and utterly condemns al usury: secondly it teaches men holy
wisdom, to do every thing they do with advise and vprightnes. Verse 6.
Notes, not only the continuance and sure footing as it were, that the godly
have, but also even the great glory and renoune wherewith the Lord crowns
them. Ver. 7. Teaches us, that whosoever steadfastly trusts in the Lord, need
not fear any thing whatsoever. Ver. 8. Teaches us that we ought to have a
steadfast and an assured persuasion of the truth of gods promises: also that the
wicked shall come to ruin and destruction. Ver. 9. Teaches us, that this is
one good note to know good men by, that they are liberal handed to the needy:
also that the Lord will make the glory of his children more and more to
increase. Ver. 10. Teaches first, that it is the nature of the wicked, to pine
away at the prosperity of the good: Secondly that all the devises and attempts
of the ungodly, against the good, shall through Gods mighty power, either come
to no effect, or else fall in his just judgment upon their own heads.

Psalm 113
I Think this Psalm does specially consist of two parts. vz. for his
infinite power, and wonderful providence, from ver. 4. to the end of the
Psalm.

The title of this Psalm, is the same with the title of Psalm 106.] Verse 1.
vz. the Lorde] O ye servants of the Lord [hee speaks both to the Levites
and other people, whom the Lord had chosen to serve him, but specially to the
Levites, whom the Lord had appointed for leaders and guydes unto the rest]
praise [ vz. both in the inward man and in the outward man, i. both with
heart and mouth] the name of the Lord [ i. his majesty, power, and goodness,
manifested to all but especially to you: and in that he doubleth this word,
praise, he does not only labor to whet our coldness and dulnes, but
shows that God is he, who alone is worthy all praise.] Ver. 2. Blessed [ i.
praised and magnified] he the name of the Lord [ i. Gods majesty, 1. of this
Psalme] from henceforth and for ever [ i. from this time, and so forward
always. In this verse the Prophet amplifieth Gods praise, by the circumstance
of time: q.d. he would have it to continue always in men's mouths: as in the
next verse he amplifieth it by the circumstaunce of place: q.d. he would
have it remain and abide also in all places.] Ver. 3. The Lords name [ i. his
majesty, power, goodness etc. as before. 1.2. of this Psalm, and also Psalm.
20.1.] is praised [ i. is meet and worthy to be praised, for the excellency
and worthiness thereof: some read it thus, let it be praised: both senses may
stand well with the purpose of the Prophet] from the rising of the sun unto
the going down of the same [ i. in and through all the world, he puts two
of the chiefest parts of the world, for the whole world, because these two
parts, vz. East, and West were most inhabited, for the North by reason of
cold, and the South by reason of 4. The Lord is high above all nations [ i.
is renowned and more glorious, then all the peoples of the world, or any one of
them: and it is a secret reproof: q.d. Is there any thing more absurd amongst
reasonable men then this, that they which have certain experience and
knowledge, of Gods glory amongst them, should cease to praise him for it,
seeing it shines even amongst them that are blinde] and his glory above the
heavens [ q.d. God does not only exceed, and excel al nations in glory, but
even the very heavens themselves, which are not able to 5. Who [either in
heaven or in earth] is like [to wit, in power, strength, providence, goodness,
etc.] unto the Lord our God [ i. unto him whom we serue] that has his
dwelling on high [ i. that dwells 2.4.] Ver. 6. Who abaseth himself [ vz. in
love and mercy toward his] to behold things [ vz. which are done] in the
heaven and in the earth [he means that God foreseeth all things both aloft
and below, 7. He rayseth ( vz. through his almighty power, and of his goodness)
the needy ( i. the poor and abject amongst men) out of the dust ( i. out of a
vile and contemptible estate) and lifts up the poor out of the dung, he
speaks the self same thing in other terms, meaning, that God many times
aduanceth the most base persons, see 1. Sam. 2.8. also 2. Sam. 7.8. and note
that he speaks not here of an ordinary course, as in other places, but of
unaccustomed works, in which Gods hand and power is more manifest, as when he
exalts a poor man not only to a simple degree of honor, but also to have
authority over his people. True it is, that this appears plainly in the
civil government, but yet especially in the state of the Church, which is the
principal theater as it were of the world, and wherein God gives the
plainest testimonies of his power, wisdom, and wonderful 8. That he may set
them with the princes ( i. that he may give and commit unto them government,
as other princes have, and not only as every other Prince, but even such
government, as the princes of his own people have, whom he has not only
chosen, but also most tenderly loved) Ver. 9. He ( i. God) makes ( vz. by his
almighty power and working) the barren woman [ i. she that was barren] to
dwell with a family ( i. to have plenty of children about her: the Prophet
puts the whole family, for the principal part thereof, that is children)
and ( vz. God makes her also) a joyful mother of children ( i. to rejoice in
her children and fruitfulnes: he ascribes here joy unto mothers, because they
prefer posterity, before all other things which they desire: that barrennes
bred grief, and fruitfulnes, joy, appears in Hannah the mother of Samuel, 1.
Sam. 1.2. chapiters throughout) praise ye the Lord (see Psalm. 106. and the
last verse.

Ver. 1. Teaches us that it becomes all men, 2. Teaches us that Gods
praises should be continual. Ver. 3. Shows that they shall be public in
all places. Verse. 4. Shows that all the glory both of heaven and earth, and
of all the creatures therein contained, is not so much as a shadow of the
glory and majesty that is in God. Ver. 5. Teaches us, that none is any manner
of way comparable with God, or like unto him. Ver. 6. Teaches us, that God
looks upon all things both in heaven and earth, which should teach us to
walk with fear and trembling in his sight. Ver. 7. and 8. Teach us, that
preferment comes not from the East, nor from the West, but from the Lord
only, as Psalm. 75.6.7. Ver. 8. Teaches further, that christian princes, and
those which govern Gods people, are more to be esteemed, then unbelieving
magistrates are. Ver. 9. Teaches us, first that barennes and fruitfulnes are
both from the Lord. Secondly that we may, yea that we ought to rejoice, when
God blesses us with posterity.

Psalm 114
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. Egypt, and the wonderful works
which God did for their sake, from ver. 1. to the end of the 4. In the second
is comprehended as it 5. to the end of the Psalm.

This Psalm has no title, as sundry other have not, and namely Psalm. 10. 91.
also Psalm. 93. etc,] Ver. 1. When Israel [ i. the people of Israel: who are
called Israel, because they descended of Iaakob, who was also called Israel]
went out of Egypt [i. were delivered out of it, by the hands of Moses and
Aaron] and the house of Iaakob [ i. his race and posterity] from the barbarous
people [ vz. of the land of Egypt, the Hebrew word used in this place,
signifies such as spoke an other tongue besides the Hebrewe, See Psalm. 81.5.]
Ver. 2. Judah [ i. not only that tribe, but all the rest of the people of
Israel, for i. was a people whom he had sanctified, and separated from other
nations, to be a peculiar and holy people to himself.] And Israel [ i. the
people that came of Israel, as ver. 1. of this Psalm.] his dominion [ i. God
had purchased unto himself, a Lordship and rule over them, because he had
brought them out of the land of Egypt. The Prophet means, that the
Israelites were gods people, and that he again was the God of the Israelites:
See Exodus 6.7. Exodus 19.5.6.] Ver. 3. The Sea [ i. the red Sea] saw [ i. felt
and perceived, after the manner that it could] it [ i. the great power of God,
waking for his people in their delivery and his love toward them] and fled [
vz. from before the presence of the Lord and his people, some this way, and
some that way: see Exodus 14.21.] Jordan was turned back [ vz. from his
natural course and running, see this history in Joshua. 3.13.14. etc. He
touches here some miracles, yt God wrought for his people. q.d. Though the Sea
were a dead element, and the other creatures insensible, yet they were as it
were stricken with a certain fear of Gods power, and did of their own accord
yet at Gods appointment, willingly 4. The mountains [ i. not only Sinai, but
the mountains round about it] leaped like rams [ i. were moved, as rams
when they leap or skippe, at the presence of the Lord, when he gave the law
unto Moses: See Exodus 19.18,] and the hills [ i. little hills, vz. leaped or
skipped] as lambs [ vz. when they play together, he means that the presence
of the Lord, made both the great mountains, and the little hills 5. What ailed
thee [ q.d. what was the cause, or was the matter in thy self? no, no, there
was an other thing in it, and that was gods power and presence, as ver. 7.] O
sea [ i. O red sea, as before ver. 3. of this Psalm] that thou fleddest [ vz.
at the presence of the Lord and his people, See for the sense of this and that
which follows in this verse, the third verse of this Psalm.] 6. Ye
mountains etc. [see for the meaning of this verse, ver. 4. of this Psalm. and
note for both these verses together, that the Prophet demands the question,
not as though he either doubted, or were ignorant of the cause, but that he
might the more evidently declare, that whatsoever was done, was by the almighty
power of God done, besides or contrary to the course that had set 7. The earth
[ vz. it self, which seems to be insible, yea and as it were vnmoueable]
trembled at the presence of the Lord [ i. shook as it were for fear, when
the Lord gave forth testimonies of his presence. See Exodus 19.18. The Prophet
gives in these words, an answer to his questions. q.d. Gods power and
presence, was the cause of this and that, he putting the word, earth, for the
sea and waters also, which by the figure finecdoche, are comprehended under
that name Immanuel reads it thus] at the presence of ye Lord, I the earth
tremble [ q.d. then I did tremble at his presence, and now and at al other
times, I am so stricken with his presence, when he shows it, as it were
extraordinarily, so that I can not but tremble at it. Though the words vary,
yet the sense is all one] at the presence of the God of Iaakob [ i. at the
presence of the only true God, whom Iaakob, that is such as came of Iaakob
worship and serve: and by this title he seuereth God, from al other counterfeit
and sorged 8. Which turns [ vz. by his almighty power] the rock into water
pooles [ i. makes fountains to come out of the rock: and when he calls
them water pooles, he notes the abundance of water that issued out of them]
and the flint into a fountain of water [ i. brought even abundance of water
out of the most hard rock. see Psalm. 78.15.16. we may also refer this, to
the histories written Exodus 17.6. and Number. 20.11. etc. if any will expound it of
Gods power, what he is able to do, I will not contend, for I suppose both
senses may stand very well.

Ver. 1. Teaches us that God has a special care over his people, 2. Shows
that it is a singular favor, when god chooses any to be a holy, and peculiar
people to himself. Ver. 3. and 4. Teach that when the Lord will have any
thing done, he will make the very creatures to turn vpside down their
ordinary courses. Verse. 5.6. Teach us that we may many times ask questions,
and yet neither doubt of the matters, nor be ignorant in them. Ver. 7. Teaches
us to stand in awe of God, seeing that the very dumb and insensible creatures
fear before him. Ver. 8. Teaches that ye Lord does whatsoever pleases him
both in heaven and in earth.

Psalm 115
THis Psalm consists of two principal parts. 1. to ye end of the 8. In the
second is contained an exhortation to the 9. to the end of the Psalm.

It is uncertain who penned this Psalm, and at what time it was written.
Antiochus made it, then David, as Immanuel Tremelius affirms.] Ver. 1. Not
unto q.d. deliver us from the tyranny of the Gentiles amongst whom we are, not
that we might have glory thereby, but that it may redound to thine own glory
and honor: and this doubling of the words shows that they cast from
themselves al trust in themselues] but unto thy name [ vz. only: understanding
by name, his goodness, majesty, power, etc. as Psalm. 113.1.2.] give the glory [
vz. of one deliverance and freedome] for thy loving mercy [ vz. toward vs]
and for thy truths sake [ vz. which thou have promised us: understanding by
truth, not only his promise, but also his faithful performance thereof. q.d.
for the glory of thine own name, and that thy mercy and truth may be 2.
Wherefore [ i. to what end, otherwise then tending to thy dishonour] shall the
heathen [amongst whom we are, and under whose power we be subiected] say? [ vz.
with open mouth, and that in disprayse of thy name] where is now [ i. at this
pinch, and at this distresse] their God [ i. the God which they worship: q.d.
if thou now help us not the mouths of the enemies will be open, to
blaspheme thee, as though thou caredst not for thy people, and so to wound and
grieve us at the heart.] Verse 3. But [ q.d. for all their blaspheming, this is
our assurance of faith, i. the God whom we serue] is in heaven [ i. is far
above all things, in majesty, power, etc.] he does [ vz. without either the
help or hinderance of any] what soever he will [ vz. both in heaven and earth.
This verse and the verses following contain and answer, to the blasphemous
scorning of the adversaries contained ver. 3. and in this answer, the true GOD
is manifestly set out, ver. 4. and further it is declared, that the false, may
not only not be compared with him, but not with men, no, not so much, as with
ye smallest creature living, ver, 4.5.6.7. and therefore that men should no
more fear the worshippers of idols, then the idols themselves. ver. 8. so
that here he opposes the assurance of faith against the blasphemies of
unbelievers, and declares that God has an infinite power, and such a one as
can not be limited, in so much that all the world being under his government
he freely executes whatsoever pleases him, no man being able to let him
therein, yea that he is not only above all lets and hinderaunces, but also
that he uses the same to serve to the furtherance of his purposes, and
therefore he adds that he 4. Their idols [ i. the idols of the heathen,
ver. 2. of this Psalm. and which they serue] as silver and gold [ i are made of
silver and gold: q.d. that is the best they can be made of] the work of men's
i. they are such works as men's hands have made.] Verse. 5. They have a mouth
[ i. the proportion and similitude of a mouth] and speak not [ i. can not
speak therewith] they have eyes [ i. a show and likeness of eyes] and see not
[ i. can not see therewith: and after the same sort must you understand all
that is said of them, ver. 6.7. The faithful do hereby declare, that it is an
absurd thing for men demand of idols that which they want, or to put any
trust in them, seeing that they have neither moving, feeling, nor any other
sense. And in these verses, he makes an opposition between the true God, and
the false gods, which are nothing but dead idols, and have no power at all,
and in these verses, is contained also a laying of that justly upon these false
gods, which the idolaters untruly did charge the true God withal, and the
arguments are taken, first of the effect, because their idols were nothing
but terrors, and such as did trouble men's minds, with grievous superstition
(from whence also they seem in Hebrewe to have their names) and not
comforting, and saving any, as God does all his continually: Secondly of the
matter, because that though they be very precious, yet they are earthly
things and without life, but God is the author of life, and dwells in
heaven: thirdly, of their beginning because men's hands made them, whereas God
is eternal and uncreated, who also by his very word, made al things: lastly,
because they are idle and unprofitable, and not endued with any power of life,
but rather vain shadows of living things, whereas the Lord does whatsoever
pleases him. And by this means he beats down, the vain confidence and
pride of the wicked, who bragged of the help of their gods, to whom they
themselves gave a beginning and though they be made of gold and silver
understanding thereby any other precious matter whatsoever, yet so it is, the
value of ye matter causes not, that the idols should be more excellent, if
they might be compared 8. They that make them [ i. the caruers, grauers,
painters, etc.] are like unto them [ i. brutish, as it were and insensible.
q.d. they are no more able to resist thee, and thy power, then those dead
images are able to resist a living man: neither are they able more to hurt thy
people, then a block or a stock of it self can hurt a living creature] so
are [ i. in the like case and condition also are] all [ vz. of what state or
condition soever they bee] that trust in them [ vz. either little or much: and
here they show one cause wherefore God hates idols, vz. because the honor
due to him alone, is given to the^.] Ver. 9. O Israel [now he speaks to the
faithful, and exhorts them to trust q.d. But thou O Israel, seeing thou have
had proof of the alsufficiency of God, and of the vanity of idoles] trust thou
in the Lord [ vz. alone, and join no other with him] for he is their help [
i. of the faithful, and of those that trust in him: q.d. he always helps
them] and their shield [ vz. in the day of distress, meaning under this term,
shield, his protecting and defending 18.2.] Ver. 10. O house of Aaron [i. O ye
priests and Levites, which were joined unto the priests for their ease, and he
speaks specially unto these, because they should show the way unto others]
trust ye in ye Lord [ vz. also, that ye in feeling the same your selves, may
the better teach and persuade other men to embrace it] for he is their help
and their shield [see ver. 9. of 11. Ye [ vz. of what nation soever ye be, and
are now come to the knowledge of God] that fear the Lord [ i. worship him and
serve him according to his word] trust in the Lord, for he is their help and
their shield [see ver. 9.10. of this Psalm.] Ver. 12. The Lord [ vz. himselfe]
has been mindful [ i. by effect and deed has declared his care and
remembraunce] of us [ vz. being in distress, and that by reason of the
covenant which he made with vs] he will bless [ vz. us al, of what state or
condition so ever we be, understanding by blessing all manner of prosperity
whatsoeuer] he will bless the house of Israel [ i. all the race and
posterity of Israel: now he applies that particularly, which he spoke
before generally] he will bless the house of Aaron [ i. the Priests 10.]
Ver. 13. He will bless them that fear the Lord [ i. such as worship and
serve him: as before verse 11. Mark also how he speaks of God in the third
person. And this often repeating of the word, blessing, serves not only to
note the continual course of Gods graces upon his children, but also to
express the certainty and assurednes thereof] both small and great [ i. as
well those that are vile and contemptible in the world, as those that are in
greatest estimation and regard, the reason of it is, because 14. The Lord will
increase [ vz. through his great goodness and mercy] his graces toward you [
vz. which are his people, he means that he will give them a daily supply of
new benefits, and greater then they have had before] toward you and toward
your children [hee notes in these words the largeness of Gods blessing, to
be bestowed 15. Ye are the blessed of the Lord [ i. you are such as the Lord
himself has not only promised bur performed great blessings unto, and
therefore you need not doubt or feare] which made [ vz. by the word of his
power, in the beginning, and ever since the beginning has preserved and
increased the same] the heaven and the earth [ vz. and al things therein
contained: q.d. you may assure your selves of a most plentiful blessing, seeing
that he who blesses you, is the author, preserver, and governor of heaven and
al things therein, and of the earth, and al things therein, 16. The heavens even
the heavens [ i. the most high heauens] are the Lords [ i. apperteine and
belong unto him, as the special place of his delight and dwelling, and yet we
must not so understand it, as God were tied to any one certain place, for his
majesty fills the heavens and the earth] but he has given [ vz. of his
large liberality and goodnes] the earth [ vz. wherein men dwel] to the sons
of men [ i. to men and their seed after them, that they should inhabit and
use it: so that in this life they might by the things thereof be provoked to
serve God, and stirred up 17. The dead praise not the Lord [the Prophet means
that if God preserved not his Church, the whole order and course of the world,
should be turned vpside down, for to what end should the creation of the
world serve, if there were not a people to call upon God, whereupon he
gathers that there shall always be some, which shall praise the Lord even
until the end of the world: and so with all there is set out the end, wherefore
men are placed in the world, vz. to praise and serve God: q.d. that we dye not
must be attributed to gods glory, and therefore even our life also must be
occupied about his praise, see Psalm. 6.5.] whether they yt go down into the
place of silence [ i. neither do they praise him that are brought to their
graves and laid in them, see for this speech, Psalm. 94.17. see also Isaiah.
38.18. 18. But we [ vz. which shall live, and be delivered from our distresses]
will praise ye Lord [ vz. for the benefits that we have received from him] from
henceforth, and for ever [ i. continually and alwaies] praise ye the Lord [see
Psalm. 104. and Psalm. 105. in the very end.

1. Teaches us, when we do in prayer appear before the Lord to crave any
thing at his hands, unfeignedly to cast from our selves all trust and
confidence in our selves, and to fly to gods sovereign goodness and truth
only. Ver. 2. Teaches us that gods glory is after a sort hazarded amongst the
enemies of God and his people, when his own people are discomfited or
disgraced* Ver. 3. Teaches us that the more the enemies do blaspheme God, the
more we should be thoroughly persuaded of his power, because that their dealing
does provoke him to execute a more swift and hard judgment upon them. Ver.
4.5.6.7.8. does lively paint out the vanity of idols, themselves, and of al
such as either make or worship them. Ver. 9. Teaches the godly howsoever other
men run a whoring after idols, to cleave only to the Lord. Ver. 10. Teaches
the ministers and preachers of Gods word, to make themselves examples unto
other of steadfast confidence in God. Ver. 11. Teaches us that with the service
of god, there must be joined faith in God, and his word, or else it is nothing.
Ver. 12. Teaches us that God never forgets his children, and merciful
covenant made with them: also that the godly shall have from the Lord, both
assurednes and plentifulnes of blessings. Ver. 13. Teaches us that God
respects no man's person, but in every nation, he that fears him, and
works righteousness is accepted before him. Ver. 14. Shows that Gods grace
and love reaches even to the godly, and their posterity after them. Ver. 15.
Teaches us that those whom the Lord pursues with his favor, shall not, nor can
not want any thing that is good. Ver. 16. Sets out the large liberality and
fatherly care of God toward men, also it teaches us that seeing he has
given us the things of this life, we should use them well, and so as they may
further us to the hope of a better life. Ver. 17. Teaches us that when God
gives us life in this world, he does thereby as it were provoke us, to set
forth his glory and praise. Ver. 18. Teaches us three things: first, that we
should praise the Lord for his mercies, for even to ye end have we our life
given, and his blessings are bestowed upon us: secondly that this our
thanksgiving should be continual, and thirdly that we should provoke and stir
up other men to do the like.

Psalm 116.
THis Psalm, as I take it may be divided into two parts. 1. to the end of
the 11. In the second 12. to the end of the Psalm.

This Psalm has no title, as many other Psalms, both before it,
114.115.117.118. etc.] Ver. 1. I love [ vz. with all my heart and vnfeignedly]
the Lord [ vz. only and alone, and none either with him or besides him, and
under the word of love, the Prophet shows that there was nothing without god,
that either could like him or please him] because he has heard [ i. because
he has yielded unto and granted] my voice [ vz. sent forth unto him] and my
prayers [ vz. which I made unto him: under these words, voice, and prayers, the
Prophet means such prayers, as he powered forth unto the Lord, not only with
his heart, but also with his mouth and words.] Ver. 2. For vz. as one that were
ready for to hear me, this is spoken of God according to man's capacity] unto
me [ vz. being in distress, and when I prayed unto him, as followeth] when I
did call upon him [ vz. for help and aid, by earnest and hearty prayers] in
my days [ i. in the time of my affliction, as may appear by the next verse
following: see Psalm. 137.7. also Lament. 1.21. and by the word, days, he
notes that he had continuance and length of trouble.] Ver. 3. When the
snares of death compassed me [ vz. on every side, and round about, so that
there was almost no hope of escaping, no more then of a bird, or wild beast
taken in a snare or grin, by this manner of speech, he means, that even then
when he was ready to dye, the Lord in mercy looked upon him. See 2. Sam.
22.5.6. also Psalm. 18.4.5.] and the griefs of the grave [ i. great and
extreme griefs, which brought me almost to the grave, and made me as it were
ready to be put into it] caught me [ i. took hold of me, and so that sore,
that I was almost past hope of escaping] when I found trouble and sorrow [ i.
when I perceived my self to be much plu^ged in abundaunce of grief, for so
much I take these two words, trouble, and 4. Then I called upon the name of ye
Lord [ i. I prayed unto him, himself, and besought his goodness to manifest his
power in helping mee] saying I beseech thee [ vz. from the bottom of my
heart] O Lord [ i. thou that art both able and willing to help] deliver [ vz.
from danger and distresse] my soul [ i. my life, which is in great hazard, by
means 5. The Lord is merciful [ vz. toward al, but specially toward the^
that call upon him in truth] and righteous [ vz. in performing his promises made
to his people, and maintaining them in their just causes] and our God [ i. the
God which we serue] is full of compassion [and therefore he will never forsake
his that are in misery, the Prophet shows in this verse, what was the comfort
of his soul in the midst 6. The Lord [ vz. alone] preserves [ vz. by his
mighty power, and that out of all the mischievous imaginations that the wicked
can deuise] the simple [ i. such as are destitute of man's counsel, and therefore
ye more subject to injury amongst men, and the more easily circumuented, and
yet do, all that notwithstanding, commit themselves and their causes, with a
simple and quiet mind, into the hands of God] I was in misery [ q.d. I can
speak this by mine own experience, for when I was in wonderful and great
distress, so that there was almost no hope of delivery, as ver. 3. of this
Psalm.] and he saved me i. delivered me out of the same: according to his
prayer made ver. 4.] Ver. 7. Return unto thy rest O my soul [ i. be no more
troubled and disquieted, but stay thy self upon God, see Psalm. 42.5.12. This
same returning to rest, is that same stay, that the faithful have in God and
his word in the midst of their griefs, so that they utterly fall not] for
the Lord has bin beneficial unto thee [ vz. many and sundry ways: all this
verse together is. q.d. Take courage unto thee, be quiet, go unto god, in whom
alone thou shall find marvelous tranquillity, for he has hertofore, and will
hereafter show himself favorable unto thee.] ver. 8. Because [this is a proof,
by his own experience of that which he spoke before, yt God had been beneficial
unto him] thou [ vz. alone, and mark the sudden change of the person from the
third to the seconde] have delivered [ vz. freely, safe and sound, and through
thy mighty power] my soul [ i. me my selfe] from death [ vz. whereunto I was
almost brought: or else you may understand by death most extreme daunger] mine
eyes from tears [ i. thou have taken away from me al sadness and heaviness, he
puts the outward sign, both for ye sign and the thing it selfe] and my
feet from falling [ vz. into these deadly dangers and trappes, which were laid
for me, and whereinto certainly I had fallen, if I had not been kept and
delivered by thee.] Ver. 9. I [ vz. being grounded and vz. through his goodness
and defense: meaning by walking, living, and being conversant: q.d. I shall
liue] before God [ i. safely and soundly, for men think those things to be
sure, which they have their eyes continually fixed vpon] in the land of the
living [ i. in this world, or earth, or amongst men dwelling upon the same, and
so we have had it sundry times used before, So that in this verse, the prophet
upon the benefits which he had before received, concludes, that he shall be
always under the care and government of God.] Verse. 10. I believed [ vz. the
Lord and his word] therefore I spoke [ vz. i. much afflicted with assaults both
inward and outward. In this verse the Prophet shows how weak and feeble his
flesh was, in the time of adversity, which almost rejected the promises of God,
had not Gods spirit vpholden him in faith: q.d. then was faith forcible and
triumphed in my mind, when I called upon God, as is expressed before in this
Psalm. ver. 4. and spoke unto mine own soul words of comfort, ver. 7. the^ I
believed in deed, and I spoke nothing but that which I was fully persuaded of,
and my tongue, and the affection of my heart agreed well together.] Ver. 11. I
i. I both thought it and spoke it, and held it as a resolute conclusion] in my
fear [ i. when I was in great fear, and ready for fear to fly from the rage
of Saul, for the word does not only signify fear, but have making, as
appears Psalm. 31.22. q.d. with fear and flying, I was carried forcibly, into
these perturbations of the flesh] al men are liars [ i. there is no certainty
and assurednes in their words: q.d. Samuel, who for his excellency might be
preferred before all men, promised me that I should obtain and possess the
kingdom, but now I perceive he spoke not in the spirit of prophecy, but of
his own brain, and lyingly: Thus in the rage and heat of the flesh does
David touch not God in deed openly, but his prophet Samuel, as though he had
not sufficiently known Gods will, and had gone beyond the bounds of his
calling: q.d. we must no more believe men, for there is nothing in them but
vanity and lying.] Ver. 12. vz. thing in all the world] shall I render unto the
Lord [ i. yield and give unto him] for all his benefits toward me [ i. for
that innumerable number of benefits, which he has bestowed upon me, and given
me freely: This interrogation or question shows that he thought himself so
much bound unto God, for his graces as that he was not able to yield any thing
that might counteruaile the least part thereof.] Ver. 13. I will take the cup of
salvation [or else in the plural God sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, and
then that he would, as the manner was in those sacrifices, make a holy feast and
banquet also unto the people, in remembrance of that manifold deliverance, which
he had received from the Lord, for in this place he does no doubt allude to
the custom of the law, which was to make a banquet, of some part of the
sacrifice, in token of rejoicing when they yielded solemn thanks to God. And
because that those sacrifices were offered often times, for some deliverances,
he adds the cup of salvation, that is deliverances: how David performed this:
see 1. Chro. 16.1.2.3. etc.] and will call upon the name of the Lord [ i. pray
unto him also. q.d. I will not only thank him for his benefits, but pray unto
him for the increase and continuance thereof.] 14. I will pay [ vz. with a free
and willing heart] my vows [ i. the things yt I have vowed: or the sacrifices
of thanksgiving which I promised unto him, if he delivered me out of distress:
for amongst other that used to make vows, they did it, yt were in extreme
danger and distress: q.d. I will not only by words confess my self to be safe
from danger, and so witness ye thankfulness of my mind, but I will declare it also
by offering the sacrifices which I vowed to the Lord, at what time Saul did
pursue me very hardly. The end of vows was to seal in the hearts of Gods
children, a hope to obtain that, which they did ask: and moreover to provoke
and bind them to thanksgiving, and this liberty to vow, is permitted unto Gods
children, to comfort them in their infirmities and not otherwise, and that
word, pay, notes that it is due debt, and that it can not be omitted without
sin, if the thing vowed be lawful] even now [ q.d. I will not defer it] in
the presence of all his people [ i. in the temple, or place of public
exercise, whether al Gods people resorted: or else before all the Israelits
whom he gathered together to Jerusalem, to bring the ark of the Lord thither:
See 1. Chro. 15.3.] Ver. 15. Precious [ i. dear, and of great account and
regard] in the sight of the Lord [ i. before him, and his iudgement] is the
death of his saints [ i. death or mischief imagined or performed, toward those
whom he allows of q.d. God by my example has declared how dear unto him is
the life of faithful men, seeing that he has so often preserved me,
assaulted so many ways, and with so great force: or thus: God does grievously
take good men's deaths, and therefore they shall not escape unpunished that
kill them. And mark this, that for his comfort, he sets this against the
malice of his enemies, that God does not at al adventure deliver his up to
death, but makes 30.4.] Ver. 16. Behold Lord [ q.d. most true is it Lord,
that thou will not have the godly slain, for thou have preserved me thy poor
seruant] for I am thy servant [ vz. and thou have showed me this grace and
fauour] I am thy servant [hee repeateth the same again, as a matter of no
small comfort unto himself, neither must we so understand him, as though he
grounded the causes of his deliverance upon his services performed to God, but
upon Gods free election: q.d. from my mothtrs womb, yea before I was borne,
this honor, and goodness was prepared for mee] and the son of thy handmayde [
i. of a woman who did purely worship thee: and this he speaks, because that
children by reason of their first education, imitated the disposition and
manners of their mothers: for which cause also it should seem, that the names
of the kings mothers, are so commonly expressed in the books of kings: see for
this phrase Psalm. 86.16.] thou [ vz. alone] have broken [ vz. in pieces or a
sunder, by thy almighty power] my bands [ i. either the bands that I was bound
in, or else the bands that were prepared to bind me in, by this manner of
speech he means yt god had delivered him from the danger wherein he was, or
else he had kept him, yt he came not into the troubles, yt his enemies had
prepared for him.] Ver. 17. I will offer unto thee a sacrifice vz. for thy
mercy and goodness showed unto me, he means that he will acknowledge and
confess gods goodness, and praise him for the same, for here he protests
again, as he had done before, ver. 13.14. that he would give God thanks: which
is a sign that he was not vnthankful] and I will call upon the name of the
Lord [marke the sudden change of the person from the second to the third: he
means by this speech, that he will never cease to worship God and to praise
God, see before ver. 13. of this Psalm.] Ver. 18. I will pay etc. [This is the
14. before going, both in words and meaning, and therefore we shall not need to
stand upon it.] Ver. 19. In the courts of the Lords house [ i. in the
Jerusalem, [i. openly in that most famous City, in which was at that time, the
only place appointed for gods sacrifices and service, because there was but one
only altar, and that was placed there, from which also it was not lawful for
any man to withdraw himself.

Ver. 1. Teaches us unfeignedly to love the Lord: 2. and 3. Teach us yt the
time of affliction is an acceptable time to pray to God in, and that affliction
it self adds also an edge unto our prayers. Ver. 3. Does further teach into
what great anguish and distress the children of god are many times brought.
Ver. 4. teaches us earnestnes and continuance in prayer unto almighty God.
Ver. 5. Teaches us that the consideration and feeling of Gods mercy, is and
ought to be a notable spur unto prayer. Ver. 6. Teaches us, yt Gods mercy
toward other men and our selves also, should assure us that our prayers shall
be heard and we delivered. Verse 7. Teaches us, to comfort our selves what we
may in our distress and heaviness: also that God himself, is the only
proppe and stay of those that are his. Ver. 8. teaches that god does
graciously preserve those that depend upon him, how great or how many soever
their troubles be. Ver. 9. Teaches that those which are under the sauegarde,
providence, and protection of almighty God shall never miscary. Ver. 10.
Teaches us that faith in God and his promises, makes us bold in prayer to
him, and overcomes all assaults of Satan's malice and our own corruption.
Ver. 11. Teaches into what extremities gods children oftentimes fall, specially
when they do not presently see the accomplishme^t of Gods promises. Ver. 12.
Teaches us that Gods benefits are so many and excellent that we are not able
to comprehend, much less to answer, the least part of them. Ver. 13.
Teaches that unfeigned and humble thanksgiving is the most acceptable
sacrifice to almighty God. Ver. 14. Teaches us that when we have vowed any
thing which is lawful and holy, we ought to perform it, but what serves
this, for vows of monkery, single life etc. Ver. 15. Teaches us that god
cares for, and that very tenderly, those that are his, which is a matter of no
small comfort. Ver. 16. Teaches us that it is a good thing to be borne of good
parents, but that it is much better, to have our names written in the book of
life: also that though mischief be devised against Gods servants, or they
themselves somewhat fall into it, yet that God, will either prevent ye
mischief, or else dispatch them out of distress. Ver. 17. Teaches us that
thanksgiving and prayer, should always be joined together. Verse 18. Is the
same with ver. 14. and delivers the same doctrines: also it teaches us not
to be ashamed openly to praise God for his mercies. Ver. 19. teaches us also
to yield him that sacrifice publicly in his Church, and in the assemblies of
his saints. It teaches us also to provoke others to praise the Lord.

Psalm 117.
1. The second comprehends a double reason why they should praise him, vz.
for his mercy in making promises, and for his faithfulness in performance of
them, ver. 2.

1. Al nations [ vz. of the world whether ye be gentiles or Iewes] praise, ye
the Lord [ vz. both with heart and voyce] al ye people [ vz. of the whole
earth: some understand by nations all the Gentiles only, and by people, the
people of Israel only, but I see no reason of it, for the Prophet speaks
generally to al] praise him [ vz. incessantly, and in all places. This doubling
of the word, notes not only how necessary the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving is, but how backwarde also we are in it; that must so often 2.
For his loving kindness [ i. his mercy] is great toward us [ i. is multiplied
very much, and sufficiently confirmed unto us. The Hebrew word may be turned,
is strengthened [ vz. so that it has prevailed against us: q.d. though we
would pue it back yet it will overcome us, meaning that it has been exceeding
great and mighty, one example of the continuance and increase of Gods favor
and graces, read 1. King. 17.14.] and the truth of the Lord indureth for ever
[ i. Gods faithfulness in performing his promises, continues steadfast and sure,
and therefore he is worthy to be praised of al. This is to be referred to the
continual testimonies of Gods fatherly favor and grace, which is, as it were
decked with stedfastnes and firmity.

Verse 1. teaches us that it behooves all men of the world, 2 teaches us that
Gods mercy and faithfulness be the principal causes which should move us to
thankfulness and praising of his name.

Psalm 118
THis Psalm seems to be made either after that David was Saul: 4 first
verses. In the second he 5. to the end of the 20. In the third is contained a
hearty rejoicing both of the people David's Kingdom, and this reaches from verse
21 to the end of the Psalm.

This Psalm has no title, as many other before have not.] Verse 1. vz. O ye
servant of the Lord, as Psalm 113.1.] because he is good [ vz. toward all,
but specially toward you] for his mercy [ vz. toward you] indureth for ever
[ i. lasts for ever and ever, he notes ye co^stancy of gods mercy toward
his children: and withal shows that the right occasion of praising God, is
rather set forth unto us in his mercy then in his justice and power, because
we shall never be well disposed to praise God unless we be drawn unto it by
the sweetness of his mercy.] Verse 2. Let Israel [ i. not only i. presently
and without any delay confess from their hart] that his mercy indureth for
ever [ vz. even as they themselves by their own practice and experience, are
very well able to report. These words are expounded before verse 1.] Verse 3.
Let the house of Aaron [ i. those that are of Aarons stock, and come from him,
meaning especially the Priests and Leuits: see Psalm 115, 10.] now say, etc.
[this is expounded before, verse 1.2.] Verse 4. i. that serve and worship him
in all holy reverence, see Psalm 115, 11, 13, All the rest is expounded before
in this Psalm, and mark that he tieth his speech to the true servant of
God, because that although many Israelites according to the flesh, occupied a
place in the church, yet they were notwithstanding strangers from it.] Ver. 5.
I called upon the Lord [ vz. i. when I was in trouble: see Psalm 1.20, ^.] and
the Lord heard me [ i. granted me the requests and prayers which I made unto
him] and set me at large [ i. at liberty, taking me out of ye distress wherein
I was, see for this purpose Psalm. 4.1. In this verse also mark, that the
Prophet comes from the general to his own particular person, declaring that
as he himself had marks and tokens of Gods goodness toward him, so he had
also thereby occasion given him as well as the rest, to praise the 6. The Lord
is with me [ vz. in all distress: he means by this speech yt God took his
part against al his enemies] therefore I will not fear what man can do against
me [ i. I will not care for all that man can do or devise whatsoever it be: by
man he means multitudes of men and great personages q.d. be they never so
many or never so great, yet I will not fear. Thus we see, how the Prophet
having felt Gods assistaunce in former time, and obtained sundry victories,
assures himself of Gods perpetual aid in time to come: such 3.6. also Psalm.
27, 3.] Ver, 7. The Lord is with me [ i. not only present, but also on my side,
and takes my part] among them that help me [ vz. being thus cast down and
afflicted, ye prophet means, yt seeing God takes his part, he shall prevail:
otherwise if he had al ye help in the world, it could not stand] therefore shall
I see my desire upon my enemies [ i. I shall see that fall upon them that I
have long desired and wished, [ vz. destruction and confusion. Immanuel reads
it thus] therefore do I despise mine enemies: q.d. I make no more account of
them and their forces, then of things which I contemn, so safe, sound, and
unfearful am I, 8. It is better [ vz. by infinite degrees, and mark that the
word, better, is not spoken here as though confidence in men were good, for to
trust in men, is to rob god of his glory] to trust [ vz. stedfastly] in the
Lord [ vz. only] then to have confidence [ i. any manner of trust or co^fide^ce
at al] in man [ vz. of what calling soever he be, or how many in number soever
9. is the same almost with ver. 8, and therefore look upon yt again] in Princes
[this is a certain kind of amplification: q.d. We must not put our trust
neither in men of low estate, nor in mighty men and those that seem to have
all the power and authority in the world, for they that will cleave to them
shall 10. All nations [ vz. which lie round about me, and my kingdom, as ye
Philistines, Moabits etc.] have compassed me [ vz. and my people, and that
round about, sometimes by fraud, sometimes by force, and sometimes by one mean,
and sometimes by another] but in the name of the Lord [ i. through the goodness,
power and strength of God] shall I destroy the^ [ vz. al, with all their
imaginations and devises. In this verse and some other following, the Prophet
rehearses the great danger he was in, he sets out also, the power,
cruelty, and multitude of his enemies, and al to this end, that he might the
more manifest the grace and power of God in his deliverance, which could not
be performed by man's aid, but after a certain marvelous and divine 11. They [
i. the nations round about me, being my deadly enemies] have compassed me [see
before ver. 10] yea they have compassed me [ i. they have oftentimes environed
me, and also very hardly and straightly beset me, so that there was no likelihood
of escaping: for so much I suppose the doubling of ye phrase imports: all that
follows in this ver. is the same in words and sense with ver. 10] Ver. 12. They
[ i. mine enemies] came about me [ vz. on every side] like bees [ i. not only
in great multitudes as though there had been many hiues of bees together, 1.44.
for this phrase. True it is that these little creatures have no great power,
and yet they are wonderfully fierce and angry, specially if they be provoked,
and make men somewhat afraid if they set upon them at the sudden, or vnawares]
but they [ i. mine enemies] were quenched [ vz. through the strength and power
which the Lord gave me. He means by this speech, that they were even as it
were utterly and suddenly confounded, as fire that has abundaunce of water
cast upon it: as a fire of thorns, which though it make much noise at the
beginning, by reason of the crackling thereof, as our experience teaches us,
and yields a greater flame, then greater wood does, yet notwithstanding it
quicklye vanishes away: q.d. for all the ungodly men's bragges, they shall
sodainlye perish, and come to nothing: see for this speech, Ecclesiasticus 7,
8. the rest that follows is expounded before in the other verses.] Ver. 13,
Thou [ vz. O mine enemy: some refer it to Saul as though David vz. with all
thy power, force, and devises whatsoever. The Prophet means by this, yt he
had left no way vnassa^ed to hurt him] yt I might fall [ vz. either by death, or
into some dangerous state, from ye high co^ditio^ wherein I now am] but ye Lord
[ vz. alone] has helpen me [ vz. through his mighty power, meaning yt the Lord
had delivered him from the dangers and distresses yt were devised against him.
Ver. 14 vz. alone] is my strength [ i. is ye strength yt I have to withstand
or to overcome al mine enemies] and my song [ i. the only matter and mean of my
joy: q.d. I have nothing else in my self to rejoice in, but only in the
Lord, who does thus and thus for me] for he has bin my deliverance [ vz.
out of all my fears and dangers: q.d. he alone has delivered me.] Ver. 15.
The voice of i. joyful voices and soundes for deliverance, vz. bestowed upon
me] shall be [ vz. continually] in the tabernacles of the righteous [ i. in the
dwelling places and houses of good men: q.d. the righteous shall sing praises
to god, for the great deliverances which he has wrought for them and me] saying
[ vz. amongst themselves, and yet so that other may hear it] the right hand of
ye Lord [ i. his great glory, power, and might] has done valiauntly [ vz.
against his enemies, and for the defense of his own children: he means that
they should 16. The right hand of ye Lord [ i. his great power and might] is
exalted [ vz. above every thing yt sets it self against it, how high or
great soever it be: the rest of this verse is expounded before.] Verse 17. I
shall not die [ vz. yet: as mine adversaries supposed and wished, and as my
weak state did make show of] but live [ vz. upon the sundry times: such a one
there is also Psalm. 110.4.] and declare [ vz. amongst men, and unto the people
which shall come hereafter] the works of the Lord [the great and exceeding
works that he does, specially for his servants and 18. The Lord [ vz. by the
hand and rod of his and mine enemies] has chastened me sore [ i. sharply: q.d.
It was Gods purpose to correct me by the means of mine enemies, but the wicked
went about thereby to destroy me but this God would not suffer, see Isaiah
10.6, 7. also Zacha. 1, 15.] but he has not delivered me to death [ vz. which
mine enemies purposed and practiced against q.d. through his goodness I have
escaped that danger.] Ver. 19. Open ye [ vz. ye Priests and Levites, that have
the watch, garding, and keeping of the Lords house: see Psalm 134.1.] unto me
[ vz. upon whom God has bestowed such graces and mercies] the gates of
righteousness [ i. the doors of the Tabernacle or Gods house: which is called
righteousness, either because none ought to enter therein but wise and good
people: or else because that in that place there was only read and expounded
the law of God which is the only true rule of all righteousness: And by this
manner of speech he testifyeth his ardent zeal when he desires that the doors
of the Tabernacle may be set open unto him, even as though the Sacrifices were
already present and ready] that I may go into them [ vz. willingly,
chearefully, and gladly] and praise the vz. with all my heart, for his graces
bestowed upon me.] Ver. 20. This is the gate of the Lord [ q.d. seeing that
these gates belong unto the Lord, it is very meet they should be opened to his
seruaunts] the righteous shall enter into vz. there to praise the Lord, and to
pray unto him.] Ver. 21. I [ vz. the people of Israel and Judah: the holy
Ghost speaks of them all as though they were but one, because they all make
but one body, and here begins the third part of the Psalme] will praise [
vz. with my whole heart and continuallye] thee [ vz. O Lord] for thou have heard
me [ i. granted my prayers and requests made unto thee] and have ben my
deliverance [ i. him that has delivered me out of al 22. The stone [ vz.
which God himself had appointed as meet for the building, to stay, uphold and
bind together the whole kingdome] which [ vz. stone also] the builders refused
[ i. the principal governors both in ye church and in the Kingdom, in Saules
time and in the days of Ishboseth if we respect David, but if we respect
Christ, then the Priests, Pharisees, and all the rest, who by duty should have
built up the Church, and not destroyed it] is [ vz. now through Gods appointment]
the head of the corner [ i. the chief stone in the building, not only because
it is set in the most excellentest place of the whole building, but also
because it does sustain the whole weight of the house. In this verse referred
to David, the people show how that though the great men stood against him, yet
God exalted him to the kingdom maugre all their devises, which as it follows
in the next verse, was a wonderful thing. But it is truly accomplished in our
Savior Christ, as appears Matt. 21.41. Act. 4.11. who is indeed the true
corner stone, Ephe. 2, 20. in whom all the building 23. This [ vz. exaltation
of the chief corner stone so contemptuouslye rejected of the great men of the
world] was the Lords doing [ vz. only, and that in mercy toward us miserable
men, whether we respect David as the figure, and so apply it to the people of
the Jews, or else refer it to Christ, as the truth and substaunce] and it is
meruaylous in our eyes [ i. we deem it and take it to be a wonderful thing,
far beyond the reach of our wit and reason, and yet we know and believe the
same to be faithfully performed.] Ver. 24. This is the day [ vz. in vz. for our
comfort and good] let us rejoice [ vz. before the Lord] and be glad in it [
vz. for the graces which he has bestowed upon us.] Verse 25. O Lord I pray
thee [ vz. even for thy own 21 of this Psalme] save now [ vz. our King, thy
servant: understanding by the word saving, not only deliverance from danger,
but aid and succoure to overcome al our enemies: and that word, now, imports
a present supplye, without delay, not that they prescribe God a time, but to
the end the enemies might be quickly ouerthrowne] O Lord I pray thee, now [
vz. at this present, wherein good occasion is offred] give prosperity [ vz. to
our King, and to us in his ministry: These be the prayers of the people,
wishing good unto their King and themselves: see for this purpose Psalm 20.
thorowout.] Verse 26. Blessed be he [ vz. with all kind of graces both outward
and inward] that comes vz. to rule and govern amongst vs] in the name of the
Lord [ i. by power and authority given him from the Lord: q.d. That thrusts
not in himself, but takes the kingdom upon him by the commandment and
appointment of God: See this applied to our Savior Christ Mat. 21, 9,] We [
vz. which are the Lords Priests, and wayt upon the Altar] have blessed you [
vz. both King and people: understanding by blessing, praying for them and
wishing them all good: which was a part of the Priests office, as appears
Deutron. 10.8. Number. 6, 23, etc.] out of the house of the Lord [he notes the
place from whence this blessing was pronounced: vz. even in that place, where
God was served, and in which place both Priests and people were assembled to
worship him: and these are the Priests words and prayers.] Verse 27. The Lord [
vz. David and vs] is mighty [ vz. above all both in heaven and in earth] and
has given us [ vz. through his great mercy and goodnesse] light [ i. prosperity
and al kind of gladness, for so much do the Hebrews comprehend under the word
light: see Esth. 8, 16.] bind the sacrifice [ vz. of praise and thanksgiving,
which you offer to the Lord, putting one number for an other, and understanding
by one many, as may appear, because he adds, with cords, for many cords need
not, for the tying of one sacrifice, but he means that they should bind and
bring al their sacrifices together, and have them in a readiness as it were,
presentlye to offer them up to the Lord] unto the horns of the Altar [he
means by this speech that they should bring them together, and fill as it
were the whole court of the Lord, for further then yt place, it was not lawful
for the people to go: so that he means by bringing them to the horns of the
Altar, nothing else but presenting them before the Lord, and that as nigh as
they might by warrant of ye law go: so yt David minding to ioin the outward
ceremonies of the law, with the inward affection and service of the heart,
exhorts every one to prepare, and to present yt which is necessary to offer
up to God for ye sacrifice of thanksgiving. The hebrew word which is here
turned sacrifice, does properly signify a sacrifice offered on some feast day:
and the word that is translated cords, signifies a cord made of many threeds
or ropes put together, and has his name as it should seem, of the thicknes of
it.] Ver. 28 Thou art my God [ i. he yt alone has mightily delivered me from
mine enemies. These be David's words, uttered either in his own name, or in ye
Priests name, concluding the Psalm with thanksgiving, as he had before taken
upon him yt person both of the people and Priests, ver. 21. and ver. 26. of
this Psalme] and I will praise thee [ vz. for thy goodness, mercy, and power
manifested unto me] even my God [ q.d. Though thou art a God unto al, yet by
particular experience, I have found thee so cheefely unto me] therefore I will
exalt thee [ vz. amongst men, 29. which also is the last verse of the Psalm is
the same with the first verse of this Psalm, both in words and sense, and
therefore have an eye back to that.

1 teaches us to provoke others to praise the Lord: also that we and they
should do it, for the continuance of his mercy toward us. Ver. 2 teaches us,
yt the sacrifice of thanksgiving does generally belong unto al of the household
of faith. Ver. 3 teaches us that it does specially appertain to Gods
ministers, as who even in that respect also, should be examples to Gods people.
Ver. 4 teaches al to profes, and that presently without any further delay, the
assuredness of Gods goodness and mercy. Ver. 5. teaches us to pray to ye
Lord in affliction, also yt the Lord does graciously hear the prayers of his
servant. Ver. 6 teaches us that an assured feeling of Gods favor and
presence, drives away al fear of man whatsoever. Ver. 7 teaches us yt God and
men many times ioin together for the defense of his servants. Ver. 8, 9 teach
us only to hang upon the Lord, and to trust in none other, how many or mighty
soever they be, but in him alone. Verse 10 teaches that no multitude shall
be able to prevail against God and his people. Verse 11 teaches us that no
force or fraud shall be able to prevail against them. Verse 12 teaches that
no rage or cruelty shall be able to prevail against them: also that the
enemies of God and his people shall be suddenly overthrown. Verse 13 teaches yt
there is no wisdom, strength, power or policy against ye Lord and his
anointed ones. Ver. 14 teaches that all the strength and deliverance of the
godly is from the Lord only. Ver. 15 teaches that God will graciously give his
children great occasions of rejoicing in him: also that the faithful will freely
and willingly confess, that whatsoever they have, they have it from the power
and goodness of God. Ver. 16 teaches us that Gods power is above all. Ver. 17
teaches us that our life in this life, ought to be referred to the setting
forth of Gods glory, Ver. 18 teaches, that howsoever God does correct his for
a time, yet he does never destitute the^ for ever. Ver. 19 teaches us to have
an earnest care to praise and thank God, in the assemblye of his Saints. Ver.
20 teaches that howsoever hypocrites thrust themselves into the Church, yet
that place does properlye and peculiarly belong only to the faithful. Verse 21
teaches us to give thanks to God for granting our requests, and working our
deliverance. Verse 22 teaches us that yt which is rejected of man, is highly
esteemed of ye Lord, and those that be his. Ver. 23 teaches us that all Gods
works are far beyond the reach of our reason, specially yt great mystery of
sending his son into the world. Ver. 24 teaches us that because we are dull
and heavy to consider of matters of spiritual mirth which the Lord gives us,
we should provoke and stir up one an other to do the same. Ver. 25 teaches us
to pray for the safety and prosperity of our Princes. Ver. 26 teaches us that
no man either in Church or common wealth should take upon him an office without
warrant from God, also that it is the duty of the ministers to bless and pray
for both their Princes and people. Ver. 27. teaches us that whatsoever
prosperity we have, we have it from the Lord only, and of his mere mercy
alone: also that we should prepare and present our sacrifices of praise unto
the Lord. Ver. 28 teaches us that the more particular feelings we have of Gods
graces, the more we should labor to praise his name. Ver. 29 delivers the
same doctrines with verse 1.

Psalm 119
Aleph.
FOr as much as the holy Ghost it self has divided this long Psalm into 22
parts, 111. in the very beginning.

This Psalm as many other Psalms before going, has no Title: David was the
pen man which the holy Ghost used in making and writing this excellent Psalm.]
Aleph [this is the first letter of the Hebrew Alphabet: and is here put down
to note and set out the first part of this Psalm. Which I think dothh
specially consist of two parts or points. 4 first verses. In the second is
contained a particular applying of the same to his own person, who earnestly
wishes grace and strength to perform ye same: 1. Blessed [ i. abundaunce of
blessedness is unto those] that are upright in their way [ i. that have a
pure and upright affection to follow righteousness, and which refer their
whole life to that mark: the word, way, is put here for manner of living or
course of life, as Psalm 1, ver. 1.6.] and walk in the law of the Lord [ i.
order and rule their life and conversation according to Gods law. Under the
word, walking, he comprehends life and conversation: and under the word,
law, he comprehends all the doctrine of Gods word, contained in the law and
Prophets, he shows by this that true blessedness is not in them that are
wise in their own eyes, and imagine in their own fantasy some holiness in
themselves, but in them that 2. Blessed are they, [see verse 1. of this Psalm]
that keep [ vz. not only in their heart to believe them as true and righteous,
but observe them also in their outward acts and behauiour] his testimonies [ i.
his commandments which testifye and witness to us his will. For these
several words, law, testimonies, statutes, etc. which are so often used in
this Psalm, and for the difference of them, see before Psalm 19.7, 8, 9,] and
seek him [ i. the Lord, vz. according to his will revealed in his word] with
their whole heart [ i. not giving part to him, and part to the world, but
giving all to him to whom it alone is due. He declares by this manner of
speech, that God will not be served with eye service only, but also with a free
3. Surely they work none iniquity [ vz. which is able to condemn them,
because all their sins are fully answered in Christ's obedience: for he
means not that they are without sinne] that walk in his ways [ i. that lead
a life according to such rules as he has prescribed unto them. Immanuel
reads this verse thus] who also work no iniquitye [ q.d. They also are
blessed, who labor and endeavor to the uttermost of strength and grace
received from God. to put down iniquity and unjust dealing, either in
themselves, or others, or both] but walk [ vz. as much as in them lyeth] in
his ways [ i. in the rules of life which he has appointed them: both texts
are good 4. Thou [ vz. O Lord] have commanded [ vz. men, or us thy seruants]
to keep [ i. to endeavor, and in deed what they may to perform, both in
thought, word and deed, the obedience of thy law] thy precepts [ i. the
things which thou in thy law haste commanded vs] diligently [ i. with care
and conscience, and continually, as it were, all the days of our life.
Immanuel varieth also somewhat in this verse reading it thus] which [ vz.
ways, mentioned in the latter end of the third verse] thou have commanded
by thy commandments, to be greatly (or diligently) kept [the Prophet that he
might somewhat terrify men, declares that the observation of the law, is even
of God himself required, and that with some severity, to the end also that men
might know, that the breach thereof shall 5. Oh that my ways [ i. my life and
conversation: as verse 1 of this Psalme] were directed [ i. might be directed,
that is, disposed and ordered through thy power, providence and goodnesse] to
keep [ vz. unfeignedly and with a good hart] thy statutes [ i. the things
that thou have established as statutes for me to observe and keep. This wish
of the Prophet notes both the want of ability in himself, and also the great
desire he had thereto.] Verse 6. Then should I not be confounded [ vz. either
before thee or men] i. regard, both outwardly and inwardly unto all thy
commandments [ vz. to do and perform the same. He means that after he shall
have learned of God, and bin taught of him, he will both acknowledge and hold
the same fast, and so by that means escape shame and confusion.] Ver. 7. I will
vz. alone] with an upright heart [ i. with a sound and sincere affection, void
of hypocrisy and counterfeiting] when I shall learn [ vz. being taught and
instructed by thee] the judgments of thy righteousness [ i. thy righteous
judgments, understanding by judgments Gods commandments, which 8. I will
keep [ vz. very much or very earnestly and diligently: he speaks this not as
though he were able of himself to perform them, but to show what a mind and
purpose he carried with him, and what a great good will he had thereto] thy
statutes [ i. thy laws and commandments: and note, that there is never a
verse in all this Psalm, but you have in it either word, law, statute,
judgment, commandment, or some such like, equivalent thereto, to signify
Gods word by] forsake me not [ vz. in the midst of mine assaults, temptations
and infirmities] ouerlong [ i. a long season. He prays the Lord, not only not
to leave him in temptation, but also to respect his infirmity and weakness,
least he should go aside from the right way.

Ver. 1 teaches us, 2 teaches us first that with knowledge there must be
joined obedience and practiced: secondly that we must seek the Lord with all
our soul and affection. Ver. 3 teaches that Gods children frame not a
conversation to themselves according to their own fantasy, but according to
the rule of Gods word Verse 4 teaches us to have care, conscience, and
diligence in the observation of Gods law, least otherwise we heap judgment
against our own soul. Ver. 5 teaches us to carry with us both purpose and
prayer, that we may walk in obedience of Gods law. Ver. 6 teaches us that
obedience to God and his truth is the way to avoid shame both before God and
men. Ver. 7 teaches us first to praise God for his mercies, secondly to do it
sincerlye and with a sound affection: thirdly that we can never rightly praise
God or serve him, til we have learned his law. Verse 8 teaches us what holy
purposes we should carry with us of obedience to Gods law: and how for the
better informing of us that way we should as it were lay vows upon our
selves, thirdly that feeling our own misery and weakness, we should by
earnest prayer have recourse to the Lord for his mercy.

Beth.
9. Secondlye, what care and conscience he himself had, to walk in the
obedyence of GOD and his Law, verse 10, 11, 13, 14, Thirdlye he praised GOD
for his graces, and prays unto him more and more to instruct him in his
truth, and this is contained in the 12. verse.

9. Wherewith [ i. by what mean, or with what thing] shall a young man [ i. he
that is the son and servant of GOD, whosoever he be, but he cheefelye
speaks of young men, because affection of sin is most raging in them]
redress [ i. reform: it is in Hebrewe, purge or make cleane] his way [ i.
the way that he is naturally inclined to walk in: and this he propounds
in the way of a question, aunswering the same himself, which is also usual in
the scripture and namely Psalm 15, 1, 2, also Psalm 24, 8, 10,] in taking
heed thereto [ i. in diligent caring and looking to it, that he fall not, or
stumble not in the fame] according to thy word [ i. according to the
commandments and counsels which in thy word thou give to that end. The
Prophet here provoke men, in good time to dispose of their life, and even
specially then when affections begin to boil within them. Now when men will
choose unto themselves an order of life wherein to live, there is no better
counsel more readily to direct them in the right way then this, to wit, to
have an eye 10. with my whole heart [ i. soundly, sincerely, and unfeignedly,
see verse 2 of this Psalm] have I sought thee [ vz. O Lord, and that according
unto thy word, which I have in part learned and laid up in my heart, as ver.
11. and which I do further desire to be taught and instructed in, verse 12.]
let me not wander [ vz. hither and thither, as one that is out of his way, and
knows not whether he goes, but follows his own imagination, and yet
strayeth from the right waye] from thy commandments [ vz. which thou have
proposed as the rule of my 11. I have hid [ vz. as it were in a case or chest]
thy promise [ i. thy word: he puts one part of the word for the whole] in
mine heart [ i. secretlye and within me: not meaning otherwist but that he had
them there to remember them to his comfort and profit. In the new Testament,
Luke 2, 18, 51, it is expressed by an other phrase, as where Mary is said to
have kept all these sayings in her heart, and to have pondered them there. He
means that he locked up as it were Gods law in his heart for fear of
Satan's embushes and assaults] that I might not sin [ vz. any manner of way,
or at any time, such a mind and will he had, though there wanted ability to
perform vz. O Lord] Verse 12. Blessed art thou O Lord [ i. praised, or worthy
of all praises, by reason of thy goodness, wisdom, justice and mercy] teach
me [ vz. not only to know but also to doe] thy statutes [ i. the rules that
thou have appointed for me to walk in, so that nothing is or ought to be the
rule of our life, but Gods ordinance only.] Verse 13. With my lips i. with
my mouth and the words of my mouth: he puts one instrumente whereby the
voice is framed, for all instruments appertaining thereto, and for words
expressed by the same] have I declared [ vz. openly, that others also might
thereby learn them] all the judgments of thy mouth [ i. all thy
commandments, which thou have uttered as plainly as can be, see judgments
put for commandments ver. 7 of this Psalm: and mouth is attributed to God
according to man's capacity: q.d. I have not only hidden thy law in my heart, as
ver. 11. but I have often and openly spoken of the same. And this is not a
vain brag that he makes, but rather serves to show that he did the part of a
good and faithful scholar, and to make himself an example that others might
follow him. [Ver. 14. I have had as great delight, in the way of thy
testimonies i. to walk according to the rules and orders that thy law
prescribeth] as in all riches [ vz. that ever I had or might have had: q.d. I
have taken as great pleasure in keeping thy statutes, as ever I did in
gathering great riches together] Ver. 15. I will meditate [ vz. earnestly and
continually, as Psalm. 1.2.] in thy precepts i. in thy law which thou have given
and commanded as a rule of life] and consider [ vz. deeply and diligently]
thy ways [ i. those ways that he had prescribed men to walk in, meaning his
law and commandments: see ver. 3. of this Psalm, and not as though God were
tied to any ways in respect of himself.] Verse 16. I will delight [ vz. all
the days of my life: and this the i. in thy law and word] and I will not
forget [ i. I carry with me this mind and purpose not to forget] thy word [ i.
not only the word it self, but the things laid upon men by the same word to
be performed and done.

Verse 9 teaches, 10. teaches us unfeignedly to cleave to the Lord our God:
also to pray the Lord to keep us, for otherwise we can not stand in the
obedience of his truth. Ver. 11. teaches us that even the promises of Gods
word rightly considered, are good means to beat down sin. Verse 12 shows
that till God instruct us, we are blind and ignorant, also that we should
daily pray for increase of knowledge and understanding. Verse 13 teaches us
boldly and openly to make profession of Gods word. Ver. 14 teaches us that
Gods word should be more pleasant unto us, then all worldly Treasure. Verse
15 teaches us not only barelye to read, but also deepelye to consider and
continuallye to meditate in Gods word. Verse 16 teaches us first that our
delight in Gods law, is a good step to godliness: secondly that forgetfulness
of Gods word, is a great mean why sin prevails against many.

Gimel.
17, 18, 19, 22, secondly Gods judgments against the wicked, verse 21. Thirdly
the earnest desire which the

17. Be beneficial [ i. be thus mercifull] unto thy servant [ i. unto me thy
seruaunt] that I may live [ vz. here upon the earth so long time, as thou shall
see the same to be good and conuenient] and keep [ vz. vnfaignedlye, and with
a good heart, what I may both in thought, word, and deede] thy word [ vz.
revealed and made manifest unto me: q.d. show thy self favorable unto me,
and grant me grace to employ ye whole life that thou shall give me in the
service of thee, according to thy law: and this is the end 18. Open [ vz. by
the mighty working and brightness of thy holy spirit] mine eyes [ vz. of my
mind and vnderstanding] that I may see [ vz. by the eyes of fayth] the wonders
of thy law [ i. the secrets which are contained therein: and he calls the
doctrine and precepts of the law, wonders, or wonderful, because they exceed
man's understanding and reason. The Prophet did well know the blindness which
was in him, and in all men naturally, which hinders them from beholding the
clearenesse of Gods word, and therefore beseeches ye Lord to open the eyes of
his understanding, and to deliver 19. I am a stranger upon earth [ vz. as all
men have bin, are, and shall be, during this mortal life, see Psalm 39, 12,
under the word, stranger, he notes not only the shortness of his life in
this life, but his ignorance and lack of knowledge: q.d. I am as a poor
pilgrim, not knowing what way to keep unless thou show it me by thy law,
hyde not thy commandments from me [ i. leave me not to my self in such
sort that I shut up mine eyes, or stop mine ears from the knowledge of thy
law, for God hides his commandments from them, whose 20. Mine heart
breaks [ vz. within me: he means by this speech that he had an earnest
thirsting, hungring, or longing as it were after Gods law: in an other place he
uses, pants and thirsts after GOD [see Psalm 42, 1, 2,] for the desire [
vz. which I have within mee] to thy judgments [ vz. not only to know them, but
also to execute and perform the same] always [ i. all the days of my life: q.d.
I fainte, wear away, and consume, with a holy desire that I have to know and
observe thy law.] 21. Thou [ vz. O Lord] have destroyed [ vz. iustlye, by thy
great might and power] the proud [ i. the wicked, unbelieving and obstinate
people: for unbelief is the mother of pride, as faith is the mother of
humilitie] cursed are they [ i. all they of what estate or condition soever
they are] that do err [ vz. in their life and conversation: and this word of
erring, does not signifye every offense indifferentlye: but an unbridled
license, which proceeds from the contempt of GOD: see verse 10 of this
Psalm, and the word, wander] from thy commandments [ vz. which thou have
prescribed as footesteppes and paths for me to tread in.] Verse 22. Remove [
vz. very far vz. thy poor and unworthy seruaunte] shame and contempt, which
the wicked and ungodly have purposed to bring upon me] for [ i. because] I
have kept thy testimonies [ vz. in my life and conversation: q.d. suffer not
the wicked to diffame and mock me, for this, that I study to observe thy
Law: meaning that in that respect, and for that cause only, the wicked did
contemn, mock, and despise him.] Verse 23. Princes also [ i. great and
mighty men, as Magistrates and Judges: q.d. I was scorned and contemned, not
only of the common sort of people, but of great personages] did sit [ vz. in
the place and on the seat of iudgement] and did speak [ vz. there and that
openly, where they should have uttered nothing but justice and truth, this he
alleges as a circumstaunce to aggrauate the sin of those Rulers] against me
[ vz. in my just cause, and that with mockes and tauntes] but thy servant [ i.
I thy servant: speaking of himself (by changing the person) in the third
person] did meditate [ vz. notwithstanding all that they spoke or said against
mee] in thy statutes [ i. in thy law and word: q.d. I did courageously
neglecte the shame and contempt which they did purposely lay upon me. And
this no doubt did much wound him, that he was mocked not only of the
popular sort, but of the mightiest amongste them, yea even of them that sat
in the judgment 24. Also [ q.d. I did not only meditate in them, but I took
also singular delight and pleasure in them] thy testimonies are my delighte [
i. I take my only pleasure and pastime in them] and my Counselors [ i. they,
by whose counsel I govern my self. David speaks here after the manner of
men, and namely Princes, who will do nothing without the advice of them that
are of their counsel: whereby he declares that we must not stay our selves
upon our own understanding and wit, but upon the word of God only.

Verse 17 teaches us that our life is given us, 18 teaches us that in respect
of apprehending Gods mysteries, we are of our selves, blinder then beetels till
GOD open the eyes of our understanding. Verse 19 sets out the wretchedness,
misery, and ignorance that is in us, not only before but after regeneration.
Verse 20. teaches us to have a holy hunger and thirste, not only after the
knoweledge, but also after the practice of God his law. Verse 21 teaches us
that GOD cannot away with proud men: also that disobedience to Gods law
pulls his curse upon us. Verse 22 teaches us to pray to be delivered, as
GOD will, from shame and contempt amongst men. Verse 23 teaches us, first that
it is no new thing to have mighty men to be enemies to Gods children,
secondlye that the more they shall trouble us by persecution, reuyling or
otherwise, the more we should give our selves to meditation of God his word and
the exercises therein prescribed. Ver. 24 teaches us also two things, first
that we should take singular delight and pleasure in GOD his word, otherwise
there is little hope of profiting thereby: secondlye that we should have it in
this reverence, never to do any thing but to ask advise of the word whether
we may do it yea or no.

Daleth.
26, 27, 29, sometimes he prays to be delivered from greefes and troubles
wherein he was. verse 25, 28, 31, sometimes he sets out the purpose that he
had within him of obedience to the law, verse 27, 30, 31, 32.

25. My soul [ i. my life, yea I my self in respect of the outward and
inward man] cleaves to the dust [ i. is not only nigh to deaths door, as it
were but is full fraught with calamities and miseries, so that I am cast down,
and lie prostrate under them] quicken me [ vz. thus distressed: q. d. Restore
me to a better state and condition of life] according to thy word [ vz.
which thou have given unto me. He puts the word, which is the whole, for
the 26. I have declared [ vz. from the bottom of my heart, and that unto thee
alone] my ways [ i. not only my matters, affairs and thoughts, but all my
miseries, yea very heart and order of life, committing them as it were into thy
handes] and thou heardest me [ vz. thus praying and declaring my greefes unto
thee: understanding by hearing, granting of his requestes] teach me thy
statutes [ i. instruct me in thy law and learn me to lead my life
according thereto: q.d. I have heretofore declared all my thoughts unto thee
without hypocrisy or deceate: I have also committed all my actions and
affections to thy care, and referred all my enterpryses to thy good will,
hanging wholye upon thy providence, and thou have heretofore heard me and
taught me, do 27. Make me [ vz. that am so blind and ignoraunt] to
understand [ vz. rightlye and soundlye] the way of thy precepts [ i. after
what sort and order, I am to live and direct my self and life according to
those things that thou haste commanded me, in thy Lawe] and I will meditate
[ vz. continuallye: and with a good heart through thy goodnesse] in thy
wondrous works [ i. in those works which thou haste done and be
wonderful, because they far exceed the reach of man's wit. I had rather
reade] in thy wonders [ i. in the wonders of thy law, see before, verse 18. of
this Psalm.] Verse 28. My soul [ i. my life and I my self, as verse 25.]
melts [ i. consumes and wears away: he uses a word here, which
signifies dropping: q.d. Drop by drop as it were, my life perishes, and
being made thin, consumes away, I weep so much] for heaviness [ vz. of
heart, which I have, by reason of the outward and inward greefes which I
sustayne] raise me up [ vz. even as it were from deaths door. He means by
this, restoring of him to a better estate, and refreshing him over all his
miseries] according to thy word [see verse 25 of this Psalm.] Verse 29. Take
[ vz. through thy vz. which am so much inclyned thereto] the way of lying [ i.
the order, trade and course of lying: understanding thereby all manner of
corruption whatsoever against GOD or man] and grant me graciously [ i. of thy
great grace and goodness give to mee] thy Law [ i. the knowledge and practice
of it, that according to the same I may lead my life: for it is not to be
doubted but that he had the Law: q.d. Keep me from all lying, vanity and
sin: from the which that he might be the better preserved, he desires
to be instructed in the doctrine of GOD his law.] Verse 30. I have chosen [
vz. through the light that thou have revealed unto i. that path that leads
into truth and well doing,] and thy judgments [ i. thy Law and
commandments, which he calls judgments, because according to the same
will he pronounce sentence] have I laid before me [ vz. not only to look
upon them, but also as the rule of my life and behauioure. Immanuell reads
this verse thus:] The way of truth which I chose, and of thy judgments which
I set before me: making it as it were an exposition of the latter part of the
other verse: q.d. Grant me graciously thy law, which I acknowledge and take
to be the way of truth, etc.] Ver. 31. I have cleaued [ vz. 12, 9.] to thy
testimonies O Lord [ i. to thy law] confound me not [ i. let me not be
confounded and ashamed: q.d. suffer me not to slide or fall into such
infirmity, either of word or deed, that my life should be shameful unto
me, and I skorned of the enemies of thy law.] Ver. 32. I will run [ vz.
chearefullye and swiftlye] the way of thy commandments [ i. that way,
order, and course of life which thy commandments show me: he means that
he will be prompte and ready to keep Gods lawe] when thou shall enlarge mine
heart [some expound it thus, when thou shall have set me out of danger, and
given me thereby an occasion of great rejoicing. I rather would expound it
thus: when thou shall have made my understanding and spirit (which of it self
is narrow and straight, not able to contain or conceive any good things)
capable by enlarging and opening of it, to contain and conceive thy gifts and
graces, see 1. King. 4, 29, concerning the enlarging of Salomons heart, which in
my judgment serves very well to open this place.

25 teaches us in distress and affliction to call upon GOD, by earnest
prayers, also that one good ground of our prayers, is Gods promises made unto
us in his word. Verse 26 teaches us that God is nigh to the faithful prayers
of his poor servant: also that we are ignorant of Gods law, till it please
him in mercy to vouchsafe to teach us. Verse 27 teaches us carefullye and
continuallye to meditate in Gods word. Verse 28 shows that Gods children are
many times brought very low, but yet the hope that they have in GOD his
promises does raise them up again. Verse 29 teaches us to abhor, as all
sin generally, so particularlye lying and falsehood: also that Gods word
rightly used, is a great mean to vanquishe sin by. Verse 30 teaches us that
GOD his word should be set before us in all the particular actions of this
life. Verse 31 teaches us, to persevere and continue in the profession of Gods
truth, all the days of our life. Verse 32 teaches us to go on forward in the
race that is set before us, and never to be weary of well doing.

He.
33, 34, 35, 38, 40, secondly he prays him to give strength to avoid evil
things. Ver. 36, 37, 39.

33 Teach me [ vz. which of my self am so blind, ignorant, and unapt to every
good thing] O Lord [ vz. whom alone I fear and worship] the way of thy
statutes [ i. that order of life which thy law sets out ver. 32. he called
it the way of his commaundements] and I will keep it [ vz. through thine
assistance and goodness, for otherwise no man can do any thing that good is]
unto the end [ vz. of my life, meaning that he would observe Gods law al his
life long, see 112 of this Psalm afterward.] Ver. 34. Give me understanding [
vz. of thy will revealed in thy word] and I will keep thy law [ vz. through thy
goodness and assistaunce (as before) not only in my heart, but in my
conversation outwardlye] yea I will keep it with my whole heart [ i. soundly,
sincerelye, and with an unfeigned affection, Meaning that in the observation
and obedyence 35. Direct me [ vz. which through mine own corruption am ready
to run out of the way] in the path of thy commandments [ i. in the way and
order of life which thy commandments would have me to tread] for therein [ i.
both in thy Law, and in a conversation according to the same] is my delighte [
i. I take 36. Inclyne [ vz. through the exercises of thy word, and the working
of thy spirite] mine heart [ i. the affections and desires of my harte] unto
thy Testimonies [ i. to embrace the knowledge and practice of thy worde] and
not to covetousness [ i. greedye affecting and desyring of that which
appertains to an other man, he puts one kind of sin, which is in deed
the root of all evil, for all other transgressions and vices whatsoever, as he
did before, the word lying, ver. 29. of this Psalm.] Ver. 37. Turn away mine
eyes [by the eyes, he i. from beholding or looking upon: he prays against the
beginning of evil, which being once overcome, process and proceeding in it,
need not to be feared] vanity [ i. vain things with the love whereof men may
easily be overtaken: q.d. remove the affections of my mind from these things,
which men do greatly desire and delight in, lest otherwise I being carried away
from thy word, I embrace vain things with other men] quicken me [ i. make me
not only lively to do thy will, but give me grace to live in it, all the days
of my life] in thy way [ i. in thy law, see ver. 15. of this Psalm.] Verse.
38. Stablish [ i. perform and accomplish: for though Gods vz. made to me, he
puts one promise for many: using also promises for the word it self
containing promises, as ver. 11. of this Psalm] to thy servant [ i. to me, for
he speaks of himself in the third person. q.d. make the effect of thy
promises to come unto me who serve thee with a good heart, for though it be
true, that Gods promises performed to others, may comfort men: yet nothing so
much can they comfort us, as this, which we feel performed to our particular
persons] because he fears thee [it would rather be turned thus, who fears
thee, for our fear of God, is not a cause why God should perform his
promises to us, and the Prophet means by the word, fear, not only a
reverent persuasion which he had in his heart of God, but the effects and
fruits of that reverence, that is, the worship and serving of him according to
his word.] Ver. 39. Take away [ vz. of thy mercy and goodnes] my rebuke [ i.
the evil which 31. of this Psalm: or else thus, for as much as by some sins,
and namely the sin of adultery with Bathsheba, and murder of her husband
Vriah, he had purchased rebuke and shame amongst men, he beseeches the Lord
even to remove that] that I fear [ vz. will not only fall, but increase upon
me, unless in mercy thou cure and cover it] for thy judgments [ vz. which
thou have pronounced in thy word] are good [ vz. to them that rightly
understand them, understanding by judgments not only the threats of the
law, but also, even those comforts which God has pronounced in the same.]
Ver. 40. Behold, I desire [ vz. i. both ye knowledge and obedience of thy
commandements] quicken me, [See ver. 25.37. of this Psalme] in thy
righteousness [ i. in thy word and law, which is called righteousness, because
it is the only rule of that righteousness, which we ought to perform to God,
or man.

33. Teaches us to pray to the Lord only, for light and instruction out of
his holy word: also to carry with us a holy purpose of perseverance and
continuance in the obedience of God, all the days of our life. Verse. 34.
Teaches us that the understanding, and keeping of gods law, is a singular gift
of his own bestowed upon his children: also that our obedience to god, should
be unfeigned and without hypocrisy. Ver. 35 Teaches us that unless God keep
us in obedience, we shall continually wander out of the way: also that our
continual delight and pleasure should be in Gods word. Ver. 36. Teaches us
what a foul fault the sin of covetousness is: also that there is no better
mean to subdue it in our selves, then care and conscience to walk in ye
obedience of Gods word. Ver. 37. Teaches us, first to nippe off sin in the
beginning thereof: secondly to labor the mortification of our earthly members,
and the parts of our bodies inclined to evil, and thirdly to pray for
liuelines and continuance in the obedience of Gods truth. Ver. 38. Teaches us
that if we have by experience either in our selves or others, but specially in
our selves, felt the truth of gods promises performed to us, we have not
only a notable testimony of Gods goodness, but a seal set upon our faith for
the greater strengthening of it in the same. Ver. 39. Teaches us to pray the
removing of shame amongst men: specially if our shame shall bring with it some
dishonor to God: also it teaches us not to be shameless as many men are, who
are without blushing, and have gotten to themselves harlots faces. Ver. 40.
Teaches us to have an earnest desire, both to know and walk in the obedience
of Gods law. This part in sum declares what great weakness there is in man,
to understand love and follow Gods law, unless he be taught and renewed by
the power of his spirit.

Vau.
41.42.43.44. Secondly he promises, and voweth as it were a thankful heart
to ye Lord, for his benefits, which he will declare openly before all men, yea
even kings and magistrates. Ver. 45.46. By a holy and religious life toward
God himself. ver. 47.48.

41. And let thy loving kindness [ i. thy most tender and infinite mercy] come
unto me, O Lord [ vz. from thee. q.d. let me have it plentifully powered forth
upon me, and make me to feel it effectually] and thy salvation [ i. aid,
help, yea, and eternal life it self: he sets loving kindness, or mercy,
before salvation, as the cause before the effect] according to thy promise [
vz. graciously made unto me. q.d. make me to feel, that loving kindness and
salvation of thine, which thou have promised and I pray for.] Ver. 42. So [ i.
by that i. be enabled sufficiently to answere] unto my blasphemies [ i. unto
them that revile and speak evil of me: q.d. I will not then dissemble any
whit at all, but speak, even as the thing it self shall require] for I trust
in thy word [ vz. which thou have given me: q.d. I persuade my self in the
truth of thy word, that when I shall once sensibly feel thy mercy and
goodness, I shall be well able to answer all my gainsayers, See Luke 21.14.15.]
Verse 43. And take not [ vz. though for my i. thy word, which only conteyneth
truth in it] utterly [ i. altogether, or for ever. Immanuel reads this part
of the verse thus. But take not out of my mouth, the very true word [ i. ye
word which is most true, referring the word which is here translated utterly,
not to the word, take away, as our English text does, but to the word of God,
which in deed is most true] out of my mouth [in this speech he does not
exclude the heart, by which we must begin, but it is, q.d. uphold not only
my heart in faith, lest I be overthrown through temptations, but bring to
pass also that my tongue may have full liberty, so that I may praise thee
amongst men, without any fear: so also Saint Paul prays the Church, to pray
for him, that utterance might be given unto him, that he might open his mouth
boldly. Ephesians. 6.19. and if we read, as it is in the English text, utterly, it
declares that he had not such a great boldness to speak, as were to be
wished] for I wait [ vz. with diligence and patience] for thy judgments [ vz.
to be executed upon the wicked in justice, and upon thy children in mercy:
the word judgments being used here, for the promises which God has made,
containing either the punishments of the ungodly, or his mercies to his
children: See verse 39. of this Psalm.] Verse 44. So [ vz. by this means, vz.
through thy goodness and strength] thy law [ vz. which thou have prescribed for
me to walk in] for ever and ever [the Prophet means, that through Gods
strength he shall continue, in the knowledge and practice of Gods word all
the days of his life.] Verse 45. And I [ vz. thy poor and vz. through thy
mercy and goodness: meaning by walking, that he would live, and be
conuersaunt amongst men] at liberty [ i. in plain and easy ways, or in
great and broad ways, or as a man would say, in the kings high way: which
Saint James chapter 2.8. calls the royal law, meaning also that he would
walk without fear of danger as they do most commonly, which are in a kingly
or broad way] for I seek [ vz. with an unfeigned heart and continually] thy
precepts [ i. the understanding of them, and obedience to them.] Ver. 46. I
will vz. freely, boldly, and plainely] of thy testimonies [ i. of thy law, and
the points and matters therein propounded] before kings [ i. mighty men of
the earth, and magistrates. q.d. I will do it in deed, and that not only
before inferior persons, and in their sight and hearing, but even before them,
who for their greatness, are wont to stop up other men's mouths, and command
the^ silence. Surely it is a good token, that men have well profited in Gods
word, when men are armed against all terrors of men] vz. to speak of it,
freely and boldly.] Verse. 47. And my delight shall be [ vz. continually, and all
the days of my life] in thy commandments [ i. in thy law, by which thou have
commanded me what I should do, and what I should leave vndone] which I have
loved [ vz. not in words only, 48. Mine hands also, will I lift up, unto thy
commandments [ q.d. I will stretch out my hands, that I may readily receive,
turn over, and search out thy commandments: and this similitude declares,
the earnestnes of his desire, because that look whatsoever we desire to have,
we do strain our selves to take it, and lay hold of it, by stretching out our
hands] which I have loved [see ver. 47.] and I will meditate in thy statutes
[see ver. 23.27. of this Psalm.]

41. Teaches us, that Gods promise is a sure ground unto us of his love and
our salvation. Ver. 42. Teaches us, that grounded persuasion out of the word
makes us bold to speak, even in the face of our adversaries. Ver. 43.
Teaches us that there can no greater punishment be laid upon us in this life,
then to lack Gods word: also that we should in all cases with patience, tarry
the Lords leisure. Ver. 44. Teaches us to endeavor what in us lies,
continually to keep Gods law. Verse. 45. Teaches us that he walks simply
and surely, that walks according to the prescript rule of Gods word. Ver.
46. Teaches us that no fear of men, nor shame of our selves, should cause us
to conceal or keep back any part of Gods truth. Ver. 47. Teaches us,
unfeignedly to love, and continually to delight in the law and word of GOD.
Ver. 48. Teaches us, with earnestnes and readiness, to labor to apprehende
Gods truth, and to hold it fast when we have obtained it: also, to use not
only hearing and reading of Gods word, but daily meditation therein.

Zain.
49. Secondly he shows what great comfort and consolation he had in the word
of God, and by the keeping thereof, and this is ver. 50.52.54.55.56. Lastly he
showed, that no scorns of the wicked would turn him away from God and his
truth, and that he recompensed that evil of theirs, with this good, fearing
greatly the great judgments, which for the contempt of God and his truth,
should fall upon them. ver. 51.53.

49. Remember [ i. declare by effect, that thou do remember. See Genesis 8.1.]
the promise made [ i. the promise which thou have made] to thy servant [ i. to
me thy servant, he speaks of himself in the third person] wherein [ i. in
which promise] thou have caused me to trust [ vz. not only because thou have
made and given me the same promise, but also have commanded me to take sure
hold thereof. The Prophet here desires God, in deed to perform that which
he had promised him, whereby he shows, that though God seemed to be far
off, yet he would stay himself upon his word.] Ver. 50. It [ i. thy promise
i. does greatly comfort me] in my trouble [ i. when I am in any trouble
whatsoever, when I think of it: this is as it were the speech of his heart,
receiving singular comfort, by meditations in Gods promises] for thy promise [
vz. made unto me in thy word] has quickened me [ i. has not only
strengthened and confirmed me at all times, but even then when I seemed to be
nigh unto death, or as it were dead already, it did after a sort restore me to
life.] Ver. 51. The proud [ vz. men of the world, meaning thereby, the wicked
and ungodly, whom he calls proud, because they did i. have scoffed and
ieared at me, not only very much, but also continually: for that word
exceedingly notes also, that day by day, and one day after an other, they did
assault him with new and fresh combats of scoffs and taunts] yet [ q.d. for
all that they have done] I have not declined [ i. gone aside or astray] from
thy law [ vz. which thou have prescribed for me to walk in. q.d. no floutes,
or taunts of men, could pull me from the obedience of thy truth.] Ver. 52. I
remembered [ i. I called to mind in my meditations, i. such examples, as whereby
thou shewedst thy self, to be judge of the world] of old [ i. which thou
did and made manifest in former ages, he means, that he thought upon,
such judgments, as God in former times had declared unto the world, for
judgments read ver. 43. of this Psalm, understanding thereby Gods punishments
upon the wicked, and his mercy toward his seruants] and have been comforted
[ vz. exceedingly, specially in the inward man, by the sight and beholding
thereof.] Verse. 53. Fear [ vz. of heart and trembling; meaning thereby also
i. has taken strong hold upon mee] for the wicked [ i. because of these
great judgments, which shall fall upon the wicked] that forsake thy law [ i.
that break and transgress thy law, in their words, thoughts, and deeds,
others I know give other senses, but methinketh, this is plain and right, vz.
that the prophet considering Gods horrible judgments against the wicked, was,
as it were, seized and stricken with a very great fear.] Ver. 54. Thy statutes
[ i. thy word and lawe] have been my songs [ i. Saul, Abshalon, or others,
in which distress he wandered up and down, and yet because he was long in it,
he did count it as it were, the house of his dwelling. I rather think, that
he understands hereby, the whole course, and race of his life, both that
time, and all other times, for the Prophet had not then comfort only, but all the days of his life: so that, in the house or place of his pilgrimage, is as
much as if he should say, in whatsoever place of the world I am, have been, or
shall be, yea all the days of my life, and this the rather, because the godly have
always esteemed their lives, for a pilgrimage, as Gene. 47.9. Psalm. 39.12.
also ver. 19. of this Psalm. See 11.9.10.] Ver. 55. I have remembered [see ver.
52. of this Psalme] thy name [ i. thy majesty, goodness, and power, as Psalm.
20.1.] O Lord [ vz. whom I serue] in the night [ vz. when others sleep. q.d.
even then do I watch and remember thee, when others take their rest] and have
kept thy law [ vz. with a good and sincere heart.] Ver. 56. This I had [ i. al
these graces were given me, from thy goodness only] because I kept [ i.
endeavored what in me lay to keep and performe] thy precepts [ i. thy law and
commandments, he bosteth not here of any merit of his own, but says, yt God
in working a special deliverance, did yield a notable testimony to that goodness
which was in him. Immanuel redeth this verse thus.] This is a comfort unto me,
that I keep thy commandments [ q.d. even the little or slender obedience that
I yield to thy law, does much comfort me.

49. Teaches us that Gods promises made us in his word, ought to be special
grounds, of our persuasions, touching his mercies toward us. ver. 50. Teaches
us that Gods promises are special comforts unto us, in ye time of our
distresses. Ver. 51. Declares what is the nature of the ungodly, vz to scoff
continually at gods religion, and the professers thereof: also, that no contempt
or ignominy in this life, should draw us away from the obedience of our God.
Ver. 52. Teaches Gods children to receive comfort, not only in his mercyes
practiced toward them, but also in his punishments powered forth upon the
wicked. Ver. 53. Teaches us, that we should not only be grieved, when we see
gods law broken but to be stricken with fear of those judgments, yt from God
shall fall upon the wicked. ver. 54. teaches us that nothing should minister
more joy and contentment to us in this life, then gods word. Ver. 55. teaches
us continually to meditate on gods power, goodness, majesty, etc. also that we
should many times forbear, even our ordinary rest and sleep, to the end we
might perform that duty. Ver. 56. Teaches us that God gives continual
blessings to them that have care and conscience to observe his laws.

Cheth.


Ver. 57. O Lord thou art my portion [ vz. alone, q.d. I have none that I hang
or depend upon, but thee alone, See Psalm. 73.25.] I have determined [ vz.
with my self, and that altogether whatsoever come of] to keep [ vz. in my
life and conuersation] thy words [ i. the word that thou have given me, as
the rule of my life: the meaning is, q.d. seeing that thou O Lord, art mine
inheritance, and have in mercy chosen me to thy self, I have fully concluded
with my self, to keep thy law.] Ver. 58. I [ vz. being privy to mine own
weakness and i. prayed before thee, and to thee, it may be understood, even
of some solemn prayer, that the Prophet made before the arke] with my whole
heart [ i. unfeignedly and without wandering affections, those setting my heart
earnestly upon things, yt I uttered with my mouth] be merciful unto me [ vz.
thus distressed as I am according to thy promise [ vz. made and given to me,
and other thy servants also that call upon thee. see ver. 49. of this Psalm.
q.d. perform thy promise made unto me, by thy word in Christ, and not in
respect of my infirmity.] Ver. 59. I have considered vz. diligently, and
carefully] my ways [ i. the manner and order of my life heretofore] and turned
[ vz. from those corrupt and naughty paths of wickednes] my feet [ i. not my
feet only, but mine affections also. see Eccle. 4.17.] into thy testimonies [
i. into the way and keeping of thy law. q.d. I have vewed my life past and I do
also well consider my conversation present, and now the thing that I wholly
purpose is this, to give my self, to the uttermost of my power to keep thy
commandments.] ver. 60. I made have [ vz. after ye beholding of the former i.
nothing hindered me: q.d. I made speed in deed, for so much does this doubled
speech mean: for such a doubled speech, see Psalm. 118.17.] to keep [ vz.
sincerely, soundly and without hipocrisie] thy commandments [ i. the things
which thou had commanded.] Ver. 61. The hands of the wicked i. the great
troops and companies of ungodly men: and by this phrase, he notes the
multitudes of his enemies] have robbed me [ i. have taken from, and that by
fraud and violence, all that ever I had] but [ vz. for all that] I have not
forgotten thy law [ i. the things prescribed in thy law, and the comforts
therein contained: q.d. neither their flattery, nor their fraud, nor any thing,
yt they could do against me, could draw me away from the obedience of thy
truth.] Verse 62. At midnight [ vz. when others are fast and sound a sleep:
See before verse q.d. even then when I should take my rest as others doe] will
I rise [ vz. not only from my sleep, but even out of my bed] to give thanks
unto thee [ vz. for thy great and infinite blessings bestowed upon me, or as
followeth] because of thy righteous judgments [ i. because of the faithful
performing, of all those things, which thou have promised, i. I use and
frequent the company] of all the^ yt fear thee [ i. serve and worship thee,
with that reverent fear that appertains unto thee] and keep thy precepts [
i. he shows how men may know whether they themselves or others fear GOD or
no, even by keeping his law, and doing the things that it requires. And the
Prophet kept company with these good men, both that he himself, by them might
be confirmed, and also i. the whole world it self, and all the creatures
therein conteined] O Lord [ vz. whom I serve alone] is full [ vz. in every
place and quarter, so that a man can turn his eye or head no way, but he shall
see plain testimonies of it] of thy mercy [ vz. toward it and al thy
creatures] teach me thy statutes [see ver. 26. of this Psalm, he desires that
the mercy of God, which is spread abroad over all creatures, may be manifested
to himward, so that thereby he may profit in Gods law, because that the spirit
of understanding, is a principal sign of Gods favor and grace and this
petition consists of two parts, vz. that God pitying his wretchedness, and
want of knowledge, would perform his promise made to him in that behalf:
whereunto the better to induce God, he uses an argument, taken from the
abundance of Gods mercy manifested to al his creatures, and that is the second
part or point.



Teth
9. part of the Psalm, consists specially of these points, 65.66.68.
Secondly he declares that even the afflictions, which they suffered in this
life, were through the consolation which 67.71.72. Thirdly, he sets out the
cruelty and naughtines of the wicked, and his own goodness, and yet without any
boasting thereof, ver. 69.70.

Ver. 65. O Lord [ vz. the only true God] thou have dealt [ vz. in every thing,
i. in all favor, love and mercy] with thy servant [ i. with me thy servant,
for he speaks of himself in the third person] according to thy word [ i.
according to thy promise that thou have made and given me: q.d. as thou have
graciously promised me all goodness, so have thou graciously also, and in great
mercy performed the same.] Ver. 66. Teach me [ vz. vz. out of thy holy
word: q.d. teach me, by the light of thy holy word, in sound judgments and
knowledge to discern between truth and falshoode] for I have believed [ vz.
stedfastly] thy commandments [ vz. that they are good, true, and holy: he
means also by this manner of speech, that he did willingly embrace all that,
which was appointed in gods law.] Ver. 67. Before I vz from thee, and by thine
appointment] I went astray [ vz. from the ways of thy commandements] but now
[ vz. since thy corrections were upon mee] I keep [ vz. with a sincere and
good mind, understanding by keeping, observing, and obeying] thy word [ i. the
things manifested and commanded in thy word: See Hosea. 5.15. Immanuel reads
it thus] when I did not yet speak [ i. even from my birth I am a sinner, a
stranger from thy law, and the child of wrath, as Psalm. 51.5.] I went astray
[ i. I was a sinner against thee, as before] but now I keep [ vz. diligently
or in my heart, meaning also that he laid it up in his mind] thy word [ i. thy
promises. Thus he applies it to original sin, whatsoever it is, certain it
is, that he was not delivered, from that stubbornes and perverse rebellion,
wherewith all mankind is infected, but by the mighty working of Gods holy
word and spirit. Ver. 68. Thou [ vz. 86.5.] teach me thy statutes [see ver.
26.64. of this Psalm, and mark how to move the Lord to teach him in his
law, he sets before him Gods bounty and goodness.] Ver. 69. The proud [see
ver. 51. of this Psalm, he means i. false and unjust accusations, he
puts one for many] against me [ vz. even to take away my life, if it be
possible] but I will keep [ vz. through thy goodness, strength, and
assistaunce] thy precepts [ i. the things that thou have commaunded] with my
whole heart [ i. sincerely and unfeignedly.] Ver. 70. Their heart [ i. their
mind i. is mightily fatned: so that there is nothing in it, as it were, but
fat: he means by fat as grease, not only that they were puffed up with
prosperity, and so made unapt to understand holy things, but also that they
were daily more and more indurate and hardened, See Isaiah. 6.10.] but my
delight is in thy law [ vz. above, and before all things.] Verse 71. It is
good [ i. both profitable and pleasant: as Psalm 92.1.] for vz. thy poor and
unworthy seruant] that I have been afflicted [ vz. graciously and mercifully
at thy hands, and that with the rods of thy children. see ver. 67. of this
Psalme] that I may learn [ vz. not only to know, but also to obserue] thy
statutes [ i. the laws which thou have established. Ver. 72. The law of thy
mouth [ i. the word which proceeded and came from thee, and was uttered, as it
were with thy mouth] is better unto me [ i. is more dear and precious and
sweete] then thousands of gold and silver [ i. then a very great number, or
infinite treasure, he means that he did prefer Gods word, before all
earthly things whatsoever.

65. Teaches us that God always graciously performs his promises to his
servants. Verse. 66. Teaches us that we can have no sound knowledge till God
teach it us. Ver. 67. Teaches us that afflictions are profitable instruments,
which God does use, to draw us on to the practice of his word, ver. 68.
Teaches us to make gods grace and goodness our special ground work of our
prayers. Ver. 69. Teaches us, first that the wicked will leave no stone
vnrolled, that thereby they might hurt the godly: Secondly that we should
strive unfeignedly to keep Gods law. Verse. 70. Teaches us that the wicked
are hardened and baked as it were in their sins: also that we should take
singular delight and pleasure in gods word. Ver. 71. Teaches us that
afflictions are even good for us, because they pull us on to the obedience of
Gods truth. Verse 72. Teaches us to prefer Gods word, before all worldly
things whatsoever.

Iod.
73.76.77.80. partly also for others, ver. 79. and partly 78. lastly he
shows what fruit the 74.75.

73. Thine hands have made me [ i. thou by thy mighty power O Lord have
created me, of the flime and dust of the earth] and fashioned me [ vz. in this
order and shape wherein I now liue] give me understanding therefore [ i. make
me apt and able so to understand thy will] that I may learn [ vz. to know
and keep thy commandments. Mark here two things, first that in making his
prayer for holy understanding, he justly accuses himself and all others of
blindness, which proceeded not from the Creator, but from man corrupted:
Secondly, that even by his creation he conceived hope, that God would continue
his work begun in him, because God leaves not his work, and therefore he
requires God, to bestow new grace upon him, and 74. So [ i. by that means
when they shall behold and see that,] they that fear [ vz. with the reverent
fear of thy sons, from which as from the cause proceeds this true effect,
of the right worshipping and serving of thee] seeing me [ vz. thus instructed,
and taught by thee, in the knowledge of thy lawe] shall rejoice [ vz. for the
graces, that I have received from thee] because I have trusted [ vz. steadfastly
and with patience] in thy word [ vz. generally, but specially in thy
promises.] Verse 75. I know O Lord [ vz. not only by the truth of thy i.
all thy judgments whatsoever, but specially these punishments whereby thou
do provoke men to repentance] are right [ i. are ministered in all equity and
right, so that no man can charge thee of iniustice] and that thou have
afflicted me [ i. corrected and chastened me, as verse 67.71. of this Psalme]
justly [ i. being moved thereto by very good right and cause.] Ver. 76. I pray
thee [ vz. humbly and heartily] that thy mercy [ i. thy singular and
unspeakable goodnesse] may comfort me [ vz. always, and namely when I am in
any sorrow and distresse] according to thy promise [ vz. made and given, that
is according to the promise that thou have made] unto thy servant [ i. to me
thy servant, for he speaks of himself here in the third person, as sundry
times before in this Psalm.] Verse 77. Let thy tender mercyes vz. which thou
was wont to show heretofore, to thy afflicted seruauntes] come unto me [ vz.
also: that is, let me be partaker of thy exceeding love in truth and
feeling, as they have beene] that I may live [ vz. here upon earth among men,
and set forth thy praise: See verse 17. of this Psalme] and it is as much
also, q.d. It is impossible that I should live, till such time as I feel my
self reconciled to thee through thy mercy] for thy law [ i. study practice
and knowledge of thy woorde] is my delight [ i. all my whole delight, for the
Prophet uses here a word of the plural number, delights.] Ver. 78. Let the
proud be ashamed [ vz. even before thee, and before men, 51.69.] for they
have dealt wickedly [ i. unjustly and cruelly against mee] and falsely [ vz.
also with me, meaning that they had both by force and fraud, as lying,
hypocrisy, etc. sought his ouerthrowe] but I meditate [ vz. earnestly and
continually for all that] of thy precepts [ i. of thy law and word, and of the
things 79. Let such as fear thee [ i. love and serve thee with an unfeigned
heart] turn unto me [ i. join themselves to me again in familiarity,
after that through thy judgments, thou shall have declared and made known
unto them, the goodness of my cause. See Job. 6.29. q.d. as the good have, for
a time, through the insolency and pride of mine enemies been beaten back, so
let them now take courage again, when they shall see me restored and lifted
vp] and they that know thy testimonies vz. to do them.] Verse 80. Let my
heart be upright in thy statutes [ i. let me have a sound affection toward
thy word and obedience of it, and let me be free, in these things that I do,
of all hypocrisy, and dissimulation] that I be not ashamed [ i. made ashamed
and that before men, which should in deed betyde me, if I should depart from
thy statutes: see ver. 31. of this Psalm, also Psalm. 44. almost throughout,
specially toward the end.

73. Teaches us to pray earnestly, for light and understanding out of Gods
word. Ver. 74. Teaches us that Gods mercies bestowed upon some of his
children, should be an occasion of comfort and joy to the rest. Ver. 75.
Teaches us freely to confess, that whatsoever God does, he does it uprightly
because there is no unrighteousness with him. Ver. 76. Teaches us that Gods
mercy and goodness rightly felt, is the special matter of comfort to al his
children. Ver. 77. Teaches us that we can not live, no not in this life, much
less in the life to come, without Gods great mercy. Ver. 78. Teaches us that
we may pray against the wicked: also what the nature of the wirked is, vz. to
use force and flattery against Gods Saints, to work them hurt if they can
thereby: lastly, that serious meditation in Gods law, is a singular comfort
against the assaults of our enemies. Ver. 79. Teaches us to pray for them
that be shrunk away, even as for our selves: also that there is no right
worship of God, without the knowledge of his word. Ver. 80. Teaches us to
pray earnestly against the sin of hypocrisy and dissimulation.

Caph.
81.82.83.88. Secondly in respect of the great outrage and cruelty of his
enemies. verse 84.85.86.87.

81. My soul faynteth [ i. my life is even as it were consumed] for thy
salvation [ i. with looking, for help and deliverance from thee] yet [ q.d.
notwithstanding all this great distress wherein I am] I do wait [ vz. in
hope and patience] for thy word [ i. for the accomplishment of those things
which thou in thy word have promised. q.d. I have in great patience, waited
for deliverance from thee, and will wait for it still: for by fainting, he
understands a certain patience, whose force though it seem to be utterly
lost, yet does it not altogether forsake them, in whom it is, who seem
notwithstanding to be dead, but, puts into their hearts secret gronings,
yea such as men cannot 82. Mine eyes [ i. the power, strength and sight of mine
eies] fail [ i. decays, and waxes dim, for otherwise he had his eyes
still] for thy promise [ i. with looking for the accomplishment of thy promise,
so long thou seem to me, to defer and put it off] saying [ i. in so much,
that I burst forth into this speech, and saide] when will thou comfort me [
vz. distressed and afflicted on every side: such a sore conflict and battle
had David 83. For I am like a bottle [ vz. made of beasts skinnes] in the
smoke [ i. hanged up in the smoke, he means that through grief and misery,
he was wrinkled withered, dried away, and consumed as it were] yet do I not
forget thy statutes [ q.d. my miseries drive me not into a forgetfulness of thee
and thy word, but make me more to remember thee and it.] Verse 84. How many
are the days [ vz. of affliction and trouble] of thy i. which thy servant
shall endure: See Psalm 116.2. in the Prophets also we shall read this phrase,
the days of Egypt, the days of Babylon, etc.] when will thou execute
judgment [ i. when will thou punish] on them that persecute me [ vz. without a
cause.] Verse 85. The proud [See before. 51.69.78.] have dug pits for me [
i. have secretly, and by ambushes, as it were, sought my death and destruction,
See Psalm 7.15.] which [ vz. crafty and subtle kind of dealing] is not after
thy law [ i. consents not with the truth of thy word, but directly
fights against it: and this he adds, to move the Lord, the rather to
execute justice. Immanuel refers it to the persons thus.] The proud who
conform not themselves to thy law [ i. will not be ruled after thy word,
nor order their life according to it] have dug pittes for me, but me
thinks the other sense is as plain.] Verse 86. All i. they all generally,
and every one of them particularly] are true [ i. most true, yea truth it
self, and in all truth and uprightness enjoined men to observe them] they [
i. the proud and wicked men] persecute me falsely [ i. not only without a
cause on my part, but lyingly and slanderously in respect of themselues] help
me [ vz. thus distressed, and deliver me from 87. They had almost consumed me
[ vz. through their wicked devises, and cruel practises] upon the earth [ i.
living here upon the earth with them. Immanuel reads it better thus] cast
down upon the earth [ i. being very much humbled and afflicted: q.d. my
misery could not move them to pity me, but the more weak I was, the more
cruel they were against mee] but [ vz. for all that] I forsook not thy
statutes [ i. I ceased not to believe thy word, and to walk in obedience of
it.] Verse 88. Quicken me [ i. recreate and refresh me over all my troubles,
and as it vz. which thou wast wont to show to thy servant, and have
heretofore declared unto mee] so shall I keep [ vz. diligently and carefully]
the testimony of thy mouth [ i. thy word and law: which is thus named, to
set out the authority that it has in it self, and should have amongst men,
See ver. 13. of this Psalm.]

Ver. 81. Teaches us, that howsoever the faith, hope, 82. Teaches us, that
God many times brings his children to a low ebb, and does for a long while
withholde his aid, yet does he not altogether for ever forsake them, it
shows also what great conflicts the godly have, in their troubles. Ver. 83.
Teaches us that no misery should make us to forget Gods word, nay rather the
more our miseries are, the more should we meditate therein, because in it only
is sound comfort to be found. Ver. 84. Teaches us that even Gods children do
many times desire to know those things, which the Lord has not particularly
revealed unto them in his word. Ver. 85. Teachech us that the wicked are both
cruel and crafty. Ver. 86. Teaches us that the more egerly men molest us the
more earnestly we should call upon God for his help. Ver. 87. Teaches us two
things: first that the ungodly are without bowels of pity and compassion,
secondly that we should be so rooted, in the love and knowledge of God, and his
truth, as nothing should pull us away therefrom. Ver. 88. Teaches us that
we can perform nothing obediently to God, till it please him to give us the
grace and strength.

Lamed.
89.90.91. 92.93.94. and so on to the end of this part.

89. O Lord thy word indureth for ever in heaven [ q.d. even the very
heavens can be witness of the continuance and constancy of thy word: seeing
that they in the strength of thy word, continue and abide, much more shall thy
word it self endure: Some expound it thus, the Prophet affirms, that we
should not seek for, the assurednes of gods word, in the estate of earthly
things which are subject to many changes, but in heaven [ i. in God himself
who is not subject to any alteration, but methinketh the other is the more
plain 90. Thy truth [ i. the truth of thy word, but specially that part of
thy word which contains promises] is [ i. lasteth] from generation to
generation [ i. perpetually and for ever, so that al ages have and shall
confess the same, by their own experience to be true] thou have laid [ vz. in
the beginning, or before time, as Psalm. 102.25.] the foundation of the earth
[hee means that God had strongly made the earth, so that it could not be
moved, even as though it were set upon a most sure foundation] and it abides [
vz. in that estate and condition, wherein thou have placed it. Immanuel reads
the latter part of the verse thus] when thou [ vz. O Lord] did establish [
i. make and create, and that also to continue the same time that thou had
set it] ye earth [ i. the world and al things therein conteined] it was [ i. thy
truth and word was then. q.d. thy stedfastnes in keeping thy promises shall
continue throughout all generations, as the earth indureth, which thou
established by thy word only.] 91. They [ i. the world and all things therein
conteined] continue [ vz. safe, sound, and sure] even unto this day [ vz.
wherein we live, and so shall do unto the worlds end] by thine ordinances [
i. by thy word and appointment: q.d. as all things were created by thy word,
so by the same word they subsist, and are preserved in their estate, and
continually multiplied upon the earth, for man's vse] for all [ vz. thy
creatures] are thy servants [ i. serve thee, and at thy 92. Except thy law [
i. thy word: he puts a part of Gods word which consists of commandments
for the whole] had been my delight [ i. had been a continual delight and
comfort unto me, which I take he means by using the word in the plural
number, though it be not so here turned: understanding likewise thereby, that
it was his whole delight also in this life.] I should now have perished in mine
affliction [ i. it could not have been avoided, but both long ago, and even at
this present, I should have sunk down and dispaired under my miseries.] Ver.
93. I [ vz. thy poor seruaunt] will never forget [ vz. through i. thy word: a
part for the whole] for by the^ [ i. by the ministry and light of that thy
holy word] thou have quickened me [ i. brought me out of darkness into light,
and out of death into life.] Verse 94. I i. I belong unto thee, through thy
goodness, even as thy son and seruant] save me [ i. deliver me therefore, from
the dangers and distresses, wherein I am, or else am likely to fall] for I have
sought [ vz. with a good and an upright heart] thy precepts [ i. thy word as
before. ver. 93. meaning by seeking, an earnest study and affection which he
had, not only to know, but also to perform the will and word of God.] Ver.
95. The wicked [ i. the ungodly and vz. very narrowly and subtilly] for me [ i.
for my life and wayes] to destroy me [ vz. if they could find any manner of
evil by mee] but I will consider [ vz. with care and conscience, and attention
of heart] thy testimonies [ i. thy word, he means that he would not be
turned back from the study and meditation of Gods law, for any thing the
wicked could do against him.] Verse. 96. I [ vz. my selfe] have seen [ vz. i.
that there was nothing could be so perfect in this life, but it had or
should have an ende] but thy commandment [ i. thy worde] is exceeding large
[ i. so large, as neither I, nor any other, can behold, no not with the eyes
of our understanding, an end thereof, because it shall continue and endure for
ever and ever: and this serves wonderfully for the commendation of the word.]

Ver. 89.90. Declare for the comfort of our consciences, 91. Teaches us that
it is Gods word only which heretofore created, and at this present vpholdeth
all things. Ver. 92. Teaches us that we should take singular delight and
pleasure in Gods word, Secondly that it alone is it, that can comfort us and
keep us from perishing in distress. Ver. 93. Teaches us to have continual
meditation and study in Gods law. Ver. 94. Teaches us to ground our prayer
upon Gods favor toward us and his election of us. Ver. 95. Shows that the
wicked leave no stone vnrolled to hurt, and to do mischief to the faithful
and godly people: also it teaches us that no violence, should turn us back
from the care and study of gods word. Ver. 96. Teaches us that when all other
things shall come to an end, yet Gods word shall abide most firm and sure.

Mem.
97.103. Secondly 98.99.100.104. thirdly how he conformed himself in
obedience to the same. ver. 101.102.

97. Oh, how love I thy law [ i. how much do I esteem of it: and that
exclamation, shows that his affection was more then he could well express,
meaning that he had so great a love to gods word, which he understands by
the term law, that all his senses were, as a man would say, seized therewith,
and the gate shut against the corruptions of his own nature] it is my
meditation continually [ q.d. I do not speak almost or think of any thing
else, at any time.] 98. By thy commandments [ i. by the light and knowledge,
which thou have given me out of thy word] thou had made me wiser [ vz. by many
degrees, and that in all my actions and affaires] then mine enemies [ i. then
those which hate me, and wish me euil] for they [ i. thy commandments and
wordes] are ever with me i. I have them always in my thought and
understanding, meaning that he did think and meditate of them continually.]
Ver. 99. I have had [ vz. through thy goodness, and the light of thy word
bestowed upon mee] more understanding [ vz. in truth and godlines] then al my
teachers [ i. then al they that taught me, and this the Prophet speaks not as
boasting of it in himself, but to set forth gods great liberality, and to
commend the excellency of ye word] for thy testimonies are my meditation [ i. I
do carefully and continually think upon thy word.] Ver. 100. I understood [
vz. by the light of thy woorde] more then the ancient [ vz. in whom wisdom
and understanding should specially abound, partly for their experience, and
partly for their yeres] because I kept [ i. labored and endeavored to keep
with a single and sincere heart] thy precepts [ i. thy commandments and word,
where the Prophet says in all these three verses, first that he was more wise
then his enemies, because that with all their subtilty and craft they profited
nothing in diuising his destruction: and that he was better learned then even
ye wise and ancient, he declares that whosoever he be, which shall have
brought his understanding in subjection to gods word, he shall find wisdom
enough, not only to keep him from the snares of his enemies, but also to make
him exceed 101. I have refrained [ vz. through ye strength that thou have
given me, and being instructed by thy law] my feet [ vz. from going or walking
in corruption, feet also may be here used for affections, as Ecel. 4.17.] from
every evil way [ i. not only from all corrupt courses and orders of life, but
also from every provocation which might draw me on thereto] that I might keep
thy word [ q.d. all this I did to this end, yt I might testify my obedience to
thy law, and therefore I did take diligent heed to my self, that I did not
102. I have not declined [ vz. either to the right hand or to the left] from
thy judgments [ i. from thy law and word, which he calls judgments, because
that according thereto, the Lord will judge ye world] for thou did teach me [
vz. to walk in the obedience thereof: q.d. If thou had not held me in
obedience thereof, I had gone astray: and he means no doubt by teaching, a
special kind of teaching, as when God draws his elect unto himself,
inwardly by his spirit.] Verse 103. How sweet [ q.d. I am not able vz. which
thou have made unto thy servant. The word which he uses here, comprehends
the whole doctrine of Gods word, the principal part whereof is the free
couenaunte and promise of salvation, and that makes our translator to turn it
promise] unto my mouth [ i. unto the mouth of my heart and soul, for otherwise
the spiritual promises yield but little sweetness unto the bodily mouth] yea
more then honey to my mouth [ q.d. They are more sweet and pleasant unto my
mind, then honey is to my mouth. He means, that with his mouth he never
tasted any meat, how good or pleasant soever it were, as he felt Gods word,
and specially the grace of adoption, sweet and comfortable to his soul.]
Verse. 104. By i. by thy word] I have gotten understanding [ vz. in great
measure and abundance, as before verse 93.] therefore I hate [ vz. from the
bottom of my hart] all the ways of falsehood [ i. all false deceaueable, and
wicked ways whatsoever.

Verse 97 teaches us two things: 98 teaches us that in all our affairs, we
should presently confer with Gods word. Verse 98, 99, 100, teach us yt Gods
word is only our wisdom: also that knowledge of it makes us to excel, not
only our enemies, but all men whatsoever. Verse 101 teaches us in care and
conscience to strive to abstain not only from gross evils, but from all
manner of evil whatsoever. Verse 102 teaches us that if God be our guide and
schoolemaister, we can not go astraye, and that therefore we should suffer our
selves to be lead by him. Verse 103 teaches us that only Gods word and
specially his promises are comfortable and delightful to the consciences of
his. Ver. 104 teaches us that if we be once truly enlightened with Gods word,
it will make us loath all sin and corruption, both in our selves and others.

Nun.
THe Prophet in this xiiii. part of the Psalm, 105.111. 106, 109, 110, 112.
Thyrdly he prays to the Lord not only to 107, 108.

Verse 105. vz. O Lord] is a Lanthorn [ i. is in steed of a Lanthorne] unto my
feet [ i. unto my ways, or unto mine affections, as verse 101.] and a light [
i. stands in steed of a light] unto my path [ i. unto my behauioure and
conversation where in I walk, as in a path. He means that Gods law did lead
him out and teach him what he should do. Under which similitude also he
teaches us, that without the light and guidance of Gods word, the world can
not go else where but in darkness, and terrible downfalles.] Verse 106. I
have sworn [ i. I have bound my self unto God and the obedience of him by an
oth] and will perform it [ vz. through his strength and assistaunce, who at
this time has given me a steadfast purpose and will, hereafter add, a power]
that I will keep [ vz. according to the measure of grace received from God,
and as man's frailty will suffer me, for he bound not himself to keep the law
wholly and in every point, because that is impossible to vs] thy righteous
judgments [ i. the rules and precepts of thy word, which contain nothing
107. I am very sore afflicted [ vz. in the outward man, by enemies troubling
me, and infirmities weakening me, and in the inward man with continual anguish
of heart and daily assaultes] O Lord quicken me [ i. deliver me from death and
danger whereto I am very nigh] according to thy word [ i. according to thy
promise in thy word, see 25, 81.] Verse 108. O Lord I beseech thee [ vz.
unfeignedly, and from the bottom of my hart] accept [ vz. in good part, or of
thy good pleasure only, favor and allowe] the tree offerings of my mouth [ i.
my prayers and thanks giuings, which I freely and willingly offer unto thee:
they are called in other places of the scripture, the calves of our lips
Hosea 14, 2. and in an other place the fruit of our lips. Heb. 13.15] and
teach me [ vz. not only to know, but also to perfourme] thy judgments [ i. thy
word and the rules thereof, as sundry times before in this Psalm] Ver. 109. My
soul [ i. my life: for otherwise the soul cannot be touched: and it is put
for life, because yt whatsoever life this life has, it has it from ye soule]
is continually in my hand [ i. is in most present danger of death and
destruction, see 1. Samuel. 28.21. also Job. 13.14. he uses this phrase or
manner of speech, because that those things which we have in our hands, we have
them in readiness for any use as it were] yet [ q.d. for all these dangers] do
I not forget [ vz. continually or vtterly] thy law [ i. thy word, putting a
part of it for the whole.] 110. The wicked [ vz. men of the world] have laid [
vz. secretly and priuily] a snare for me [ vz. to catch me in it. He means
that the ungodly has secretly conspired and practiced his destruction] but [
vz. for all that] I swarued not [ vz. to the one side or to the other, meaning
that neither the fear of his adversaries, nor favor toward himself, had
drawn him away from the obedience of God] from thy precepts [ i. from doing
the things which thou commaundest 111. Thy testimonies [ i. thy worde] have I
taken [ i. esteemed and had in as great regard] as an heritage for ever [ i. as
a perpetual inheritance. He means that he did more esteem the doctrine of
God, the^ al possessions, though they had bin never so durable] for they are
the joy of my heart [ i. my heart (meaning by heart himself, putting the
principal part of him for the whole man) takes joy and delight in nothing
else, so much as in them.] Verse 112. I have applied mine heart [ i. I have not
only carried a purpose with i. to observe and do the things which thou have or
dained in thy law to be performed] always [ i. continually and for euer] even
unto the end [ vz. of my life, meaning by that manner of speech, all his life
long, see verse 33 of this Psalm.

Verse 105 teaches us that without the light of Gods word we cannot walk
rightly. Ver. 106 teaches us to use all the means we can, 107 teaches us, that
Gods children in this world, are many times brought to a low case: and that we
have no liveliness in us to good things, till God bestow it upon us. Ver. 108.
teaches us that we can do nothing which can please God, except it please him
in mercy to accept of the same. Ver. 109 teaches us that many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but yet that for their comfort, they should
continuallye think upon Gods word. Verse 110 sets out the malicious minds
of ye ungodly against the good, also it teaches us for no persecution to go
astray from God and his truth. Verse 111 teaches us in what price and
estimation we should have Gods word: it teaches us also that there is no true
joy to be found, but in that. Ver. 112 teaches us to carry with us a
continual care and conscience, to walk in the obedience of Gods law.

Samech.
IN this xv. part, the Prophet specially propounds three things: 113.114.115.
In the second he makes his prayers unto god 116, 117. In the third, 118.119,
120.

Verse 113 I hate [ vz. with an unfeigned hatred, as Psalm 139, 22. i. all the
devises of any man's heart or head whatsoever. The hebrew word, which he uses
in this place, properly signifies boughs or branches, and by a Metaphor, are
put here for inventions, devises or thoughts, which coming from the heart, as
it were from the trunk or body of a Tree, spread themselves hither and
thither: and that causes Immanuel to turn it thoughts. Whatsoever it be, he
means doubtless, the crooked inventions and devises of man's hart] but thy law
[ i. thy word: see ver. 109 of this Psalm] do I love [ vz. unfeignedly, 114.
Thou [ vz. alone, and no other but thou alone] art my refuge [ i. the place
that I fly unto in distress, meaning that God was he alone, under whose
protection and sauegard, he did withdraw himself, see Psalm 18.2.] and shield
[ vz. to defend me from deadly darts and dangers: see again Psalm 18, 2,
where you shall find both these words expounded, and Psalm 3, verse 3.] and
I trust [ vz. steadfastly and patiently] in thy word [ i. in the promises that
thou have made in thy word: he means that he did assuredly believe, that
Gods promises made in his word, should be performed, and though they were
delayed for a while, yet he would patiently tarrye the 115. Away from me ye
wicked [ q.d. Depart from me, for ye labor in vain to draw me to commit
wickedness with you: see this speech expounded Psalm 6.8.] for I will keep [
i. I have a purpose to keep, and through the strength and assistaunce of my
God, will perform it] the commandments of my God [ i. those things which my
God has commanded, and will at no hand do these wickednesses, which ye
provoke me unto.] 116. Stablish me [ i. confirm and strengthen me in thy
truth, and in all goodnesse] according to thy promise [ vz. made unto me in thy
word] that I may live [ vz. even here in this life, before men to thy glory]
and disappointe me not of my hope [ i. of the things that I hope for. He makes
this prayer, not as though God did at any time fail his children, but to the
end he himself might more and more feel his faith strengthened in the truth of
the word.] Ver. 117 vz. from faynting, sliding or falling] and I shall be safe
[ vz. from dangers and distresses: meaning that unless God kept him, he
could not stand one minute of an houre] and I will delight continually in thy
statutes [ vz. not only to know them, but also to do them, see verse 112.]
Ver. 118. Thou have trodden down [ vz. under thy feet, even as a mighty King or
conqueror, see for this phrase Psalm. 110.1.] al them [ vz. of what state or
condition soever they be] that depart from thy statutes [ i. that swerue and go
astray from the things that thou have appointed them to walk in] for their
deceit [ i. the mischievous practices, which deceitfully they have devised
against others] is vain [ i. is 119. Thou have taken away [ vz. from amongst
thy children, and that in thy heavy iudgement] all the wicked of the earth [ i.
all the ungodly inhabiting the earth, of what state or condition soever they
were: see verse 118 for this word, all,] like dross [ i. as a thing or matter
of no account: for indeed the wicked are not regarded before God, neither are
they to be esteemed of his children: see, the wicked compared to dross, Isaiah
1, 25. and though I know others to interpret it otherwise, yet I approve this
sence] therefore [ i. because thou defendest thine, as verse 114. and art a
just judge against the wicked, as ver. 118, 119.] I love [see ver. 113] thy
testimonies [ i. thy word which is called a testimony, or testimonies, because
120. My flesh [ i. my whole man, putting one part for the whole] trembles [
vz. exceedingly, and very much] for fear of thee [ vz. who art such a just
judge against the wicked and ungodly, and I know grievous faults and offenses
by my self. He speaks not this as though he were afraid of Gods presence,
as Adam was Genesis 3, 10. for he greatly desires that but by reason of his
own wretchedness and weakness, least either he had or might provoke him to
judgment against him, which also may appear by that that follows in this
verse] and I am afraid of thy judgments [ vz. poured forth upon the wicked,
meaning by judgments punishments.

Verse 113 teaches us to hate all manner of evil, and to love all good
things, 114 teaches us, that God is a mighty defense for those that are his:
also that Gods word is the ground of our hope. Verse 115 teaches us to shake
of the society and company of wicked men, who would draw us away from the
obedience of our God. Ver. 116 teaches us that Gods promises is the ground of
our hope and prayers. Verse 117 teaches us that unless God uphold us, we
shall slide and fall. Ver. 118 teaches us first, that the wicked for all their
might and subtlety, are not able to resist God: secondly that their wicked
imaginations shall tend to their own hurt. Verse 119 teaches us that Gods
judgments exercised upon the wicked, and his mercy toward his children
should make us the more to love him and his word. Verse 120 teaches us always
to have a reverence of Gods judgments, specially when we see them threatened or
executed.

Ain.
IN this xvi. part, which specially stands of prayer, 121, 122. Secondly he
prays for patience, feeling of Gods mercy, knowledge 123, 124, 125, 126.
Thirdlye, that he might the better move 126 127, 128.

Verse 121. i. I have given my self over to do upright and good things: and I
have not only abstayned from all injury and wrong doing to them that persecute
me, but I have done them also good] leave me not to mine oppressors [ i. to
them that would oppress me, and do with me what they pleased, neither does
he here allege his good doing as a cause why God should grant him his
request, but as a testimony to his own conscience that the Lord would not do
it] answer [ vz. to mine enemies] for thy servant [ i. for me thy servant.
He speaks of himself in the third person] in that which is good [ i. in his
good and upright causes. I suppose ye Prophet alludeth here to the custom of
earthly Princes courts: q.d. Appear for the defense of my good cause, and
plead it, and set thy self against mine enemies in my just defence] and let
not the proud oppress me [ vz. at their pleasure: for this word, proud, see
before verse 78, and 85.] Verse 123. Mine eyes vz. even of their sight, in so
much that they have been dazeled, and dimmed, and were not able to behold any
thing: and this he speaks, not of bodily eyes only, but even of the eyes of
his faith and persuasion [see before Verse 82] in waiting [ vz. a very long
time, yet in care and patience] for thy salvation [ i. for deliverance from
thee, out of all my distresses. So we have had the word salvation used sundry
times before, and namely Psalm 3, verse 8.] and for thy just promise [ i. for
the performaunce of thy promise, which 124. Deal with thy servant [ vz. in
this his distress and miserye, and here he speaks of himself in the third
person, as before 122] according to thy mercy [ vz. manifested to him and other
thy children] and teach me [ vz. that am blind and ignoraunt] 12.26.33.]
Verse 125. I am thy servant [ vz. through thy goodness I am advanced to this
honor, for he boasts not here of his dignitye, but sets out the grace
which he had received from God, to move him to finish that which he had begun]
grant me therefore understanding [ vz. to guide my self so as thou may be
glorified, I my self comforted, and others builded vp] that I may know thy
testimonies [ vz. to do and practice the same, for otherwise the knowledge of
the^ is to little purpose.] 126. It is time [he speaks not this, as though he
prescribed God a season, but the rather to set out the abundance of wickedness
which did ouerflow the world: q.d. If the Lord did not in time cut off sin and
wicked men, all would be as it were infected therewith] for the Lord to work [
i. to declare by his work that he will take punishment upon the transgressors of
his law] for they have destroyed [ i. the wicked men by their lewdnes and evil
conversation, have done what they could to overthrow thy word, not that they
are able to do it: q.d. they are become so bold and fierce, that they do not
only seek my destruction, but set themselves against God and his word] thy law
[ i. thy word, as before verse 113, and 109.] Verse 127. Therefore [ i. because
I am sure that the wicked shall not escape unpunished. It may also be taken for
a reason why David desired to be instructed in the Law, because of the
excellency thereof] love I [ vz. willingly and unfeignedly, see verse 113] thy
commandments [ i. thy word: a part for the whole] above gold [ i. more then
gold] yea above most fine gold [ i. above all things in the world, though for
their excellency and beauty they be never 128. Therefore [ vz. also, even
because thy judgments are poured forth upon the wicked, which also thou have
manifested by thy word] I esteem [ vz. I do not only reverence, but also
judge and take] all thy precepts [ i. all the things which thou have commanded
in thy law] most just [ i. to be, or that they are most just and righteous] and
hate [see before ver. 113] al false ways [ vz. how glorious soever they be in
man's eyes, or whosoever forged and devised the same.

121 teaches us that it is a hard thing to fall into men's hands. Verse 122
teaches us to beseech the Lord to plead our causes, when the ordinarye course
of a just defense is stopped against us. Verse 123 teaches us never to leave
off hanging upon the Lord, though the Lord a long while defer his aid.
Verse 124 teaches us in all our supplications, and prayers to fly to Gods
mercy. Verse 125 teaches us, that till GOD give us understanding, we are
utterly blind. Verse 126 teaches us that the heaping up of wickedness, will
doubtless procure the Lord to come with swifte and sharp judgment. Verse
127 teaches us to prefer Gods word before all pleasures and profits of
this life whatsoever. Verse 128 teaches us vnfaignedlye and from the bottom
of our hearts, to abhor all subtle and deceitful ways.

Pe.
THe Prophet in this seventeenth part, 129, 130, 131. Secondlye, he 132, 133,
134, 135. Thirdlye 136.

Verse 129. Thy Testimonies [ i. thy law and word, see verse 111, 125] are
wonderful [ i. comprehend wonderful things, because it contains mysteries
which are high and hidden from men's reason and understanding: and hereby he was
moved to reverence and esteem Gods word] therefore [ i. because they are so
excellent] does my soul [ i. I my self both in the outward and inward man]
keep them [ i. strive and labor to keep the^, and through thy goodness many
times perform them.] Ver. 130. The entrance into thy word [ i. the beginning
q.d. the word of God is so clear, that even at the first sight of it, it
lighteneth men's eyes. The hebrew word, which is here turned entrance,
signifies door, gate, or opening: q.d. Even the very first rudiments or
instruments of thy word, shows light [ vz. to such as resort and repair to
it: he means that it lighteneth their minds and chaseth away the natural
darkness which is in them] and gives understanding [ i. abundance of
understanding and knowledge] to the simple [ i. to the^ that be rude or
ignorant: and specially to such as being void from presumption and pride do
willingly submit themselves to GOD, that they may be instructed in and by his
word. Verse 131. I opened my mouth [ i. I very earnestlye vz. for an earnest
desire which I had: see Psalm 42, 12. I take these same to be metaphors
borrowed from thirstye and weary wayfaring men, q. d. I do so earnestlye
hunger and thyrste after thy law, as the hungrye and thirstye do after mea^e
and drink, yea I do by all the means I can strive to attain it] because I
loved [ vz. earnestlye and vnfeignedlye, see Verse 113.127] thy commandments
i. thy whole word, a part for the whole.] Verse 132. Look upon me [ vz.
continuallye and at all times, specially in the days of mine affliction] and
be merciful unto me [though there be nothing in me to move thee unto it] as
thou use to do unto those [ i. even as thou art accustomed to show mercy
and love to such] that love thy name [ i. that love thee, and that unfeignedly
and from a good heart. The name of God, put for God himself, as 8.^8. where
this phrase, love God, is used.] Verse 133. Direct my steps [ i. order my
conversation and course of life, some turn it thus, direct my feet, but the
sense comes all to one] in thy word [ i. according to that truth which thou
have sanctified and set forth in thy word: and in that he prays God to direct
him, he shows what great weakness is in man by nature] and let no iniquity
[ i. sin, either against thy majesty, or men my brethren] have dominion over
me [ vz. to carry me from the ways of thy commandments, for though we have a
will sometimes to do good, yet evil is present, and sin dwells, though it
reigns not in this our flesh, see Romans 7. 134. Deliver me [ i. set me free
and that through thy goodness and mercy] from the oppression of men [ i. from
men that would oppress me and do me wrong: or else from the oppression and
wrong which they purpose against me, see verse 121 of this Psalme] and I will
keep thy precepts 115. of this Psalm.] Verse 135. Show the light of thy
countenance [ i. be merciful and favorable, you have such a phrase before
Psalm 67, 1.] upon thy servant [ i. upon me thy servant, or unto me thy
servant, speaking of himself in the third person] and teach me thy statutes
[see verse 64, 68.] Verse 136. Mine eyes gush out with rivers of waters [ i. I
weep and sheade abundance of tears, yea I am altogether in tears: q.d. I
weep continuallye not only for mine own cause, but even for the wicked men's
sakes, whom I pitye, and specially for the law of God, which it greeueth me to
the heart, to be violated and broken] because they [ i. the men of the world,
and wicked ones] kept not thy law [ i. have neither care nor conscience to
keep it.

129 Verse 129 teaches us that the excellency of Gods word should draw us to
a love liking and obedience thereof. Ver. 130 is an excellent place, to
answer the Papists, who accuse Gods word of darkness and hardness. Verse
131. teaches us earnestly to hunger and thirst after the food of our souls,
which is the word of God. Verse 132 teaches us, that God uses continually to
show mercy and love to those that love and fear him. Verse 134 teaches us,
that the more God does set us free from danger, the greater care we should
have to walk in obedience. Verse 135 teaches us, that Gods favor is the
Fountain of all goodness to his children: also that til he teach us, we are
but blind and ignorant. Verse 136 teaches us to be grieved not only for our
own sins, but for other men's transgressions also.

Tsaddi.
137, 138, 140, 142, 144. The second is a description of his own misery,
trouble, and grief, and this is put down in verse 130, 141, and 143.

Verse 137. Righteous art thou, O Lord [ vz. even thou alone, q.d. if a man
should seek for righteousness without him, he shall not find a drop thereof]
and just are thy judgments [ vz. which thou exercisest toward men, meaning
also by this speech, that all of them, and every one of them are just.] Ver.
138. Thou have commanded [and therefore good cause thou should i. mutual
performance of duties one of us toward another: so is the word used Mica. 6,
8.] by thy testimonies [ i. by and in thy worde] and truth [ i. not only sound
and sincere dealing, but doing of it, with an upright affection] specially [for
though a man do the thing and do it not with the same mind that God requires,
it is sin to him. For in the obedience of Gods commandments we must
carefully take heed that we tread in these three steps: to do the same thing
that he appoints, and none other, to do it with ye same mind that he
demands it to be done, and to refer it to the same end.] Ver. 139. i. the
grief of my heart, as before ver. 136, and the anger which I did conceive, has
even consumed me [ i. almost wasted me and worn me away, so that there is
little or no hope of my life: he means not that he was thus consumed by
reason of ye sorrow which he conceived for private injuries, but because the
law of his God was tra^sgressed] because mine enemies [who the particulars
were, as whether it were Saul or others, it is not certain, but he speaks of
the^ al generally] have forgotten thy words [ i. will not acknowledge it, but
co^temtuously tread it under their feet.] Ver. 140. Thy word is proved most
pure [ i. 12.6.] and thy servant [ i. I, thy servant, speaking still of
himself in the third person: and that same word, and, may well be turned
therefore] loves it [see ver. 97, 113, 127.] Ver. 141. I am small i. of small
account and little estimation] and despised [ vz. of all men, specially of the
great ones] yet [ q.d. for all that] I do not forget thy precepts [ vz. but
think upon them both to know and do them, see ver. 109.] Ver. 142. Thy
righteousness i. not only the righteousness which is in God, but that which
God himself requires of men in his word] is an everlasting righteousness [ vz.
both because it indureth for ever, and brings the doers of it to eternal
blessednes] and thy law [ i. thy word, as sundry times before verse 109] is
truth [ i. not only true, but very truth it self: which is more significant,
noting yt there is no truth without or beside that word.] Ver. 143. Trouble and
anguish [ i. abundance and i. have seized and taken hold of me] yet [ q.d. for
all my greefes] are thy commandments my delight [ i. thy word does not only
delight and pleasure me, but much comfort me.] Ver. 144. The righteousness of
thy i. that righteousness which thou prescribest in thy word] is everlasting [
i. indureth and abides for ever, as before verse 142.] grant me
understanding [ vz. thereof] and I shall live [ vz. a blessed, certain, and
assured life: hereby he shows, that to speak properlye, men live not when
they are destituted of the light of God and heavenly wisdom: and therefore
that note in the Geneua Bible is good for the doctrine, that the life of a man
without the knowledge of God is nothing else but death.

137 teaches us always to confess Gods judgments to be righteous, though
perhaps it appear not so to our own reason. Ver. 138 sets out before us the
excellency of Gods word by the things which it commands. Ver. 139 teaches us
to be greatly grieved when other men transgress gods law. Ver. 140 teaches us
that the excellency of Gods word should draw from it, love, and liking of it
on our parts. Ver. 141 teaches us that no adversity should cause us to forget
God and his truth. Verse 142 teaches us that Gods word is the only rule of
righteousness and truth: so that whatsoever is not according to it, is to be
condemned for falsehood. Ver. 143 teaches us that only Gods word can delight
and comfort us in the days of our trouble and anguish. Ver. 144 teaches us
that howsoever men live in this life, yet they live not in deed the life of
God, without the knowledge of his majesty by his word.

Koph.
145, 146, 147, 148, as arguments to move the Lord to grant his request.
Secondly he uses reasons for that purpose, taken first from the person of
God, who is most merciful, ver. 149, ready to help, ver. 151. and most
constant in his word, verse 152. Secondly from the person of his adversaries,
who pressed upon him to do him mischief, ver. 150. Thirdly from the
experience which he himself had had of Gods goodness, ver. 152.

145. I have cried [ i. earnestly, and vehementlye prayed unto the Lord, for
that word, crying, declares that he directed all the affections of his heart
to GOD alone, and that with vehemence and ardencye] with my whole heart [ q.d.
My mouth has not only been nigh thee, but even my very heart, and all the
powers and parts thereof, have consented to the good things, which I uttered
with my wordes] hear me O Lord [ i. grant me my requests and petitions, for
otherwise it is not to be doubted, but that the Prophet knew that the Lord
heard him] and I will keep thy statutes [see verse 115, and 134 of this 146. I
called upon thee [ vz. heretofore, specially when I was in trouble, as Psalm.
120, 1, and thou heardest me, Psalm. 3, 4. q.d. I hope thou will do so now]
save me [ i. deliver me from dangers and distresses] and I will keep thy
testimonies] this is the very same, but yet in other words, which he 145.]
Ver. 147. I prevented [ vz. with my prayers] the morning light [ i. the dawning
of the day, or the light which comes before the morning] and cried [ i.
prayed earnestly unto thee. The Prophet means that he used to pray unto the
Lord, even before the day dawning, see before verse 55, 62] for I waited on thy
word [ i. I steadfastly stayed my hope upon thy promise, and did patiently abide
the performaunce thereof.] Verse 148. Mine eyes prevent i. I my self am more
attentive to meditate, and think upon thy law, than the night watches to keep
their watch and ward. Or else thus: Even before the night watches begin to
set their watch, do I begin to medytate on thy word: and as they continue
in the same, so do I. For the better understanding of this place, see Psalm
1, 2. also Psalm 130, 5, 6.] Verse 149. Hear my voice [ i. grant the prayer
which from my heart I utter vz. showed heretofore to others of thy Servants and
to me, as verse 132, specially when they call upon thee] O Lord quicken me [
vz. in the knowledge and obedience of thy truth, and he testifyeth by this
word so often used in this Psalm, that even in the midst of life we are
dead, unless we be quickened and vpholden by the power of God] according to
thy judgment [ vz. pronounced in thy word: or we may take judgment to be put
for the word it self, which declares unto us Gods goodness, he alludeth no
doubt to the office of an earthly judge, whose duty consists in these ij.
points, to absolve and lose some, and to pronounce the sentence of comdemnation
upon other some: in which sense also we say in ye common confession of our
faith, yt Christ our savior shall come from heaven to judge the quick and the
dead.] Ver. 150. They draw near [ vz. to me, even to persecute, hurt, i. that
pursue the mischievous, and wicked attempts, which they themselves in their own
malice had maliciouslye and wickedly devised against me] and are far from thy
law [ i. they care not either for the sight, hearing or knowledge of it: thus
he gives two properties to know the wicked by: the first is that they are
malicious: the second which indeed is the welspring of al mischief, they
despise Gods law.] Ver. 151. Thou art vz. to al thine, even to aid and succor
them in their distresses] for all thy commandments are true [that word, for,
would better be turned, and: and he means that not only the words, wherewith
gods commandments are expressed, but even the very things commanded therein,
are just, true and holy.] Verse 152. I [ vz. my selfe] have known [ vz. even
by mine own practice and experience] i. not only of late, but sundry times
heretofore, which I will never forget] by thy testimonies [ i. by thy word]
that thou have established them for ever [ i. that thou have ordained that it
should abide firm and stable, for ever and ever, see ver. 89 of this Psalm, and
verse 144.]

Verse 145 teaches us, that in all our supplications and prayers to ye Lord,
146 teaches us that the former experience of Gods goodness in hearing our
prayers, should imbolden us both to pray, and to hope to receive the like.
Verse 147 teaches us, even to break our sleeps to give our selves to prayer
and calling upon the name of GOD.] Verse 148 teaches us to be continually
diligente and careful, in the meditation and study of Gods word. Verse 149
teaches us, that Gods free mercy is the first cause of the granting of al our
requests. Ver. 150 does lively paynt out the nature and disposition of the
wicked and ungodly. Verse 151 teaches us, that the Lord is never absent from
those that love and fear him. Verse 152 teaches us, that to know the
assuredness of Gods word, and to have felt by proof the certainty thereof,
are two notable proppes of our faith and hope.

Resch.
153, 154, 158. secondlye, 155, 157. Thirdlye the great love, mercy and truth
of the Lord, verse 156, 159, 160.

153. Behold mine affliction [ i. how great the affliction is, which I
presently endure: not that the Prophet thought the Lord did not behold it, but
because he would have him by effect to declare, that he did regard and consider
it] and deliver me [ vz. out of the same] for I have not forgotten [ vz. as the
wicked men do, verse 139, but I have thought upon it to do it] thy law [ i.
154. Plead my cause [ vz. against mine adversaries, that would oppress me,
see Psalm 35. verse 1. and verse 122 of this Psalm. It is as much as if he
should desire the Lord to defend him and his case] and deliver me [ vz. from
them that would oppress me: as ver. 134, see also for this phrase, ver. 153.]
quicke^ me according unto thy word 25 of this Psalm.] Verse 155. Salvation [ i.
help and deliverance out of danger, as Psalm 3, 8,] is far from the wicked
[ i. they shall have no part or portion of it: and this he speaks specially
of his adversaries, who defended an unjust cause against him] because they
seek not [ vz. vnfeignedlye and from a good harte] thy statutes [ i. thy
word, and that to know and to do them] 156. Great are thy tender mercyes O
Lord [ vz. toward thy sons and servant. See Psalm 86, 5, 13, 15.] quicken
me according to thy judgments 149 of this Psalm.] Verse 157. My persecutors
and mine oppressors [ i. those that persecute and oppress me] are many [ vz.
in number and great in power] yet do I not swerve from thy testimonies [ q.d.
for all that, I leave not the love and obedience of thy truth, see verse 110.
of this Psalm.] 158. I saw [ vz. even with mine eyes, meaning that he did
certainly know, the naughtiness of the wicked men] the transgressors [ vz. of
thy law: for sin is the transgression and breach of Gods law, 1. John 3,
4,] and was grieved [ vz. with them, and at them, for their sins sake: see
before verse 53, 136, 139.] because they kept not thy word [ i. because they
had no care either to 136.] Verse 159. Consider, O Lord [the Prophet speaks
this, not as though he doubted whether god knew it, yea or no, but to entreat
ye Lord by effects to declare, ye care yt he had of him] how I love thy
precepts [ i. how much I love them, see ver. 97, 113, 127, and sundry other
places of this Psalm] quicken me according to thy loving kindness [this may
stand us 149, and 156, if that be not plain enough: as that he should
understand by judgments Gods promises and mercies, in which sense also the
word is used in sundry places of scripture] Ver. 160. The beginning of thy word
is truth [ i. thy word has bin true even since the beginning] and all the
judgments of thy righteousness [ i. all thy just

Ver. 153 teaches us, 154 teaches us, whether we have ma^s aid or no, yet we
should continually hang upon the Lord and pray unto him for our just defense
every manner of way. Ver. 155 teaches us, that a very contempt of Gods word,
which the wicked use, is a seal unto Gods children, yt no part or piece of
Gods favor belongs unto them. Ver. 156 does notably set out ye abou^dant
riches and infinite treasure of Gods eternal mercy. Ver. 157 teaches us that no
persecution or oppression should cause us to decline from God, or the obedience
of his truth.] Ver. 158 teaches us to pity and pray for other men in their
falls and transgressions, and not to rejoice in them, as the world does. Ver.
159 teaches us, that unfeigned love to Gods law is a mean to move the Lord to
show mercy upon us. Ver. 160 teaches us, that it is no small comfort for Gods
children to know, that Gods word shall never fail.

Schin.
IN this xxi. part, the Prophet first sets out men's malice toward him,
161, 162, 163. Secondly 164, 166, 167, 168. Thirdlye he 165.

Ver. 161 Princes [ i. great and mighty men of the earth] have persecuted me,
vz. being small and despised, as ver. 141] without cause [ vz. given unto them
on my behalf] but mine heart [ i. I my self, putting a part for the whole man:
and yet he does not without cause mention the heart, because if there be not in
it, rightly planted a true reverence of God, all outward things are but
hipocrisie] stood in awe of thy words [ i. had a reverent and childish fear,
and cared not for Princes, having thy law on my side.] Verse 162. I rejoice at
thy word [ i. I 127, 128.] as one that finds [ vz. after an overthrow given,
or a conquest and victory gotten] a great spoil [ i. a rich booty and pray.
He means that he was as glad of Gods word, and found as much pleasure in it,
as he that being a conqueror, did besides the honor of the triumph, enrich
himself with the spoil of his enemies.] Ver. 163. I hate [see verse 113 of
this Psalm.] falsehood [ i. lying, hypocrisy, and dissimulation, which is
contrary to round walking and vprightnes] and abhor it [ vz. from the bottom
of my heart, so that I can not abide so much as to behold it with mine eyes,
see Romans 12.9] but thy law do vz. earnestly and unfeignedly, see verse 113 of
this Psalm.] Verse 164. Seven times a day [ i. very often in a day, and as it
were continually, a number certain put for an uncertain, which is an usual
thing in the scriptures, see Leuit. 26, 18,] do I praise thee [ vz. with my
whole heart, which kind of speech is often used in this Book of Psalmes]
because of thy righteous judgments [ vz. practiced and performed toward men,
and declared in thy holy word: all this is as much: q.d. that he has found in
Gods law such great perfection of righteousness and wisdom, that even from
time to time, he has as it were betaken himself to praise God, and to yield
him continual thanks] 165. They that love [ vz. unfeignedly and with a good
harte] thy Law [ i. thy worde] shall have great prosperity [ i. shall have
abundance of blessings poured forth upon them: the word which is here turned
prosperitye, is in the hebrew, peace, by which they understand the abundaunce
of all blessings, specially outward blessing] and they shall have none hurt
[this doubling of one and the self same thing in contrary words, is much
used in the Scriptures, as we have sundry times noted heretofore, and serves
in this place, to show that they shall be delivered from al evil, and have
aboundante 166. Lord I have trusted [ i. I have both stedfastlye hoped for,
and patiently waited for] in thy salvation [ i. freedom and deliverance from
thee from all distresses: see verse 155.] and have done thy commandments [
i. have had through thy goodness not only care and conscience; but also
strength and abilitye to perform the same.] Verse 167. My i. I my self, a
part for the whole, and yet in using this word he notes his vnfeignednesse
in observing Gods lawe] has kept thy testimonies [ i. has endeavored to
keep them, and through thy strength has sometimes performed them] for I love
them exceedinglye [see for the truth of this, verse 97, 127, and 162 of this
Psalm.] Verse 168. I have kept [ vz. vnfeignedlye and i. thy word: he uses
two words signifying one thing. For keeping of his testimonies and precepts,
see verse 22 of this Psalm] for all my ways are before thee [some expound it
thus: my whole life and conversation is known to thee: putting this word, way,
for order of life, as Psalm. 1. ver. 1.6. some thus] all my ways are before
thee [ i. thou see, know, orderest, and carest for my whole life, this
latter comprehends the former, which makes God the Judge and arbitrator of
al his thoughts, and goes somewhat further, that is to show that God guides
him and all his actions.

161 teaches us, first that it is no new thing, that great men be the enemies
of Gods people: secondly, that it is a comfort to Gods children, when they are
persecuted without a cause: thirdlye, that howsoever men deal with us, yet we
must have a continual reverence of God and his word in our hearts. Verse 162
teaches us in what great regard and account we should have Gods word. Ver. 163
teaches us to avoid al hypocrisy, and to strive to al roundnesse and soundnes
of conversation. Ver. 164 teaches us, to be continual in the praising and
thanking of God for his graces. Ver. 165 to provoke us the more earnestlye to
love Gods law, sets before us, not only the avoiding of all evil, but also
the abundaunce of all good. Ver. 166 teaches us, both to hope for, and
patientlye to look for deliverance from God, out of all our dangers
whatsoever, Ver. 167 teaches us, that where there is a sincere love of Gods
law planted in the heart, there will be striving and indeuoring to perform the
same. Verse 168 teaches us that to know that God has an eye over our
conversation, is a good mean to draw us to the obedience and practice of his
truth.

Tau.
THe Prophet in this last part, first makes his prayer unto God, 169, 170,
173, 175, 176. Secondly he promises, after the granting of his petitions,
humble and unfeigned 171, 172, 173, 174. and thus I think may this part be
fitly divided.

Verse 169. i. the complaint and cry which I make unto thee] come before thee
O Lord [ i. appear in thy sight: q.d. show by effect yt thou hear my
complaint] and give me understanding [ vz. in thy law and worde] according to
thy word [ i. according to thy promise made unto me: see verse 25 of this
Psalm, where word is used for promise.] Ver. 170. Let my supplication i. the
prayer which I make] come before thee [ i. appear in thy presence. It is the
same in other words which he said before, ver. 169] and deliver me [ vz. out of
al my fears and distresses according to thy promise [ vz. made unto me: q.d.
deliver me as thou have promised] Ver. 171. My lips shall speak praise [ vz. to
vz. to know and vnderstand] thy statutes [ i. thy word: q.d. before he had
knowledge thereof, he could not do it, and so we learn that such as are
ignoraunte of Gods doctrine, can not praise and glorify him.] Verse 172. My
tongue [ i. i. not only simplye speak and talk of it, but solemnly sing and
set forth the praises of it] for thy commandments are righteous [ i. the
things that thou commaundest are most iust] Verse 173. Let thine hand help me
[ i. let thy power preserve and defend me from all mischiefs and inconveniences
whatsoever: hand, put for power] for I have chosen [ vz. before all other
things whatsoeuer] thy precepts i. thy law and word.] Ver. 174. I have longed [
i. I have greatly and earnestly desired, even as women with child lust after a
thing, see Psalm. 84.2.] for thy salvation O Lord [ i. for help and
deliverance from thee, as ver. 155, 166 of this Psalme] and thy law [ i. thy
word, as sundry times before, a part for the whole] is my delight [ i. is the
cheifest thing wherein I take most delighte and 77.] Ver. 175. Let my soul
live [ i. grant me to live long upon the face of the earth: soul, put for
the whole man, as ver. 167] and it shall praise thee [ vz. continually, and
that for all thy mercies both bodily and spirituall] and thy judgments [ i.
the vengeance that thou shall show upon mine enemies] shall help me, not
only because they shall be weakened and beaten down and so I by that means
strengthened: but also, because I shall be helped forward 176. I have gone
astray [ vz. from thee O Lord, wandering up and down hither and thither, in
the vain and wicked imaginations of mine own hart] like a lost sheep [ i.
like a sheep that strayeth and stragleth far, both from the flock and ye
sheepeheard whereof there can be no other account made then as it were of one
that were lost] seek [ vz. even as the sheepeheard does the straying sheep,
see Ezech. 34, 4, also Luke 15, 4.] thy servant [ i. me thy servant, for he
speaks of himself in the third person] for I do not forget thy
commandments [ i. I hear thy voice, even as thine own sheep, John 10, 3,
etc. these words are often times repeated in this Psalm, as verse 61, 93, etc.

169 teaches us to pray earnestly to the Lord, for the understanding,
knowledge, and practice of his word. Ver. 170 teaches us in all our prayers to
call to mind the gracious promises of GOD made unto us in his word, as the
cheifest ground in deed of all our supplications. Verse 171 teaches us, that
as we cannot praise God till he have given us light, so when we have received
that light from him, we should then speak continually to his praise. Verse
172 teaches both to speak of Gods word continuallye, and also to labor to
praise the same, according to the dignity and excellency thereof. Verse 173
teaches us, that unless God help us by his almighty power, we cannot
stand. Verse 174 teaches us, in patience to tarrye the time wherein the Lord
will work our deliueraunces. Verse 175 teaches us that the end of our life
in this life is to praise and glorify God: also that the faithful are
furthered to Godward by his judgments poured forth upon the wicked. Ver. 176.
teaches us first in all humblenes and simplicity to confess our sins:
secondlye with a steadfast faith to come unto the Lord, that so we may be cured
and helped of our diseases.

Psalm 120.
THis Psalm as I take it may be divided into three parts: 1.2. In the
second he speaks 3.4. In the third part he grievously lamenteth his own
case, in that he is enforced to 5.6.7.

The title: A song of degrees [Some, as the Geneua note, q.d. a most excellent
song: and of this mind is Immanuel. Some take it to be meant thus, that this and
the other xiiii. Psalms following, are called songs or Psalms of degrees,
that is of stairs or steps: because they were sung upon the stairs or
steps of the Lords house, of which you may read, 2. Chro. 9.11. and I for
mine own part incline thereto, because there is mention made of the stairs of
the Levites, that is of the stairs whereupon the Levites were wont to stand.
Nehem 9.4.] Ver. 1. I called [ i. I prayed earnestly] vz. only, because he
alone was able to helpe] in my trouble [ i. when I was greatly and much
troubled with affliction] and he heard me [ i. he granted me my request. see
Psalm. 3.4.] Ver. 2. Deliver my soul [ i. 119. ver. 167. and 175.] from lying
lips [ i. from the lying words of the wicked, and ungodly, who did
continually accuse him before Saul, as David himself shows, 1. Sam. 24.10.
also 26.19. See for this purpose also, Psalm. 52. almost throughout] and from a
deceitful tongue [ i. from a tongue that utters deceit and craft: and in
these words he notes particularly, the kind of affliction, that made him to
cry unto god.] Ver. 3. What does i. what do thy false words profit thee: or
what gain gettest thou by speaking so wickedly against other men? thus he
speaks to one, as it were particularly, yet in him noting others also, given
foully to that fault] or what does it avail thee [ vz. that thou do by evil
speech hurt othermen.] Ver. 4. It is [ i. the tongue it self and slanderous
words i. as dangerous and hurtfull] the sharp arrows of a mighty man [ i.
as sharp and pearsing, as are those sharp arrows, which a mighty man
shoots, q.d. they are very deadly, and bring even as it were present death
with them] and as the coals of Juniper [ i. as the coals which come of Juniper
wood being burned, which are most hot and lively, as Hierom writes unto
Fabiola, and though he yield not a reason of it, yet I suppose, that the
gummy or salty matter in the tree may be one cause of it, and he uses the
rather this similitude, because, as is before said, these coals burn and
pearce more deeply, the things which they take hold of, then coals of other
wood: q.d. they burn whatsoever withstandeth them. Of the inconveniences of
the James 3. ver. 1.2.3. etc.] Ver. 5. We is me [ q.d. my case is pitiful,
miserable, and grieuous] that I remain [ i. that by occasion of persecution at
home, I am enforced to inhabit and dwell] in Meseel. [this is the name of one
of Iaphets sons, Gene. 10.2. whereupon some suppose, that both the place
wherein he and his posterity dwelt, and also the people that came of him were
called by this name] and dwell in the tents of Kedar [ Kedar was Ismaels
son, as appears, Genesis 25.13. and likely it is that both the people and
the country were so called of him: See Psalm. 83.6. and he makes mention of
tents, because all the oriental people did for the most part dwell in tents. Some
think that under these names, Mesech, and Kedar, he means the bastardly
Israelites, who had degenerated from their holy fathers, and that therefore he
resembles them to these two people, because of their barbarous cruelty and
rage. Some think that he understands by these places and persons, places
and people nigh unto the land of Canaan, whither he did sundry times fly, as
appears by the first book of Samuel, whatsoever it was, he was greatly 6.
My soul [ i. I my self as verse 2. of this Psalme] has to long dwelt [ vz.
if the Lord saw it so good] with him that hates peace [ i. with men much
grieved against me, and here he puts the singular number for the plural,
meaning by him that hates peace, such men, as did, even of set purpose 7. I
seek [ vz. by all the means that I can, and this sense I give, by reason of
that, which is read Psalm 34.14.] peace [ vz. with those mine aduersaries] and
[I would rather turn it, but] when I speak thereof [ vz. unto them: q.d. I
do no sooner open my mouth about such a matter, but] they are bent to war [
i. they are prepared and ready for it, and cry as a man would say, alarm.

1. Teaches us to call upon God in our troubles, with confidence that we
shall be delivered and set free from the same. Verse. 2. Teaches us to pray
particularly, that we may be delivered from slanderous and lying speeches.
Verse 3. Teaches us that such as give themselves to backbiting, and
slaundering, shall in the end get nothing thereby. Verse 4. Declares how
raging and violent slanderous tongues are. Ver. 5. Declares in what a
miserable estate they are, that live amongst the wicked. Verse. 6. Teaches us
that the shorter while we have our habitation amongst the ungodly, the better
it is for us. Ver. 7. Teaches us if it be possible and as much as in us lies,
to seek to have peace, with all men: Secondly it painteth out the nature of
the wicked: that the more they are sought to, the worse they are.

Psalm 121.
THis Psalm stands especially of three parts. 3.4.5. In the third 6.7.8.

The title, A song of degrees [this is expounded before in Psalm. 120.] Ver. 1.
i. I will look upon, and set mine affection vpon] unto ye mountains [ vz. of
the land of Canaan, for it may be, that in them I may have succor and defense
from my enemies: such counsel the wicked gave him, as appears Psalm. 11.1.
Canaan was full of rocks and mountains, and therefore in that respect it is
called the mountain of gods inheritance, Exodus 15.17.] from whence [ i. from
which mountaines] mine help [ i. help, aid, and succor for mee] shall come [
vz. as I suppose. So that the prophet speaks here, as though he were debating
the matter with himself, from whence he should look for aid: q.d. the rocks
and hills of Canaan, shall defend me from the rage and cruelty of mine enemies,
and yet rejecting that opinion of his, he does in the second verse, correct
himself saying.] Ver. 2. Mine help [ i. help for me] comes from the Lord [
vz. alone. q.d. what mean I to talk of mountains, it is most certain, that
I can have no help but in the Lord only, for though I fix mine eyes upon the
mountains, and trouble my self much with the means which are before me, yet I
shall in the end know, that I can have succor, no where else but from God, so
that here, he does both correct that which he said before, and shows a
victory against his assaults, wholly committing himself unto God for his
Christ's sake, because in God there was power and will both, to help him] which
has made [ vz. in the beginning, Gene. 1.1. and that of nothing. Heb. 11.3.]
heaven and earth [ i. both those elements themselves, and all things whatsoever
in them contained: and this title is here and in many places attributed to God,
to the end that men might learn, to assure and stay themselves in his power
and might.] Ver. 3. i. God] will not suffer [ vz. through the providence and
care that he shall have over thee] thy foot [ i. thou thy self putting a part
for the whole, meaning notwithstanding that Gods providence shall reach, not
only to the guiding of ye whole man, but to every particular member of him: see
Psalm. 34.20. also Matthew. 10.30.] to slip [ i. to stumble or fall, so that thou
shall be hurt, or lie down under thy fall: and thus under one he turns his
speech to every faithful man, assuring them of Gods favor and care toward
them: by the promise, which he has made unto all his people, and to his whole
Church: which every one particularly ought to apply to himself thus, saying,
God is my keeper] for he that keeps thee [ vz. under his providence, and
protection: and this he speaks of God onely] will not slumber [ vz. never so
little, or any whit at all q.d. thou need not to fear, because he has his
eye watching continually over 4. Behold [ q.d. mark this, and take it as a
certain trueth] he that keeps [ vz. under his providence and protection, as
before ver. 3.] Israel [that is his faithful people and Church, Paul calls
the^ Galat. 6.16. the Israel of God, and Romans 11.26. al Israel] will neither
slumber, nor sleep [ vz. because it agreeeth not to his nature, and eternal
Godhead, He means by this, that as he will never be careless over them, so he
will always 5. The Lord [ vz. alone, and none other but hee] is thy keeper [ i.
is he, that graciously protecteth thee and thyne] the Lord [ vz. alone, as
before] is thy shadow [ i. is a place both of pleasure and sure defense unto
thee] at thy right hand [ i. on every side of thee. Immanuel turns this
latter part thus, the Lord which is thy shadow, is at thy right hand [ vz. to
aid, succor, and defend thee, and this I take to be the more plain reading 6.
The sun [ i. the extreme parching, and pearsing heat of the sunne] shall not
smite thee [ i. shall not touch thee, to hurt thee] by day [ i. in the day
time, because by Gods ordinance it is appointed to shine in ye day, Genesis
1.16. nor the moon [ vz. which shines in the night, and here you must
understand this much, shall smite thee, to hurt thee, with her cold, as the
sun in the day time, should not hurt them with heat: now he promises not
that we shall be exempted from all griefs utterly, but he sets out this
comfort, that having God favorable unto us, we shall be in such safety that no
evil, which shall fall upon us shall destroy us, for under the discommodity in
the heat of the day, and of cold in the night, he compriseth all
inconveniences, from which the 7. The Lord shall preserve thee [ vz. through his
great power, and of his infinite goodnes] from all evil [ i. from all manner of
distresses, plagues, punishments, etc. understanding it with the conditions
before alleged, to wit, if it may serve for his glory, or their salvation, or
if it do take hold of them, that it shall not destroy them] he shall keep [
vz. safely and surely] thy soul [ i. thy life, and whole man, as Psalm.
120.2.6.] Ver. 8. The Lord [ vz. thy God] shall preserve [as before, ver. 7.]
thy going out, and thy coming in [ i. al thy affairs and businesses, for
whatsoever men do, they do it at home or abroad, as Deuteronomy. 28.6. meaning that
God would direct all his enterprises and actions, and give good success to al
his affaires] from henceforth, and for ever [ i. continually or always.

1. Teaches us how ready we are to seek strange aids and helps besides
God our Lord. Ver. 2. Teaches us to correct our judgments in that behalf,
and to hang only upon him, that is able to help us. Verse. 3. Teaches us that
Gods providence extends it self, not only to all the faithful generally,
but to every particular one of them, yea to every member and part of their
bodies. Ver. 4. reaches us that it is a singular comfort to gods church, to
know, that they have so vigilant a watchman over them, as the Lord is. Ver.
5. Teaches us that the Lord keeps and protecteth his children on every side.
Ver. 6. Teaches us that even al Gods creatures, shall be in a league with his
children not to hurt them. Verse. 7. Teaches us that no affliction shall take
hold of us, otherwise then shall make for Gods glory, and our salvation. Ver. 8.
Teaches us that unless al our affairs both generally and particularly, be
directed by God, they can have no good success. To shut up this Psalm it is
lamentable to consider, how much this Psalm has been, and is abused in our
Church service, appointed for women's purification, where it is put down to be
used as a thanksgiving, whereas we see, that the Prophets special purpose is,
to show in what assurance they are, that are under the providence and
protection of almighty God, it being of the same argument, with Psalm. 91. and
not so much, as one word or syllable in it tending, either to prayer or
thanksgiving, which I take to be a part of prayer.

Psalm 122.
THis Psalm consists specially of two parts. Jerusalem, wherein God was
truly served. ver. 1.2.3.4.5. In the second he exhorts al to pray for ye
good of the church, 6.7.8.9.

The title, A song of degrees [see Psalm. 120. David [ i. a Psalm, that David
made, rejoicing greatly, that the arc which was a token of Gods presence, was
brought into Jerusalem, for this title, see Psalm 6.8. and many others in
their several titles.] Ver. 1. I rejoiced [ vz. heartily, and i. the people]
said unto me [ vz. their King and Prince] we [ i. all together, one and
other of vs] will go [ vz. willingly and gladly] in to the house of the Lord [
i. into the place where the Arc should be placed, and that to worship and
serve God, by prayer thanksgiving etc. he means that he much rejoiced in
this, that he himself knew, that the ark of God should dwell, as it were in
mount Sion, and that the people did willingly agree thereto, that there they
might worship God.] Ver. 2. Our feet [ i. even we our selves, a part 121.3.]
shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem, [i. now we shall not go from place to
place, to seek the arc of covenant, as we were wont to do, for it shall
dwell and abide in Jerusalem, whither we will go up to serve the Lord.] Ver. 3.
Jerusalem [i. this excellent city to which we shall go to vz. very
excellently, and beautifully, as appears, 2. Sam. 5.9. 1. Chronic. 11.8. and
yet this must not be referred to the walls and towers only, but chiefly to the
policy and order of government which was therein, as may appear, by that which
followeth] as a city, that is compact together in it self [ i. as a fair,
glorious, and round city, whose buildings are even and proportionable one of
them with an other: and by this he compares the concord which was amongst the
citizens of Jerusalem, to buildings and houses, 4. Whereunto [ i. to which
Jerusalem, and the exercises of religion observed there] the tribes [ i. the
twelve tribes of Israel] even the tribes of the Lord [ i. the tribes, which
the Lord himself has, to be his special portion and inheritance, for this
is added, both for explication of the former, and to set out also the
excellency of the persons] go up [ vz. to worship and serve God: and he uses
the word of going up, because the City stood upon an hil] according to the
testimony to Israel [ i. according to the ordinance, that God had ratified and
established amongst ye Israelites, by which he shows that they did nothing in
that behalf, but by warrant from god. Immanuel turns it thus] to the
testimony of the Israelites [ i. to the Arc of the testimony, which god gave
to the Israelits, and for that end he allegeth Exodus 25.21.22. others read it
thus] which is a testimony to Israel [ vz. of the covenant made between god
and them, but methinketh the first sense is most plain of al] to praise the
name of the Lord [ i. to set forth by praise and thanksgiving, the majesty,
power and glory of God: and he puts one part of Gods service for the whole,
and note that in this verse he commends Jerusalem, for the exercises 5. For
there [ i. in Ierusalem] are thrones set for judgment [ i. judgment places
are erected and established, putting the places of public justice, for
judgment and justice it self, and the persons that administer the same,
because it were in vain to have the places, without the men, and the matter]
even the thrones of ye house of David [ i. thrones appointed by God, to David
and his posterity: for so I take house to be used in this place, and this
repetition imports, that it was Gods purpose, to have the prerogative of the
kingdom established in David's posterity, until such time, as the true eternity
of that kingdom were manifested 6. Pray [ vz. O al ye good and faithful people,
for he utters his speech in ye plural number] for the peace of Jerusalem, [i.
the felicity, prosperity, and quietness of it, both public and private, inward
and outward, as may appear by ye words following to the end of the Psalm.] let
them prosper [ vz. in all goodness, thus he teaches them to pray, not only for
it, but for all them that carry any good affection vz. unfeignedly and with a
good heart.] Ver. 7. Peace [ i. al manner of prosperity and blessedness, as ver.
6. of this Psalm] be within thy walls [ i. within thy houses, O Jerusalem which
are compassed about with walls, the Hebrew word, does signify a ditch
wherewith cities are commonly compassed, and that makes some to turn it thus]
in thy ramparts [that is in places about thee appointed for thy defense,
whatsoever it is, he wishes well, to the City and people] and prosperity
within thy palaces [ i. in the great and noble houses that are within thee, so
that he would have al sorts blessed, and the city it self, both within and
without.] Ver. 8. For my brethren [ vz. which i. even at this present, and not
only now, but all the days of my life, if my wishing can do thee good, thou
shall not want it] prosperity [ i. all manner of prosperous and good things. And
these be David's own words, testifying his great love, to the place of Gods
worship, and his brethren assembled there.] Ver. 9. Because of the house [ i.
because i. of the Lord, whom we al serue] I will procure [ vz. by all the means
that possible I can] thy wealth [ i. al prosperity and goodness for thee, so he
shows that he sought not his own profit only, or the profit of those that
were his, but generally of the whole Church of God.

Ver. 1. Teaches us that we ought to be very glad, 2. Teaches us, to delight
and continue in those places and assemblies, wherein God is truly and sincerely
served. Ver. 3. Teaches us that not only glorious buildings, but chiefly
unity and concord, are a singular ornament to any City or commonwelth. Ver. 4.
Teaches us that the exercise of Gods word and religion do specially commend
a City or Country to us. Ver. 5. Teaches us that the administration and
execution of public justice, is a notable commendation also to any town or
country. Verse 6. Teaches us to exhort others to pray for the state of the
Church, and teaches us also in our own persons to pray for it, and for them
that favor and affect it. Verse 7. Teaches us to pray, both for the outward
and inward quietness of Gods Church. Ver. 8. Teaches us to have a care for our
brethren and neighbors, in respect of godliness, even as for our selves.
Verse. 9. Teaches us that even a holy love to Gods Church, should cause us to
do any thing, for the benefit, profit and good thereof, that possible we can.

Psalm 123.
THis Psalm, though very short, 1.2. In the second he prays to the Lord
for the

The title] A song of degrees, or Psalm of David [this is expounded before,
120. and Psalm. 122.] Ver. 1. I [ vz. being distressed on every side and seeing
all aid of man to forsake mee] lift up [ vz. earnestly and attentively, hoping
and looking for help from thence] mine eyes [ i. not only the eyes of my
body, but of my mind and faith also] to thee [ vz. O my God and Lord] which
dwell in the heavens [ i. which art God almighty, he means by this title,
that God is exalted far above all creatures, and that he guides and
governs them according to his good pleasure, it sets out also, the power
of God over all creatures, and his government and providence, and declares
further, that neither he himself imagined, neither should we imagine any
fleshly thing of 2. Behold even as the eyes of servants look [ vz. earnestly
and attentiuely] unto the hand of their misteris [ i. unto their power, aid,
and help, not doubting of their faithfulness, succor, and defense, neither yet
looking for aid from others, besides their misteris] and as the eyes of a
maid [ vz. look and wait vpon] the hand of her maistresse [ i. the power,
help and succor of her, whom God has placed over her, as before in this
verse] so our eyes [ vz. both of our bodies and of our minds, as ver. 1. of
this Psalme] wait [ vz. with patience and continuance] upon the Lord [ vz.
only] our God [ i. whom we serve and worshippe] until he have mercy upon [ i.
until he show by effect that he will take pity upon us, and deliver us out of
our griefs, ye word, until, in this place means not, as though that then
they would leave of to trust in him, but it notes continuance and perpetuity
of time: see Psalm. 110.1. and many other 3. Have mercy upon us [ vz. that are
so greatly distressed and afflicted] O Lord, have mercy upon us [this doubling
of their prayer, notes both their great earnestnes, and also their great need
wherein they were] for we have suffered [ vz. a long while together] to much
contempt [ vz. from the proud and wealthy men of the world, as may appear by
the next words following.] 4. Our soul [ i. even our whole life] is filled
to full [ vz. in our judgments, if thou O Lord think it so also] of the
mocking of the wealthy [ i. with the mockes and taunts which the rich men of
the world vomit out against us: and he speaks thus, because that many times
riches engender fearcenes and pride of heart] and of the dispitfulnes of the
proud [ i. with that despite and hatred, which the proud use against us.]

1. Teaches in all extremities, whether men stick to us or forsake us, to
hang upon the Lord our God only. Verse 2. Teaches us by a notable
similitude, never to leave off either trust in God, or prayer unto him, til
such time, as he graciously look upon us, and grant us our petitions. Verse
3. Teaches us to be earnest in prayer with the Lord our God. Ver. 4. Sets
out the naughty nature of the wicked men of the world, who can do nothing
else but mock and disdain, the sons and servants of the most high God.

Psalm 124
THe Prophet in this Psalm, specially propounds two things, 1.2.3.4.5.
secondly, he prayseth the Lord, for setting 6.7.8.]

The title is expounded before, Psalm 122. in the title thereof.] Ver. 1. vz.
by his almighty power and presence] had not been on our side [ i. had not
taken our partes] may Israel now say [ vz. very justly and truly: he puts
this word, Israel, for the people of God, as Galat. 6.16.] Verse. 2. vz.
casting all fear of God, and love of his people aside] rose up [ vz. in their
rage and madnes] against us [ vz. to destroy us.] Ver. 3. They i. without all
doubt they had destroyed us: and by these words swallowing up quick, they
signify both the barbarous cruelty of the enemy, and also their own
weakness to resist so mighty enemies: and here mark, that very likely it is,
that David made this Psalm in his own name, and the name of the Church] when
their wrath was kindled against us [ i. when they were set on a rage, presently
as it were to destroy us.] Ver. 4. Then the waters [ i. the great abundaunce of
their wrath and fury, 69.1.] had drowned us [ i. had overwhelmed us, and quite
and clean destroyed vs] and the stream [ vz. of their rage] had gone over our
soul [ i. had persed, even unto the inward man, and had doubtless taken away
our life.] Verse 5. 6. Praised be the Lord [ vz. continually, for this his
great goodness and vz. up, that is delivered us, or made us, which in his
justice for our sins he might have done] as a pray [ i. to be spoiled and
deuoured] unto their teeth [ i. unto their cruelty and rage, he compares the
enemies here, to wild beasts, that with their teeth tear in sunder, 7. Our
soul [ i. our life, and we our selves, as sundry times before, and namely
Psalm. 120.2.6.] is escaped [ i. is graciously delivered, and so by that means
has escaped their barbarous cruelty] even as a bird [ vz. taken in a foulers
snare or grinne, and yet notwithstanding, is by some mean or other delivered
and escaped thence] out of ye foulers snare [ i. out of that snare which the
foulers lay for it or for the^] the snare [ vz. which our enemies prepared and
laid for us: and this word shows that the wicked did join to their force and
violence, treason and subtlety: and that yet notwithstanding Gods people, yea
though they were void of counsel and of force, were miraculously preserved by
Gods own hande] is broken [ vz. vz. through his goodness out of al those
dangers.] Ver. 8. Our help [ i. the help and succor which we look for, and
must haue] is [ i. stands only, and is no where else to be found but] in the
name of the Lord [ i. in his might, power, majesty, goodness, etc. as Psa.
20.1] which has made heaven and earth [this is expounded before. Psalm. 121.
ver. 2.

1. Teaches us yt if God take not part with his children, and defend them,
they shall easily be ouerthrown. Ver. 2 teaches the selfsame thing and shows
further, that men, are many times to men, wolves and deuourers, though happily
not in action, because by god they are restrained therfrom, yet in affection.
Ver. 3 teaches us, that when God his children are in the greatest dangers, he
is most nigh to deliver them: also that the wrath of man never works ye
righteousness of God. Verse. 4. and 5. Declare, and set out the rage and
cruelty, of the wicked and ungodly men. Ver. 6. Teaches us, first Gods mercy
in delivering his from al their dangers and fears, secondly our duty, that we
ought by all manner of means, to show our selves thankful unto him for the same.
Ver. 7. Teaches us that the wicked join to their power and cruelty, craft
and subtlety: but it shows further that there is no wisdom, strength, or
policy, that can prevail against the Lord, and his people, whom he will
succor. Ver. 8. Teaches us, that God alone, is he whom his people must trust
to, for help and succor.

Psalm 125
1.2.3. In the second he makes his prayer for them that be good, and shows
what punishments shall overtake the wicked, and what prosperity shall be to the
faithful and holy people. ver. 4.5.

The title is expounded before, Psalm 120.] Ver. 1. vz. assuredly, and
stedfastly] in the Lord [ vz. only, joining none other neither in heaven, nor
in earth with him] shall be [ vz. steadfast and vnmoueable] as mount Sion [i. as
the rock whereupon the Church is builded, yea and as the Church it self,
against which no storms nor tempests, no nor the gates of hell shall prevail,
See Matthew. 7.24. Matthew. 16.18. which can not be removed [ vz. though the
world and wicked men, do what they can against it] but remains [ vz.
steadfast and sure] for ever [ i. continually: now we must know that the
stedfastnes of the Church and every particular member thereof, hangs not of
themselves, but of Gods eternal love toward them, and Christ's earnest prayers
for them, as when he says to Peter, Luke 22.32 I have prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not.] Verse 2. As the mountains are Jerusalem [vz. to
strengthen and defend them from the force of their enemies] so is the Lord
about his people [ vz. on every side of them to save them from the violence of
men] from henceforth and for ever [ i. he is presently their defense: and
will be so continually: so that by this similitude taken from the mountains
compassing Jerusalem. The Prophet sets out the sure and secret defense of
GOD toward every particular one of his Church] and this we see plainly set
out, Psalm 5.12. also Psalm. 34.7. also Psalm 91. throughout: also Psalm
121. throughoute. Zachari. 2.5.] Verse 3. For [in this verse, he preuenteth an
objection, which might be vz. of government and authority, meaning thereby
the Scepter, putting the sign of government, for government it selfe] of the
wicked [ vz. men of this world: in the Hebrewe text, he uses the word
wickedness, putting the thing for the men given thereto: and so the Geneua
text yields the sense] shall not rest [ vz. long, but shall be quickly
removed, and so the good delivered, as 1, Corinth. 10.13. on the lot of the
righteous [ i. upon the Church and inheritance of the godly people, which he
calls the lot of the righteous, because GOD has as it were given the same
unto them, by lot, as it were, for an inheritance] lest the righteous, put
forth their hand unto wickedness [ i. do commit wickedness and sin,
either by murmuring against GOD, or by falling to the impieties of their
persecutours, and so he shows a reason why affliction lies not long upon
Gods children: and for this cause, as it should seem, did the Lord command
them to be flayne, that inhabited Canaan, lest the people should follow
their fashions: the sum of all is. q.d. though the Lord appoint his, to be
afflicted for a time, by very wicked people, yet he will not leave them for
ever, for the wicked shall not always have power and authority over the
godly. So that this third verse, is as it were a correction of the other. q.d.
Gods protection lettteth not, but that his, should be waked, by crosses, and
tribulations, to the end that the righteous being tried by temptation, should
not give themselves over to licenciousnes in sin, which he expresses, by
stretching out their hands their hands I say, which before were subjected, to
the obedience of Gods will: understanding by hands their whole man, putting a
part for the whole.] Verse 4. Do well, O Lord [ i. bless and pursue
continually with thy favor, See Psalm. 119.17.] unto those that be good [ i.
unto such, as thou have made good unto thy self, by thy word, and the working
of thy spirit, for otherwise there is none good, no not one, as Psalm
14.1.3.] and true [ i. found and upright, both to thy majesty, and to men] in
their hearts [ i. in their affections, he 5. But those that turn aside [ i.
hypocrites, which have a place in the Church, and live in it, though they be
not of it, and by turning a side, he means going stray, from the right way,
which God has sanctified in his worde] by their crooked ways [ i. by devises
and imaginations of their own: for all that man deuiseth without God is
crooked and perverse. Immanuel reads it thus: but those that set their
minds, upon their own crooked ways: which in my judgment is more playne]
shall the Lord [ vz. himself in his great justice and iudgement] lead [ vz.
out of his Church forth unto judgment, meaning that he shall pull them out
from the godly, and then pronounce sentence of condemnation against them, and
give them their portion even eternal judgment. Matthew. 21.41. Matthew. 25.32. Luke
12.46.] with the workers of iniquities [ i. with all others that have given
over themselves with greedines to commit sin, see Matthew. 7.21.22.23.] but
peace [ i. al manner of blessedness and prosperity, as Psalm. 122.6.7] shall be [
vz. continually] upon Israel [ i. upon Gods Church and people: See Psalm
124.1. and by Israel, he means not only them that came of Abraham according
to the flesh, but those that are Abraham's children by faith. So that he
shows that the peace of the Church shall proceed from this, that the wicked
shall be driven out of it.

1 teaches us what stedfastnes Gods people have, as who can never fall away
from grace, because whom the Lord loves, he loves for ever. Verse 2.
Teaches us that God compasses his servants so on every side that no evil can
come unto them further, then he himself will. See Job. 1.10. Ver. 3. Teaches
us that howsoever we be afflicted, yet our afflictions are but momentary, and
endure but for a short space, See Psalm 30.5. also 2. Corinthians. 4.17. Ver. 4.
Teaches us to pray for the continuance of gods favor upon our brethren, even
as toward our selves. Ver. 5. Teaches us that howsoever hypocrites flourish
in the Church for a while, yet the Lord will plague them in the end: also it
teaches us that howsoever he punishes the wicked, yet he will graciously
bless his own.

Psalm 126.
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. 1.2.3. In the second they pray
the Lord to perform the work which he had begun, prophesying, 4.5.6.

The title. A song of degrees [this is expounded before. Psalm. 120. David
[this is not in the Hebrew text, and therefore would be left out, for this
Psalm seems not to be made by David, or in David's time, but in the days of
Cyrus, who published a proclamation for the return of the Jews into their
country: at the which diverse of the godly, rejoicing together, penned also
this Psalm.] Verse 1. When the Lord [ vz. vz. out of Babylon, whither they
were tarried captives for their sin: and thus they ascribe all the work of
deliverance, wholly to the Lorde] the captivity [ i. the captives he puts
the thing, for the persons] as we have noted out before, Psalm 125.3. out of
the Hebrewe text] of Sion [i. of the Church of the Jews, he means all the
people, by the place which was of greatest excellenty amongst them: to wit,
Sion whereupon the temple was builded, and in which God was worshipped] we
were [ vz. in our own judgment and estimation] like them that dream [ vz.
that dream of excellent things, and yet have the^^ not, not but that they were
delivered, but the wonderfulnes of the deliverance was so great and so
incomprehensible to all men's understanding, that it seemed almost impossible to
be performed: q.d. we could hardly persuade our selves of it, til we saw
the Gentiles speak of our great deliverance, and (...) help us forward with
aid toward our own Country, see Ezra. 1. through out.] Verse 2. Then [when
we knew that God had done this great work i. we had a plentiful and large
occasion given us, of rejoicing, because the countenance and face, are
specially occupied in laughing, and the mouth is a part thereof, he puts a
part for the whole, yea even for the whole man, if you will] and our tongue
with joy [ i. we had great occasion also to speak joyful words: q.d. we had
occasion given us, not only to be merry in countenance, whereas before in
our captivity we hanged down our heads, but also we expressed the joy of our
hearts by our woordes] then [ vz. when they also saw it] said they amongst
the heathen [ i. diverse and many of the heathen amongst whom we were
captives, and prisoners] the Lord [ vz. their God whom they worship and
serue] has done [ vz. through his great strength and power] great things [ i.
excellent, yea and wonderful thinges] for them [ i. for their sake, and even
for their particular persons also, They mean that the miracle of their
deliverance was so great, that the Gentiles 3. The Lord [ vz. our GOD, for
these are the words of the faithful, answering as it were the heathen, that
confessed GOD to be the worker of their deliverance: q.d. we confess it
also with you] the Lord has done great things [all this is expounded before,
verse. 2.] for us [though we be his poor and unworthy servants: so all
serves for the magnifiyng of Gods might and 4. O Lord bring again [ vz.
through thy almighty power: and that out of Babylon, into the land of Iudah]
our captivity [ i. our brethren and friends which yet remain captives: See
ver. 1. of this Psalm.] as [ vz. thou many times bryngest] the rivers [ i.
abundaunce of waters] in the South [ i. into the South, putting the South
Country for dry and barren places, because of the continual and ardent heat
of the sun in that quarter, which parcheth all their grass, come, etc. and
dries up, as it were all their rivers and waters: and n^ce, that in this
place, the Prophet compares, Gods favor in the deliverance of his people,
with the rivers of water, and the people themselves in captivity with a barren
and dry land, from whom, none could turn away Gods favor if it pleased him
to water them therewith. So that in this verse, the Church prays the Lord,
to stretch out his hand to the faithful, which remained yet in Babylon, and
to help them from thence, for albeit, it was a very hard matter, that the
remnaunt dispersed, should be gathered together into one body yet they stayed
themselves upon the power of GOD, who could as easily do that, as cause
rivers of waters to run through the South Countries.] Verse 5. They that sow
in tears [this is an other allegory as it were or similitude, in which the
people carried into captivity, are compared to needy husbandmen, who cast into
the ground for seed even that which was left them for the sustentation of
lyfe] shall [ vz. in good tyme] reap with joy [ q.d. their sorrow shall be
recompensed with gladness: in this other part of the similitude, he compares
the people, returning out of captivity to reapers or husbandmen, which are
glad, for the abundaunt harvest which they find: the meaning of altogether is,
that the Jews, who were heavy and sad, when they were carried captives into
Babylon, shall be joyful, when they shall have reaped, that is to say obtained
the fruit of their hope, that is a glorious deliverance. And this similitude
declares, that such as were vphelde by the promise of God, albeit, that in
extreme famine or need, they did cast seed into the ground, even as it were
at all adventure, yet that they were notwithstanding, nourished, and felt in
their hearts the hope of that 6. They [this word may either be referred to
the needy husbandman, that having by some mean or other gotten seed, are wont
to sow it with grief: or else to the people in captivity, who went thither
with heaviness of heart and abundaunce of tears. I refer it rather to the
people] went [ vz. out of their own land, into Chaldea, being carried
captiues] weeping [ i. sorrowful and heavy hearted, expressing that grief of
theirs by teares] and carried [ vz. with them into that strange countrey]
precious seed [ i. hope and faith, in the truth of Gods promises, which none
could take from them] but they shall return [ vz. from thence into their own
Countrey] with joy [ i. with great store of outward and inward comfort] and
bring [ vz. with them, after that they have gathered in their harvest, as it
were] their sheaues [or after some, their handfuls, whatsoever it is, he
means that they shall return again, with greater abundance of feeling, then
they carried with them, thus does GOD make his children to thrive under the
cross.

Verse 1. 2. Teaches us to be glad and to rejoice specially in the Lord and
his goodness, when it pleases him to offer us occasion, and to give us matter
of mirth: also it shows that Gods works for his children, are so plain and
sensible, that even the wicked are enforced to confess them. Verse 3. Teaches
us plainly and with thankfulness to acknowledge Gods graces bestowed upon
us. Verse 4. Teaches us that when GOD has delivered us from misery, yet we
should not forget our brethren, that lie plagued in the same wherein we were,
but that we should remember them in our earnest prayers to the Lord. Ver. 5.
and 6. Teach us that howsoever we be afflicted and made sorrowful for a time
yet a day will come wherein we shall rejoice and have our heads lifted up,
which time we ought to attend in all patience.

Psalm 127.
THis Psalm consists wholly of instruction and doctrine, 1.2. Secondlye he
declares particularly 3. to the end of the Psalm.]

The title. A song of degrees [this is expounded before Psalm 120. Solomon [i.
which Solomon made: some read, or for Solomon, as though David his father had
made it as an instruction for him: See somewhat of this matter: Psalm 72. in
the title thereof, whether Solomon made it, or David for his use, it is not
much material: this is to be marked, that here the Prophet would give us to
understand, that all things whatsoever must be directed and governed by God,
or else 1. Except the Lord build the house [by house he means not only
the frame of an house, wherein men dwell, but the persons commonly called the
household or family, yea and the very order and manner of government thereof:
and by building, he means, bless it, and further it, yea do all in all, in
it, and about it] they labor in vain [ i. they take pains to no end or
purpose, but lose their trauaile] that build it [ i. that endeavor or toil
about it, to build it, set it up, and bring it to good order] except the Lord
keep the City [ vz. from the rage and spoil of the enemy, understanding by
City, not only the houses and walls, but the people, and the whole common
wealth, yea the very form and order of their politic gouernement] the keeper
[ i. he that is appointed by office to keep it: meaning hereby not only the
watch, which order is observed in all towns of war, and those that suspect
the enemy, but even the judges and maiestrates, who also in the Scriptures are
called watchmen] watches in vain [ i. to no end or purpose, he means that
all the industry of men, either in maintaining or governing a family, or in
upholding a good policy and government in a City, shall be vain and
unprofitable, unless GOD 2. It is in vain [ vz. unless Gods special
blessing be present with you] for you [ vz. of what state or condition so ever
you bee] to rise early [ vz. to your labor and worke] and to lie down late [
i. to go to bed, from your worke] and eat the bread of sorrow [ i.
sustenaunce gotten with great pain and travail of the body, and great grief
of mind, so that they can not eat quietlye, with a mind free from labor,
care, and feare] but [ q.d. notwithstanding the ungodly have these griefs and
cares] he [ i. the Lorde] will surely [ i. without fayle] give [ vz. of his
mere liberality and mercie] rest [ i. both norishment and all good things
whatsoever, and yet not yielding unto them an idle life, or forbidding them
labor, because the faithful do willingly subject themselves thereto, through
the obedience of fayth] to his beloved [ vz. people, putting one for all, for
he speaks here in the singular, loved: by beloved ones, he means them
whom the Lord loves, and such also as being confirmed in his love toward
them, do 3. Behold [ q.d. consider it as a thing, most certain and
profitable] children [ i. posterity and issue, which it pleases GOD to give
in this life] are the inheritance of the Lord [ i. are a portion, that as it
were for an inheritance, the Lord gives unto vs] and the fruit of the womb [
i. children, see Micah. 6.7.] his reward [ i. a reward that he gives to men in
this life: and mark that in these three last verses, he makes three degrees,
as it were of gods blessing: in this ver. he mentions the blessing of
posterity, or generation, in ver. 4. he speaks of their good, liberal, and
obedient education: and verse 5 he shows what fruits come by them that are
well brought up. The hebrew word which we turn here reward, signifies every
good thing whatsoever that God gives unto men.] Ver. 4. As are the arrows [
i. the clean and well kept arrowes] in the hand of the i. so are the children
that are begotten in the flower of their parents age; meaning it of those
children, which are well brought up, that they are in a readiness always to
go and come, and to do all good things enjoined them. I know there is another
sense of these words as to the end he might the more commend this benefit of
God, he should commend them for their natural force, because their fathers
might strengthen and defend themselves by them, as it were by archers and good
men. But me thinks the other is a more fit sense for this place.] Verse 5.
Blessed is he [ vz. i. that is replenished and has his house garnished, with
such good children: for he continues in the similitude of shafts and arrows
still, which he had put down in the other verse before going] for [this is a
reason of the things which go before] they [ i. neither the fathers nor the
children, for so largely would I take it] shall not be ashamed [ i. they shall
not give place to their enemies but shall overcome them, yea and shall possess
the gates of their enemies, as is promised] when they speak with their enemies
[ vz. face to face] in the gate [ vz. either of the City if it be besieged, or
else in the place of public justice, because the judges were wont to fit in
the gates of the City to determine public causes: as Genesis 34, 20. Deuteronomy.
25, 7. 2, Samuel 15.2. and in many other places.

Ver. 1 Teaches us, that nothing either in house or city, 2 teaches us that
no means either lawful or unlawful can perform any thing except the Lords
blessing concur with the same, and yet we should not therefore neglect the
means, but use them always with prayer to God to bless them to us, so far
forth as may make for his glory and our comfort. Verse 3 teaches that
children are a blessing, which it pleases the Lord to bestow upon the sons
of men: not that we should conclude them to be accursed that want them. For
the want of blessing, yea of sundry blessing, makes not accursed, for who
then should be blessed? Verse 4 does teach us, both how good and profitable
holy education is to children, and also what fruit it yields, to wit, in the
children readiness and obedience to the parents. Verse 5 teaches us that good
children are a singular glory unto their parents, yea and they add estimation
unto themselves also.

Psalm 128.
1, 2, 3. In the second part, he assures them of the continuance of Gods
favor and blessing upon them and their posterity, ver. 4, 5, 6.

120.] Ver. 1. Blessed is every one [ vz. of what estate or condition soever he
be: and that word, blessed, contains in it abundance of blessedness: q.d. he
shall be plentifully blessed, whosoever he bee] that fears the Lord [ i. that
rightly serves and worshippeth him. He puts the beginning of Gods service
for the whole, for we can never rightly serve God til we have a reverent fear
of his majesty printed in our hartes] and walks in his ways [ i. that
keeps his commandments, and directs his life according to such laws as
God has prescribed. For God does not otherwise allow of our life, except it be
reformed according to his law, walking is put here as in sundry other places of
the Psalms, for order of lise and conuersation] 2. When thou eatest [this by
the consent of the best interpreters would be turned thus: for thou shall eat:
showing a reason as it were of his blessedness: and not as though the godly
man were not blessed, till he did eat the fruit of his labors, which many
times he does in this life, and so the blessing of God upon him in this life,
should be called into question and doubt, we will therefore turn it thus] for
thou [ vz. that have a care and conscience to fear God: and mark how he
passes from the third person to the second] shall eat [ vz. quietly through
Gods blessing and favor toward thee] meaning by eating, enjoying and living
by] the labors of thine hands [ i. that which thou thy self, with thy hand
have labored for: q.d. no foreign enemy, nor any extortioner shall spoil thee
of that, which thou have travailed for, but thou shall enjoy with all profit,
and use it with all pleasure] thou shall be blessed [ vz. with all manner of
blessings from the Lord both outward and inward, both bodily and spiritual:
and this is another grace that God will show to his seruants] and it shall be
well with thee [ vz. whersoeuer thou art whether at home in thy house, or
abroad in thy fields, as is promised Deuteronomy. 28, 3. meaning also by this manner
of speech, yt even all his affairs and businesses should mightily prosper,
and go well forward.] 3. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine [ i. shall bear
thee many children, as the fruitful vine does many clusters and bunches of
grapes, posteritye and seed is reckoned amongst the outward blessings that God
bestows upon his] on the sides of thine house [some expound it thus, nigh to
thy house. Methinketh he alludeth to the common custom of men, who plant vines
under their houses, and at the sides of them, specially at the sides of them,
where they may have the most sun, and by which they may be most defended from
the cold, for heat makes the Vine plentiful, fair and flourishing] and thy
children [ vz. which god shall give thee by her, shall be (what?) like the Olive
plants [ i. as fair and as pleasant, as the plants of young Olive trees, or
as the young trees themselves: yea I stretche it somewhat further, that is, they
shall be always green, fresh, flourishing, and increasing: see Psalm. 52, 8]
round about thy table [by this speech he expresses the great delight that
children bring unto their fathers, while they see them, as many in number, so
neat and trim, standing always as it were in their fight] Ver. 4. Le [here
he stirs up the faithful, both to behold, and also to acknowledge vz.
without all doubt] thus [ vz. as is before expressed and as hereafter
followeth] shall the man be blessed [ i. every man, as verse 1 of this Psalme]
yt fears the Lord [see also ver. 1 of this Psalm. Now we must know that he
promises the faithful earthly blessings from God, not that they should stay,
and rest themselves there, but to the end that by the same they might be lifted
up to the meditation of ye heavenly life.] Verse 5. The Lord [ vz. whom we
serve and i. out of the place wherein he dwells and is worshipped: and here
he puts the faithful in mind that it is because of the couenaunte, which
he has made with the^, that he bestows these graces upon them, and not for
any merit or worthiness in them] shall bless thee [ vz. with his grace and
favor, and that so largely and plentifully, that] thou shall see [ i. both
with the eyes of thy body and with the eyes of thy faith: yea that thou thy
self shall enioye] the wealth [ i. the prosperity, peace, and all manner of
goodness, see Psalm. 122, 9.] of Jerusalem [i. of the City and Church of God,
because God was served therein: so that he descends from particular
blessings, to the common blessing of the whole Church, from whence as it were
from a fountayn, the particular blessing floweth] all the days of thy life [
i. so long as thou shall live in this life.] Ver. 6 Yea thou shall see thy
childrens children [ i. thou shall perceive the singular 20. in the fifth
commandment: secondly by the plentiful increase of thy posterity and seede]
and peace [ i. all manner of blessing and goodness, as Psalm 122.6.7,] upon
Israel [ i. upon that people which serve God sincerely, see Psalm. 124.1.

Ver. 1. Teaches us first, that such as serve God, 2. teaches us that not
only gains gotten by labor are gods blessing but to have the fruition and use
of them, after we have obtained them, is gods blessing also. Ver. 3 Teaches us
that the fruitfulnes of our wives, and store of children, is a blessing from
the Lord likewise. Ver. 4. Teaches us that the blessings which God has
promised us, shall be most assuredly performed. Ver. 5. Teaches us, that this is
the blessing of al blessings in this life, to see the flourishing and
prosperity of the Church. Ver. 6. teaches us that old age, and large
posterity both, are good blessings from the Lord.

Psalm 129.
1, Secondly in the spirit of Prophecy as it were, they do foretell the
assured destruction and overthrow of all their enemies: from verse 4 to the
end of the Psalm.

120 in the Title thereof. Ver. 1. They [ i. our wicked and cruel enemies, whom
as a man would say he will not vouchsafe to name] have oftentimes [ vz.
heretofore, and eue^ at this present one time after another doe] afflicted [ i.
troubled, grieved and persecuted, and that after sundry sorts, and by sundry
means and wayes] me [ i. us, he speaks of the holy body of the faithful,
as it were but of one person, by reason of the unity and fellow-like feeling
that is or should be amongst them] from my youth [ i. even from the beginning
of the world when the Church then began] may Israel [ i. the faithful people,
as Psalm 124, 1, also Psalm 128, 6.] now [ i. even at this present. So we see
that the Church counts those afflictions, that the faithful have endured
before, her own, even as those which she presently suffereth] say [ vz.
justly, rightly, and upon very good cause. They mean by this and that which
follows after, that the Church thinking diligently upon ancient examples and
experiences might easily gather both after what sort God had exercised his
people from the first beginning of the world, as from Abel, Abraham and other
Patriarks from whom the church came, and also how they had a blessed end of
all their afflictions: and this is done to the end, that by the former
deliueraunces, they might in a good hope comfort and confirm themselves, that
God would deliver them from the like in time to come.] 2. They have oftentimes
afflicted me from my youth [this is the same with verse 1, the repeating of it
serves to this end, both to show that they were sore afflicted in deed, and
also to set out the assuredness of their deliueraunce] but they could not [
vz. for all their subtlety, and for all their power] prevail [ vz. at any
time or by any meanes] against me [the reason, because 124, 1, 2.] Verse 3. The
Plowers [ i. the emies which God did use as husbandmen to plow and till his
Churche] plowed upon my back [ i. went quite and clean over us, by which he
notes both the weak estate of the Church, and the hard hartednesse of the
enemies.] and made long furrows [ vz. upon us, not sparing us any whit at all,
for all the miserye that we are in. In this verse he compares the people of
God to a field, which men till and plough, that he might the better show that
the cross has always bin fastened upon the back of the Church: meaning that
they suffered many grievous things from the enemies, and that they did both a
long season, and very sorely afflict them.] Verse 4. But the righteous Lord [
i. he that deals and vz. even in sunder, and that of his goodness toward
us, through his almightye power] the cords [ i. all the powers of the wicked,
whether they consisted in counsels, purposes, practices, or any such like] of
the wicked [ i. which the wicked men did imagine and use. All tends to this
end, that here he puts down a comfort, and shows that God has very
easily and with little ado, repressed the rage and cruelty of his enemies,
and set his own people at liberty, as if one should cut in sunder all that
belongs to the horses that go to plowe, which as I take it in some country
they call the geares, and so by yt means, the plow and the owner thereof
should stand still, and the horses be at liberty from their labors: and so he
continues still in his allegory or Metaphor.] Verse 5. They that hate Sion [
i. the Church of God, as Psalm 125, 1. also 128, 5. Now if the haters shall be
punished, hate being an affection of the heart only, how shall they escape
which put their hatred in execution and practice?] shall be ashamed [ vz. not
only before God, but even before men: and that word, all, notes of what state
or condition soever they be, whether high or low rich or pore, etc. for with
God there is no respect of persons] and turned backward [ vz. as those that in
the day of battle come forth with fierceness, and yet through a sudden fear
are glad to turn their backs, so that in this verse he sets out the ruin
and destruction of the enemies, which thing also he does in the next verses,
amplyfiing it by similitudes or metaphors taken from husbandry.] Ver. 6. They [
i. that hate Sion, and such other wicked and ungodly vz. which groweth] on the
house top [as we see by daily experience that grass grows on the tops of
houses and in gutters, specially in those houses which are not much inhabited]
which withers [ vz. through the great and parching heat of the sunne] before
it come forth [ vz. so far as that it may be cut down with the sith or
sickle. This is the first allegory or metaphor wherein the wicked are
resembled to hay or grass, by the which he means that they shall presently
perish, though they be lifted up very high even as the grass or herb that
grows upon houses incontinently withers, because it has not earth
sufficient under it, to give it moisture and nourishment, wherefore look by
how much they shall through ye greatness of their pride, draw nigh to the
Sun, so much the more sodainlye shall they be consumed, because they have no
root.] Verse 7. whereof [ i. wherewith] i. he that should mow it] fills not
his hand [ q.d. it is so skarse, that he can not take a handful of it] neither
the glainer [ vz. which comes after the mower, and looks more narrowly] his
lap [ i. can get any thing to speak of: this may have a double sense, and
both good, though I confess there is but one right sense of all scriptures:
for it may be referred unto the grass, spoken of before in the house top:
and then his meaning is that it comes not to any ripeness, in so much that
it can neither be mowed nor gathered. but this I approve not, because men use
not to mow grass on the house top, nor yet to gather it to any vse] or it
may be another Metaphor taken from Corn that comes thinly up, here an ear
and there an ear, noting that the wicked through Gods judgments should be
brought to such a wasting, that very few or none of them should be left: and I
take to be the more fit sense.] 8. Neither they which go by [ vz. the mowers
and reapers] say the blessing of the Lord be upon you [ i. the Lord bless you
and your harvest, because they cannot say so, for they see Gods hand upon them
in scarsitie: Those that passed by were wont to wish well to the harvest
workers, as appears Ruth 2, 4, so that this is as much: q. d. They shall not
pray: no not for the work men, much less wish well to the harvest it selfe]
or [this particle shows that it is an other kind of speech, that they used,
to the harvest men] we bless you [ i. we wish you good] in the name of the
Lord [ i. through his majesty, power and goodness.

1 sets out the continual both malice and assaults of ye wicked against the
godly. Ver. 2 shows that they can never prevail utterly against them. Ver.
3. declares the hard hartednes and unmercifulness of ye wicked. Ver. 4 teaches
us, that God does frustrate all the purposes and attempts of the ungodly
whatsoever. Ver. 5 contains the destruction of them that persecute ye church.
Ver. 6 shows that the ungodly are of no long continuance, because they have
no deep root. Ver. 7 shows, that the ungodly and wicked are utterly
unprofitable to every good thing. Ver. 8 teaches us, that it is a testimony of
Gods great curse upon us, to want either the prayers or good wishes of the
godly.

Psalm 130.
1, 2, 3, 4. In the second he testifyeth his faith and patience, exhorting the
faithful continually to hang upon the Lord, from ver. 5. to the end of the
Psalm.

120.] Ver. 1. Out of the deep places [ i. out of most deep and huge dangers,
it is a metaphor taken from waters ready to drown a man, see Psalm. 69, 1, 2.]
have I called unto thee Lord [ i. earnestlye prayed unto thee, see Psalm. 116.3,
4. so that we see that the Prophet when he felt himself sore oppressed with
distress, yea as it were plunged in a gulf of perplexity, calls earnestly
upon God, for the greater the afflictions are which Gods children endure, the
more earnest are their supplications.] Ver. 2. Lord hear my voice [ i. grant
me the prayers which I express with my voice] let thine ears attend [ i.
harken diligently, meaning that he would have the Lord by effect to show, that
he had carefully heard his prayers] to the voice of my prayers [ i. to the
words which I use in my prayers, because the voice is a mean to utter 3. If
thou O Lord [ vz. which see and know all thinges] straightly markest [ i.
narrowlye weighest or keep as a man would a register or reckoning]
iniquities [ i. the infinite numbers of sins committed against thee and
others, for so I take the word in the plural number] who shall stand [ vz. in
thy presence or before thee, see Psalm 1, 5. q.d. who is he that shall be
able to bear thy judgment, or the least part thereof? Verily there is not
one amongst all men, that either have bin, are or shall be* He means then that
we can not be just but by the remission of sins: and I take this verse to
contain a reason as it were of his former prayer: q.d. Spare us, not for our
own sake, for there is nothing in us that can move thee to pity us, but for
thine own mercy sake, as in the next verse.] Verse 4. But i. thou have infinite
and abundaunt mercy] that thou may be feared [ vz. amongst men: and he
puts fear in this place, for the reuerente and sincere service of GOD: so
that he does as it were desire GOD to have regard of his own glory, which
consysteth in the faith and truth of his promises, and in his worship and
service, both which should utterly decay, if the Lord did straightlye
observe our iniquities, and destroy us in his judgment therefore: and so he
shows that there is no reverence of God in men's hearts, till his mercies be
sensiblye felt and known which is the foundation thereof, and by fear he
means in this place, the reverent fear of Children, and not the slavish
fear of Servant.] Verse 5. I have vz. heretofore, and yet at this present
do, for under this he comprehends also the present time] waited [ i.
trusted and hoped, and have obtained yt which I hoped for] my soul has waited
[ vz. upon the Lord, as in the next verse. He means by this that he trusted
in God not feignedly, or in hypocrisy, but heartily and from the deep
affection of his heart, whereby he shows that the seat of sure hope is in the
hart] and I have trusted [ vz. stedfastly] in his word [ i. in all his word
generallye, but specially in his promises made unto me. Meaning that as he had
before trusted and obtained favor, so he would do still.] Verse 6, My soul
wayteth on the Lord [see this expounded before verse 5. the i. that watch that
is appointed to watch til the morning, and has no body to ease him from his
watch al night long] watches for the morning [ i. for that time, wherein in
the morning he shall leave his watch: q.d. I am more desirous to enjoy God and
the favors of his grace, then the watchmen which are weary with watching all
night, do desire to see the breaking up of their watch in the morning.] Verse
7, i. Gods faithful people, as before Psalm 129, and afterward Psalm. 131,
3, and in this verse he exhorts all the Church by this example to ha^g upon
God] wayt [ vz. with patience] on the Lord [ vz. only, and no other but him]
for with the Lord is mercy [ i. he is gracious and merciful, as before verse
4 of this Psalm: and this is a reason why he would have the faithful to hang
upon the Lord] and with him is great redemption [ vz. proceeding from that
mercy of his, as the stream from the Fountain. Meaning by that word great
redemption, that the Lord has diverse means to deliver his by, and to draw
them out of all dangers wherein soever they shall be.] Ver. 8. And he [ vz.
himself, and no other for him] shall [ vz. most certainlye and assuredly
redeem [ i. set free and deliuer] Israel [ i. his faithful people, which
shall have their trust in him] from all his iniquities [ i. not only from all
their sins, but also from all dangers and distresses whereinto their sins
might cast them. For so largely do I rest persuaded that the word should be
taken in this place.

1 teaches us that the more afflictions increase upon us, the more earnest and
often should we be with the Lord by prayer. Verse 2 teaches us, that because
sin cleaves fast unto us, and our prayers pierce little or nothing that
therefore we should continually call upon the Lord to hear our prayers. Verse
3 teaches us in our prayers to have recourse unto Gods mercy only: also that
no man is able to stand as righteous in the presence and judgment of God.
Verse 4 shows that Gods mercy should not breed carelessness in us, but care
and conscience to walk before him in fear and trembling. Verse 5 teaches
that there was never yet any one confounded, that did vnfeignedlye put his
trust in the Lord, Verse 6 teaches us earnestly to hunger and thyrste after
the Lord. Verse 7 teaches us to provoke others as well as our selves, with
patience to wait upon the Lord. Verse 8 teaches us that it is God only that
can deliver from sin, and from all those punishments which sin has pulled
upon us.

Psalm 131.
1, 2. Secondly he exhorts the faithful by his example, to strive to
patience verse 3.

120 also Psalm 122 in the title thereof.] Verse 1. Lord [ vz. whom I serve:
q.d. thou know whether it be true or no that I speak, though men will not
believe me] mine heart is not haughty [he begins with the fountain of
pride, which is in the heart: q.d. Thou know that I have not so much as in
heart affected the Kingdom, or Saules ruin, or taken in hand any great
matter, but by a steadfast faith have wholye stayed my self upon thee, and
rested in the obedience of thy will] neither are mine eyes lofty [from the
inward which is the heart, he comes to the outward which are the eyes: q.d.
that there was not in his visage or countinance, any sign of pride, but that
outwardly he gave an evident testimony of the humility of his heart inwardly]
neither have I walked in great matters [ i. I have not attempted high
enterprises by fact, without the reach of my calling] and hid from me [ i. I
have not assayed to look into such things as pass the light 2. Surely [
q.d. this is most certain, and thou know it though I would not report it] I
have behaved my self [ vz. both outwardly and inwardly] like one weaned from
his mother [ i. even as a little child which is humble and lowly, in which
respect our savior says, except we receive the kingdom of God as a little
child, we shall not enter therein. Mar. 10, 15. and Paul, be not children in
understanding, but as concerning maliciousness be children, 1 Cor. 14, 20.]
and keept silence [ i. speak very little or nothing] I am in my self [ i. in
mine own persuasion, and that in the upright testimony of a good conscience
before God] as one that is weaned [ i. as a young child in respect of
affections and wicked desires, for children commonly are not very old when they
are weaned.] Ver. 3. Let Israel 130. ver. 7.] from henceforth and for ever [
i. from this time and continually.

Ver. 1 teaches us to avoid pride and arrogancye, 2 teaches us, to strive to
all humility and lowliness of affection. Ver. 3 teaches us, not only with
patience for ye time to wait upon the Lord, but to do it continually and for
ever.

Psalm 132.
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. Di*
In the first is contained a prayer for David, the Lords Priests, and the
faithful 1. to the end of the 10. In the David and his posterity, and also to
the whole church generally from ver. 11. to the end of the Psalm.

The Title is expounded before in the title of Psalm. 120.] Ver. 1. Lord [ vz.
i. declare by effects, that thou reme^brest, and beholdest him, and that thou
do approve the purpose of his mind, in granting him his request, for
otherwise God never forgets, specially those that are his: see Genesis 8.1.]
David [vz. thine anointed king and seruaunt] and al his affliction [ i. al and
every one of ye troubles which he has endured, specially the great care of his
heart for the building of thy Temple, of which see 2. Sam. 7, 1, 2, 3. but
specially yt which follows in this Psalm. and all this he alleges not as
boasting of any thing he did, but yt seeing ye Lord merciful unto him, he
might thereby take an argument of good things. Ver. 2. who i. bound himself
unto him by an oath, and that to this end, yt thereby he might be ye more
carefully bound to perform ye good which he had promised, see Psalm. 119, 6] and
vowed a vow [ i. promised and that certainly: this difference I take to be
between an oath and a vow, yt the one is made with calling god to witness, and
the other is a solemn protestation or promise only, yet so, that if it be made
concerning good things, and by them yt have power in themselves to perform it,
it binds ye conscience, see Number. 30 through out] to ye mighty god of Iaakob
[i. to God, who by his mighty force and power, did deliver the Patriarche
Iaakob from all his daungers] faying [ vz. unfeignedly and from his 3. I will
not enter [ vz. willingly and gladly] into the tabernacle of my house [ i. into
any part of the house, or the house it self, which I have caused to be newlye
builded, see 2. Samuel 5, 9, also 1 Chronicles 15, 1.] nor come upon my pallet
or bed [ vz. which are set and made in my new house to lie down 4. Nor
suffer mine eyes to sleep [ vz. very much, specially in that house which I
have newly made] nor my eye liddes to slumber [ q.d. I will be continually
watchful and careful, for to build God a house. The Prophet means not in all
this, that he was so proud as to think yt either by oath or vow he could
prescribe God a law: neither yet that he was so rash as to promise that he
would dwell openly in the air, and not sleep neither day nor night, till the
arc were brought to a place, which he would prepare for it, which could not
be very quickly done, for that had but after a sort to have killed himself, but
this he means: that he made religion and conscience of it, to go into his
new house, unless he had prepared a place for God's ark to rest in also: q.d.
I must not be more careful for my self, either in respect of 5. Until I
find out [ i. until I shall by searching find out] a place [ i. a fit, meet,
and convenient place, for otherwise there were places ynow] for the Lord [ vz.
to dwell and rest in] not that God is tied to any place, for the heaven of
heavens can not contain him, but he means the Ark, which is called the Lord
himself, because it was a most manifest testimony of his majesty and power] an
habitation [ i. a place to rest and dwell in, that it may no longer be carried
from place to place as it has bin] for ye mighty God of Iaakob [i. for that
great God whom Iaakob worshipped, or else for him that saved and delivered
Iaakob from many 2.] Ver. 6. Lo, we [ i. both I and others] heard of it [ i.
not of the place, but of the arke] in Ephrathah [ i. that it was Ephrathah: I
take this rather as Immanuell does to be the name of the country wherein the
tribe of Ephraim dwelt then of any one particular place: yet so, that it should
note Shilo in the Tribe of Ephraim, where the Ark of the Lord was kept, from
the days of Iehoushua until the death of Helie the Priest, at what time it
was taken by the Philistines: see 1 Samuel chapiters 1, 2, 3, and 4.] and found
it [ i. the Arke] in the fields of the Forest [or as Immanuel turns it, and
as it is in the hebrew text, in the fields of Iahar [ i. in the city of Iahar:
which was situate both in a plain and woody place, and therefore is turned here
in the fields of ye forest: in which respect also it has several names: for
of ye woods it is called Kiriah Iearim, that is, the city of woods: and of
the plain or field it is called Baal, or Baalah, or Kiriah in Baalah, and
sometimes Bala of Judah, that is plain place: for the sense of this place, see
1. Sam. 7, 1, etc. and for the city it self, see Iehosh. 15.60. where it is
reckoned up among the cities allotted to the tribe of Judah, and has two names.
I know other men give other senses, 7. We will enter [ vz. cherefully and
gladlye] into his tabernacles [ i. into the places where this arc shall rest,
and he himself be religiously served, which in Psalm. 100. ver, 4. are called
his gates and his courts] and worship [ vz. him] before his footestoole [ i.
before the ark of the covenant, which is so called to put the faithful in
mind, that they must not stay in the beholding of ye ark only, as though god
were enclosed therein, but yt they must lift up their hearts to heaven to worship
God there with all reverence: as though GOD stretched his feet from the heaven
to the earth, that he might lift us up to heaven. Now he must be sought to in
Christ, who is the very Arc of Couenaunte in deed,] Verse 8. Arise [ vz.
now, at the earnest prayer of thy people] O Lord [this is to be referred both
to God himself, and to the Arc also as may appear by that which follows in
the Verse. See the word, Lord, also put for Arc verse 5 of this Psalme] to come
into thy rest [ i. into the place of thy rest: because that before the Arc
stayed not long in one place, as may appear by the continual concourse of
the stories] thou, and the Arc of thy strength [ i. both thou thy self and
the visible sacrament, as it were, of thy strength and power: and he calls it
the ark of Gods strength, because that in and from the Arc the Lord did
plainly declare his majesty, power, etc] Ver. 9 i. the Priests which thou have
chosen unto thy self, to be the administers of holy things] be clothed [ i.
compassed about on every side, and let it cleave and stick fast to the^ as
apparel does to ye body] with righteousness [ vz. both outward and inward: q.d.
Let the^ yt are sanctified to this great office, be more and more sanctified]
and let thy saints [ i. thy people whom thou have sanctified to thy self]
rejoice [ vz. greatly and that for this, because the Ark shall stay in one
place, and not flit as heretofore it has done, so yt here he prays both for
Priests and people.] Ver. 10. For thy servant David's sake [ i. for him and
those promises which David christ ye son of David, who also in ye Prophets is
called by that name, as Hosea 3, 5, in ye letter ye first sense is most plain
he speaking of himself in the third person: in the doctrine, ye other is very
true] refuse not the face of thine anointed [ i. of me whom thou haste
appointed to be King, understanding by not refusing his face, the granting of
him his requests: for here he prays ye Lord to be merciful to his priests,
and people, and not to reject ye prayers which the king makes for the^.] Ver.
11. The vz. himself] has sworn in truth [ i. has truly and justly sworn to
perform whatsoever he has promised] unto David [i. unto me, speaking still of
himself in the third person] and will not shrink from it [ i. will not at any
hand, or by any means go back from his word: see Psa. 110.4. and note that God
swears, not for any inconstancy in his word, but for the strengthening of our
fayth] of the fruit of thy body [ i. some one or other of thy children, see
Psalm. 127, 3] will I set upon thy throne [ i. I will establishe them as thy
lawful heirs in thy kingdom after thee, meaning that he would provide yt one
of his children and posterity should continually succeed him in ye kingdom.]
Ver. 12. If thy sons [ i. thy posterity: David establishing ye covenant with him
and his seed] keep [ vz. unfeignedly and with all their hart] my covenant [
i. the couenante which I have made with them, and is passed between them and
me] and my testimonies [ i. my law and word, and that every particular piece of
it, for so much do I think does the plural number in this place signifie] that
I shall teach them [ vz. by the ministry of my servant, the Priests and
Prophets] their sons also [ i. their posterity, even to many generations]
shall sit upon thy Throne [ i. shall succeed thee and them in the Kingdom,
putting throne, a part of the kingdom for the whole: and it is called David's
throne or kingdom, because he was ye first man of al his race yt God advanced
to that high honor] for ever [ i. for a long season referred to David and his
natural seed, but for all eternity referred to Christ, see these words
expounded 1 King. 2, 4, also 1 King. 8, 25, also 2. Chron. 6, 16.] Verse 13.
For the Lord [ vz. himselfe] has chosen [ vz. of his great mercy] Sion [ i.
his Church or Jerusalem, vz. to be the place where his arc should abide, and
he himself be serued] and loved [ vz. of his own good pleasure, and not for
any excellency or worthiness yt was in it] to dwell in it [ i. to remain 14.
This [ vz. place] is my rest [ i. is the place wherein I will have mine arc to
staye] for ever [ i. for a long time if we refer it to the Material
Jerusalem, but continuallye, even to all eternitye, if we refer it to the
Churche] here will I dwell [ i. in this place I will give, of my presence,
power, and continual aboade] for I have a delight therein [ i. I have
delighted and loved to dwell there, as in the 78, 68.] Verse 15. I [ vz. who am
able to do it] will surely [ i. without all fayle] bless [ vz. plentifully and
abundantly] her vitailes [ i. all things that I shall give her, necessary for
the maintaynaunce of this present life: q.d. I will not only give them
abundaunce of vitailes, but I will make their meat and drink profitable unto
them] and will satisfye [ vz. with abundaunce and plentye] her poor [ i. the
poor which shall be in Sion, or in the Churche] with bread [ i. with things
necessary for the nourishmente of this life. He joins here spiritual graces
to the temporal blessings, declaring that he will so provide, even for the
poorest of them, that they 16. And [ vz. I my self, who am the only Lorde]
will clothe [see before verse 9. of this Psalme] her Priests [ i. those that
attend upon holy exercises and services in hir] with salvation [ i. with
deliverance from dangers and distresses: he means that he will defend and
keep under his sauegarde, the ministers of his Church, and his saints [ i. the
people of Sion or of the Church: see before verse 9] shall shout for joy [ vz.
of that goodness and grace which GOD shall show to the whole Church, and
every particular member of it: and this phrase, shouting for joy, or as it is
in the hebrew, in singing shall sing, does not only note the great joy which
17. There [ i. in Sion, Jerusalem, or in the Churche] will I make [ i. cause
through my power and goodnes] the horn of David [i. the power, might, kingdom.
etc, of David my seruant] to hud [ i. to prosper and increase: it is a metaphor
taken from beasts, who have snags in their heads as dear have, which are unto
the^ in steed of bows as it were, by which he notes their flourishing and
prospering] for I have ordained [ vz. in mine eternal counsel] a light [ vz.
even in that place, meaning by light the regal dignity and glory, and the
godly person that should execute the same, as 2 Samuel 21.17. 1 King. 11, 36.]
for mine anointed [ i. for David my servant, whom I have appointed to be
King: some expound it thus: q.d. I will bring to pass yt the kingly dignity,
shall not so be quenched, but yt it shall always show forth some light, the
other sense is better in my mind.] Ver. 18. His i. David's enemies, and the
enemies of his godly posteritie] will I clothe with shame [ i. compass them
about with confusion of face, so yt they shall not dare to lift up their heads,
meaning further yt he would even confound and destroy them] but on him [ i. him
himself, and his posterity] shall his crown flourish [ i. his kingdom shall
continue flourishing and not wither away, but be preserved always in his force
and beauty, and this was fully accomplished in Christ.

Verse 1 teaches us to beseech the Lord to declare by effect yt he thinks
upon us. 2 teaches us to bind our selves by all lawful means we can to the
obedience and service of our God. Ver. 3 teaches us yt we should little
esteem all the pleasures of this life, in respect of God and his glory. Ver. 4
teaches us, yt we should make but little account of profitable and necessary
things in respect thereof. Ver. 5 teaches us to ioyn our selves to ye
exercises and assemblies of gods congregation. Ver. 6 does commend unto us the
care of Gods Church, religion and service. Ver. 7 teaches us, not only to
hear of Gods Church, but when we have heard of it, to labor the finding of
it. Ver. 8 teaches us to pray ye Lord to be continually present with us, and
to beseech him to give us all the signs and testimonies of his favor. Ver. 9
teaches all but specially Kings, to pray for ye ministers and officers of Gods
Church, and for the whole congregation. Ver. 10 teaches us to offer up all our
prayers in the name and meditation of Christ Jesus only. Ver. 11 shows how
that God for the strengthening of our faith in ye truth of his word, does even
bind himself unto us by an oath. Ver. 12 teaches us, that albeit the covenant
that God has made with us, be of it self and as it proceeds from God, free,
yet it is delivered under certain conditions, which he would have to be
observed, that we in some measure performing ye same, might be more and more
confirmed in the truth of it.] Ver. 13 shows us, that gods free love is the
chief cause of al his graces toward the Church. Ver. 14 teach us, that Gods
grace toward his Church is unchangeable and abides for ever. Ver. 15 sets
forth Gods great liberality toward the Church, and his singular favor, who
will not destitute, no not the meanest or poorest. Ver. 16 teaches us even in
Gods own example to have a singular care to preserve a lawful and ordinary
ministry, as without the which the Church can not be. Ver. 17 teaches us
that the prosperity of al Kings and kingdoms, comes from Gods blessing only.
Ver. 18 teaches us, that such as rise up against lawful magistrates, shall
never prosper, but come to decay.

Psalm 133.


120. and also Psalm. 122. in their titles.] Verse 1 Behold [ q.d. Let it be
well considered and weighed] how good [ i. profitable and necessary, as Psalm.
92.1.] and how comely [ i. pleasant and excellent: q.d. If either profit or
pleasure can allure you to the embracing of it, you have both] brethren [ i.
not only natural brethren, but the sons of God and members of his Church, and
partakers of the selfsame doctrine and life in Christ] to dwell even together [
vz. not only in one house, but specially to be of one affection and consent,
and to practice fellowship amongst themselves, even as God 2. It [ i. brotherly
love and mutual consent] is like [ vz. in excellency and sweet sauour] to the
precious ointment [ vz. which was appointed for the priests to annoint them
withal, see Exodus 30, 22, 23, etc.] upon the head [ i. powered upon the head of
the high Priest] that runs down upon the beard [by this and that which
follows, he notes as I take it, the plenty and abundaunce of it] even unto
Aarons bearde [ vz. who was the high Priest, and for whose anointing, this
Oil was specially made] which [ vz. oyle] went down, on the border, or
rather unto the border, such plenty and abundance there was of it] of his
garments [ i. Aarons garments, of which you may read Exodus 28, 2, 3, etc. The
meaning is: q.d. as it is pleasant and delightful to have Aaron wholly
anointed with that holy oil, and all his garments, and as it is a sweet
smelling favor to all that are round about him: so very pleasant is the body
and fellowship of those that agree and meet together in Gods name, whom God
assuredly beautifyeth with his own presence, and the most sweet smelling
gifts of his spirit; meaning also that me^ shall be utterly without favor unless
they be perfumed with the odor of peace, 3. And [ vz. it is. For this is
another comparison or similitude that he uses to express the excellencye of
this speech by In the former he commends it for ye sweetness and
pleasantness of it: in this he commends it for the fruit and profit which
comes by it] as ye dew of Hermon [ i. as the moisture yt falls from heaven
upon that great hill of Hermon. Of one hill of this name, which Hermon the
Sidonians call Shirion, and the Amorits call it Shenir, we read Deuteronomy. 3, 9, and
Iohoshua 13, 5, and this name is given sometimes to other hills and mountains
of the land of Judah. Some are of this opinion, yt there be two mountains of
this name, the one very nigh to Gelboe and Jordan, the other is much more high,
and stands nigh to ye country of Trachenitis: and they gather it, because
David says Psalm. 42.6. from the land of Jordan and Hermonim, using a nowne
plural diminutiue as it should seem. Othersome say thus, these high mou^tayns
are a part of Libanus, and from thence stretch themselves southward, and
separate ye Land of Bashan from the nether Sir: they compass the land of
Galile on ye northside and toward ye east. We must likewise note that there is
another mountain named Hemon, in the frountirs of the tribe of Issachar, at ye
foot whereof is the town named Naim, see also what is said before, Psa. 89,
12, whatsoever it be, this se^ce I would give: q.d. as ye dew and wet yt
falls down from heaven upon Hermon, and desce^deth from thence into ye plain
of Bashan, makes yt plain country fertile: so does brotherly love bring with
it great fruit and profite] which falls upon the mountayns of Sion [this
place is ill translated, and seems to carry with it this sense, as though ye
dew and wet of Hemon, should come from thens to the mountains of Sion, which
has in it no sense at all: wherefore we must either mend the translation, or
else supply somewhat thus] and as ye dew which falls [ vz. from heaven, this
being indeed another similitude, to expres the same thing, 1. brotherlye
co^cord] upon the mountains of Sion [he speaks of mountains in ye plural
number, because there were many mountains therabout, as psalm. 125, 2: q.d. as
ye dew and moisture falling upon those mou^tains also, makes the^ fruitful, so
does brotherly unity and concord make the^, through Gods blessing, amongst whom
it is sincerely observed, fruitful and plentiful in good works toward God, and
in him and for him toward men, and one of them toward another] for [this is a
reason why they shall become fruitful, to wit, because ye lord has so promised
and appointed] there [ vz. where brethren dwell and consent together, as ver. 1.
or we may say that he puts the place for the persons] the Lord [ vz.
himself, who can not be deceived, neither will deceaue] appointed [ vz. to pour
forth upon them, and that from himself] the blessing [ i. singular blessings,
both concerning this life, as peace and quietnes] and life for ever [ i. not
only long life here, but also eternal life, for brotherly love is a sure seal
thereof as 1 Ioh. 3.14.

Ver. 1 teaches us, 2 teaches us that brotherly love is not only pleasant to
them that religiously esteem and keep it, but to others which are about them,
as sweet perfumes and ointments are, not only to persons using them, but to
others nigh them. Ver. 3 teaches us that unfeigned love has the promises both
of this life, and of that to come.

Psalm 134
IN this Psalm the Prophet does first exhort both Priests and people, to
praise the Lord for his mercies, ver. 1.2. 3.

120.] Ver. 1. Behold [ q.d. seeing, O holy Church, thy body is so knit
together in Christ, and abounds with so many blessings, as is declared in
the other Psalm, go to, and praise ye Lord] praise ye the Lord [ vz. for his
infinite mercies and great loue] all ye servants of the Lord [ i. of what
state or condition soever ye be, whether ye be Priests or people, but
specially the Priests and Levites, to whom he gives this title, by reason of
the offices whereunto they were appointed, and that therefore they to the end
also, that by their example they might draw on others to do the like, should be
so much the more carefully stirred up to the spiritual exercises of true
religion] ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord [ i. which do not
only serve God in the day time, but in the night keeping watch and ward, about
the temple of the Lord, see Number. 18.1.2, etc. 1. Chron. 9.33. And though it be
true that many of the people had that affection to remain day and night in the
temple, as it is reported of Anna, Luke 2.37. yet I refer it in this place only
to the Priests and Levites: and when he says stand, he means their
continual aboade there as it were. And by house of the Lord he means
either the 2. Lift up your hands, [ i. pray and give thanks: the sign of
prayer, or an outward gesture used in it, put for the thing it self, as
Psalm 141, 2. also 1 Timothy 2, 8.] to the sanctuarye [ i. toward the
Sanctuarye, meaning the place where the Arc was, and the Arc it self, out of
which God had promised to answer his people, and to hear their prayers] and
praise the Lord [ vz. for his mercyes, as verse 1. and here he shows that
the principal end of outward ceremonies, is to set forth Gods praise and
glory.] Verse 3. The Lord that made heaven and earth [ i. the God of all
majesty, glory, power, etc. see Psalm 121, 2, also Psalm 124, 8,] bless
thee [ vz. with all goodness and fauour] out of Sion [where the arc the sure
testimonye of his favor and presence was: so that here they acknowledge in
the first place his power, and in the second his fatherlye love: which two
must never be sundered, but always joined together for the strengthening of
the faith of gods children. And whether he speaks this in the person of the
Priests, whose office it was to bless the people, as Numbers 6, 23, or in his
own person, as praying for them, and testifying his great love unto them, it is
not much material.

1. teaches us to exhort and provoke all men, yea the very ministers of God if
they be negligent, to the performance of their duty. Ver. 2 teaches us that
Gods children, should always join prayer and thanksgiving unto God together.
Ver. 3 teaches us in all holy affection and unfeigned love, to pray for others
as for our selves.

Psalm 135.
IN my judgment, 1. to the end of the 12. In the second he shows what great
difference 13. to the end of the Psalm.

The title is] praise ye the Lord [see this expounded before, Psalm 106.
113. in the titles, so that this title seems to comprehend the argument of
the Psalm, as though the whole Psalm did nothing else but provoke men to
praise God.] Ver. 1. Praise the name of the Lord [ i. his majesty, power, 20.1.
and Psalm. 124.8.] ye servants of the Lord [this I refer generally to all, as
Psalm. 134.1. but specially to the priests] praise him [this doubling of the
exhortation, seems to set out, as men's dulnes and unaptness to the same, so
the excellency of the thing it self.] Ver. 2. Ye that stand in the house of
the Lord [ i. ye priests, i. in those courts, that did appertein to ye
temple of the Lord, amongst which the people had some, which place is called 2.
Chro. 4.9. the great court: and this is the reason, why though I refer it
chiefly to the Priests and Levites, yet I would have it also to be
understood, that this exhortation is directed to the people likewise.] Verse 3.
vz. for his wonderful kindness and love, see Psalm. 134.1.] for the Lord is good
[ vz. even of his own nature: and from that abundaunt goodness which is in
him, flows all goodness, which we have: and this is as it were the first
general cause why men should praise him] sing praises unto his name [ i.
extol his majesty, power etc. as before ver. 1.] for it is a comely thing [ vz.
to do so, meaning by comely, pleasant and profitable, 133.1. also Psalm. 92.1.]
Ver. 4. For the Lord [ vz. whom I exhort you to praise and magnifie] has
chosen [ vz. of his infinite mercy and goodnes] Iaakob [ i. the faithful seed
and posterity of Iaakob] to himself [ i. to be a peculiar people unto
himselfe] and [ vz. he has freely chosen, for here you must repeat or
understand that word] Israel [ i. the true Israelites, or the Israel of God, as
Psalm. 124.1.] for his chief treasure [ i. for a people whom he makes more
account of by many degrees, then men do of their chiefest treasures. See Exodus
19.5. The Hebrewe word signifies treasure gathered together of verse most
exquisite things as pearls, precious stones, or such like. And in this verse
is contained a particular cause to provoke thankfulness: vz. that GOD chose from
all the nations of the earth, the issue and seed of Abraham to be his 5. For I
know [ vz. both by his word, works, and mine own experience] that the Lord [
vz. whom we serue] is great [ vz. in power and might] and that our Lord [ vz.
whom we worship, according to his will revealed in his word] is above al Gods [
i. is higher and mightier then they, whether they be Angels and magistrates, to
whom this name is sometimes given, or idols which the vain people worship,
whose vanity he does afterward declare in 6. Whatsoever pleased the Lord [
i. whatsoever it liked him to do] that did he [ vz. because no power was able
to resist him] in heaven, and in earth, in the Sea, and in all depthes [ i.
every where, for no place is excepted from his power and presence, as Psalm.
139.7.8. etc. and how true this is, the particular examples of his word do
declare: specially these two, the universal flood, and the confusion of Babel,
Gene. 7.8.11. chapt.] and in this verse is contained a third cause, wherefore
men should praise God, and that is the great power of God, declared not only
in the creation of heaven and earth, the waters etc. but also in that he
governs every thing according to his 7. He [ vz. God alone] brings up [
vz. into the air and sky, and that by his almighty power] the clouds [ i.
vapors and exhalations, which afterward in the middle region of the air are
turned into clouds, as we see them] from the ends of the earth [ i. from all the quarters of the worlde] and makes [ vz. by his almighty power] the
lightnings with the rain [ i. both lightning and rain, which are seldom
sundered, but come together, as our daily experience teaches us, for we have
seldom any lightning, without rain, and thunder] he draws forth the wynds
[ vz. by his almighty power still, to which every thing, even ye dumb and
insensible creatures must obey] out of his treasures [ i. out of holes, dens,
hidden and secret places, in which as it were in treasure houses god keeps
the winds, of which our savior Christ says, John 3.8. That the wind blows
where it lists, and men hear the sound thereof, but whence it comes, or
whither it goes, no man can tell. And thus we see, that though by reason we
can give a natural cause of these meteors as that the clouds are congealed of
moist and watery vapors drawn out of the Sea, and from the earth, from which
clouds the rain comes, as Ecclest. 11.3. and that lightning is made, of
hot, dry, and fiery exhalations, drawn by the power of the sun into the
regions of the air, and so forth of the rest, yet we may perceive by the
plain words of this text, that nothing is done in the order of nature,
without the counsel and will of our GOD, See Job. 36. verse 27.28, etc. also
Job. 37. throughout, for this purpose.] Verse 8. He smote [ vz in his justice,
and judgment, and that by his almighty power] the first borne of Egypt [ i.
all the first borne in the land of Egypt] both of man and beast [ i. of all
men and beasts whatsoever, See Exodus 12.29. Psalm 105.36. meaning by smiting
destroying them with death. And note, that here he reckons up a fourth cause,
wherefore the faithful should praise God, to wit, for his special graces and
benefits bestowed upon his Church, in their preservation and deliverance, and
his singular judgments and punishments, brought upon their enemies, wherein
the principal praise of his virtue and power is manifested.] Verse 9. He [ i.
God himselfe] has sent [ vz. by his eternal power, in the ministry Moses and
Aaron his seruants] tokens [ vz. of his wrath and iudgement] and wonders [ i.
fearful and strange thinges] into the midst of thee O Egypt [ vz. so that
thou can not either plead ignorance or allege excuse, for my judgments
were euen] upon Pharaoh [ vz. thy king] and upon all his servants [ i. not
only them that attended upon him, but upon all his people and subjects, the
truth and accomplishment of this, See in Exodus 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12.
chapters.] Verse 10. He [ i. God] smote [ vz. in his judgment, vz. greater
and mightier then the people of the Jews, See Deutronom. 2. and 3. chapt.
throughout, for this matter] and flewe [ vz. by the sword of his servants and
people] many kings [whereof some he reckons up in the next verse, and
others are mentioned Numb. 21.1. and in other places.] Verse 11. As Sihon king
Og the king of Bashan [see the history of these. Numb. 21. Deuteronomy. 3. Joshua
12.] and all the kingdoms of Canaan [which was divided into sundry kingdoms,
and wherein dwelt seven nations greater and mightier then the Jews.] Ver. 12.
And gave [ vz. of his free goodnes] their land [ i. i. for a place for them,
as safely and as lawfully for them to dwell in, as if it had descended to them
by inheritance.] Ver. 13. Thy name [ i. thy majesty, power and goodnes]
indureth for vz. toward all, but specially toward thine own people.] O
Lord thy remembrance [ i. the continual instructions, which thou give to
thy people, to remember thee] is from generation to generation [ i. lasts
comtinually, and goes on from age to age, so that there is no age, but they
have evident examples thereof.] Ver. 14. For the Lord [ vz himselfe] will
judge [ i. 96.13. and Psalm 98.9.] and be pacified toward his servants [
i. he will, as it were change his purpose, and not execute with heavy
judgment, that which he had determined against them: and this is spoken of God
according to the manner of men.] Ver. 15.16. See expounded before Psalm. 115.
ver. 4.5.6.7.8. where you shall find both the very same words and matters.
And he here inueigheth so sharply against idols, because that the praise
which belongs unto GOD, is many times falsely given unto them: and therefore
he declares, that neither the matter it self, whereof they are made, nor the
workman, can give them the title of GOD, or God head.] Ver. 19. Praise the
Lord [see 1.3. of this Psalme] ye house of Israel [ i. ye that descend of
Israel or Iaakob, meaning by this speech, all the people generally] praise the
Lord ye house of Aaron [ i. ye Priests, who descend and come from Aaron, to
whose race, family and stock, the priesthood was by Gods ordinance 20.
Praise the Lord ye house of Leui [ i. all ye Levites who were inferior unto
the Priests, though they came all from one father, to wit, Leui, Iaakobs third
son: and by this place we see, that even by the very institution and
ordinance of God, there were two distinct orders amongst the people of the
Jews, to wit, priests and Levites, according to which also he speaks here]
ye that fear the Lord [ vz. with a reverent and child like fear: meaning
also by this speech, such as did worship and serve 128.1.] praise the Lord [
vz. with a good heart, see before ver. 1.3. of this Psalm.] Ver. 41. Praised
be the Lord [ vz. for his infinite mercies toward vs] out of Sion [i. in Sion
which was the place appointed for his worship, for this phrase see Psalm.
128.5. also 134.3.] which [ vz. Lord and God] dwells in Jerusalem [i. gives
most plain testimonies, of his presence and abode there, and not that God is
tied to any place. The Prophet means that in Sion and Jerusalem the place of
his worship, he gave evident signs of his presence and power, and not that
he was enclosed, or tied to that place only] praise ye the Lord [this Psalm
begins and ends with like words, for which see Psalm. 105. and Psalm. 106.
in the beginning and ending.

1. Teaches us to exhort and provoke al gods people to thankefulnes to God for
his benefits. Ver. 2. Teaches us particularly to stir up both priests and
people to that duty, when we find them slack. Verse. 3. Teaches us, that the
Lords continual goodness toward us, should draw us on to praise his name. Ver.
4. Teaches us, that even his gracious election, particularly above the rest,
should be a singular argument of our praise and thanksgiving. Ver. 5. Teaches
us the particular experience which we or any of us have had of Gods power
should be a notable proppe to our faith. Ver. 6. Teaches us that nothing can
withstand his purpose and power. Ver. 7. Teaches that even all natural
things, are guided and governed by him and his appointment. Ver. 8. Teaches
us that the Lord in executing his judgments upon the wicked, respects no
man's person. Ver. 9. Does the same thing, teaching us further, that Gods
judgments are so plain and manifest, as the wicked are not able to allege
either ignorance or excuse against them for themselves. Ver. 10. Teaches us
that though God use means for the performance of his counsels, yet the
accomplishment and glory of them belongs to him alone It teaches also
further, which thing also, Verse. 11. Does that there is no power, wisdom,
counsel, multitudes, or authority, able to hinder, though never so little, the
Lord in his works. Ver. 12. Teaches us that they have right to land, and
inheritance, to whom it pleases the Lord to give the same, because he is the
Lord of the whole earth. Verse. 13. Teaches us that God in all ages, leaves
notable spectacles of his power to al people, to the end that thereby they
might be drawn unto him. Ver. 14. Teaches us that though the Lord be angry
with his people for a while, yet he will turn to them in everlasting love. Ver.
15.16.17. Set out unto us, the horrible vanity and great abuse of idols. Ver.
18. Teaches us that the idol, the idol maker, and al such also, as serve
them, are not only beastly and blockish before men, but shall before god, in
good time come to shame and confusion. Ver. 19.20. Teach us that it is meet
for all the faithful, but specially for the Lords ministers as guides unto the
rest, to praise the Lord for his great goodness. Ver. 21 teaches them to
perform that service to him, even in the public assemblies of his saints.

Psalm 136.
IN this Psalm the Prophet does exhort all the faithful people, 1.2.3.26.
secondly, for his works of creation and providence, 4.5.6.7.8.9.25. Thirdly
10.15.17.18.19.20. and fourthly for his exceeding favor toward his own
servants. ver. 11.12.13.14.16.21.22.23.24.

This Psalm has no title, as many such we have had heretofore, 104.105. and
sundry such like.] Ver. 1. Praise ye the Lord [ vz. O ye faithful people]
because he is good [ vz. toward al, but specially toward you] for his mercy [
vz. which is the first course of all his goodnes] indureth for ever [ i. shall
never have end. This sentence is repeated in every verse of this Psalm, not as
idle, superfluous, or vain, but to show, that Gods goodness is the fountain,
both of al our praises, and al his works, which doctrine, because it ought to
be perpetual, therefore did the Levites sing this Psalm, or some other of the
same argument or matter daily in the old Church of the Jews, as appears, 1.
Chron. 16.41. and it seems also to show, how much we should continue, in the
acknowledging of gods graces. Ver. 2. Praise ye the God of gods i. he that is
above all, that have any divine or heavenly offices, whether they be men as
magistrates, or Angels, or any other thing which has the name of God given
unto it, see Deuteronomy. 10.17.] for his mercy [ vz. toward all, but specially
toward his own people] indureth for ever [all this is expounded before.] Ver
3. Praise ye the Lord of Lords [ i. he that has the fulness and perfection 1.
Tim. 6.15. Reuelat. 17.14.] for his mercy indureth for ever [this is expounded
before, and therefore we shall not need to repeat it again.] Ver. 4. Which [
vz. God i. by himself alone, and his own power, none joining with him as
assistant] does great wonders [ vz. even as we our selves know, and can
report.] Ver. 5. Which by his wisdom [ i. most wisely, and with great
understanding, 3.19. we may understand also by wisdom, his eternal son, see
Pro. 8. from ver. 22. to the end of the 31.] made [ vz. in the beginning, as
Gene. 1.1.] the heavens [ vz. and all things therein contained, for so large
do I take the 124.8.] Ver. 6. Which has stretched out the earth [ i. the
continent and firm land] upon the waters, see Psalm. 24.2. he means that God
has caused the waters, to withdraw themselves from of the earth, to the 1.9.]
Ver. 7. Which made great lights [ vz. two, as Gene. 1.16. of which he speaks
afterward particularly, and they are called great, because they are in our
judgments in deed, 8. As [ vz. for example] the sun to rule the day [ i. to
shine in it, and to make it light, whereas otherwise it would be all darkness.]
Verse. 9. The moon and the stars to govern the night [ i. to shine and 10.
Which smote [ vz. with his plagues Egypt [ i. the land and the people
inhabiting it] with their first borne i. all their first borne, from man to
beast: See Psalm 135.8.] Verse 11. And brought out Israel [ vz. who was kept
in captivity and thraldom putting Israel, for the Israelites] from among them
[ i. quite and clean out of their company 13. chapt. of Exodus.] Ver. 12. With a
mighty hand [ i. with such great power, as the Egiptians could no way resist]
and stretched out arm [ i. with singular favor and pro^ection over his own,
and great judgments upon the wicked, for the arm serves both for 13. Which
divided the red Sea into two parts vz. that his people might pass through it,
See Exodus 14.22.] Verse 14. And made Israel [ i. the Israelites, he speaks
thus of them all, as though they were but one man, because they were but one
body] to pass through their iddest i. of the waters so divided.] Verse 15. And
ouerthrewe [ vz. by his almighty power] Pharaoh [ vz. who was king of Egypt]
and his host [ i. the people which he had gathered together, to pursue the
Israelites, in their flight, yea he so destroyed them, that there was not one
of them left] in the red Sea [the place is named, for the certainetie of the
history also.] Verse 16. Which [ vz. God] led [ vz. carefully and tenderly as
a father his children, or a shepherd his flocke] his people [ i. the
Israelites, whom he had chosen, to be a peculiar people to himself, as
Psalm 135.4.] through the wilderness [ i. through sundry wildernesses,
putting one for many, as Sin, Pharam and others, as whosoever will read the
history of their iourneyes, in 33. shall plainly perceive.] Verse 17. Which
smote [see Psalm. 135.8.10.] i. kings of great power.] Verse. 18. And slew [
vz. by the sword of his captains, and people, see Psalm. 135.10.] mighty
kings [ i. kings of wonderful might and force, how great and mighty soever
they 19. As [ vz. for example] Sihon king of the Ammorites [ i. one Sihon, that
governed that people.] Ver. 20. And Og the king of Bashan [ i. he 21. And gave
[ vz. freely and of his own goodnesse] their land [ i. the land, which they
and their people inhabited] for an heritage [ i. by the right of inheritance as
it were, so that the people might lawfully possess it.] Verse 22. Even an
heritage [ i. to be a most i. unto the Israelites, which did serve and
worship him, and upon whom he had bestowed this honor, to be his
servants, because to serve him is to be a king, for the story of all these
matters, contained here from verse 10. to the end of the 22. See Exodus
chapters 12.13.14. etc. See Psalm 78. from ver. 12, to verse. 56. also Psalm
105. verse 27. to the end thereof. See Psalm. 106. almost throughout. Psalm
135. verse 8.9.10.11.12. also Numbers 21. Deutronomie 3. Josh. 12. and many
other places.] Verse 23. Which remembered us [ i. showed by effect that he
thought upon us, 8.1.] in our base estate [ i. when we were afflicted and
oppressed on every side, for to such a low ebb, are Gods children many times
brought.] Verse 24. And has restored us, from our oppressors i. from the
power and tyranny of such as did oppress us: the metaphor of restoring is
notable, not only declaring their misery, who were taken captives and
prisoners, to be used according to the pleasure of those that had taken them,
but also expressing Gods mercy, in delivering his people out of the same: and
Gods power, because the enemy could not gainstande it.] Verse 25. Which gives
food [ i. graciously, and plentifully provides i. not only men, but also all
beasts and creatures: see Psalm. 104.27.28.] Ver. 26. Praise ye the God of
heaven [ i. the true and

Verse. 1. Teaches us, both to provoke others, and also our selves, 2.
teaches us to praise him for his excellent nature, and incomprehensible
majesty. Ver. 3 teaches us to praise him for his large and great government.
Ver. 4 teaches us that God alone is he that does notable things howsoever he
uses men as means in the performance thereof. Ver. 5 teaches us that all that
God does, he does in most exact wisdom, and understanding. Ver. 6 teaches
us that it is by Gods power, that the waters ouerflow not the earth. Ver. 7.
Teaches us, that even the light which we enjoy, is a singular gift of God.
Verse 8. Shows that the sun shines in the day, by the order which GOD has
set, and not for any natural cause. Verse 9. Teaches us the self same thing,
touching the moon and the stars in the night season. Verse 10. Teaches us
that God spares not the wicked in his punishments. Vrr. 11. Teaches us that
it is a singular benefit of God, to deliver his people, from idolaters, and
out of an idolatrous land. Ver. 12. Shows that God does it by his only
power, which none is able to resist. Verse. 13, Teaches us that God will make
the whole course of nature, give place unto his Servants. Verse 14.15. Teach,
that Gods children, go in safety, where the wicked many times perish and are
ouer-whelmed. Verse 16. Teaches us, not only that GOD does sundry wise prove
the faith and patience of his servants, but mercifully provides for them in
the places of greatest danger. Ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Teaches us yt as
there is no power or strength, able to withstand God in his purposes and
attemptes: so god for his peoples sake, and this assured love toward them,
will spare to plague none, though never so high, and to do wonderful and great
things. Verse. 22. Teaches us, that whatsoever God gives us in this life,
he does it to this end, that we should employ it and our selves wholly to
his service. Verse 23, 24. Do teach us that GOD does not only think upon
his people for their good, but also graciously performs their deliverance.
Verse 25. Does excellently set out Gods providence over all his creatures.
Verse 26. Teaches, that we must not pray to, or praise any, or give thanks to
any, but to the true God only, which dwells in heaven.

Psalm 137
1.2.3. Secondly they set out the great strength that god gave them in those
afflictions, and their earnest love to the Church, Ver. 4, 5, 6. In 7.8.9.

1. By the rivers [ vz. named Euphrates, and Tygris] of Babel [ i. not only of
the City, but also of the whole monarchy, for the Jews were not only carried
into the City, but dispersed throughout their whole government, as appears
in the books of Ezechiel, Daniel, and Ezra] we [ vz. who were captains of the
people of the Jews, but specially ye priests and Levites who were occupied and
skilled in singing] sat [ i. we were a long while in that captiuity] and there
we wept [ vz. in great abundaunce] when we remembered Sion [i. the place
wherein we were wont to worship GOD, 2. We [ vz. being thus sad and heauie]
hanged our harpes [ i. our musical instruments putting one sort for sundry
sorts of them] upon the willowes [ i. openly and abroad, showing thereby that
we had no care or regard thereof: he means that they regarded not their
musical instruments, nor had any pleasure or delight in singing] in the midst
thereof [ i. which willowes are a long by the rivers sides in that Country.]
3. Then [ vz. in this great heaviness and grief of ours] they that lead us
captives [ i. the Babilonians and Assyrians, in whose country we were
prisoners] required of us [ vz. scornefully and disdainfully, thinking thereby
to add unto our griefes] songs [ i. such songs as we were wont to sing in
Sion, Jerusalem, and our own country, before the destruction of the temple
and our captiuity] and mirth [ i. they scoffingly desired us to be merry, when
they saw us so heavy hearted, as nothing could make us glad] when we had
hanged up our harpes as before in this Psalm. ver. 2.] sing us [ i. for us, or
in our hearing] one of the songs of Sion [i. some one or other of those
songs, which ye were wont to sing in Sion, when ye were at home in your own
country: thus the faithful put down the words of the Babylonians, to which
they themselves answer in the next verse.] Ver. 4. How shall we sing said we
[ i. vy what right i. some one or other of those songs, which were dedicated to
the honor and service of the Lorde] in a strange land [ vz. besides our own
country, he means not simply, that either the place was of it self, unfit
for such a purpose, or the thing it self unseeming their persons, but because
heaviness is not a fit time for singing, as James 5.13. and they would not
deliver Gods holy songs to be profaned, by and before a company of
unbelievers, therefore do they say thus.] ver. 5. If I forget i. O thou city
and temple of the lord, meaning that no afflictions should cause them to
forgette] let my right hand] i. that hand wherewith we sound our harps, and play
upon other instruments] forget to play [ i. forget all her cunning, or let it
be, as we would say, dead, dried up, and withered, not able to play.] Verse
6. If I i. continually think upon thee, and that not only in the meditation
and grief of my heart, but will testify by my daily lamenting and mourning
for thee and thy case] let my tongue [ vz. wherewith I should speak and sing]
cleave to the roof of my mouth [ vz. in such sort, that I may not be able to
do either the one or the other: and this is an other wish, by which he
declares, that he would rather want the use of his tongue, then sing at
those men's pleasures and requests, which was after a sort to forget Sion, and
Ierusalem] yea [ q.d. let that thing fall out upon me likewise] if I prefer
not Jerusalem to my chief joy [ i. if I make not more account of it, then of
any thing in this life whatsoever, that could make me never so joyful: q.d.
this shall be my whole and perfect joy, to think earnestly upon Jerusalem, and
the restitution thereof: any where else, or in any other thing, I shall find
no matter or occasion of joy, this he speaks in the person of one, meaning
notwithstanding thereby, all the rest of the faithful that were in captivity.]
Verse 7. Remember [ vz. when thou powrest forth thy judgments, q.d. declare
by effect, that then thou think upon their wickednes] the children of Edom [
i. the Idumeans, or Edomites, who though they were their neighbors, and came
of Esau, Iaakobs son, who was called also Edom, as it should seem. Gene.
36.1. yet they took part with the Babylonians, and Chaldeans, and provoked
their rage and cruelty against the Jews: See Obadiah. chapt. 1. ver.
8.9.10.11.12. etc. See also Psalm 79.12.] in the day of Jerusalem [ i. in that
same miserable day of the ruin and destruction thereof] which said [ vz. in
the spyte and cruelty of their own hearts, and that to the encouragement of
the Chaldeans and Babylonians: See Ezechiel 25.12.] Raze it, raze it, [this the
Edomites spoke to the Chaldeans, and Babylonians: q.d. spare it not at any
hande] to the foundation thereof, and leave not so much, as any appearaunce of a
foundation as it were, our Savior expresses the ruin of it by an other
term, vz. that they shall make it even with the ground, and shall not leave a
stone upon a stone, Luke 19.44. for the destruction of this people, See Ierem.
49.7. etc. Ezech. 25.12. 4.12. etc.] Verse 8. O daughter of Babell [ i. O City
of Babylon, for the Hebrews do use to understand by daughter many times,
Cities and Towns: See Joshua 15.45. with the note in the margent, and if my
memory fail me not, I have noted once or twice before in this exposition
upon the Psalms, meaning also thereby, not the city only, but the whole
Country, and the government thereof, as verse 1. of this Psalme] worthy to
be destroyed [ vz. for thy exceeding great wickedness, and namely for thy
wonderful cruelty and hard heartednesse] blessed shall he be [ i. they of
what state and condition soever they be: here he speaks of one in the
steed of many: neither means he, that the service of the Persians and
Medes, who destroyed Babylon was acceptable to God, because they were carried to
the doing of it, for the satisfiyng of their own ambition and covetousness, and
not of zeal to serve the Lord: but by blessing, he means outward
commodities, as riches, wealth, spoil, and the wishes of the people and their
good words, because that for the tyrannies of Babell, every one should not
only desire, but also rejoice in the destruction of it, as it had deserued]
that rewards thee, as thou have served us [ i. that shall destroy thee and
thy people, as thou have done our City Jerusalem, the whole land of Judah, and
us, see concerning the destruction of that great City Babell, and the whole
kingdom thereof. Isaiah 13. also Jeremiah, chapters 50.51.] 9. Blessed shall
he be [this must be expounded as it was before, ver. 8.] that takes and
dasheth thy children against the stones [ i. that deals most sharply and
severely with thee, according to the heinousness of thine own evil deeds,
that is, that as thou sparedst none, no not young children, but cruelly
destroyedst us and all ours, so shall they be well thought of and well spoken of
amongst men, that shall yield the like measure unto you O ye Babylonians and
Chaldeans.

1. Teaches us, what grief of heart and abundaunce of tears, the affliction
of Gods Church should wring from us. Verse 2. Teaches us, that the time of
affliction and misery, is not seasonable, for outward mirth and meriments.
Verse 3. Teaches us, what is the hard heartedness, cruelty and scoffing
nature of the wicked, when they have gotten Gods children into their nets.
Verse 4. Teaches us not to obey the wicked, no though they have the mastery of
us, in every thing, that they demand, specially when God and his glory shall be
profaned thereby. Ver. 5. Teaches us continually to think upon Gods Church,
and the mysteries thereof, that thereby we may be provoked to power forth
earnest prayers to God for it. Ver. 6. Teaches us that we should rather forget
our selves, then Gods Church, it teaches us also, that nothing in this life
should be so joyful unto us, as the restitution and flourishing thereof.
Verse. 7. Teaches us that we may safely pray against the wicked and ungodly.
Verse 8.9. Teach us, that God many times punishes one sin with an other, as
cruelty with cruelty, not that he delights in sin, but to show that sin
shall not escape unpunished, and that to this end and purpose, he rayseth up
one wicked man and people against an other.

Psalm 138
THe Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1.2.3. In the second he does
by the spirit of prophecy as it 4.5.6. In the third he sets out, the
assured persuasion, that he had 7.8.

The title] A Psalm of David [ i. a Psalm that David made, 4. in the title.]
Ver. 1. I will praise thee [ vz. O Lord, and that for thy mercies and
benefits, and this Psalm should seem to be a public confession, that
David made unto GOD, for the blessings which he had received at his handes]
with my whole heart [ i. in sincerity of heart, with a sound, and not an
hypocritical heart, and this is opposed against a double heart: q.d. no part
of my heart, nor of the affections thereof, but they shall be all wholly
occupied in praising of thee] even before the Gods [ i. openly, and before the
Kings and Magistrates of the worlde] for so have you the word, Gods, used,
Psalm 82.1. which thing also David himself promises, Psalm 119.46. and in
other places] will I praise thee [ vz. continually and unfeignedly.] Verse 2. I
will worship toward thy temple [ i. I 5.7.] and praise thy name [ i. thy
majesty, power, goodness, etc. as sundry times before] because of thy loving
kindness [ vz. toward mee] and for thy truth [ vz. in accomplishing thy
promises, so here he puts down the causes of his thanksgiving: See Psalm
115.1.] for thou have magnified thy name above all things [ i. thou have made
thy majesty and power appear more excellent and great, then all things
whatsoeuer] by thy word [ i. by faithful accomplishment of those things which
thou have promised in thy word.] It may also receive this sense, q.d. the
things which thou speak and performest in thy word, are more great and
large, then that men can either name them, or thou be sufficiently praised for
them, 71.15.] Ver. 3. When I called [ vz. upon thee by prayer] then thou
heardest me [ i. grauntest me my requests and petitions: See Psalm. 120.1.]
and thou [ vz. alone, for none could do it but thou] have increased strength in
my soul [ i. have made my soul and inward man very mighty and strong, with
patience to suffer all calamities whatsoever: it may be also understood thus,
that God had more and more strengthened himself, putting a part for 4. All the
kings of the earth. [This seems to be a prophecy of the calling of the
Gentiles, he means that many kings, and their people shall be converted to the
Lorde] shall praise thee O Lord [ vz. by mine example] for they have heard
the words of thy mouth [ i. they have not only with their ears heard, but
with their eyes seen, and with their hearts consented unto, the truth of thy
word generally, and particularly this, that thou have by wonderful means
brought me to the kingdom: and this he speaks 5. And they shall sing [ vz.
openly and in the hearing of others] of the ways of the Lord [ i. of the
things which the Lord does, and of the order and course which he observes
therein: he means that they shall both acknowledge gods works and praise him
for the same, specially for the course which he has kept, in preserving David
from his enemies, and exalting him to the kingdome] because the glory of the
Lord is great [ i. because the things that he has done gloriously and
openly, as it were a conqueror are very high and 6. For the Lord is high [ i.
mighty and passing the very heavens themselves, and so it may be a reason of
the great glory of the Lord, whereof he spoke before] yet [ q.d.
notwithstanding the great distaunce between him and vs] he beholds [ vz.
with a favorable and loving countenance, and that not idly, but
effectually, and as one that has altogether care over such] the lowly [ i.
such as are humbled, despised, and contemned amongst men] but the proud [ vz.
men of the earth] he knows [ vz. thoroughly, both within and without] a far
off [ vz. how far off so ever they be from him: and it may be that he
means, that as the proud does scornefully, and as it were a far off
behold others, so deals the Lord with them. Immanuel reads the whole
verse thus] though the Lord be lifted up [ vz. in great and exceeding
glorie] yet he beholds the lowly [ i. such as are depressed and beaten down
of men] and though he himself be high [ i. lifted up even above the
heauens] he knows a far off [ q.d. GOD has both sight and certain
knowledge, both of the good and of the bad, the senses in my judgments differ
not much.] Verse 7. Though I walk [ i. though I be much conuersaunt] in the
midst of trouble [ i. in very great danger, so that I am compassed about
with, both before and behind, on the right hand and on the left, See Psalm
23.3.4.] yet will thou revive me [ q.d. though my dangers were so great, that
I should seem to be dead, yet thou will quicken me, and preserve me from
death.] Thou will stretch forth thine hand upon the wrath of mine enemies [ i.
thou will not only set thy power between me and their rage, to the end that
they do me not any hurt, but thou will also oppose and set thy self against
them. Immanuel reads it thus] thou stretchedst out thy hand, against the
face of mine enemies [ i. thou will strike them and that openly, as it were
with thy left hand, and wilt defend me with thy right, as follows in this
verse] and thy right hand [ i. thy gracious and mighty power] shall save me [
i. deliver me out of al my dangers.] Verse. 8. The Lord [ vz. vz. graciously
and in good time] his work [ i. the work that he has begun in me toward
me [ i. upon me, and for my cause. q.d. he will proceed (...) declare, that
he has care over my saluatioon, and will bring to perfection that which he
has begun: See Philip. 1.6.] O Lord thy mercy [ vz. toward all, but
chiefly toward thy children] indureth for ever [ i. shall never have end:
for though that in the life to come we shall not sin, no more then the
Angels in heaven do now, yet as they stand now, so must we then, by his only
mercy in Christ] forsake not the works of thine hands [ i. leave not me in
mine affliction, and the good things that thou have begun in me.

Ver. 1. Teaches us unfeignedly to praise the Lord for his mercies: 2.
Teaches us, that Gods continual grace toward us, and the faithful
accomplishment of his promises, should always provoke us to be thankful
unto him. Verse 3. Teaches us, that GOD is nigh to the earnest supplications
and prayers of his servants. Verse 4. Teaches us, that it is the duty even
of Kings, to serve the Lord, even as well as the meanest of the people: and
that the hearing of Gods word, is a good mean for men's conversion. Verse 5.
Teaches us, to take singular delight in the meditation, and speech of Gods
works and word. Ver. 6. Teaches us that God considers the conversation
both of the good and the bad, but to diverse ends and effects. Verse 7.
Teaches us that when Gods children are in the greatest distress, that even
then they should assuredly believe that God will work most comfortably for
their deliverance. Verse 8. Teaches us, that GOD begins nothing in his
children, but he does accomplish, and make the same perfect: and yet that it
is our duty notwithstanding, to use continual and hearty prayers unto him,
for the performance thereof.

Psalm 139
1. to the end of the 6. In the second he declares, that nothing neither in
heaven nor in 7. to the end of the 12. In the third part, he sets out
certain reasons thereof taken 13. to the end of the 18. and in the fourth
part, he prays 19. to the end of the Psalm.

David [see this expounded before, Psalm 4. in the title: See also the title
of Psalm 14.] Ver. 1. O Lord [ vz. who alone art the searcher of the hearts
and reynes] thou have tried [ vz. by sundry and many meanes] me [ vz. whom
men speak so much evil of] and known me [ vz. thoroughly, both inwardly and
outwardly, so that my thoughts, words and deeds are open in thy sight: and
that which he speaks here generally, he utters in the next verses more
particularly. And this David does, appealing to the judgment of God, and
making him witness of his heart, because he saw that he was unjustly
accused of his enemies.] Verse 2. Thou know [ vz. thoroughly as before verse
1.] my sitting i. whether I sit down, or rise up, or do any thing else, it is
naked before thee: understanding also by these two, all the actions of the whole
life of a man] thou understand [ i. know and perceiuest] my thought [ i.
both it, and the things that in it, I think vppon] a far off [ i. long
before it be brought to effect, yea long before it come into my mind, or I
have 3. Thou compassest my paths and my lying down [ i. thou art always with
me, whether I journey, travail, or lie still] and are accustomed [ i. well
acquainted, and as it were familiar] with all my ways [ i. with the
conversation and actions of my whole 4. For there is not a word in my tongue
[ i. I am not about to speak any thing at all: he puts the instrument of
speech and words conceived and ready to be uttered, for words uttered
already as it were] but lo, thou know it wholly O Lord [ vz. even before I
speak it, so that 5. Thou hold me strait [ vz. by thy almighty power]
behind and before [ i. on every side, as above and below, on the right hand
and on the left: q.d. thy power and presence enuironeth me on all sides, so
that I can neither think, do, nor speak any thing, but thou see it, and
know it] and layest thine hand upon me [ i. thy power: q.d. even as
though thou had arrested me, and made me thy prisoner, thou keep me
in such sort, that I can not go out of thy sight nor do any thing, but thou
know it, yea and guidest and gouernest me also.] Verse 6. Thy knowledge [
i. the knowledge of thy majesty, and of thy wonderful and excellent woorkes]
is to wonderful [ i. over high and marueilous] for me [ vz. to reach unto it]
it is so high [ i. excellent and exquisite] that I can not atteine unto it [
vz. by any wit or industry that I have: q.d. I am not able to comprehend of
my self, or by any thing that is within me, or without me, to know thee,
and thy great works, because they are far beyond the reach of my reason,
capacity, and understanding.] Verse 7. Whither [ i. into what place of heaven
and earth] vz. to hyde me from thy knowledge and understanding: because men
conceive and understand things, by the spirit, which is a faculty and power
of the inward man, he speaks thus of God, not meaning it of the holy Ghost,
which is the third person of the godheade: q.d. I know not whither to go,
but thou will always perceive and understand where I am] whither shall I fly
from thy presence [ q.d. I know not whither to get me, from thy sight, as may
appear by the particular enumeration following.] Verse 8. If I ascend [ i.
go vp] into heaven [ vz. i. I shall certainelye find thee there] if I lie
down in hell [ i. in the grave, as we have had it sundry times in this book
of Psalms: q.d. if I should rest in the grave and lower parts of the earth,
as men do in their beddes] thou art there [ vz. in thy almightye power,
providence, and presence.] Verse 9. Let me take the wings of the morning [ i.
as I take it the q.d. albeit I had as great quickenesse as the sun has, both
when it rises, and when as it were in a moment it goes round about the
world, yet that would not profit me, to hyde me from thy presence and
knowledge] and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea [ i. should dwell, as
far as there is any Sea: or at the furthest end of the Sea.] Verse 10. Yet
thither [ vz. even to that i. thy power and might] lead me [ vz. even as a
shephearde is wont to lead his sheepe] and thy right hand [ i. thy great
power and might] hold me [ vz. there, and keep me in that place. q.d.
though I would think by flying hither and thither to withdraw my self from
thy presence, yet I should be in thy presence and power still, because by it,
I should be carried whither I my self would, to stay there, and to return
again from thence, at thy pleasure, even as the sheep hang upon the
shephearde.] Verse 11. If I say [ i. if I should either speak or think thus]
yet the darkness [ q.d. seeing other places and means can not help, yet
this shift I will have, I shall be hidden from thee in the night: for I take it,
that by darkness he understands night, as may appear by that which
followeth] shall hyde me, vz. from thy presence and knowledge, so that thou
shall not see or perceive mee] even the night shall be light, about me [ q.d.
certainly I shall be but deceived, for that which is done in the night, is as
well known to thee, as that which is done in the noone day, for howsoever to me,
and other creatures, the night is dark, yet to thee that art the creator, all
things are open, naked, and bare, as Heb. 4.13.] Ver. 12. Yea the darkness i.
the night, nor no other darkness whatsoever, though it were as thick, and
palpable, as the darkness of Egypt] hydeth not [ vz. any, either thought,
word, or deede] from thee [ i. from thy sight and knowledge] but the night
shines [ vz. before thee, and in thy sight, meaning by the word, shines,
that it is as clear for God to behold any thing in, as the noone tyde] the
darkness and light [ i. the night and the day, See Gene. 1.5.] are both a like
[ vz. to thee, for thou see as clearly in the one, as in the other.] Verse
13. For thou have possessed q.d. by good reason, all these things are known
to thee, because thou have created man and every part, and piece of him, and
under the word, possessed, the Prophet notes, first the knowledge that God
has of us: for no man possesses evidences, or houses, but he knows the
right title and rooms thereof: Secondly, his right and authority: for
howsoever men obtain unjust possessions, yet with the Lord there is no
iniustice] my reins [ i. mine affections, yea the most secret thoughts of my
heart, and whatsoever lay, or lies hid within me] thou have covered me in my
mothers womb [ Immanuel adds here a term that makes the sense most plain,
thus] from the time, that thou have etc. [ q.d. yea even from my conception,
and long before, thou knew al things concerning me: And yet I deny not, but
this text of the Geneua Bible, may have a good sense thus] thou have covered
me [ vz. with flesh, sinews, skin, etc.] in my mothers womb [ i. before I
was borne, and when in that place, thou gave a form and fashion to me, and
so it may be a reason why nothing can be hidden from God, because God made him
there, and knew him 14. I will praise thee [ vz. with my whole heart, as psalm.
138.1.] for I am fearfully and wonderously made [ i. the very creation and
making of me, and the due consideration which I have thereof, do strike into me
a fear of thy majesty, and a wondering at thy workmanship, or else thus: thou
have created me after a fearful and wonderful sort. Immanuel reads it thus]
I do praise thee, because, by these thy reverend works, I am brought to
wondering [and then repeateth these words] I praise thy marvelous works, my
soul knows the^ very well, but I take the other text to be as good as this]
marvelous [ i. very excellent and wonderfull] are thy works [ vz. every one
of them, and namely the continual forming and creating of mankynde] and my
soul knows it well [ vz. through thy great goodness, who have put that
light into it, to know and consider of that excellent and wonderful work.]
Verse 15. My bones [ i. neither they all nor any one of them, for thou 34, 20.]
are not hid from thee, for thou know both their names and their number]
though I was made in a secret place [ vz. in my mothers womb, as verse 13,
q.d. the closeness of yt place, could not hide them from thy presence and
knowledge] and fashioned beneath in the earth [whereas thou notwithstanding was
in heaven: q.d. the distaunce of the place could not hinder thee from the sight
and knowledge of me, and of every part and piece of me.] Verse 16. Thine eyes
did see me [this is spoken of i. when I had neither shape nor fashion, but was
as it were a rude lump: he speaks here of a great secret of nature. Of which
we should both think and speak reverently and modestly] for in thy book [this
is spoken according to men, who use books for the help of their memory that
they may have every thing by peecemeale as it were] were all things written [
i. all the members and parts of my body, were as well known in thy providence
unto thee, as if they had bin written in a book and laid before thee] which [
vz. members and parts of mine] in continuance [ vz. of time] were fashioned [
vz. through thy great power and woorking] when there was none of the^ before [
vz. created and made. This is it that he means, that as God in the beginning
made heaven and earth, as a huge heap without form, and yet afterward gave
them that notable form which they have, and out of them framed that great
variety of excellent creatures: so out of the rude lump conceived first in the
womb, which yet notwithstanding did in it self contain the whole body, did ye
Lord by a merueilous workmanship create that excellent form and proportion of
man's body, and of the several members and joints thereof.] Ver. 17. How dear [
i. how precious, yea incomprehensible to my judgment, or to al men's vz. for
the causes above rehearsed] are thy thoughts unto me [ i. are the meditations
which I my self have, concerning thee and thy great workes] how great is the
sum of them? [ i. both of thy works, and of the thoughts and meditations
which I have of them: q.d. they are so many as they are able to ouerwhelme all the understanding of men, that they are not able to count them, much less to
comprehend them, see Psa. 40.5.] Verse 18 If I should count them [ i. go about
or endeavor to count them] they q.d. I might as well number the sand of the
sea, which is infinite and innumerable, see for this speech, 1. Samuel 13.5.
2. Sam. 17.11. Psalm. 78.27.] when I awake [ vz from my sleep and natural
rest] I am still with thee [ i. I do continually meditate of thy wonderful
works and wisdom: q.d. Except it be when I sleep, I spend little or no time
otherwise then in the meditation of thy majesty and works.] Verse 19. Oh that
thou would vz. in thy just iudgements] O God, the wicked and bloody men [ i.
me^ that give themselves over to wickedness and murder: q.d. Then should I
much rejoice, to have this my wish and prayer performed, and I and others
should be instructed to turn from their ways and not to follow them] to whom
I say [ vz. unfeignedly and with a good hart] depart ye from me [see Psa. 6.8.
Immanuel reads this verse far otherwise, and gives a contrary sense, but I
see no reason or ground for it: for the place of the 2. Chron. 30.18.19. has
no such thing 20. Which [ vz. wicked and bloody men] speak wickedly of thee [
i. do openly show both by words and deeds, without any manner of hypocrisy
or counterfeiting, a full contempt both of thee and thine, and that of hatred
against both] and being thine enemies [ i. opposing and setting themselves
against she and thine] are lifted up [ i. advance themselves and are swelled
in pride, as though that in the loftines of their hearts, they would do
whatsoever pleased them upon the earth, but all this is] in vain [ i. to no
purpose, for down they shall be cast and have terrible falles] Immanuel
reads this latter part thus] who do vainly extol [ i. not only without a
cause, but also proudly and presumptuously set up, favor and allow of thine
enemies: of which see Romans 1.32.] Ver. 21. Do not I hate them O Lord, that hate
thee? [ q.d. thou know that I do it, for that I take to be the force of the
interrogation] and do not I earnestly contend with those that rise up against
thee? [ i. do I not strive as it were for life and death against those that
are thine enemies: for this phrase rising up against 3, 1.] Ver. 22. I hate
them with an unfeigned hatred [ i. not as men, who seem to hate, and yet to
love, but I do unfeignedly and with a round hart] as they were mine utter
enemies [ vz. yea and more to, if it be possible for a man to hate more. He
shows that he had gods glory in such regard that he would not have any
familiarity with the contemners of God.] Ver. 23. Try me, O God [ vz.
thorowly] and know mine heart [ i. not that he doubted q.d. thou art a
witness of all my matters, and I am thy servant, therefore if need be,
behold I am ready to endure thy trials, see Psalm. 26, 1, 2. etc. Neither does
he here boast, as though he were without sin, but assures himself that God
will accept his godliness and endeavor, although that through infirmity he
fall sundry times.] Ver. 24. And consider [ vz. thoroughly i. whether I follow an
ungodly and rebellious kind of life against thee, yea or nay, for it is one
thing to fall of infirmity, and another thing to sin rebelliously: Paul Romans
7 expresses it by sin dwelling in us, and sin reigning in vs] and lead me
[ vz. through thy goodness and mercy] in the way [ vz. of thy commandments,
i. in a godly and holy conuersation] for ever [ i. continually. He prays unto
God, that he may be constant in his obedience and that he may finish the course
of his life, in his faith and fear.

Verse 1. teaches us, that God is the searcher of the heart and raines. Ver. 2
teaches us, that the Lord does not only know, but also dispose of all the
affairs of our life: also that he looks even unto our thoughts, and that
therefore we should strive even to a reformation of them likewise. Verse 3
teaches us, that God is the protector and defender of those that be his, in
every thing that they take in hand. Ver. 4 teaches us, that God regards even
our words, and that therefore we should labor to make them approved unto him.
Ver. 5 teaches us, that we can do nothing without God. Verse 6 teaches us
that we cannot of our selves attain to the knowledge of God and his majesty.
Verse 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, teach us, that nothing nor no place, can hide us
from the presence and power of God, neither heaven nor hell, nor the sea, nor
the darkness, nor any thing else whatsoever. They teach further, that it is a
very vain and false persuasion for a man to think, that by going or flying he
can escape from God. They show also that God by his power and providence is
every where, Verse 10 does specially teach us this, that whatsoever we purpose,
yet we can go no whither, but thither whither the Lord will have us to go.
Verse 13 teaches us that God preserves and keeps us, even before we be
borne, or else should we never behold this light. Verse 14 teaches us, but
even to look into our selves and our creation, and we shall find great
occasion offered us thereby to be thankful to God. Verse 15. sets out Gods
providence, as to whole man generallye, so even to the particular parts and
members of his body. Verse 16 teaches that God alone works in all in our
conception, creation, etc. Verse 17 teaches us reverently to esteem of Gods
ways, and of his works, and not to let them pass with so slight a
consideration as commonly men do. Ver. 18 teaches us, that Gods works are
infinite, and we not able to comprehend them, no not any one of them in such
sort as we should, and as the excellency of them requires: it teaches us also
in the meditation and beholding of them, that thereby we may more and more
profit in the knowledge, and apprehension of his majesty goodness, power,
etc. Ver. 19 teaches us, not only to pray against the malicious and obstinate
enemies of Gods Church: but also to have no society nor familiarity with them.
Verse 20 does liuelye set out the nature of the ungodly: who in the pride of
their own hearts, spare not to speak against God himself: it shows also
further that this their pride and haughtiness is but in vain. Verse 21
teaches us to oppose our selves against those, that set themselves against God
and his truth: this belongs generally to all christians, but most especially
to Kings and Princes, such a one as David was. Verse 22 teaches us, that this
setting of our selves against such must be done, as not for any worldly, or
carnal respect, so of a single and sound heart toward God and men. Verse 23
teaches us that it is good to pray ye Lord thoroughly to try us, because that
the more we are tried, the more pure and fine we are to him. Verse 24 teaches
us to pray for constancy and continuance in every good and holy way.

Psalm 140
1 to the end of the seventh. In the second part he prays against the
wicked, 8 to the end of the Psalm.

David [this is sundry times expounded before, and namely Psalm 4 in the
title thereof.] Verse 1. Deliver me O Lord [ vz. of thy goodness through thy
almighty power] from the evil man [ i. from him that wholly gives himself,
even as it were without provocation or occasion to do euill] preserve me [ vz.
safe and sound, and that according to thy good pleasure] from the cruel man [
i. from him that sets himself in cruelty to perform against me whatsoever
they can. And though in this verse he speak but of one, yet he means many as
may appear by the sudden Saul and his counselors, and his servants, who
both by fury, force and fraud, did persecute him.] Verse 2. Which imagine [
vz. even upon their beds and continually: see Micah 2, 1.] evil things [
vz. against me: understanding by evil things, such things as tended to his
hurt and destruction] in their heart [ i. secretly and closely] and make war [
vz. both by themselves and others, whom they provoke and stir up by all
means they can against me, see Psalm 120, 7.] continually [ i. every day, so
that no day escapes them. In this verse he charge his enemies, that they
did both openly and privately, both in purpose and counsel, by themselves and
by others, devise all mischief against him: and verse 3. and others following,
he shows that both in word and deed they attempted to perform it.] Verse
3. They [ i. the wicked and ungodly men] have sharpened their tongues [ vz. to
destract, and speak evil of me, and to hurt me] like a serpent [ i. as the
serpents tongue i. their mouth is full of wicked and venomous words against
me: some read Adders, some read vipers, some Aspes, for mine own part, I
suppose that the word being somewhat of a doubtful signification, should be
referred to such kind of serpents, as though they lie still in a place, do yet
notwithstanding spit their poison or venim far from them] Selah [this has been
expounded before as I suppose Psalm 3. verse 2. It is as much as if the
Prophet should say, mark this, being a note or warning of attention.] Verse 4.
Keep [ vz. under the shadow of thy wings, and thy almighty vz. whom am thus
sought and set for, by mine enemies] from the hands of the wicked [ i. from
their power, and that which they would do unto me: for he puts the
instruments whereby they perform things, for the things themselues] preserve
me from the cruel man [see verse 1 of this Psalme] which purposes [ vz. in
himselfe] to cause [ vz. either by his force, or by his fraud, or by both] my
steps to slide [ i. to cast me down, and to cause me to fall, that so when
he has me down, he may ye more easily and tyrannously exercise his will
against me. I take it to be a metaphor taken from men who lay grinnes and cords
to overthrow wild beasts withal.] Verse 5. The proud [ i. the wicked and
ungodly, which are puffed up in the pride vz. closely and secretly] a snare for
me [ vz. to take or catch me withal, see Psalm 119.69.85.95] and spread a
net with cords [ i. have set a very great and strong net, thinking assuredly
to catch me so fast therein that I shall not escape] in my pathway [ i. even in
the plain, or beaten way that I should walke] and set grinnes for me [ i. to
catch and take me as before. Under all these metaphors borrowed from fowlers
and hunters, tending all to one end, he means nothing else but this, that
they did not only use open force and violence against him, but also subtelties
and crafts to surprise and take him] Selah [this is expounded before verse 3.]
Verse 6. Therefore [ i. I seeing my self thus beset by men, did run to the
Lord by prayer] vz. with a feeling heart, when I was in these dangers and
distresses] unto the Lord [ vz. whose goodness and power I had had great
experience of, as appears verse 7.] Thou [ vz. alone, and none but thou] art
my God [ i. he upon whom only I will depend for help and succour] hear O
Lord, the voice of my prayers [ i. grant me those requests which with my
voice and words I make unto thee.] Verse 7. O Lord God the strength of my
salvation i. thou that sauest and deliuerest me from all dangers, with
maruailous power and strength, and in whom only my deliverance stands: this
is a notable title attributed to God, for the strengthening of his faith] thou
have covered [ vz. by thy power and might, even as it were with a Helmet and
shield] my head [ i. me my self a part for the whole: and yet he names this
part rather then others, because it is the most excellent, as which, in some
men's judgments contains life in it, and does disperse the same into all the
parts of the bodye] in the day of battle [ i. when I was in the field, and
did fight: q.d. thou have delivered me heretofore, from all the assaults of
mine enemies, and I hope, that thou will hereafter likewise deliver me.] Verse
8. Let not the wicked have his i. the things that he has desired against me:
q.d. Let him not see mine overthrow which he much wishes and desireth]
perform not [ i. give him not leave or strength to perform against me] his
wicked thought [ i. the wicked thing, which he has wickedly thought upon, and
devised against me, and by one no doubt, he understands many mischiefs of
theirs] least they be proud [ vz. above measure, for he had before charged
them with pride ver. 5. he means least they should wax proud even against
God and man] Selah 9. As for the chief of them [how great or high soever he or
they be. Whether he speak it of Saul, Doeg, and such like particularly, it is
not certaine] that compass me about [ vz. to destroy, and are my deadly enemies:
see Psalm. 3.6. also Psalm. 118.10.11.12.] let the mischief of their own lips [
i. that mischief which with their own lips they have spoken against me] come
upon them [ i. fall upon the^ through thy just judgment. I know others both
translate this verse otherwise, and give some other sense, but methinketh 10.
Let coals [ vz. of thy wrath and iudgement] fall upon the^ [ vz. from heaven,
as it did in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, to which he seems to
allude] let him [ vz. god: thus he speaks to him or of him, in ye third
person] cast the^ into ye fire [ vz. that never goes out, but burns for
ever, Mar. 9.43] and into ye deep pits [ vz. of danger and destruction] that
they rise not [ i. that they may never be able to rise up again to do any more
hurt.] Ver. 11. For ye backbiters [ i. slanderers and such as have their
tongues full of venime, and work mischief rather by fraud, flattery and
backbiting then by open force] shall not be established [ vz. any long while]
upon the earth [ i. in this life to live long here] evil [ i. plagues and
punishments from the Lord] shall hunt [ vz. from place to place and pursue him,
so that he shall not escape it] the cruel man [see verse 1.4 of this psalme]
to destruction [ i. in such sort that it shall in ye end utterly destroy him.
Immanuel and others read this whole verse as a prayer.] 12. I know [ vz.
certainly and assuredly: q.d. I am fully persuaded, both by Gods word and the
daily executing of his judgments upon the wicked] that ye Lord [ vz. himself]
will avenge [ i. in good time, not only deliver his, but overtake with his
judgments the wicked and ungodly, for the injuries they have done them] the
afflicted [ i. such as are afflicted by the wicked] and judge [ i. not only
pronounce righteous sentence, but also deliver from the cruelty of the vngodly]
the poor [ i. those his servants, which are here despised amongst ye
worldlings 13. Surely ye righteous [ i. those whom thou have made righteous, by
imputing righteousness unto them, and by framing them to a righteous
conuersation] shall praise [ vz. unfeignedly and with all their hartes] thy name
[ i. thy majesty, power, and goodnes] and the just [ i. such as deal
faithfully, both with thee, and their brethren] shall dwell in thy presence [
i. shall not only in this life be maynteined and vpholden, by thy fatherly care
and providence, but shall be made partakers of eternal glory.

1 teaches us to pray to be safely delivered from the rage of ye wicked ver.
2. and 3. do generally paint out the malicious nature of ye wicked. Ver. 2.
does particularly teach us, that wicked thoughts against gods children are sin
before him. Ver. 3 teaches us, yt the wicked spare not even with slanderous
and venomous toungs to persecute ye godly. Ver. 4. teaches us, yt unless the
Lord keep us, we can not be delivered from the rage and power of ye ungodly.
Ver. 5. shows the malicious minds of ye wicked, who cease not both openly and
secretly to endeavor ye destruction of ye good. Ver. 6 teaches us, yt the more
men set themselves against us, the more earnest and often we should be with God
in prayer for his gracious assistance. Ver. 7 teaches us that God is the
protector of his in all dangers and distresses whatsoever. Ver. 8 shows yt if
God let not wicked men in their attempts, they will be more bold in mischief,
and swel against his majesty and men also. Ver. 9, 10 teach us that we may
pray against the malicious wicked, and desire their overthrow. Ver. 11 teaches
us what a grievous offense the sin of backbiting and slaundering is. Ver. 12
teaches us to be assured of Gods favor and goodness toward us, and of his
judgments toward ye wicked Ver. 13 teaches us two things, first that it
becomes the godly to show them selves continually thankful, secondly what is
the excellent estate and condition of Gods children.

Psalm 141
THis Psalm consisting wholly of supplication and prayer unto God, may be
divided into two parts: 1 to the end of the 5. In the second he foretells as
it were the destruction of ye wicked 6 to the end of the Psalm.

The Title] A Psalm of David [ i. which David made, David made this Psalm. at
some time or other when he was grievously afflicted and persecuted, and we may
refer it without injury as I suppose to ye history contained 1 Samuel 24.] Ver.
1. O Lord I call upon i. pray unto thee earnestly and continually, specially in
the time of my grievous afflictions] have thee unto me [ vz. to help me and to
deliver me out of the same: neither does he here prescribe God a time, but
rather declares the great danger and distress that he was in: q.d. unless he
were speedily helped, in the judgment of flesh and blood he should perish]
hear my voice [ i. grant ye prayers which I utter with my voice and words]
when I cry unto thee [ i. when heartily and earnestly I pray unto thee.] Ver. 2
Let my prayer [ vz. which I make i. come before thee and be accepted of thee]
as the incence [ vz. which was wont to be offered unto thee by thine own
commandment. And here he alludeth to the perfumes which they used in the
time of the law, of which read Exodus 30 chap.] and the lifting up of my hands [
i. even my prayer and supplication. He puts a gesture used in prayer for
prayer it self, as 1. Timoth. 2.8.] as an evening sacrifice [ i. as that
sacrifice which thou have appointed to be offered to thee in ye evening. God
prescribed that both morning and evening a sacrifice should be daily offered up
unto him: as Exodus 29. ver. 38.39. also Numb. 28.3.4. but here he speaks but
of one only.] Ver. 3. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth [ vz. that I may not
only be kept from the act of reuengment, but also that I may not speak any
thing but that which I should speak] and keep the door of my lips [ i. keep
me from evil speech, and guide both me and my words so, that I do not rashly
utter any thing, or else mine adversaries subtlely draw somewhat from me,
before I be 4. Incline not] vz. by leaving me in the hands of mine own
counsel, and withdrawing thy grace and goodness from me: for otherwise god
draws not any man to evil, as James. 1.13.] mine heart [ i. the affections,
motions and appetites of my heart, and by this he declares that it is little
or nothing, for a man to bridle his speech, if wicked affections be not
repressed within the mind] to evil [ i. to any evil thing: he prays that
god would confirm him against evil, and strengthen him in good things, so
that he decline not, to the right hand, or to the left hand, by any either
threatninges or alurements of his aduersaries] that I should commit. [ vz.
against thee and yt either in thought word, or deed, but specially in deed]
wicked works [ i. ungodly and unlawful yea such things, as thou condemnest]
with men that work iniquity [ i. in the company of such, as give over
themselves with greediness to commit every evil thing, and are strong and
mighty to perform naughtinesse] and let me not eat of their delicates [ i. let
me not only not enjoy, such prosperity as they do, by which they are puffed up
to wickedness, but let me not have acquaintance with them, at their tables,
lest I be overtaken with their sin: so we see what a conscience David had, to
abstain even from the allurements and prouocations to 5. Let the righteous [
i. the godly and virtuous, yea such a one, as to whom thou O Lord imputest
rightiousnesse, and whom also thou framest to righteousness.] smite me [ vz.
with the friendly and charitable word of admonition or reproofe] for that is a
benefit, or shall be a benefit: q.d. I do, and will accounte of it, as of a
great good turne] and let him reprove me [ vz. in every thing, wherein he
shall know me to do amiss, whereby he declares that he had in such sort
accustomed his heart, to docility, quietness, and patience, that he would not
think sharp any reprehension, which he knew to proceed from the spirit of
mildness.] And it [ i. this admonition and reproofe] shall be a precious oil [
i. in steed of a precious oil unto me. q.d. it shall bring both more pleasure
and profit, to mine inward man, the^ any outward oil, can bring to my outward
man, which though it be sweet in smell, and profitable to supple the members
of the body, yet the other shall be more sweet and profitable,] that shall not
break my head [ 1. which shall not hurt me. But this part of the verse, and
that which follows, is better and more plainly translated in Immanuel thus]
let him not withhold it from my head [ i. let him not cease continually to
sprinkle me, as it were with his most sweet and pleasant reproves: his whole
meaning is that the reproves of gods people should not only not be hurtful,
but pleasant and profitable unto him, and that he preferred their reprehensions
before all the favor of the vngodly] the more he [ i. the righteous man] shall
do it [ i. perform christianly and charitablie this duty of admonition and
reproof unto me] so much the more shall my prayer be [ i. so much the more
earnestlye shall I pray for them] in their evils [ i. not only when they
themselves shall be afflicted, but look whatsoever evils I shall receive from
them, they shall not provoke my mind against them, but rather provoke me to
commend them in my free prayers to god. The Geneua reads it thus] for within
a while [ i. very quickly and shortly] I [ vz. my self, seeing them cast down
and ouerthrown] shall even pray [ vz. for them though they persecute me] in
their miseries [ i. when they shall fall into such miseries as they cannot avoid:
q.d. let us wait but a little while and we shall see the wicked men's calamities
so great, that we shall be constrained in pity to pray for them. This is a
good sense referring it to the wicked, but yet methinketh the other which
refers it to the godly, is more apt and fit, and hangs better together.]
Verse 6. When their judges [ i. their rulers i. ouerthrown through Gods hand and
power] in stony places [ i. even as it were from the high rocks and huge
mou^tains] they [ i. the people which follow such corrupt rulers and captains]
shall hear my words [ i. reverently receive and give consent unto, ye good
things which I shall speake] for they are sweet [ vz. in deed: q.d. howsoever
they are now reproved as naught and unsavory, yet they are good and shall be so
accepted the^. He seems here to lay the common peoples fault (who were drunk
with false reports, and carried forward with extreme rage against him) upon the
rulers and judges themselves, not only suffering them without punishment to
speak so vnco^troledly, but also for that they were in their own persons
infamous examples of ye wickedness: q.d. when the great ones shall be discomfited
and ouerthrown, the people shall be wise and come to amendment. This is good,
but I rather allow Imman. text and sense thus] But their judges [ i. their
rulers and captains, specially and above the rest Saul] move themselves [ i.
go] by ye sides of the rocks [ i. closely and secretlye thinking to apprehe^d
me: see 1. Sam. 23.26. also 24, 3.] though they understand [ i. know in their
consciences and sometimes confess with their mouths] that my words are
pleasant [or sweet, meaning that he had not so much as by a word offended them,
or any of them, but had pleasured them very greatly, and spoken most humbly,
comfortably and sweetly unto them: see 1 Samuel 24, 9, 10, etc. also 26.14, 15,
etc.] Ver. 7. Our bones [ i. I and my companions, putting a part of vz. here
and there, meaning that they were in great distress and danger, because yt
they were many times sundered one of them from another, as that body is, whose
members are as it were out of joint, or distracted one of them from another] at
the graves mouth [ i. in great danger, and even as it were at deaths dore] as
he yt heweth wood [ vz. makes ye shiuers to fly hither and thither, so are we
through thy judgment dispersed] or diggeth in ye earth [ vz. and casts it
abroad one peer from another he cares not whether. This text and sense is
somewhat dark, therefore clear it out of Immanuel thus] as though a man should
cut wood and cleave it on the earth: our bones are scattered ready to be thrust
into the graves mouth [ i. the enemies do compass me and mine with such great
violence, and are so ready to fly upon us all, that we shall be presently
broken, and rent in pieces by their rage: unless thou O Lord lay to thy helping
hand, which danger of theirs is most excellently set out, by a very fit
similitude taken from wood cleauers: or else thus, I and my companions have bin
handled in all cruelty, as if that after they have cut a man's throat they 8. But
mine eyes [ vz. both of my mind and of my body] look [ vz. carefully and
continually, as Psalm. 123.1.2, etc.] unto thee O Lord God [ vz. only, who have
both power and will for to help me] in thee [ vz. only, and none other but
thee] is my trust [ vz. always, but specially in this time of my great
danger, and calamitie] leave not my soul [ i. me my self, a part for the
whole] destitute [ vz. of thy defense, aid, and 9. Keep me [ vz. of thy
goodness, and that by thy power and might] from the snare [ i. that I fall not
into ye snare or grin, or be taken therwith] which they [ i. mine enemies and
ungodly men] have laid [ vz. closely and secretlye] for me [ vz. to take me,
and to catch me in] and from the grins [he repeateth the same matter in other
words, which is not vain, because it serves to amplify ye cruelty and craft
of his wicked aduersaries] of the workers of iniquitye [see before 5.5. also
Psalm. 6.8. also ver. 4. of this very Psalm.] Ver. 10 Let the wicked fall [ vz.
through thy just iudgeme^t] into his nets [ i. into his own nets, vz. which he
has made and laid for others] together [ vz. with all them that take their
part: q.d. let all the ungodly be overtaken, with their own nets through thy
judgments, as fishes are taken with a casting net, for such a Metaphor, he
seems to use in this place: see for this metaphor Isaiah 19.8.] whiles I
escape [ vz. out of the dangers, which they supposed to have brought upon me,
and this escaping of his must be attributed to Gods goodness and power only.

1 teaches us, earnestness and seruency in prayer to our god, and not, as a
man would say to leave of, til he have graciously granted our requests. Ver.
2. teaches us that seeing our prayers smack of the corruption which is in us
we should earnestly desire the Lord to accept of them in his own mercy. Ver. 3
teaches us, that we can not bridle our speech, unless the Lord give us grace.
Ver. 4 teaches us, not only to pray against gross evils, but also things that
may preuoke and stir us up thereto, by reason of the slipperines of our
corruption. Ver. 5. teaches us that the reproves of the godly are good and
profitable: secondly, that a godly man should ever take them in good part:
thirdly that no evil yt men can do to us, should make us neglect our duty
toward them. Verse 6 teaches us, not only how subtle and crafty the wicked
are, to entrap Gods children, but also that no humble or sweet speech that the
godly can use, will assuage their malice and cruelty against them. Ver. 7
teaches us to what a low ebb, and miserable estate Gods children are many
times brought in this life. Ver. 8 teaches us not only in the great sea of our
afflictions, confidently to trust in the Lord, but also with patience to
attend his leisure and time for our deliverance. Ver. 9 teaches us to pray
the Lord to deliver us from the fraud and force of his and our enemies. Verse
10 teaches us to pray for the confusion of the malicious enemies of God and
his people.

Psalm 142
THis Psalm may be divided into two parts. 6.7.

The Title] A Psalm of David to give instruction [See this expounded before
Psalm 42, and Psalm 44 in the titles thereof] and a prayer [ vz. David
himself made when he was in the cave [ i. in the self same Cave with Saul,
whereof read 1 Samuel 24, 4.] Verse 1. I cried [ i. I earnestly prayed unto
the Lord [ vz. in my trouble, as Psalm 120, 1.] with my voice [ i. which
seruent words expressed with my voyce] with my voice I prayed unto the Lord
[he expresses the same thing in other terms, noting thereby the ardency and
earnestness of his prayer. Verse 2. I poured out [ vz. plentifullye i. the
meditation of my heart: q.d. I did not only pray unto him with my heart, but
laid forth the holy meditations of my soul with abundance of wordes] before
him [ i. in his presence, not meaning that God was ignorant of the thoughts of
his heart, but expressing his great duty toward the Lord] and declared [ vz.
plainly and plentifully] mine affliction [ i. the affliction and sorrow,
which I did suffer and endure, not but that GOD knew it for he knows all
things, but because this is a piece of duty which he has laid upon us, to
call upon him in the time of our trouble.] Verse 3. Though my spirit was in
perplexity in me [ i. though I my self was full of anguishe, as Psalm 7^,
ver. 3, and troubled i. did approve and allow of, as Psalm 1, 6.] my path
[ i. the order of my life, and innocent conuersation] In the way wherein I
walked [ i. what journey or way soever I tooke] have they [ i. the wicked and
mine enemies] privily laid a snare for me [ vz. to catch me in it: see Psalm
141, 9.] Verse 4. I looked vz. as well and as narrowlye as I coulde] upon my
right hand [ i. on every side of me or round about me, putting a part for
the whole] and beheld [ vz. on my left hand, and that as attentiuelye, as I
coulde] but there was none [ vz. amongst men] that would know me [ i. have any
care or regard of me, or succor me any manner of waye] all refuge [ vz. of or
from men] failed me [ i. was taken from me] and none [ vz. amongst men, cared
for my soul [ i. esteemed either me or my life: q.d. I looked on every side,
and I perceived my self 5. Then [ vz. when I saw my self thus distressed: so
yt we see yt the true taste and feeling of our own dangers and miseries will
speedily send us to god] cried I unto the Lord [see this expounded verse. 1. of
this Psalm.] and said [ vz. from the bottom of my hart] thou art my hope [ i.
he in whom I put my hope to be delivered from al my distres and fear, for
otherwise he had his hope fast settled in his hart] and my portion [ vz.
wherewith I do content my self, knowing yt having thee, I have all things, and
wanting thee I have nothing] in the land of the living [ i. in this world, and
in this very present 27, 13] Ver. 6. Hearken unto my cry [ i. grant my
petition, which I do earnestly make unto thee and pour forth before thee] for
I am brought very low [ vz. by outward persecutions and inward greefes, as ver.
3 of this Psalm. meaning by this speech also that he was at the last cast, and
even as it were at deaths dore] deliver me [ vz. of thy goodness through thy
great power and might] from my persecutors [ i. from such as persecute me, and
that without any cause on my part] for they are too strong for me [ vz. alone
and of my self meaning that he was not able to deal with the^ any manner of
way, unless God took his part 7. Bring [ vz. through thy goodness and power] my
soul [ i. my life and me my self, a part put for the whole, as Psalm. 14.1.8.
and ver. 4 of this Psalm.] out of prison [ i. out of this most present danger
and captivity wherein I am, and with which I am compassed about on every side,
by the reason of the rage of mine enemies, as the prison is with strong wals]
that I may praise thy name [ i. thy majesty, power and goodness for that
deliverance: so we have had the word, name, used sundry times in that sense
before] then [ i. when thou shall have delivered me] shall the righteous come
about me [ i. a great number of good people shall come unto me, and hear me
setting forth thy praise, for thy mercy toward me and shall not only rejoice
and be glad on my behalf, but praise thy name together with me] when thou art
beneficial unto me [ i. when thou shall have bestowed upon me this great
benefit of deliverance: see Psalm. 119.17.

1 teaches us earnestnes and feruency in prayer. Ver. 2 teaches us that the
way to be rid from affliction, is hearty calling upon the name of the Lord. Ver.
3 teaches us, that howsoever we be distressed either outwardly or inwardly,
this is our comfort, that the Lord approves us. Ver. 4. teaches us, of what
little estimation Gods children be, with the world and worldly men. Ver. 5
teaches us that the more afflictions increase upon us, the more chearefully
should we stir up our faith and hope, and earnestly call upon the Lord. Ver.
6. teaches us, that the feeling of our own misery and weakness, and the
fear of our foes force, should be good whetstones to sharpen our prayers.
Verse 7 teaches us not only to praise God for those mercies which he
bestows upon us our selves, but also to repair to others upon whom God
has bestowed great graces, that thereby we may be provoked to praise God, not
only for the^ but for our selves also, and his mercy toward us.

Psalm 143
I Do judge that this Psalm may very fitly be divided into two parts. 1. to
the end of sixth. In the second part he does as it were renew his prayer
afresh, 7. to the end of the Psalm.

The title] A Psalm of David [i. which David made: 1. Hear my prayer O Lord [
i. grant me the things that I pray for] and hearken unto my supplication [ i.
give me the things that I humbly sue unto thee for] answer me [ vz. who call
upon thee, and pray unto thee, understanding by answering also, yielding unto
his requests] in thy truth [ i. according to thy gracious promises which
contayn in the^ nothing but truth because they proceed from thee, that art the
God of truth and truth it self] and in thy righteousness [ i. according to thy
righteous nature, who do deliver a just cause from injustice: or else by
righteousness we may understand gods goodness, by which he maintains those
that are his, for gods righteousness specially shines forth in his faithful
accomplishment of his promises.] Ver. 2. And enter not into judgment [ i. be
so far of, from pronouncing i. with me thy servant, speaking of himself in
ye third person, as sundry times before, and namely, Psalm. 119, 17.] for in thy
sight [ i. before thee, if thou should once take upon thee to enter into
judgment with the^] shall none [of what state or condition soever he be] that
lives [ vz. even now, or shall live hereafter] be justified [ i. be found just,
if he be looked upon in himself, for otherwise he minds not to say yt al shall
be condemned, for God has a remnaunt in election according to grace.] Ver. 3.
i. my enemy or enemies rather ^utting one, who was the cheef, as Saul or some
such other for him, and al his co^plices] has persecuted my soul [ i. has
egarly pursued me, and my life to take it away from mee] he has smitten [
vz. with his rage and crueltie] my life [ i. me my self and my company that I
have with me, who are means for the preservation of my life, which appears
plainly by the history of the first book of Sam. and by Psalm 141.7] he [ i.
the enemy, as in the beginning of this verse.] has laid me in the
darkness [ i. has caused me and mine to dwell in Caves and holes, and other
dark places: see 1 Samuel 24.4.] as they that have bin dead long ago q.d. By
the importunity of our enemies, we are enforced to fly the light, and to live
in dark places even as it were in the graves with them that died long
sithence.] 4. And my spirit was in perplexity in me [ i. I was greatly and
grievously troubled, see Psalm. 77.3. also Psalm. 142.3] and my heart within me
was amassed [ vz. by reason of the grievous assaults that both outwardlye and
inwardly 5. Yet [ q.d. notwithstanding al my heavy affliction] do I remember [
vz. even to my great joy and comforte] the time past [ i. the graces and
blessings which in former time thou did bestow upon my forefathers and
me. He puts time for the things done in the time, he means that by former
examples and trials he strengthened himself in the faith, against the bitter
assaults which he suffred] I meditate [ vz. carefully and continually] in all
thy works [ i. in all that thou have wrought] yea I meditate [ i. I do
diligently and deeply think vpon] in the works of thine hands [ i. in those
excellent works which by thy power and providence thou have performed.] 6. I
stretch forth mine hands unto thee [ i. I do earnestlye and hartilye pray unto
thee: he puts the sign for the thing signified, as Psalm 141, 2. to
declare that we must even as it were lift up our selves unto God] my soul [ i.
I my self, but cheefely my inward man] desires after thee [ i. longs sore
after thee: see Psalm 42, 1, 2, also Psalm 84, 2,] as the thirstye land [
vz. does desire water, rain, or dew. He understands by thirsty land, the
earth which is dried and chopped for lack of water, gaping greedily as it were
to receive the moisture or rain that shall fall from heaven: see also Psalm.
63.1.] Ver. 7. Hear me [ i. grant the requests which I make unto thee]
speedily O Lord [ i. quickly and in good time, not that he prescribes god a
season, but expresses rather his great misery: q.d. unless thou quickly
help, it is like in ma^s judgment that I shall be destroyed] for my spirit
fails [ i. I faint even in the inward man, and this is a reason of his
prayer, taken from his own person and the misery that he was in] hide not thy
face from me [ i. show not thy self angry against me, as men many times do,
who will not vouchsafe to look upon the^ with whom they are displeased] else [
vz. if thou hide thy face] I shall be like unto the^ that go down into the pit [
i. there will be no difference between me and those that 8. Let me hear thy
loving kindness [ i. make me to know, feel, and perceive thy mercy] in the
morning [ i. in good time and speedily] for in thee is my trust [ i. I depend
and hang only upon thee] and show me the way that I should walk in [ i. direct
not only the order and conversation of my life, but even my very steps also
from danger.] for I lift up my soul unto thee [ i. I 9. Deliver me O Lord
from mine enemies [ i. from the power and rage of them, who seek nothing else
but to destroy me] for I hid me with thee [ i. I did hang upon thy providence
and 31.5.6.] Ver 10. Teach me to do thy will [ i. to do the thing which thou
willest and commaundest in thy word] for thou art my God [ i. thou art he
alone, whom I will serve and worship] let thy good spirit [ i. thy blessed and
holy spirit, which is called good, because it is Gods effectual instrumente,
to lead us into all goodnesse] lead me [ vz. which am so often and
continuallye straying and wandering from good thinges] unto the land of
righteousness [ i. guide me not only in this life to righteousness of life,
but to that same eternal life, wherein righteousness shall dwell for ever,
see 2. Peter. 3.13.] Ver. 11. i. cause me to pass safe and sound through this
danger, wherein I seem to be as it were in death] for thy names sake [ i. that
I and others may praise thy name, as Psalm. 142.7.] and for thy righteousness [
i. for thy righteous and faithful accomplishment of thy promises] bring my
soul [ i. me, and my life] out of trouble [ i. out of this trouble, wherein it
presently is, and under which it will quail if thou assist me not.] Ver. 12.
And for thy mercy sake [ vz. i. destroy them, by what means, or ways soever
thou shall think good] and destroy [ vz. in thy justice and judgments against
the wicked] al them [ vz. of what state or condition soever they be whether it
be Saul as the cheifest, or his complices] that oppress my soul [ i. me, and
would feign take away my life from me] for I am thy servant [ i. I am such a
one, as whom thou in mercy have vouchsaued worthy of this honor, to commit
some part of thy service into his hands: see 1. Timoth. 1.12, 13. so that he
boasts not here of his merits, but magnifieth ye grace of God, from whom this
goodness came.

Ver. 1 teaches us, 2 teaches us two things: first to pray the Lord to remove
al things that might hinder the course of his mercy toward us: secondly it is a
strong place to overthrow al imagination of man's righteousness. Ver. 3 teaches
us that God suffers and appoints ye wicked many times to prevail very far
against ye godly. Ver. 4 is a notable place to prove yt even gods children in
their troubles, have their affections against that blockish dotage of the
sto^ks. Ver. 5 teaches us that the consideration of Gods goodness in former
times, should minister no small comfort unto us, in the time of our present
heaviness. Ver. 6 teaches us to hunger and thirst after the Lord, and to be
earnest with him in our supplications unto his majesty. Ver. 7 teaches us,
that ye more our miseries grow and increase upon us, the more earnest and often
we should be with the Lord our God in prayer. Ver. 8 teaches us yt there is
nothing more comfortable then plentifully and in good time to feel Gods mercy.
Ver. 9 teaches us in all distresses to commend our selves to Gods power and
providence, as to a most sure rock and tower of defense. Ver. 10 is a notable
place against freewill, because we are blind til God teach us, and we can do
nothing without the assistance of his holy spirit. Ver. 11 teaches us, that
unless God set us free from trouble we can never be delivered. Ver. 12
teaches us, that we may safelye pray against the malicious and obstinate
enemies of Gods Church and people

Psalm 144
4 first verses. In the second he prays to GOD for the overthrow of his
enemies (whose corruption he touches) and for his own deliverance: and vz.
he shall be praised, and they shall be comforted, from verse 12 to the end of
the Psalm.

David [vz. which he made after his coming to the kingdom, when he had
obtained diverse victories, and yet notwithstanding his enemies were very busy
with him, either the Philistine, as 2 Samuel 5. or else 2. Sam. 8.] Ver. 1.
Blessed [ i. praised and that continually] be the Lord my strength [ i. he who
alone gives me strength to overcome mine enemies, see Psalm. 18.2.] which
teaches my hands to fight [ vz. against his and mine enemies, meaning hereby
also yt God gave him strength to overcome them, as well as knowledge in warlike
affairs to deal with them] and my fingers to i. apteth them and makes the^
able to endure fighting.] Ver. 2. He [ vz. alone] is my goodness [ i.
whatsoever good thing I have, either within me or without me, he is the
Fountain from whence it flows, meaning also that he had ever felt GOD
liberal and merciful toward him] my Fortress, my Tower, and my deliverer,
my Shield [all these terms are expounded Psalm 18.2.] and in him I trust [
vz. stedfastlye and continually] which subdueth [ vz. by his almighty power] my
people [ i. the subjects that he has given me] under me [ i. under the
obedience of me and my laws: he means that GOD did put into the hearts of
his people, a mind willing and 3. Lord what is man [ i. of himself, what
account or regard is he to be had in] that thou regardest him [ vz. so greatly
and so much as thou doest] or the son of man [ i. his posterity how great or
famous soever it bee] that thou think upon him [ vz. in such great mercy,
and with so fatherlye a care: see Psalm 8. verse 4.5, etc.] Verse 4. Man is
like to vanity [ i. to a thing of no accounte, or regard, or to a vain
thing. In an other place he says, that they are vanitye, that the chief men
are but lies, and to lay them upon the Balance, they are altogether lighter
then vanity. Psalm. 62.9. his days [ i. the days of this life in this
worlde] are like a shadow that passes [ vz. out of men's sightes and
remembraunces quickly and suddenly. q.d. his life is but short, and of small
continuance: see. Job. 14.1.2. see also for this verse Psalm. 39.5.6. and
psalm. 90. almost throughout.] Ver. 5. Bow thine heavens O Lord [ vz. to
come to succor and 2. Sam. 22.10. also Psalm. 18.9.] and come down [ vz. to
deliver me from the hands of mine enemies and persecutors] touch [ vz. in thy
wrath and fury: q.d. thou need not use al thy power or any great might
against them, begin but only to lay thy hand upon them: q.d. and do but touch
them as a man would say softly, and yet they shall be consumed] the mountains [
i. my most high and mighty enemies: this kind of metaphor is very often used
in the Prophets: see Isai. 2.14.] and they shall smoke [yea burn, and that to
their own destruction, he puts the beginning of their miseries, for the
accomplishment, and full performaunce thereof. And he uses all these manner of
speeches, both in this verse, and in the verse following, that he might more
excellently set out Gods power, who delivers his, after a wonderful sort, and
that he might declare, that no worldly lets or hinderaunces are able to do any
thing against Gods infinite power, which he apprehended by faith.] Ver. 6.
Cast forth the lightning, and scatter them, vz. one from an other, and q.d. by
thy heavenly wisdom and power, destroy and overthrow them] shoot out thine
arrows [ vz. against them, understanding by arrows, either thunders, or some
other particular iudgments] and consume the^ [ vz. utterly and from amongst
men, that they may no longer molest me, and thy people.] Ver. 7. Send thine i.
display and make manifest here below upon the earth, thy might and power, which
seems after a sort, to be shut up in heaven, because thy servants be not
delivered from their distresses] deliver me [ vz. of thy goodness and through
thy power, from the rage and violence of those that persecute me] and take me [
vz. who am ready to be drowned with troubles] out of the great waters [ vz.
which are ready to ouerflow and drown me, by great waters, he does not only
understand the grievous afflictions wherein he was, but also the extreme rage
of his enemies, who did break in upon him, as waters of the sea into the
land: see Psalm. 18.4. also 69.1. also 124.4.] and from the hand [ i. from the
power and force] of strangers [this may be referred, either to cou^terfeit and
bastardly Israelites, who though they bragged in mouth, that they were good
people, yet were they in deed stark naught, or else to the^, that were in
deed idolaters and infidels, such as the Philistines were, and to these latter
would I rather apply it.] Ver. 8. Whose mouth talks vanity [ i. who do
nothing i. they are unfaithful people, and full of subtilty, and have no
certainetie nor assurance in them. This speech is borrowed from the common
custom of men, who when they make a promise, give one another their hands: see
Gal. 2.9.] Ver. 9. I will sing [ vz. even from my heart] a new song [ i. a
singular and excellent 98.1.] unto thee O God [ vz. when thou shall have
performed these graces in delivering me, and overthrowing mine enemies: and the
Prophet makes this promise, and carries with him a purpose to perform it,
because he was certainly persuaded and assured, that God would in deed do,
both the one and the other] and sing unto thee upon a viole, and an instrument
of ten strings, see Psalm. 33.2. also Psalm. 92.3. he means that he would use
these instruments, 10. It is he [ vz. alone] that gives [ vz. of his goodness
and mercy] deliverance [ vz. from all dangers and distresses] and rescueth [
vz. when no other can do that for him] David his servant [ i. me whom he has
advanced to this honor to serve him in the government of the kingdom, and
thus he speaks of himself in the third person] from the hurtful sword [ i.
from the sword of his enemies, who did purpose to hurt him, if they could
have caught him, or overthrown him, we may also stretch this word further,
as that under it, he should comprehend all the dangers, through the which he
had passed] and he means that this should be the argument 11. Rescue me [
vz. O Lord, for unto him only he directs his prayers] and deliver me [ vz.
who am in distress and danger on every side] from the hand of strangers [see
for the understanding of this, and all that follows in this verse, the 7. and
8. verse of this Psalm, where you shall see the very same words.] Ver. 12.
That our sons [ i. the posterity that we shall leave behind us, through thy
favor toward us, and thy judgments upon thine and our enemies] may be as
the plants [ i. tender, fair, green, and florishing] growing up in their
youth [this may be referred either to the children, or to the plants, but I
rather refer it, to the plants: q.d. even as plants set in good ground, grow
up a pace: so by this thy blessing, the seed that we shall leave behind us,
shall increase in all comelines, beauty, and good thinges] and our daughters [
i. our seed and posterity, for under these two, sons and daughters, he
means all posterity, either male or female, which they could leave behind
them] as the corner stones [ vz. of the house builded, or in the foundation of
the house, which were not only profitable, to uphold the whole building, as
Psalm 118.22. but also was finely hewn, and cunningly wrought] graven [ i.
curiously wrought and cut] after the similitude of a palace [ i. after the
form of most costly stones wherewith most costly buildinges, as palaces are
built. But I like better Immnuel, who reads it thus] that our sons, being
as the plants growing up in their youth, and our daughters, being as the
corner stones [al this agrees with the sense before giuen] may be the
building of the temple [ i. may be such stones, as may be used to the building,
and polishing of Gods church, that we may altogether grow up, to an holy temple
in the Lord Ephe 2.21. also Ephe. 4.12.13.] Ver. 13. That our corners [ i. not
only the barnes and store houses which we have, but every corner of our
dwelling house] may be full [ vz. through thy blessing] and abounding [ vz.
in great measure and plenty] with diverse sorts [ vz. not only of grain and
corn, but of all manner of prouision] and that our sheep, may bring forth [
vz. through thy especial blessing] thousands and ten thousands [ i. may
increase infinitely, and as it were without number, for he puts a number
certain, for an vncertaine] in our streets [ i. openly, so that not only we
our selves, to our great joy, but our adversaries to their great grief may
behold the same.] Verse. 14. That our oxen [ vz. also i. meet and fit for all
that labor, whereunto thou have appointed them, and we shall according to thy
will use them, he means by this that the people may be rich and abound with all manner of worldly blessings] that there be none invasion [ vz. of the enemy
against us, that is, that the enemy run not in upon our land and us,
neither make breaches in our walls, nor enter into our cities] nor going out [
vz. to battle and war, which can not be, if none come to assault them] nor no
crying in our streets [ i. neither noise or sudden tumult, as comes to
pass in the taking of towns, nor no mourning by any occasion, either when the
enemies slay us, or otherwise, q.d. that no evil thing at all may come upon
us, that no good thing may pass from us, and that we have no heaviness, nor
cause thereof within us, and our Cities, but al things joyful and pleasant.]
Ver. 15. Blessed are i. in so good a cause. d.q. most happy surely are they]
yea blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord [ i. they in deed are
blessed, who howsoever they have or enjoy the outward blessings before
rehearsed, or have them not, yet so do taste and feel the grace of God, that
they are still persuaded of his fatherly love toward them, and in the
apprehension thereof, go on forward toward the obtaining of the heavenly
inheritance.

Ver. 1. Teaches us, that we can do nothing, no not outward things well, 2.
Teaches us, first, that God alone, is the whole aid and defense of his
children, secondly that it is not kings powers and policies that keep the
people in good order and subjection, but he alone, who boweth their hearts
thereto. Verse 3. Teaches us, that there is nothing in man, as of man that can
commend him to God. Ver. 4. Sets out, the vanity, brittlenes, and shortness
of man's life. Ver. 5. Teaches us that God needs not to use any great power,
for the overthrow of his enemies. Verse. 6. Teaches us that we may safely
pray against the malicious and obstinate enemies of his truth. Verse 7.
Teaches us, that unless GOD deliver us out of our great dangers, there is no
way or means for us to escape out of them. Verse 8. Teaches us, that there is
nothing but vanity, lying, and falshoode to be looked for, at the hands of
the wicked. Verse 9. teaches us, to be always thankful to the Lord, for
his mercies, and because we are very dull thereto, to stir up our selves, by
all the means we can. Verse 10 teaches us, that Kings victories, and their
deliverances from dangers, proceed from God, as well as the poor man's does.
Ver. 11. teaches us, that because we can not help our selves, we should
pray the Lord, to deliver us from distresses. Verse 12. teaches us, that it
is a singular blessing, to have a posterity grafted into Gods Church. Verse 13
teaches us that abundance of al things come from the Lord only. Verse 14.
Teaches us that neither our cattle nor any thing else can stand us in steed,
without Gods especial blessing: and al these three verses laid together, do
teach us further, what great commodities ensue to Gods people, by the overthrow
of their enemies: also that even these outward blessings, are to Gods servants
sure seals and testimonies of a better hope, Ver. 15. Teaches us, that they
in deed are in some measure blessed, that have these outward benefits
bestowed upon them, but yet they are in better case, which though they want
them, feel with assurance of persuasion, the eternal favor of God toward
them, in the hope and certainty of a better life.

Psalm 145
1.2.3. In the second he does as it were prophecy, that all Gods creatures
and works, shall serve to set forth his praise: from ver. 4. unto 12. In the
third he shows reasons and causes why men should praise the Lord, to wit,
for his government, his mercy, his providence, etc. 13. to the 20. And lastly
he shuts up the Psalm with promise of thanksgiving, as he began it, ver.
21.

David [ i. which he made] of praise [ vz. unto the Lord, i. of such praise
and thanksgiving, as he promised and performed unto him. So that this word
seems to comprehend the argument or the whole matter of the Psalme] this
Psalm is written, in the order of the Alphabet, every verse beginning with the
letters, as they are in order in the Hebrewe Alphabet, one only being omitted
and that is the letter Nun, in the 14. verse, which begins with Samech, the
next letter in the Alphabet, such Psalms we have had before. Psalm. 25. which
begins every verse so, two or three only excepted: such also are Psalm.
111. and 112. which begin every verse of it, and the second part of it,
which two letters of the Hebrewe Alphabet in order.] 1. O my God [ i. he whom
only I worship] and king [ i. whom I serve, and whose subject I am] I will
extol thee [ vz. in my songs and thankesgiuinges, and that above all
whatsoeuer] and will bless [ i. praise thy name, i thy majesty, i.
continually.] Ver. 2 I will bless thee [ i. praise thee, as before ver. 1.]
daily [ i. every day, q.d. no day shall pass over my head but I will spend it,
or some part of it in magnifiyng of thee] and praise thy name for ever and ever
[see before ver. 1. of this Psalm.] Verse 3. Great is the Lord [ vz. in power
and goodness, toward all, but chiefly toward his owne] and most worthy to
be praised [ vz. for those excellent things that be in him, and the great
works that he does dayly] and his greatness is incomprehensible [ vz. of us
men: for though after regeneration, we do look into it by faith, yet it is
but in some measure, for we know in part, and prophecy in part. 1. Corinthians.
13.9. and though it be said that in the life to come we shall see him as he
is, 1. John. 3.2. yet he means not that there we shall be able to attain, to
the full apprehension of Gods eternal majesty, because he dwells in light
that no man can come unto. 1. Tim. 6.16. and that which is finite as we shall be
after the resurrection, though we shall have glorified bodies, can not
comprehend that which is infinite, as God is always, but that we shall have a
far greater measure in that life, then we have had in this.] Ver. 4.
Generation shall praise thy works unto generation [ i. the praise and i. the
generations shall preach and set out the greatness of thy power, and the
excellency thereof. Immanuel refers it to Gods works, both senses are
true.] Ver. 5. I will meditate [ vz. deeply and diligently] of the beauty [
i. not only of the i. of thy majesty which is full of wonderful glory] and
thy wonderful works [ i. I will meditate of thy works also, which are rather
to be wondered at, then comprehended.] Ver. 6. And they [ i. men and specially
thy people] shall speak [ vz. vz. which is great and exceeding] of thy
fearful acts [ i. of those judgments which thou exercisest upon the
contemners of thy majesty, which should strike fear into al men's hearts] and
I will declare [ vz. freely and openly] thy greatness [ i. thy excellency,
majesty, and power, See ver. 3. of this Psalm.] Ver. 7. They [ i. men] shall
break out [ i. plainly and with open mouth] into i. even to the making
mention of] thy great goodness [ vz. toward all, but specially toward thy
people] and shall sing aloude [ i. speak openly and playnely] of thy
righteousness [ i. of thy faithful and just dealing toward all.] Ver. 8. The
Lord is gracious and merciful [this seems to be the special 34.6. see also
Psalm 86.5.15.] slow to anger [ i. not easily moved to punish] and of great
mercy [ vz. toward those that draw me unto him.] Ver. 9. The vz. his
creatures, and namely men, but chiefly amongst them, to his chosen people] and
his mercies [ i. the abundaunt plenty of his mercy, for so much I suppose the
word in the plural number importeth] are over all his works [ i. there is
none of his works, but it shows unto others, and finds in it self, very
large testimonies of Gods mercy and goodness. They then do not rightly
understand the place, that from hence would gather, that Gods mercy exceeds
all his works, though that is to be confessed to be true. But this is the true
and natural meaning thereof, that though it be so, that by means of sin,
all the world be wrapped up under the curse, yet the mercy of God passes
through al his creatures, and enters even unto the 15.16. of this Psalm.]
Ver. 10. Al thy works [ vz. which thou have created, and the noble deeds
which thou have done] praise thee O Lord [ vz. in their kind, that is do set
forth thy praises unto men, and do put in to their mouths, as it were, an
occasion to praise thee] and thy Saints [ i. those whom thou have made holy
unto thy self: See Psalm 16.3. also 30.4. also 132.9.] bless thee [ i.
praise thee, as ver. 1.2. of this Psalm.] 11. They [ i. both thy works and
people] show [ vz. out, and that sensibly and plainely] the glory of thy
kingdom [ i. the excellency of thy rule and government, meaning also that
Gods works, and the praises of his people, shoot all at this mark, vz. to
bring the world in subjection to his obedience] and speak of thy power [ i.
set it forth very plainly: how the creatures perform this: See Psalm
19.1.2. etc. also Roman. 1.19.20. etc.] 12. To cause his power [ i. Gods power,
for he suddenly changes the person, from the second to the thirde] to be
known [In these words he notes the end, why God uses his creatures, and
men's praises, vz. that other men, thereby may be drawn, to see, approve, and
confess, his goodness and power] to the sons of men [ i. to all ages and
posterities] and the glorious 11. of this Psalm.] Ver. 13. Thy kingdom [ i.
the government which thou exercisest over all] is an everlasting kingdom [ i.
shall never have ende] and thy dominion [ vz. which thou hast] indureth i.
shall never decay.] Ver. 14. The Lord [ vz. himself] vpholdeth, [ vz. by his
mercy] all that fall [ vz. into any danger or distress. See Proverb.
24.16.17. and yet we must restrain that general term, to such as the Lord
knows, in his goodness, are meet to be vpholden and stayed: without which
goodness of his, none is raised up or maintained] and lifts up all that are
ready to fall [ q.d. whether they be entering into afflictions or adversities,
or whether they be already fallen into the same, God reaches out his hand,
and either keeps them from falling, or else delivers them 15. The eyes of
all [ vz. things whatsoeuer] wait upon thee [ vz. with patience, and that
for their ^^^^re and sustenaunce] and thou give [ vz. even in thy mercy] them
their meat [ i. that portion of food, that thou have appointed for them] in
due season [ i. in that time that thou see 16. Thou openest thine hand [ i.
thou stretchest forth thy power, and give plentifully and largely to all thy
creatures] and fillest all things living [ i. whatsoever lives, and moves,
or has sense, feeling, and groweth] of thy good pleasure [hee notes here the
cause why all the creatures are norished, vz. Gods good pleasure and 2. ver.
Psalm 104. ver. 27.28. etc.] Verse 17. The Lord is righteous [ i. just and
equall] in all his ways [ i. in every thing that he takes in hand: he
means that God observes a most upright course in every thing he does, how
corrupt or partial, so ever men be in their dealings] and holy in all his
works [ i. his very works declare, that there is a certain kind of
unspeakable holiness in his majesty: that word, holy, would be better
turned, good or merciful, and so does Immanuel turn it: see to this end*
ver. 9. of this Psalm.] Ver. 18. The Lord is near [ i. even ready at hand
not only to hear them, but to help them] unto all that call upon him [ i. to
those that 4.26. 1. Corinthians. 1.2. also 2. Timot. 2.19.] yea to all that called
upon him in truth [ i. without feigning or hypocrisy, or else that call
upon him in such sort, that they perform not the invocation of his name, by
their inventions and superstitions. In sum he sets truth against
infidelity, doubting, impacience, murmuring, counterfeite humility, and
vicious affecting of things, which are the fruits of lying, for true
worshippers: See John 4.24. and this he adds in the way of correction. q.d.
though I said before, that the Lord hears all them that call upon him, yet
I mean it of al them that call upon him in truth.] Verse 19. He will
fulfill [ i. accomplish and i. the things which they shall desire and will,
according to his will: See 1. John 5.14. because God sets upon their
affections, a law of obedience] that fear him [ i. that serve and worship
him: this has been sundry times expounded before] he will also hear their
cry [ i. grant them their requests, which they pray everlastingly unto him
for] and will save them [ i. both deliver them out of all the dangers of this
life, and at the end bring them to eternal life.] Verse 20. The Lord
preserves vz. from any notorious hurt or danger: or if not so, yet he makes
away for them to escape out of it, as shall be most for his glory and their
comfort] all them that love him [ vz. unfeignedly and with a good heart, See
Roman. 8.28. but he will destroy [ vz. in his wrath, and just iudgement] all
the wicked [ vz. of the world, of what estate or condition so ever they be.]
Verse 21. My i. I will boldly and openly in words set forth his praises: he
puts the instrument wherewith words are uttered, for the words themselues]
all flesh [ i. all men, for when this word is so put alone, without adding any
thing to it does most commonly in the Scriptures respect men] shall bless his
holy name [ i. shall praise his majesty power and goodnes] for ever and ever [
i. continually, see ver. 1.2. of this Psalm.

Verse 1. Teaches us, not only to be thankful to God for his mercies, 2.
teaches us that we should let no day pass, without hearty thanksgiving,
to the Lord for his graces. Ver. 3 teaches us that Gods power and
incomprehensible majesty, should provoke us to thankfulness. Verse 4. Teaches
us to have a care to convey the remembrance of Gods benefits to our
posterity. Verse 5. Teaches us to employ more time in the meditation of Gods
works, then heretofore we have done. Verse 6. Teaches us, as well to publish
Gods judgments as his mercies, that the wicked may be pearsed with a fear of
his majesty. Verse 7. teaches us, never to be ashamed to publish gods
promises. Ver. 8, 9. Are excellent descriptions of god by his qualities, and
comprehend much matter of comfort for those that be afflicted, and also
contain very excellent causes, why we should praise, and thank God. Ver. 10.
Teaches us that it becomes all Gods creatures, but specially his faithful
people to bless and praise the Lord. Ver. 11. and 12. Teach us, not only for
our own good and the discharge of our own duty, but that others also thereby
may be drawn to do the like. Ver. 13. Teaches us, that howsoever men's
kingdoms be brittle, yet Gods government, over all, but specially over his,
indureth for ever. Ver. 14. Teaches us, that God so provides for his
children, in their dangers and distresses, that howsoever they be afflicted,
yet they do not utterly perish. Ver. 15. Sets out Gods gracious providence
and fatherly care over his children. Ver. 16. Shows that the Lord is
liberal handed toward his creatures, and that all the good things which we
have, proceed from his good will and pleasure. Verse 17. Teaches us, that
whatsoever God does, he does in all vprightnes, though perhaps we through the
blindness and corruption of our nature, can not conceive so thereof. Ver. 18.
Teaches us that God quickly hears, the earnest and unfeigned prayers of his
Servants. Verse 19. Shows that God will graciously deliver his, out of all
their dangers. Verse 20. Shows the unlikely reward, between the godly and
the ungodly. Verse 21. Teaches us, both in our own persons, and in others, to
stir up, and provoke our selves to continual thankfulness.

Psalm 146
1.2.3.4. and 5. In the second, he shows certain causes why he and other
should praise the Lord, from ver. 6. to the end of the Psalm.

106. in the title.] Ver. 1. Praise thou the Lord O my soul [ vz. for his
mercy and goodness toward thee, understanding by soul the seat of his
affections, which is the heart, See Psalm. 103.1.] Ver. 2. I will praise the
Lord [ vz. for his mercies] during my life [ i. as long as I live, and all the
days of my life] as long as I have any being [ vz. either in this life, or in
eternal life, for the action of praise and thanksgiving to God shall not cease
then] I will sing [ vz. praises and thankesgiuing] unto my God [ i. unto him
whom I serve, and whom I have found by particular 3. Put not your trust [ i.
have not any confidence or affiance in them, as though that without God or
against him, they were able to help you] in princes [ vz. how little or how
great soever they be in authority] nor in the son of man [ i. in any man
whatsoever: and this he does, to the end that God may have his whole glory^
^ecting and abolishing all perverse hopes, specially those which we have in
great personages] for there is none help in them [ i. he or they altogether
are not able of themselves, to help either themselves, or other distressed:
and this is one reason, why they should not trust in men.] Verse 4. His breath
departs [ i. even vz. out of which he was taken, as Gene. 3.19. and this must
be understood in respect of his body] then [ vz. when he dieth] his
thoughts perish [ i. all that he thought upon and devised in his imagination
come to nothing: and this is an other reason, taken from the vanity of man's
life.] Verse 5. Blessed is he i. he is in a good and blessed state] that has
the GOD of Iaakob, for his help [ i. that has the true GOD to help and
deliver him in all assayes: See Psalm 144.15.] whose hope is in the Lord his
GOD [ i. that puts his trust only in that true god, howsoever men do
destitute, forsake, or fail him.] Ver. 6. Which made heaven and earth [see
Psalm 124.8. also Psalm 121.2.] i. whatsoever lives and moves in the same:
See Psalm 8.8.] which keeps his fidelity for ever [ i. which does faithfully
and continually perform: whatsoever he has promised.] Ver. 7. Which vz. upon
the wicked and ungodly, and that word, Justice, shows that God does them
no injury when he punishes them] for the oppressed [ i. on the behalf of the
oppressed: q.d. when they are oppressed, and none able to deliver them, then
does God take upon him the defense of their just cause against the
oppressours] which gives bread to the hungry [ i. food and sustenance to
them that want it] the Lord loses the prisoners [ vz. out of their prison and
bondage, as he did Joseph, by bowing rulers hearts to set them 105.20.] Verse.
8. The Lord gives sight to the blind: the Lord raises up the crooked [ i.
he heals all diseases: yea though they be never so hard and incurable: how
true this is the whole body of the Scripture declares, and specially the
miracles of our Savior Christ in the new testament, and by crooked, he
means them, that be broken, and bowed as it were together, with afflictions
and infirmities] the Lord loves the righteous [ i. pursues them especially
with his favor, seeming after a sort to restrain that to the godly, which
he had generally spoken before.] Ver. 9. The vz. safe and sound, and free
from hurt and daunger] the strangers [ vz. which are tossed from one place to
an other, and have as it were no body to comfort them] he relieueth the
fatherless, and widow [ i. he comfort them in their distress and
heaviness, under these three, he comprehends all them, that be destitute
of aid and defense, or have no means to come by the same, of these see Exodus.
22.22.23.24.] but he overthrows [ vz. in his just iudgement] the way of the
wicked [ i. all his devises, words, and works: See Psalm 1.6.] Ver. 10. The
Lord [ vz. our God, which we serue] shall reign for ever [ vz. do his Enemies
against him and his what so ever they can] O Sion [he speaks to Sion, that is
to the Church, because God specially reigns for the preservation thereof]
thy GOD [ vz. whom thou seruest] endures from generation to generation [ i.
rules and reigns for ever and ever. as Psalm 145.13.] Praise ye the Lord
[see Psalm 106. in the end.

1. teaches us, that our praising of God should proceed from the heart. Ver.
2. teaches us, that we should continue in it, and never be weary of well
doing. Ver. 3. teaches us, earnestly to fight against that natural
corruption which is in us, that is to trust in others besides the Lord. Ver. 4.
sets out the brevity and brittlenesse of man's life. Ver. 5. teaches us,
that how soever we be forsaken of men, yet we are in good case if we trust in
the Lord. Ver. 6. teaches us, to praise God, first for the works of
creation, secondly for his merciful promising, and faithful performinge of
that which he has promised. Ver. 7. teaches us, that how soever men deal
unjustly one with an other, yet God always executes Justice: Secondly it
teaches us, that he does not for ever forget, the pore afflicted estate of his
people: Thirdly that we ought to praise him for his providence toward the
poor and needy, and his pity toward the prisoners. Verse 8. teaches us,
that many times in matters past men's reach, the Lord works most mightily,
to the end that all the glory might be given to him. Ver. 9. teaches us, that
these whom men commonly make least account of, GOD most highly regards and
esteems, it sets out also, the unlikely reward of the wicked and of the
godly. Verse 10. teaches us, that it is a singular comfort to the Church and
to every member thereof, to know that GOD is the King thereof, and his
Kingdom and government, shall endure for ever.

Psalm 147.
THis Psalm standinge chiefly in exhorting men to the praise of GOD, 1. to
the end of the sixth. In the second he exhorts men to praise him, specially
for his providence to all creatures, 7. to the end of the 11. In the third he
provoke them to praise him for his might, power, and goodness toward 12.
to the end of the Psalm.

1. Praise ye the Lord [ vz. for his mercy and goodnesse] for it is good [ i.
profitable and comfortable even to us: see Psalm 92.1.] To singe [ vz. praises
and thanks giuings] unto our god [ i. unto him who has testified by infinite
tokens, his great care and love toward us, and we again on the other side do
serve and worship] for it [ vz. praise and thanks giuinges] is a pleasant
thing [ i. is an acceptable thing even unto GOD also, as who requires the same
at our hands, as a piece of his service. Psalm 50.15.] and praise [ vz. given
unfeignedly unto GOD] is comely [ vz. both before him and all good men, though
the wicked of the world make no account of it, but as a deformed thing: see
for these two words, good, and comely, Psalm 133.1.] Verse 2. vz. him selfe]
does buyld up [ vz. through his goodness and power] Jerusalem [ i. his Church:
and under the term, build, the Holy Ghost does mean, that GOD is the author,
the founder, yea all in all for his Church] and gathers to gether [ vz. by
the voice of his word, and the use of his Sacramentes] the dispersed of
Israel [ i. the straying members of his Church. If we refer it to Jerusalem
and the Jews, he means, that GOD has been always a gracious Father unto
that people, and that howsoever they were now scattered abroad into other
cuntreyes yet he would bring them home again to their own. If we refer it
to the Church as we may and ought to do in deed, he means then, that it is
not builded by man's power, but by a heavenly and divine power, that is by GOD
himself, who gathers into the bosom or lap of his Church, all those that
are strayed from it, and appertain to his election.] Verse 3. He [ i. the
Lorde] heals [ vz. i. humbled in the inward man, for their sins committed
against him: see Psalm 51.17. it may also be taken for such, as be grieuouslie
afflicted, either outwardly, or inwardly, yea thrown down, and overwhelmed,
as it were, with their affliction] and builds up their sores [ i. remedieth
and redresseth their hurtes and evils, and cures as it were their griefs,
like a good Shepherd, Ezech. 344. and as the good Samaritane, Luke 10.34. and
as a good Surgion is wont to do, after that he has opened and dressed his
patients wounds.] Verse 4. He [ i. i. knows the very certain number of
them, and not that we should think that he sits there to reckon them, after
the manner of men,] and calls them all by their names [ i. knows how to
name every one of them, q.d. that GOD which sits in heaven, and knows all
things, yea even the least things that are, and who also rules all things
even in the very Heavens, and does by name bear rule over every one of them,
according to his authority and might: see Isaiah. 40.26. yea even yt God is
worthy to be praised: declaring also, that it is no more hard matter for God,
to gather his Church and the dispersion thereof, then to number the stars,
and to give to every thing his office, might, and property, guiding them all by
his providence and wisdom, in such sort, that nothing shall be disorderous in
that great multitude] Ver. 5. Great is our lord [ vz. in vz. also: d.q. both
his goodness and power, is very great yea infinite: See Psalm. 135.3.] his
wisdom is infinite [ vz. to men, as who can neither account it, nor thoroughly
comprehend it: understanding by wisdom, his most fatherly and wise
government also, and the particulars 6. The Lord relieueth [ i. comfort by
his word and spirit, and many times in his providence exalts to great
honor, as Psalm. 113.7.] the meek [ i. the humble hearted, and such as by
their afflictions are brought to true lowlines] and abaseth the wicked to the
ground [ i. casts them down 7. Sing [ vz. praises and thankesgiuing] unto
the Lord [ vz. our God] with praise [ i. with ioyfulnes also, as well as with
prayse] sing [ vz. Psalms of prayse] upon the harp [hee adds instruments,
for the better stirring of men up: See Psalm 144.9. and yet this was but
temporal, and arbitrarie] unto our God [see ver. 1. of this 8. Which covers
the heavens with clouds [ i. casts thick clouds containing rain in them,
over the firmament meaning thereby, that God does by that means, change as
it were, the face of the heaven, which should draw us, even to wonder at his
power] and prepares [ vz. by that meanes] rain for the earth [ i. for the
good and profit of the earth, because without rain and moisture from heaven,
it would be utterly barren] and makes [ vz. through his special blessing,
as the first cause, and the rain as the instrument] the grass to grow [ vz.
in great plenty and abundaunce] upon the mountains [ i. in most barren and
dry places, which are for the most part very scant of grass, because they are
nigh to the parching and pearsing 9. Which gives [ vz. in mercy] to beasts
their food [ i. the nourishment, wherewith they are maintained and liue] and
to the young ravens [which are not able to feed themselues] which cry [ vz.
through want of food and sustenaunce: See Job. 39.3. and in this verse the
Prophet sets out Gods fatherly care and providence, which stretches it
self, even to Ravens or Crows, which are the most contemned fowls almost
that are, men making no account of them as for food, 10. He [ i. GOD] has
not pleasure [ i. cares not for, nor delights in] in the strength of an
horse [of which you may read, a lively description. Job. 39.22.23. etc. and
under this and that which follows, he comprehends all means of flesh and
blood whatsoever, in which many men put their trust, but that is a perverse
thing, and much to be condemned: and yet without that we may lawfully use all
holy means, which God shall give vs] neither delights he in the legs of
man [ vz. how strong, well proportioned, swift, and nimble so ever they be:
meaning notwithstanding that God exercises this goodness toward us, of the use
of the means, not for any worthiness, that is in any of the Creatures, but
for his own glory fake, and the good of his 11. But the Lord delights in
them [ i. both cares very much for them, and takes singular pleasure in
them] that fear him [ i. sincerelye worship and serve him, having a reverent
fear of his majesty in their heartes] and attend [ vz. in hope and patience]
upon his mercy [ i. the time, till in mercy he perform that, which he
has graciously promised them.] Verse. 12. Praise the Lord [ vz. for his mercy
and i. O thou his Church] praise thy God [ i. the GOD which thou seruest] O
Sion [by Sion and Jerusalem he understands both one thing [ vz. Gods Church
and congregation: See Psalm 51.18. meaning also by this often provoking of men
to praise the Lord, to teach them this, that they can never want occasion or
matter in that behalf.] Ver. 13. For he has vz. in such sort, that no enemy
is able to break them, or to make any irruption into them, meaning by this
speech that the Church was well defended with aid and succor from GOD yea in
such sort, that it need not fear the enemies thereof, because it was defended
and should be delivered from all euill] and has blessed [ vz. with all manner
of goodness, and namely with increase of multitude] thy children within thee [
i. those that appertain unto thee, whether they be young or old, for all are
the children of the Church.] Verse 14. He [ vz. alone] sets peace in i.
keeps thy coasts, Country and people in all quietness, not only in that
he mightily drives away all thine enemies, but also in that he inclines the
hearts of thine own people, to mutual peace, and so keeps them from
tumults and rebellion] and satisfies thee [ vz. to the full in all abundaunce
and plenty] with the flower of the wheat [it is in Hebrewe with the fat of the
wheat. See Deutron. 32.14. See also Psalm 81.16. meaning even that part of
the wheat, not only which yielded greatest plenty, but also wherein the
greatest strength of nourishment consisted: understanding also by this
particular thing, whatsoever did appertain to this present life, and was fit
for man's nourishment.] Verse 15. He [ i. God the Lorde] sends i. he needs
no more, but to command only, and then by a certain secret motion and
inclination which he has given unto the earth, the earth brings forth the
effects thereof, as we see, by experience] and his word [ i. the word
which he vttereth] runs very swiftly [ vz. to be accomplished and
performed: q.d. when he has declared what he would have done, all things
are pressed and prepared ready to obey him: so that look whatsoever he speaks
by his word and commands, it is presently done, as appears Psalm 33.9.
and by the particular enumeration of things, which follows in this Psalm.]
Ver. 16. He gives i. sends, vz. from heaven and casts it upon the earth]
snow like wool [ i. very white, and light as wool is: so that in these
respects snow and wool may be compared together] and scatters the hoare
frost [ vz. in sundry places] like ashes [or dust, which being light of
themselves, and cast out, are scattered hither and thither with the wind.]
Verse. 17. He casts forth his ye like presently fallen but a little before:
yea we have seen, that almost at the one and the self same instant, there
has been rain and frost, other some for hail and tempest: and to this latter
do I incline, because that the drops of rain, by very great cold in the
air are turned into hayle, which seem to be, little morsels or pieces as it
were] who can abide the cold thereof? [or rather thus, 18. He sends [ vz.
forth his word [ i. his commaundement] and melts them [ vz. presently: q.d.
he needs but only speak the word, and they are by and by molten and
consumed as it were] he causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow [ i.
he brings speedily the wind into a warm quarter, and there comes
presently a thaw of the snow, frost, ice, hail, etc. and by their melting, the
waters are increased, and flow and swell beyond their ordinary and
accustomed bounds. The wind is called Gods, both because he created it, and
has it continually at his commandment to do with it, whatsoever pleases
him, and by waters he 19. He shows [ vz. plainly and manifestly, so that
they can not pretend ignoraunce] his word [ i. his doctrine, and certain
knowledge out of the same, that they may follow him, whither he calls them
thereby] unto Iaakob [ i. unto his faithful people] his statutes, and his
judgments [ i. his whole law and every part thereof, whether it consist of
commandments, or punishments for the breath of those commaundements] unto
Israel [ i. unto Iaakob and Israel are here put both for one thing. See Psalm.
14.7.] Ver. 20. He has not dealt so [ vz. mercifully and graciously] with
every nation [no not with any nation, for unto the people of the Jews, all that
time, were the oracles of God committed only: See Romans 3.2. and Romans 9.4.]
neither have they [ i. other nations and people of the world besides the Iewes]
known his judgments [ i. his word, putting a part of it for the whole, as
sundry times in Psalm. 119. True it is the Gentiles before their calling, knew
him by his works, and that was sufficient to make them without excuse before
him, but by his word he was only known to his own people] praise ye the
Lord [see Psalm. 106. in the end, also Psalm. 113. in the end, and Psalm. 146.
in the end, and the rest of the Psalms following even unto the end of this
book.

1. Teaches us, that it is profitable for our selves, and acceptable to God,
to be earnest and often in praising and thanking of him. Ver. 2. Teaches us,
the continual care and love, which God bears toward his Church. Ver. 3.
Sets out Gods pity and love, toward all such as are truly beaten down,
with their afflictions either outward or inward. Verse. 4. Sets out his
exceeding great power and care in the government and disposing of his
creatures. Ver. 5. Teaches us, that we can not of our selves, attain to the
least part of Gods wisdom. Ver. 7. Shows, how dull we are in praising our
God, in that we are so often provoked unto it, and have need of so many both
outward and inward things to stir us up thereto. Ver. 8. Teaches us, that
rain, the fruitfulnes of the earth, and all other such like things, proceed
from God alone. Ver. 9. Teaches us to be rightly persuaded, of Gods
providence, who seeing he feeds the unreasonable beasts and ravens, will not
leave us destitute.] Verse 10. Teaches us, that no outward thing which we
have, nor can do, as of our selves, can commend us to God.] Ver. 11. Teaches
us, that if we will be acceptable before God, we must strive to these two
things, vz. in hope and patience to wayce upon him, and to yield unto him
that service, that in his word he requires at our hands. Verse 12. Teaches
us, that Gods faithful people, and his Church, are specially bound above
others, to praise the Lord. Verse 13. Teaches us, that the safety,
prosperity and multiplying of the Church comes from God only. Ver. 14.
Teaches us also, that the peace and plenty of his people proceed from him
only, and not from any policy or devise of man whatsoever. Ver. 15. Shows,
that the Lord can by his word, do watsoeuer pleases himself. Ver.
16.17.18. Teach us, that howsoever God use secondarie causes, in the
accomplishment of his will, yet it is his power only that directs and
disposes of al things: see to this end Job. 37. throughout. Ver. 19. Teaches
us that gods word is the most singular jewel and blessing that God can give us
in this life. Ver. 20. teaches us that God will have mercy upon whomsoever he
will have mercy, and he will show compassion to whomsoever he will show
compassion, as for the other he will harden.

psalm 148
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. In the first, 1. to the end of
6. In the second he stirs up 7. to the end of the 12. In the third, he
exhorts

The title] Praise ye the Lord [See before Psalm. 106. also 111. also 112. 113.
also 146. also 135. and 149. and 150.] Verse 1. Praise ye the Lord from the
heaven [ q.d. al ye things that are in the heavens, and have your abiding
there, magnify the Lord, and extol him for his goodness, praise ye him in the
high places [ i. ye that are in the heavens, and have your dwelling places as
it were there, and the heavens are called high places, because they are high
above us, and note that in this verse, he speaks generally unto them al,
meaning them parcularly, and as it were one after another in the verses
following,] ver. 2. Praise ye him, all ye his angels [hee speaks this, not as
though the Angels did not their duty in that behalf, but because he would
have them to show men the way as it were to praise God, and they are called
Gods angels both because he created them, and also because they are always
ready to execute his commandements] praise him, al his armies [or hosts, this
is a general word, and is to be referred to all the heavenly creatures, as
Gene. 2.1. which are called Gods armies and hosts, because he uses their
ministry and service, either in the defense of his children, or in the
overthrow of his and their enemies: and yet notwithstanding it may very well be
applied to Angels especially as who are 3. Praise ye him sun and moon [he
directs his speech to the insensible creatures, though they have no
understanding, because they glorify their creator, in doing their duty, and
keeping the order, which he has set them, and because Gods glory shines forth
in them, and they do, as it were, with a loud and clear voice, publish and set
forth his praises, see Psalm. 19.1. and Psalm. 145.11. all this he does to
show, that it should be great unkindness, if men should degenerate from the end
of their creation] praise ye him al bright stars [ i. all stars: for there
is no star, but he has brightness and light in him, to shine upon the
1.16.17.] Ver. 4. Praise ye him, heaven of heavens [ i. not only the circles
and spheres, wherein the planets are, as it were in diverse seats, and dwelling
houses, as the Philosophers affirm, but even the very true heavens, the place
of eternal joy prepared for the elect, see for this phrase, 1. King. 8.27.] and
waters [ i. raine] that be above the heaven [ i. are in the clouds, above the
firmament, and are there uphold by his almighty power, See Genesis 1.7. so
heaven in this place, is put for the air, or the nethermost region of the
air, 5. Let them [ vz. altogether, and every one of them] praise the name of
the Lord [ i. celebrate and set forth his majesty, power, goodness etc.] for
he commanded [ i. he spoke the word onely] and they [ i. all and every one
of them were created [ vz. immediately 33.6.9.] Verse 6. And he has
established them [ vz. by the strength and power of the same word, whereby he
created them] for ever and ever [ i. to all perpetuity and this must chiefly
be understood of the Angels, and ministering spirites] he has made an
ordinance [ i. he has set a decree, or decreed, by which they are lead, to do
the office whereunto they are appointed] which shall not pass [ i. which shall
not vanish or fleet away: or rather thus, which they shall not pass [ i. which
they shall not transgress, 7. Praise ye the Lord from the earth [ i. ye
earthly things, as from the heaven, verse 1. was heavenly things, and this
is a general term, comprehending the particulars expressed afterwardes] ye
Dragons [the Hebrewe word properly signifies great fishes, such as are
Whales, but yet it may be applied generally to all great beasts, whether they
live in the land, or in the waters] and all depthes [ i. all deep places, or
rather by the sign metonomia, all things contained in the deep places, as
whether they be in the bottom of the sea, or in the caves of the earth.] Ver.
8. Fire [ i. lightning] and hail [ i. which commonly vz. in the air, which
are drawn up thither by the power attractiue of the sunne] stormy wind, which
[ vz. wind, or else all of them together, but I rather refer it to the wind]
execute his word [ i. obey his commandment after their manner and fashion, the
accomplishment whereof we see Exodus 14.25. And this he says because
alterations come not by fortune or chance, but are guided and governed by Gods
secret will.] Verse 9 Mountains and all hills [by this particular i. trees that
bear fruit for the nourishment of man and beast, which thing many trees do
not, being replenished only with boughs and leaues] and all Cedars [ vz. how
high and tall soever they be, meaning that if the best were not excepted, the^
the worst should not.] Verse 10. Beasts and all cattle [ vz. of what kind or
form so vz. as worms, snakes, serpents, and such like, which creep or
craule, understanding also by those the very fishes, as may appear Genesis 1.20.]
and feathered fowls [ i. every thing that has wings and flies.] Ver. 11.
Kings of the i. al manner of rulers and men of might, by what title or name
soever they are called: and in that he begins with them, he does not only
closely as it were reprove them for their unthankfulness, because that whereas
they are more bound to God then others, by reason the greater benefits they
have received from him, and yet notwithstanding they are more slow to do their
duty in this behalf, unless they be wonderfully provoked and pricked on
forward, defrauding God by that means, of the praise which is due unto him,
supposing that the world was made only for them, but also secretly tells the^
their duty, to wit that they should go before others in the performance of
that great office: for the more that any has received, and in the offices of
his exaltation draws nigh to God, the more is he bound to serve him and to
magnify the riches of his grace] and al people [ vz. of the world, of what
nation, country or kindred soever they be] princes and all judges of the world [
i. all that have the matters of state or public justice committed unto them.]
Ver. 12. Young men q.d. yea let virgins which are not so well instructed as the
male kind is, and let children which are not so skillful as the old sort are,
perform this duty of praise unto the Lord.] Ver. 13. Let them [ vz.
altogether, 11, 12.] praise the name of the Lord [ i. his goodness, power and
might] for his name only is to be exalted [ vz. in the songs and praises of
his peoples, meaning that none is worthy of praise, in respect of himself, but
he alone: see Psalm 145, 3.] and his praise above the earth and the heavens [
i. he is to be praised more then the heavens or ye earth: or else his praise is
so great, that neither the heavens nor the earth, nor all things therein
contained, are able sufficiently to express it: and this is ye first reason
why they should praise him taken from the excellency of Gods own majesty.] 14.
For he [ vz. alone] has exalted [ vz. by his power and mighte] the borne of
his people [ i. their strength, for so have we had the word horn used sundry
times heretofore, meaning that God advanced his Church both into great
strength and dignity] which [ vz. exaltation and lifting up of their glory and
strength] is a praise to all his saints [ i. tends not only to their glory
and praise, but also offreth them a plentiful occasion to praise and magnify
his name, by reason of the grace which he has showed them. For the word,
Saints, see Psalm 145, 10.] even for the children of Israel [ i. even for ye
true and right Israelites, and this is an other term proper and peculiar to
Gods sons and seruaunts] a people that is nere unto him [ vz. by the reason
of the covenant which God has made with them in the person of Abraham, and
confirmed in his son Christ: and thus he does more and more specify the
people, who have most singular occasion to praise him] praise ye the Lord
[see Psalm. 146 in the end.

1. to the end of ye 10. vz. that if all Gods creatures in the duty, and by
the right of their creation are bound to praise God in their kind, much more
man, for whose sake all ye creatures were made, that are made An other general
doctrine we may gather out of verse 2. that if Angels must be put in mind of
the performance of this duty, men had much more need to be remembered, and not
only so, but to be pricked and provoked forward thereto. Verse 5 being a
general inference upon the particular premises, does plainly prove, that
Angels as well as other things were created, and yt therefore that is a dotage
of some to think that they were without beginning: and withal it plainlye and
sufficientlye overthrows the dream of the Sadduces, who did think that
there was neither Angel nor spirit. Verse 6 teaches us, that not one of the
creatures, nor all the creatures, can go beyond the bounds which God has set
them in his eternal decree. Verse 8 teaches us that al gods creatures are but
instruments to execute that which God will have them to do. Verse 11 teaches
us that as Kings are the highest, so they should be ye first, and examples to
others in the service of God. Verse 12 teaches us, yt no age or sex can or
should be exempted from the sincere worship and service of God. Ver. 13.
teaches us that as God only is to be praised, so he is only to be prayed unto
because praise and prayer, belong only unto him alone. Verse 14 teaches us,
first that all the glory and strength, which the church has, it has it from
God, secondly that God never bestows benefit upon the Church, but that it
becomes the same above all others to be thankful to God for it.

Psalm 149
THis psalm may be divided into two parts: i. to the end of the 4. In the
second he provoke them to praise him, for the strength 5. to the end of the
psalm.

The title is expounded before. Psalm. 148. 1. Singe ye [ vz. which are his
sons and seruantes] unto the Lord [ vz. your God] a new song [ i. a singular
and excelent song, by reason of an unaccustomed benefit which you have received
from the Lord. see Psalm. 33.3. also psalm. 144.9.] let his praise [ i.
songs and Psalms made unto his praise] be heard [ vz. openly and painelie]
in the congregation of saint [ i. in his Church: this is an excelent
description of the Church: for saints: see Psalm. 148.14. [Ver. 2. Let
Israel [ i. the Church of God and faithful people: see Psalm. 147.19.
148.14.] rejoice [ vz. excedinglie, and with an unfeigned joy.] in him that
made him, [ i. in God, and he means it not here of the general creation
only, but also of their free adoption, by which they were chosen and separated
from all mankind, to be a peculiar people to God, which was as it were a new
creation] and let the children of Sion. [ i. the faithful members of the
Church: see Psalm. 146.10. and 147.12.] rejoice [ vz. as before in this verse]
in their king [ i. either in David, and so by consequent in Christ, because
David was but a figure of him: or else in God, whom the faithful many times
call their king, as Psalm. 5.2. and this latter do I rather allow, because of
that which goes before in this verse and follows in the next.] Ver. 3. Let
them praise his name [ i. i. let them boldly and freely praise him, by all
the means that lawfully they may: see Psalm. 81.2.3. and other Psalms also
as. 33.2 and 144.9.] Ver. 4. for the Lord has pleasure in his people: [that
is, as 147, 11.] he will make the meek glorious, by deliverance [ i. by
delivering them out of the hands of their enemies, and all their dangers: he
means that God will give the^ that be afflicted, this honor, vz. he will
vouchsafe them aid and deliverance from him, or as we would say, will bestow
upon them, the great honor of deliverance.] Ver 5. Let the Saints [see before
ver. 1, of this Psalm.] be joyful with glory [ i. gloriously rejoice: or else
rejoice for the great glory, that God has vouchsaued to bestow upon them] let
them sing aloude [ vz. unto the Lord and his prayse] upon their beds [ i. in
the night season: q.d. let them spend days and nights in the praising of him
for his great mercies.] Ver. 6. Let the high acts of GOD [ i. the notable and
singular i. let them continually speak of them, and praise him for them and a
two edged sword in their hands [ vz. both to defend themselves and to 7. To
exercise vengeance upon the heathen [ i. to repaye them the iniurye and wrong
which the heathen and wicked enemies have done them] and corrections among the
people: [ i. to chastise, correct and subdue them, as others had done the like
8. To bind their Kings in chains [ i. to make even their Princes and Rulers
Prisoners] and their Nobles with fetters of iron [ i. to make them captive
also: it is as much: q. d. That there might be neither 9. That they [ i. the
faithful people] may execute [ vz. with justice and vprightnesse] upon them [
i. upon the heathen kings and their people] the judgment that is written [
vz. in the holy Sscripture. So that I take these 4. last verses to be a prayer
that the Prophet made for ye flourishing estate of the people of ye Jews, that
they might faithfully execute Gods judgments upon the Gentiles, according to
his word, without adding any thing thereto, or taking any thing therefrom. See
Deuteronomy. 12.32. also Deuteronomy. 29, 29. If we apply this to the church and kingdom of
Christ, then by the two edged sword, we must understand the word of God, which
is the sword of his mouth, of which fee 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Heb. 4 12. Revel. 1.16.
and al other instruments which God uses to cast down strong holds, and to
overthrow mighty imaginations, whereof see 2 Cor. 10.4, etc.] this honor [ vz.
of their conquest and ouercomming of their enemies] shall be to all his saints [
i. they shall have their part in it, and feel the work and power of God
inabling them to do the like: which is a matter of great comfort] Praise ye the
Lord [see of this in the end of Psalm. 148.

1 teaches us two things, first that as God multiplieth new benefits upon us,
so we should anew and afresh as it were, stir up our selves to be tha^kfull
unto him continually: secondly that above all his praises should specially be
founded forth in his Church. Verse 2 teaches us, that seeing God has begotten
us again unto himself, and is become our kingdom, that therefore we should
strive in all soundness to the obedience of his will. Ver. 3 teaches us to
use all lawful means to provoke and stir up our selves to that great duty of
praise and thanksgiving. Verse 4 sets out unto us the singular love and
affection of God toward his people. Verse 5 teaches us not only cherefully to
praise God for his mercies, but to do it also continually both day and night.
Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, teach us, to wish and pray for the prosperitye and flourishing
of Gods Church, and the confusion and overthrow of the obstinate enemies
thereof. Ver. 9 teaches us, that by reason of the fellowlike affection and
feeling which is and ought to be amongst the members of the Church, the joy,
glory and victory of some members and parts thereof, shall be the joy, glory and
victory of the other.

Psalm 150
THis Psalm may be divided into three parts. 1.2. Secondly 3, 4, 5.

The title has bin sundry times touched heretofore. 1. Praise ye God [ vz.
which are his faithful seruauntes] in his sanctuary [this may be expounded
thus, either that God dwells in heaven, which is sometimes called his
sanctuary, or thus, in his sanctuary, yt is in his temple. Or else thus, in
his sanctuary: that is, in his sanctity, or holiness, and so I suppose the
hebrew word would rather be turned: q.d. praise God for the great holiness he
has in himself, some part whereof also it pleases him to communicate unto
vs] praise ye him in the firmament of his power [ i. praise ye him for the
firmament which declares his power, as Psalm 19, 1, or else thus] praise ye
him for his power stretched out [ vz. over all creatures, because in him and by
him, they live, move, and have their being, and this sense I take to be the
better, and to agree best with the hebrew text.] Ver. 2. Praise ye him in his
mighty acts [ i. for his noble and valiant acts which he has done for you,
and against your enemies: i. though ye can not praise him as he most justly
deserves, yet strive you to render unto him that which he has enabled you to
perform. For he means not that we are able to praise him according to his
excellency.] Ver. 3. Praise him in the sound of the trumpet [ i. with trumpets
clearly sounded, see Psalm. 81.3.] praise 33.2.] Ver. 4, Praise ye him with
Timbrell and flute [see Psalm 149, 3.] praise ye him with Virginals and
Organs.] 5. Praise ye him with sounding Cimbales [ i with Cimbals that may be
heard, for otherwise there are no Cimbals, or any other musical instruments,
but they have a sound if they be played vpon] praise ye him with high sounding
Cimbales [ i. with Cimbales which being set high and so tuned, may very easily
be heard. By this particular enumeration, he means nothing else but that they
should praise God by all holy and lawful means they could: see to this
purpose before Psalm 149, 3. Concerning these instruments it is true that under
the law they served to lead the people to a certain kind of holy joy. If any
would infer hereupon, therefore they should be used now publicly in the
Church, they are much deceived, for they were but ceremonies, and we know and
believe, that the ceremonial law and every part and piece thereof is
abolished: so that we can not without injury to Christ, retain them publicly
in our Churches. Concerning the private use of them, they are so far forth to
be used, as they provoke us to holiness, if they be instruments to stir up
men to sin and filthiness, they must be detested and abhorred as vile and
abominable.] 6. Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. Some refer
it to all creatures, and it is true that the word may well bear and import so
much. I for mine own part refer it only to men, who though they live as other
creatures do, yet the word breath, as also the word life, does more properly
agree to them, then to beasts] praise ye the Lord [see before in the end of
three or four of these last Psalms. Now let us mark that when the scripture
does so often times put us in mind to praise the Lord, it does justly charge
and upbraid us, with our unthankfulness and slothfulness in that behalf.

1, 2 teach us that we are bound to praise God, and show also certain causes
why we should do it, vz. for the holiness he communicates to us, for his
great care and providence over us, and all creatures, for his mercies toward
us, and his judgments toward the wicked. Ver. 2 teaches us, that though we
cannot praise God, or pray unto him as we should, and he justly deserves, yet
we should not for all that leave of. Ver. 3.4.5. teach us to use all the holy
and lawful means we can to stir up our selves to unfeigned thankfulness to
our God. Ver. 6. teaches us, that men above all his other creatures, are
specially bound to be continually thankful unto him.

Ephesians. 3. Ver. 20.21. Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, even
above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us,
be praise in the Church by Christ Jesus, thorowout all generations for ever.
So be it.

Faults escaped. The first number notes the page, the second the line.
Page 1. l 13. they, r, theirs. 2. l. 12. in the, r, of the. 3. l. 40. they, r,
men. 5. l. 3. many, r, man, l. 15. kingly, r, king by, l. 16. imagination,
inauguration, 9. li. 28. of r. from l. 41. co^triued r, contained. 10. l. 6.
or, r, on. l. 22. draw. deceive. 14. l. 39. such, r, further. 15. li. 20.
rebuked, reputed. li. 26. cruelty and subtlety, r, cruelly and subtly, li.
31. par. r, per. 19. l. 21. time, term. 22. l. 24. puts, r, put them. li.
37. sum, r, same. 23. l. 20, consists, r, trusts. 27. li. 7 t^^e, r,
term, 35. li. 2. out, r, on li. 9. not to, r to note. 40. l. 32. thy, r, my.
46. l. 28. possible, r, impossible. l. 31. Gods, r, God. 46. l. 18. lustines,
loftiner, l. 26 sentences, senses. 51. li. 20. removed, revived. 59. li. 32.
strike, r, stir. 68. li. 27. affection. r, affliction. 70 l. 38 quarellors,
quarellous 73. li. 10. better, r, bitter. li. 30. set, r, fet 74 li. 3. intent,
innocent. 77. li. 20 guilty, r, guile, 82. l. 24. rejected recited, 85. 38.
spoke, r, smoke. 88. l. 33. past me, past cure. 91 li. 40. drunk, dumb. 96.
li 20. trusty, untrusty. 97. li. 30. parting, for panting 104. l. 39. kimcho,
for kimchi. 100. l. 37. performed, for perfumed. 110. l. 20. 1. Cor. for 1.
Chro. 111. l. 15. breathing, for breaking. 113. l. 30. sects. r, sorts. 161 l.
21. expounded, r, propounded. l. 36. ceased, r, seized 172. l. 34. captains,
r, captives. 174. l 20. mother, read both our. 176 l 6. expound, for propound.
l. 7. expounds, propounds. l. 16. seek, for sets out. 181. l. 6.
altogether, r, All together, 186. l. 17. faithful, r, faith 203. l. 1.
afflictions, r, affections. 205. l. 29. godly, for ungodly, 255. l. 24. first,
r, for so. 259. l 27. referred, r, corrected. 265. l. 18. see, r, use. 266. l.
10. mortal, for immortal. 271. li. 26. strange, r, strong. 303. l. 16. comfort.
r, confute. 315. li 11. three, r, two. 347 li 35. for necess. r. but for
necess. 354. l. 18. peraphrasis, read, periphrasis. l. 19. beginning, r,
begetting. 363. li^. 13. means, for names. 364. li. 28. land, read hand.
367. l. 13. slaieth, for staineth. 397. l. 31. reed, for rod li 38. bands, r,
bounds, li. 40. supposes, r, suppostes. 399, li. 13. Himites, r, Hiuites, 405.
li. 4. shall, r, should 406. l. 25. invisible, for insensible.


