A SERMON PREACHED at great Yarmouth, Upon Wednesday, the 12. of September.
1599.

By W. Y.

The argument whereof was chosen to minister instructions unto the people, upon
occasion of those present troubles, which then were feared by the Spaniards.

Eccles. 9.18. Better is Wisdom, then weapons of war: but one sinner
destroys much good. Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling
hill, near Carterlane. 1600.

TO THE Worshipful, Master John Felton the elder, and Master Thomas Manfield,
Bayliffes of the Town of great Yarmouth, grace and peace in our Lord Jesus
Christ.
IT is feigned of the Poets (Worshipful master Bayliffes, Ovid. Metam. 11.
Riuus aquae Lethes, etc.
that there is a River in Hell called Lethe, of which whosoever drinks,
forgets all that he has remembered before. Whatsoever they have imagined, sure
it is, that the devil has an hellish device, to make the ears of the people
drunken with vanities, that whatsoever instructions have been delivered unto
the^, yet, for the most part, they are soon forgotten, and the remembrance of
them no more to be found. I will not condemn them for so weak of memory, as
Massula was, who forgot his own name: or so dull of capacity, as the
Thracians, that could not recko^ above four, yet sure it is, the small profit
and practice that arises by the preaching of the word, argues the dryness of
their brains, or that God speaks once and twice, and man regardes it not. Many
there be which will go to hear sermons, but few that can go to remember
them: could we as well remember, as we can hear, no doubt, Christianity
would flourish as the vine-tree, and bring forth plenty of fruit: but because
it is otherwise, sermons being once preached, become as music unto us,
delighting our ears only for a time: but being ended, their sound vanishes
away. Therefore (though I may seem to add more fulness to the sea) I have
published, and in publishing, enlarged this sermon, which was once preached
before you, that if your memory fail of that which was then delivered, the
ear may hear it again, and the eye see it, and the mind conceive it, and the
soul receive and taste the benefit thereof: Efficacior lingua qua^ litera,
Barnard, Ep. 66.
and though it be now less perswasiue, then when it was pronounced by the
gesture and countenance of a living man: yet wants there not to answer it,
that you may read and read it again, meditating thereon not once or twice,
but often. Many wise and learned have prudently and painefully labored in this
course, and the world flows with diversity of Books, as the sea with
variety of fishes, and therefore mine might have well been spared: yet was
the argument (of which Ispake) so fitting to the time when I spoke, that lest
we should be as forgetful of these instructions, as it seems we are of those
rumors of wars and troubles which then suddenly befell us, I have ventured
to acquaint you with the same matter again, and to make the benefit thereof
more public, which then was but private to your own ears.

Now, because you are the men, whom the Lord has made his lieutenants over
this town, next under her Majesty, Number. 27.17.
to go in and out before this people: I have made you the patrons of this my
simple labor, as you are Patrons over those (for whose benefit it was
preached, and is now published) both to lead them forth, and to bring them
home, that the congregation of the Lord, might not be as sheep without a
shepherd. And even as the Loadstone does by a secret operation and virtue
attract iron unto it, so your virtuous and religious minds, entertaining and
patronizing this, may (with the Loadstone) draw others of the iron sort, and
those of baser metal then your selves, to entertain, receive, and peruse it,
to their comfort, being guarded with the countenance and credit of your names.
If any Christian receive profit by it, Iam. 1.17.
let him, who is the Father of lights, and giver of every good and perfect
gift, and the increase of these which are imperfect, have the praise thereof;
there shall none of his glory cleave to my fingers: neither is that which I
have done, for any earthly respect, or worldly consideration: for I have had
that which I expect, and more I neither look for, nor desire. Only this, that
the Lord in his mercy would grant, Oculus and sceptrum. Emble^. Egyptiac. quo
Magistratuu^ regimen desig. Psa. 2.9
that as he has set you on high, and graced you with the government of this
people: so your eye and your scepter may be joined together: that first you may
be quick-sighted to discern sin, and sin being discovered, to bruise it in
pieces with your scepter of government, that judgment may praise you in the
gate, and Justice advance her self in the great congregation: that unity,
peace, and concord may be established, virtue, godliness, and religion
furthered: that the preaching of the word may more and more flourish, and work
mightily in the hearts of the people for their conversion: Mat. 4.13.
and that Yarmouth may be with So the word signifies.
Capernaum, even a place of repentance, situate by the seaside.

The Lord, even the most mighty God, inflame your worshipful and zealous
hearts with a care hereof, that during the heat of the day, and the time of
your government, ye may be Paragons to those which went before, and examples
to as many as shall follow. And thus I commend you unto the Lord, and to the
word of his grace, which is able to build you further, and to give you an
heavenly inheritance, among them which are sanctified in Christ Jesus. From the
Priory in Yarmouth, Oct. 24. 1599.

Your Worships in the Lord, William Younger.

A SERMON PREACHED AT great Yarmouth.
The Text. Jeremiah 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that
thou may be saved: how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee?
THe purpose of the Prophet in the former part of this prophecy (Worshipful
and well beloved) is to work conversion in the hearts of the Jews: Eccles.
4.12.
and because (as Solomon says) A threefold coard is not easily broken: so to
the end that he might with greater force, and more vehemency, draw them
thereunto, he has twisted and twyned together a threefold cord, an argument
of a triple force and efficacy, to move them to repentance. First, from the
consideration of his benefits and mercies bestowed upon them, in the second and
third verses of the second Chapter. Secondly, from covenants and promises made
unto them, in the fourteenth verse of the former Chapter. Thirdly, from
judgments and threatenings denounced against them, in the seventh verse of this
Chapter, where the Prophet says: Verse. 7.
The Lio^ is come up from his den, the destroyer of the Gentiles is departed
and gone forth, to lay the land waste, and the Cities shall be destroyed without
an inhabita^t. So that you see how wisely, and with what powerful discretion,
the prophet enforces his exhortation.

1 From benefits bestowed: 2 From promises made: 3 From judgments threatened.
So as, if benefits would not allure them, promises may provoke them: if
promises could not provoke them, judgments might fear them: when
Nabucadnezzar should come as a roaring Lion from his den, and their enemies the
Caldea^s, to lay the land waste, and to level their Cities with the ground,
when places full of inhabitants, should be left without inhabitants, when all
the orders and companies of Israel, from the highest Cedar, to the lowest
shrub, from the Prince of high estate, unto the man of low degree: when the
heart of the king should perish within him, and the hearts of their nobles
languish: their priests astonished, and their Prophets wonder: when the
habitations of Sion should be burnt with the fire of the enemy, and the
streets of Jerusalem scowred with the judgments of the almighty: when they
thought still to have enjoyed peace, the sword should pierce their flesh, and
when they had swallowed up abundance, by reason of peace, they should wallow
in the blood of their own destruction. I say, when all this, as sudden as a
tempest, as swift as a flying Eagle, should come upon them, then should they
confess their own woe, and profess their own destruction: Woe be to us, for we
are destroyed. Verse. 13.


Wherefore, as the Prophet had often before in the 1, 4, and 8. verses, labored
for their conversion: so likewise, in this verse which I have read unto you, O
Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how
long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? As if he should say, The
Lord has a quarrel against thee, O Jerusalem, he has sharpened the arrows
of his displeasure, he has bent his bow and made it ready: the instruments
of his wrath, and engines of his indignation, are provided for thy destruction:
Nabuchadnezzar and the Caldaeans are in less then an hours warning to execute
his command, they stay but for the Lords watchword, to say unto the^, Go,
and they go; Kill, and they shall devour: thy case being thus, there is no
other remedy to be had, or course to be taken for thy safety, but this:
Wash thy heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem.

The words (as you see) do contain nothing else, Diuisio.
but an exhortation to repentance; and in it I observe these two things.

1 The exhortation it self. 2 The reason of it.
The exhortation it self, in these words: O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved. The reason, in the words following:
How long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee?

In the exhortation it self, I propound three points to be handled: 1 The
person exhorted: O Jerusalem. 2 The thing required: Wash thine heart from
wickedness. 3 The end: that thou may be saved.


In the reason or argument, uttered by way of complaint, these five things
offer themselves to our consideration.

1 The circumstance of time, whereby the argument is enforced: How long?
Quovsque


2 The thing which he complains of: not actions or words, which are easily
discerned, but thoughts. Cogitationes.


3 The qualities of these thoughts: they are not of any holy and sanctified
disposition, but they are wicked. Impiae.


4 The continuance: for they have not their motions and flittings, as the wind
in the air, which is sometime in the East, and sometime in the west, but they
abide by it, Manent.
they remain. Fifthly, the place of their abode, is not in any place about, In
medio tui.
or without us, but within. Of these in order: and first, for the first, that
is, the person exhorted.

O Jerusalem, etc.
Almighty God made a law, Deuteronomy. 2.10. that no City should be destroyed, First
person exhorted.
before peace were offered unto it, When thou come near a City to fight
against it, thou shall offer it peace: and we read in the second of Samuel,
20. that the prudent and provident woman of Abel, objected this law to Ioab, in
effect, when he had cast up a Mount against the City. That speech of our
Savior Christ, unto the Cities of Coraysin and Bethsayda, gives us to to
understand, that there were many notable things wrought in them, before the woe
took hold upon them. So the Lord here threatening Judah and Jerusalem, with the
sword of the Gentiles, that the scouts came from a far country, to compass
it round about, as the watchmen in the field, for the utter subversion and
desolation thereof: yet he offers peace unto it. The Prophet comes to
Jerusalem, with a sentence of safety in his mouth, as Noah's dove came to the
Arc, with an Olive branch in her bill.

If a man should weigh the justice of GOD in a balance, and narrowhe examine
it, he shall never see it his manner, to punish any place, or plague any
people, without just cause: for, though he looks, for a time, with a sierce
countenance, and threatens to send down his judgments as thunderbolts, and
his wrath as a mighty tempest, to seize upon the wicked: yet he powers down
a sweet shower of his mercy before, so as, if there be any insight or
foresight in them, of Gods hand that hangs over them, they may prevent it. The
Lord here proclaims open war against his people: yet the Prophet delivers
unto them many good exhortations aforehande, as Jonathan shot arrows, to
give David warning, that by repentance they might prevent his judgments. O
Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, etc.

The same love (beloved) which the Lord in former times bare to Jerusalem,
Judah, is like to the laws of the Medes and Persians, Dan. 4.
which are never altered, but ever, and for ever are continued: and his mercy
toward his people, rises up by degrees, like the water in Ezekiel, Ezec. 4.7.
which at the first time came but to the anckles, the second time to the knees,
the third time to his loins, the fourth time it was as a deep river, and not
to be passed over; for the further he waded, the deeper he was plunged: so
Gods love is inscrutabile quiddam, a thing unsearchable, and his mercy past
finding out. And if ever age in former and precedent times had experience of
it, if ever Jerusalem and the Cities of Judah had a taste of it, if ever the
sweet showers of Manna rained down upon the Israelites; surely the sweet
showers of his mercy have plentifully been powered down upon us, and his love
has embraced us on every side. For God is not delighted in the destruction of
a sinner: he takes no pleasure to see the workmanship of his own hands, and
the children (as I may say) of his own loins, murdered and massacred in the
streets, by the sword of the enemy: and hence it is, that the Lord in so many
places, and at sundry times, by the mouths of his Prophets, has used
exhortations even without number, to dissuade them from the cause of Gods
judgments, that is, from sin, disobedience, and transgression. Especially,
from the beginning of this Prophecy, Jeremy has been very earnest: as in
the third Chapter, the Lord condemns Israel for an harlot. Lift up thine
eyes, Oh Israel, unto the high places, see and behold if thou have not played
the harlot, etc. Thou have sitten waiting for them in the ways, as the Arabian
in the wilderness: yea, the land is polluted with thy whoredoms and
abominations: yet, when Israel had done all this, God said, Turn unto me:
notwithstanding, she returned not, as her rebellious sister Judah saw. Again,
in the fourteenth verse: O ye disobedient children, turn unto me, and I will
take you, one of a City, and 2. of a tribe, and will bring you into Sion, and I
will give you pastors according to mine own heart, that shall feed you with
wisdom and understanding. The like in the 22. verse, and in many other
places: the Lord seems to be moved with a pitiful compassion and
commiseration over his own people: their case was pitiful in his sight, and
their careless regard wrought sorrow in his heart, when he saw that howsoever
he was provident for their salvation, yet were they very forward in their own
destruction: and the more careful he he was for their conversion, the less
respect had they to his admonition.

Indeed true it is an ancient father says, The wicked alacrius currunt ad
mortem, quam nos ad vitam: they run far faster in the way to condemnation,
then the godly do in the way to salvation: as the Psalmist notes them for
their haste, when he describes the ungodly, as if they had wings on their
heels: Their feet are swift to shed blood. Ps. 145.
Yet the Lord (who as David says) is merciful, gracious, long-suffering, and
of great goodness, labors to draw them home: his heart breaks within him,
and his bowels yearne with grief, when he sees Jerusalem: that is to say, his
own people, how wilful they are in their own destruction. As I live (says the
Lord) I will not the death of a sinner: As if he should say: The fault is not
mine, when sinners drink the dregs of iniquity, when the scourge of my
judgments fasten upon them: for I have no pleasure to see the workmanship of
mine own hands perish in confusion: As I live, as I live (says the Lord) I
will not the death of a sinner.

Marcellus, Valerius.
after his soldiers had conquered Syracusa, not without the great slaughter of
many, was so co^passionate over them, that he went up to the highest tower in
the Castle, and with tears lamented the ruin and overthrow thereof. Plutarch
speaks of one Pollio a Roman, who having invited the Emperor Augustus to a
feast, would have thrown his servant into a deep poole in his rage, for a small
matter. The Emperor beholding his angry spirit, controlde him with these
words, Homo cuiuscunque conditionis, etc. A man, of what state or condition
soever he be, if there were no other cause, but because he is a man, is more
to be valued and esteemed, then all the gold and silver in the world. Well,
whatsoever may be said of Marcellus for his clemency, over those whom he had
slain: or of the mild and humane spirit of the Emperor Augustus, judging it
to be very noble and honorable; yet is there no comparison to be made betwixt
him, and the Emperor of heaven and earth, even the God of the whole world:
who, as the Prophet says, is merciful gracious, long-suffering, and of great
goodness. For if Mercy were not before him, and Grace behind him, if
long-suffering stood not at his right hand, and great goodness at his left: if
these Peacemakers (as I may call them) being qualities in his nature, did not
mightily prevail with him, why, so great is our sin, that the world could
not stand, but had long ere this time perished like Sodom, and had been
destroyed, as was Gomorrah. Therefore would you know, what vpholds the frame
and structure of the world? why, it is Mercy: would you know what vpholds the
good estate of Israel, of our land? His Mercy: would you know what continues
the days of our ancient mother in Israel, our gracious Sovereign, that as yet
we cannot say of her, as was said of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
that her eyes have waxed dim in her head, or her natural force abated: but
still flourishes as the Palm tree, and grows up as a Cedar in Lebanon? it is
Mercy. In a word, you know the cause of the Gospels continuance amongst us,
that yet with freedom we may hear the sound of it in our Temples, and with
peace behold the open faces of Gods Prophets, which bring unto us the glad
tidings of salvation: why we enjoy other blessings and benefits in the land,
and are not taken away from us, by the violence and rapine of foreign
strangers? it is his Mercy, his Grace, his long suffering, his great goodness,
that he bare to thee, O Jerusalem, even to us, his own people.

Mat. 23, 37. our Savior Christ does there challenge Jerusalem for great
cruelty, that he had sent Prophets, but she had slain them: and Apostles,
but she had stoned them. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which have been sent unto thee: how often would I
have gathered thee together, even as the hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, but ye would not? The hen was not more tender over her young ones, the^
I was over you, says the Lord: and my love and kindness, and loving kindness was
not once or twice, but often. Neither would I have committed the trust of you
to any other, but my self would have gathered you together. What love and
kindness could I more show, but you would not? I would (O Jerusalem) but thou
would not.

How often beloved, has the Lord wooed us on this manner? how often has the
heavenly trumpet of his mercy sounded in our ears? how often has the sweet
showers of his mercy fallen upon our heads, even as abundantly, as the
Quails upon the Israelites? If you should deny it, I would ask the stars
in the heavens, the beasts of the earth, the fowls of the air, and the fishes
of the sea, and all these would witness with me. How often has the Lord cried
unto you in effect, Yarmouth, Yarmouth, thou that swellest in the vanity of
thy conceit, that say with Laodicea, Reu. 3. I am rich and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing: and therefore pride and envy strive which
shall get the upper hand, as the unruly waves of the sea encounter one another:
wickedness walks up and down among you without controlment, and iniquity
runs full sea in the channels of thy streets, and the course thereof cannot be
stayed. Sodom and Gomorrah lie not in the dust for greater abominations, then
are daily committed: thou Yarmouth, that art in this case, How often would I
have gathered you together, even as the hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, but you would not?

Thus the Lord reasons with us (beloved:) Many fruits of his blessings have you
tasted of, both by sea and by land: from time to time has he sent home your
ships, balanced with the riches of the Ocean, as if they came laden with
treasures from Egypt: for which, the Lord increase not only plenteousnes within
your vessels, but even thankfulness within your bowels. Many excellent and
powerful instructions have been delivered unto you, by the mouths of his
servants, the Prophets. All this has been to this end, to gather you together
unto the Lord: his blessings temporal, and his graces spiritual, have been
as two hands, to draw you home unto him: but as yet, for ought we see, you
will not. Therefore look unto it: if the like should befall you, as here to
Jerusalem, (either in this place by Nabucadnezzar and the Caldeans, or there,
by Titus, Mat. 23.37.
and Vespasian:) that your enemies should entrench your town, and enuiron you
round about, that hunger and famine should tirannize over your bodies, whereas
now plenty sits at your doors, to welcome your friends: that the sword of
some foreign Nation should shorten your days, whereas now the sword of good
Magistrates is carried before you: if your houses of pleasure, should become
your prisons: if your loving wives should be deflowred, and your tender infants
murdered in the streets before your faces: If this, or a greater evil should
befall, which the Lord in his mercy turn away, beloved, is it not just? shall
we challenge God of his equity, or charge him of injustice, and say: Lord,
why have thou done this? surely no: many times (says the Lord) would I, but
you would not: for I am a God merciful, gracious, long-suffering, and of great
goodness: but the more I was merciful, the more you were sinful: the more I
was gracious, the more you were graceless: the longer I was in suffering, the
longer were you in sinning: and the greater I was in goodness, the greater
were you in transgression: therefore, because I then would, but you would not:
perhaps now you would, but I will not. Bethink your selves of your estate
present: bethink your selves what may befall.

O Jerusalem, etc.
Secondly, Jerusalem (the elect City of God) most holy, most glorious, built
upon holy mountains, no City in the world comparable thereunto, Jerusalem
Metropolis Iudaeorum Nico. de Lyra gloss. ordina. Esaias 2. Mich. 4.
as well for the loftiness of the seat, for the temperature of the air, for
the moderation of the heavens, and fruitfulness of the soil: and yet all this
serves not so much for the credit of it, as that The Scepter went forth from
Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem. It was the only place of Gods only
worship: the Lord had a delight to have his name there: neither had any more
privileges, more teaching or preaching, then they had: yet for all this, they
wanted perseverance, they could not continue unto the end: yea, these which
should have bin schoolemasters to al other Nations round about them for
knowledge. Yet see the testimony that God gives of Jerusalem: Chapter 5.1. Run to
and fro in the streets of Jerusalem, behold now, and enquire in the open
places, if ye can find a man, or if there be any that executes judgment, and
seeks the truth, and I will spare it, says the Lord. Lo, my beloved, not a
righteous man, not a faithful soul (it seems) found in Jerusalem, either
among their princes, or among their people.

Whereby we learn, we have the word of God preached, and the heavenly oracles
of his will revealed unto us, from the bosom of the almighty, by the mouths
of his Prophets, and other privileges and prerogatives given unto us, which
God has not vouchsafed to other Nations: yet cannot we challenge this
privilege and prerogative of perseverance. So likewise, the Churches of
Constantinople, and of Ephesus, excellent privileges they had, and great
prerogatives they were graced with, yet could they not persevere unto the end.

Well, the uses in a word, be found asunder: alas, we may with Esau deceive
our selves, Genesis 26.
and think to have a blessing, when we shall hit upon a curse. Therefore, let
us not content our selves with the outward sound of the word, if the inward
obedience of the heart be absent: though we bring our Bibles to Church under
our arms, it is not that will make us good Christians, if our hearts be not
set to obey: but we must join the outward ministry of the word, and the
inward obedience of the heart together: no sooner must the Lord open his mouth,
but we must open our ears, and drink the sound of his word, into the secrets
of our hearts, which may become mighty, and by the operation thereof, make us
fruitful unto salvation.

Secondly, Gal. 5.1. 1. Pet. 2.
we must (as Paul admonishes us) standfast, and not be as variable clouds
in the air, that are carried about with a tempest, but steadfast, constant, and
confident, in the profession of the Gospel. For if we prove either
faint-hearted, or faithless hearted Christians: if it be said of us, as Paul
said of the Galathians: Gal. 5.7. Apostatas.
Ye did run well in the race of Christianity, but now, ye slide back: our
end shall be worse then our beginning: for it had been much better that we
had never learned the truth, nor known the way of righteousness, then after
we have known and learned it, to return with the dog to his vomit, and with
the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

Thirdly, 1. Cor. 10.12. Non locus, persona, dignitas priuilegia, aut
immunitates possu^t nos ab ira Dei eximere.
in that Jerusalem could not persevere, it teaches us that of the Apostle: We
which think we stand, must take heed lest we fall: let us not boast of
those privileges and blessings that God has enriched us with: for were they
never so many, or never so great, Jerusalem had more, and greater: yet, though
she was highly in credit with the Lord, and countenanced of him as the
Empress of the world, her glory is here threatened to be laid in the dust.
Ge^. 11.2
Let Nimrod and his company build a City, whose towers and turrets may reach
up into heaven: yet shall Babel be Babel: the thing it self shall be the
confusion thereof. The whore of Babylon may advance her self in pleasures,
Reu. 18.8.
and in the pride of her heart say, she sits as a Queen, and shall see no
mourning: yet shall her plagues come at one day, death, sorrow, and famine, and
she shall be burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord God, which will condemn
her. Reu. 18.8. Therefore, if we assure our selves of the continuance of Gods
favor amongst us, by our outward prosperity, or think to stand hereafter, as
we have stood hitherto, we are deceived: for were we as dear and near unto
the Lord, as Jerusalem, or answerable unto it, either for bravery of
buildings, commodities of merchandise, store of munition, to drive back the
force and fierce assaults of our enemies, yet are they not sufficient to drive
back the gunshot of Gods displeasure, when for our transgression, he
entendeth our destruction.

Fourthly, estate to be this; it teaches us to commend our prayers and
supplications unto GOD, for this special blessing of perseverance: for what
profits a man, Simile.
to sail a long voyage prosperously, and with success, if at length he makes
shipwreck, being ready to enter into the haven? So, what will it avail us
(my brethren) sailing in the full sea of Gods blessings, and in the floods of
his abundant mercies, with the winds of prosperity, and before we come to our
iourneyes end, make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience? It is not
sufficient for us that we run, but we must so run, as we may attain. It
will not avail us to begin well, if we do not continue to the end: if we
have begun in the spirit, Gal. 3.3.
there is no perfection to be looked for in the flesh. That seed is in vain
cast into the ground, whereof a man fills not his bosom in the time of
harvest: and the profession of the Gospel is ill begun, and to no purpose,
except we persevere unto the end.

Now, it may be demanded, the Lord look for such measure of obedience, Luke
31.6.
planted in a vineyard, serves fitly for the illustration hereof: A certain
man (says he) had a figtree planted in a vineyard, and because he had
planted it, he came and sought fruit thereon, but found none. Then said he to
the dresser of the vineyard: Lo, this 3 year have I come, and sought fruit
thereon, and hauc found none: cut it down, why keeps it the ground barren?
This vineyard, beloved, is the Church of God: the fig tree, though it be there
meant of the estate of the Jews, yet by it may be understood the estate of
every several soul: the planter thereof is Christ, the dressers are his
servants the Prophets. Now (says Christ) I have planted a fig tree, great
cause therefore that I should have fruit of it. Well, any time these three
years have I come and sought fruit thereon, but have found none. Neither is it
only fruitless it self, but it makes the ground barren and fruitless
likewise. Surely, my purpose is, it shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.

O Lord (beloved) an happy thing were it, if in our vineyard we had no such
unprofitable fig trees; if in our Church we had no such unprofitable
professors: upon whom Gods Prophets and ministers have bestowed cost, and of
whom, no doubt, the Lord has expected and waited for, not three years, but
many years, the fruits of his blessings: but alas, we deceive his
expectation: long has he thought for, and sought after the fruits of his
Gospel, but lo, nothing but weeds of disobedience spring up amongst us. What
will be the end of this? Surely, we may justly fear the like judgment, that
befell to the fig tree: Cut it down: why keeps it the ground barren? We may
(I confess) be suffered to grow for a time, to flourish for a season, yet
utter destruction will happen in the end. We know heretofore, how the Lord has
dealt with us, for we have played the hypocrites with him, and therefore has
he made the earth, and the creatures thereon, to play the hypocrites with us.
The Lord has expected the fruits of our obedience, but behold, it is like unto
a shadow, something in show, but nothing in substance; or even as Ephraims
righteousness, Ose. 6.4.
like to the morning dew: so we (in former years) have expected the fruits of
the earth from him, yet have we been partakers of the curse that Job speaks
of: Job. 31.40.
That thistles have grown in stead of wheat, and cockle in stead of harley:
so as the husbandman sorrowed and sighed within himself, when he saw no
better fruit of his labors.

Thus has the Lord caused the earth to deceive our expectation, because we
have deceived his: and though now on a sudden, he has equally divided the
pipes and cunduites of his mercy, and opened the windows of heaven, and has
sent down a gracious rain, upon the ground of the good and of the bad, of the
just, and of the unjust, filling our bosoms with abou^dance of blessings, that
our vineyards clap their hands, and our fields do rejoice and sing: yet let us
beware that this sudden prosperity and plenty, be not to fat us against a day
of slaughter.

Let us therefore consider our estate what we are, and what we have been,
even a people blessed of the Lord: but we may speak of our selves, as Pliny
speaks of a certain country, that ex siccitate lutu^, ex imbre puluere^,
etc. drought has caused dirt, and rain has stirred up dust amongst us: for
what has the sunshine of his mercies? but caused us to lie in the mire of our
abominations: and what has the moisture of his graces? but even dried up the
fountain of grace in us: so as we are given over to work transgression with
greediness: the increase of his blessings have increased our iniquities; and
the abundance of his mercies have brought forth abundance of sin in us: for
what have we, but in stead of obedience, rebellion? in stead of knowledge,
ignorance? Is there no complaint of oppression to be heard in our streets? do
not rich men grind the faces of the poor, plucking their skins from their
bodies, and their flesh from their bones, as the Prophet speaks? Is not one
man ready to pull out the throat of another, urging, and using extremity,
rather then a good conscience, in matters of law? Is there no swearing, and
forswearing? no profanation of the Sabbath amongst us? do not Absaloms
adulteries run for meriments in our age? and have we not those, fitter for
the company of Sodomites, then for the society of Christians? and behold,
yet, and yet greater abominations then these? Are these the fruits of the
Gospel? is this the issue and effect, that Gods word has wrought in us these
forty years? have we answered the Lords expectation, in the smallest measure
of obedience, as he has answered our desires, in the greatest measure of his
mercies? Surely no. Oh beloved, what then remains for such unprofitable
fig trees? Cut them down, cut them down (says the Lord) burn them in the
fire.

So much for the first point, the person exhorted, and the instruetions thereof.

Now follows the second point, namely, the thing required.

Wash thine heart from wickedness.
THe Prophet does here touch Jerusalem to the quick, Quid lauandum. Fons vita
when he comes to the heart: which, (as Phisicions say) is the fountain of
life: it is the first thing that lives, and the last thing that dies in a
man. The heart is like an Instrument: if it be in tune, and well struug, Dulce
melos.
it makes a sweet melody: but if it be out of tune, all the parts and powers
of mind and body are out of course. Or as the stone of Scyros, Plin. lib. 36.
Cap. 17.
if it be cast whole into the water, floteth, and swimmeth aloft, but if it be
parted and divided, it sinketh to the bottom: so is it with the heart, so long
as it be kept whole and vndistracted, why, it swims, and all things run
current with it: but if broken or divided, it sinketh like lead. It may be
compared to the apple of a man's eye, which will be troubled with a little
moate: so is the heart tender of it self, and will be disquieted with a
rebellious affection: or look even as a steele-glasse is bright and pure, yet
the breath of ones mouth will dim it: so is the heart, a thing in it self
bright and pure, yet are there many wicked and contagious vapors in the soul,
that dim and obscure the integrity thereof.

When God looked down from heaven, Genesis 6.5. He saw the wickedness of man
was great on the earth: and did God behold but the earth only? surely yes, he
took a view of man's heart also; and there he found the heart, and not the
heart only, but the thoughts of the heart, and the imaginations of the
thoughts: the mother, her daughters, and their children evil, and not only
evil; but only evil, and cuil continually. Above all things (says the
Prophet) man has an unfaithful heart, as deep as the deep sea, nothing can
sound it: as wide as the wide world, nothing can contain it: as large and
spacious as hell it self, who can find it out? If a man possessed as much
ground, as ever the devil showed the son of God from the high mountain; if he
had the whole world, yet could man's heart contain another and if he had two
worlds in his possessio, yet the heart of man would be casting for a third:
therefore it is worth the noting, that which Philip of Macedo^ is reported to
have observed in himself, when by wrestling, he had taken a fall in the sand,
and seeing the impression of his body therein, was thereby (as it seems by his
words) brought into consideration, that a small parcel of ground, and in
comparison, but a spa^ of earth contained his body, but the whole world, were
it much wider the^ it is, sufficed not his covetous heart. Well, whatsoever the
heart of man is, I leave unto God, the searcher of all hearts to examine: and
whatsoever Philip of Macedons covetous heart was, and the hearts of those, which
in ye time of Noah were swept away with the waters of the flood: yet here we
find, Jerusalem has a wicked heart, and so wicked, that unless it be
purified, purged, and washed with the waters of repentance, destruction upon
destruction is proclaimed against it, verse 20.

Wash thine heart from wickedness.
Where first of all we note, that our repentance must be like the repentance
of Nineveh, it must begin with the King: he must first arise from his throne,
and throw away his costly robes, and cover himself with sackcloth and ashes,
and then proclaim the like to his subjects and inferiors: that is to say, the
heart which sits in the body, as a king in his throne, and has all the
inferior powers at command, when Jonas shall denounce judgments, and the
Lords ministers proclaim repentance, it must first rouse and raise up it
self: and when that begins, the inferior parts are easily brought to order:
therefore says the Prophet, Wash thine heart from wickedness: not thy face,
or thy hands, or thy feet, or thy upper garments, but thy heart, O Jerusalem.
Simile.


Our hearts may be compared to the rudder of a ship, or the balance of a
clock: the ship (we know) is a great and an untoward vessel; and if it be
left to it self upon the seas, it runs to a thousand dangers: but let the
rudder be well guided, and the whole body thereof, with all that belongs
thereto, is directed without hazard: so, if the heart go aright, it goes not
alone, but all the parts and powers of the soul and body, immediately follow in
the same safety: even as a clock, Simile.
if the balance thereof stir, all the other instruments and weights follow
in a good course: but if that stand still, every one of the rest go out of
order: so, let our hearts move and step forward in the course of Christianity,
all the instruments and members of the body will go onward likewise: but if
the heart stays, the body stirs not, but standing still, is the apter to
receive any corruption.

Well, First instruction.
the instructions that we learn from hence, are diverse: first, in that we
must begin with the heart, it teaches us, that true repentance stands not
in outward behavior, in outward ceremonies, or in a civil kind of life: but
it must arise from the heart. We cannot chase wickedness from our eyes, from
our hands, from our tongues, or from our feet, if first it be not chased from
the heart: for the eye may be wicked, the hand may be wicked, the tongue may
be wicked, and the feet wicked, but the heart is the seat of wickedness, it
is a fountain of iniquity, the streams whereof overrun the whole body:
therefore to good purpose is that of Joel: Vena scin datur cordis. Joel 2.13.
Rend your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God:
because it was the manner of the ancient times, when any were possessed with
grief and discontent, to rend their garments, manifesting by their outward
behavior, their inward sorrow: as in the example of David for Saul, 2. Sam.
1.11. and for his son Absalom, 2. Sam. 10.31.
2. Sam. 13.31. of Ioab for Abner, and of other. Now, lest this ceremony, or
such like, should be rather of fashion, then from the affection of the heart,
Joel disclaimes from them, as things which the Lord regards not, if the
purity of the mind, and sincerity of the heart be absent. It is not outward
sanctification, outward holiness, outward behavior, that the Lord requires,
but the purifying and purging of the heart from sin: For God sees not as man
sees: 1. Sam. 16.7. Prou. 15.11.
man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart:
therefore, Wash thy heart, O Jerusalem.

I might here by the way, take occasion to fight a battle with hypocrites,
Hypocrites.
whom we may compare to boat-men, that look one way, but row another: or like
to Mercuries Images, that point the way to others, but themselves stand still
and stir not one foot: or like to stage players, which for an hour or two,
seem to be greatstates-men, but the play being ended, they are as base
companions as they were before: or like unto the Carbuncle, which has a show
of fire, but no true fire: so they; a show of zeal, but no true zeal: Mat.
23.27.
or as those painted Sepulchers, beautified to the eye, but within, full of
rottenness and corruption. These will seem religious amongst you, though not
refrain their tongues, Ia^. 1.26.
but deceive their own hearts; whose religion (by the judgment of the
Apostle) is vain. But to leave them (because my purpose was but to take them
by the lap of their garments at this time, for a remembrance only) let us that
will be Christians in deed and sincerity, be wary that we play not the
sophisters with our selves, thinking that outward purity and sincerity stand
for current in the sight of God. It is the pureness and sanctimonie of the
heart only, Our repentance must be, nou corporis, sed cordis. Eiusdem capitis.
that the Lord requires: we may pray with the Pharise, Luke 18.11. and kiss
Christ with Judas, Mat. 26.49. and offer sacrifice with Cain, Genesis 4.3. and
fast with Iesabel, 1. Kin. 21.9. and humble our selves with Ahab, verse. 27. and
present an Oblation with Ananias, Acts 5.2. and lament with the tears of Esau,
Genesis 27.38. yet all these are nothing, if the heart be not only devoted and
consecrated unto God.

Wash thine heart from wickedness. Second instruction.

Secondly, in that he says, Wash thine heart from wickedness, we see how
loathsome a thing it is in the sight of God, to have a wicked heart, an heart
not sanctified and upright before him. An happy thing were it, if we could
bethink our selves, what an enemy we carry about with us in our breasts,
when we have wickedness in our hearts. It is like death, Malitia.
which having once seized upon the heart, all the members of the body are
immediately captiued: so, let the heart be wicked, and the whole body is
wicked: for out of the abundance of the heart, the head deuiseth, the hand
executes, the tongue speaks, the eye sees, the foot walks: I. King.
15.30.
and even as wicked Jeroboam made all Israel to sin, so the wicked heart
makes the whole body to sin.

Therefore should every one of us pray with good King David: Psalm. 50.
Create in me, O Lord, a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me.
We must dislodge our hearts of this great evil, and make them the wagons and
chariots of the Spirit, wherein he may sit to guide our whole body: and the
privilege which hereby we shall reap, is singular: Ro^. 8.14
for (says Saint Paul) So many as are led by the Spirit, are the sons of
God. Now, the Lord has given us our hearts and bodies, to be resting places
for the holy Ghost, and wherein he should take delight to seat himself. But
alas, the Spirit sits in the streets, Judge. 19
like the Leuit that came from Gybeah, and no man receives it into the house of
his heart: nay, we choose rather to make them dens for the devil,
storehouses of sin, and even a Dagon of all iniquity. Should it be thus
with Christians? God forbid: the Lord has given thee a body, to be the temple
of the holy Ghost: shall thou now take this body of thine, and make it the body
of an harlot? God forbid: the Lord has given thee hands, as organs, to
perform the necessary actions belonging to thy welfare, shall thou now divert
them to an ill use, and make them instruments of murder, violence, rapine, and
oppression? God forbid: the Lord has given thee a tongue, an excellent benefit
of nature, to convey unto thy brother the secret conceits of thy mind, both for
the praise and glory of God, and for thy profit and benefit in thy trade of
life: shall thou now make it a tongue of blasphemy, unchastity, cursing,
swearing, and forswearing? God forbid: the Lord has given thee eyes to behold
his creatures upon the face of the heavens, and the superficies of the earth,
to behold the admirable works of the almighty, in the frame of the world: and
they are as two lights, for without them, the whole body should be possessed
with darkness: now, dare thou attempt to make them instruments, to solicit
the heart with uncleanness? or make them windows of vanity, by beholding the
beauty of the strange woman? nay, rather let us say with Ioh, Job. 31.1.
I have made a covenant with mine eyes, not with an unchaste affection to
behold a virgin. Foedus pepigera^ cum oculis meis, etc. Pro. 23.26. Romans 12.1.


Thus have you heard, that the Lord has given us an heart, that we might, as
Solomon's wisdom requires, give it unto the Lord again: he has given us a
body, that we might, as Paul requires, offer it up unto him again. All powers
and parts of both has God given unto us, that we should dedicate them to him
again: but alas, we bestow them upon Satan, sin, and the pleasures of the
world. Iehu used not the temple of Baal more basely, then we use our hearts,
making them cabbins of unclean spirits, full of deadly sins, whereas they
should be vessels of holiness and honor unto the Lord. 1. These. 4.4.


Let us therefore in the Lords fear, supplant this bitter root of wickedness
in our hearts, and plant in them the graces of the spirit, that the heart may
be as a sweet garden furnished with virtues, as with fragrant flowers, that
he may say of it, as elsewhere he speaks of Sion: Here will I dwell, for I
have a delight herein: so shall he which created it, have it; he that gave it,
receive it again; and he which preserues it in this life, may preserve it for
ever.

Thirdly, Third instruction.
in that he says, Wash thine heart from wickedness, it gives us to
understand, that sin is a corruption: for the word here which the Prophet
uses, Laua: Ablue.
is a borrowed speech, taken from the manner of those, which are wont to rinse
or wash any thing that is filthy or polluted: for our hearts being as sinkes
or channels apt to receive any filth and corruption, are to be purged and
scoured with the besome of repentance, and washed with the tears of
contrition, that they may not appear loathsome unto God. The leprosy of
Naaman, 2. King. 5. a grievous leprosy: Esaias 1.5
for there is nothing whole within us, but wounds, sores and swellings, and
our hands are full of blood, yea from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot, we are nothing but blemished with iniquity, Esa. 1.16.
and stained with corruption: therefore says the Prophet, Wash you, make you
clean: we must with Naaman to the waters of Jordan, and there wash our selves
seven times and we shall be clean Neither must we follow our own carnal
reason; for then we will judge Pharpar and Abanah, rivers of Damascus, better
then all the waters of Israel: but we must take the direction of the man of
God, and Jordan is the place must do us good. If we consult with flesh and
blood, about the matter of our conversion and washing away of sin, we shall
never be clean: but if we follow the advice of Elisha or any of Gods
ministers, were pur leprosy worse then Naamans the Assyrian, the waters of
Jordan would wash it away; were our hearts like Ahabs chariot, 1. 1. King.
22.38.
Kings 22. even embrued with blood and filthiness, yet would they be clean,
being washed in the poole of Samaria. Were we either sick, Ioh. 5.3.
or blind, or halt, or withered, and had never so many diseases, or never so
much distraction in our limbs, yet if we wait for the moving of the water,
and step into the poole of Bethesda, and there wash our selves, we shall be
recovered: were our sins like crimsin, Esaias 1.
yet they shall be as white as snow, and were they as red as scarlet, they
shall be as white as wool. This is the great benefit that we shall reap and
receive after our baptism and regeneration in the waters of repentance, as
Jonas in the waters of the sea, wherein being thoroughly purged and washed from
our corruptions, by the blood of the immaculate Lamb, we shall with Jonas
receive a new commission, and be invested into our former credit and favor
with God. For this same corruption of sin, which lies in the heart unwashed
away, is a bird, which (as I may say) sings two manner of notes, or has two
manner of calls. It either calls to us, or it calls to the Lord: when to us, it
calls for repentance; when to the Lord, it calls for vengeance. So that, though
sin lies shrouded full low in our hearts, and wickedness be harbored in the
secrets of our souls, yet is thy sin like the sin of Sodom, the cry of it
is exceeding great: for they are so many in number, so diverse in nature and
different in kind, that being in thy heart, they are like unto a sort of
fierce Lions and cruel Tygres in a den, Beasts of diverse kinds.
which cannot agree together. And therefore, if thou labourest not to empty thy
self of them, and open thine care unto them, when they cry and call unto thee
for repentance, the Lord will open his ears, when they call to him for
vengeance.

It is lamentable to consider (yet it ever has been, and I think it will be)
that men are possessed with smallest care in matters of greatest danger. The
infection or corruption of the body every man will labor to purge and wash
away, but the corruption of the soul, and the wickedness of the heart no man
regards: nay, after sin committed (as the Prophet fitly notes) No man says,
What have I done? O miserable and wretched man that I am, what have I done?
though it be an aspiring kind of wickedness, as that of the Ninevites: Ionds 1.2
ascending, clyming, and being feathered with the wings of presumption flies up
into the court of heaven, even daring to show it self in the presence of the
most high: though it extends to the annoyance of the earth below, to the
provocation of the heauons above, to the punishment of all the creatures in and
between them both: nay though it strikes and strikes with a double hand at the
majesty of God himself, yet no man says, What have I done? O Lord, (beloved)
a long time have we been acquainted with sin, but can our acquaintance
gain us no experience of sin? will you ever look upon the pleasure and
profit that sin brings unto you; but will you never have an eye to the
policy and subtlety thereof? Indeed we make much of it: Easola voluptas,
solame^que mali. Aenei. 3
we nourish it in the secrets of our hearts, and keep it warm in the inwards of
our souls: we are as loath to forsake sin, as Jacob was to forsake Benjamin:
and to depart from iniquity, as Lot was to depart from Sodom: but shall we
never look into the mischief that ensues of it? When shall we once be wise?
They say that no element is ponderous or weighty in his proper place: as for
example, we feel not the weight of the air, although we live within the
circle and compass of it. Suppose a man should lie in the bottom of the sea,
it would not offend him with any pressure or burdensome weight, although it ill
annoyed him otherwise: so is it in the estimation of sin: we live and we
lie in it; but alas wretches that we are, we feel not, no, we feel not the
weight and burden thereof, how it even presses our souls unto condemnation.
Sin is not heavy unto us, by reason of the inclination of man's will
thereunto, which greedily does ingurgitate and readily swallow up a whole sea
of abomination. It may seem strange which is written of the nature of thunder,
that it bruiseth the tree, yet breaks not the bark, it cracketh the blade,
but never hurts the scabbard: such a thing is the nature of sin, it will
bruise and wound the heart, but never harm the eyes, or the ears, or the
hands; it will pearce and afflict the conscience, but never hurt the outward
man; it is even a plague unto the soul, and yet a pleasure unto the body.
Well, the time will not permit to set out sin as it deserves, and to acquaint
you more with the nature of it, although I would to God we were less
acquainted with the use, and less affected with the desire thereof: yet so
violently are our headstrong affections carried and ravished, that we add sin
to sin, and join them in a league of friendship, and when we have so done,
we lay iniquity upon sin, wickedness upon iniquity, rebellion upon
wickedness, and transgression upon rebellion, and nothing else but an heauing,
and heaping up of confusion upon confusion, Genesis 11.2.
as if Nimrod were amongst us, and Babel again to be built, the towers whereof
might reach up unto the stars.

Well beloved, let us lay the foundation of sin as low as we will, and build
as strongly thereupon as we can, as if we were assured, that the hand of Gods
judgments should never raze it up; yet no doubt we shall find, that it is now
high time for us to leave our sins, seeing we see the Lord begins to leave
us for our sins. It is now high time for us, not to wash our hands with
Pilate, but our hearts with Jerusalem; to change our Morian skins, to put
off our stained and defiled garments, to entertain repentance into our
souls, seeing that even now we fear the reward of our impieties, and the
portion of iniquity to be shared out for us. If ever before it was needful,
surely now much more necessity enforces, and time it is for Abigal (if she
respect her own safety) to arise and meet David with a present to appease
his wrath, 1. Sam. 25.
for it seems he is now at hand with his sword girded upon his thigh: though
not to lade our Asses as she did, with two bottles of wine, with frailes of
raisins, and a sheep ready dressed, or such like provision: but to lade our
bodies and sinful carcasses, which we have used as Asses to bear the huge
burden of our sins with sackcloth and ashes, Saceus and ieiunium sunt arma
poenitentiae.
with fasting and mourning, which are the armor of repentance to withstand his
judgments. Let our eyes be as 2. bottles of wine, to carry with us, the tears
whereof we may drink, to comfort us in the assurance of Gods mercies, and our
broken and contrite hearts as presents which the Lord will have respect unto, and
receive kindly at our hands, Verse 35.
and lay his sword down which he has taken up against us. and bid us
return in peace unto our houses.

Oh that I could possibly prevail thus far with you, to possess your souls
with the consideration of this point. Though this sudden opportunity of
repentance were not offered us, yet let us examine our estate, and we shall
find, that (alas) we are not sinners of yesterday; we are not newly entered
into Satan's schole: but we are of a great standing: for in sin our mothers
conceived us, in iniquity they brought us forth, and we drew corruption
from their breasts; all which, as we have grown with them, so they have
grown with us. We have long and ouerlong traced the footesteps of wickedness,
and trodden the paths of injustice; we have tyerd our selves, and surfeted our
selves with the works of abomination: we are not fallen of ignorance (alas) as
our forefathers, which knew not the Gospel; but willingly and wilfully have
we brought our selves into the habit of sin, into the nature of sin, into
the custom of sin, and within the compass of Gods most fearful judgments,
to seize upon soul and body, unto condemnation; and not upon our selves only,
but such is the corruption thereof, that it has ouerspred the face of the
heavens, of the earth, and ouerunne all the creatures, that even they for our
sin must one day come to judgment. O then how needful is it, that with
Jerusalem we should wash our wicked hearts from this corruption with the
tears of repentance, that she might sit in thy heart, and with her strong
sighs and groans break the heavens which are hardened against thee, and draw
down the Lords loving favor to thy soul. If the infant in the cradle cries
for milk; if the Lion in the forest cries for food because they want it: how
should it move us (my brethren) to send up our cries for the favor of God,
because we have it not! The tears of our eyes being shed in true contrition
for our sins, will be as little messengers to the great and angry God of
heaven and earth, to entreat a truce betwixt him and us his creatures, and as
gunshotte, will batter down the partition walls of our sins, and cause his
loving countenance to shine upon our souls. Let us therefore in the fear of
God make experience of this, and though for the time it may seem bitter as
Aloes unto the flesh, yet is it wholesome and medicinable unto the soul. And
look as it was the manner of ancient times, when trouble or heaviness befell to
any, they presently called for women and others who were tender hearted and
skilful in mourning, to cause them mourn the better: so we which would feign
learn to repent and lament for our sins, and know not rightly how; let us
have recourse unto the book of God, and there may we behold the tears
standing in Ierusalems eyes, and in the eyes of Marie Magdalene, 1. Sam. 1
and of Anna the wife of Elkanah, that their weeping might procure our weeping,
their grief provoke our grief, their passions move our affections with the
like lamentation and sorrow for our sins.

So much for the thing required, Quorsu^
being the second point,
Wash thine heart from wickedness.
Now follows the third, which is the End, End.

That thou may besaued.
J Doubt not, Vt salua sis. Verses 5.6.7.8.
but the trumpet blown in the land, and the cry, which said unto them of
Judah, Assemble your selves together, and get you into strong cities; and the
standard set up in Sion, and the plague threatened to be brought from the
North, Iuterfector Gentium.
and the Lion that should come from his den, and the Dry wind in the high
places of the wilderness, and that suddenly; (for it should be as a tempest
and swift) for his horses are lighter then Eagles; might easily persuade them
of imminent and present danger, except they had the hearts of the Leuiathan, as
strong as stones, or as hard as the nether millstone, not to receive any
impression; or their joints tough as Elephants, that nothing could ^end them.
Therefore their danger th^eatning such extremity, it was more then time to
take some course for their own safety.

The Poet notably describes the fear that Aeneas and they of Troy were in,
Aenci. 3
and the great speed they made to escape the danger of the Cyclops.

Praecipites metus acer agit quocunque rudentes.
Excutere, and ve!it is intendere vela secu^dis.
When they saw the company of giants clustring upon the shore, Aetni^^ fratres.
resembling the strength and fortitude of mighty Oaks, or lofty Cypress
trees, that their very looks threatened destruction, it was no time for them of
stay, but speedily to hoysse up their sails, Parebiaz^nt^.
and nimbly to betake them to their oars; rather then the giants should offer
violence to them, they offer violence to the sea, and hasten away.

The only course that Icrusalem has to prevent this imminent distres, which
was even at their shore ready to assault them, is swiftly to sail away in the
waters of repentance: every man to betake himself to his oars of true
contrition and invocation unto God, to labor painefully in the sea of their
sinful hearts (though they be well washed and drenched with the waves thereof)
for their own safety and preservation. Wash thine heart from wickedness, Ve
Deus te in fauorem recipiat.
That thou may be saved. In the handling of which I will first speak of the
sense of the words secondly, of the use.

For the first, the word in the original signifies, Salutem, open^,
opitulationem. A versu quinto.
either safety, help, or aid: and here it may fitly bear a double sense;
first, by the relation of matter going before: for in the former part of this
Chapter many judgments are exemplified by many figures to come upon Jerusalem
by Nabuchadnezzar, and the Chaldeans, who should cut them down with the
sword, and lay their land waste. Now this being so, the Prophet stirs up
Jerusalem to repentance, that she may be saved: that is to say, In this common
calamity and judgment which is to fall, yet that she may be secure and safe
from the touch thereof, and be restored to the favor of God: and therefore,
that the faithful among them should not despair, but rather lift up their
heads and cheer themselves with a hope of safety in time of danger, as also to
cross the crooked generation of hypocrites, showing that there is no way to
appease Gods wrath by any shifts, but by true conversion which must begin at
the heart. Or thus, Repent, that thou may be saved in the day of judgment
by the redemption of Christ, because without repentance there is no salvation.
And so for the sense. The use follows.

In time of danger, or of prosperity, 1. use.
or whenever, is any thing sweeter unto us then our life? or more precious
then the breath of our own nostrils? Why (says the Devil) when he informed
against Job, Job. 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has, he will give for his life. Be
it a life of sorrow, misery, and vexation, yet naturally we love it better
then death. Tanti est contemplatio coeli and lucis ipsius, etc. So we may
behold heaven and the light thereof, in our own estimation it is so much
worth, that we are content to endure any misery for it. I will appeal to no
other witnesses at this time, then to the Gibeonites, Iosuah 9.24.
who did that which they did, and became slaves to the host of Israel. For
fear of their lives they were content to endure any slavery and bondage, so
as they might escape with life. And therefore that action of Cleombrotus may
seem strange, that reading Platoes discourse of the immortality of the soul,
fell from the top of an high wall, of purpose to break his neck, the sooner to
attain to immortality.

Howsoever, this action of his, as one says, was Potius magne factum, quam
been factum, a great act, rather then a good act. It seemed likewise that
Achaemenides the unfortunate companion of Ulysses, Comes infoelicis Vlissis.
Virgil. Spargite me fluctus, vastoque immergite ponte. 1. King. 19.
little regarded the benefit of life, and thought it rather a glory to die,
so it might be manibus homin^m, in some manlike manner. And that of Elias in
the sacred volume sauoreth much to this purpose, It suffices, Lord, take away
my soul from me, let me not live any longer to be eyewitness of that
misery that Iezabel has thretned unto me. Well, howsoever, to let them pass
that are so weary of their dearest friend, sure it is, every thing in nature
desires being, from the greatest to the smallest: and this great benefit
repentance brings with it, life in the midst of death, safety in time of
calamity, preservation against judgments, deliverance in time of danger. O
Jerusalem, if, when Nabuchadnezzar shall come as a fierce Lion from his den,
and the Chaldeans as cruel Tigers to devour thee; when mine indignation shall
be thy portion to drink, and when destruction upon destruction shall befall
for the execution of my vengeance: yet if thou will be saved when others must
be destroyed, here is thy remedy, Wash thine heart from wickedness. So you see
the Prophet reasons with them a fructu poenitentiae, from the benefits
arising from repentance.

To give you the taste of it in a word: If the seas which are as a girdle to
this Island (enuironing and encompassing the same about) were at our command, or
that the Lord should put the raines and government of the mighty waters into
our hands, that we might rule them as we list for the subversion of our
enemies; or that our land were walled with brass, and strengthened with the
strongest defense against our Nabuchadnezzar of Spain, and our enemies the
Caldeans: Yet would not all this make so much for our safety, as if we had
repentance in our hearts, a special antidote against any judgment. In deed we
fear the forces of our foreign foes, and we may justly: but our greatest
enemies are our home-bredde sins. We stand quiuering and shaking under the
rod of his Judgment, the fear whereof has so possessed us, that we run
hither and thither, and are almost at our wits end, as if there were no God to
go before the shields of Israel. What is the cause hereof? Alas, our guilty
consciences do accuse us, and we can not but confess, how just our
destruction is. For were we penitent sinners, and at peace and reconciliation
with God, we should not need to fear what man can do unto us: but till sin
be removed out of our hearts, and our iniquities as rebels, cast out of our
souls; until we become penitent for the manifest and manifold transgressions
of our lives, alas, we must yet live in fear of the Spaniard; neither may we
fear Spain alone, but even the heavens, and the stars in the heavens, to
sight against us, Judge. 5.
as they fought against Sisera; the earth, and the creatures on the earth, to
plot out our subversion: for the Lord will use them as his men of war against
us, and make them at utter defiance with us. Nay, we may fear our hands,
which we account as our dearest friends: for he can make them as the hands of
Saul, I. Samu. 31.4.
even instruments of our own confusion.

If therefore we will have peace in our land betwixt Spain and us, we must
labor for peace in our consciences betwixt God and us. If we would have Gods
Judgments removed from us, we must labor to remove our sins, which are
the cause of them, and then will the Lord pass his word unto us, that we
shall be saved. Prou. 16 17.
To depart from evil (says Solomon) is a fortress and a bulwark, to
preserve the righteous from Judgments.

If the whole world with engines of war threatened our confusion, yet if we
were engrafted into Christ, and made one with him, (betwixt whom there is now
as great a separation as Abraham's gulf, Luke 16.
by reason of our manifold sins and transgressions) there is no doubt, but
his loving countenance and merciful eye should ever be upon us, and his right
arm stretched out for our defense. Will any man hurt the apple of his own eye,
and not rather to be tender over it? why, we are as the apple of the Lords
eye. Will a man cast off or dishonor the signet of his right arm? why, we are
his signet: will a man use violence to the wife of his own bosom, who is one
flesh with himself? why we are the Lords spouse, Cant. 5.1.
and he has made us one with him, and therefore may look for protection and
defense at his hands, and not for strokes and violence, as if our God were a
stranger unto us, and had never given us pledges of his love. Thus as you see
the danger that we may justly fear by reason of sin, so likewise the comfort
and confidence that we may have, if we become penitent for our sin. Therefore
which of these two makes greatest for our safety, judge you.

Secondly, salvation by the redemption of Christ (who gave his blood once for
our ra^some) it is a thing generally desired of us all, Reu. 1.5. heb. 9.14.
Genesis 27.
nay many make claim unto it, as Esau did unto the blessing, and yet must go
without it. The way that leads thereunto is narrow, Mat. 7.13.
and scarce one amongst a number finds it: we are as lame creeples, we cannot
so much as get to the beaufull gate, except we be carried; Act. 3.2
much less into the temple it self, unless our lamenesse be taken away.
There is but one way unto it, and that is by repentance: he that seeks
salvation and Gods kingdom any other way, takes a wrong course: it will not be
got either with pleasure or profit: all the gold of Ophir, the treasures of
Ezekias, or the riches of Solomon will not buy it: only repentance will so
far prevail, that thou may be saved. And therefore Christ told the Jews
(who thought themselves privileged, and therefore condemned the Galileans)
Except you repent, Luke 13.3.
ye all shall likewise perish. Therefore bear this principle in mind, for it
stands as firm as the pillars of heaven, that without repentance there is no
salvation.

And thus much for the Exhortation it self and the parts thereof.
First, the person exhorted.

Secondly, the thing required.

Thirdly, the end.

Now follows the reason:

How long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee?

THis is an argument used by way of complaint; wherein (if you remember, we
observed these 5. points.

First, the circumstance of time, wherewith the argument was enforced: How long?

Secondly, the thing which the Lord complaynes of: they are thoughts.

Thirdly, the qualities: they are Wicked.

Fourthly, their continuance: they remain.

Fifthly, the place of their abode is, within us.

Concerning the four latter, though we may compare our selves to the sea, into
which all the rivers of the earth run, and is never the fuller: so though all
the instructions in the Scripture be applied unto us, yet many are never the
better, and therefore necessary to handle these severally, sense of the
Prophet, and deliver from them jointly such instructions,

But first, for the circumstance of time, How long? A word of great
consequence:

Is it not sufficient (O Jerusalem) that I have borne with sin so long, and
do you think me still able to endure it? Have I but hitherto winked at your
iniquities, and will you yet and yet vex my righteous soul? Is this the
fruit that my long-suffring brings forth in you? Were thou borne sinful, and
will thou dye sinful? Is there no place for repentance? How long shall thy
wicked thoughts remain within thee?

Thus the Lord reasons with Jerusalem and with us. And surely it is fearful,
that our sin should grow to such an height, and iniquity wax so ripe, that
the Lord should thus complain of it, How long?

When God sends Judgments upon us, and the fingers of his wrath faste^ either
on our bodies or goods; when pestilence came with co^missio^ from ye angry God
of heaven, to attach our sinful and rebellious carcasses, and the bodies of
our sons and daughters; when we feared to draw our breath in the streets,
lest we should have drawn our confusion, and not an haires-breadth there was
betwixt us and death; when the unsatiate mouth of the grave still craved for
more, and never thought it had enough, and spared not to swallow up our
sweetest comforts; when day by day we followed our friends with weeping, our
neighbors with mourning, and our nerest kinsfolks with lame^tation, to bring
them the way of all flesh; when death was as a tyrant amongst us, Mors
tyra^nns, Cicero.
and the pestilence as an unmerciful soldier that spared none: then (beloved)
what did we? Surely, we cried and cried, How long, Lord, Lord, how long will thou absent thy self hiding thine eyes from beholding, and stopping thine
ears from hearing the words of our complaint? How long, Lord, will thou give
us gall to drink, and fill our souls with bitterness, as with wormwood:
Lord, how long, how long, Lord, shall it be thus or thus with us?

Thus we pressed the ears of the Lord with our how long, and he heard it. He
looked down from heaven and beheld the sorrow of the sons of men upon earth.
He commanded his Angel to stay his hand, clearing our air from infection, and
seasoning our joints with health. Thus did the Lord help us, when we could not
help our selves. But (alas) he cries and complaynes of our wicked thoughts,
sinful lives, and adulterous conuersations; but we give him not the hearing.

Lo, beloved, our unequal hearts, and the unkindness wherewith we requite
him, who so kindly has dealt with us. Let. God complain, but we will not
complain. He cries, How long? We cry with Salomons sluggard, Not long enough:
Yet a little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little more folding of the
arms together. Judge. 1.15. ios. 15.18.
And as Achsaph in the book of Judges, was importunate for riches, and never
thought her self satisfied: so is it with us; when we have committed one
sin, we think we may commit a second; and that being done, we will yet
venture upon a third. If we lived one hundredth years, we could be content to
live another, so we may live to sin; and when we have lived two, yet we
think it not enough. Well, let us in the fear of God slake the thirsty desire
thereof, and labor to rid our selves of it: for he that has fewest sins, in
the day of Judgment shall find he has too many: and let us weigh the Lords
cause in our own balance; that as we think, we may justly complain, when
the weight and burden of his judgments are upon us: so let us think the
Lords complaint equal, when the weight and burden of our sin is upon him.
Esaias. 1.14.


Secondly, How long is like Cynthius to pull us by the ear, and admonish us
how we spend our time: for God will have a reckning of every idle hour that we
spend; therefore it should teach us to walk circumspectly as the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 5.15.
redeeming the time, that what time soever heretofore has been ill spent, we
may have an eye to the time to come that it may be well spent: for we know not
whether we have forty days respit allotted unto us, as the Ninevites had: but
sure an happy thing is it for him that has time and place for repentance, and
woeful will it be when the whole course of our life is spent in vanity and
profaneness; and in the end and vpshotte thereof the Angel of God shall
answer us, Time shall be no more. Esau had a time when he might have
repented, but being ouerslipt, he had no place for repentance, Heb. 12.17.
though he sought the blessing with tears. These times are not allotted for
the body, but for the soul. Romans 13.11.
And now is the time not of pleasure or delight, but of salvation, if ever we
will have it. Therefore let tempus vitae be tempus poenitentiae; let the time
of our life be the time of our repentance.

So much for the circumstance of time How long: Now it follows:

How long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee?
HE ye has planted the ear, does not he hear? and he ye has created the
eye. does not he see the thoughts of the heart? Man can but judge of actions
and outward appearances only; but the Lord knows the heart. Penetrat Deus
vsque ad ine timos recessus cordium. Psa. 139 15.
There is nothing hidden from God, either in heaven or earth, or within the
reins and hearts of our bodies, or of the lowest destruction, but he sees it
with eyes ten thousand times brighter then the Sun. My bones are not hid from
thee (says David) though I was made in a secret place, and fashioned beneath
in the earth. And in the 94. Non respicit Iah.
The Lord shall not see it: As if their wickedness could shroud it self from
the all-seeing eye of his eternal Deity. They are not only our actions and
words, that are apparent unto the Almighty, Thoughts
but the thoughts of our heart, whether they be good, or evil.

Thus the LORD saw Ierusalems thoughts, Wicked.
and he beheld them wicked: according to that of the Prophet, The Lord knows
the thoughts of men, Psalm. 94.
that they are but vain, or, vanity it self. Verse 11 Quod ipsae sunt
vanitas, traiectio.
And Genesis 6.5. The Lord saw the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart
evil.

The thoughts of the heart are like unto a gadding servant, when he should
employ him self to his masters business at home, he runs and rangeth after
his own pleasure: so when our thoughts should be attendant to the heart, for
the service of God, they are here and there, and abroad, after their own
vanities: nay, many mar them, Cogitationes vanitatis: sic Call. super ter.
as foolish parents do their wanton children, by too much cockering and
favoring of them, and by giving them too much liberty without restraint; but
suffer them to follow their own lusts, winding themselves so much into favor
with us, that they prevail so far, as from an unchaste imagination, the body
is carried into an unchaste action; and from a proud and an angry thought,
comes forth many times a blasphemous oath: yea, they will urge and press us
onward unto evil: we can no sooner shake off a wicked thought, but with the
Egyptian fly it will light upon us again. Genes. 6.14.
Therefore as God commanded Noah to pitch the Arc within and without, that no
water should get in: so should we pitch the arkes of our souls, that no
violent and disordered thoughts might rush in to oppress us: or as we hedge
our vineyardes from wild beasts, so should we hedge our hearts with the
graces of the Spirit, from unruly and untamed affections, not to give them the
least ground of advantage; but to observe that heavenly principle of an heathen
Poet; Principiis obsta.
Withstand beginnings, because they may be compared to Panthers, who have
sweet smelles, but devouring minds; and the conceit of a wicked thought may
seem pleasing and delightsome, but in the end it deuoures like a two edged
sword. Captains. Mat. 8.9
We should be masters of our thoughts, as the Centurion was over his
servants, that when we say to a wicked thought, Go, it should depart: and
when to a good thought, Come, we should then embrace it. But if with deceyte,
Ios. 9.23
like the Gibeonites, they get themselves within us, and like hypocrites, feign
themselves otherwise then they are, let us with the host of Israel, set them
to hew wood, and to draw water; employ them to the seruilest and basest duties,
or rather, slay them out of hand, lest the Lord slay us: for they be not the
actions or words only of the oppressor, adulterer, or proud man, that shall
be punished; but he will scatter the proud, or any other whatsoever, in the
imaginations of their hearts, Cogitationibus cordis ipsorum. Luke 1.51.
and for our thoughts we must come to Judgment.

Well, the Lord here deals with Jerusalem, as a Physicion with his patients,
who prescribes such a medicine for their maladies, that he would not any
corruption should be left behind, whereby they might either seem loathsome
unto him, or deceive themselves with a vain hope of security, when there is
no such matter.

For what though the whole world had judged well of Jerusalem, or though by any
outward ceremonies they had seemed conformable, if still the thoughts of
iniquity had Pernoctare, hospitari, murmurare: sic enim hebraice significat.
lingered in their wicked hearts, which would have been as an inward corruption
festering in a wou^d, and in the end have brought greater misery upon them?

Where note, thought, any shift, excuse, or device, but the Lord is inward unto
it; which if he once perceyues, it enforces him to a further revenge. Ephesians. 5.6.
It was the caveat which Paul gave to the Ephesians: Let no man deceive you
with vain words: for, for such things, the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience. If men either excuse sin in themselves, or mock at
the Judgments of God, the anger and wrath of God in the violentest manner comes
upon them.

Secondly, condemns us, yet can we not promise our selves security, if we
have any wicked thoughts reigning and remaining in our hearts. And therefore
because man's nature is so subject to corruption drawn from Adam, that the
brightest fire has some smoke, the clearest fountain some mudde, and the
purest heart some infection, we must in the sincerest manner that we may,
wholly resign our selves into the Lords hands, and commit the ordering,
disposing, and sanctifying of our thoughts to his good will and pleasure;
knowing that in him lies all our safety and security from all judgments;
and for our selves, were we as just and upright as Daniel, yet might we say
with him, Shame (Lord) and confusion belongs unto us.

Thirdly, let us learn, remains within us. For if ever any thing be
dangerous, surely this is most dangerous, when a sin that sprouted up in us
thirty or forty years ago, and still the same sin remains in our hearts,
In medio tui.
and lurketh in the inwards of our souls, surely, it is now grown to a great
tree, and not easily to be plucked up. For it is the nature of sin, when custom
gives it any encouragement, first it is an egg; secondly, a cockatrie:
thirdly, a serpent; fourthly, a fiery flying serpent. For as it remains, it
keeps not at a stay, but it grows up, and gets heart, strength and
encouragement, that it fares like a sleepie Lion, Genesis 4.7
which if a man begins to rouse, is ready to fly in his face. Therefore let us
crush the heads of our wicked thoughts, while they are but little serpents, and
not suffer them to remain in our hearts so long, lest at length they get
strength to ouer-master us.

Lastly, by the tenor of this argument we may see, how the Lord is grieved
with the delay of repentance in any sinner: Simile.
we know in our own ordinary affairs (either in following matters of law, or
when we have any suites and requests to exhibit to princes or men of state)
delay breeds many dangers, Mora trahit periculum.
and makes us that we either go without the thing that we sue for, or else we
obtain it with great difficulty and charge: after the same sort, if any
desires this heavenly promotion, which all the kingdoms in the world cannot
purchase, and be slack in following the suite thereof, to think as Naaman
thought of the waters of Jordan, 2. King. 5
that other waters may be as good, and so another time as meet, and shall not
to morrow be as to day, etc. surely he shall either go without it, or else
obtain it with great difficulty: for the longer that we remain in sin, the
further off will the Lord be from us, yea so far, as it shall be hard to find
him; and the more sins that a man commits, the more walls of brass are
built and made up betwixt God and us, that the cries of our sinful hearts can
not have passage unto him, nor his mercies unto us. Were it not much better
then (beloved) to seek the Lord while he may be found, Esaias 55.
and to call upon him while he is near? to put up our supplications into the
hands of this heavenly Prince while he now passes by us, then to stay and
delay till he shuts himself up in his chamber of presence, and then will not
open unto us? Oh that we could once be wise and provident for our own
salvation! When Abel offered sacrifice, he brought the first fruits of his
sheep, and the fat of them to offer up: Genesis 4.4
And the Lord had respect unto it. And shall we think to spend the first
fruits of our age, and the prime of our years in sin, and the service of
the Devil; and when we have thus spent the strength, sap and greenness of our
youth; and grow old and withered, lying like brands in the fire of sin, Zach.
3.
wasted and consumed to stumps, as the Prophet speaks; and then offer up our
old, adulterous, broken and shattred sacrifices unto God? shall we think (I
say) the Lord will regard them? or that he will thus be mocked at our hands?
Surely no. Our safest course (beloved) will then be, not to grieve the Lord
with delays, that he should justly complain of us, as of Jerusalem: How long
shall the wicked thoughts remain within thee? Is it not yet enough? Are ye
not content to grieve men only, but you will grieve me also? etc. But rather
forthwith whiles we are in our best strength, Eccles. 12.1.
before the evil day comes, to season our green vessels with the liquor of
his spirit, even with holiness and sanctimonie of life, and to think the
prime of our years, and (as it were) the maidenhead of our youth, in the
purest and holiest manner, to be better bestowed on the Lord, who has promised
himself to be a most loving and faithful husband unto us, then upon the
Devil, which is our professed enemy, and seeks our overthrow every way. O
let us consider how brittle a staff we leave upon, when we trust unto our old
age, which when it breaks, the splinters and shiuers thereof will wound us. If
we repose any confidence to the hour of death for Gods favor, we tread but
upon ye; which if it be molten with a little heat of Gods anger, alas, we
sink into the gulte of destruction. Indeed many are blinded in giving credit
to Satan, when he says unto them, Ye shall not die, or the time is not yet,
etc. thinking that Gods mercy will wait upon them when their eyes shall be
closed up, or obtain that at the hour of death, which they have contemned all
their life: but let us for our parts labor for it, even while it is called to
day, yea while the Lord calls, and says unto us as he said to Adam, Where art
thou? Genesis 3.9.
and never color nor cloak our filthiness with the Fig leanes of our devises,
or shroud our selves in the thickets of our wicked imaginations; for then we
shall show our selves of what house we come: but rather endeavor to be new
creatures in Christ the second Adam: yet let it repent us that we have
deferred the time so long, and suffered sin to grow to such a height, to the
greater offense of our heavenly father, and to the greater hazard of our own
salvation: and as he has thought long for our turning unto him; so let us
think long for his turning unto us, that there may be amity, league, and
friendship betwixt God and us, and then shall we live without fear of any
foreign enemy; Exodus 14 14.
yea we may then hold our peace, for the Lord will fight for us, and put all
our enemies unto the sword: he will make us return into the court of heaven
with palms of honor in our hands, and crowns of victory upon our heads; and
the whole Trinity shall with one voice say, Amen, for the confirmation of our
eternal happiness. Then shall we have no more wars, nor rumors of wars to
dismay us; no more enemies to fear us, no fear to grieve us, no grief to
trouble us, no trouble to disquiet us, no sickness to distemper us, or death
to dissolve us; but life in him who lives for evermore. The Lord possess out
souls with a desire of it, and give a blessing to that which has been
delivered. Amen.

FINIS.

