HAGGEVS the Prophet.

Whereunto is added a most plentiful commentary, gathered out of the public
Lectures of D. John James Gryneus, professor of Divinity in the University of
Basil, and now first published, Faithfully translated out of Latin into
English, by Christopher Fetherstone student in Divinity.



LONDON Printed by John Wolf, for John Harrison the younger, dwelling in
Paternoster-row, at the sign of the Golden Anchor.

1586.



TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, and my very good Lord, John Lord Saint John, Baron of
Bletsoe, Grace and Peace with great increase of honor.
WHen I call to mind (right honorable) the buildinge of the Lords Temple by
the Jews of elder days, and there-withall take a view of the truth of that
material temple, of the Church I mean, generally, and more particularly here
in England, this angle of the world: me thinks I may full well compare these two
buildings together, whether we respect the causes inforcinge, or the
hindrances lettinge, or the punishments by the Lord inflicted, for not going
forward in his work. For the causes which ought to have been as pricks,
goades, and spurs to the Jews, were these principally. First, the choice which
the Lord had made of them. For seeing that the Lord had chosen them out of all
nations, countries, tongues, and people: for of all the trees of the wood God
chose one only Vine: of all the fowls of the air, one only Dove: of all the
nations of the world, one only Judea: of all the cities of the world
Jerusalem alone, that he might build his Temple on high, and put his name
there: and seeing that being iealouse of his glory, and careful for his
worship, which the Heathen could not give him, for they had not called upon
his name, but Jerusalem was the place of his rest, and there would he be
called upon, and for this cause would he have the Temple built at the first:
it stood them upon if they would escape the crime of impiety, and
ingratitude, to build the Lords house. Another, the remembrance of their
deliverance out of their late captivity, where for solace they had sorrow,
and pro socco saccum: where in steed of their own vynes which they sometimes
had, and under which they were wont to sit, they had Wyllowe-trees, where-on
they hanged their harps, as being unable to sing the Lords song. Seeing that
the Lord had delivered them out of a nation so polluted as was this, where they
saw those Gods worshipped, which neither they nor their fathers knew, and had
brought them back again to their own country that they might worship the
living God according to his law, and that in his holy Temple: what madness
moved them to delay the building of the Lords house? If the consideration of
those things could not have served to enforce them, yet the other ought to have
drawn them, as, that Cyrus the king of Persia had commanded them, and that the
Lord of heaven had given them this in charge, and had for this cause shortened
their captivity. But they were let, and that first outwardly, and secondly
inwardly. Outwardly by the enemies of Judah, and Jerusalem, who when the Lions
force could not prevail, assayed by foxes craft to hinder the Lords
building. Inwardly they were lets to themselves, because they sought their
own things, and not the things of the Lord, they preferred their own
affairs before the Lords, their own buildings before the Lords house, and
their feet were swift to build their own sieled houses, where in they
themselves might dwell, but they went with leaden heels about the place of
the Lords rest, which lay in ruinous manner. But as they had sinned, so were
they punished: and that even in those things which they preferred before the
Lords affairs. For the Lord with-drewe his blessing, and it pleased him to
inflict a curse upon them, which Haggai does in ample manner set down, namely
that they did sow much, and gathered in but a little: they did eat, but they
were not satisfied: they did drink, but their thirst was not quenched: they
were clothed, but they felt no warmth: and those which hired themselves out
for wages, received wages as in a bottomless bag, which did profit them
nothing. These were their plagues and many more, which to explicate I need not,
for why? they sufficiently expound themselves. But now let us look into our
own state. Though the Lord has not chosen us alone out all nations, to call
upon his name, yet has it pleased him to call us out of darkness into light, to
bring us from horrible superstition, and Gentilisme, which reigned some times
in this our nation, and to give us his word to be a light to our paths, and a
lantern to our feet in this dark and misty world, and therefore are we bound
to build a Church unto the Lord as were the Jews, to build a temple: that in
the same the Lord may be worshipped, seeing the wall of separation is taken
away, and the hour is come, that neither in the mount, neither at Jerusalem
the Lord is worshipped, but the true worshippers do worship him in spirit and
truth. Again, though our captivity from Babyloin of the Assyrians has not
been turned as the rivers in the south: yet has the Lord brought us in some
measure from the captivity of that romish Babylon, out of which we ought so to
depart, that we ought to touch none of her unclean things: and that to the
end we may worship him sincerely, and with an holy worship: and therefore
ought we to build the Lords Temple. Again, though Cyrus the king of Persia
has not enjoined us this thing: yet Cyrus the Lords shepherd (as the
prophet terms him) has commanded us, and why do we not then erect the
ruinous walls of Jerusalem? But (alas for woe) too many are our lettes. For
outwardely we are let by the enemies of Judah and Jerusalem, the papists I
mean, who though they can not by violence hinder our labor, because the Lord
has compassed in his Vine with a brazen wall, whose hedge is not yet broken
down: yet by secret means they vnderminde our work, and because they will
bear a show of building, they build with untempered mortar, or rather under
color of building a Temple to the Lord, they set up a Synagogue to Satan: yea,
by sattle means they steal away those stones which we should lay in the
Lords buildinge, that they may be corner stones in their ruinous work. These
are no small lets, but (the more the pity) we have as great among our selves.
And the first of these seems to be the silence of those which have
sometimes labored painefullie, whose work is in danger to decay, if storm
and tempest should arise. An-other let there is, and that is, the laborers
want their wages, by reason of the insatiable covetousness of the men of our
days, which will not suffer them to let go the spoils of the Church,
impropriations I mean. Again, amongst the builders there be those which fill
the roumes of builders, but know not how to lay one stone upon an-other, I
speak of unlearned ministers, if it be lawful for me to call them
ministers, whom I may more rightly term Idol sheepheards, or if you will
Siphers in Augrim.

And many there be also which know how to build, but they will not, the
world has so ouer-taken them, and their lasines is such: which both are no
small lets to the work. And to be brief, there is generally amongst all a
greater care to seek their own, then the things which are Gods: to prefer
their own commodity before the Lords glory, and finally, to seek their own
ease rather the^ the kingdom of God: and therefore is it that the Lords Temple
is not builded, and therefore is it that the Lords plagues are in some measure
upon us inflicted. For let us call to mind these latter years, and see if the
Lord has not scourged us, as he did sometimes the Jews. And to gather their
punishments into this abridgment, that the Lord did not bless the works of
their hands, how-soeuer they toyled and took great pains: have not we tasted
of the like judgment? Let that general dearth which lay, and as yet does lie
upon the whole Land, witness: for I will not stand to amplify every
particular point, for I hasten toward an end. If the punishments of the old
people, when we only heard thereof, could not move us to build the Temple of
the Lord: yet let them now enforce us, seeing we taste thereof in some measure.

But now to come to your honor. That especial duty which to your Lordship
for many and good causes Iowe, has caused me to publishe these my labors
under your honorable title, and that not only that it may be a bush to
shrowde them from evil tongues, but that as they be to your good Lordship
presented, so you may there-by be moved, enforced, encouraged to further the
Lords building, and to seek the remoouing of these lets and hindrances which
may stay the same. And because (right honorable) it is no small help to the
common building, for every one of what condition so-euer he be, privately to
erect in his own family a Church unto the Lord, as did that good Cornelius:
let me with such reverence and dutifulnes as I ought, crave at your hands that
you would proceed to consecrate your honors family to the Lord in such sort,
that it may with-in your private walls resemble the Lords Church. And
how-soeuer worldly respects may keep you back from this: yet let that fear
of the Lord which I know to be planted in you, and my very good Lady your wife,
overcome all these lets and hinderancances. It is true liberty (my Lord) not
to serve sin, and it is true honor, to honor, and serve the Lord aright.
This therefore do, and no doubt the Lord will advance you, for he has
promised to advance those to honor, which honor him. Shake of therefore all
those things which may hinder you in this course of godliness: remove all
hindrances which may keep you back: call away your eyes from be-holding the
vanities of this world, whose shape must pass away: make straight steps unto
the fear of the Lord: consecrate your self to serve him: halt not between the
fear of the Lord, and worldly vanity: purge your house from all profane
persons, such as was Esau: so shall the Lords blessing be upon you, so shall
he to honor advance you, and so shall you through faith in Christ, reign with
Christ for ever, and ever. The Lord bless your good honor, and increase in you
the manifold blessings of his sacred spirit. From my chamber in Southwarke this
present xxj. of July. 1586.

Your honors much bounden, and in the Lord, at commandment, Christopher
Fetherstone.

To the Reader.
THough (good reader the abundance and satiety of printed and translated
books, has in these days bred in the minds of many a certain loathesomnes,
so that curious men with squinting eye, and countenance disdainful, look upon
other men's labors, thinking them to be odlie, how-soeuer not idly
occupied, which employ themselves that way: yet am I not ignorant, that those
pains which are bestowed about this, do profit many, if they be well
bestowed in things appertaining unto godliness, and the explaning of the
Scriptures: for-asmuch as there be many which read the word of God, and
all do not understand it, neither can, unless they have some to expound it
unto them. Which because it can-not be done viua voce, because there is too
much want of that means: they must have it ex scripto. My pains which I have
taken in this translation, have been taken for thy sake (Christian reader)
whose desire it is to read other men's labors, and there-by to profit: that
thou may be instructed thoroughly to know the will of God, who bless thee in
reading these learned Lectures, which if with attentiuenes thou read, no doubt
the profit thou shall there-by reap shall be very great. Accept therefore my
pains, and make thy profit thereof, and pray for me that the Lord will
bless my labors which I shall undertake for the profit of his Church.

Thine in the Lord, Christopher Fetherstone.

TO THE EXCELLENT and right honorable Lord, the lord Huldrich Fugger, lord of
Richberge and Weissenhorne, the patron of the learned, health.
MOST SWEET is that saying of the son of GOD, Christ Mat. 5. 4
Jesus our lord: Blessed are they which mourn: because they shall receive
comfort. For seeing that the calamity of Joseph, that is, of the miserable
church of Christ, being now oppressed with old age, and bewayling the most
sorrowful fates of her warfare; does marueylouslie move the minds of the
godly: we ought all of us most earnestly to bethink our selves, what
things may augment that huge sorrow, and what may cure the same: and we must
also bring to light those remedies for these sorrows, to the profit of the
godly; the which the spirit of Christ has opened unto every one of us. It
shall be therefore a point of equity and humanity in the godly, to take in
good part those things which I shall speak, both concerning the sorrow of
the church, and of all the godly: and also concerning the medicines, and
remedies whereby the same may be cured: seeing that I set all things before
the eyes of the godly to be examined according to the word of God: and would
have all things tried and examined, but those good things only received,
which are correspondent and agreeable unto the straight rule of the holy
scripture.

In this we are greatly deceived, that being too too much addicted unto this
world, we do invent, and greedelie desire to have a diuorcement made between
the gospel of Christ crucified, and trouble, and persecution: and also in
that we think that we are able with a weak faith to overcome this world,
and those things which are therein. We confess that we must only glory in
the living, and almighty God: but in the mean while we look to have the
favor, consent, and patronage of princes and noble men. If we want these,
then think we that the kingdom of Christ is quite undone. We do thoroughly
weigh and consider in our minds, what things the world does deny unto us,
and what it does promise: but in the mean season we do not mark (until such
time as we be oftentimes admonished by the spirit of God, and his
instruments) what the Lord our God does: how that by our miseries he
brings good things to pass wonderfully: how that by the means of our
enemies he does good unto us: to how good and wholesome an intent he takes
from us earthly things, that he may put heavenly, and eternal things in
place thereof.

Seeing that I do seem to my self, not fully to understand what other men do
think of the fountain, and original of these errors, and imaginations: I will
boldly and by the good leave of others profess that, which I have always
(conferring our affairs with the rule prescribed by God) thought to be most
like to be the fountain thereof.

The principal cause of all those miseries and sorrows, wherewith we are
vexed by the just judgment of God most just, and most good; is the weakness of
our faith, which makes us to be unable to overcome this world, and the things
therein contained; namely the riches, glory, and most of all the vain pomp
thereof. But notwithstanding, as the weakness of faith makes us to stand in
need of comfort: so the stedfastnes thereof makes us to abound with true and
manifold consolation.

We do not sufficiently ponder that, which notwithstanding we have always
in our mouth, namely, that in God we live, we be, and move: that we are the
work of God: that God has a care over us: that the living and almighty God,
is he, which has not only a great respect to all mankind, but also to the
church and all the faithful.

Therefore we are afraid to offend Monarchs, we are so afraid of the
affliction and death of godly princes, of the mutable natures of men; as if
all judgment, and power were in their hands, and not in the hands of God.

And although we hear that Christ does Psalm. 10. 2.
raygne in the midst of his enemies: yet because all his works are brought
to pass amiddest contrary means; we do hardly suffer our selves to be
persuaded, that the truth and those which bear record of the same, shall have
the upper hand when it is resisted, although the enemies thereof do rage
against it, and go about to overthrow the same: that the kingdom of Christ
shall come and shall flourish: that the enemies of Christ shall be so quite taken
away, that some of them by their sudden destruction, some of them by that
destruction which comes upon them in tract of time, shall testify, that God
is the judge of the whole earth.

We hear also that the holy spirit is the best comforter: that the mind
and purpose of the Lord is known unto him: that he only is the meetest witness
to testify unto us the merciful good will of God toward us. But in the mean
while we have great respect unto men, and their counsels and promises: as if we
could be more safe under their protection, then under the protection of that
spirit which governs all things.

What man is he which does so often and so greatly rejoice that he is made a
member of the church, a fellow Citizen with the saints, one of Gods
household, as he ought, and as the thankefulnes of a Christian does require? I
will not now speak of those which are rotten members of the church. How many
of us are there which do make so great account of our calling, regeneration,
and justification as we ought: so that we have always need to have some
godly exhortation given us, by the godly teachers, wherein we may be
exhorted hereunto.

We quake and tremble, when we hear any mention made of death, when as in
the mean while we glory that we do believe the resurrection of the flesh,
and everlasting life. To be brief, we can not away with this to be baptized
with the baptism of Christ his afflictions, and to drink of the cup of his
suffringes: but we can be very well content with this, to sit on high in
glory on Christ's right hand, and on his left, in his kingdom: and in that
time which the Lord has appointed for warrefare and afflictions, to triumph,
and to lead a most happy life.

Hereunto is added another, and that the greatest error, that in the choice of
good and evil, being greatly deceived, we think that the witnesses of the
truth are unhappy, seeing that they are hated of the world; and that those
which lay waste the church, and are the adversaries of the truth are happy,
because they lie soft and fare daint^lie in kings courts, freely persecuting
the churches, and the faithful ministers thereof; and are in the mean season
accounted amongst the unskillful, as pillars of the church.

Truly, seeing that it is meet that the godly do with great faithfulness,
and diligence endeavor themselves to mitigate the sorrows of the minds of
men wherewith they are afflicted, as they would extinguish a great fire: I will
use the same order in declaring the means whereby I endeavor to mitigate the
same sorrow (which I have suffered these few years for the afflictions of
the church both public and private: then the which also I am persuaded that
the pain which I shall suffer at the departure of my soul out of the prison of
this my body, shall be nothing greater) which I see observed in the canon of our
faith, I mean the Apostles creed.

John. 5. 17
hairs of my head are numbered: that man Act. 17. 28.
does prepare his heart, but the answer of the tongue is of the lord.

Therefore forasmuch as I am persuaded that prosperity and adversity, life
and death, the 1. Pet. 5. 7. Mat. 10. 30. Pro. 16. 1.
benefit of friends, and injuries of enemies, are moderated, and ruled by God:
bearing with a quiet mind adversity, and with a temperate, and a thankful
mind prosperity: I think I might say with Job, If we have received Job. 2.
10.
good things at the hands of the Lord, why should we not receive evil
things at his hands also? For I am persuaded that as prosperity, so
adversity also does happen unto me by the merciful determination of God, and
that to my great profit: and I also think that these men do greatly err,
which do think that we reap no commodity by adversity which is sent unto
us by God.

And although I do in heart bewail the manifold ruin of ^ens affairs, and
empires: the perturbations and laying waste of the church: the exile of the
godly: the success of hypocrites, which are wont almost to work the utter
destruction of the godly: yet notwithstanding as I do acknowledge all these
miseries to proceed from these miscre antes; so nothing doubting but that God
uses these things to his glory, and our trial: I repeat that saying of
David, I held my peace Psalm. 39. 10.
and opened not my lips: because thou have done it.

For it cannot be that a godly mind (beholdinge first of all the
enormities, and tumultes which are to be found in certain churches and
universities; the banishment of godly ministers; the subtlety, and success
of certain hypocrites; the delighte which they take in those which are of high
degree, and also those men which are of base estate: then secondly, the wicked
joy which the papists conceive of the calamities of the godly, beholding all
these things most gladly; and the vain hope which they have of the restoring
of Antichristianisme:) can be at quiet, unless turning unto God, (who makes
all things for himself, even the wicked against the evil Pro. 16. 4.
day) it say with David: Therefore I thought upon this in knowing it: but it
was a grief in my eyes: until I entered into the Sanctuary of God, and
understood the end of these men. Certainly thou set them in slipperie
places: thou throwest them down headlong. Furthermore, whom shall we Psalm.
73. 16. 17. 18.
thank for these harbou^oughes, and hospitals of the godly teachers and
learners, which are in some provinces of Europe; but the lord our God, to whom
the Psalmist did sometime say: Thou preparest a table in my sight, before mine
enemies, thou annoyntest my head with oil, my cup Psalm. 23. 5.
runs over.

the heavens at his time, to judge the quick and the dead. For I do know that
he is present Mat. 28. 20.
with us, and that he will be present with his church until the end of the
world. And forasmuch as he is true, and the truth it self; forasmuch as he is
almighty, and almightines it self; I am persuaded, that he will not leave
Ioh. 14. 18.
us destitute, but that he will give us eternal life; that we shall not
perish for ever, and that Ioh. 10. 28.
no man is able to pluck us out of his hands. If we were not made members of
his body, being made one body with him: if Ephesians. 5. 30.
we were not flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: if we had not been
planted with him, and grown up with him, in the similitude Romans 6. 5.
of his death and resurrection: If finally that high priest of ours, Christ
Jesus, were not touched with the feeling of our infirmities: then were there
great reason why we should neither receive any comfort and pleasure
throughout our whole life, by prosperity: neither should adversity suffer any
hope of deliverance from so great miseries, to remain in us. * For what does
it profit a man if he win the whole world, and destroy Luke. 9. 25.
himself, or loose himself? But we are assured in our hearts (the spirit
of Christ bearing witness unto our spirit) that we are one body with him;
that we are ingrafted into him; and that he is thoroughly touched with the
feeling of our infirmities.

Therefore in him alone do we rejoice, who is made unto us of God, our
wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
sanctification, and redemption;* and we know assuredly that we are more then
conquerors through him, who has loved us: and that neither death nor life, nor
Angel, nor principality, nor power, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other thing which is created, is able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Romans ^. 37. 38. 39. Psalm. 110. 2.
Christ Jesus our Lord.*

Christ reigns, he reigns in the midst of his enemies, therefore shall
his kingdom come unto us, and the works of the Mat. 6. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
devil shall be loosed.* He shall beat down Satan under our feet, and that
shortly.* Romans 16. 20.


Let us not doubt, but that he shall shortly revenge his glory, even upon
those which in word do profess, but in deed do deny that Christ is come
in the flesh. For the 1. Ioh. 4. 3.
same Christ our Lord shall confound and overthrow this spirit of
Antichrist with the breath of his mouth: who is in deed made partaker of our
flesh and blood, but without sin.* Heb. 2. 14.


All sorrow departs when we have once received Christ. This is a true
saying, For if we be dead with him, we shall also live 2. Tim. 2. 11. 12.
with him: If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.* It is
better for us to Romans 8. 29.
be made like unto his image, and denying Mat. 16. 24.
our selves, to take up the cross and to follow such a guide, which will
lead us unto Act. 3. 15.
to life: finally, it is better for us to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy Heb. 11. 25.
the pleasures of sin for a season.*

Ephesians. 1. 14.


The godly minds do perceive that in this dangerous and continual warfare
of the natural life, they have need of instruction, exhortation, consolation,
hope, patience, constancy, and many more gifts then these: and they do always
freely confess with Jeremy: We know O Lord that man's way is not his own
way, neither is it in man that walks to prepare his Ier. 10 23.
own goinges.*

But that one and self same spirit works in us all these things,
distributing them particularly, as it pleases him. For like as there is one
body, and it has many members; but all the members of one body, albeit they
be many, are but one body: so likewise Christ, that is, that mystical body
of the Church, (whose head is Christ, and whose members are the faithful,)
according to the diversity of the members, has diverse functions; the which,
that the members may execute rightly, and orderly; they are furnished with
gifts, mysteries, and ability, by the holy spirit, who is one and the self
same in the head and members. Therefore we are all baptized into one body by
one spirit, whether we be Jews or Greeks; whether we be bond or free:
and we have all drunk of one cup, 1. Cor. 12. 11. 12. 13.
into one spirit.*

Therefore do we so greatly rejoice because of this so great grace and favor of
God, which rests upon the immutable purpose of his will: that thoroughly
weighing the greatness, stablenes, and fruit thereof: we do not suffer the
feeling of adversity to pearce and trouble us to much.

Let us not think that this was only said unto the Apostles by Christ
Jesus, but unto us also: But I say the truth unto you: it is expedient Ioh. 16.
7.
for you that I go hence: for unless I shall go hence, that co^forter shall
not come unto you, but if I shall go hence, I will send him unto you.

Therefore let us desire to be governed and raised up by the holy spirit, let
us consecrate our selves wholly unto him, and let us most gladly suffer our
selves to be ruled and directed by him.

Ep 8. 19. 20.


O we most happy creatures, whom our heavenly father has made meet to be
partakers of the condition and estate of the saints in the light*: and has
delivered us from the Col. 1. 12. 13. 14
power of darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his well beloved
son, in whom we have redemption through his blood, that is, remission of
sins.*

And although as it becomes good citizens to be careful for their common
country; so also it becomes all the faithful to have an earnest care for
the church, which is their common country, their duetifull and tender mother,
being careful and tender over them her children: yet let them thus certainly
persuade themselves, that the almighty God, who in the time of Pharao,
Senacherib, Antiochus Epiphan, Dioclesian, Julian the apostata, and of the
flourishing Antichristianisme, did save and defend most miraculously an holy
seed, namely a remnaunt of godly men: will also in this last time be present
with his church, to save his, and to judge and punish both the open, and privy
enemies thereof. We have seen many, and that notable examples of the
delivery, and defense of the church, and of certain godly men.

We have also seen testimonies of the just judgments of God executed upon
tyraunts, and false brethren, who when they made manifest both by their words,
and writings, that they were given up into a reprobate mind; some pined away
through grief of mind; some hanged themselves; some broke their own necks;
some of them came to their end by some other means being men which condemned
themselves, and being their own judges. The histories of Hoffmeisterus,
Latomus, Crescentius, and certain other false brethren, and enemies not much
unlike unto these, are well known.

be on our side, who is against us? How shall not he give unto us al things
with him, which has not spared his only son, but has given him for us all?
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies,
who is he that can condemn? Christ is he which died; yea rather which was
raised up again: who sits also at the right Romans 8. 31. 32. 33. 34.
hand of God, and makes intercession for us. *

We sin, I confess oftener then we would, being prevented with manifold
occasions of falling; neither ought we to make small account of the greatness
of sin, and of the wrath of God against the same: yet let us comfort our
selves herein, that we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, for he is the propitiation for our sins. * 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2.
He came into this world that he might save these sinners, to whom he gives
grace to repent, and to turn unto him. * 1. Tim. 1. 15.


And although it be an horrible thing, and a spectacle by all means to be
lamented in this our time, that the wrath of God is revealed by so many means,
from heaven, against al impiety, and unrighteousness of men; as they which
unrighteously keep back the truth *: that many are given over into a
reprobate Romans 1. ^8.
mind, and a mind void of all judgment: that certain (passing over
Antichristianisme) do so rage against their fellow servant, and the standerd
bearers amongst the people of God; as if they might safely behold papistrie a
far of, and to rage as enemies against their brethren, were a glorious thing
for them: that finally there is in the minds of many men no desire to know
the truth, as their words and deeds do declare: notwithstanding it stands
us upon, to reverence most reverently the judgments of God most just and most
mighty: to learn by the perverse zeal and ruin of other men, what we ought
to leave undone, and what we ought to do: in fear and trembling to work
Philip. 2. 12.
out our salvation: * to rejoice in our own felicity, and to join the love of
the truth with the love of our brethren. For although (seeing that clouds and
darkness are round about the Lord) we cannot see, perceive, and find out the
depth of his judgments with the dazeling eyes of our mind: yet is it certain
that righteousness and judgment are the foundation of his seat, and therefore
must Psalm. 97. 2.
we stay our selves reverently upon God being well pleased, and upon his
judgments. And when as we are fully persuaded in the Lord of our
justification, and assure our selves that we are justified freely, that is,
through his grace, by the redemption wroughte by Christ Jesus: we cannot doubt
of our vocation, Romans 8. 29. 30
and election gone before; neither of our sanctification following after. For
whom God knew before, the same did he also predestinate, that they should be
made like unto the image of his son: that he might be the first begotten
amongst many brethren *. Romans 8. 29. 30


And whom he did predestinate, them also he called: whom he called, them
also he justified: whom he justified, them also he glorified. Howsoever our
outward man be vexed with adversities, and manifold miseries: yet are we in
good case, when as we perceive that God of his infinite goodness, has wrought
in us an effectual says, a working love, and suffering hope; most sure
testimonies 1. These. 1. 3. 4.
of our election: and that he will never forsake this his excellent work, but
that he will crown, pullish, and fully finish the same.

1. Ioh. 3. 14.
believe in him shall live although we die. * Ioh. 11. 25.
Therefore being sure that we shall be made partakers of eternal life: we
rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation works patience; patience
experience; experience hope; which makes not ashamed, because Romans 5. 3. 4. 5.
the love of GOD is shed abroad in our hearts, through the holy spirit,
which is given unto us. * And seeing that the things Romans 5. 28.
which we now suffer are nothing comparable to the glory to come, which
shall be showed in us: I think we ought to suffer, and overcome these things
with a stout courage. For the time shall come, when the Lord shall wipe away
all tears from our eyes, and shall give us these things to enjoy, which the
eye has not seen, the care has not heard, neither have they ever entered into
the mind of man, which God has prepared for those which love him unfeignedly
*. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Isay. 64. 4.


I think I have pointed out as it were with my finger the fountains from
whence the principal consolations do spring, whereunto the rest which I shall
annex hereunto, ought to be referred. Notwithstanding I will briefly touch
the subordinate places, that the godly minds may see how excellently it was
said of Paul the apostle: Like as the sufferings of Christ do abound in us: so
likewise our consolation abounds through Christ. And let 2. Cor. 1. 5.
them remember that I do here chiefly entreat of the remedies of the
consolations, whereby the afflictions are cured, which we ought to suffer for
Christ's sake; for the truths sake; and for the churches sake.

bear witness with the truth: but also it is made more manifest by the lies of
those which are enemies thereunto: (a very marvelous matter, yet is it most
true.) Let the enemies of the heavenly, and immoueably verity be ashamed of
their wrangling, cogging, and lying, although the whole world subscribe unto
them, and give the^ their consent. On the contrary part, let the witnesses of
the truth take a good courage to them. For why? Bernard says very well,
Veritas magis elucet impugnata. The truth, the more it is resisted, the more
clearly it shines. To speak the truth is void of danger, as says
Nazianzenus. To resist the known truth does exceed Idolatry, as Augustine
says very gravely.

God, by the means of his enemies does good to those which are his. Therefore
must we not regard what they pretend, what they respect: but what God, who is
most wise, and a friend to all mankind, does in the mean season intend. Let
them curse us, yet shall the Lord bless us. Let them make insurrection against
us, yet shall they be confounded, and the servants of God shall be Psalm. 109. 28.
glad and joyful. Let them imagine evil against us, yet the Lord does turn
it to good for us. Genesis 50. 20.


of the battle against such as are enemies unto true Christians, and set
themselves against Christ his merits, and person: then might we singe that
woeful song: We see not our Psalm. 74. 9.
signs, there is not any more a Prophet: and there is none with us that
understands any longer*. But through Gods great goodness there are those yet
alive, whom the thing it self does testify to be furnished of God with many
notable gifts of the holy ghost, and to be raised up to defend the purity,
and sincerity of the heavenly doctrine, and to refute vain babbling, and
false doctrine. Therefore let us not doubt, but steadfastly believe that God
cares for us, and that he is present with us. For he furnishes his church
with so great gifts not in vain: it is not for nothing that he sets
captains and vnder-captaines over his holy army.

scurrility, vainglory, their desire of wordly goods, and the fragilitie of
those commodities whereunto they do lean: give place unto the latter
opinions, which are wont to be the better and sounder.

The best, and most valiant soldiers of Christ have need sometimes to use an
holy, and religious kind of silence (which not-withstanding, may not be
prejudicial unto the confession, and profession of the truth:) and they have
always need to have an invincible constancy: and then most of all whenas the
fury and outrage of their adversaries is armed with the aid of the arm of
flesh. But a time there is whenas the Iayes having made an end of chatteringe;
the Swannes do with a merry noise, and pleasant song celebrate the victory
of the truth. Comparisons are odious, yet what man is he which being well in
his wits, does not see how far inferior these Censurers are to the clear
windows of the church, and the light bearers thereof, which in their hands
bear the clear shining light of the truth: whether he look into their
godliness, and humanity; or learning and eloquence; or finally their
deseruinges of the church, and their most excellent monuments of godly wit?
I will not speak of this, that they which have suffered, and do as yet suffer
great adversity; which have preferred Christ far before riches, their
country, and all prefermentes: are worthy to be had in greater estimation,
then they which live in the midst of all manner pleasures.

of things, and seasons.

If at any time we see the affairs of the church not only afflicted, but
even almost past all hope: then let us repeat that saying of David: And I
said, this is my destruction, but Psalm. 77. 10.
the chaunges are in the right-hande of the Lord. For how often did God
deliver his saints miraculouslie? How often did he deliver his people out
of the midst of death? At the red sea, in the times of Iosaphat, Ezechias,
the Machabees.

As the glory of the three witnesses was the greater, after that they came out
of the furnace at Babylon vn-hurt: of Daniell when he was brought out of the
Lions den: so shall the glory of the whole church, and of the sincere
Teachers of the truth be greater, whenas they have passed over their sharp
warfare.

the hope of success. The sayings of the prophets are well known, wherein we
find the most sweet similitudes of the Palm Tree, and of the Olyue-tree.
Not-withstandinge I shall be as a green Olyue-tree in the house of the Lord,
I hope in the goodness of the Lord for ever, and throughout all ages. And
again, The just man shall flourish as a Palm Tree: as a Cedar in Lybanus shall
he prosper. They which Psalm. 25. 8.
are planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish Psalm. 92. 12. 14.
in the courts of our God. And again. They shall flourish in their old age,
they shall be fat and green: that I may declare that the Lord my rock is just,
and that there is no iniquity in him.

the examples of the saints, which have been since the world began, and
especially of that saint of saints Christ Jesus. Seeing that he by his
cross, and afflictions, is entered into the kingdom of his father; and all the
elect, have been, are, and shall be like unto him: let us well remember that
saying of his, The servant is not greater then his master. If they have
persecuted 1. Reg. 19. 4. Ioh. 15. 20.
me, they shall persecute you: If they have kept my sayings, they will also
keep yours. I am not (says Elias the Prophet) better then my fathers. And
truly it were a point of great impaciencie if they should refuse to suffer
those things which they suffered, whom those Captains of ours, do freely,
and willingly acknowledge to have been both their superiors, and betters.

is the fate and destiny of the church. As it never triumphed but under the
cross: so has it oftentimes felt the discommodities, which civil and long
peace does bring. The church did florishe more, and was more greatly increased
by the faithful which were added thereunto, in the hot and vehement ten
years persecution, moved by Dioclesian, and Maximian Augg. then after-warde
under Constantine the great, and his sons, and under Valens, whenas that most
sacriligious, and impious heresy of the Arrians, did most violently rage
against the very bowels of the church. If any man do look into these times,
he shall see that this thing is true. Do not those churches most flourish, by
reason of the light, and sincerity of doctrine, and the zeal of the
faithful; and do not they enjoy the most excellent teachers, and pastors: to
whom it is given in Christ his business, not only to believe in him, but also
to suffer persecution for his sake? Again, all men do see, that those churches
which do enjoy civil peace, and earthly commodities, are not occupied about
the beating down of Antichristianisme: but about the resisting of peace-able
men. Our time (alas for woe) brings out too many Minutij, who if they were
so wise as they ought to be, would know that they are to make war, not with
Fabius, but with Hanniball; not of Carthage, but of Rome.

the works of GOD, which are miraculouslie brought to pass amiddest contrary
means. God has many ways and means to bring things to pass, both
ordinary, and extraordinary, yet being all good, and serving to the
accomplishing of his purpose, and determination. It seemed good to him, of late
years to scatter abroad certain most florishinge Universities. Therefore we
see that men which did excel in wit, learning, eloquence, and experience in
great matters, have been driven away by certain Drone-bees, and have been
dispersed as the Bees are scattered abroad with smoke. But as in times past,
the dispersing abroad of the faithful, after the martyrdom of Stephen, did
greatly profit the Samaritanes, and others next adjoining unto them, when as
many being converted unto Christ, did cast away the heathenish Idotrie, and
Idolatry used of the Samaritanes, and did join themselves unto the true
church: so I hope in the Lord Jesus, that it shall come to pass, that thexile
of these holy men, both young and old, shall greatly serve to the spreading
abroad of the truth, the glory of God, and the restoring of the church.

Whenas in times past the Samaritanes were grieved at the restoring of
Jerusalem, and left nothing unassayed, which might make to the hinderance
thereof: by the marvelous providence of God, their intent fell out to the
contrary: so that they were enforced against their will to further the same,
and also to bear the charges thereof, at the commandment of Darius the son
of Histaspes. And who is he that does not see, that even at this time, the
minds of the godly learned are more and more inflamed with the love of the
truth, and with zeal to defend the same, through that outrageous obstinacy
and vehemency of their adversaries, most horribly defending their assertions;
so that the truth is farther brought to the light thereby?

is the hope of the victory, and the joyful end.

Truly it is as certain and sure, that (their Sophistry, and vaine-babling
being refuted) the truth shall have the victory: as it is certain that this
world was created by GOD, and is by him preserved. And hereupon it is that the
banner of the truth is oftentimes displaied, to the great terror, and
astonishment of these Sophisters; but to the joy of the godly, which is
thereby increased. We have seen with our eyes these Sophisters pleading their
evil cause with such fear, and trembling; that by the palenes of their
countenance, the trembling of their members, their confused oration, they
themselves did bewraie their subtlety, and hidden wound of conscience. How
often has this fallen out amongst them, that they which suppose themselves to
be able to prescribe laws unto other men, were not able to answer the spirit,
and wisdom of GOD, which spoke in the mouth of godly young men. The
ministry of Athanasius I confess was full of calamity and affliction: yet
was the same most fruitful to the church, and to him most glorious, even in
the midst of his miseries. And seeing that the ministry of our pastors and
teachers is such: let us in no case think that their labor shall be in vain
in the Lord. For they which do sow the doctrine of the truth with many
tears, shall in their time reap with joy. Psalm. 126. 5.


But I thought good (right honorable) to dedicate my Lectures upon Haggeus the
Prophet, unto your noble, and most renowned name, that there might some public
testimony of my duty, whereby I am bound to your highness, be extant: which I
hope, and am fully persuaded, will be well welcome unto your honor, by
reason of that confidence which I have in your heroical virtue. Perhaps it is
not for me to take upon me to set forth your highnesses deserts toward the
commen-wealth of learning: for I think I ought to leave this charge to the
Captains, and governors of the learned. I will only testify that which
gratefulnes bids me profess; namely, that many most excellent writers
have come to light by means of the Printers, as it were begetting them again,
and your highness his cost and charges most liberally bestowed there-vpon:
which other-wise we should either not have had at all, or else we should not
have enjoyed them so finely, and truly printed.

But another thing there is which most of all pleases us, which do profess
religion; and causes us most of all to esteem highly of your honor. Where
as it behooves princes and magistrates to be mindful of the commandment
of the Lord: Ascribe unto Psalm. 29. 1. 2.
the Lord ye mighty, ascribe unto the Lord glory and strength. Ascribe unto
the Lord the honor due unto his name, bow your selves unto the Lord in his
holy sanctuary *: who is he that may not worthelie rejoice, that your
clemency is endued with the true knowledge of the true God, being purged from
the leaven of man's inventions, which thing (the more is the pity) is at this
day had in great estimation with some men? I confess, that honor, dignity,
noble parentage, riches, the favor of of mighty princes (whom to please is
counted a great praise;) are excellent things. There is also great account to
be made of the deserts of noble men toward the commen wealth of learning,
and of their liberality towatde those which are endued with virtue and true
learning: who do encounter with many great miseries. But the honor of true
religion ought to be preferred far before all these things, which serves
greatly both to enlarge the fame, and also to edification, Therefore as the
good do with due reverence rejoice, that your honor is endued with the
spiritual, and corporal gifts both of the body, and of the mind; and also
with those temporal and external goods, which are the instruments of many
excellent virtues: so do they likewise pray that Christ Jesus, that king of
kings, and Lord of Lords, will long preserve and keep your renowned highness in
flourishing estate, for the commen wealths sake: that it may proceed to be a
bountiful patron to the learned.

Let your clemency fare well and happily. Written at Basil the first of
March.

Your honors most bounden, John James Gryneus.
Anno Domini. 1581.
Certain brief notes upon Haggeus, by John James Gryneus.
1 Haggeus does signify in the Hebrewe tongue, Pleasant and solemn. We may
read the history of Haggeus not only in this book, but also in Ezr. 5. ver.
1. and in Josephus de antiquit. lib. 11. cap. 4. and else where.

2 His fellow and partner in the office of prophesying was Zacharias, with
whom he began to prophecy in the eightenth year after the return of the
people of the Jews from Babylon, which was about the second year of Darius
the son of Histaspes, and in the year of the world 3444. after Funcius his
Chronicle, which we do follow: yet so that this may be no whit prejudicial
to the judgment of other men.

The state.
1 Forasmuch as they are by all means unfortunate, and subject to the curse,
who only seek those things which are their own, and not those things which
are Gods: Let the godly first of all seek the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof: for all these things which appertain unto the
sustentation of this mortal life, shall be added *. Hereto Math. 6. 33.
belong those sayings, Give those things which are gods unto God *. Whether
therefore Mat. 22. 21.
you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God. * That
saying 1. Cor. 10. 13.
also of the old Historiographer is well known, The things which are gods are
to be prefered before things which are men's. Certain it is, that all our
household affairs, pollitike affairs, School affairs, and all other
affairs whatsoever, are full of vanity and the curse, if any man do go
about the same, and do neglect the worship of God.

2 And as it becomes us to be careful for the whole Church which is the
temple of God: so it behooves every one of us to have a Ephesians. 2. 20. 22. 22 1.
Cor. 6. 19. Romans 12. 1. 3.
great care of his own edificatio^ and restoring *. For we also are temples of
the Lord, and we must offer our bodies a lively sacrifice to God. *

3 The Jews being brought back again The argument.
from Babylon did build their own houses gorgeously, and sought after their
commodity diligently, neglecting in the mean season the restoring of the
Temple, and the administration of the true worship of God. But they had the
word to cloak this their negligence withal, namely, that the time was not as
yet come wherein the Lord would have the Temple to be builded again. * Hag. 1.
2.
The Prophet most sharply reprehendeth them, and tells them that this
wicked negligence of theirs, was the fountain from which gods curse did flow.

The principal points of doctrine which are to be observed in both these
Chapters.
1 God shall restore his Church that it may be safe for ever.

2 God, when the fulness of time is come, shall be made manifest in the flesh.

3 When as the gospel shall be preached to the Gentiles, the heavens and the
earth shall be moved.

4 Let the faithful remember that they are Temples of God, and for this cause
let them love Christ, that by his spirit they may be more and more restored
and renewed.

Haggeus the Prophet.
The argument of the first Chapter.
1 The description of the circumstances of the time, The judicial kind is
such as is used in accusing of a man or in defending of him.

The deliberatiue kind of oration, is such as is used to persuade a man to do
a thing, or to deswade him from doing of it.


the persons, and matters, is comprehended in the 1. and 2. verses

2 Hereunto is annexed an oration partly of the judicial kind, and partly of
the * deliberatiue kind. For first of all the Prophet shows that the Jews
had greouously offended, in that they had in all have and with great expedition
builded their own houses, neglecting the restoring of the holy temple of the
Lord. Secondly he shows how the Lord had chastned the^. Lastly, he exhorts
the^ unto the building of the Temple, adding a most large promise of the
blessing of God, wherewith they should be enriched, if they did their duty
as they ought: from the third verse until thend of the eleventh verse.

3 A laudatorie narration of the obedience of the Princes, and people of the
Jews: unto the end of the Chapter.

Cap. 1.
1 IN the second year of King Darius, in the sixth month, the first day of the
month, was the word of the Lord in the hand of Haggeus the prophet unto
Zerubabell son of Salthiel captain of Iehuda, and Iehosua the son of
Iehosadac the chief priest, that he should say,

2 Thus has the Lord God of hosts said, in saying, This people has said,
The time is not yet come, the time ( I say) that the house of the Lord should
be builded.

3 The word of the Lord was therefore in the hand of Haggeus the prophet, that
he should say,

4 Whether or no, o ye, is the time come that ye should dwell in your sieled
houses, and that this house should lie wast.

5 Now therefore the Lord of hosts has thus spoken, Set your hearts upon
your ways.

6 Ye shall sow much and bring in little: ye shall eat and not be satisfied:
ye shall drink and not be dronken: ye shall cloth your selves and not be
warm: and he that shall place himself for wages, he shall place himself
for wages which shall be as if it did fall into a bottomless bag.

7 Thus has the Lord of hosts spoken, Set your hearts upon your ways.

8 Go up into the mountain, and bring thence wood, and build my house, and
I will be favorable therein, and I will be glorified says the Lord.

9 Ye shall look unto much, and behold it is but a little: and ye have
brought it into the house: but I blow upon it. For what cause says the Lord
of hosts? For my house which lies wast, and ye run every one into his own
house.

10 Therefore has the heaven shut it self upon you, that it may not give
you dew: the earth also has shut her self that she may not give her fruit.

11 And I have called a drought upon this land, and upon the mountains, and
upon the wheat, and upon the wine, and upon the oil, and furthermore upon
men, and upon the cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands.

12 And Zerubabel the son of Salthiel, and Iehosua the son of Iehosadac the
high priest, and all the remnaunt of the people heard the voice of the Lord
their God, and the words of Haggeus the Prophet, as the Lord their God had
sent him, and the people did fear before the face of the Lord.

13 Therefore said Haggeus the ambassador of the Lord, in the embassage of
the Lord, unto the people, saying, I am with you says the Lord.

14 And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubabel the son of Salthiel
captain of Iehuda, and the spirit of Jehosua the son of Iehosadac the high
priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people, and they entered in, and
did the work in the house of the Lord of hosts their God.

The argument of the second Chapter.
1 An oracle of the great glory of the second temple wherein the Messiah
should teach. It is contained in the 10 first verses.

2 An other oracle consisting upon a Parable, and an answer, where he
teaches that the sacrifices of the Jews have been and are profane, which
were and are offered without faith. ver. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.

3 The curse which shall befall those which only seek those things which are
their own, and not those things which are Gods. ver. 16. 17. 18.

4 A promise that those shall be blessed which repent. ver. 19. 20.

5 The last oracle of the preservation of the Church and commonwealth of the
Jews. Zerubab^ll being a figure of Christ, has this excellent title given
him, that he is a signet upon the Lords hand.

1 IN the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of
Darius.

2 In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the same month, was
the word of the Lord in the hand of Haggeus the prophet, saying,

3 Say now unto Zerubabel the son of Salthiel the captain of Iehuda, and
unto Iehosua the son of Iehosadac, the high priest, and unto the remnant of
the people, saying,

4 Who is there amongst you left which has seen this house in her former
glory, and how do you see it now? Is it not so as if it were not in your
eyes?

5 But now strengthen thy self Zerubabel says the Lord, strengthen thy
self Iehosua thou son of Iehosadac the high priest, and strengthen thy self
all thou the people of this land, says the Lord, and work: because I am with
you, says the Lord God of hosts.

6 And I will do the word which I couena^ted with you when ye came out of
Egypt: my spirit also shall stand in the midst of you: fear not.

7 For thus says the Lord God of hosts. Yet a little and I will shake the
heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the dry land.

8 And I will move all nations, and the desire of the Gentiles shall come, and
I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord God of hosts.

9 The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord God of hosts.

10 The glory of this latter house shall be greater then the glory of the
former, says the Lord God of hosts: and in this place will I give peace,
says the Lord God of hosts.

11 The four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year of
Darius, was the word of the Lord in the hand of Haggeus the prophet, saying,

12 Thus says the Lord of hosts, ask now the priests the law, saying,

13 If any man shall carry holy flesh in the skirtes of his garment, and he
shall touch with his skirte bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any manner
of meat, shall it be made holy? And the priests answered and said, No.

14 Then said Haggeus, If one that is polluted because of the dead carcas of a
man, shall touch any of these things, shall it be unclean? And the priests
answered and said, It shall be unclean.

15 Therefore Haggai began to say thus, So is this people, and so is this
nation before me says the Lord, and so is all the work of their hands: and
whatsoever they offer here, it is unclean.

16 Now therefore set your hearts I pray you, from this day and upward,
before the workmen did lay one stone upon another in the temple of the Lord.

17 Before they were in that work, the husbandman did come unto an heap of
twenty bushels, and it was ten bushels: when the dresser of the vineyard came
unto the winepresse, that he might draw out fifty hogsheades of wine out of
the wine press, there was but twenty.

18 I have smitten you with drought, and meldewe, and with hail all the works
of your hands, and ye did not turn unto me says the Lord.

19 Set now your hearts from this day, and upward, I say from the four and
twentieth day of the ninth month, that is, from the day wherein the foundaiion
of the temple of the Lord was laid, set your heart.

20 Is there as yet seed in the barn? Furthermore the vine, and figgetree,
and pomgranate, and the olyue tree has not as yet brought forth fruit: I
will bless you from this day.

21 And the Word of the Lord was unto Haggai the second time, in the four
and twentieth day of the same month, that he should say,

22 Speak unto Zerubabel the captain of Iehuda, saying, I am about to shake
the heaven and earth.

23 And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the heathen, and I will overthrow their chariots,
and those which ride in them, and the horses, and they which shall ride upon
them shall come down, every one with the sword of his fellow.

24 In that day says the Lord of hosts, will I take up thee Zerubabel, thou
son of Sealthiel, my servant, says the Lord, and I will set thee as my
signet: because I have chosen thee says the Lord God of hosts.

The end of the prophecy of Haggeus.
THE LECTVRES OF John James Gryneus upon the book of Haggeus the Prophet.
BEcause in the notes upon Haggeus, we have touched those 1. Lect. 19. Oct.
1579
things which were to be spoken of his book in steed of a preface: it
seems good to me in this first lecture, first of all to speak in general
of the Prophets, that we may know what we ought to think generally concerning
them, and what account we ought to make of them. Secondly, if time permit, I
will speak by name of Haggeus, and of his authority. Lastly, I will briefly
note to you the causes for which I took in hand the interpretation of the
same Prophet.

A method concerning the Prophets, according to certain places of invention.

1 The self same men were called in times Notation.
past both Seers and Prophets. In times past in Israel every one said on this
wise, when he went to ask an answer of God, Come let us go unto the Seer:
because he which is called a Prophet at this day, was in times past called a
Seer.

They were called Seers in respect of ye cause, and also of the effect. I call
the vision showed unto them by the Lord, the cause, which did instruct the
Prophets in great matters. The heavens Paul calls it Revelation by the
general name.
were opened, and I saw the visions of God*. But Daniel understood all the
vision, and the dreams. I call the light of the mind, and the excellent
knowledge of the oracles Ezech. 1. 1. Dan. 1. 17.
of God, the Effect, wherein the Prophets did excel all other men.

And it seems they were called Prophets for this cause, because they were
interpreters of the will of God, according to the commandment of God, which
Paul calls Interpretation*. 1. Cor. 14.
Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet, that is, thine interpreter*. We read
that Exo. 7. 1.
some men have attained unto this gift by use, as Iesaias: and that other some
received the same at the hands of God: forasmuch as they were called unto the
office of prophesying far contrary Ier. 1. 6. 7.
to their expectation, as Jeremy*, and Amos*. Amos. 7. 14. 15.


This words Prophet is not affirmed of diverse sorts of men in one and the same
respect, in the holy Scriptures. For it is attributed The diverse significations
of this word Prophet. Tit. 1. 12.
unto the heathenish Poets improperly. A certain man of them, being their own
Prophet, said, the Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies*.

2 Secondly this word Prophet is affirmed Which is when diverse things are
called by one name. Isa. 9. 15. Is. 28. 7.
of the false Prophets Equiuoce. The Prophet which teaches lies he is the
tail*. The Priest and the Prophet have erred because of strong drink, they
are swallowed up because of wine, they have gone astray through drink, they
have erred in the vision, they have stumbled in judgment.

3 Thirdly this word ( Prophet) is taken by transsumption, sometimes for the
doctrine of the Prophets, sometimes for their books. Think not that I am come
to destroy the law or Mat. 5. 17.
the Prophets *, that is, their doctrine. It is written in the Prophets: And
they shall be John. 6. 45
all taught of God *.

4 Fourthly, it is taken properly, as in these sayings: We see not our
signs, neither is their a prophet any more, neither is there with us any that
understands any more *. Psalm. 74. 9.
And again, I have made thee the prophet of Ier. 1. 5.
the Gentiles *.

5 Fifthly according to the most principal signification John. 1. 4. Deuteronomy. 18.
Christ is said to be that Prophet, which should come. I thought good to note
thus much concerning the diverse significations of the word.

Every Prophet is the servant of God, 3. Genus.
but not on the contrary. Since the day that your fathers went out of the land
of Egypt, until this day, have I sent unto you all my servants the
Prophets, rising day by day, early in the morning, and sending them.

Ob. Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy Joel. 2. 28.
*. Therefore all the servants of God are Prophets.

An. I answer that there is a fallacy, which is called * Fallacia
Aequiuocationis, in this word Which is when a word has diverse significations.
Prophecy, because in the saying of Joel it is taken generally for the general
confession of those which do with the heart believe unto righteousness. But
we do now speak of the degree of that good order and discipline which God
has appointed in his Church, namely of the prophetical office in special.

All the Prophets were not of one sort. It seems there were four sorts of
Prophets, 4. kinds.
whereof the last is as yet used, seeing that the Church militant cannot be
without the same.

1 The first was of those, which when they did execute some ordinary function
in the church, were raised up extraordinarily by God to purge the celestial
doctrine.

2 The second was of those who did both foretell things to come, and also did
peculiarly apply the Scriptures unto certain particular causes, places, and
times: being enforced thereunto by the holy spirit.

3 The third was of those to whom it was given to expound the scriptures, yet
being endued with a certain power, and peculiar gift of vnder-standing,
whereby Paul does distinguish them from the Doctors.

4 The fourth is of those who being lawfully called of the Church, do
expound the Scriptures according to the proportion of faith, and they are
called Doctors.

These four orders are dystinguished one from another, according to the form
of doctrine, and calling. Furthermore, the Prophets of the olde-testament, are
called old, * Luke 9. and the Former, Za. 7. to distinguish them from the
Prophets of the new Testament.

None is a Prophet save he whom God has V. Difference.
called, that being inspired with the spirit of Christ, he may either
foretell certain* things to come: or truly interpret the oracles of God.
Therefore it is laid to the charge of the false Prophets, as a great fault,
that they being not called did teach. I have not sent those Prophets, Hie. 23.
21.
and yet they did run: I have not spoken unto them, and they did prophecy.
And if they had stand in my secret place, and had made this people to hear my
words. etc.

It is proper to the true Prophets to speak VI. Properties.
in the spirit, concerning those things which God has showed them. If there
shall be a Prophet Number. 12. 6.
among you, I the Lord will appear unto him in a vision, in a dream will I
speak with him *.

David by the spirit calls him Lord. * Prophesying was not brought in times
past by the will of man, but the holy men of God being moved with the holy
ghost, did speak.

The Prophets were witnesses of Christ *. VII. Adiunct.
And unto this man do all the Prophets bear witness, that every one which
shall believe in him, shall receive remission of sins, through Act. 10. 43.
his name.

There were also certain of the Prophets of the old Testament, which did
govern certain civil counsels, as we may see in the histories of
Hieremie, and of the Prophet Daniell.

God raises up the Prophets. He has given VIII. The principal cause.
some to be Apostles, and some Prophets. * etc.

Lect. 2. Oct. 20.
The Prophets did declare y^ salvation whereof Christ is the author. Of the
which salvation IX. The principal end whereunto the prophets were ordained.
the Prophets have inquired, and searched; which have fore-tolde that grace
which should come upon you: searching when, or what time, the spirit which
testified before of Christ, which was in them, should declare those sufferings
that should come unto Christ, and the glory that should follow.

CERTAIN SAYINGS of Chrysostom concerning the Prophets.
1. The Prophets did see with the eyes of their mind, things to come *.

2. The mouths of the Prophets are the mouth of God. Therefore do they
repeat this, Thus says the Lord. Pro. 29. 18. When there is no vision, the
people are scattered abroad.


3. The silence of the Prophets is a sign of Gods anger.

4. The Prophets have spoken, have written, and prefigured things to come.

Of Haggeus.
FOr-asmuch as I hope I have faithfully set down in my notes, those things
which were to be spoken concerning the doctrine, and person of our prophet:
I will in this place speak somewhat of his authority, that it may evidently
appear that we ought to account the same holy.

1 The holy history does plainly declare and affirm, that Haggeus, and
Zacharias, were raised up of God to be Prophets. Therefore may we in no case
doubt of their credit and authority. And Haggeus the prophet, and Zacharias
the son of Iddo did prophecy, which were prophets to the Jews, and
Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel upon them *. Ez. 5. 1.


2 The Apostles do allege the authority and testimonies of the Canonical
books only. And Paul * speaking of the majesty of the gospel, Heb. 12. 26.
wherewith the whole world was shaken, brings in the testimony of Haggeus,
as being most sure, and without all exception.

3 Also the consent and agreement of the Canonical books, with the history,
and doctrine of the prophets, and apostles, makes them worthy of credit and
commendation. But wonderful is the agreement of Haggeus with the ancient
holy history of the estate of the people of the Jews, after their return
from Babylon. And more-ouer, Haggeus does deliver the same doctrine, which the
rest of the prophets did teach. Therefore it is meet that we be fully
persuaded of his authority, and of the certainty of his doctrine.

THE CAUSE OF THE taking in hand of the exposition of Haggeus.
MOst certain it is, that the best kind of life A rule.
is prescribed unto us in these sayings of the son of God, our Lord Jesus
Christ: First seek the kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof, and all
these things (which appertain unto the sustentation of the mortal life)
shall be added unto you *. Mat. 6. 32.
And again, Give unto God the things which are Gods *. For therefore are men
created, and Mat. 22. 21.
by Christ redeemed, that they may acknoweledge A reason.
God, and worship him by faith. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord *
etc. Romans 14. 8.
And it becomes us to imitate Christ in this Example.
point, who gave unto his parents this answer: Did you not know that it
behooves me to be occupied in my fathers business *? General experience.


For the general experience of all times teaches us thus much, that Churches,
Commonwealthes, Domestical affairs, the studdies of learning, and all
affairs both private, and public, are unfruitful: if they be not lightened
by the faith of Christ, and if the worship which is due unto God be either
altogether omitted, or else be given him only for fashions sake. For The
inuersion of the order which GOD has appointed.
that good order which God has appointed, is ouer-throwen, when earthly
things are preferred before heavenly things, according to that exprobration of
Horace, O Citizens, Citizens, money is first to be sought for, and virtue is
to be An old example.
sought for after money. Hereof does Haggeus set before us a most lamentable
example in this history of the people of the Jews, where-in he shows, that
they were subject to the curse of God, because that neglecting the Temple, and
service of GOD, they had built up their own houses: and because they had most
carefully sought after their own commodity: omitting both the reasonable,
and also ceremonial service of God.

And that I may speak of our selves: whilst that in the studdie of
Divinity, omitting the practice thereof, which consists in the exercise of
true godliness, and repentance, we follow the speculation, and do become rather
better learned, then better lived, preferring knowledge before conscience: we
do first of all separate those things which God has coupled together:
secondelie, for the most part it fares with us according to the saying of
Agatho: That thing which is unnecessary, that do we, as if it were
necessary: and that which is necessary do we omit, as if it were
unnecessary. What then remains for us to do (my brethren) but to change our
minds, and purpose, for the better: to follow the counsel of Haggeus, and to
be busied not so much about our own private houses, as about the Temple of
the Lord: that is, giving faithfully unto God those things which are his, that
we may at length be made partakers of his blessing. But we shall speak of
all these things in the discourse which follows.

Cap. 1. Ver. 1.
THe Prophet begins his book with an historical 3. Lect.
description of the circumstances, that he may teach, when, who, and in whose
name, under whose conducte, and finally unto whom he spoke. The same order
will we observe in our exposition.

In the second year of Darius the King, The time when.
in the sixth month, the first day of the month. That is, in the year after
the creation of world 3444. the first day of September: whenas in the year
next going before, Darius the son of Histaspes began to reign over the
Persians.

Darius the son of Histaspes succeeded Cambyses, being elected by the
Princes of the Persians, as Herodotus does testify in his Thalia.

Plato in his third book of laws, praising Darius, says: That kingdom
which in the time of Cambyses the king was decayed, was in the time of King
Darius his reign almost restored again. Furthermore he denies that Darius
was dayntily brought up of a child. Also he affirms that the kingdom was
by him divided into seven parts. Moreover he says that he brought in
equality: and that by his princely liberality and magnificence he won unto
himself the minds of the Persians. Yet does he greatly blame him for this,
that he did not provide that Xerxes his son might be instructed in that
princely discipline of his, testifying, that unto him it might be said, O
Darius how is it that thou have not learned to be wise by Cyrus his harms,
for thou have trained up Xerxes in the same manners, in the which Cyrus trained
up Cambyses.

1 Let such superstition be far from the holy history* which will not
permit us to use the Positions
names of Heathen kings when need does require. We must take heed that we
do not offend either in excess or defecte, that is, that we do neither so
much mix profane things with holy things, that the holy things do thereby
wax base, and be thereby obscured* neither that we do therefore contemn those
things which are well said, because they did proceed from men which were
destitute of the principal light, which is Christ.

2 Moreover we have need diligently to mark the times and seasons, for every
thing has his time *. And that saying of Plato is well known, Many things are
given in time, Eccl. 3.
to those, which use our trade of life.

2. The person sent of the embassage.
THe person which was sent of the embassage was Haggeus the Prophet, who in
this self same Chapter verse 3. is called the ambassasadour of the Lord:
concerning which matter we have spoken somewhat before, and more will speak
in his place.

The holy Prophets did their message unto men in the name of God, whence we
do gather, first, that their authority is holy. He that A position.
hears you, hears me. Luke 10. 6. Secondly, that the Apostles are partners
and fellows in office with the Prophets. Therefore we are the ambassadors of
Christ. Thirdly, that we 2. Cor. 5. 20.
ought to make great account of the faithful ministers of the Church, seeing
that they are together both Gods fellow laborers, and also the successors of
the Prophets and Apostles. And fourthly that they must be watchful, that their
diligence and faithfulness in their office, may be aunswerable to the dignity
of their function.

In whose name Haggeus was to Prophecy.
WE may gather by these words, The word of the Lord was in the hand of
Haggeus, in whose name the Prophet was to prophecy. Which importe thus much as
if he should have said, Haggai began to prophecy in the name of the God of
Israel.

Therefore the holy spirit does testify, that Haggeus was both called of the
Lord, unto the ^. ^zr. 5. 1.
function of prophesying: and also that he preached the word of the Lord,
and not his own word; neither any invention proceeding from other men's
brains.

1 It is only in the hand of the Lord to A position.
make men to be able ministers of both testaments. Not that we are sufficient
of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves: but what we are it
commerh of God: who has also made us to be able ministers of the new
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit *. Let those which are
students of Divinity 2. Cor. 3. 5.
thoroughly pondering this in their minds, pray daily in faith, Lord Jesus
Christ lead me by thy holy spirit into all truth, grant that I may profit
in learning and innocensie of life: that if thou shall at any time hereafter
call me to be a teacher in thy Church, I may serve to the sanctifying of thy
holy name, and the restoring of the saints, with great faithfulness and
watchfulness.

2 Secondly, it is the part and duty of the ministers and messengers of the
Lord, not to tell old wives fables, but to preach the word of God, according
to the saying of Christ. Teach them to observe all things which I have Mat.
28. 20.
commanded you *. And again, Go your way, preach, saying: The kingdom of
heaven Math. 10. 7.
draws near *.

3 Thirdly those fantastical fellows are not to be heard, which cumming in
their own name, do prophecy according to their own Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
hearts. That Prophet which* shall deal proudly, that he may speak a word
in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, and he which shall
speak in the name of strange Gods, that Prophet shall die the death *.
Afterward he adds a rule whereby we may know the false Prophets, which
shall be most excellently set forth by the example of the four hundredth
false Prophets 1. Reg. 22.
which promised to Ahab the victory over the Syrians, of whom he was then
conquered and slain.

Ob. But that came not to pass which Jonas had foretold as touching the
destruction of the Ninevites, shall he therefore be accounted in the number of
the false Prophets?

An. I answer, that the threatening of Jonas had the condition of repentance
annexed thereunto, which being fulfilled, we see that there fell out nothing
contrary to the threatening. There is therefore in this argument afallacy,
forasmuch as that which was spoken condicionally, is here taken as if it* had
been spoken simply. But all the godly do know what place Jonas is worthy to
have amongst the Prophets of the Lord, so that there is no cause why we
should go about to find a fault, where there is none to be found.

4. To whom the Prophet Haggeus was sent.
HE was sent unto Zerubabel the son of Salthiel, the captain of the Jews:
and unto 4. Lect. 23 oct. 1579.
Iehosua the son of Iehosadack, the high Priest.

We have noted in this place two things. First, a personal description of two
most notable men, namely Zerubabel, and Joshua: and secondly the counsel of the
holy Ghost, which admonishes us of weighty matters.

Of Zerubabel.
1 This word Zerubabel does signify ( void of confusion) as certain do
affirm. Philo does say that he* was also called Barachias.

Forasmuch as things are signified by A position.
names, it becomes us to be delighted in the most excellent names. And such
are those which do resemble godliness, and do prick men forward earnestly
to follow the same.

2 Zerubabel had for his father, Salthiel, His father.
which issued out of the most noble stock of David the King.

A position concerning Nobility.
It is only liberty with God not to serve sin: and it is only nobility with
God to excel in virtues *. Hier. ad Celantiam.

3 The office of Zerubabel was this, he was His office.
the captain of the Jews, who was also borne in the year of the world.
3410. When he was but seauenteene year old, he brought a part of the Jews
back from Babylon unto Jerusalem. He executed the office of a Captain 58.
years. He began to use the ministry of Haggeus the Prophet when he was 30.
years of age.

The multitude have need to have a captain, A position*
which will be peaceable and prudent: that he may keep these which are under
him Plato lib. 1. de leg.
knit together with the bond of friendship, and that he may be careful over
them.

Of Joshua the high Priest.
THis word Iehosua does signify a Savior, His name.
or Deliverer. Math. 1. 21.

When the ministers are joined with Christ, A position*
they are said to save themselves and others also. 1. Tim. 4. 16.
But when they are compared unto him, they are found to be nothing. 1. Cor. 3.
7.


2 His fathers name was Iehosadac. A His father.
most excellent name, forasmuch as it does signify the Righteousness of the
Lord. A position*


Even the princely Priesthood of God, does acknowledge no other cause of
their salvation, sa^^ only the righteousness of God. His office*


3 He was the high priest of the Jews. He began to execute the office of
ye Priesthood in the year of the world. 3428. and he was chief Priest 36.
years. Then being sent of a long embassage unto Darius the king of the
Persians and son of Histaspes, he continued therein eight years, which being
ended, he became high priest again for the space of twenty years. A
position.


1 Those which served in the Priests office, and which do now serve in the
ministry, they do not serve themselves only, but the Church.

2 The Priests of the Jews did take upon them certain civil offices: but
the ministers of the Church must only be occupied about the administration of
the word, and Sacraments.

Of the drift and purpose of the holy Ghost.
TO the end we may show the drifte and meaning of the holy Ghost, we will
first of all reduce the argument unto certain positions: then secondly we will
handle in few words a brief introduction concerning Christ Jesus.

1 First, God is the only reformer of those A position.
misorders which are in the Church and common wealth.

Which thing is proved, first by example. The word of the Lord was by the
hand of Haggeus ^. Example.
ver. 1. Whence we gather that this reformation of misorders was taken in
hand, God being the author thereof.

2 Secondly it is proved by reason, for God is not the aucthor of misorder but
of order and decency, seeing that he is both most wise and most good. Let
those therefore especially respect God and not man, who are desirous (all
misorder being quite taken away) to have that good order which GOD has
appointed, to be put in place thereof, that is, which are desirous to provide
for the profit and tranquillity of all estates.

And here God brings to pass this reformation 2. Position.
by the means of others for the most part, using the ministry of the
Prophets and other fellow laborers.

This is proved by authority. The Lord does 1. Authority.
nothing unless he shall reveal his secret intent unto his servants the
Prophets. If the lion roar who shall not be affraide? The most mighty God
has spoken, who shall not prophecy? Amos. 3. 7. 8.

Haggeus the prophet. etc.

God begins first to work this reformation 3. Position.
in the heads, that he may afterward reform the members.



2 Furthermore, such is the mutual agreement of the head and the members, that
when as the head aketh, all the rest of the members are out of frame: when it
aketh not, all the other members are in better case* For the head is not only
the place of understanding, reasoning, and of memory: but also the shop of all
the Senses, both internal, and external. In like sort ought those to excel
in the gifts of the mind, which are governors in the Church, and
commonwealth.

Whiles God does work this reformation, he 4. Position
does not separate those orders which are straitely lincked together. I call
the ecclesiastical function, and the civil function, the orders which are
lincked together: the seminary whereof is the good discipline kept in private
houses. God did adioyne unto Moses, Aaron, to be unto him a helper, when as
the people of Israel was to be brought out of Egypt. Such fellows in office
were Zerubabel and Iehosua, of whom our prophet does here make mention.

God will have the civil Magistrate to do 5. Position.
that which appertains unto his office, and him which bears an office in
the Church, to do that which belongs unto his office, so that either of them
must do that which is for him to do. The Syllogism framed concerning the
distributive justice is well worth the remembering.

Ma. It is certain that we have no less need of the things themselves for
life, then of the degrees and offices which serve for the lawful ordering
thereof.

Mi. But we have need of such things as do appertain unto the sustentation
of the life, we have need to be instructed concerning God, and we have need
to be governed. Con. Therefore the domestical order, the ecclesiastical
order, and civil order, are very necessary: and least there should be a
certain barbarous confusion, every man must do that only which unto his
function appertains.

Yet so that they do always remember that 6. Position.
they do work together. For like as all the powers which are in man do agree
together to work his safety: so it becomes all estates of Gods people to
agree together, that there be no dissension in the fellowship of the saints.

And God will have them to give place to mutual 7. Position.
exhortation, least any should wax sluggish, being discouraged with the
tediousnes of troubles, and vexations: like as Zerubabell the captain, and
Iehosua the priest, were not discontented with those admonitions which were
given them by the prophets.

An introduction.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ is in deed to be compared with all other. For he is
both the author of life, and also an high priest after the order of
Melchisadech: always living, that he may make intercession for us. Zerubabell,
and Iehosua, were Types and figures of him. For as they brought back the Jews
into the^ country: so does he bring us into the celestial^ country. But we
shall speak else where more at large of this matter. 5. Lect. Nouem. 2. 1579.


Verse. 2.
THus says the Lord God of hosts: saying, this people has said, The time is
not yet come, the time ( I say) that the house of the Lord should be builded.

Although this be but a very short oration, yet is it so full of matter, that
it is a most excellent example of the common proverb, There is a grace
adjoined unto small things. There is in the writings of the prophets, a
peculiar and an holy kind of breuitye, concerning which Gregory Nazianzene
says finely in a certain epistle. That is not brevity which is thought to
be brevity: namely, to write few syllables: but to comprehend many things
in a few syllables.

But like as when we behold a precious-stone, we use to inquire of the place
whence it came, of the color and price thereof: so in this brief oration let
us consider these eight points in order, both for teaching, and also for
learnings sake.

1. What kind of cause bears the greatest sway herein.

2. In whose name it was made.

3. Unto whom it was chiefly directed.

4. Who was the Witness, and Procurator which made the same.

5. Of what manner speech it consists.

6. What is the state thereof.

7. Concerning what things it was made.

8. What is the end, and use of this whole oration.

1. Of the kind of cause.
THose orations do appertain unto the judicial kind of cause, wherein are
reprehended the unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, and also both their
public and private faults. And in this speech, though it be but short, is
the people of the Jews most sharply reprehended, both because they only
sought after those things which do appertain unto this life, and also because
they had no regard of the heavenly treasures, and of the true worship of God.

It is greatly to be feared, that that complaint which the prophet here makes
of the people of the Jews, may be truly ma^e of the greatest part of men.
The matter it self does testify, that the prophecy of Christ Jesus our Lord
is fulfilled in our age: As were the days of Noah, so shall also the coming
of the son of Mat. 24. 37. 38. 39.
man be. For as in the days which were before the floode, they eat, they
drank, they married wives, and were given in marriage, until that day, wherein
Noah entered into the Arc: neither knew they the floode, until it came and
took them all away: so shall the coming of the son of man be.

2. In whose name this oration was made.
THese things were published in the name of the Lord of hosts.

We have spoken at large else where of this word * Jehovah. Therefore we will
in this Jehovah.
place only speak a word or two by way of distinction for the younger sorts
sake.

The word Jehovah does properly betoken the eternal essence *. Exodus 3. 14.
proceeds not from any other: Lord,



Jehovah, or the Lord, is, and is not the father of the Word. He is in respect
of his person: he is not in respect of his essence. For the Word is called,
and is the son of the father, not of the essence.

But let us come unto the matter it self. weighty Aphorisms. First,
concerning the presence of God. The Lord looks down from heaven, he
beholds all the sons of Psalm. 132. 13. Genesis 11. and 18.
men *. GOD is a beholder, who inquireth most diligently after the life, and
works of men *. The Lord does judge the people *. Psalm. 7. 9.
And although he do sometimes defer his judgments, nevertheless he does
execute the same in their time. The heathen men also learned this by
experience, whereupon this proverb did rise: The Gods have woollen feet.

The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, which with-holde the truth in unrighteousness *? Public
punishments, as plague, famine, Romans 1. 18.
war, are testimonies of Gods wrath against the sins of men. In like sort
private evils, as blindness of heart, a reprobate mind, contempt, and despising
of the truth, labor spent in vain in studdy, and in other businesses. These
and such like testimonies of Gods curse, are like sermons which the Lord makes
from heaven unto us, that he may bring us unto the knowledge, and feeling of
our sins. God grant that we beholding the works of the Lord, may not be
swallowed up with sorrow, but that feeling the hand of the Lord, we may
humble our selves under his mighty hand, and bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance: so that those suffringes which are unto us nothing pleasant, may
be made unto us wholesome instructions, according to the saying: Before I was
humbled I did go astraie: but now I do keep thy commandments. * Psalm. 119.

3. Unto whom the oration in this 6. Lect. Nouem. 3.
verse was chiefly directed.
IT is without all doubt that these words Apostrophe.
were spoken unto Zerubabel the Captain, and Joshua the high Priest, who were
then chief rulers amongst the people of the Jews. For we may gather so much,
both out of the verse going before, and also out of the thing it self.

That there may reformation of enormities A position
be had, the Magistrates, and Pastors of the Church, are to be called unto
the consideration thereof.



2 Secondly, it becomes these two orders and degrees to consent together, so
that Moses and Aaron may help one another for the Commonwealths sake.

3 Thirdly, it is certain that God working by means, does use these fellow
laborers, to the rooting out of evil, and planting of good.

4. But what witness, or procurator, did the Lord use in this action?
He used Haggeus, who also for the testifying of that matter, said not, Thus
says Haggeus: but, Thus says the Lord God of hosts. A position.


1 No man takes to himself honor, unless he be called of God, as was
Aaron. Heb. 4. 4. Of calling.

2 A man can receive nothing unless it shall be given him from heaven. * Ioh. 3.
27. Of 2. Pet. 1. 21. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
the gifts and dignity of every man.

3 Forasmuch as the holy men of God did speak as they were moved by the
holy ghost *: we ought to receive their words as the words of God: and not of
men.

4 It is modesty, and truth, becoming the servants of God, to acknowledge
to have received the oracles of the holy ghost, only at the hands of God.

5. What manner of speech he used.
THe Prophet uses a counterfaytinge of the speech of the people, that he
might amplify the unworthiness of the matter. As if he should have said,
This unthankful people have this always in their mouth: The time is not yet
come that the Temple of the Lord should be builded. But it appears that
they care especially for their own houses, and their own commodities.

In like sort it is said in Ezechiel *. What Ezech. 18. 32.
mean you that you speak this Parable parabolicallie, upon the land of
Israel? The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, the Childrens teeth are set on
edge. etc.

1 We must beware of those words which A position.
smell of incredulity.

2 And it is a token of incredulity, for men to prescribe a time at their own
pleasure, for these things which ought at all times to be done to the glory of
God.

3 If we must give an account of every idle word, much more of that which is
blasphemously spoken against God.

We know the old saying, GOD is blasphemed by that wisdom which he
abhors. And he is blasphemed, whenas words, and speeches are spread
abroad, which are repugnaunt unto his will. The saying of Plato in his second
Book de Repub* is worthy to be remembered. It appears that God is unto no
man the cause of evil, being himself good, and by all means resisting
evil: neither does it become any man to say so in his City, if he will
be governed with good laws, neither ought any man to hear any either
young, or old telling fables, either with measure or without measure, if he
neither speak such honest things as are to be spoken, neither such things as
are profitable for us, either such things as do not hang well together. And
Plato adds afterward two Laws: The first whereof is this, that God is the
cause of good things: the second, that God is not a deceiuer. etc.

These things do I speak, that the younger sort may understand with what
reverence, and how religiously the sounder sort of the Ethnickes did judge it
became them both to think, and speak of God. How reverently ought we to
speak of his essence, his will, his judgment: which have received the gift of
the holy ghost?

4 It is so far off that GOD does take in good part reproachful words
uttered against him: that he will not have us to utter the same against our
brethren. Thou suffer thy mouth to speak evil, and thy tongue works
deceit. Moreover, thou speak against thy brother, thou slaunderest thine
own mothers son. These things have thou Psalm. 50. 16. 20.
done, and I held my tongue, thou thoughtest that I am like unto thee: but I
will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee.

7. Lect. Nouemb. 4.
6. The state of the oration.
THe state of this oration is iurediciall. For the question is whether it
stood with equity, and piety, that the people of the Jews did so long
defer the restoringe of the Temple or no?

Haggeus having confuted the reason which the Jews brought in defense of
their negligence: does teach that it did neither stand with equity, neither yet
with piety, y^ they did so long defer the restoring of the temple.

This was the argument which the Jews did use. There is a time to pluck
down, and there is a time to build up. Eccle. 3. 3. But the time is not yet
come, that the house of the Lord should be builded: therefore are not we to
be reproved for our slacknes in building the house of the Lord.

7. Concerning what things this oration was chiefly made.
THat it may appear what great mischief was packed in this thing, let us
see what things the prophet does chiefelie entreat of in this oration. And we
will follow the course of the common places of the state iurediciall, as Law,
Custom, Nature, Equity, Covenant.

1 The will of GOD is the highest and Law.
most just law. But GOD would have his Temple restored: and for this cause
had he raised up Haggeus, and Zacharias the prophets, that they might be
Witnesses and Haraldes to proclaim his will openly.

2 That which was appointed and assigned Custom.
by God to the religious custom of the Church of Israel, could not be
neglected without committinge of a most heinous offense. But the Temple of
Jerusalem was in times past builded to that intent, that the Israelites
should there meet together thrice every year, and should do holy worship
therein. For as yet the time was not come whereof Christ spoke, John. 4. 21.
The hour comes whenas ye shall neither in this mountain, neither at
Jerusalem, worship the father.

3 What sway Nature ought to bear in Nature.
this case, we may see even by these disputations of Plato, wherein he
teaches in what place Temples are to be builded. And he forbids to bring
the weapons which are taken from the enemies into the Temples. And although GOD
does not dwell in Temples made with hands, yet would he have the Leuiticall,
and Ceremonial worship which was a part of the Discipline of the law, to be
done orderly, and decently in the Temple at Jerusalem. Of the Tabernacle of
the Covenant it is said. And they shall make me a Tabernacle, that I may
dwell in the Exo. 25. 8.
midst of them.

4 Furthermore, equity it self does teach Equity.
us, that we ought as well to appoynte a place, a time, and other
necessaries, for the holy public administration: as for our own business,
labor, rest, food, and riches. Thererefore as we are woonte to say: A
friends house is the best house: So let us say with David, I was glad for
them which said to me: we will go into the house of the Lord. Psalm. 122. 1.


5 More-ouer, the Covenant which God Covenant.
had made with the Israelites did import thus much, that they should both go
unto the Temple at the appointed seasons: and also, that even when they were in
Exile, they should make their prayers, turning their faces toward the
Temple. Again, GOD would have the Messiah to teach in the second Temple,
therefore they could not neglect the restoringe thereof without committinge a
most grievous crime.

8. The end and use of this oration.
1 FIrst, it is the office of the Magistrate, and Ministers, with all their
might, to endeavor, that the Temple of the lord may be builded: that is to
say, that true, doctrine may be taught, and all the holy rites, and ceremonies
may be done rightly and orderly.

2 Secondely, we must take heed that we do not become like unto these, of
whom our Apostle speaks*: For all men seek Philip. 2. 21.
the things which are their own, and not the things which are Christ Jesus
his. Philip. 2. 21.

3 Thirdly, we must beware of that kind of confusion which changes the
order appointed by GOD, and makes a man to prefer private affairs before
public affairs, households affairs before Ecclesiastical affairs: profane
things before holy things: corporal things before spiritual things: earthly
things before heavenly things: things temporal before things eternal: and
finally, himself before God.

4 Fourthly, let us remember that we are the dwellinge place of God in the
spirit*. Ephe. 2. 22.
But we shall speak hereof more at large in that which follows.

8. Lect. Nouemb. 16. 1579.
Verse. 3.
Therefore the word of the Lord was in the hand of Haggeus, that he might
say.

Of the dispensation of the oracles of God.
TO the end the studious youth may see that in the books of the prophets, and
Apostles, every little verse is repleanished with most wholesome doctrine, and
also with great store thereof: we will now speak somewhat as touching the
dispensation of the oracles of GOD: but yet by way of position, and having
respect unto the time.

1. Position.
The prophets do call the Oracles of GOD Adauerim: the Apostles do call them
Lively speeches. The Grecians do call these oracles Romans 3. 2. Act. 7. 38.
which were uttered in prose ( Logia,) and these which were given in verse (
Chresmous.)

Of the principal efficient cause, they are called the Oracles of GOD: and of
the force and efficacy, they are called ( lively words.) For the word of
God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword*.
He has made my mouth as a sharp two edged sword. Esa. 49. 2.

These things do chiefly concern the will 2. Position.
of God.

Some men do very godlily divide the will of God, into that which is hidden
from us, and that which is revealed unto us, and whereof the annoynting of the
holy spirit does testify.

Unto the hidden will of God do appertain these curious and lofty
questions,. Why all men are not elected in Christ. Why the gift of faith is not
common unto all men. Why God loved Jacob, and hated Esau. And such like,
whereof we ought not curiously to enquire. For it is impiety to seek out any
other cause then the will of God.

But as for the revealed will of God, it stands us upon to seek out the same
through faith, both to the glory of God, and also to our own edification. For
it is not modesty, but impious sluggishnesse, to be unwilling to know these
things which God does vouchsafe to reveal. That saying of Theodoret is
worthy of rehearsing. We must not curiousle search after hidden things, but
we must love these things which are written, which are meet for us. 3.
Position


And we cannot certaynely know this revealed will of God, unless GOD do
speak unto us.

GOD is said to speak four manner of ways. Let there be light* Let us make
man according to Genesis 1. 3.
our own similitude and likeness *. And again, Genesis 11. 7. Exodus 20. 18.
Deuteronomy. 18. 16.
Go to, let us go down and confound there their language *. Ge. 12. 15. 17.
18
presence of his grace.

Therefore God does speak unto us, but yet either without means, or by some
other 4. Position.
means.

He spoke in his own person in times paste unto Adam, Noah, Abraham, and such
like. Yet certain it is that no man was able to hear God speak unto him,
without being horribly astonyed, and without casting down to the ground. And
therefore the hearts of the godly had need to be underpropped and
strengthened: as the examples of Moses, Daniel, Esaias, and many more do testify.

Forasmuch as God does speak unto us in the person of others, it stands us
upon to make great account of ye holy ministry which he uses, according to
these sayings, He that Luke. 10. 16.
hears you hears me. And again, Who is Paul, or who is Apollos, but
ministers by whom you have believed, and as the Lord has given to every man
*. And again, 1 Cor. 3. 5.
We together are Gods laborers. And again. Ibid. 6 Heb. 13. 17.
Obey your guides, and submit your selves.

And although the oracles of God be committed unto all the Church: yet has he
of credit 6. Position.
given ye interpretation thereof unto the teachers particularly.

1. Cor. 14. 29. Let two or three of the Prophets speak, and let the other
judge *. In this precept Paul shows that the teachers and learners are two
distinct orders.

And that the oracles of the living God do appertain, and are given unto the
Church, it appears by these sayings. Deu. 4. 8. And what nation is there so
great, which has statutes and judgments so just, as is this whole Law, which
I give before you this day. Psalm. 76. 6. God is well known in Iehuda. etc.
Romans 3. 2. For that is a principal thing, that unto them the oracles of God
are of credit given.

Seeing that these words, Ipse dixit, the Lord has said it, are annexed unto
the oracles of God: there is no cause why they should loose any whit of their
authority because of the ministers. The word which we received of God, which
ye have heard of us, have ye received not as the word of men: but (as it is
indeed) as the word of God, which also works in you which believe. 1. These.
2. 13.

Therefore these men do greatly offend, which do attribute the honor due
only to God, to his servants: and also they which do reiecte the oracles of
God for the ^erie names sake of these men whom they do hate.

You may see some whom it suffices if you allege only Luther, Calvin,
Melangthon: although you bring no testimonies of holy scripture. Again you may
find othersome who hearing some doctor whom they hate only named, they will
straight way cast away the book, and reject the opinion, giving judgment
before they know the matter. George Duke of the Saxons does seem to have
been one of this sort of men, for it is reported that he should say, Although
I am not ignorant that there have both errors and abuses crept into the
Church, yet will I not embrace that Gospel which Luther Preaches.

We must give ear unto that which is spoken. 8. Position.


Or prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith *. 1.
These. 5. 19. 20. Extinguish not the spirit *: despise not prophesying.
Therefore if we perceive that any man does teach according to the proportion
of faith, let us not reject him.

Forasmuch as the oracles of God are most 9. Position
sure and certain: the full persuasion of our faith must be answerable thereto.

God requires at our hands that thing which he gives, namely, that not only
these inferior degrees, as comprehension and knowledge be in us: but also
that superior degree, which is, a steedfast faith. Comprehension is common
unto al these which have any understanding, as, that God is good, merciful,
just. Knowledge is proper to these which by an external illumination of the
holy spirit, have gotten a certain kind of faith which lasts only for a
season. But all men have not a full persuasion without wavering. 2. These. 3. 2.
And this degree does distinguish the elect from the reprobat. Tit. 1. 1.

10. Position.
There can no greater mishappe befall the Church militant then the want of
prophecy.

We see not our signs, there is not any more a Prophet, and there is none
with us Psalm. 74. 9.
which knows any more *. When there is no vision the people are scattered
abroad *. Pro. 29. 18.
The Prophets were called Videntes, Seers, a visione, of seeing.

In the time of Heli the word of the Lord was precious, and there was no
manifest vision. 1. Sam. 3. 1. And again in the same Chapter ver. 21. The
Lord appeared again in Siloh: because the Lord had showed himself to Samuel
in Silo, in the word of the Lord.

11. Position.
There be many weighty and great eauses for which it is expedient that God
should speak unto us by holy men, rather the^ in his own person.

1 Man's weakness altogether unable to suffer the majesty of God. I am not able
(says the Ex. 20. 16. Deuteronomy. 18. 16.
people of Israel) to hear the voice of the Lord my God, neither can I behold
this great fire any more least I die.

2 The faithful are the Temples of the holy ghost. Therefore is it meet that
the oracles b^ 1. Cor. 6. 19. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
given by those which together are Gods laborers, in the dispensation thereof,
and are calle^ the dispensers of the secrets of God.

3 Also, forasmuch as all our senses, and amon^ these, seeing, and hearing,
ought especially t^ serve unto knowledge: God will have us t^ hear the voice
of the teachers outwardly, an^ the voice of the holy spirit inwardly. For fait^
comes by hearing, and hearing is by the wor^ Romans 10. 17.
of God *.

Furthermore this is an especial work o^ charity, to instruct others in the
knowledge o^ God, and his will. Therefore the Lord will hau^ godly men to do
this. Psalm. 119.

Let the well disposed read Calvin, 4. lib Inst. Christ. cap. 3. Sect. 1. etc.
and August. i^ his preface upon his books de doct. Christ. concerning this
matter.

9. Lect. Nouemb. 17.
The Rhetorical art used in the oration o^ Haggeus, made unto the people of
the Jews.

1 The kind of cause is mixed, forasmuc^ as our Prophet does in the beginning
sharpel^ reprehende the people of the Jews, for the neglecting of the
restoring of the temple of Jerusalem, and does also threaten unto them greeuou^
punishment for this their negligence: and afterward exhorts them that they
would in all have set their hands unto the holy work and building.

Therefore the first part of this oration is judicial: the latter consists
upon an exhortation and a giving of counsel.

The iuredicial state bears the chief sway in the first part. The restoring
of the Temple has hitherto ben omitted ungodly and unjustly. This
proposition does our Prophet prove by two arguments.

1 The first argument is fet a comparatis, from comparing of things together.
Whosoever do prefer their householde affairs before the ecclestasticall,
and holy affairs, they do without all doubt greeuouslie offend. But you
Jews do the same, as your sieled houses, and the temple of the Lord which
lies wast do sufficiently testify.

2 The second argument is fet from the effect. Certain it is that the
transgressors of the law are accursed, according to the saying. Cursed is he
which continues not in all Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
the words of the law to do them *. But God curses you. This minor
proposition does the Prophet prove by an induction, ver. 5. You shall saw much
etc.

The state of the latter part of the oration wherein is contained a giving of
counsel, is in like sort iurediciall. You shall do well, and it shall turn
to your great commodity, if you shall in all have set hand to the restoring
of the temple of the Lord.

The arguments serving to the proof hereof are fet.

1 From the facility thereof. Go up into the mountain etc. ver. 8.

2 From the favorable good will of God. I will be well pleased therewith. In the
same ver.

3 Thirdly from ye end. I will be glorified says the Lord. In the same verse.

4 Fourtly from the threatening denounced against the disobedient. Ye shall
look unto much, and behold it is but a little. ver. 9.

5 Fifthly from the impulsive cause. For my house his sake. In the same verse.

6 Sixthly from the punishment which had befallen them before time, which he
proves by an induction. ver. 11.

The form of the oration.
It is like an hypotheticall disjunctive Syllogism. IIII.


It must needs be that you shall either be blessed, if you take in hand to
build the temple of the Lord: or accursed if you neglect the building of the
same. But you have need of the blessing of God. Therefore must you not
neglect, nor prolong the restoring of the temple o^ the Lord.

The scope and drift of the oration. V.

1 The argument. The Jews being returned from Babylon, and neglecting the
building of the Temple of the Lord, were accursed: but so sone as they took
in hand to restore the same they did enjoy the blessing of God.

The position.
2 They are accursed which do not give unto God those things which are his.
On the contrary they are blessed which before all things, Mat. 6. 33.
do seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof.

3 This is the best kind of teaching which can be used in the Church, which
does first lay open the fountaynes of evil, and then offers and exhibiteth
remedies against evil.

A similitude.
As Physicians which have taken in hand to cure any pacient, beginning with a
recital of the cause of the disease, do first entreat of the disease: then
coming to speak of the remedies for the disease, they prescribe Physic for
the same: so sinners are first to be instructed concerning the greatness of
sin, then are they also to be taught concerning the forgiveness of sins.

We have an historical example of this precept, in this sermon of Haggeus
which he made unto the people of the Jews: and there is a positive example
thereof extant in the Epistle to the Romans. For (that I may speak only of
this latter example) the Apostle does first of all bring to light those
diseases wherewith mankind is infected, namely original sin, and his
fruits, which the same Paul does call in another place, The works of the
flesh: secondly he shows the remedies wherewith these diseases may be cured,
in the doctrine of justification, sanctification, and predestination: and at
length he diligently prescribes ye exercises of godliness.

That is the best kind of teaching that can be used in the Church, which
together with the refutation of false doctrine, and the reprehension of sins,
does join the doctrine of faith, hope and charity, and adds moreover godly
exhortations to the doing of the duty. We see that Haggeus did use this
manner of teaching. The same method also did the teacher of the Gentiles,
Paul, prescribe unto us in these words: Preach the wotde, be instant in season,
and out of season: improve, rebuke, exhort with all lenity and doctrine. 2.
Tim. 4. 2.


I thought good to speak thus much after the manner of the Anatomistes. For
like as they (when men's bodies are to be opened) do first entreat in
general of the parts of man's body, and do show the same: then afterward
they speak particularly of the placing, function, and use of every particular
member: so I thought good to make a certain anatomy of this oration of
Haggeus, that the younger sort might see, concerning what things, and in what
order it was made. Now it remains that we handle particulerly every member
thereof.

10. Lect. Nouemb. 18.
Ver. 4.
Whether or no is the time come that you should dwell in your sieled houses,
and that this house should be wast?
The handling of this verse according to the art of Logike.

This verse contains first a fallacy fraymed by the Jews, which our prophet
refuteth: secondly a demonstration which Haggeus urges straightly against them.

The Jews did argue thus. What thing soever is done out of time is not well
done. But that time which the Lord has appointed for the restoring of his
holy temple is not yet come. Wherefore we are not to be blamed for neglecting
the restoring of the temple.

This was a very fine reason for these men which did seek their own things,
and not the things which are Gods.

They might paint their mayor proposition with these most excellent sayings
touching opportunity and time, which are to be found both in the holy
Scriptures, and also in profane writers.

There is an appointed time for every thing, and there is a time for every will
under heaven. etc. Eccl. 3. 1. Who is a faithful and wise Steward, whom the
Lord may appoint over his family, to give the^ their portion of meat in due
season. Luke 12. 42. Redeeming the time because the days are evil. Ephesians. 5.
16. The principal thing to be respected in every thing is that it be done in
due time. * Pyndarus in Pyth.

And again. It is an excellent thing to observe opportunity.

And again. As great things so small things are given in time.

Furthermore they thought they could prove the minor proposition, wherein the
controversy consists, by this reason. The restoring of the Temple has
hitherto been let, partly by the malice of the Samaritanes, and cumbates had
with them: partly by the kings commandment: partly by the necessary
business in the setting in order of household and civil affairs. Which
things should in no case have happened, if God would have had us to have
left all other things undone, and only to occupy our selves about the
restoring of the Temple. He might have taken away all these lettes and
hindrances, etc.

But as it is in the Psalm. 94. 11. The Lord knows the thoughts of men that
they are vanity *. Therefore (that I may use artificial words) he answers
both the man and also ye matter. The man or person he answers by a
reduplication, and also by a reprehension.

Whether or no, (o ye) is it time for you? As if he should have said, Are ye
not ashamed having received so many benefits at the hand of the Lord, and
being newly brought out of captivity and restored into your own country: to
prefer your own commodity before the glory of God? Again he calls them
unto an other thing.

For he calls them from their own business, unto a more weighty matter,
which was the temple of the Lord, whereunto without doubt they ought to have
had greater regard, then unto their own private houses.

In answering the matter by the denying of their minor proposition, and the
declaring of the place a Connexis, from the things knit together: he shows
that even in the midst of miseries, and in the perilous times, we ought to
have respect unto the glory of God. For as the Church militant does triumph
under the cross: so does she also give unto God the honor due unto him, with
great reverence, even when she is oppressed, and afflicted, many ways.

For she is fully persuaded of that which Paul taught in these words, If we
have hope only in Christ, in this world, we are of all men the most miserable
*. 1. Cor. 15. 19.


And again. We suffer persecution, but we are not forsaken therein: we are
cast down but we do not perish, every where we bear about in our body the
dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be made manifest in our
bodies *. 2. Cor. 4. 9. 10.


They are much deceived which think, that the Temple of the Lord ought only
to be builded then: when all things are quiet, and in time of prosperity:
that is, which think that we can be builded upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, and that we can be brought unto the kingdom of the
everlasting father, by these middle honors, joys, and good successes, which
we have in this life. For as the heathen man says, In rebus arduis prodit se
virtus, Virtue shows her self in hard matters. So that the Church when it
groneth under the cross, adds unto faith virtue, unto virtue 2. Pet. 1. 5. 6.
knowledge, unto knowledge temperance, unto temperance patience * etc.

Now let us see how strong that demonstration is, which our prophet Haggai
sets against y^ fallacy and subtle reason which was framed by the Jews.

There is greater regard to be had unto him, who is most good, most wise, most
just, etc. and ye author of al goodness throughout ye whole world: then unto all
creatures. This proposition is a principle, which is written by God in the
hearts of all men, which teaches us to attribute more unto our most liberal
creator, then to al ye things which are created, and also to obey and serve
him, Mat. 19. 17. Iam. 1. 17.
readely, sincerely, and constantly. But the Lord our God is most good, most
wise, and most just, and from him alone comes every good, and perfect gift.
Therefore seeing he will have a temple built for himself, and the worship which
is due unto him, to be given him there: we are to let pass al other business
and letts, and only to apply the building thereof day and night.

The Rhetorical art.
Our Prophet does amplify the unworthiness or haynousnes of the matter, by
using certain figures which are these which follow.

1. An Apostrophe or reuersion. O ye Jews. As of he should have said, I do not
now speak unto the heathenish Atheists of the world: but unto the Jews, the
children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God made with the Fathers,
as says Peter *. Such an Apostrophe or reuersion is found Romans 2. 17. Behold
thou art syrnamed a Jew, and thou reste^t upon the law, and thou make thy
bost of God.

2 An Eironia or a taunting I warrant you the time is now come in which you
must neglect the temple of the Lord, and build and garnish your own houses?
Such tauntings are used. Genesis 3. Behold man is as one of us. And again.
Sleep and take your rest. Mat. 26.

3 An interrogation or question. Is it now a fit time for you to neglect the
Temple of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10. ^0.
and to be occupied about your own buildinges? The answer is understood, No.
For we ought at no time to be more careful for those things which serve to
the sustentation of this life, then for the worship of God. Herodotus says
very well. Diuina sunt antiquiora and potiora humanis. The things which are
Gods are both more ancient, and also better, then the things which are man's.
And Paul would have al other things to serve to the sanctifying of the name of
God. Whether therefore you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the
glory of God. *

11. Lect. Nouemb. 20. 1579.
The application of this saying of Haggeus unto ourselves.

Now that we may go from the argument unto the position, we must fully
determine with our selves, that nothing which is created must be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord *. And
that we Romans 8. 36.
ought to prefer nothing which is in heaven or earth before God. And that the
fear of the Lord is our treasure. *.

The fountain from which this position springs Isay. 33. 6.
is the law of God. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Luke 10. 27.

And the same is most notably expounded in Jeremy. Cap. 9. 23. 24. Thus says
the Lord, Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in
his strength, nor the rich man in his riches: but let him that rejoices
rejoice in this that he understands and knows that I am the Lord, which
show mercy, judgment, and justice in the earth: for these things will I,
says the Lord.

Seeing these things are so, who sees not that all things must serve God, and
to the worshipping of him: and that we ought not to make so great account of any
thing as of God, and of his holy and wholesome will.

Now forasmuch as Aristotle says, and that truly, that doctrine is attained
unto by Syllogism and Induction, we will use these two instruments, to prove
this position withal.

Demonstratiue syllogismes.
1 The order which God has appointed, (seeing ye it is a most manifest
testimony of his divine wisdom and goodness) is not to be altered. For it is
not meet that the clay should contend with the Potter, that is, that man
should contend with GOD, about the praise of wisdom. But this is an eternal
and immutable order appointed by God, that man's affairs, and all other things
should give place to the things which are his. For it is most meet that all
other things should give place to that, which is the infinite good thing.
Therefore we must attribute much more unto the things which are Gods, then to
all things which are in this world.

2 The effect which is * finite, is not to be Or contained within a certain
compass.
compared with, ne yet to be preferred before the efficient cause, whose
goodness, might, and wisdom is infinite. For there is no proportion or
equality between that which is finite, and that which is infinite. But man is
the creature of God, compassed about with beginning, and space, both of time
and place. Psalm. 100. 3. Know ye that the Lord he is God: he has made us,
and not we our selves. And, GOD is a spirit, uncreated, eternal, without
beginning, almighty, etc. Therefore we ought to have greatest respect unto him
in all our affairs, and actions.

3 It is better to obey that will which is vnchaungeably good, and whose
effects are good: then the will which is chaungeable, and whose effects are
unlike one to another. But the will of God is vnchaungeably good: the will of
man is chaungeable. Therefore must we rather obey the will of God, then of man.

4 The affairs which are proper to the spiritual life, and serve to the glory
of God, and our own edification, are neither to be quite omitted, nor yet
deferred for these affairs which are proper onl^e to the natural life, and
serve for the same only. But unto the former sort do appertain the
exercises of godliness: unto the latter, the household and civil affairs.
Therefore, although these household and civil affairs are not quite to be
omitted: yet for their sakes are not the exercyses of godliness either to be
let slip, or to be done only for fashions sake, or faintely.

The real induction.
No man ought to prefer before the Lord God almighty, first, himself. You
are not your own. 1. Cor. 4. 10. Secondly his life, Mat. 16. 25. Whosoever
shall loose his life for my sake, shall find it. Thirdly, his country, his
parents, his kinsfolks, his children, his riches. Mat. 19. 26. And whosoever
shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or Father or Mother, or Wife or
Children, or lands, for my names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold, and
shall possess eternal 1. Cor. 4. 7.
life. Fourthlye the gyfts of the mind. What have thou which thou have not
received? But and if thou have received it, why boastest thou thy self as if
thou had not received it.* Fifthly, honor and public offices. And Psalm. 2.
10. 11. 12
now ye kings be wise, be learned ye that are judges of the earth. Serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence. Kiss the son etc.
Sixthly, his death: for even hereby ought we to glorify God.

And Paul having a godly hope says. * Christ shall be magnified in my body,
either by life, or else by my death. Neither do I think the contrary of any
other thing. Therefore must we our selves, in all our affairs, in all our
words, and deeds, serve wholly to the sanctifying of the name of GOD,
according to the saying of Paul. * And whatsoever you do in word or deed,
do it in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the father
through him.

Certain additions touching godly studdies.
1 Erasmus does worthily reprehend certain Italians, as Politian, and others:
because they did not join Christianity, but a certain kind of paganism with
the studdies of learning.

2 For the studdies of Christians ought to be holy, and not profane.

3 They shall be holy, if they be lightened, and directed by faith: and if the
knowledge of God do cause us to worship God aright, and to be desirous, and
careful to deserve well of our neighbors.

4 They shall be profane, if the searchinge out, and knowledge of things be
compelled to serve to our own praise and gain, and to the fulfilling of our
lusts, and corrupt affections.

5 And as the labors of the Jews were accursed, whenas neglectinge the
temple, they were very careful for their own houses, and private gaynes: so
are the studdies of those men accursed, who neglectinge prayer, holy
assemblyes, sermous, and the sacraments: do play the Philosophers after the
manner of the heathen, that they may purchase to themselves some learning,
which in time to come may serve their vain lusts. It becomes those men
which are students in Physic, Philosophy, and Law, to sanctify their studdies
with prayer, and reading of the holy Bible.

The students of divinity, and Ministers of the word of God must serve to the
glory of God, and for that cause must they seek for, and also beg at Gods
hands the knowledge of heavenly things.

8 For Saint Hierome says very well. In Christ's warrefare seek not lucre of
the world.

Our Lord Jesus Christ grant us grace to be careful for heavenly things,
and not for earthly things, and sanctify us all, and all our studdies, that
they may serve to the setting forth of the glory of his holy name. Amen.

12. Lect. Nouem. 30. 1579.
Verse, 5.
Now therefore, thus says the Lord of hosts, set your heart upon your
ways.

We will handle three things in this place: first, the phrase or manner of
speech, and the words: secondly, the argument: and thirdly, the doctrine.

This manner of speech, To set the heart upon any thing, is so to consider
upon any thing, that thou may understand the same thoroughly, the ministry
of the senses seruinge unto this inquisition. Ezechiel. 40. 4. Thou son of
man, see with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart unto
all the things which I show unto thee. On the contrary, not to set the heart
upon any thing, in the Hebrewe tongue does signify, not to regard, or
mark what heavy thing is done or said. Isay. 57. 1. The just man perishes,
and there is no man which sets it upon his heart: and the merciful men are
gathered together, and there is none that understands that the just man is
gathered, because of the evil which is about to come. By such manner speeches
the holy spirit moves attention. Set it upon thy heart. He that has ears to
hear, let him hear. Mat. 13. 9. But why do we not all give ear when the
Lord speaks, and when he works why do we not all turn our minds unto
the works of the Lord? Psalm. 107.

Heart.) The heart of man does properly signify the Lord of life in man's
body, which receives by the Veins and Synowes, the benefits of others, and
sends into all parts of the body by the Arteries or vital Veins, the
vital Spirit, which is a lively flame, not much unlike the celestial nature,
seeing that it does not only nourishe the members with the heat thereof, but
also helps the actions. It puts us in mind of many weighty matters,
whereof these are part.

First, that as without the heat and benefits of the heart, man's body cannot
continue sound, and in good temperature, neither can it live, because the
heart is the fountain of the vital Spirits: so without the holy ghost, and
his gifts, the Church cannot flourish.

Secondly, as the Arteries and Veins are coupled together, and one enters
into an other, one helps an other by nourishing, and giving life one to an
other: so ought there to be a mutual participation, and imparting of good
turns among men, whether we respect the Church particularly, or all
mankind generally.

The commodities springing and flowinge from the heart, are these.

1 First, it gives life unto the whole body, according to the saying of
Aristotle:

Cor est principium vitae omni parti, datque viuificum calorem omni,
spiritumque cerabro and hepati.

The heart is the beginning of life to euetie part, and gives lively heat
unto every part, and life to the Brain, and Liver.

2 Secondly, it ministers the instruments of the principal actions in the
Brain, and synowes. I call the vital Spirits the next instruments: the
Actions, the Cogitations, the Senses, and Motions.

But let these things pass, and let us briefly note the metaphorical
significations of this word Heart.)

The Heart by Metonymia does signify the middle part of any thing. Exodus 15.
8. Psalm, 46. 2. The heart of the Sea. And of the Sepulcher of our Lord Jesus
Christ it is said. The son of man shall be in the heart of the earth three
days, etc. Mat. 12. 40.

The same by Synecdoche does signify the power whereby man understands and
chooses. Romans 10. 10. With the heart man belieueth unto righteousness. 1. Tim.
1. 5. The end of the commandment, is, love out of a pure heart, a good
conscience, and a faith unfeigned.

Hence come these manner of speeches. To speak unto the heart of Jerusalem.
Esaias. 40. 2. To understand with the heart. Mat. 13. 15. With a good and honest
heart to hear the word of God and to keep it, and to bring forth fruit
through patience. Luke 8. 15.

Way, does signify in this place the Cogitations, counsels, and affairs, both
domestical, civil, and also holy: whereunto the Jews were so addicted, that
they did in very deed testify, that they were more delighted in earthly, and
frail things: then in heavenly, eternal, and spiritual things. Of this
inordinate kind of life does Ecclesiastes speak through-out his whole book,
whose theme or proposition is this*. Vanity of vanities and all things are
vanity. And before him the kingly psalmist says*. Truly all things are
vanity, every man that stands, Selah. Truly man walks in a vain shadow,
truly they disquiet themselves in vain: he heapeth up riches and he knows
not who shall gather them. Psalm. 39. 7.

In the argument we will first expound the The argument.
sentence, secondly we will declare the use thereof. The meaning of the words.


Saint Hierome very godlily and in few words, expounds this sentence on
this wise. Because (says he) you say it is not time to build the Lords
house, and you your selves dwell in houses, whose foundations are low laid,
and my house lies waste: consider, (I the Lord commanding you,) and call to
mind what you have done, and what you have suffered. The thing it self
declares, that God is angry with you, seeing that his judgments are so
manifest, in reuealinge his ire from heaven, against your unrighteousness and
ungodliness.

The use of these words is declared in these positions. The use of these
words.


1 The prophets and apostles in their sermons did call their hearers unto the
beholding of the things themselves, and unto the consideration of the works
of the Lord: so that they might not only understand what God said, but also
see what he did, and that they might declare it abroad to the glory of God.
According to that saying: I will enter in into the strength of the Lord GOD,
I will make mention of thy righteousness only. O GOD thou have taught me from
my youth up, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. Psalm. 71. 14.
15. 16. 17.

Furthermore, it is meet that we with a thankful mind do meditate not only
upon those things, which God has bestowed upon us particularly: but also,
that we make great account of those benefits which the Lord has both in times
past, and also in our time: bestowed upon the whole Church: and that we do
laud and magnify the author and giver thereof.

For as in times past the Israelites in their holy Sermons made unto the
people, and in their Songs, and Psalms, made mention of their deliverance out
of their bondage, wherewith they were oppressed in Egypt, and also of all other
benefits which the Lord had bestowed upon them, and their forefathers in the
Wilderness, and in the land of Canaan: so let us well weigh and consider with
our selves, what benefits we have received at the hands of the Lord: as that,
that the son of GOD was given for us, that the Lord has gathered together a
Church among the Gentiles: that he has wonderfully regenerated the same: and
that he has purged the heavenly doctrine from all the leaven of man's
traditions: and then let us give thanks to the son of GOD our Lord Jesus
Christ, and lead our lives according to the prescript, and rule which he
has appointed for us.

2 Forasmuch as it is both wisely, and truly said of Solomon: Pro. 16. 25.
There is a way that seems right unto man: but the end thereof is the way
of death: even they which are in the Church are to be exhorted, that they
diligently consider with themselves what way they have taken.

For there is a kind of disease called self love, which so bewitcheth men,
that whiles they only behold the virtues, and good things which are in
themselves, and do make great account thereof: they cover their vices, and
make them less then they be in-deede: so that at length they fall fast a
sleep in the cradle of security: and flatter themselves in evil matters,
thinking that they are wise so long as they do not wander out of the highway
wherein most men do walk.

13. Lect. December. 1.
A Position concerning the censure which man ought to have of his life and
studies.

Now that we may go directly from the argument unto the doctrine, and that
we may entreat of the iudginge, or decerning of the way which every mortal
man has taken: least it should be an hard matter for the younger sort to
mark the course of the things whereof we are about to speak: we will after
our accustomed manner, draw out all things by way of distinction, and also
declare from whence they be fet.

1. Aphorism.
God will have us diligently, and earnestly to ponder in our minds the way
of our life, according to those sayings. Psalm. 32. 9. Be ^as thing soever ^
shall do, ^fider well what ^ges thereto. ^^n prudentlie about ^oe, ^arke
whether th^nd ^ood or no.
not as Horse and Mule which have no understanding, etc. Prou. 12. 15. The way
of a fool is right in his own eyes: and he that obeys counsel is wise.
Pro. 15. 19. The way of a sluggard is a thornie path, but the Pythagoras.
path of the righteous is lifted up. Pro. 16. 9. The heart of man inuenteth his
way: but Wherein have offended? what ^aue I done^ or that part of my ^uty have
I o^itted?
the Lord directs his goinges. Psalm. 90. 12. Make us to number our days, and
so make us wise.

2. Aphorism.
That this thing may be both wisely, and commodiouslie brought to pass: we
must follow the judgment of GOD, and not the wisdom of the flesh.

For of that way which the flesh allows, and shows, it is said: There is
a way which seems to man to be good: and the end thereof leads unto
death. Prouer. 14. 12. And most sweet, and comfortable is that promise which
God has made: I will instruct thee, and teach thee what way thou shall walk:
I will direct thee with mine eye. Psalm. 32. 8.

Therefore, so often as we are brought into any doubt, as men coming unto
three ways, and not knowinge which to take: let us call to mind this sweet
promise, and then let us pray with David, Teach me O Lord thy way, and lead
me in the right way, because of mine adversaries. Psalm. 27. 11. Let us also
enter into the Sanctuary of GOD, that is, let us ascend from the secondarie
causes, unto the first and principal cause, which is most just, most wise, and
most good: and let us stai^ our selves upon his good will and pleasure.

3. Aphorism.
Those men which do this godlilie, and religiously, must consider with
themselves what beholder they have, what guide, and what instructours: they
must also learn rightly to discern the works of the Lord, and the ways of
men: the things which are good, and the things which are evil: the things
which are to be done, and the things which are to be left undone: and
finally, the last end of men.

4. Aphorism.
GOD is the beholder of all things. God looked down from heaven upon the
Children of men, that he might see if there were any that did understand, and
sought after God. Psalm. 53. 2.

5. Aphorism.
The holy ghost is the guide, and leader of the godly: but the flesh carries
away the natural men. The spirit of truth is he that shall lead you into all
truth. John. 16. 15. If you shall live according to the flesh, ye shall die:
but if by the spirit ye shall mortify the works of the body, ye shall
live. Romans 8. 15.

6. Aphorism.
The instructers of the godly, are the faithful ministers of both testaments:
which ought to shine as burning lights before other men in faith, and life
unblameable. I have set thee as a defense, and fortress in the midst of my
people: therefore thou may know and prove their way. Ierem. 6. 27. And Paul
speaks of the Jews: saying, And thou belieuest that thou art a leader of
the blind, a light for those which are in darkness, an instructor of the
unwise. Romans 2. 19.

7. Aphorism.
The works of the Lord are of two sorts: proper or agreeable to his nature:
improper, or not agreeable to his nature: yet both of these do serve to his
glory. Esaias. 28. 21.

The works which are agreeable unto his nature are these, to have mercy, and
to do good. The works which are contrary to his nature are these, to be
angry, to accurse. etc. Psalm. 75. 8. God is the judge, he brings down one,
and sets up another.

8. Aphorism.
The way of men is either good, which is called the way of the Lord, the way
of the just, the old way, the way of faith: or evil, and it is called the
way of Cain, the way of the unjust, the new way, the way of unbelief.
Because GOD knows the way of the just, and the way of the wicked shall
perish. Psalm. 1. 6. Will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the
Lord? Now therefore behold, the hand of the Lord shall be against thee? Act. 14.
20. Now therefore stand upon the ways, and see, and inquire after the old
way, which is the good way, and walk in the same, and you shall find rest
for your soul. And they said we will not walk. Ierem. 6. 16. Of Apollos it
is said, that he was informed in the way of the Lord*. And the doctrine of
the Act. 18. 25.
gospel is called a way,* because it entreats of Act. 19. 23.
him, who did truly testify of himself: saying, I am the way, the truth,
and the life.

9. Aphorism.
Forasmuch as God after his manner is the author of the good things, and also
of the evil which befall us: we must judge aright of the same. Who is he
therefore which has said, and it has been, and the Lord has not commanded
Ier. Lam. 3. 37.
it? Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil, and good? He
speaks of the evil of punishment. Their table is made unto then a snare.


The evil are never in good case, and that thorough their own fault: on the
contrary, the good are never in bad case, thorough the mere mercy of God. For
to the evil, even good things are turned to evil: and to the good, even evil
things are turned to good.

10. Aphorism.
Isaiah comprehends in these words, the things which are to be done, and
the things which are to be left undone. Cease of from doing evil, and learn
to do good. Esaias. 1. 16.

It is reported that Iustus Jonas the younger, did recite this verse
immediately before his death.

Quid iuuat innumeros scire atque euoluere casus,
Si fugienda facis, and facienda fugis.
What profit doo'st thou reap by this, to know full many a thing?
And strange events to call to mind, what profit does it bring?
If things from which thou should fly, thou do with might, and maine:
And from those things which thou sholdst do, thou willingly abstain.
Whereunto Nicolas Hemingius does answer.

Et iuuat innumeros scire atque euoluere casus,
Si facienda facis, and fugienda fugis.
Great profit may thou reap by this, to know full many a thing:
And strange euentes to call to mind, commodity does bring:
If those things which thou should do, thou do with might and maine:
And from those things which thou should fly, thou willingly abstain.
Hereunto appertains that precept of David: Come my children and hearken unto
me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is he which will
live, and see good days? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from
speaking guyle. Fly from evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it. Psalm.
34. 12. 13. etc.

12. Lect. December. 2.
11. Aph.
Neither must we look only into the fable of the life spent, but we must
also mark the conclusion thereof.

For oftentimes the greater part of the life, of the wicked, is like a
pleasant comedy: and the life of the godly is like a doleful tragedy. Yet
the last end of the wicked, is woeful, the end of ye godly joyful. Until I
went into the Sanctuary of the Lord, and understood the last end Psalm. 73.
17. 18.
of these men. Truly thou haste set them in slipperie places, thou make them
to fall headlong into desolation *. This is the portion of the ungodly, but
concerning the godly the same Psalmist says. Mark the perfect man, and
behold the right man, because the last end of such a man is peace. All these
Psalm. 37. 37.
things are set forth in the parable of Lazarus and the glutton. Luke 16.

12. Aph.
They which neglect this beholding and consideration of their own life, and
care more for their own things then for God and the things which are Gods:
are by the just judgment of God given up into a reprobate mind, so that to
their great shame and reproach, they do these Romans 1. 28.
things which are not comely.

Verse. 6.
Ye shall sow much, and bring in little: ye shall eat and not be satisfied:
ye shall drink and not be drunken: ye shall cloth your selves, and not be
made warm: he that shall hyre out himself for wages, shall hyre out him
self for wages, which shall be as if it fell into a broken back.

Here let us mark the transposition of the tense, For he uses the verbes of
the future tense as if they were of the Preterperfectense or Present tense:
first that he may revoke the minds of the Jews unto the consideration of y^
things, actions, and evils which are past, and present. Secondly that they may
thereby gather what they must look for, unless they repent, and at length
give unto God the things which are due unto him. These are common proverbs
which are in every man's mouth. Prometheus post factum. When the steed is
stolen we can shut the stables door. We learn wisdom by adversity. And
again, Quae nocent, docent. we are taught by things whereby we are hurt, And
again, Malo accepto stultus sapit. A fool will become wise after he has
received some harm.

And yet must we confess that the Children of this world are by correction
made never the wiser or better: but the Children of God are by his fatherly
chasticement bettered, and by the same do they profit. And to the end that
Gods children being rebuked of the Lord, may be saved, and the other may be
made inexcusable, the Prophets do use such reprehensions.

The word (drunken) is not to be understood in this place, of that
drunkenness which is forbidden by God, and whereof Esaias speaks Cap. 5. 22. Woe
be to those which are mighty to drink wine, and these men which are strong
to mix their drunkenness: but these words are meant of the moderate use of
wine, which serves to quench the thirst, and to satisfy the honest appetite,
whereof mention is made Ioh. cap. 2, 10. All men at the first bring forth good
wine, and when the gestes are drunken, (Methusthosi) have quenched their
thirste, then that which is worse. Psalm. 104. 15. Wine makes glad the heart of
man, that he may make his face to shine with oil. Pro. 15. 6. Give strong
drink to him that perishes and wine to them that are of a bitter mind. That
he may drink, and forget his poverty, and that he may not remember his
calamity any more.

Of the testimonies and effects of the curse of God.
We must for the declaration, and laying open of this sentence, add one
syllogism, and that after the manner of the Geometricians. The whole drift of
this sentence is this, to convince the Jews of the breach of the law and also
to reprove them for the same. For they would never have given place to the
wholesome counsels and persuasions of the Prophets, unless they had been
sufficiently told of the greatness, and dangerousnes of these diseases, and
evils, wherewith they were infected.

The curse of God is a punishment most due Deuteronomy. 27. 2^. Psalm. 119. Gal. 3. 10.
to those which break the law of God. Cursed is he which abides not in the
words of this law to do them. Cursed are they which turn aside from the
comma^dementes of God.

But God has hitherto cursed you Jews, and as yet does he punish you.

Therefore it is certain that you are guilty of the breach of the law of God.

He proves the minor proposition by an induction, wherein the younger sort
shall note,

1 First the fountain or first original of this curse which the Prophet here
denounces. Deuteronomy. 28. 38. Thou shall bring forth much seed unto the land,
and shall gather but a little: because the locust shall consume it. Thou shall
plant vineyards, and shall til, and shall not drink wine, etc.

2 Secondly, the expolition or amplification of this manner of curse. Mich. 6.
13. 14. I will also make thee to be sick, by smiting thee, I will make thee
desolate because of thy sins. Thou shall eat and not be satisfied: and thee
humbling of thee shall be in the midst of thee, thou shall touch a wife, and
she shall not bring forth, (that is, she shall not bring thee forth
Children,) and those whom she shall bring forth will I give to the sword. Thou
shall sow and shall not reap: thou shall tread the olyues, and shall not be
anointed with oil.

3 Thirdly, the manner and form of this curse. The Jews did sow plentifully,
but they did reap but a little: they did eat, but they were not satisfied:
they did drink, but their thirst was not quenched: they were clothed, but
they were not warm: they gathered money, but in a broken bag. The like
judgment was executed upon all their labors, and affairs, both household and
civil. Therefore even by this that their labor was in vain, and not blessed,
may we gather, that God had accursed them as transgressors of his law.

4 Fourthly, the testimonies and affectes both of the curse, and also of the
blessing of God. A private or household blessing is this, a plentiful harvest
far exceeding the quantity of the labor and of the seed that was sown:
the moderate sufficiency of meat and drink: honest and comely apparel:
abundance of necessaries, and household stuff, and other things whereof
mention is made. Psalm. 128. Deuteronomy. 28. Leu. 26.

Out of the same places may we gather the diverse kinds of civil blessings,
whereof we will speak else where.

And we must define the curse not only by the privation or wanting of good
things, but also by the infinite number of evils.

It is not sufficent for us to know these things contemplatiuely, but we must
also apply them unto our own use, that we may not only learn to be wise by
other men's harms, and to profit by the good things of others: but also that
being taught by our own harms, we may bring forth better fruits: and that
having our hearts cheared with these good things which we have received at
the hands of the Lord, we may declare and prove our thankfulness and desire
which we have to obey him. But we will speak^ hereof else where.

15. Lect. December. 4.
Verse 7.
Thus says the Lord of hosts, set your hearts upon your ways.

A digression concerning the censure which ought to be had in the study of
Divinity.

That we may pass over from the treatis^ and matter which concerns
household affairs, and husbandry, and proceed to speak concerning
divinity, and the study thereof: we must first of all note that it is like
unto a way, and the studies thereof unto travelers. Psalm. 119. Blessed are the
perfect in the way, they which walk in the doctrine of the Lord. Ver. 4.
Would to God my ways were made strong to keep thy commandments. ver. 14. I
am delighted in the way of thy testimonies, before all riches* ver. 17. Make me
to understand the way of thy commandments, and I will meditate upon thy
marvelous works. ver. 29. Remove from me the way of falsehod, and give me
thy doctrine. 30. I have chosen the way of thy truth: I have set thy laws
before me. And although the Prophet does in that psalm speak generally of the
study of all the faithful: yet is there no cause why we may not apply his
sayings unto those which ought to carry the light of the celestial doctrine
before their hearers, and who for their offices sake ought to adorn their
doctrine with vprightnes of life.

And to the end we may in this place use a certain method and order, we
will here dispose the additions touching the way of the study of divinity,
according to the opposition of contraries, whereof there is one and the same
doctrine, and which being matched together do more evidently appear,

The student of holy scripture which sets upon his heart the way of his
study (that I may use the Hebrew phrase) must consider and thoroughly mark
these things.

1 First the traueiler. As a traueiler standing in a place where three ways
meet, does earnestly consider upon the right way, upon a faithful guide,
and upon many other things: so ought the students of holy Scripture, often
times and earnestly to think upon the right way to learn, upon a guide, and
upon the helps whereof they shall stand in need in this their journey.

For it is wicked negligence, and great ingratitude, if a man do not consider
with himself, what way he has taken in his study, and be not moved with
desire to know the truth: and if he be like those of whom our Apostle
speaks, who are always learning, yet can they never attain to the knowledge
of the 2. Tim. 3. 7.
truth *.

2 The way. The way of true doctrine does distinctly comprehend the law and
the Gospel. On the contrary, that is the way of lying which transformeth the
Gospel into the law, and adds thereunto the inventions of man's brain.

Of the amplenesse hereof there is mention made in the 119. Psalm verse 96. In
every perfection I have seen an end: but thy commandments are exceeding
broad. All other kinds of learning have their ends: but Divinity reaches
so far, that we which are in the way of faith do know only a part thereof.
1. Cor. 13. 9.
And the law is it which makes our diseases known unto us, the Gospel
ministers medicine to cure the same: yet so that the one helps the other.

3 Thirdly the guide. Christ Jesus is our guide, the way, the truth, the
life, and our teacher. On the contrary Satan leads our minds into error,
after they are by him bewitched: let us therefore hear Christ, him let us
follow, neither let us thrust into his place Luther, Mat. 17.
Calvin, or finally any mortal man how learned and godly soever he be. For
not even the teacher of the Gentiles Paul, would have any of the faithful to
be called after his name. And most true is that which Galene says, touching
these which are given to sects: that, They 1. Cor. 3.
are blind and deaf, so that they can neither hear nor see these things
which other men can easily perceive.

4 Fourthlie the end of the journey. Let him which enters the study of
wisdom, begin with God, go forward with God, and let him manfully strive to
come unto God who is the chief good thing, the chiefest wisdom: forgetting
those things which he left behind him.

In this our course we are by a wonderful periode brought back unto him at
whom we began. But those which have entered the way of lying, are turned
back from God unto the creatures, from the chiefest good thing, unto things
which are evil, and being caught in Satan's net, they do at length miserably
perish.

5 The laterall limits or bonds appointed. We must beware that we turn not
aside Deuteronomy. 28. Ies. 23.
unto the right hands, or unto the left*.

For we must follow the way of truth, least we err and fall into the most
cruel errors and furies.

As it is an indecent thing for those men which stand without the dancing
place, to dance: so is it a dangerous thing to start and step aside from
the truth: a per^itious thing never to return into the way of truth.

6 Sixthly the condu^^rs in this way are those to whom it is said. You are the
light of the Man 5.
world*.

As we are much bound to reverence those which carry before us the light of
the truth: so ought we to detest those se^ucers who with their sophistry,
and wrangling, go about to lead us away into the bywayes of lying*. Deuteronomy.
18, Mat. 1.


7 Seventhly the companyons. We have all those to be our companions in this
our voyage, whom the same fellowshippe of faith has coupled and linked with
us.

And let us not contemn the gifts and judgments of y^ Physicians, the
lawyers, and other ye godly: but let us think that they are out companions in
this our journey, and let us praise those whom we see set forth and stir up
the gifts of God.

8 Eighthly, the images of Mercury. Let us They were w^^ in old time to set up
images o^ Mercury in places where three or two ways met which pointed out
the way to every seuera^ place.
also give due reverence first of all unto the writings of the Fathers, and
secondly to the Testinionies of the best Philosophers concerning the works of
God and the nature of things. For there is no cause why we should reiecte
and speak against the one, teaching according to the proportion of faith: nor
the other, speaking those things which agree well with the works of God, and
the order by him appointed.

The progress or going forward in the journey. Let the profiting in this be
manifest in all men.
We must consider how we have profited, and how we do profit, as in
innocencte of life, so in the study of wisdom.

And let us consider with our selves that we are also stirred up, and
exhorted to do our duties, by those expostulations, and reprehensions for
neglecting the doctrine and knowledge which are necessary.

Are you yet without understanding*. And again, You who in respect of time
should A^^. 15. 16.
have been teachers, have need to be taught again what be the first
principles Ie^. ^. 12.
of the oracles of God*.

10 The tenth thing is the victual necessary for the journey. The holy Bible
is to us in steed of victual necessary for our journey, out of which we may
have whatsoever is profitable to doctrine, to reprehension, to correction, and
Tim. 3. 16.
to instruction in righteousness*.

11 The eleventh thing to be considered is, the lettes and hinderaunces which
hinder this journey. Many things there be which do hinder the study of holy
Scripture, as the desire of honor and riches, unstable teachers etc. And
therefore does David pray, Turn away mine ^sal. 119. 37. ^7. 113.
eyes least they behold vanity*. Before I was humbled I went astray. I have
hated the unconstant, but I have loved thy law. Again, if any man dig to
himself cisternes, neglecting the clear fountaynes, that is, if any man do
forsake the reading of the Bible, and spend all his time in reading the
commentaries and expositions of men.

12 The twelfth thing is a light. In this dark and mistie world we are
lightened by faith, and the knowledge of Christ set forth in the Gospel.
Psalm. 119. Thy word O Lord, is a lantern unto my feet and a light unto my
paths.

13 The thirteenth thing is, the talk and communication. In this way we must
use the same speeches which the Prophets and Apostles did use speaking of
divine matters.

For strange speeches have brought in new doctrine concerning religion,
namely school divinity. Therefore does Paul most wisely give us this
admonition to beware of vain iangling. 1. Tim. 6. 20. O Timotheus keep that
which is committed unto thee, and avoid profane and vain bablings, and
oppositions of sciences falsely so called.

14 The fourteenth thing is doctrine and ininstruction. Let us not be carried
about with diverse and strange doctrines*. Heb. 13. 9.


If any man teach any other doctrine, and agrees not unto the wholesome words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to that doctrine which is according unto
godliness, he is puffed up knowing nothing, but doteth about questions and
strife of words, whereupon ryseth envy, strife, railyng, evil surmisinges.
1. Tim. 6. 4. 5.

15 The fifteenth is the scope and end of the journey.

Al our studies must serve to the glory of God, and the edification of the
Church. Hyrelings refer all things unto gain, Heretics to win praise, and
get riches: both of them do serve their Romans 16.
bellies, and not our Lord Jesus Christ*.

16. Lect. 7. December. 1579.
Verse 8.
Go up into the mountain, and bring thence wood, and build this house, and I
will be favorable therein, and I will be glorified says the Lord.

HAggeus proves by four arguments which are contained in this verse, that the
Temple of the Lord was to be builded withal expedition.

The first argument.
1 The first is fet a Facili, from the facility of it. Certain it is that
opportunity to do things well, is the singular gift of God, by means whereof
it comes to pass that those things which are most difficult, do become
easy and ready. But God has given you most singular opportunity to build
the Temple: which may sufficiently be proved by this, that the circumstances
do excellently agree now unto this purpose: and all these lettes and
hindrances, which hitherto have hindered you, are taken away. Wherefore ye
Jews go too, and be not slack to do your duty. Go up into the
mountain, bring thence timber, build the Temple etc.

Seeing that the Lord does not only in his express word declare unto us,
what he will have us to do, but does also help us with these helps,
whereof we have need in doing that well which he would have done: let us
endeavor our selves so that we never be found slack to do our duties, and let
us use the opportunity offered aright.

This word Opportunity is nothing else but a Demost. 1. Oly^.
diligent considering of the time, and other circumstances. And again, the
exhortations given by time and opportunity are most grave and wise, and the
same are plain and evident, neither are they neglected without great danger
aed damage.

Let not the virtuous and studious young men neglect any opportunity, whenas
they may profit in learning and manners: but let them lay hold upon it
readely, valiantly, and constantly, when it is offered unto them, and let them
employ and apply the same unto their use.

2 The second argument which the Prophet uses is fet ab aequo, from the
conueniencie. It is most meet and convenient that we do those things
courageously, and religiously, which we do well perceive do please God. But
of the temple of the Lord it is said* I will be favorable in it. Ergo etc.

Ob. The most highest God dwells not in temples made with hands. Act. 7. I
will be An objection se^ apugnantibus, from things which do disagree between
themselves.
favorable in the temple. Hag. 18. Therefore the one of these two is false.

Ans. I deny the consequent, because in the antecedent there is ignoratio
elenchi. Ignorance of an argument, or of the proofs. For these things are not
spoken both after one manner.

Stephen alleging the words of the Lord which we read in Isa. 66. 1. Heaven
is my seat, and the earth is my footestole: entreats of the universal
presence of God wherewith he replenisheth al things, being himself infinite. Am
I God of that which is nigh me, and not of that which is far off? Shall any
man hide him Ier. 23. 24. 25.
self in a secret place, and shall I not see him? says the Lord. Do not I
fill the heaven and earth? says the Lord. This universal presence is an
essential quality or property belonging only unto God, which no creature
has, nor can have. But the saying of Haggai is to be understood of the
particular presence of God, which is the presence of his grace, and also of his
fauourablenes.

The meaning of the words of Haggai.
As in times past it pleased God to dwell in the tabernacle of Syloh, and
afterward in the temple which Solomon built, and there to give answers and
oracles unto his servants: so likewise hereafter will he be present in the
second Temple, and take in good part the worship done unto him in faith.

Ob. The flesh of Christ replenisheth all things. Ephesians. 4. 10.

Therefore not only God the creator, but eue^ this creature likewise is every
where.

An. I answer. There is a double fallacy in this false reason.

1. The first is Homonymiae, or fet from the ambiguitie of the word. For that
which Paul speaks of Christ in the concrete, some men do falselie
understand in the abstract, of the nature which Christ took.

2. The second is, Fallacia accidentis, which is, when we reason from the
accident to the substance. For that which is rightly spoken and affirmed of
the gifts wherewith he fulfilleth all things: Of whose fulness we have all
received, even grace for grace *: is falselie John. 1.
wrested unto the substance of the flesh of Christ, which is not infinite,
because it is man's flesh: not Mercioniticall, etc.

3. The third argument which the prophet uses, is fet from the end, and use
of the Temple. The building again of that Temple is not to be omitted,
wherein God will be glorified: but God will be glorified in the Temple of
Jerusalem, as it is in plain words set down in this place. Therefore, etc.

Positions concerning the Temple.
1. Position.
Forasmuch as God would have the Temple of Jerusalem to serve to his glory,
the instruction of the Jewish people, and the administration of the ceremonial
worship: the building again thereof could not be omitted without committing
of a most heinous offense.

2. Position.
And as God would in no case have religion serve for gain: so would he not
have the Temple polluted with the helps thereof. Make not my fathers house an
house of marchaundise *. And again, My house is an house of prayer, but ye
have made it a den of thieues *.

17. Lect. 9. December. 1579.
3. Position.
YEt GOD is most delighted in the Temple of the heart, being purified by
faith. If any man love me, he will keep my sayings: and my father will love
him, and unto him will we 2. Cor. 12. 14. ^. Cor. 4. 18.
come, and make our aboade with him. Again, Do ye not know that your body
is the Temple of the holy ghost, which is in you, and whom you have of God.

4. Position.
In this Temple must prayers be made continually: Romans 12. ^ohn. 4.
in this Temple must thanks be given to God without ceasing: in this Temple
must the reasonable service be done, and that spiritu and veritate, in spirit
and truth.

4. The fourth argument used of the prophet, is fet a iusto, from justice, and
equity. The order of justice does require that all men, and especially the
faithful, obey the Lord, when he prescribes and commands any thing. But
the Lord has straightly commanded you to build the Temple. Ergo, etc.

A Position.
In holy sermons, and exhortations made unto the people, the authority of God
must be alleged, least the oracles of God wax base, and become of no
reputation, and least they seem to be inventions, and dreams proceedinge
from man's brain. Therefore is it, that the prophets do oftentimes repeat
these words, Thus says the Lord.

Verse. 9.
You shall look unto much, and behold it is but a little: and you have brought
it into the house, but I blew upon it. For what cause, says the Lord God of
hosts? For my house which lies waste, but you run every man into his own
house.

5 The fifth argument is fet from the plagues and punishments wherewith the
Jews were plagued. It becomes men which are of a found judgment, and which
are godlily given, not only to mark the causes of plagues and punishments:
but also to avoid the same. But you, if you hold on to neglect the Temple,
and to do your own business, shall be plagued with vainesse of your works and
labor. Therefore before all things, you must do your endeavor to give unto
God the things which are Gods. He proves the minor proposition by the
example of their unfortunate labor in their husbandry, and householde
affairs. You sow much, and yet you gather but a little: and these things
which with great pain and labor you have gathered in the fields, and brought
home, the same do perish when God blows upon them, and they are scattered
abroad like chafe.

A digression concerning evil gotten goods.
1 It is a ridiculous and hateful kind of vanity, to gather goods together
by hook and by crook, which shall shortly afterward perish.

2 For he which does this is impious toowardes God: for doubtless he can not
serve God Luke 16. 13.
and Mammon.

3 And again the same man does also hurt and bring himself to destruction,
according to that saying of Paul: But those which will wax rich, do fall
into temptation, and the snare, and many foolish and hurtful desires, 1. Tim.
6. 9.
which do drown men in perdition and destruction.

4 He is also injurious unto the society and company of men, according to
that saying of Paul. Let not a man dare to oppress and entangle his brother
in his business, because GOD is the revenger of all such things *. These. 4. 6.


Hereunto belong these proverbs.

The burden of Salt is gone thither whence it came.

Evil gotten goods do soon perish.

6 The sixth argument is fet from the impulsive cause. There is no cause why
those men should marvel that they are altogether unfortunate, which make more
accounte of their own houses, then of the Temple of the Lord: of their
household affairs, then of the worship of God: of their own gain, then of
the glory of God: finally, of themselves, then of God. But the Jews
returning from Babylon did all these things. Ergo. etc. This argument depends
upon that which went before.

Of the alteration of the order by God appointed.
1 The degrees, conjunction, and distinction of things do wonderfully set
forth the order which God has appointed.

2 The degrees, are holy things, and things profane. By nature there is
nothing profane *: but certain things are counted profane, Act. 10. 15.
only by use and custom *. 1. Cor. 9.


3 It is good order to prefer holy things before profane things: It is
disorder to put profane things before things which are holy.

4 Holy things are holy either in deed, or by good custom and use only, as
things indifferent.

5 It is good order, if things indifferent be set after things which are
rightly called holy: disorder, if they be preferred before them.

6 So there be certain things which are so unlike and contrary, that they
neither can, neither ought they to be joined together.

7 It is good order before all things to seek Mat. 6. Luke 16.
the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. It is disorder, to be
desirous to serve God and Mammon.

8 So there be certain things which are so linked together that in the
ordinary dispensation they ought not to be separated.

9 It is good order, to join the external word with the internal: with the
baptizinge with Water, the baptism of the Spirit: with the Bread and Wine
used in the Supper of the Lord, the Body and Blood of Christ,
sacramentallie. It is great misorder to separate the external word from the
internal: the Sacramental signs from the things signified. I do define the
things signified not only by the fruit, but also by the substance. As many
of the Israelites being in times past contented with the external sacrifices,
did neither think upon the Lamb of GOD which takes away the sins of the
World, neither of the sacrifices of thanksgiving.

10 Furthermore, because GOD has separated certain things, he will not have
us to attribute any thing unto them confusedly.

11 It is good order to ascribe the giving of life unto the flesh of Christ,
and not unto the earthly bread used in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Also to ascribe the washinge away of sin, not to ye water used in baptism,
but to the sprinkling of the blood of Christ.

12 It is better to follow the judgment of GOD in all things, who is the
best, and the wisest, then the wisdom of the flesh: for he knows best,
what things he will have us to account good, evil, or indifferent.

Examples.
While we look not on the things 2. Cor. 6. 19.
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for the things which
are seen are temporal: but the things which are not seen are eternal *.

I seek not yours, but you: for the children John. 14. 23.
must not heap up treasures for the parents, but the parents for the children.

18. Lect. December. 14. 1579.
Verse. 10.
Therefore has the heaven shut it self upon you, least it should give you
dew: and the earth also has shut her self, least she should give her
increase.

7 The last argument where-by the prophet does prove, that the building of the
Temple is not any longer to be prolonged, is fette from the public plague and
punishment wherewith the Jews were punished.

Ma. Public and private punishments are testimonies of Gods wrath against ye
transgressors of the law, and evident causes of the conversion of these men,
which are not past repentance. According to the saying: If we did judge our
selves, we should not be punished. But when we are punished, we are
instructed of the Lord, least we should be condemned with the world. ^.
Cor. 11. 31. 32


Mi. But GOD does grievously punish you, in that he has shut the heavens
that they may not moisten the earth with dew: neither yet water the same with
rain: and in that he has shut the earth that she may not yield unto you
her increase. Ergo. etc.

1 In this minor proposition, we will note in order the situation of the holy
land, and how the same was watered. The land whereunto ye go over that you
may possess it, is a land of Mountains, and Valleis, thou shall drink
water of the rain that comes from Deuteronomy. 11. 11.
heaven.

2 Therefore was it a blessinge of GOD whenas the Country was watered with
rain. I will give rain unto your land in his season, early and late, and so
shall thou gather thy Deuteronomy. 11. 14.
corn, and thy wine, and thy oil. And I will give grass in thy field for
thy cattle, and thou shall eat and be satisfied.

3 On the contrary, the with-holdinge of rain was a testimony of Gods curse.
God is angry with the Idolaters, so that he shuts Deuteronomy. 11. 17.
the heavens, that there may be no rain, and that the earth may not yield
her increase. And the heavens which are over thy head shall be of brass, and
the earth which is under thee of Iron. The Lord shall give unto thy land, for
rain dust and ashes. * etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 23.


Therefore it is certain that the Jews are brought unto the feeling of the
wrath of GOD, and called to repentance, by those punishments which were laid
upon them for breakinge the law, and neglecting the building of the Temple.

1 Of the historical sermons of the Prophets, and Apostles.
1 The historycall Sermons do plainly declare not only what the Lord says,
but also what he does.

2 He shows in the words of the law, that all men have sinned, and are
destitute of the glory of God: and in the joyful message of the gospel, he
professes that the faithful are justified freely for Christ his sake. Romans 3.
Romans 3.


3 And as at all times he sets forth his mercy toward the penitent: so
he declares his justice toward the stubburne, and stiffnecked, which will
not repent.

4 Therefore as Christ said to the disciples of John: Go ye and show unto
John what Mat. 11.
things you hear and see: so let us hear and see what God does.

5 Let us remember that it is our part and duty to seek the Lord, that we
may find him even by groping, seeing that he is not far from every one of
us. Act. 17. 27.

6 Therefore men are oftentimes, and that diligently to be put in mind of the
deliverance of the Church which was in the west part of the world, out of the
captivity of Babylon: of the regeneration of ye Church being stricken in years:
of the restoring of the light of the gospel: of our conversion, and of the
conversion of many more: that they may give themselves to mark the works of
God, to extol the same, and to thank God for his unspeakable benefits.

2. Of the causes attending upon the execution of Gods judgment.
1 All the whole nature of things serves for Gods purpose, and for the
execution of his judgments.

2 This may we see by the ready ministry, and obedience of the Elements.

3 At Gods beck the heaven and earth are set open, that men may enjoy Gods
blessinge.

4 At his commandment the riches of heaven and earth are shut up, so that
unthankful and disobedient persons can-not obtain the same.

5 And most certain is that which ye Apostle says, the creature is subject to
vanity, not of it self, but because of him which has subdued it.

6 And although the agreement of the heaven and earth be wonderful in
preserving of the life of living creatures: yet is the same compelled to serve
both the blessing of God, and also his curse.

7 Therefore, seeing that God does vouchsafe to prosper the order of nature,
that he may bless the obedient: and again, seeing he does restrain the force
of the nature of things, that he may send a curse upon the disobedient: even
the very experience of this most free action ought to stir up, and nourish in
our minds the hatred of sin, and love of righteousness.

19. Lect. 15. December.
Verse. 11.
And I have called a drought upon this land, and upon the Mountains, and
upon Wheat, and upon Wine, and upon Oil: and upon all things which the
earth brings forth: and upon men, and upon beasts, and upon all the
labor of men's hands.

THis verse contains the exposition of the verse going before, and also the
proof of the minor proposition of the last Syllogism. This is the sum of
the induction which the prophet uses.

God has brought a drought upon the earth, the Mountains, Wheat, Wine, Oil,
upon Man, and Beast, and finally, upon the works of your hands. And the
like judgment is executed upon all other things. Wherefore it is certain that
you are subject to that curse whereof mention is made. Deuteronomy. 28. 16. Thou shall
be accursed in the town and in the field. Cursed shall thy basket be, and
thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land,
the first begotten of thy oxen, and of the flocks of thy Sheep. Cursed shall
thou be when thou go out, and when thou come in.

In these west countries we had in the last Spring, frost and cold in the
very Easter holydaies. Before harvest, and in the Seede-time continual rain.
This year did God shut the heavens that we were quite past all hope to reap
any store of fruit. Whence we do gather that GOD does punish us in like
sort, as he did the Jews in times past, and that he does shut the heaven,
and the earth.

Questions, and answeares.
Qu. What things are to be noted in this induction which the prophet uses?

An. The order and state of things. For to the end the prophet may declare
according to the comminations of the law, that there is nothing which is not
now accursed for the sins of the Iewishe people, he begins at those
things which are, as the heaven and earth, which give unto us lodging:
secondly, he comes unto the fruits of these things which are, and do live,
declaringe that the drought has hurt the corn, the wine, and the oil, and
other the fruits of the earth, and the trees: thence he proceeds unto those
things, which are, live, and have senses: and whilst that by Synecdoche he
makes mention of beasts, he understands all other living creatures which
live upon the earth, in the water, and which fly in the air. Fourthlie, he
induces him who has also reason and understanding, and for whose sake the
creatures which are of lower degree are created, namely man, comprehending
under that common name, Wives, Children, Servants, declaringe that he also
is accursed. Lastly, under these words, The labor of the hands, he
comprehends the affairs of husbandry, the household affairs, the civil
affairs, ecclesiastical affairs, affairs in the schools, etc. And to be
brief, all, both public and private actions and functions, declaring that
they were vain, and unfruitful by the just judgment of God.

Let us behold this distribution of things, that we may without delay extol
the plentifulnes of Gods blessing, if at any time ye same be granted us
contrary to our deserts, and that we may be stirred up to give God thanks for
his blessings, both spiritual and corporal, whereunto the examples of holy
men, which we find every where in the holy scripture do exhort us.

2 God is the governor of storms, and tempests. Mat. 5. 45. Act. 14* 17.
God does make his sun to rise upon the good, and bad, he sends rain upon
the just and unjust *: for he has never suffered himself to be without
witness, in doing good and giving rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling our hearts with meat and gladness *. The same thing does the whole 29.
psalm, and many other psalms testify.

2. Question.
Qu. Why then does Paul say that the government of the air is in the hand of
the devil, if God alone do raise up tempests, increase them, and still them
as it seems best to him? I reason thus. In whose hand the government of the
air is, it seems that he does stir up tempests, govern them, and cease
them. But the devil has the government of the air in his hand, as Paul does
testify, etc. Ergo.

An, I answer unto the minor proposition, that Satan after a sort has the
rule in the air, Tertul. ^he devil cease to hurt, that he may be thought
to cure.
and for this cause it is said that he bears rule in the air, but not
simply. For as the devil by Gods permission does bring diseases upon men,
whenas he abuses the natural motions of the humors, spirits, and members,
that either when he comes he may procure diseases, or else when he departs
and cease to move, he may seem to cure ye same: so when God does permit
him, by y^ stirring up and intermingling of winds, clouds, and meteors, he
brings to pass wonderful things: yet is not he able to do any more, or any
greater things then God will permit him to do. With fire did he consume the
flocks of Job, and with a whirle-winde did he throw down the house wherein
his children were feasting.

3. Question.
Qu. Do thou think that witches are able to stir up thunder, hail,
frost, or other tempests?

An. I suppose that those witches which have made themselves y^ bondslaues of
Satan, when as otherways there is some such tempest at hand, are moved by
Satan (for whom it is no hard matter to gather by the signs next before going,
that there will some tempest ensue, or to foretell what tempests he will
stir up) to think that certain things being done, they have stirred up
tempests.

Ob. Therefore seeing they are not the efficient causes of tempests, they are
not to be punished.

An. I deny the consequent. For seeing that they have willingly and wittingly
given themselves to serve Satan, and do also destroy both men and beasts with
their socerie, and finally have forsaken God: they deserve to be punished with
death, as reuolts, homicides, and idolaters. Who is he which does think that
a robber is worthy to be pardoned, if being put to flight by the traueylers,
he miss his purpose? I speak of these witches which by godly persuasion, not
by any sudden force of torments, are brought to confess that they have
forsaken God and godliness, that with poisoned things they have murdered men and
beasts, and that they have served ye devil. I know there be certain which
confess that they have done things, which are impossible to be done, either by
force of nature, or power of devils. I think there is no credit to be given to
their confessions which are wrunge out of them by torments, neither do I
think that there ought any rigor to be used toward such. And in this place we
do speak of those, which are properly called witches, concerning whom ye law
is, Thou shall Venisicae.
not suffer a witch to live. Paul in the number of the works of the flesh
which deserve death, Exodus 22.
reckons up witchcraft. But let it suffice to have spoken thus much by the
way touching this matter.

20. Lect. December. 1.
Verse. 12*
And Zerubabel the son of Salathiel, and To hear the voice of the Lord.
Iehosua the son of Iehosadac, the high Priest, and all the rest of the
people heard the voice of the Lord their God, and the words of Haggai the
prophet (as the Lord their God had sent him) and the people did fear before
the face of the Lord. To fear the Lord.


This history contains the commendation and description of the obedience of
faith which the Jewish people, together with their rulers began to declare, and
use toward the Lord, after they had heard Haggeus his sermon.

In this text we will briefly note these things.

1 First the proposition. By faith y^ Jews with one consent, heard the
commandment given touching the building of the temple, and they feared God.

2 Secondly the confirmation. The arguments whereof are these.

1 First the consent and agreement of all degrees of persons both superiors
and inferiors.

2 Secondly the form and order. For they heard Haggeus not as a man, but as
an ambassador of God, with such reverence and attentiuenes, as if they had
heard God himself speaking unto them out of the heavens.

3 Thirdly the effect. They feared the Lord. For they did well perceive that
they had not given unto their most loving Father the honor that was due unto
him, and therefore did they fear before the face of the Lord.

But to the end that you my brethren and The order which we will observe in
the handling of this text.
hearers may perceive both by what means the argument being reduced unto a
position: the use of this history may be declared, and also what method and
order we will observe in expounding the same: we will plainly set before
your eyes first the position, secondly the chief points of the exposition.

The position.
The seed of Gods word being received by faith, is effectual and lively,
and brings forth good fruit, as the fear of God, and other fruits of the
spirit, which are meet for those which have repented.

The principal points of the exposition, whereof we will speak in order.

1 First we will speak of the efficacy of the word of God, and of the causes
thereof.

2 Secondly of the phrase, To hear the voice of the Lord: And of the
obedience of faith.

3 Thirdly of the phrase, To fear before the face of the Lord: or of the
sonnely fear.

1 Of the efficacy of the word of God.

The word of God is effectual.
This proposition do I prove by a demonstracion fet from the authority of
God, and experience.

That which both the authority of God, which ought to be to us in steed of a
sufficient reason, and also the general experience of holy men does teach and
testify, is not to be doubted of. But these two testimonies, namely, the
authority of God, and the experience of the Saints do both together testify,
that the efficacy of the word of God is great. Therefore we ought no more to
doubt hereof, then when we see the sun rise we ought to doubt, whether
when it ascends above our half sphere it shall lighten all things which are
laid open unto it, or no.

1 I prove the minor by the authority and testimony of the Lord himself.
Truly like as the rain and snow come down upon Esa. 55. 10. ^2.
the earth, and return not again, but water the earth, and make it to bring
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to him that
eats: so shall my word be which shall proceed out of my mouth, Ier. 32. 28.
it shall not return unto me in vain, but it does that which I will, and it
prospers in these things whereunto I sent it.

What is the chafe (that is the dreams and inventions of the false Prophets)
to the wheat (that is, to the word of God.) Is not my word like fire, (This
fire does melt, separate, and purge the gold) says the Lord: and like an
hammer that breaks a rock *.

But if you all prophecy, and an infidele or 1. Cor. 14* 24. 25.
an idiote come in, he is raprooued of all, he is judged of all: and so the
secrets of his heart are made manifest. And so falling upon his face he
shall worship God, confessing that God is indeed amongst you. Here let us
note, that the Apostle speaks in this place of the word preached, which
thing is done by the mouth of the servants of God: least together with those
heretics, which do profess themselves to be inspired with the power of God,
we should take from the same, the use and efficacy thereof.

The word of God is lively and sharpe^ the^ any two edged sword: and it
pearceth unto the dividing of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrowe, it discerns the thoughts, and intentes of the heart. In this place
the Apostle speaks of the word of God which is preached, and not of the
word subsisting.

2 The second thing whereby I prove my minor proposition is experience. In
that solemn establishing of the old Testament and the covenant, which was
done after the law was repeted in Mount Sinai by Moses: The Israelits were so
affected and moved with the word of God that they said: Whatsoever the Lord
has said we will do and obey. And Exodus 24. 7.
in the same history of the people of the Jews, it is plainly set down that
all men of what degree soever they were heard the voice of the Lord, and
feared the Lord.

Ob. The kingdom of God is not placed in words, but in power, namely of the
spirit. Things contrary are not affirmed one of an other. Paul in setting
Power against word shows that they be contrary. Therefore he denies that
the word is effectual,

Ans. I answer unto the minor proposition, wherein is a fallac^e grounded
upon the ambiguitie of the word, Word: which in this place signifying man's
eloquence which is set and placed in choice of words, is atributed to
certain persons which are puffed up with pride: and set against the spirit of
the word of God, whereunto power is proper.

Therefore Paul does not deny that the word of God is effectual: but he
denies that the profounde speeches of these grounded and eloquent fellows
have any force or strength at all.

21. Lect. 12. Ianuar. 1580.
Whence comes this efficacy of the word of God?

IT depends upon the principal efficient cause, that is upon the living
and almighty God, who speaking unto the heart of man gives life and light
unto the same, that it may be both most sweetly refreshed, and also follow
him when he calls: least any man should falsely suppose that there is some
magical force, either in the word written or preached.

The course and order of the subordinate efficient causes is this.

1 First the principal cause is God. Furthermore forasmuch as these external
works are attributed to all the persons of the holy trinity, the testimonies
of Scripture do sometime attribute that generally to God, that he does write
his word in our hearts. As for example. Ier. 31. 3^.
I will give my law in the midst of them, and I will write it in their
hearts. Sometime they do attribute it unto one person only. As for example.
The spirit of truth shall lead you into all truth* For he shall not speak of
him self, but whatsoever he hears, that shall Ioh. 16. 13.
he speak, and he shall tell you what is to come. By this place of Scripture
we do gather, that the spirit of God does both teach us, and also that he
teaches us, and beats into us that doctrine which the Father would have to
be revealed unto the Church by his son.

2 Secondly, the fellow cause is faith, which is kindled by the holy spirit
after that the heart of man is once lightened by the word, and that it may
shinne as a lamp, it is nourished by the same spirit, by adding thereto
matter and nourishment. Heb. 4. 2. For unto us was the gospel preached as well
as unto them: but the word which they heard did profit them nothing, because
it was not mixed with faith, in those that heard it.

1 By these words we gather, first, that the word is effectual, being mixed
with faith, that is, when the correlatiue, which is faith, does answer unto
his relative, which is the word of God.

2 Secondly, we must think the same thing concerning the sacraments, which as
Augustine says, are the visible word of God. Unless faith be joined with
them, we reap no fruit thereby, but such as turns to the destruction of a
man.

Ob. Therefore the word of God, and the Sacraments do depend upon the
faith of men, so that without this faith there is no veriritie and efficacy in
them.

Ans. I answer by an instance. Therefore the rising of the sun depends
upon the sight: so that unless living creatures do see it cannot rise. How is
it then that so many living creatures which are blind do no whit hinder the
rising of the sun?

Therefore it is a popish toye, to feign that the word of God and the
Sacraments do give grace, by the work wrought, that is, if the word be
heard only with the outward ears, and the sacraments be externally
received: though faith be not joined therewithal.

Furthermore it is a foolish kind of transmutation for a man to separate the
Word and the Sacraments, and to change the Sacraments into idols, and to
attribute greater efficacy unto them, then unto the Word. For unless the
word be added unto the element, there shall be no sacrament. Moreover it is
evident that the word is sufficient, if the sacrament be wanting: but not on
the contrary. And now, if in an unbeliever the word of God be not effectual,
what force shall the sacraments have in him?

Therefore let us affirm that which is most true, that the efficacy of the
word and sacraments does depend upon the will of God. And that he will have
faith to be joined therewith in the right use thereof. And consequently that
God who gives not holy things unto dogs will not have the unbelievers to
be made partakers of the truth of the word and sacraments, as well as the
faithful.

Therefore as blindness has not power to behold the light, nor deafenes to
hear the words which are uttered, neither numnesse of the lymmes to feel the
qualities which are perceived by touching: but let and hinder men from
perceiving such obiectes: so incredulity which is the privation of faith, has
no greater force then the word of God, and the sacraments, but yet
notwithstanding it does so let and hinder the Infidels that they cannot be
made partakers of the internal word and the substance of the sacrament. For
faith is such an isntrumental cause that without the same we cannot lay hold
upon the celestial gifts. As without eyes no man sees, without ears no man
hears, without smelling no man smells, without tasting no man discerns
tastes, without touching no man touches any thing: so without faith can no man
see, hear, smell, taste, eat, and finally touch Christ.

3 Thirdly the instrumental cause is, the ministers of the word of God. 2.
Cor. 3. 9. For we are Gods ministers. 1. Cor. 3. 5. Therefore who is Paul or
who is Apollos, but the ministers by whom ye have believed, and as the Lord
has given to every man. Mat. 16. The Apostles, the Lord working with them,
preached in all places. Mat. 16.


Quest. If such be the efficacy of the word of God, how comes it to pass
that all men which hear the same, do not believe it?

Ans, I answer that that comes to pass by means hereof, because it is not
given to every one to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God. And for this
cause it is not given to every man to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
God, because all men are not of God. Mat. 13. 11.


Ob. That which is openly preached in the hearing of all, that is received of
all men. But the word of God is heard as well of the unfaithful, John. 8. 47.
as of the faithful which are present. Therefore is it received as well of the
one as of the other.

An. I answer, there is a double fallacy in this argument. In the mayor
proposition there is a Or a craving o^ that to be granted which is chiefly in
controversy. Or a fallacy grounded upon the diverse significations of one
word.
fallacy called * petitio principii.

Secondly in this word Heard there is * fallaci aeqniuocationis, and also in
these words the word of God, The unbelievers do hear with their ears the
external word of God, but they do not receive into a pure heart the seed
of the internal word. Therefore that same external word is a testimony
against them. But the faithful do hear the holy spirit inwardly beating
into them, and sealing up in the^, those things which the ministers do
outwardly teach, and testify: forasmuch as this thing is given unto them
alone, and not unto the other.

22. Lect. Id. Ianu. 1580.
An answer unto an argument whereby this may be reduced unto an absurdity.

THerefore these men are not to be blamed for their incredulity, which have
not the gift of faith given them, (which is the acknowledging of the truth)
seeing they are rather to be pitied then reprehended.

Ob. I argue thus. Every man has not faith. 2. Tim. 3. 2. Therefore are the
unbelievers not to be reproved for their incredulity.

Solu. I answer. I deny the consequent. My reason is, because here is a
fallacy in this, that y^ is assigned to be a cause, which is no cause. The
middle and next cause of incredulity is left out, namely the will of the
unbeliever being wrested and turned away from God, and the blindness and
hardness of man's heart.

2 Of the phrase, To hear the word of God, and of the obedience of faith.

No man can hear the voice of the Lord, unless God do open his holy mouth
and speak unto him.

1 God is said to speak sometimes without using any words, when he sends
thunders, and tempests. 1. Sam. 12. 11. The Lord sent thunder and rain.
Sometimes God is Psalm. 29.
said to speak in plain words, as when he called our first parents unto
judgment *: when Genesis 6.
he gave the law in mount Synai: Deuteronomy. 18. I cannot hear the voice of the
Lord any longer. And again. The Lord spoke unto Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 18.
you out of the midst of the fire, you heard the voice of his words: but
saw no similitude Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Math. 3. 17.
save a voice. And when he bare witness of his only begotten son *.

2 It pleased him to speak unto men, sometime in his own person, sometime by
some other. He spoke in his own person (that I may not repeat the former
examples) when he made this answer unto our Lords Jesus Christ, saying: I
have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. The author of the Epistle
to the Ioh: 12. 28.
Hebrews, does testify that he has sundry times spoken unto his saints by
others. God many times and diverse ways, in times past, spoke unto our fathers
by the Prophets, in Heb. 1. 1.
these last days has he spoken unto us by his son *.

3 He will have us no less to esteem his voice, and word uttered by others,
then if he uttered the same himself. Luke 10. 16. He that hears you hears
me: and he that rejects you rejects me: and he that rejects me,
rejects him that sent me.

Examples.
The Jews hearing the voice of Haggeus, thought they heard the voice of the
Lord. And the men of Thessalonica being taught by Paul, received the word of
God with a pure 1. These. 2. 13.
heart.

Ob. The efficient causes are not to be mixed. But you in attributing that
unto the secondarie cause, which is proper to the principal cause, do mix
them. You attribute that unto the ministers which is proper to GOD, namely the
effectual word of God. Ergo.

Ans. I answer unto the minor proposition, wherein is a fallacy a dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. Forasmuch as this reason is grounded upon
that which is spoken respectively, as if it were spoken simply.

That thing is attributed unto the external ministry in some respect, which
is proper to the holy spirit, because it is an ordinary means, Romans 10. 12.
and because by means thereof, the holy spirit is effectual, according as it
is said, Faith 2. Cor. 3. 5.
comes by hearing. And again, Who is Paul and who is Apollos, but ministers
by whom you have believed, and as God has given to every man? In this latter
sentence the principal cause which is GOD, and the isntrumental cause, that
is the ministers, are joined together. And here we are taught what we ought
to attribute to either of them.

I have spoken somewhat of these words. The voice of God, which in this place
are taken simply: It remains that I add a word or two touching this word
Hear. For it is said that the Jews heard the voice of the Lord generally,
with one consent.

1. Question.
How many ways may men be said to hear the word of God?

Ans. For memory, and also for judgments sake we will declare the same ways
according to certain places of invention.

If you look first into the signification of the word. Some men are said to
hear the word of God, properly, namely, these which hear Mat. 13. 22.
the same and understand it, and bring forth fruit. Othersome do hear the
word improperly, Mat. 13. 19. 20. 21.
either with a wavering mind, or at least but for a certain season, or
finally being tootoo much addicted unto worldly cares and business.

Secondly if you respect the instruments. The word of God is heard with the
ears, if you mean the external word: inwardly with a faithful heart, if
the internal word.

Quest. Does the internal word differ from the the external in form?

Ans. No, for the holy ghost and the ministers consenting together do preach
all one word, they differ only in the ordinary administration of the same.
For that I may use a plain similitude, as the words and the meaning thereof
do differ: so does the external word and the internal. The ministers they
speak the word, the holy ghost does beat into the heart the meaning thereof.

Ob. But this is a strange kind of phrase which you use, To hear with the
heart,

Ans. It ought to seem unto you no more strange, then if I should say that a
faithful man does with the heart see, smell, taste, and eat ^om. 10. 10.
Christ. With the heart man believes unto righteousness. And faith is unto the
believer as eyes, ears, tongue, lips, mouth, and hands. For by faith alone
do we lay hold upon Christ and his spiritual benefits, and also thereby
apply the same unto our selves.

3 Thirdly, the act and the manner how it is done. First, the faithful being
in the congregation of the saints which prophecy, do both hear with their
ears, and also with their hearts. Secondly hypocrites do hear with their
ears, ^sal. 42.
but not with a pure heart. Thirdly the saints (as Danid being in exile) do
hear with their hearts, not with their ears.

4 Fourthly, the time of illumination and conversion. Some men do hear long
time with their ears, before they do hear with their hearts, being in this
point like unto seed which lies long time under the ground, before it sprout
out. Some hear first with their heart, Act. 10.
then with their ears, as Cornelius the Centurion.

23. Lect. Ianuar. 25.
2. Question.
Who be those which hear the word of God aright, and in deed?

Ans. Those only which have the privilege of Gods adoption, of the special
gift, of effec^uall calling and sanctification granted unto them, according as
it is said, first concerning adoption. These which are of God, do hear Gods
word* Ioh. 8. 17. Secondly concerning the special gift. It is given unto you
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given.
Mat. 13. 11. Thirdly concerning effectual vocation. He has called you by our
Gospel to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. These. 2. 14.
Fourthly concerning sanctification. He that hears these words and does
them. Mat. 7. 24. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only deceyuing
your selves. Iam. 1. 22.

3 Quest. How does God make us hear his word?

Ans. So sone as he opens our ears, that the sweet harmony of his word
may enter into the same. Mine ears have thou opened. Psalm. 40. 6.

For like as those which dwell nigh unto the fall of Nilus and Rhenus, do
become deaf by reason of the horrible noise of the water: so these men which
live in this world are so stricken, and become so deaf with the vain pomp
thereof, that God must needs pearce through, and open their ears. That done
he opens their hearts, as it is said of Lydia: The Lord opened her Act. 16.
14.
heart, that she might hearken unto the things which were spoken of Paul. Lastly
he opens the scriptures by interpreting the same. Luke 24. 32.


4 Quest. What things does the obedience of faith comprehend?

Ans. First the light of the truth. For faith is an acknowledging of the
truth. Therefore ^. Tim. 2. 4.
comprehension and knowledge are attributed both to the same. Yet is there
great difference between this knowledge and all other. For as Aristotle says
vna scientia melior est alia, vel quia certior, vel quia de meliori. One
knowledge is better then an other either because it is more certain, or
because it is of a better thing. The knowledge of faith is first of all other
most certain: secondly it is occupied about the very best object, which is
the promise of grace. Again as the same Aristotle says, Scientes universal
saepe ignorant ipsum singular. They which know the general, are often times
ignorant of the particular. But the believing man knows certaynely that not
only those which believe shall be saved, but also that he himself is heir
of eternal life.

2 Secondly full assurance. Romans 14. Let every man be fully assured in his
mind. And in the second chapter of the epistle to the Collossians, there is
mention made of ye full assurance of understanding. Heb. 10. And let us draw
near in assurance of faith. This assurance is declared more plainly by the
example of the father of the belieuers. Romans 4.

3 Thirdly, a desire to obey God. O my God this will I that I may do that
which is acceptable in thy sight: and thy law is in the midst of my bowels.
Psalm. 40. 8.

3. Of the phrase, To fear before the face of the Lord, and of the sonnely
fear.

Although it is said that the people did fear before the face of the Lord, and
it is also a likely thing that the people had more grievously offended then
their rulers: yet dare not I restrain this fear unto the people only,
according to the opinion of Hierome. For if the politic and ecclesiastical
Rulers had been blameless, peradventure they should not have had any need of
any admonition and common reprehension. This do not I speak preiudiciallie.

A short Method.
1 First, what the fear of God does signify. The fear of God signifying not
only the honor, but also the reverence due unto God, is commonly called of the
Grecians (...). Heb. 11. 7. it is called, (...). Sometime it signifies the
same which (...), godliness, when it comprehends under it, all that worship
which is due unto God, as in that most worthy saying, The fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom. Psalm. 111. 10. Sometimes it signifies the
special gift of ye holy ghost. With fear and trembling make an end of your
salvation. Phil. 2. 12.

2 Secondly, the diverse significations of the word fear. There is a sonnely
fear, and there is a servile fear. Of this latter fear does Paul speak,
when he says: For God has not given unto us the spirit of fear.

3 Thirdly, whether there be any such fear of God. Be not high minded, but
fear. Romans 11. 20. These words are a remedy against carnal pride and
confidence, neither is it repugnant unto the assurance of faith, and the
certainety of our salvation.

4 Fourthly, what it is. It is a sonnely reverence kindled in the heart of a
faithful man by the holy ghost, consisting upon the reverence of God, being
most just, and the love of him being most merciful, which is lightened by faith.

5 The efficient cause of this fear is, the holy ghost.

6. The form, so to reverence GOD that Esaias. 11. 2.
thou love him alone.

7 The end thereof, the honor due to God the father. Mat. 1. 6. A son
honors his father, and a feruaunt his master: If I be a father where is my
honor? If I be a master where is my fear?

8 The effect, to prefer the worship and love due to God, before all things
which are in this world.

9 The virtue which is like unto this fear, is modesty. And also humility,
and diligence in doing of the duty.

10 The vice contrary hereunto in defect, 1. John. 4. 1. Pet. 3. Apoc. 21. 4.
2. Tim. 1.
is Epicurisme, whereof it is said. There is no fear of God before their eyes.
Romans 3.

The vices contrary to the same in excess are first, fear without love.
Secondly, too much fearing of men. Thirdly, fear joined with unbelief.
Fourthlie, servile fe^^e.

24. Lect. Iann. 25.
Therefore Haggeus the ambassador of the Lord, in the embassage of the Lord,
said to the people, I am with you, says the Lord.

LIke-as cunning Chyr^rgians, if at any time they have launced an incurable
wound, or with an hot iron have dried up a festered sore, use to apply such
plasters as are most fit for the place, and may best diminishe and mitigate
the pain: so the prophets after that they have gathered by the fruits which
are meet for repentance, that there is a godly sorrow stirred up in the
minds of men, through the heavy preaching of the law, and the denouncing of
plagues, and punishments: they raise up and put in good hope humble and
contrite hearts, by promising the grace and presence of God. Hereof have we a
most notable example in this history, in handling whereof (if God permit) we
will speak in order of two things: namely, of the persons, and of the speech.

The persons are of two sorts, the person of him which made this oration, and
the persons to whom it was made.

His calling and office, sets forth the person of him that made the oration,
For Haggeus is called the angel, or ambassador of the Lord

1 The credit and countenance of an ambassador depends upon the power and
majesty of his prince. Haggeus did his message not in the name of a mortal
king, but in the name of that blessed and only king, the king of kings, and
Lord of Lords, who only has immortality. Therefore was his authority holy.

2 Further-more, for-asmuch as it is y^ duty of an ambassador with great
faithfulness to declare those things only which are given him in charge by his
prince: Haggeus our Prophet does show most plainly, that he spoke unto the
people of the Jews not his own dreams, or the inventions of his own brain,
but the oracles of the Lord God of hosts.

Hierome interpreting this place, brings in the opinion of certain
concerning the same, which he does not allow. Touching which opinion we will
speak something after the manner of the Logicians for the studious youths
sake.

Certain there were in times past which did suppose that Haggeus, Zacharias,
and John Baptist, were not men, but angels: and that by the appointment, and
commandment of God they took to themselves bodies. They reasoned thus.

These three persons before named, are called in the scriptures * Angels.
Therefore they were not men subject to the like passions, as we be. For-asmuch
as diverse kinds cannot be affirmed of the same things.

I answer, there is a fallacy of equivocation in this word angel, which is
not the name of the nature, but of thoffice, being common unto the ministering
spirits, and the holy men of God, which are sent ambassadors in the name of
Christ.

And although we do grant that the angels do by Gods appointment take unto
them men's bodies, (that the godly may the less be feared here-with:) yet do
we think that they do both foolishlie and also dangerously go about to
prove that, by the example of the incarnation of the Word, as these words
do seem to import. Neither is this any marvelous thing to be believed of
the angels, seeing that even the very son of God took upon him man's body
for our redemption.

For the Word did not visiblie appear in the flesh for a certain season, as
do the angels: neither did he take upon him a fantastical body, which
seems to be a body, but is none, as Marcion did think: neither yet man's body
only, without the reasonable so^le, as Apollinaris Laodicenus does affirm:
but he coupled unto himself by a perpetual and personal league the entire
nature of man.

Moreover, y^ is false which (as Hierome says) ye same heretics taught,
namely, y^ all reasonable creatures have one nature, for this cause, because
these men which have pleased God, shall be equal with the angels. Their
fallicie was this. The blessed shall be as angels in eternal Luke 20. 36.
life. Therefore all reasonable creatures have one nature.

I answer, there is in the antecedent a fallacy from y^ which is spoken
respectively, unto y^ which is spoken simply. For the blessed shall be like to
the angels in respect of certain properties, not simply in respect of their
essence. As in the nature of angels there is no place either for marriage, or
for procreation of children, forasmuch as God made the hosts of angels, and
would have them to be ministering spirits, which should have no need of any
bodily helps, as meat, drink, or medicines: so the blessed shall not be
married, they shall not have need either of meat or other helps which serve to
the sustentation of the natural life. This speak I to this intent, least we
should mix diverse kinds together, and adioyne unto the former fallacy, a
fallacy of the accident.

Therefore do we agree with Hierome, who thought and that truly y^ by this
word ( angel) Ezee. 7. ^.
was meant, Prophet. For the word Prophet, does signify an interpreter of the
will of* God.

Of the ambassadors of God.
Paul, 2. Cor. 20. says, We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's name, that you will be
reconciled to God.

1 In this short sentence we will briefly note, first, that the prince which
sends the ambassadors Ephe. 1. 10.
is God the father, who will have all things to be gathered together into
one, in Christ.

2 The judge and taskemaister which gives the charge is Christ Jesus.
Teachinge Mat. 28. ^0.
them to observe all things which I have commanded you.

3 The * prophets, and sub-prophets are or sposman.
the faithful ministers of both testaments.

4 The adiunct, to be ambassadors even in bands.

5 The property, to pray in Christ's name. Not as though ye were lords over
Gods inheritance, but that you may be an example to the flock. 1. Pet. 5. 3.

6 The thing given them in charge, the word of reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5. 19.

7 Unto whom these ambassadors are chiefly sent: unto those which are
predestinate unto eternal life.

8 The end whereto they are sent: publikelie and faithfully to testify the
reconciliation with God.

Since these things are so, let those which are sent of this embassage now,
take heed that here-after they be not punished for doing a wrong message:
and let those which are about to take this same embassage upon them, get to
themselves with all faithfulness, and diligence, those helps which are
necessary for this embassage, which is most weighty: least that they take in
hand so holy a thing being unprepared, and with unwashed hands.

It remains that I speak somewhat of these unto whom this oration was made.
Hierome does think that these things were not spoken unto the Captain and
high Priest, but unto the people of the Jews: and this does he gather hereby,
because the people were not as yet come unto the love of God, which casts out
all fear.

And although I willingly grant that the Jewish people was farther from
perfection then their rulers, namely Zerubabel, Iehosua, and others: yet do
not I think that these things which are here spoken, were only spoken unto
the people. For what? Had the rulers less need of the gift of the fear of
God, and of the prophets consolation, then the common people which were of base
estate? Furthermore there is in the Or a craving of that to be gra^^ted which
is chiefly in controversy.
reason which Hierome brings a fallacy called Petitio principii. For that
was not a seruil kind of fear, which is said to have been in the Jews: but a
sonlie fear, which is joined with love. This may be sufficiently proved
hereby, because God was not offended there-at, yea because it was given them by
God to fear him, and to be afraid because they felt his wrath against their
sins.

Let us remember that the most sweet co^solations of the prophets, are spoken
unto us also, and that they are written for our sakes, if so be it there go
before in us contrition of heart, hatred of evil, love of that which is good,
and to be brief, the study of sanctification* For whatsoever things are
written before time, they are written for our learning, that through patience
and consolation of the Scriptures we might have hope *. Romans 15. 4.


A comfortable speech.
I am with you (says the Lord). In this speech, though it be but brief, we
will note four principal points. First the manner of the cause: secondly the
proposition: thirdly the argument: fourthly the mystery.

1 The manner of cause is in this place deliberatiue. For the prophet does
exhort the people without delay to take in hand the building of the holy
temple, and to hope well of the help and defense of God, and also of the good
success which they should have in their work.

A position.
Like-as a faithful and wise steward gives unto his* masters family their
portion of meat in due season: so the prophet when need requires uses
reprehension: and when as he gathers by ye effects, that their hearts are
co^trite, he uses the remedy of consolation. Brethren if any man be
suddenly taken in any offense, you that are spiritual restore such a man with
the spirit of meekenes. Gal. 6. 1.

But Paul speaks of the duty of all the faithful, and not of the ministers
only, whose duty it is to follow his footesteps which said: The spirit of
the Lord God is upon me, because the lord has anointed me. To preach the
gospel unto the meek has he sent me, that I should bind up the broken in
heart, that I should preach liberty unto the captives, and the opening of the
prison unto these which are bound. Isay. 61. 1. etc.

2 The proposition which in this place for breuities sake is omitted by the
prophet: may be gathered out of that which goes before, and that which
follows. Build the temple of the Lord, take in hand that holy administration
which he has appointed, and that without delay, that you may in-deede
declare that you make the greatest account of holy things, and that they are
more dear unto you, then profane things.

3 The argument drawn from the presence, and help of God is this.

With whom-soeuer the Lord is present, it becomes those being excellently
encouraged with faith and hope, valiantly to take in hand, and courageously to
finish the work of the Lord. But God is now present with you Jews. This do
his gifts unto you given sufficiently declare, namely the obedience of faith,
sonnely fear, and other helps which without al doubt are bestowed upon you
for this cause, that you should at length take in hand the work of ye Lord.
Therefore now go to, let pass your own buildinges and household affairs a
while, and build the temple of the Lord.

The mayor is made evident, and also confirmed by that place of the Psalm. 127.
1. If the Lord build not the house, they labor but in vain that build it. If
the Lord keep not the city he watches but in vain that watches it. And
worthy to be remembered are these two godly verses of that godly, and blessed
man Philip Melangthon.

Nullius est foelix conatus, and vtilis vnquam,
consilium si non detque iuuetque Deus.
No enterprise man takes in hand, can bring him any gain,
If God be not his counselor, and help him in the same.
25. Lect. Ianu. 27. 1580.
An objection against the mayor.

THat thing which is common as well to the infidells, as unto the belieuers, and
also to all the creatures that are in the world: can be no singular and
particular comfort unto the saints. But God is present with all these, as his
governing and preserving of the whole course of nature does sufficiently
testify. Therefore could not this oration, I am with you (says the Lord) any
whit encourage the Jews.

An. I answer unto the minor proposition, wherein there is a fallacy of
equivocation in the phrase, I am with you, which the prophet understands of
ye presence of grace: but in this argument it is taken for the presence of God,
Or which fills all things.
which is commonly called the * repletiue presence. These sayings may be
understood of the repletiue universal presence of God. Ps. 135. 7. 8. Whither
shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I fly from thy face? If I go up
into heaven thou art there. If I make my bed in the hell, behold thou art there
also. Isay. 66. 1. Thus says the Lord, heaven is my seat, and the earth is my
foote-stoole. Ier. 23. 24. Shall any man hide him self in the secret places,
and shall not I see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill the heaven and earth,
says the Lord? But of the presence of his grace and aid, it is said, I will
be with him in trouble, I will deliver Psalm. 91. 15.
him and glorify him *. Seek the Lord while he Esaias. 55. 6.
is to be found, call upon him while he is nigh *. If God be on our side who is
against us *. Romans 8. 31.


Que. Are these words of Christ Mat. 28. Behold I am with you, to be
understood of the person of Christ, or of the one of his natures only?

An. They are to be understood in the concrete of his whole person. For whole
Christ is every where, but not the whole of Christ. And many things are rightly
affirmed of his whole person, which in the abstract do agree with neither
nature of themselves, as the names of his office: or else they do agree with
the one of them, as to be crucified, to die do not agree with the Godhead.
Christ is dead, in the flesh *. 1. Pet. 4*


Qu. Is the humanity of Christ every where reallie?

An. No truly, and that first of all for this cause, because he is an
isntrumental creature, if you respect his body: a finite spirit, if you
respect his substantial form. Secondly, there is nothing in all places, but
that which is most simple, there is nothing most simple, save that which is
from everlasting and uncreated. Lastly all the godly confess that the body of
Christ is not in the supper of the Lord really.

Cyrillus subscribing hereunto, in his eleventh book upon John. Cap. 19.
says, whilst Christ was present and living together with his apostles, in the
flesh, it was unto them a manifest consolation, seeing y^ he might be seen
with ye eyes. For man's mind is wont to give credit not to hidden things, but
to things that are evident. Although therefore the Lord when he is absent in
body, can do all things what-soeuer he will, (for Christ Jesus is ye same
yesterday, and too day, and remains the same for ever:) yet his apostles
being deprived of his presence, could not but be troubled, especially seeing
that the waves of ye world did with great rage beat against them, and
endeavored by all means possible to throw them down when as they preached the
truth.

Qu. Is that self same * humanity every Or man-hoode.
where, after a spiritual manner?

An. Yea truly. For he is present with the faithful in all countries and
places, by the efficacy of* his merits, his power, his majesty, and Ephe. 4.
10.
gifts: yea, he fulfilleth all things here-withall.

Qu. How are these words of his to be understood? The son of man is in
heaven. John. 3. 13.

An. By the imparting of properties, that is, the manner of affirmation,
whereby the properties of the natures are attributed unto ye whole person in
the concrete. Therefore Christ was at that time in heaven, and in all places,
according to his divine nature: but according to his humanity he was in that
place where Nicodemus found him, and spoke unto him.

Cyrillus interprets these word. When as (says he) the son, being the
Word of GOD, came down from heaven, he says that the son of man came
down, refusing to be divided into two natures after his incarnation: neither
suffered he any man to affirm that the temple which was taken of the Virgin
was one son, and the word of GOD an other, although these things which are in
both of them naturally, may be conveniently distinguished. For as the Word is
of God, so is the man of the woman. Therefore is Christ one of both, being
indivisible in his sonnehoode, and divine majesty. For how can the things
which are proper only to the word of God, be otherwise applied unto the
son of the Virgin? And on the contrary, how can ye things which belong only
to the flesh, be attributed unto the word of God? For he says now, that the
son of man is come down from heaven, and it is written that in the time of
the passion, the son of God himself did fear, as if he himself did
suffer, which things are only proper unto his humanity.

Qu. Does the son of man, and the humanity signify all one thing?

An. Noe. The man Christ, the son of man, of God, of the highest: do
signify his person in the concrete. The godhead, the word the person taking:
The flesh, the humanity, do signify the nature taken.

Qu. Is not Christ divided, when as it is denied, that his flesh is every
where with the word?

An. He is not divided. For to be every where together is not the specificall
difference of the unity of the word, and the humanity: (for then should the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost be all one person, and not three distinct
persons, seeing they are together every where, which are one in essence) but to
make one person.

Furthermore, forasmuch as the Godheade is infinite and incomprehensible, as it
is without the humane nature, so is it in the same, and joined personally to
the same.

Qu. To Christ is given all power, therefore the universal presence or
vbiquitie.

An. You should first of all have diligently distinguished between all power
which appertains Omnis potestas. Omnipotentia.
to his office, and omnipotency, which is nothing else but the infinite essence
of God: for Christ speaks of the former, and not of the latter.

If omnipotency, that is, an infinite essence were given to the flesh of
Christ really, the^ perhaps this argument might proceed. But forasmuch as
there is a personal union of two natures in Christ, I will then grant that he
is every where in the flesh, whenas you shall prove that the same flesh has
been from everlasting, and that it is most simple. Secondly, you should not
have been inconstant in your words: neither should you have reproved your
self.

For to prove that Christ is every where in the flesh, you use to infer
these words, I am with you until the end of the world: which as I have
declared may be rightly understood of his person: but they are falselie by
you restrained unto the humane nature, although I am not ignorant y^ that
pronoune (I) is sometime restrained unto the other nature. But in this place
you do falsely restrain the name of Christ (which without all doubt does
signify the person,) unto his flesh. To Christ say you (that is to his flesh)
is given all power.

Ob. The Godheade can take nothing, therefore these words, (To me is given
all power,) ought to be referred unto the humanity.

Ans. You should have made a distinction between the divine essence, which is
sufficient of it self: and the person of the mediator.

Like as in respect hereof the son was sent, he went out from the father,
he is inferior to Mat. 28. 18. Phil. 2. 9.
the father, he humbled himself etc. so also he received all power, and a
name which is above every name. Unto the godheade of the Word can nothing be
added, which is all one with the father and the holy ghost. For it is, as he
says, a substance sufficient of it self unto felicity. Thus say I least any
man should object that we play the Arrians.

Quest. What answer shall I make to those which restrain this pronoune (I) in
the sayings which concern Christ, unto his humanity.

Ans. Show then these three things, which are grounded upon the authority of
the scripture.

1 First, that it is sometimes to be understood in the concrete of the whole
person of Christ, as in these sayings: I am: and you shall Mar. 14. 62.
see the son of man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of heaven. Mar. 19. For I am that good sheapehearde. Ioh. 10. 11. I
have overcome the world. Ioh. 16. 33.

2 Secondly, it is sometime restrained unto the Godheade, as in these sayings.
Before Abraham was I am. Ioh. 8. 85. I and the father are one. Ioh. 10. 30.

3 Thirdly, it is sometimes restrained unto the humanity, as it appears by
these testimonies of scripture. And if I shall be lifted up, I shall draw all
men unto me. Ioh. 12. 32. And again. You shall always have the poor with
you, but me shall you not have always with you. Ioh. 12. 8. Cyrillus
expounds these words thus. When he said of himself, but me shall you not
always have, the Lord spoke of the presence of his body. For according to
his majesty, according to his providence, according to the unspeakable and
invisible grace of his godheade, that is fulfilled which he said. Behold I
am with you at all times even unto the end of the world.

It shall be the part and duty of the godly, omitting contention, diligently
to mark what y^ pronoune (I) does signify in diverse places. I An absuditie.
will add a brief example of reducing the same unto an absurdity. Christ
says, John 12. 26. Where I shall be, there shall also my minister be. But*
Christ is every where (in his flesh) by that supposition, which feigneth that
this pronoune (I) is restrained unto his humanity only. Therefore shall his
ministers be every where. Who is he that does not see this same to be false.

Forasmuch as we shall have occasion ministered Of the mystery.
to speak elsewhere of the mystery contained in this Oration: we will only
recite the words of Hierome. I will be your helper, build my house, which
amongst you is destroyed: whilste I am amongst you, no man shall be able to
hinder your building.

To the same purpose serves that saying of the apostle. Do you not know that
your body is the Temple of the holy ghost, which is in you, whom you have of
God, neither are you your own.

26. Lect. Feb. 8.
Verse. 14.
And the Lord raised up the spirit of Zerubabel the son of Salthiel, the
captain of Iehuda, and the spirit of Iehosadac, the high priest, and the
spirit of all the rest of the people, and they entered in, and did work in the
house of the Lord of hosts their God.

BY Gods assistance we will here handle two points, the history, and the
allegory.

The history.
The Argument. Thorough Gods aid and help, the second temple of Jerusalem
was restored with great good success.

1 Certain it is that the consent of all estates to take in hand the work of
the Lord, and also to finish the same: is a singular gift of God. The chief
governors of the people of the Jews most joyfully, and with one consent took
in hand the restoring of the Temple. According to the oracle of the restoring
of Sion: For thy servants shall favor her stones, and her dust. And the
heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, Psam. 100.
and all the kings of the earth thy glory: because the Lord shall build up
Sion, and he shall be seen in his glory etc. Wherefore it is without all
doubt that their spirit was raised up by the Lord.

2. Position.
It is only in the hand of God, not only to take away such hindrances as
do let any good and godly purpose, but also to turn them into the contrary,
so that whereas they were lettes, they may be helps, and serve to godly
purposes. But the purposes and endeavors of these men which were unwilling the
Temple should be restored, were not only made frustrate, but also served to
the purpose of the Jews, as we may see, Esdras 5. 6. in the history of
Thatthenaus and Setharbosnaus, and of other which were enemies unto the Jews.
Therefore most certain it is that God brought this thing to pass.

Positions.
1 God is he that works in us both to will and to do, of his free good will
*. Wherefore Phil. 2. 13.
touching good works whereof we are only properly the isntrumental causes,
although not only the passive causes, let us sing that song of David, Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory: for thy mercy and
for thy truethes sake. Psalm. 115. 1. Shall the hatchet, the saw, the rodd,
triumph. Isay. 10. 15.

2 All the works of God are amidest contrary means. Therefore when he
determines to bring to pass wholesome and laudable things, some hindrances
are always laid in the way, which God does afterward remove, that he may
make way for his counsels, and works. Whenas the Jews were begun with great
consent, industry, and labor to build the temple: straightwaye come their
enemies the captain of Syria, and the Samaritanes, who when they could not
hinder the holy work themselves, they referred the matter unto Darius the
son of Histaspes, who having searched the chronicle, commanded them to
hasten the building, and also to bear the charge thereof. 1. Esdras. 5. and 6.

3 We must not regard what envious men think and do, but what God does.
For God helps and furthereth the good, not only by means of the good, but
also by means of the bad, though they be ignorant thereof. You (says Joseph
unto his brethren) thought evil against me, but God thought to turn the same
to good. Genesis 50. 20. And Haman the enemy of the Jews, was enforced to give
that honor unto Mardocheus, which he hoped for himself. These and the like
examples, may be a comfort to those which are in misery, by reason Ester. 9.
of the cruelty and subtle dealinges of their enemies.

The Allegory.
Although the most highest dwells not in temples made with hands, yet would
he have the Temple of Jerusalem, which by Solomon was builded to his name, and
by Zerobabel and others was restored: to serve for ye instruction of the old
people. And furthermore he will dwell in all the faithful, and in the whole
Church as in temples by him sanctified, for which cause we must give our selves
to lead an holy life, seeing that we are made Gods dwelling place.

And here for instructions sake, we will first of all speak of the temple
made with hands: secondly of the Temple of man: thirdly of the Temple of the
Church, fourthly of the Temple of heaven: lastly, why John: Revel. 21. 22.
does deny that there is any temple in the Jerusalem which came down from
heaven.

27. Lect. Feb. 9.
1 Of Temples made with hands.
1 STephen the first Martyr. Act. 7. 48. calls those Temples, Temples made
with hands, which by the industry, cost, and labor of men were builded.

2 And amongst all the most famous Temples which were in the whole world, the
temple of Jerusalem did bear the bell not only in respect of gorgeousnes,
whereat the heathen did marvel: but also of the commandment given by God, and
the use thereof.

3 Touching these things we will cite the sayings of Isay Chap. 56. I will
bring them unto my holy mountain, and I will make them glad in my house of
prayer. Their burnt offeringes and sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine
altar, because my house shall be called the house of prayer for all people,
says the Lord.

Although in this oracle the Prophet does entreat of the gathering together
of the Church from among the Gentiles, and of the worship which these men
should give unto him by faith: yet does he also speak of the Temple of
Jerusalem, and of the use thereof: teaching first that the same was holy unto
the Lord: secondly that not only the ceremonial worship, but also the
reasonable worship was there done unto the Lord, and was acceptable in his
sight. To the same purpose serves the oracle of Ezechiel. 43. 7. Wherein it is
called the place of the throne of God, and the place of the soles of his feet,
wherein he dwells in the midst of the children of Israel. This Temple
therefore is extolled, because God would be present there, and would hear in
the same the prayers which should be powered out before him in faith.

4 And although the second temple was not like unto the first which Solomon
did build, in A figure of the the Church.
gorgeousness of buylding: yet was the glory thereof greater for this cause,
because Christ The worship which the Church gives to God.
taught therein. Hagg. 2. 10.

5 Ob. But the words of Paul seem to be contrary to that saying of Ezechiel
touching the place of the throne, and the soles of the Lords feet. God who
has made the world, and the things that are therein, forasmuch as he is the
Lord of Heaven and earth, dwells not in the Temples made with hands,
neither is he worshipped with men's hands, as though he had need of any
thing. Act. 17. 24. 25.

Ans. I answer they are not contrary, forasmuch as they are not spoken both
in respect of one thing. For Ezechiel speaks of the presence of the grace of
God, whereby he vouchsafed to be present in the Temple, not for the houses
sake which was made with hands, but for the godly men's sake which met there,
and and worshipped God in faith. But Paul teaches that God has no such need
of lodging, food, apparel, and other helps which serve to the sustentation of
the natural life. For the Apostle speaking unto the superstitious Ethnickes
and Idolaters, refuteth their imagination touching the temples and Altars of
their Gods which they had feigned to themselves.

2. Of the Temple of man.
1 Likeas our Lord Jesus Christ, speaking of the temple of his body, said
unto the Jews, Destroy this Temple, and in three days will I build it again
*. So Paul the Apostle speaking of the bodies of the faithful says, Know
John. 2. 19.
ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you,
whom you have of God, neither are you your own *. This is the chiefest
commendation which our 1. Cor. ^. 19.
body can have, being worthy to be preferred far before all the titles and
testimonies of the Physicians, and natural Philosophers.

2 And out of this commendation does the Apostle pick sufficient matter for a
godly exhortation in ye verse following. You are bought 1. Cor. 6. 20.
with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirit, which
are Gods *. And thus do we glorify God, when we make our bodies a lively
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable serving of
God, and when as we worship God who is a Romans 12. 1. John. 4. 24.
spirit, in spirit and truth. These sayings of Bernarde are worthy to be
remembered. The soul must be enlarged, that it may be an habitation for God.
And again, The soul is Christ's house wherein he dwells willingly. And
again, The soul that walks in the spirit is the house of the bridegroom.
Furthermore that is a notable saying of Augustine. Will thou have thy flesh to
serve thy soul? Let thy soul serve God: thou must be governed, that thou
may be able to govern.

3. Of the Temple of the Church.
There can nothing be more fitly and truly spoken of this temple, then ye
which Paul taught Ephe. 2. 20. Being builded upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, whose chief corner stone is Christ Jesus himself. 21.
Wherein all the whole buylding being aptly coupled together, it grows to be
a Temple holy unto the Lord. 22. In whom you also are builded together, that
you may be a dwelling place for God through the spirit.

1 By this place we learn, first, who is the foundation, and who is the
chief stone of the corner of this Temple, namely Christ Jesus. 1. Cor. 3. 11.
For an other foundation then this can no man lay, besides that which is laid
which is Christ Jesus.

2 Secondly, who be these lively stones which are builded upon the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, namely the faithful. 1. Peter. 2. 5. You also
as lively stones be builded a spiritual house, etc.

3 Thirdly, what is the manner of the building, namely the conjunction with
Christ by faith. 1. Pet. 2. 4. Unto whom you being added, who is the lively
stone, being rejected of men, but chosen and precious with God.

4 Fourthly, who is the builder, namely God. Heb. 3. 4. For every house is
builded of some man, but he that builds all things is God.

5 Fifthly, who those be which together are Gods laborers, namely the
faithful ministers. 1. Cor. 3. 9. 10. You are Gods buylding. By the grace of
God which is given me, as a skillful builder, I have laid the foundation: but
another builds thereon. Furthermore let every man take heed how he builds
thereon.

6 Sixthly, what is the end whereunto it is ordained, namely the coupling
together of the saints, (as says the the holy Apostle) the work of the
ministry, the edification of the body of Christ.

28. Lect. 10. Febr.
4. Of the Temple of heaven.
Apoc. 11. 19, Then was the Temple of God opened in heaven, and the arc of his
covenant was seen in his temple. Most men do take this temple for the
sanctuary of heaven, whereof mention is made. Heb. 9. 24. For Christ is not
entered into a sanctuary made with hands, which is a figure like to the true
sanctuary: but into heaven it self, that he may appear now in the sight of
God for us. In this temple is our freedom, according to that saying of Paul:
For we behave our selves as freemen of heaven, from whence also we look for
a Savior even the Lord Jesus. Philip. 3. 20. For this cause seeing we are
risen with Christ, let us seek the things that are above, where Christ is
sitting at the right hand of God: let us care for heavenly things, not for
earthly things. Col. 3. 1. 2.

Quest. What means John by these words spoken of the heavenly Jerusalem:
Neither saw I any temple in her, for the Lord God Almighty is her Temple.
Apoc. 21. 22.

An. The same which Paul means by these words. God shall be all in all.
Therefore says John, The Lamb shall be in steed of a Temple, the Sun, the
Moon, to all the blessed. And then shall be revealed the glory and felicity
of those men which are grafted into Christ, and made partakers of his body, and
shall reign with him etc. God grant that our sorrows which we now feel,
whilste we are strangers with the Lord, may be mitigated by the hope of so
great felicity. Amen.

Quest. Is it lawful to build Churches in honor and remembrance of dead
saints?

Ans. It is not lawful. For we must not give that unto any creature, which is
only due unto God, and is proper to the divine nature. It is proper to God
alone to appropriate us to himself, and to dwell in us, according to these
sayings. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God? If any man destroy the
Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which you
are. 1. Cor. 3. 16. 17 And of all the faithful it is said. Know ye not that
your body is the Temple of the holy ghost, which is in you, and which you
have of God, and ye are not your own. 1. Corin. 6. 19.

These things are spoken of the Church, and of the lively members thereof,
wherein Inst.
without doubt, the holy spirit does dwell: but the question was also
mentioned concerning the temples made with hands. Let us therefore hear what
Augustine says, who denies that the Temples are erected unto the Martyrs. To
God, (says he) do we build Temples, although they be named after the names
of the Martyrs, to put men in mind of the Martyrs.

Cyrillus in his Book De fide, praising Queens, amongst other things gives
them this commendation, that they did erect most sumptuous temples unto
Christ, without making any mention of the dead saints.

And whereas Hierome in a certain place says, that the temples of the martyrs
are to be had in great reverence, it ought not be prejudicial to this matter.
For certain it is that the honor which is due unto God alone, must not be
given to Martyrs, neither is their blood to be mingled with Christ his blood,
which is the price of our redemption. The memorial of the martyrs, and the
great admiration which their gifts wherein they excelled did and does
procure, ought to serve to the glory of God alone, and to our amendment,
because he powered out upon them the gifts of his grace in such abundance.

The first verse of the second Chapter.
In the four and twentieth day of the month, in the sixth month of the
second year of Darius the king.

This verse agrees with the former history set down in the end of the first
chapter, as we may gather even out of Hierome his translation and exposition.
I omit the allegories, and to speak of the numbers here mentioned. The
meaning of these words is this, that the Jews began to build the temple, the
four and twentieth day of September, in the second year of Darius, the Son of
Histaspes, which was about the year from the creation of the world. 3444. If
we will follow Funcius a most diligent chronicle writer. Moreover it is an
usual thing in the commentaries of the common wealth, and in the inscriptions
and titles of great works, and buildings, to make mention of the surueiers of
the work, of the days and years.

If you respect the doctrine which may hence be gathered, we are admonished by
the examples of the Prophets, Apostles, and other the faithful, diligently to
mark the time wherein great things were begun, continued, and finished, in
Gods name, and through his assistance. For every thing has an appointed
season, and every will under Heaven has his time. Eccle. 3.

1 Yet have we need to make some discourse, whereto the destinction of things,
and circumstances serves according to that saying of David. Who is wise and
will mark these things, and will turn his mind unto the mercies of the
Lord? Psalm. 107. 43.

Also Esaias does greatly reprehend those men that are drunken with pleasure,
because they regard not the work of the Lord, neither see the works of his
hands. It shall be therefore our parts and duties, carefully to consider what
the Lord works in the Church, in the common wealth, and in our own life,
that the testimonies of his presence, his help, his judgments may nourish and
kindle in us, faith, love, and sonnely fear.

That we ought to have respect of time in preaching the celestial doctrine,
and in the exercises of repentance, it is evident by these sayings. Who is
therefore a faithful servant and a wise, whom the Lord does appoint over
his family, that he may give the^ meat in time? Math. 24. 25. And again. And
that considering the season how that it is now time, that we awake out of
sleep. For our salvation draws nearer now, then when we believed. The
night is past, the day is come. Let us therefore cast away the works of
darkness, and put upon us the armor of light. To. 13. 11. etc. And again,
And this say I brethren, because the time is short hereafter, and let those
which have wives be as though they had none. 1. Cor. 7. 24. And again.
Redeeming the time because the days are evil. Ephesians. 5. 16.

THE SECOND CHAPTER of the prophecy of the Prophet Haggai.
The first verse.
In the seventh month the one and twentieth day of the same month was the
word of the Lord in the hand of Haggeus the prophet, saying.

29. Lect. Feb. 12.
THe order and number of the parts of the seconds Chapter have we touched in
the notes. Therefore omitting that whereof we have spoken before, we will come
to speak of the times, whereof mention is made in the first verse. For we have
oftentimes spoken both of the simple, and also of the compounde words which
are mentioned in this place. In the same year from the creation of the world
3444. the four and twentieth day of October (which was the seventh day of the
feast of tabernacles, and the great feast of palms) was this oracle followinge
published by the mouth of Haggeus.

The second verse.
Speak now unto Zerubabel the son of Salthiel, the captain of Iehuda: and
unto Iehosua the son of Iehosadac the high priest, and unto the residue of
the people saying.

This verse and the verse going before contain the circumstances of the
persons. The same may we distinguish after this manner.

1 First, the author of the oracle was the Lord, at whose commandment also it
was to be published, according to that saying. The Lord does nothing unless
he shall reveal his secret to his servant the prophets. If a Lion roar who
will not be afraid? The Lord God has spoken, who shall not prophecy *? Amos.
3. 7. 8


2 Secondly, the Crier by whom this oracle was proclaimed, was Haggeus the
Prophet, who did testify before, Cap. 1. 13. that he was the ambassador of
the Lord, and did his message.

3 Thirdly, to whom the prophet revealed ye will of the Lord: namely to ye
magistrate, the priest, and to all the people of ye Jews. For these things are
to be declared to all men, which all men ought to know. But it belongs to
all those which are of the people of God, to know what is the holy will of
God. Therefore must the same be revealed, both to those which are of great
dignity, and of mean estate, and finally to those which are of low degree:
that all men of what degree soever they be, may fulfill the same most
diligently.

Aphorisms touching the publishing of the oracles of God.
1 No oracles concerning the will of God, are true: but such as proceed from
the inspiration and revelation of the true power divine.

Ier. 23. 16. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Hear not the words of the
prophets which prophecy unto you, they teach you vanity, they speak the
vision of their own hearts, not out of the mouth of the Lord. 17. In saying,
they say to those which despise me, the Lord has said peace shall be upon you:
and to every one that walks in the hardness of his heart. There shall no
evil come upon you. 18. For who has stood in the counsel of the Lord, and
has seen and heard his word? Who has marked his word and heard it?

2 They to whom the publishing of the oracles of God is committed, must speak
in the name of the Lord, and not in their own name. Amos. 27. 14. Amos
answered Amasia: I am no prophet, nor the son of a prophet, but an heard-man,
and a gatherer of wild figs, 15. But the Lord took me as I followed my
cattle, and the Lord said unto me: go prophecy unto my people Israel:

16. Now therefore hear the word of the Lord.

He testifies both things: first, that he was called unto the office of a
prophet: and secondly, that in the name of God, he spoke his word.

3 And this preaching and publishing of the will of God must serve for all
those which are of the people God. For the oracles of God are not like to these
holy things, which might not be dispersed abroad amongst the common people.
It belongs to all men to know them. And therefore says Christ to his
disciples, What things I say to you, I say to all men.

And Paul says, He will have all men (that is, all sorts men) to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of the truth. 1. Tim. 2. There is no difference
between the Jew, and the Greek. For he that is Lord over all, is rich unto
all that call upon him. Romans 10. 12.

4 Furthermore, the faith of the auditorie must be answerable to the
dispensation of the Oracles of God. Therefore let us not be like to those of
whom it is said, The word which they heard did profit them nothing, because it
was not coupled with faith of those that heard it. Heb. 4. 2.

5 We must not make a divorce between faith and confession. With the heart
(says the Apostle) man belieueth unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation. Romans 10. 10. The same Apostle teaching us by
his own example, says, I am not ashaymed of the Gospel of Christ *. Romans 1.
16.


6 The works of the hands must represent the consent which is between the
heart and the mouth, least the deeds be contrary to the words, and the
words contrary to the affection of the heart. The heathen man said, We must
play the philosophers not only in word but also in deed. In like sort must
we play the Divines. Here we have an example of this harmony or consent,
in this history of the people of the Jews. For by the same it does evidently
appear that all men of what degree so-euer they were, gave credit to the
Oracles of the Lord published by Haggeus the prophet, and that fearing God,
they set hand with all celeritie unto the holy work.

GOD grant that we also building a spiritual Temple unto the Lord readely,
and sincerely, may offer our bodies a quick sacrifice, acceptable unto God, and
that we may be holy in spirit, soul, and body.

30. Lect. 28. Febru.
Verse. 4.
Who is there left of you which has seen this house in the former glory, and
how do you see it now? Is it not as if it were not in your eyes.

THat which Socrates was wont to say concerning the entraunces and
beginninges of humane Orations, and actions touching weighty matters, ( that,
to begin well was no small matter, yet did it seem to be but a small matter)
came often into my mind when as I began the simple and plain exposition of
most weighty oracles. Some men there be which make no great account of the
beginninges of things. But believe me it is no small matter, to begin a
matter as it were at the A. B. C. to point out with the finger the Fountains
thereof, and to bring godly and virtuous men unto the contemplation of most
excellent things, and then at length to reclaim them unto ye practice and use
thereof.

Hereof will we show a simple and plain token, having declared the chief
points of this oracle, the exposition whereof we have taken in hand.

1 The occasion.
The same thing happened after that the building of the second Temple was
continued some space, not without the great joy and mirthe of the builders:
which happened before when ye foundation thereof was laid. For as Esdras does
testify Lib. 1. Cap. 3. 12. 13. Many of the priests, and Levites, and chief
of the fathers being ancient men, which had seen ye first house, when the
foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept alowde, and many
other did shout out for joy, with a loud voice: so that the people could not
discern the sound of the shoute for joy, from the voice of the weeping of the
people, because the people did shoute alowde, so that the noise was heard far
of. Therefore the people had need both to be exhorted to finish the work
which they had begun, and also to be comforted, and lastly, to have this
promise made them, that they should have good success, and that the second
Temple should be glorious.

Positions.
1 We must not so much regard what seems to flesh and blood to be great
and profitable, as to faith.

2 For earthly things bearing a great and glorious show do please them, and
they are displeased with base things: but on the contrary, celestial things
and base things (if you respect the external show thereof) do please faith,
and it cannot away with the great pomp and vanity of earthly things.

3 Flesh and blood does allow those things which bear a show only of good
things, but faith likes the things which are good in deed.

4 And as flesh and blood do err in judgment, so faith giving sentence upon
these things according to the rule set down by God, is never deceived.

5 These things which God does give are to be esteemed not so much according
to the outward show, as according to the efficient cause, the end, and use
thereof.

6 It is better joyfully to receive all manner gifts coming from God, then by
requiring other churlishlie, to bewraie, if not our unthankfulness, yet our
lothsomnes toward the present gifts of God.

7 The diversity of men's judgments concerning the works of God, is even in
the faithful a testimony of the degrees of faith.

2 The proposition.
If you respect the argument, the proposition is. Let the Jews hold on in the
building of the temple of Jerusalem, which they have once begun, and let them
not suffer themselves called away from their laudable purpose by any thing. If
you respect the position, then does it yield this proposition. We must
diligently apply our selves to the edifyinge and restoring of the Church, and
of all the faithful.

And let us remember that this is not only spoken unto ye faithful ministers
of Gods word, whose duty it is to plant and water the Lords field, and
wisely to build up again his house: but also unto us all, to whom it is said,
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling *. Phi. 2. 12.


3 The confirmation.
The confirmation consists upon demonstratiue arguments, which are these.

1 The first is drawn from the commandment of God, as from the efficient
cause. ver. 5.

2 The second from the promise of God his presence, and help, in the same verse.

3 The third from the covenant of GOD made with the Israelites.

4 The fourth from the power, and giving of the holy ghost. ver. 6.

5 The fifth from the exhibiting of the Messiah, and from his majesty. ver. 7.
8.

6 The sixth from that which should follow: namely, from the glory of the
second Temple, which he amplifieth by an opposition. ver. 10.

7 The seventh from a comparison.

8 The eight from the plenty of peace, and of the gifts of the holy ghost.
ver. 10.

Of all these same will we speak at large and with diligence, in their
places, if GOD permit.

4 The parts and figures of the oration.
The parts of this oration are three in number. An exordium. ver. 4. A
proposition. ver. 5. A confirmation which is contained in the verses following,
unto the tenth verse. And herein are comprehended many excellent figures which
make the oration not more obscure, but more plain: as Interrogations,
answers, Metonymiaes, Synecdoches, and other where-of we shall speak else
where.

5 The Mystery.
Of the restoring and glory of the Church, which redoundeth unto the same from
the head, and redeemer thereof, the apostle Paul, Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. 27.
speaks on this wise. Christ has loved the Church, and has given himself
for it: that he might sanctify it, purging it by the washing of water through
the word: that he might present it glorious unto himself, that is, a Church
having neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, but that it might be
holy and without blame.

We (if God shall so permit) will add unto this our purpose, somewhat
concerning the names of GOD, and concerning the holy Trinity.

Verse. 4.
Who is there left of you, which has seen this house in the former glory, and
how do ye see it now? Is it not as if it were not in your eyes.

THis short verse consists upon an interrogation, and an answer. The
interrogation or question is. I would have the ancient men which in times
past have seen Solomo^s temple, to speak freely what they think of this
second Temple. The answer. It seems to be very narrow, low, and very
base, if it be compared with that Temple.

Moral Aphorisms.
1 It is the part of the aged wise men, rightly to compare old things with
new. For long experience of things makes old men more truly and more
fully to know ye same, then other which are but yonglings and ignorant.

2 And away with all unthankfulness and thurlishnes, which make the present
gifts of GOD to wax base, and that perverse persons had rather tragically
reckon up ye same as evil, then acknowledge them to be good, and rightly to
use them.

3 For it is most meet for us to be contented with our poor estate, and to
love things present, as our Cato teaches us.

4 This shall we do, if during our whole life we shall not so much regard
and require great things, as necessary things, according to that noble
saying. Not to be contented with things present, but to seek after great
things, is the property of mad men.

Spiritual Aphorisms.
1 As the first Temple was more gorgeous (if you respect the buildinge) then
was the second: yet was the glory of the second greater then the glory of the
first, because the Messiah being revealed in the flesh, taught therein: so
also although the Leuiticall administration was much more painful then ours,
yet is this of ours to be preferred far before it, according to that saying:
For the commandment goinge before (that is, the Ceremonial law) is
abrogated, because it is endewed with no strength, and unprofitable. Heb. 7.
18. And again: Bodily exercise profits little: but godliness is profitable to
all things, etc. 1. Tim. 4. 8.

2 Although the Congregation of the faithful seem to be but a small flock of
sheep upon earth, set in the midst of Wolves: and although it be slaundred,
and chastened with many evils: yet does the glory of God appear upon and in
it, when he is present with it, which said: Behold I am with you until the
end of the world. Mat. 28. 20.

3 And men are oftentimes deceived in their judgment, concerning the Church,
when they follow the reason of flesh and blood, and not the light of faith.

As the Jews made great account of Solomon his temple, because it was famous,
by reason of the fine building, and greatness thereof, and also for the
hangings, the silver and gold which was therein: so many are desirous to have
a Church flourishing with civil power, riches, the favor of princes, and other
earthly commodities, and they abhor the same when it groneth under the
Cross. But the just shall florishe like a Palm Tree. And as that our holy
apostle says: If we have hope in Christ in this life only, we are the most
miserable of all men. 1. Cor. 15. 19.

31. Lect. 1. March. 1580.
Verse. 5.
Behold now strengthen thy self Zerubabel, says the Lord: strengthen thy
self also Iehosua thou son of Iehosadac, the high priest: and strengthen thy
self all thou the people of this land, says the Lord, and work: because I am
with you says the Lord of hosts.

THis verse contains the proposition, and the first argument of the
confirmation.

The proposition is exhortatiue, Let the Jews strengthen themselves, and let
them build the Temple with all diligence possible.

Ob. Why did God command the Jews to build the second Temple, seeing that
the son of GOD says: The hour comes when as ye shall worship the father
neither in this mountain, neither at Jerusalem? John. 4. 21. I reason thus.
It was to no end to build a temple there, where no man should worship in
time to come: (for temples are the houses of prayer. Mat. 21. 15.) But in time
to come no man should worship at Jerusalem. Ergo. etc.

An. I answer, there is a fallacy in the mayor proposition, in that the
reason is fet from that which is no cause, as if it were a cause. There is in
these sayings no co^trariety, because they are not both spoken concerning one
thing. The temple at Jerusalem, and the Leuiticall Gal. 4. Heb. 9. 10.
sacrifice were to serve for the instruction of the old people, which were
under the tuition of the law: and yet but until the time of reformation. But
the meaning of Christ his words is this, that not the place, but the spirit and
truth are that which makes the prayers commendable, and acceptable in the
sight of God, according to that saying: GOD is a spirit, and they that do
worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. John. 4. 24.

The first argument drawn from the efficient causes.
The prophet begins with the efficient causes, and first of all with the
isntrumental causes, namely with the consideration of the Captain, the high
Priest, and of the people of the Jews, and that by a preventing of an
objection.

Ob. That which cannot be brought to pass by man's industry and labor, is not
to be enjoined any man: least he take in hand that which he cannot do. But
the Jews were not able to build the temple after their return from Babylon,
being oppressed with famine, poverty, and the malice of their mighty
neighbors. Therefore there was no cause why they should be commanded to
build the temple.

Ma. Against this argument does the prophet set a demonstration. You must and
ought to have a greater regard unto the commandment of God, then for the
imbecility of secondary causes to neglect the same. Mi. But God commands
you to build the Temple. Con. Wherefore ye must neither linger, nor loiter in
the work of the Lord: neither yet is it lawful for you to neglect the same.

Aphorisms containing instructions.
1 We must not be so inquisitiue about the commandments of God, that we
must ask whether we ought to obey them or no. 2 For this ought to be
sufficient for us, that we are taught, and told, what God will have us to
do. 3 For this is without all doubt, we must obey God.

4 And this is blockish incredulity to wax so dull through imbecillitie of
the secondary causes, that thou do never so much as once think upon the
power and might of the first cause.

5 God grant therefore that we may all think upon that oracle: The power of
Christ is made perfect in our weakness. 2. Cor. 13.

A definitive method touching the spirit of strength.
1 The genus is, the gift. Romans 12. 6. Having diverse gifts according to the
grace which is given us. 1. Cor. 4. 7. What have thou which thou have not
received.

2 The principal cause, is God. 2. Tim. 1. 7. For God has not given us the
spirit of fear: but of strength, of love, and of soundnes of mind.

3 The fellow laborers are all the faithful. Therefore the prophet says,
Strengthen thy self Zerubabel, etc.

4 The subject, A faithful heart. Psalm. 27. 14. Tarry thou the Lords leisure
and be strong, and let thy heart be established, I say, tarry thou the Lords
leisure.

5 The form, is the act it self, driving out vain fear, and staying upon
God, with a sure confidence.

6 The end, Courageously to go forward in the work of the Lord, that these
things may be brought to pass which are acceptable to God, and profitable for
the Church.

32. Lect. March. 2.
The definition of the spirit of strength.
THe spirit of strength is an excellent gift of God, whereby the hearts of
the faithful are so strengthened, that all vain fear being driven away, they
take in hand the work of the Lord courageously, and finishe the same
joyfully, that those things may be done which are in the sight of GOD
acceptable, and for the Church profitable.

Quest. Why does God require at our hands this adiunct, which no man can
obtain, unless he have it from heaven? according to that saying, A man can
receive nothing, unless it shall be given him from heaven. John. 3. 27.

Ans. Det (says Augustine) quod iubet, and iubeat quod vult. Let him give that
which he commands, and let him command what he will. And again. In
praeceptione disce quid debeas habere: in correptione tuo te vitio non habere:
in precatione, a quo petere debeas id quod debes habere. In the commandment
learn what thou ought to have: in reprehension that thou have it not
through thine own folly: in prayer, of whom thou must ask that, which thou
must have. Furthermore these things which are subordinate are not contrary.
And again, these men which are regenerate must stir up the gifts of God, in
the number whereof is the strength of the heart. For they are the fellow
laborers of the holy ghost, created unto good works, that they may walk in
them.

And let us remember that in every kind of holy calling we have need of
strength of heart, which you may well call a holy boldness. For seeing that
we have to contend and wrestle not only with the infirmity, and in like
sort with the intemperancie of our flesh, but also with a thousand shifts,
and slightes of Satan: it cannot be but that in so many and so great
prouocations we shall fainte, and be in danger of being overcome, unless
the Lord in mercy do give us strength and courage.

The second argument drawn from the presence and help of God.
They with whom the Lord is present in the holy work, ministering unto them
strength, opportunity, and other helps serving to the accomplishing of their
business well, must not loyter, but rather go forward valiantly. The Lord is
present with you Jews. Ergo. etc. The same argument does Paul use, speaking
of himself. At my first answering (says he) no man assisted me, but all
forsook me, I pray God it may not be laid to their charge, but the Lord
asisted me, and strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be known, and
that all the gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the
lion. 2. Tim. 4. 16. 17. And in every holy work the Lord uses fellow
laborers, whom he will have to have respect only unto him, to ascribe unto
him the praise of things which are well done, and to crave his aid and
assistaunce.

Psalm. 90. 16. 17. Let thy work appear toward thy servants: and thy glory
to their Children. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and
establish the work of our hands upon us, and establish our handie work.

Of the Lord of Sabbath.
Forasmuch as this word ( Lord) is repeated thrice in this fifth verse, we
will speak thereof by way of distinction.

1 This word ( Iehoua or Lord) is the essential name of God. We must mark
this distinction of the names of God. Certain be essential, as Iehoua:
certain do signify the properties which are attributed unto him in respect
of the creatures, as when he is called Everlasting, Jealous, Merciful, Kind.

2 The word Iehoua or Lord is derived of the word which does signify the
essence. Exo. 3. 14. I am that I am, Furthermore, thou shall say thus to the
children of Israel: I am has sent me unto you.

3 For the word does signify him that is, or the essence it self.

First because he is so without beginning and so without ending, that he is
above all other of himself, and has always been, and shall be for ever.
Secondly because seeing that he is the creator and Lord of all things, of
him, and through him, and for him, are all things. Lastly Romans 11. 36.
because the restoring of all things depends only upon him.

4 Therefore this name Iehoua is proper to no creature. For (that we may
omit that which is said before) it belongs properly unto him, who is by
nature God, and it is set exclusiuely Gal. 4. 8.
against all those Gods and Lords, which are so called by equivocation: seeing
there 1. Cor. 8. ^^
is but one God, even the father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we through him.

5 There be no more but one Lord. Deu. 6. 4. The Lord our God is Lord only.

6 Christ is called Lord in respect of his godhead, or of the Word. Psalm.
110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand, etc.

And thereupon does Christ gather that he is David's Lord in respect of his
godheade, but Ioh. 20. 28.
his son in respect of his manhood. When Thomas did call Christ his God and
his Lord, he used the Hebrewe words Jehovah Elohenu.

7 In the writings of the Apostles, the greek word Curios does answer the
Hebrew word ( Jehovah.) The words of Moses are these. Non tentabis Iehouam
Deum tuum, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Matthewe uses these words.
Non tentabis (...). Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Notwithstanding all
the learned know that the word (...) does signify Lord, and the word
Jehovah does properly signify the essence.

8 They err daungerously which do restrain the word Jehovah unto the person
of the Father only. For seeing that it does signify the eternal essence of
God himself, which That is, to the son and the holy Ghost.
is common to the three persons, it is rightly attributed to them also.

33. Lect. March. 4.
Verse 6.
The word which I couenaunted with you when you came out of Egypt, will I do:
my Spirit also shall stand in the midst of you: fear not.

The argument.
THere is no cause why those men should be smitten with the spirit of fear,
and cease from doing the Lords work, which are joined to God we an eternal
covenant, and have him to be their patron and helper. But God has joined you,
and your fathers unto him by a covenant: and in times past when as he brought
your forefathers out of Egypt, he established the same by a solemn rite. This
minor proposition does the Prophet set down in these words. The word (so
calls he the covenant by Metonymia) which I have couenaunted with you, when
you came out of Egypt. He affirms that both the fathers, and also the
faithful children are joined to God by one and the self same covenant. For
he speaks of the children of the kingdom so called vniuoce: least any man
should think that these things are repugnant unto the holy doctrine of
particular election. The conclusion is evident.

Positions touching the covenant of grace.
1 The covenant of grace is sometimes called the Testament, because it is
established by the blood of Christ Jesus the promise maker: sometimes it is
called the covenant because it is the reconciliation of those which were
enemies. It is called the covenant to the end we may think that there was
enmity before the covenant was made. It is called the covenant of grace, of
the eternal cause, or the cause going Romans 5. 1^.
before in God, who in himself found cause why he should join us unto him.
It is called Heb. 19. 15.
the Testament, because Christ is the mediator of the new Testament, that
through death, which was for the redemption of the transgressors, which were in
the former testament, they which were called might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance.

2 And as Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and to day, and throughout all
ages, so is there Heb. 13. 8.
but one everlasting covenant, and one Testament if you respect the substance
thereof. Ephe. 4. 4. 5. 6. There is one body, and one spirit, as you are
called into one hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one
God and father of all, etc. Paul. Romans 4. Does declare that we are justified
by the same means whereby Abraham was justified, namely by faith, that the
manner of the fathers election and our election is all one, namely free, and
unchangeable. 1, Cor. 10. The Apostle says that the fathers did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, which we eat and which
we drink. Which thing all the godly and these which have understanding, do
see to be understood of the substance and fruit of the Sacraments, and not
of the sacramental signs.

These and other such like sayings do teach us that there is but one
Testament, and one covenant of grace in substance and truth.

3 Notwithstanding the old Testament and the New do so differ in the
dispensation: that the new Testament does far exceed the old. Math. 13.
17. Verily I say unto you, many Prophets and just men have desired to see the
things which you see, and have not seen them, and to hear the things which
you hear, and have not heard them. Yet let us know that these things are
spoken respectively, and not simply. For he does not deny that the Fathers
knew the same kind of doctrine, but he prefers the estate and condition of
Christ his Church before the discipliue of the law, as being better. For
after that Christ the light of the world began to teach, there did so great
light of the knowledge of God shine in the hearts of the faithful, that he
that was least in that new estate of the church, was greater in the kingdom of
heaven then John the baptist, if you consider the plentifulnes of doctrine. In
the eight to the Hebrews, verse. 7. the apostle reasons thus: If that former
testament (he means the old testament) had been such, that there had been
nothing wanting therein, then had there been no place sought for the second.
But there has been a place sought for the new covenant. verse. 8. 9.

And that may be understood of the word, and the sacraments. For seeing the
same doctrine, the same faith, and the same Christ does reign in the Church of
both testamentes, the diversity of dispensation consists in the letter
administration, (and whether you respect the preaching of the word, or the
administration of the Sacraments) and not in the spirit and truth.

But some there be which do attribute unto the Fathers the shadows, and unto
us the truth. And to the end they may prove this, they allege the words of
the Apostle. Heb, 10. 1. The law having a shadow of good things to come, and
not the very express form of things. etc.

I answer. First, they falsely take that as spoken simply, which is spoken
respectively, and by way of comparison, touching the most solemn yearly
sacrifice, which was now abrogated, when Christ was upon the Altar of the
Cross.

Secondly, if they attribute no more unto the Fathers but the shadows, and do
spoil them of the truth: then surely they think y^ there was but small
provision made for their salvation, and restoring. For what? shall we think
that any man can be saved without the truth?

Thirdly, why does Paul attribute to us Circumcision made without hands Col.
2. 11. and to the Fathers Baptism, and the spiritual meat, and drink, 2.
Cor. 1. 2: if the thing signified by the Sacrament, be not common to the
faithful of both Testamentes? For all men do know that their signs and ours
are not all one.

Lastly, what shall we say Augustine meant, when he did affirm that the
Sacraments of the Fathers and ours, do differ in the signs, but are all one
in substance? But of these things we shall speak else where.

The latter part of the sixth verse.
Also my spirit shall stand in the midst of you: fear not.

4. Argument
There is no cause why the taskemaisters, and overseers of the Lords work
should be discouraged with the fear of their enemies, and the feeling of
their own infirmity, seeing that the spirit of God does stand in the
midst of them.

The reason.
For the spirit of the Lord, is a spirit of wisdom and understanding, a
spirit of counsel and strength, a spirit of knowledge and fear of the Lord.
But the holy spirit of the Esaias. 11. 2.
Lord will be present with you Jews, whilst you are in building the Temple.
This minor proposition is grounded upon his promise, who is a God that cannot
lie. Wherefore you must go forward stoutly in the holy work, and hope Tit. 1.
2.
well of the success.

My) The same holy ghost is sometimes called the spirit of the Father,
sometimes the spirit of the son. Whereby it is well proved that he does
proceed from the Father and the son: as we shall hereafter declare.

Spirit) Certain taking the effects for the cause, do think that it is to
be understood of the gifts of the holy Ghost. But Christ using the same
argument when he was ready to go to the Father, promises his Disciples the
holy Ghost, which should be present with them, and should lead them into all
truth.

Shall stand.) These words do signify presence and perpetual help: like
as does that phrase: To stand at any man's right hand. Psalm. 16. 8.

In the midst of you. Therefore the holy spirit is present by the presence
of his grace, with these only, to whom this thing was promised, and given by
the Father.

Of the holy spirit.
Aphor. 1.
This word Spirit, Ruah, Pneuma, is sometime attributed to the creator,
sometime to the invisible creatures.

This distinction is drawn from the cause and the effects. God is the cause
and creator of all things. The same is also a spiritual essence, infinite,
eternal, uncreated.

2 When as the word spirit is attributed to the creator, it does sometime
signify the essence, which is common to the three persons: sometime the divine
nature of Jesus Christ: sometime the person of the holy spirit, according to
these sayings. John. 4. 24. God is a spirit. This may be understood of the
same essence of God. Romans 1. 4. The Son of God being mightily declared,
according to the spirit of sanctification. etc. He sets the spirit, that
is, the Godheade of the word, against the flesh, that is, the humane nature
which is in Christ. Ephe, 1. 13. You are sealed with that holy spirit of
promise.

3 The third person in the Godhead is the holy ghost, because he is the
essential power of God, whereby all things are vpholden, and the Church is
sanctified.

The word Spirit, does signify a worker and mouer, and not any quality in
God. 1. Cor. 12. 4. There are diversities of gifts but one spirit, ver. 12.
4. For to one man is given the word of wisdom by the spirit, and to another
the word of knowledge by the same spirit.

4 The spirit is a substance or person distinguished from the father and the
son by the note and mark of proceeding. 1. Cor. 12. 11. But that one and the
same spirit works all these things, distributing them particularly to
every man as he will.

Out of these words we will fraime two demonstrations.

1 Actions are proper to subjects or persons. But now, as else where the
creation and preservation of things: so in this place distribution of gifts
is attributed to the same spirit. Therefore it is certain that the holy
spirit is a person.

2 Whosoever divides the most excellent gifts of God as it pleases him, he
is a person understanding and willing. But Paul does in plain words affirm
the same of the holy spirit. Ergo etc.

5 This spirit proceeds as well from the son, as from the father. He which
is the spirit of them both, that is, both of the Father and the son, he is
rightly said to proceed from them both. For he is said to be theirs in
such sort, that he is consubstantiall with them both, and the substantial
power of them both. But that holy spirit is said to be the spirit of the
Father, and the Son, according to these sayings: For it is not you that
speak, but the spirit of your Father, he it is that speaks in you. Mat.
10. 20. And again. But you are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, because
the spirit of GOD dwells in you. But and if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is not his. Furthermore if Christ The holy spirit is wholly in his
substance in Christ.
be in you, etc. Romans 8. 9. 10.

6 Therefore the same holy spirit is very God. Whosoever is the true and
eternal Jehovah, creator of heaven and earth, he is very God. The reason.
For let the gods which have not made heaven and earth perish from under these
heavens. Ier. 10. 11.

But the holy spirit is the true and eternal Jehovah. For the Lord which
appeared to Esaias. 6. 9. Act. 28. 25.
Isayas is called the holy spirit. The same spirit created all things,
according to that: The spirit of the Lord did nourish the waters. Genesis 1. Yea
the holy spirit created the mass of the humane Luke 1. 35.
nature, which the Word took unto him.

I will add Dydimus his argument. He is very God whosoever is every where,
and from everlasting, and yet is neither the Father nor the word. But the holy
spirit is every where, and from everlasting, etc. Ergo, he is very God.

7 The benefits of the holy ghost are of two sorts, general and special.
The general benefits are the preservation of all things, and other such
like. The special benefits are the regeneration, illumination, governing, and
consolation of the faithful, upon whom the spirit of grace and prayers is
said to be powered out.

35. Lect. Mar. 6.
Verse 7.
For thus says the Lord of hosts, yet a little and I will shake the heaven,
and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land.

THis verse wherein the Prophet entreats of the preaching of the Gospel:
does the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews interpret on this wise. Take
head that you do not despise him that speaks. For if they escaped not which
refused him that spoke in Gods name upon the earth, much less shall we escape
Heb. 12. 25.
if we turn away from him which is from heaven, whose voice did then shake the
earth, and now he has declared saying: yet once more will I shake not only
the earth, but also the heaven. Furthermore the word (once more does signify
the remoouing of unstable things, as of things that are made with hands,
that the things that are stable may remain.

All these things may we briefly set down thus.

1 The voice of the Lord shakes the world and the inhabitants thereof. The
voice of the Lord does sometimes signify thunder and the noise of tempests
*, sometime it does Psalm. 29.
signify the word of the Lord.

2 The Lord spoke from heaven, first when he gave the law, secondly when
the Gospel was published. I speak of that solemn and Exodus 19. 20. Deuteronomy. 4.
public publishing of the gospel and celestial doctrine, which was done not
without wonders and miracles altogether divine and to be wondered at.

3 And then he provided that the law might be published, Moses being the
interpreter thereof: but afterward he caused the gospel to be preached his
only son being the expounder of his word. John. 1. 17. For the law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

4 Therefore may we not despise GOD when he speaks, whether we respect
the interpreters, or the doctrine revealed from heaven. Isay. 1. 2. Hear o ye
heavens, and hearken O earth, for the Lord has spoken.

5 For if the Israelites did not escape which resisted Moses which spoke in
Gods name upon the earth, much less shall we escape unpunished, if we resist
Christ which speaks from heaven.

Of Christ Jesus John the Baptist says thus, He which comes from above is
above all: he which is from the earth is earthie, and speaks the things
which are earthie: he which comes down from heaven is above all. And that
which he has seen and heard does he testify. Ioh. 3. 31. 32. And Paul
says. The second man is the Lord from heaven. 1. Cor. 15. 47.

6 Furthermore if you respect the doctrine, there is no cause why we should
attribute more to the law, and his discipline, then to the gospel and the
liberty thereof. 2. Cor 3. Gal. 4. 5. Is God then subject to repentance, and to
the alteration of his purpose? No. Yea he knows what thing is fit for all
times of the world. The Physician, etc.


Shaking does signify the remoouing of unstable things, as of things made
with hands: that the things which are stable may remain.

These words may be understood of the abrogation of the Ceremonies of the
law, and of the instruments of the Leuiticall administration. For the apostle
calls the Tabernacle which was made with hands together with all his
vessels, and the Leuiticall administration, unstable things, and things made
with hands. The alteration thereof does he call the abolishing, and
abrogating of them. The things which are stable, are the reasonable service,
and the obedience of faith. These things will the Lord have done in spirit
and truth, who grant us grace with readiness, and constancy to obey him, so
that the holy name of God may be glorified by us. Amen.

36. Lect. March. 18.
Verse. 8.
And I will move all nations, and the desire of all the Gentiles shall come,
and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts.

When As here-tofore I did declare the disposition of the arguments which
Haggeus does use: I told you that the fifth, and sixth demonstrations were
comprehended in this eight verse: and that the fifte was drawn from the giving
of the Messiah, and from his majesty: the sixth from that which should follow:
namely the glory of the second Temple, which the prophet does amplify by an
opposition. But my after wit has made me think that I had better dispose
mine arguments thus: yet so that it may be no whit prejudicial to the
judgment of other men.

5 Argument being drawn from the type of the calling of the Gentiles.
The calling of the Gentiles being nigh at hand, it was meet for the true
Israelites with great joy* to finish the holy work, and to build the Temple
which was a certain figure of that union.

A reason.
For there is nothing wherein the true Israelites, or faithful, take greater
pleasure, then in the enlarging of Christ's kingdom, and in the gathering
together of the saints, and in the verity of the earthly Temple made with
hands, as being a certain type and figure, whereof it is said: Being built
upon the foundation of the prophets, and apostles, Jesus Christ himself being
the head cornerstone. In whom the whole building being fitly coupled together,
grows up to be an holy Temple unto the Lord. In whom ye also (meaning the
faithful Gentiles, and by name the Ephesians) are builded together, that you
may be an habitation for God through the spirit. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22.

And certain it is, that the Gentiles were to be called shortly after unto
the estate of the saints in the light.

The reason is drawn from Gods purpose. I will move all nations. The meaning
thereof is this, All nations shall be moved, when God shall be revealed in the
flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached to ye Gentiles, and
believed on in the world, and received up into glory. 1. Tim. 4. 16.

In this minor proposition we will note these points of doctrine.

1 There is nothing which does more move, and stir up the minds of men,
then the preaching of the celestial doctrine.

All men, says Aristotle, are naturally desirous to know. But seeing that (as
the same Metah. 1.
Aristotle says) one knowledge is better then another: either because it is
more certain, or Top. 8.
because it is of a better thing: it is without all doubt that the doctrine
which is not of men, but from heaven, is to be preferred before all other
kinds of doctrines, both seeing that it is most certain, and is also occupied
about a most certain matter. And the more account we make of this doctrine,
so much the more are we moved and stirred up therewith. And Aristotle says
well, that although all knowledges be Meta. 5.
noble, yet is the divine knowledge more noble, because the subject thereof is
more noble. But I will cease to speak of these things.

2 For-asmuch as the preaching of the gospel, which came from heaven as it does
appear, came about the time of reformation; it shook all these, both by
abrogatinge the discipline of the law, and the sacrifices: and also by calling
the Gentiles unto the light of faith and grace.

Paul in these words shows why it was needful that the administration of
the law, should be taken away: Christ is our peace, which has made both one,
and the stop of the wall of separation has he taken away: having abrogated
through his flesh the hatred, that is law of commandments, which did
consist in ordinances: that of these two he might make one new man in
himself, making peace. Ephesians. 2. 14. 15. The Apostle his meaning is this, that
the ceremonial worship whereby the Jews and the Gentiles were separated,
being taken away by Christ, they should make one mystical body of Christ's
Church, whose head is Christ Jesus himself.

3 The meaning of the universal word, is the same which our Apostle taught.
Rom.* 3. 29. 30. Is he the God only of the Jews and not also of the Gentiles?
yes even of the Gentiles also. For there is one God that shall justify the
circumcision of faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. And again, the
words of Peter be these. Act. 10. 34. 35. In truth I find that God is no
accepter of persons, but that in every nation, every man is acceptable to him,
which fears him, and works righteousness. Now do I conclude: the Jews
must needs go forward stoutly and courageously in the work of the Lord,
being encouraged with the expectation of these things, and even for this cause
must they build the temple, because it should be a figure of the coupling
together of the faithful, and of that most holy building of the Church of the
faithful, whereof there is a most excellent picture extant. Isai. 54, 11. 12.
The poor woman being tossed with tempest has received no comfort: behold I
will lay thy stones in Carbuncles, and I will lay thy foundation in the
Sapphires. Behold I will make thy windows of pearl, and thy gates of the
stones of Carbuncle, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and he shall multiply
the peace of thy children.

14. In righteousness shall thou be grounded, thou shall be far from
oppression.

37. Lect. April. 11.
THe proof of the minor proposition does follow in this assumption: And the
desire of all the Gentiles shall come, that is, the Messiah which has been
long and much looked for of all the Gentiles.

It is certain that the Gentiles shall then be more vehemently shaken, and
that all those which are predestinate unto eternal life, shall be called out of
darkness into light, and unto the fellowship of the true Church, when as the
Messiah shall come. But he shall come ere it be long: for the time which was
before appointed for the incarnation of the word is, at hand. Therefore it is
without all doubt, that the uniting and gathering together of the Gentiles
unto the true Israelites is also at hand.

1 Of these things will we speak in order. First, what we ought to think
according to the scriptures, of the coming of the Messiah, and of his presence
in the Church, and absence from us.

2 Secondly, why the Messiah is called the desire.

3 Thirdly, why he is called the desire of all the Gentiles, seeing the
Gentiles were not so well persuaded concerning the incarnation of the Word,
as were the Jews.

1 Certain distinctions concerning the coming of the Messiah, and of his
presence in the Church, and absence from the same.

1 Christ is one way present with all creatures, and an other way with his
Church. He is present with all creatures substantially, essentiallie,
presently, mightelie, (if you respect the Word) who, seeing he is by nature
God, he is infinite and from everlasting. Therefore, he is incomprehensible,
both in respect of time, and also of place.

2 He is, he has been, and will be present with his Church always, and in all places, according to these sayings. Hebr. 13. 8. Jesus Christ is yester-day,
and too-day, and is the same for ever. That is, even from the beginning of the
World has our Lord Jesus Mat. 28. 28.
been the Mediator between God and men *. Behold I am with you always. 1. Cor.
10. 4. For they all drunk of the spiritual rock which followed them: and the
rock was Christ. ver. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ as certain of them
tempted and perished by serpents. Therefore was he present with the Fathers,
and did feed them. John. 14. 18. I will not leave you fatherless. And let us
remember for our comforts sake, that we can no more be left fatherless now,
then could the Apostles in times past, and also that Christ did pray even for
us also. John. 17. 20. 21.

3 For without Christ there can be no Church. As the body is imperfect, if it
want the head: so there can be no Church of the elect at all, without Christ
the head. Therefore is it that Paul says that we are elected in Christ, and
that we are made one body with him, and in-grafted into him.

4 Christ is present with the Church, as in the person of a Lord, so in the
person of a Mediator.

The person of the Mediatoure comprehends under it the office of a King, a
Prophet, and a Priest. Therefore Christ Jesus does defend and govern us: by
the ministry of the spirit he instructs us: and making intercession Ephesians. 1.
4.
for us, by the efficacy of his merits, he obtayneth mercy for us, at the
hands of his Romans 6.
Father.

5 It was said in times past that he should come, in respect of the incarnation
of the Word. For when the fulness of time was come, he was sent of his father,
he was made of woman, he Gala. 4. 4.
was made subject to the law. Therefore does he affirm that he was sent of
his father. Ioh. 6. 38. I came down from heaven, that I might do not mine own
will, but the will of him which sent me.

6 He ascended into heaven, his body and soul being taken up into heaven. So
is it in the godly confession of the Church of Basil, in the article
concerning Jesus Christ God and man.

Therefore let us not yield unto the opinion of those men which make the flesh
of Christ invisible, and do very inconstantlie affirm that he is present
with us bodily, yet inuisibly. For wheresoever the true and natural body of
Christ is, there may it also be seen and felt. Lu. 24.

7 Notwithstanding this is certain: that whole Christ is every where, but not
the whole of Christ.

Lombardus in his third Book of Sentences, did. 22. says, Truly whole
Christ was in hell, whole Christ was in heaven, and whole Christ was every
where at the same time. For that eternal person was no greater, when it had
the flesh, and the soul united together unto it, then when it had but the one
of them only: neither was it any greater when it had them both together, or
but the one of them only united unto it, then it was having neither of them
united. Therefore whole and perfect Christ was every where. Whereupon
Augustine says, He sent not the Father from him when he came into the
Virgin, being whole every where, and perfect every where. And a little after.
The Totum Christi, Totus Christus.
whole of Christ was neither in the sepulcher, neither in hell, although whole
Christ were there: like-as whole Christ is God, and whole Christ is man, but
not the whole of Christ: because he is not only God, or only man, but both
God, and man.

Totum enim ad naturam refertur, totus ad hypostasin.

The whole of Christ is referred unto the nature, but whole Christ unto the
person: Sicut aliud and aliquid ad naturam, alius vero and aliquis ad personam.

As another thing, and some-thinge, are referferred unto the nature, but
another man and some man are referred unto the person.

Whereupon John Damascene says:

Totus Christus est Deus perfectus, non autem totum Deus est etc.

Whole Christ is perfect God, but the whole of Christ is not God: for he is
not only God, but he is man also: and whole Christ is perfect man, but the
whole of Christ is not perfect man: for he is not only man, but he is GOD
also. For the whole of Christ represents his nature, but whole Christ his
person: Sicut aliud quidem est naturae, alius vero hypostaseos: Like-as another
thing imports the nature, but another man imports the person.

38. Lect. 12. April. 1580.
TO the end that that which goes before may be made more plain, I will
adioyne unto the Prophets words concerning the coming of the desire of the
Gentiles, the like saying of the Apostle, which comprehends in it two rules
touching the spirit of God, and Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. The word was
made flesh.
the spirit of Antichrist. 1. John. 4. 2. 3. By this know ye the spirit of
God: every spirit which confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is of God. And every spirit that does not confess that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichriste, of whom you
have heard, that he should now come, and that he is now in the world.

Now that we may apply these things unto our purpose, and admonish the
younger sort, that they do not only take heed of that opinion of Antichrist,
which denies that Christ is come in the flesh, that is, that he is made like
unto us in all things, (sin only excepted, having taken to himself the
true humane nature, which consists upon a reasonable soul, and an
isntrumental and comprehensible body:) but also of the position, which being
set down, that does follow: we will set down^ the Method of our speeches
Syllogisticallie, which shall teach both these things, both that the truth is
a most perfect harmony, and that those which starte aside from the same, after
they have granted one absurdity, do gather more, and lay them upon their
own shoulders, and upon others also.

1 Syllogism.
They which deny that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh are led with the
spirit of Antichrist. 1. John. 4. 3. But who-soeuer they be which feign that
the flesh of Christ is present every where really, they deny that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh. Wherefore we must pray unto God that they may be
delivered from the spirit of Antichrist, whereby they do not p^rceiue
themselves to be led: For it becomes us to report well of those whom we
see take our part against the popish Idolatry.

2 The proof of the minor.
Who-soeuer do feign that the flesh of Christ was from everlasting, they do
deny that Christ came in the fulness of time in the flesh. But they which do
affirm that the flesh of Christ is really euery-where, do say that the flesh
of Christ was from euer-lasting. Therefore they deny that Christ is come in
the flesh.

3 The proof of the minor.
It is altogether impossible, and an absurd thing, to attribute to any thing
an universal presence, without eternity of beginning. But those men which
say that Christ is every Or bodily.
where * really, do attribute to the flesh of Christ universal presence.
Therefore they do affirm that the flesh of Christ was eternal and without
beginning.

4 The proof of the mayor.
What things soever can not be separated from their subject, and nature, these
things also cannot be separated one from another. But to be in all places at
once, and eternity without beginning, cannot be separated from the divine
essence: for they are not accidents, but the essence it self. Therefore they
cannot be separated one from another. Therefore if the flesh of Christ be
every where really, it is also from everlasting.

5 I prove the mayor thus.
For if one thing have many properties, if one of them be in any nature, the
rest shall also be in it. But if (as they falsely suppose) universal presence
be in the flesh of Christ. Therefore shall also eternity, the greatest
simplicity, and other adjuncts of the God-heade be actuallie in the flesh of
Christ. Which every man of sound judgment, does see to be false.

I will add in steed of a conclusion Paul his exposition upon the oracle, of
the coming of the desire of all the Gentiles. Jesus Christ being in the form
of GOD thought it no robbery to be equal with GOD. But he made himself of
no reputation, taking to him the shape of a servant, and was made like unto
men, and was found in his apparel as a man, he humbled himself, being made
obedient unto death, even unto the death of the Cross. Phil. 2. 6. 7. 8. He
which was long looked for, came when as the Word was made flesh. John. 1.

The form of GOD does signify in this place the divine nature, as Basil
taught godlily, whose words are these: That which is in the form GOD, is in
the substance of GOD, for the form of GOD is not one thing, and the substance
an other, being not compounde: he therefore which is equal according to the
form, he is equal according to the substance. Basil reasons thus, by
reducing his argument unto that which is impossible. If in the person of the
Word, the form of God were one thing, and the essence of God another
thing, then were God compounded, and not simple: but the consequent is
absurd, therefore is the antecedent absurd also.

Now seeing that the form of a servant is set against the form of God: what
man is he that is well in his wits, that does doubt that it does signify
the humane nature? Moreover Paul calls it the similitude of men, and that he
was found in apparel as a man. Neither did that glory which was annexed unto
the humane nature, take from it the truth and properties of nature: as
Augustine taught very well. Further-more, in the blessed life we shall be as
angels, not in respect of substance, but of the qualities. 1. Cor. 15.

39 Lect. 15 April.
Why is the Messiah called the desire?

THis did Christ expound Luke. 10. 23. 24. Blessed are the eyes which see
those things which you see. For I say unto you, that many prophets, and kings
have desired to see those things which you see, and have not seen them, and
to hear those things which you hear, and have not heard them.

Object. Have not therefore the holy prophets, and kings seen and heard
Christ? I reason thus: Abraham reioysed to see Christ his day: and he saw
it, and reioysed. Ioh. 8. 56. Therefore that his assertion is false. Luke 10.
24.

Ans. I deny the consequent, and my reason is this: because in this objection
there is ignoratio elenchi ignorance of an argument. For these are not spoken
both concerning one thing. The saying of Christ in John entreats of the
faith in Christ, which is common to all the elect, whereby Abraham, and his
true sons are said to see Christ. But in these words which are in Luke he
speaks of the measure, and degrees of light, and of faith, in some respect,
to declare the difference which is between the two Testamentes, which is fet
from the measure of the revelation.

Qu. But for what cause is he said to be desired?

Answer. The cause is set down in these words of the Prophet, and the
Apostle. Isa. 61. 1. 2. 3. The spirit of the Lord upon me, because the Lord
has anointed me: to preach glad tydinges unto the meek has he sent me,
to bind up the broken in heart, to preach liberty to the prisoners, and
opening of the prison unto those which are bound. To preach the acceptable
year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that
mourn. To appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, and to give to them for
ashes, oil of gladness, for mourning, the garment of gladness, for the spirit
of heaviness etc. Ioh. 11. 25. I am the resurrection and the life etc. 1. Cor.
1. 30. Jesus Christ is made unto us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, etc.

Therefore I reason thus from these benefits which we have by Jesus Christ.
He is rightly said to be desired, which is sight to the blind, life to the
dead, resurrection to them which lie in the dust of the earth, the right way
to them which wander and are out of the way, wisdom to the foolish,
righteousness to the guilty, sanctification to the unclean and profane,
redemption to the prisoners. But Jesus Christ our Prophet, our king and
mediator: is and does all these things for us, and many more. Therefore he is
rightly said to be desired.

3 But why is he called the desire of all the Gentiles?

Ob. Some man will perhaps reason on the contrary, thus: No man is desirous of
that which he knows not. The promise of the coming of the Messiah was
unknown to the Gentiles: but the Jews knew it full well. Therefore the
Messiah ought to be called the desire of the Jews, and not of the Gentiles.

I answer confitendo by confessing. Although the promise concerning the
sending of the Messiah was not so much beaten into the heads of the Gentiles,
as of the Jews: yet is Christ rightly termed the desire of the Gentiles,
because he was to be sent, even for their sakes also, that he might deliver
them out of the power of darkness. And why mast thou not confess y^ he is
rightly called thy desire, which was as they say the head and the helm.

But I reason thus. Seeing that God is the redeemer only in Jesus Christ,
Christ is rightly called their desire, whose God (that is redemer) is the Lord.
But the Lord is the God not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles. Romans
3. Surely of the Gentiles also. Therefore I conclude that the Lord Jesus is
the desire as well of the Gentiles as of the Jews.

I prove the mayor. For they whose God is the Lord, are not only persuaded
that Christ has created them, but also that he is their redeemer. As by faith
they perceive that the world was made by the word of God: so being justified
by faith, they confess that they believe the remission of sins.

In like sort I prove the minor. GOD does justify none but those whose
merciful God he is. But he does justify the circumcision of faith, and the
uncircumcision by faith. Romans 3. 30. Therefore he is the God as well of the
circumcised as of the uncircumcised in the flesh.

Let us thoroughly ponder these and such like sayings, that being mindful
that we are sprung from the wild Olyue tree, we may with one mind and one
mouth give thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, who has delivered us from the
power of darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of light. To him
be glory for evermore. Amen.

40. Lect. 25. April. 1580.
6 An argument drawn from the glory of the second Temple.
I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts.

IT is questionles that that temple is to be builded with great industry and
ioyfulnes, which the Lord has promised to replenish with glory. But the Lord
does promise to replenish the second Temple with glory. Ergo. etc.

Aphorisime concerning glory.
1 There is one glory of the flesh, and an other of the spirit.

2 The glory of the flesh being kindled with the confidence that is reposed
in works, as straw with fire, is an hinderance to faith. John. 5. 44. How
can ye believe when ye receive glory one from another, and do not seek the
glory which comes from God alone?

3 The glory of the spirit staying upon Christ alone, is joined with faith*
2. Cor. 3. 18. But we beholding as in a myrrour, with open face, the glory of
the Lord: are transformed into the same image from glory to glory.

4 There is one kind of glory of the flesh which consists in riches,
dignity, and good success, and it is common as well to the faithful, as to
the unbelievers. Genesis 45. Psalm. 112. 2. Reg. 12.

5 Yet ought the glory of the spirit to be preferred far before it, which
accompanyeth plenty of the Lords blessing in spiritual things.

6 And forasmuch as both of them are to be esteemed according, to their end
and use: we ought to prefer the glory of the spirit (which serves
chiefly both to our own edification, and the glory of God,) far before the
glory of the flesh.

The blessing of God is commended first, for ye efficient cause or the author
thereof, which is God, who is called the God of glory. Psalm. 29. 3. Secondly
for the formal cause, which comprehends the decent and good order used in
the dispensation of the word of God, and his worship, and the approbation
thereof, which is declared by the imputatio^ of perfection wrought by faith,
whenas otherwise God might require many things at our hands. Lastly for the
plentifulnes thereof which is signified by this word (fill). And now, how,
and of what gifts this fullness is meant, these sayings do sufficiently
testify. And of his fullness have we all received even grace for grace. Ioh.
1. 16. And again, He is ascended far above all heavens that he might
fulfill all things, (namely, with the gifts of the spirit) and that he
might give to the Church faithful servant). Ephesians. 4. 10.

2. Of the funiture of the second Temple.
Although we must needs confess that there was great store of riches
gathered together in the treasury, and that, as the histories do testify,
there were other riches taken fro other: yet no doubt this was the principal
glory thereof, that the son of God being revealed in the flesh, taught the
gospel of the kingdom therein.

We will infer certain notable sayings of the holy Scripture, and out of
them will we gather what be the chief ornaments of Temples. 1. Reg. 8. 12.
13. The Lord said that he would dwell in the thick clouds. Certaynely I
have built thee an house to dwell in, an house, that thou might dwell for
ever. The presence of God hearing prayers, an^ taking in good part the
worship done to him in faith, is the first and chiefest ornament of a Temple.
And whereas it is said that the Lord does not dwell in temples made with
hands: that may not be understood simply, Act. 7. 48.
but in some respect, first in respect of his essence, according to the which
he is not only in the Temples, but also every where: secondly in respect of
the comparison. For it delights him not so much to dwell in a material
Temple, as in a faithful heart. Isay 56. 7. My house shall be called an house
of prayer to all people. Under prayer made in faith, the Prophet does
comprehend by Synecdoche, the administration of the word and Sacraments, and
also both the external and internal worship of God. And is certain that
hanginges, organs, and musical harmony do nothing like so much adorn
Churches, as the preaching of the word of God, which serves to the use and
edification of the saints Ioh. 2. 16. Carry these things hence, make not my
Fathers house an house of Marchandice. Therefore the house of the Father,
seeing it is an house of godliness, must not serve to the profane gain of
those men which think that gain is godliness, (and for this cause they do
all things, that they may serve to their filthy lucre. 1. Tim. 6. 5. 9.) but
to the edification of the mystical body of Christ, which is the Church.

3 Of the glory of the Church of the new Testament.
Isay. 40. 5. The glory of the Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see
it together, because the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Isay. 60. 2. For
behold darkness shall cover the earth, and a mist the people: but upon thee
shall the Lord arise, and upon thee shall his glory be seen. The meaning of
these oracles may be gathered out of these sayings. John. 1. 14. And that
word was made flesh: and it did abide amongst us (and we saw the glory
thereof, the glory I say as of the only begotten, coming out from the
father) full of grace and truth. 2. Cor. 3. 9. For if the ministry of
condemnation was glorious, much more does the ministration of righteousness
abound in glory.

4. Of the glory of the Faithful.
1 It is most certain that the faithful are the Temples and houses of God.
Ephesians. 2. 22. Wherein you also are builded together, that you may be a dwelling
place for GOD, through the spirit.

2 For this cause is it said that Christ does dwell in their hearts by faith.
Ephesians. 3. 17.

3 And it is certain y^ they which are destitute of holy spirit and of faith,
have no part nor fellowship with Christ. 2. Cor. 6. 15. What concord has
Christ with Beliall? or what part has the believer with the infidele?

4 Truly the only glory of the faithful is Christ. 1. Cor. 1. ver. 31. But
you are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that as it is written, he
that rejoices let him rejoice in the Lord.

I thought good briefly to note these things, that they which are desirous
(the vale being pulled away) to go from the shadow unto the truth, and
thoroughly to ponder the mysteries of the oracle, might have store of godly
meditations. The Lord Jesus drive away our confusion with his glory, and
illuminate our mistie minds with the beams of his light, to the glory of his
eternal father. Amen.

41. Lect. April. 26.
Verse. 9.
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord God of hosts.

IN these words is contained an answer whereby he preuenteth this
objection. The temple of Solomon was in times past bewtifull with gold, silver,
and brass: whether a man did behold the vessels or the hangings thereof: but
who shall enrich and adorn the temple with gold and silver? None truly, none.

The Lord makes answer, that all the silver and gold is his, which is in
the whole world: yet are not the temples adorned with th^se, though they be
noble metals: but with far other ornaments, whereof we have spoken before,
and more shall speak hereafter.

A brief institution briefly set down, concerning the golden vessels, and
silver vessels of Temples.

1 The use of vessels of gold, and vessels of silver was necessary in times
past in the Leuititicall sacrifice. That may be gathered, first out of the
special commandments of God concerning the gathering of these metals, and
the making of diverse vessels of the same to diverse uses: secondly, out of the
holy rites of the sacrifices, perfumes, sacraments, etc. And that ceremonial
worship had many peculiar things, which we cannot now imitate without such
emulation as is not tolerable: seeing that the manner of our administration is
far unlike to that.

2 The use of these vessels is now indifferent: seeing there is no especial
commandment extant concerning the matter of ye vessels, which we use in the
administration of the sacraments, and also seeing that is certain that Christ
and his Apostles did use common vessels.

3 Therefore let us remember that the vessels which we now use, are not to be
esteemed according to the prise and profit of the matter, nor yet according to
the singular wormanship of the form, but according to the use and end thereof.
Would to God these men would think upon this, which do think that the
Lords supper cannot be celebrated without such chalices as the massemongers
did use: and for this cause they turn the cups which have been long time used
amongst us, into chalices.

4 We must needs confess that not long after the Apostles time, first the
vessels of wood, and afterward the vessels of glass being taken away, they
began to use vessels of gold and vessels of silver, if at any time the
sacraments were to be ministered. Zephorinus the Pope having taken away wooden
vessels, did put in place thereof vessels of glass.

But Vrbanus who entered the Popedom in the year of Christ 227. and in the
third year of Alexander Seuerus, having abolished the decree of Zepherinus:
did command that they should use vessels of gold and silver, and if they
had none such, that then they should use vessels of Tynne.

He provided very wisely (I warrant you) both for the poor and also for the
rich. I think he would have given them leave to have used woden vessels, and
of glass, if they had not had vessels of metal. But I think it will not be
amiss, here to recite these things which are set down in the Popes law,
Distinct. 1. The The Popes law.
vessels used in the celebration of the holy mysteries are chalices, and
pattins, concerning which Bonifacius the martyr and bishop being asked
whether it were lawful to celebrate the sacraments in wooden vessels or no?
he answered, that the Priests in times past did use not golden, but wooden
chalices. Zepherinus the sixtenth bishop of Rome did decree, that the masses
should be celebrated in Pattins of glass. After that Vrbanus the Pope made all
the ministering vessels of silver. For in this, as in the other kinds of
worship, the dignity of the Churches has increased more and more by increase
of time. For in our days (which are servants of the good man of the house)
that the dignity of our mother the Church may not be any whit deminished, but
rather augmented and much enlarged: we do ordain that hereafter no priest
presume any way to celebrate the holy mystery of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ in vessels of wood: least God be prouooked to wrath with that
wherewith he should be pacifyed. Also that the Lords chalice with the pattin
be made, if not of gold, yet of silver. And if any man be so poor that he
cannot so have it, yet let him have a chalice of tin. And let not the chalice
be made of brass, or of latin, which by reason of the virtue of wine procures
canker, and also causes vomitte. But let no man presume to sing Mass in a
chalice of wood, or of glass.

1 In these decrees will we note first, that the Church of Rome did quickly
fall away from the thriftenes and simplicity of the Apostles.

2 Secondly that the new Bishops did sometimes abolishe the decrees of their
predecessors.

3 Thirdly that they thought that the chief dignity and worship of the Church
did consist in gold and silver: whenas the principal ornament of a Church is
the sincerity of doctrine, of the sacraments, and of life.

4 Fourthly, that they suppose that God is pleased with vessels of gold and
silver, and is displeased with these that were baser. Surely then there was
but bad provision made for the Apostolic Church, which used wooden vessels, if
at any time the sacraments were to be cele, brated.

Constantinus the great did wonderfully enrich the Churches with vessels of
gold and of silver: but Iulianus the Apostata did shortly after take them
away, as the ecclesiastical history does testify.

5 Notwithstanding the holy bishops did more regard the living vessels then the
metals. Hereof have we a notable example in the history of Ambrose, who in his
second book of offices. Chap. 18. writes thus: As we sometimes were hated,
which broke the mystical vessels that we might redeem the prisoners: which
thing might displease the Arrians, and not so much the fact, as that they might
have somewhat which they might reprehende in us. And a little after. Which
thing although we did not without some reason, yet were we so hated amongst
the people, that we did confess, and prove, that it was much better to keep
souls for the Lord, then gold. For he which sent his Apostles without
gold, has also gathered Churches together without gold. The Church has
gold, not to keep, but to bestow, and to succor in time of necessity. What
need have we to keep that which helps nothing? Do not we know that the
Assyrians did rob the Temple of the Lord of great store of gold and silver?
Does not the Priest better gather it together, that it may serve the poor, (if
other helps do fail) then that the sacralegious enemy should carry it
away? Shall not the Lord say: why have thou suffered so many poor people to
starve? And yet thou had gold to buy them food withal. Why were so many
prisoners led into captivity, and not redeemed? Why were they slain? It had
been better for thee to have saved the vessels of the living, then of metals.

To this purpose serves the 17. Law in the book Lib. 1. Tit. 5. l. Sancimus.
If need shall require in redeeming of prisoners, then we do grant license
both to sell the foresaid things, and also to lay them to gage: forasmuch as
it is no absurd thing to prefer the souls of men, before all matters,
vessels, and garments.

6 These words of Ambrose do teach us, what answer we ought to make to those
men, which cry out that the sacraments are dispoiled of their dignity, if
golden vessels, and silver vessels be not used in the administration thereof. I
was afraid, would thou say, least the Temple of God want his furniture? He
would answer. The Sacraments do not require gold, neither do these things
please in gold, which are not bought with gold. The ornament of the
Sacraments is the redemption of prisoners. And these are precious vessels
indeed, which redeem the souls from death etc. in the same Chapter.

7 Therefore if we do use in our Churches vessels of gold and silver in the
administration of the Lords supper: yet let us use them without all boasting,
and opinion of the necessity and price of the matter thereof. Neither let us
so deal that that Ecclesiastical adage may be verified in us. In times past
there were golden Priests and wooden vessels, but now there be wooden
priests and golden vessels.

8 Neither let us condemn nor find fault with the reformed Churches (in the
number whereof is the Tigurine Church) which do imitate the thriftines and
simplicity of the primitive Church, and do use wooden vessels, yet such as
are clenly and fit for the purpose. For if we think that the Lords supper
cannot be decently ministered unless we use vessels of gold, and silver: why
are we not also desirous to have fontes and lauers of gold and silver? Unless
peradventure we think that we ought to make more account of the Lords
supper, and of the administration thereof, then of Baptism which is the Lauer
of our regeneration.

43. Lect. April 29.
Verse. 10.
The glory of this latter house shall be greater then the glory of the
former, says the Lord God of hosts: and in this place, will I give peace,
says the Lord GOD of hosts.

7 Argument drawn from the comparing of the first Temple and the second
together.
THat Temple is to be builded with all readinesses and diligence, whose glory
shall be greter, the^ was the glory of that first house builded by Solomon
the king. For there is no cause why any man should object that it will be but
base, and of no price and estimation. But the glory of this second Temple
will be greater then the glory of the first, as the Lord himself does
testify.

Of the unlooked for works of God.
It is said in the holy Scriptures, that God does oftentimes bring to pass
wonderful things, both because in rewarding of godliness ordinarily, and
punishing of ungodliness: he sets up the meek, and pulls down the
proud: and also because he restores things which are almost quite gone to
decay, contrary to all men's expectation: and those men which seem most of all
to florishe, does he in his his just judgment throw down to the ground.

Psalm. 75. 6. 7. Promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west,
nor yet from the wilderness: For God is the governor, he brings low, and
he exalts. The meditating upon these works of God, ought to nourish and
kindle in us fear of God, and the hope of having these miseries mitigated
wherewith we are oppressed. The Jews thought in times past that it could
never come to pass that the latter temple should be corespondent to the
former in any point. Neither was there any other cause, from which this
imagination did spring save this, because they did look unto themselves, and
unto the small wealth of the Jewish people, and not unto God. But the Prophet in
the name of the Lord God of hosts, tells the Jews of little faith a thing
that they little looked for: namely that the glory of this temple would be
greater then ever was the glory of the first Temple. And how often are we
brought to ye pass in time of adversity, whereunto David does confess
himself to have been brought? Psalm. 31. 22. But I said in my have, I am cast
out from the sight of thine eyes: not-withstanding, thou have heard the voice
of my prayer, whilst I cried unto thee.

Let us therefore endure, and so much as we are able let us save our selves in
time of prosperity. The Church of GOD in Germany is marueilously troubled in
these our days, and that by the counsels and endeavors of these men; which had
rather be Lords over Gods Heritage, and enforce all other men to receive
their doctrine: then to be examples unto the flock. But let us valiantly
bear the unjust preiudices, 1. Pet. 5. ^.
and excommunications of these princely Potentates, and looking unto the
judgments of God (whereof he often shows manifest tokens) let us wait for
the mitigation of these evils. For God is faithful, and he will not suffer
us to be tempted above that which we are able to bear. He neither slumbreth
nor sleeps which keeps Israel. Therefore to him alone let us commit the
Church, and all our selves also.

8 Argument drawn from the plenty of peace, and of the gifts of the holy
ghost.
And in this place will I give peace, says the Lord God of hosts. Under the
word ( peace) he comprehends by Synecdoche all manner of spiritual
gifts. For the Jews did not enjoy earthly peace long, and the second Temple
was oftentimes spoiled, and at length was it set on fire, and overthrown. But
the prophet Haggeus reasons thus. God will give peace in this Temple, he
will cause the gospel to be preached, he will power out the spirit of grace
and of prayers. Wherefore you must apply the holy work, that you may obey
your chiefest good thing, the Lord your God commanding you to build this
second Temple.

Object. The Lord Jesus says: The hour comes when as ye shall neither in
this mountain, neither at Jerusalem worshipp the Father. Therefore God did
not give peace John. 4. 21.
in that place. For doubtless there can no peace be given without prayer, and
faith, and other gifts.

Ans. I deny the consequent, and my reason is this, because there is ignoratio
elenchi, ignorance of an argument. For these sayings are not uttered both
concerning one time. God gave peace in that place, in that he preserved and
enriched wonderfully with the plenty of the gifts of the holy Spirit, the
remnaunt of the godly, until such time as the Messiah was given, and the Jews
were rejected for their invincible hardness of heart: and the holy City together
with the Temple was ouer-throwen, and quite destroyed, the gospel was preached
far and wide amongst the Gentiles, and Jesus Christ was believed on in the
world.

Of the presence of Gods grace.
As light does accompany the rising of the sun, which lightneth things which
are upon the earth: so the participation and powringe out of Gods gifts does
follow the presence of his grace.

2 For where-soeuer God is, he both is and works there freely, and
effectually.

3 God is sometimes present for a season in places, countries, and with
persons. This time is called the time of visitation. Luke 19. 44.

4 And in his just judgment he forsakes certain persons. Behold, your house
is left unto you desolate. Mat. 23. 38.

5 But the Lord does never quite forsake the Church of the elect. Isa. 54. 7. I
have left thee for a space, but in my great mercies will I gather thee
together. 8. In the time of my wrath I hid my face for a while: but in mine
euer-lasting mercy have I had mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer.
10. The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down: but my
mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace fall
away, says the Lord that has compassion on thee.

6 The same opinion must we have concerning all the faithful. For God is also
present with them by the power and grace of his spirit. He furnishes them
with most excellent, and wholesome gifts, with faith, hope, charity, patience,
and other things, which are undoubtedly testimonies of the presence of the
grace of God. And how-soeuer such men so suffer persecution by false brethren,
be smitten with blockish thunder-boltes, and rash curses: yet must we make
great account of them, seeing they fare no worse then did the Prophets and
Apostles in times past. We know what David says. But unto the saints which
are upon the earth, and the Psalm. 16. 3.
strong, toward whom is all my delight.

43. Lect. Verse. 11.
The four and twentirh day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius,
was the word of the Lord in the hand of Haggeus, saying.

THis verse contains the circumstances of the second oracle which is in this
chapter set down, where-of I will speak orderly and briefly.

1 The time. In the second year of the reign of Darius the son of
Histaspes, which was before ye birth of Christ about 519. years, and in the
year after the creation of the world 3 444. according to Funcius his
chronicle: in the 24. day of December, which month the Hebrews call Cisleu,
was this oracle published. We see that the prophets do exhort us by the
examples of their diligence, attentively to observe at what time the celestial
doctrine was purged and preached, what signs of times happened, whose
ministry God used: that we may be confirmed in the faith, and sanctify the
name of God.

The author. This oracle proceeded from the Lord God of hosts. For
prophesyinge came not in times past by the will of men, but the holy men of God
being moved up the holy spirit, spoke*. Hence therefore do we fitly gather
2. Pet. 1. 20. 2^.
that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private motion. And for this
cause they which are Teachers in the Church, must examine all things by the
proportion of faith, and they must have respect unto the dignity of prophecy,
whether a man look unto the sincerity of things, or the purity of speech,
according to these sayings. Romans 1. 12. 6. Whether we have prophecy according
to the proportion of faith. And again. If any man speak, let him speak as
the word of God. 1. Pet. 4. 11.

3 The Crier was Haggeus the prophet, and the ambassador of the Lord. For God
in times past spoke many times, and sundry ways to the Fathers, by the
prophets. Now speaks he Heb. 1. 1.
unto us by the faithful Ministers of ye Church, whom who-soeuer does hear,
he hears the Luke 10. 16.
Lord Jesus. And those men must remember, that they do not speak in their
own name, but in the name of God, and for this cause must they speak
reuere^tly, least in time to come they be punished for doing their message
wrong.

Of the dispensation of the mysteries of God.
For-asmuch as it is so often repeated, that the Lord spoke by Haggeus the
prophet, to the end that these oracles might be of credit and authority: and
it is also very profitable for us to know^ thoroughly, how the mysteries of God
are orderly distributed: I will entreat there-vpon positiuely. The Lord Jesus
grant that we may also handle this point with great fruit, and that in the
same we may adore the wisdom and goodness of God.

1 We call these points of y^ doctrine of faith, hope, and charity, which are
set forth in the word of God, and are sealed with the Sacraments: the
mysteries of God.

2 We call them mysteries because they do far exceed the capacity of the
natural man. For they are unto him foolishnes, neither can he ^. Cor. 2. 14.
know them, because they are judged and discerned spirituallie. They are called
the mysteries of God, because as they proceed from him alone, so are they also
revealed by him alone. Mat. 11. 27. Neither knows any man the father, but the
son, and he to whom the son will reveal him. And again. Flesh and
blood has not revealed these things to thee, but my father which is in
heaven. Mat. 16. 17.

3 In these, all things must be referred unto Christ, who is made our
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. As Christ is to be
compared with all other things: so is he made unto us al things, for our
saluations sake: so that we ought thus to determine with our selves, to know
nothing amongst other men, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. We know 1.
Cor. 2. ^
the verses:

Si Christu^ discis, nihil est quod caetera nescis:
Si Christu^ nescis, nihil est quod caetera discis.
If Christ thou learn it skilleth not
If thou do know none other thing:
If Christ thou know not, all things else
To learn, no gain at all does bring.
To learn Jesus is more profitable then any thing that can be known, as says
Bernard in a certain Epistle: who in another place says very godlily, that
the name of Jesus, is meat, light, and medicine. And as Christ* Jesus is made
unto us all things, so ought all out life, studdies, and actions, to smell of
nothing but of faith, love, humility, righteousness, and finally (that I may be
brief) of Christ Jesus our Lord, who dwells and reigns in us.

They which broche, and bring abroad the oracles of GOD, are the faithful
ministers of God his Testament, who as Paul says do sow spiritual things.
It is required at the hands of these, that they be faithful. 1. Cor. 4. 2. It
is required of the disposers, that every man be found faithful.

Ob. Paul says, For to this man truly is given by the spirit the word of
wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge, by the same spirit. 1. Cot.
12. 8. Therefore spiritual gifts are not given by the ministers.

An. I answer. Things which are subordinate, are not contrary. God alone does
give spiritual gifts, if you respect the principal cause: but if you respect
the isntrumental causes serving out-wardly, then meets you that saying of
the Apostle: Therefore who is Paul, or who is Apollos, but ministers by whom
you have believed, and as God has given to every man? 1. Cor. 3. 5.

And here must we admonish the younger sort, that they do diligently
distinguishe these sayings, wherein the whole ministry is spoken of in
general, from these where-in it is spoken of in part, that is, where-in
mention is made either of the inward, or outward ministry. For if they
respect the former sort, they shall oftentimes find that thing attributed by
Synecdoche to the ministers of the word, as to the inferior causes: which is
proper to ye principal efficient cause. As these two sayings do testify,
wherewith we will at this time be contented. Who-soeuers sins ye remit
they are remitted unto them: and who-soeuers sins ye retain, they are
retained. Ioh. 20. 23. Take heed to thy self, and to thy doctrine, continue
in these things, for if thou shall do that, thou shall save thy self and
them which shall hear thee. 1. Tim. 4. 16.

Paul speaks of the parts of the ministry by an opposition, where he
says: Therefore, neither he that planteth is any thing, neither he that
waters: but God who gives the increase. 1. Cor. 3. 7.

4 And as it is not lawful for the ministers to separate the sacraments, from
ye word of ye covenant: so is it not lawful to take away the relation and
affinity that is between spiritual things, and their signs. Although we are
not ignorant of this, that God who works most freely, does work sometimes
by means, sometimes without means, and that he is able if he will, to give
spiritual things without the external signs: yet must we do all things
decently, and in order, according to the rule which he has set down.

Object. Paul says: Christ has not sent me to baptize: but to preach the
gospel. Therefore the Word and the Sacraments may not be separated.

Ans. I answer, that Paul speaks thus in some respect, by way of comparison,
to the end he might declare that he was chiefly sent to preach the gospel,
and that he does not simply deny that he was sent to baptize, which thing
may appear by that which went before.

5 For like-as man consists upon the body and the mind: so does the holy
administration consist upon visible signs, and spiritual and invisible things.

44. Lect. March. 10.
THe body is no dishonesty to the mind, which uses the ministry thereof as
of a most fit instrument, to do many excellent things withal. And by the
signs instituted, and commanded by God, are the spiritual things, and the
reasonable service no whit dishonored, but they serve according to Gods
ordinance to the representing of these things.

Ob. God does oftentimes testify that he is displeased with the Ceremonial
worship which he has not commanded, etc. According to these sayings: Because
thou would no sacrifice and I would have given it thee: thou will not have
burnt offerings. Psalm. 51. 18. And again: Why do ye offer unto me a
multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord? I am full. Isai. 1. 11. And
again, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God rather
then burnt offerings. Of. 6. 6. Therefore the holy administration consists
only upon spiritual things: neither has it any need of the external
signs.

An. It is no good argument where in that which is spoken in some respect, is
taken as if it were spoken simply. In the first saying, by way of comparison,
giving of thanks is preferred before sacrifice: godliness, before bodily
exercise. In the second, all sacrifices are not condemned, but only those which
superstitious men did offer without faith, with an opinion of the work
wrought. In the third, moral things are preferred before things ceremonial,
and the reasonable worship before the sacrificiall worship. Therefore the
works which God has commanded are not simply condemned.

6 As the Sacraments may be perceived by the senses, and the external word
pearceth the ears: so the things by y^ Sacraments signified are apprehended by
the sensitive instruments of faith, and by faith are they perceived.

Reasons.
1 For the Sacraments are visible signs, and signs instituted by God, of an
invisible grace, and the spiritual gifts.

2 The things by the Sacraments signified are invisible: but faith is an
argument of things Heb. 11. 1.
which are not seen. And this faith is to y^ heart in steed of eyes, ears,
mouth, hands, whereby we apprehend Christ, and apply him unto our selves.

7 Christ has the word of life. Ioh. 6. 68. And whilst the father teaches
us inwardly, and writes his laws in our hearts, we are taught of God: but the
word which is y^ sign thereof is Ioh. 31. 33. Ioh. 6. 45.
preached outwardly by the mini^ers of ye word.

Ob Isa. 4. 2. The servant of God are commanded to speak unto the heart of
Jerusalem. There-fore the ministers of the word do also speak inwardly
unto the heart.

An. I deny the consequent, because in the antecedent, that is attributed to
the inferior cause, namely to the external ministry, which is proper to the
principal efficient cause, namely to Christ, who executes the internal
ministry, and speaks unto the heart.

The reason of this manner of speech is drawn from the end, because the end
and purpose whereunto they which are Teachers in ye Church do serve, is this,
so to pearce the ears with the lively voice of the word of God, that the
efficacy thereof may be mighty in the heart, and may brust out into the works
which are meet for repentance. Therefore let us acknowledge the agreement which
is between the Minister of the word speaking unto us outwardly, and God the
father comforting our hearts inwardly. Neither let us other-wise then the
thing it self declares to be true, disorderedly attribute these things
simply to the external minister, which are only proper to God: and let us not
confusedly ascribe those things to God, which are proper to the ministers.
Let us receive the voice of Christ when he speaks, with a pure heart: let us
hear the voice of the minister with open ears.

8 It is God that circumciseth the heart: but it is man that circumciseth the
flesh of the foreskinne. Deuteronomy. 30. 6.


Here all men may see that God does not circumcise Genesis 17. 24. 25.
the flesh of the fore-skinne immediately: but it is cut away by man: on the
contrary, God does circumcise the heart without the help Col. 2. 11.
of another. And for this cause is it that Paul calls the circumcision of the
heart, circumcision done without hands. Stephen the first Martyr calls the
Jews which were circumcised in flesh and not in spirit, uncircumcised in Act.
7. 51.
heart. Act. 7. 51.

Ob. The Lord gives this commandment, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Circumcise there-fore
the foreskinne of your heart, and be not any more stiffnecked. There-fore not
only the flesh, but also the heart is circumcised by man.

An. I answer, it is a fallacy of the Pelagianes a non causa, vt a causa,
from that which is no cause, as if it were a cause, if any man do gather the
power and strength of man out of the commandment. Augustine says better. By
the commandment learn what thou should have, by reprehension, that thou
have it not through thine own fault: by prayer, of whom thou must ask that
which thou should have.

9 The Ministers of the word baptize Mat. 3. 11.
with water: but it is Christ which baptizeth with the holy ghost, and with
fire.

Let no man inuert this good order of the dispensation of baptism. And let us
persuade our selves that we are as surely baptized of Christ by the holy
spirit, and fire inwardly: as we are sprinkled outwardly by the Ministers of
the word with water.

Ob. One Minister does give one baptism. There is but one baptism. Ephesians. 4. 5.
Therefore the Ministers of the word do not only baptize with water, but
also with the holy ghost.

An. I answer unto the mayor proposition, where-in there is first an
Equivocation in the word ( One). Secondly, there is petitio principij, a
crauinge of that to be granted, which is chiefly in controversy. For it is
said there is one baptism, not in respect of the sign, and the thing
signified, but of those which are partakers thereof.

Albeit therefore it behooves us to live together in unity, because we are
all baptized with one baptism: yet does it not there-vppon ensue that the
Ministers do baptize with the baptism of the spirit: unless a man will
speak metonymicallie.

10 In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper Ioh. 6. 51.
Christ does give to the faithful, bread, * which is his flesh, which was
given for the life of the World. * But the Ministers do give 1. Cor. 11. 28.
bread.

The same opinion must we have concerning the blood of Christ, and the sign
thereof, namely the Lords wine.

More-ouer, let us not corrupt the dispensation of this good order. For as we
see with our eyes things which are visible: we hear with our ears soundes
and words: with the smellinge we smell sauoures: with the touching we
touch the four first qualities: so in the Lords Supper we see the visible and
earthly signs the Lords bread, and wine: and with the mouth we consume them
naturally: but we acknowledge that the invisible celestial things, which
cannot be perceived with the outward senses, (namely the body of the Lord
which was given for us, and his blood which was shed for us) are offered unto
us by faith, which is an argument of things which cannot be seen: and that
we receive them only by faith, and that by a simple, and inexquisite faith:
as says Cyrillus.

Good God how unlearned and monstrous are those speeches which we see some
men use (by whom the Lord does tempt and prove us now): namely, that the
body of Christ is received with the mouth, and that as well of the Infidles,
as of the Belieuers? And again, that the very body of Christ is put into the
mouth of the receiver, by the hand of the Ministers of the word.

I quake when I think upon these things which follow here-vpon. For they
speak as foolishly as if a man (inuerting ye order of things) should say, ye
earthly things are received with ye mouth of the soul, and that celestial
things are received with the mouth of the body. Let us which continue in the
way of truth, through ye grace of GOD, pray earnestly for them which think
otherwise then we do, that the Lord will open their eyes, and give them
grace to think one thing with us in the Lord.

Quest. What think thou of that notable saying of Macarius the Egyptian. The
bread and the wine are types of his flesh, and blood, and they which receive
the visible bread, do eat the flesh of the Lord spiritually?

Ans. I do very well like that saying, neither were it an hard matter to
gather together many such like sayings, where-in the like thing is affirmed.
Not-withstandinge, this ought to satisfy us, that the same is extant in the
declaration of the confession of Basil.

Quest. But some there be which do think that it is an absurd thing for
any man to say, that the body of Christ is eaten spirituallie, and not
corporally? For they reason thus. The body of Christ is eaten, therefore it
is eaten corporally, and not spirituallie.

Ans. To the end I may answer briefly, I say, that as surely as we receive
the bread and wine of the Lord, so surely are we made partakers of the body
and blood of the Lord in that holy Supper. For the Lords Supper consists
upon these earthly things, and the heavenly things, both which we receive.

2 And as touching the receiving of heavenly things, I say more-ouer, that we
receive them only after a spiritual manner. Now I add this reason: because
these things are not present as in place, therefore not visiblie. And for this
cause are they not present as in place and visiblie, because they are not
present corporally, and therefore are they not perceived by the outward
senses. Very excellent truly is that decree of the counsel of Nice
concerning the holy supper of the Lord. And here again touching the Lords
table: we do not baselie set our minds upon the bread and the cup which
are upon the table, but lifting up our minds, we perceive by faith the lamb
of God, which is set upon that holy table, which lamb takes away the sins
of the world, which was profanely slain by the Priests, and we truly
receiving his honoble body and blood, do believe that they are signs of our
resurrection. And for this cause we do not receive much, but a little, that
we may know that we eat not to fill our bellies, but unto sanctification.

I might add also an other reason drawn from the definition of the natural
and bodily eating: which teaches us that the lively flesh of Christ is not
eaten bodily and with the mouth. The same is extant. Mark. 7. 18. 19. But I
will speak thereof else where if the Lord will, and give me leave.

If any man say that the body of Christ is eaten sacramentally, not
spiritually, we will pray him to learn to speak properly with ye Church and
not to trouble the younger sort with such dark sentences. Forasmuch as the
Lords bread is the Sacrament of the body of Christ, and therefore is the
bread called the body of Christ by Metonymia: he which eats this bread,
eats the body of Christ sacramentallie. To the end the younger sort may
understand these things: I say that the body of Christ is called his body
sometimes properly, sometimes metonymically. As the body of Christ (as it is
called his body properly) is given to be eaten of us truly and spiritually, so
is it received of us truly and spirituallie. But the body of Christ, as it is
called the body metonymically, (that is the Lords bread, if you respect the
same as it is bread is eaten naturally: and if you respect it as it is the
Sacrament of the body of Christ, he which eats this bread eats the body
of Christ sacramentally. But let it suffice to have spoken thus much by the
way. For even three words are sufficient in a good cause. God grant that all
things may serve to his glory and our instruction.

45. Lect. April 29.
A declaration of the parts of the oracle, concerning the censure of the
religion, and of life the Jewish people.

IF, as Galene does think, the Physicians ought to behave themselves in the
cutting up of the brain, as in a temple where the holy ceremonies are done
decently and orderly: much more ought they which study the holy Scriptures
with great reverence rightly to cut in pieces, and divide the word of truth,
in the school of the holy Ghost. Therefore I beseech the eternal GOD to
sanctify us by his truth, and to give us grace so to enter into the secret
corners of this oracle, that we may thence gather and bring such things as may
serve to the sanctifying of Gods holy name, and our own salvation.

Moreover if every thing which is set in order be comely as says Augustine,
then is the declaration of this oracle most comely, forasmuch as it is set in
very good order. Which we intend now to declare using a diuisiue instrument.

The parts of the Oracle are two in number, a parable, and an exhortation.

The parts of the argument, wherein the Prophet proves that the Jews, and
their administration did displease God, because they were unclean, are thus
disposed.

1 It contains an exordium, concerning the persous which were their own
judges. verse, 12.

2 The first problem or hard question concerning things which did not
sanctify: and the exposition thereof consisting upon a denial. verse, 13.

3 The second problem concerning these things which make a man unclean, and
an affirmative exposition thereof verse. 14.

4 The applying of the former parabolicall problemes unto the Prophets purpose.
Wherein he teaches that both the people of the Jews, and also all their
worship which they did to God, so long as the Temple was unbuilt, was
unclean, and for this cause was not acceptable in the sight of God. ver. 15.
And we see that in all these there is a preventing of an objection which is
this: As if our sacrifices, Sacraments, holy days, and all our ceremonies
which God has appointed, could displease the Lord, the Temple being yet not
built, so that for their sakes, we must needs build the Temple, least God
do not allow of them. The Prophet answers that all these things were
profane, and not acceptable in the sight of God, because that neglecting the
temple (which God would have builded) they would rather purchase and demerite
his favor by their ceremonies.

The exhortation.
The other part of the oracle consisting upon an exhortation unto a more
narrow consideration of the life, depends upon the former part, and may be
thus divided.

1 First it contains a rehearsal of the former life, and of those evils
whereunto it was subject, and of the principal causes thereof. For it becomes
the godly to profit under the fatherly correction and chasticement of God: and
hereunto does the remembrance and consideration of evils that are past not a
little avail. That they were punished it appears in the 16. verse. The cause
why they were punished is set down verse 18. The Lord says he smote the
Jews, and he reproves them because they did not repent.

2 Secondly it comprehends a promise of a blessing which God will send upon
the Jews, after they have taken in hand the building of the Temple. In this
place we will note two circumstances, the one concerning the time, the other
concerning the persons, for the Prophet declares who will bless, and whom
he will bless. verse. 19. 20.

All these things tend to this end, that we may know, that all those are
accursed, which buste themselves so in holy, civil, and household affairs:
that they have no regard of the glory of God, and the edifying of his Church:
and that they are blessed which do so administer holy things, and things
appertayning to this life, that before all things they give unto God the
things which are his, and bend all their might to the building up of the
Church.

Ver. 12.
Thus says the Lord of hosts, ask now the priests the Law.

The meaning of these words is this. Propounde unto the priests (which
profess that they are leaders of the blind, a light to those Romans 2. 19. 20.
which are in darkness, teachers of the unlearned, masters of infants, because
they have a form of knowledge and truth in the Law) such questions as are
not contrary to their profession, but are questions of the Law, and such as
are proper to their profession etc.

1. In this place we will note, that when as the corruptions of religion are to
be redressed, we must first begin at those which are teachers in the Church,
and not at those which are learners. For unless ye teachers be brought into
the way of truth, the blind shall lead the blind.

2. And when as their errors are to be convinced, we must use a religious kind
of zeal and wisdom, that they themselves condemninge themselves, may give
glory to God, and yield to the truth. For if the teachers be convinced of
error, and do suffer themselves to be brought back again into the way of
truth, the hearers will be easelie brought to the same.

3. It is the duty of those which are teachers in the Church, to answer
discreatlie when any question is asked them concerning the Law, according to
that saying. The lips of the priests shall keep knowledge, and they shall
require the law at his mouth: because he is the messenger of the Lord.

Let us also think that this is spoken to us which are students in divinity,
and are bound to give an account of our faith when it is demanded of us: and
let us get to our selves the most excellent knnwledge of heavenly things both
by studdie, and also by prayer.

There is a merry jest of Cicero extant, which he used toward Pompilius, who
would seem to be a Lawyer, when as he was altogether ignorant of the law. For
being called to be a witness in a matter, he answered Cicero, that he knew
nothing. Cicero made answer tauntingly, perhaps says he you think that the
question is asked you concerning the law.

But it is greater shame for one which professes divinity to have nothing to
answer, when he is asked concerning things which appertain unto salvation.

46. Lect. 13. April.
A digression concerning the doctrine wherein those which are teachers in the
Church must excel.

HIerome in his commentary upon the Epistle of Paul unto Titus Chap. 1. 9.
expounding these words, That he be able to comfort in sound doctrine, and to
refute them that speak against it: says thus: The former things which he
placed amongst the virtues of a bishop, do appertain unto the life: but
this which he says: That he be able to comfort in sound doctrine, and to
refute those which gaynsay it: is to be referred unto knowledge.

For if the life of a Bishop be only holy, he may profit himself in so
living. Furthermore if he shall be instructed both in learning, and speech: he
may be able to instruct both himself and others: and not only to instruct and
teach his own, but also to refute his adversaries: who unless they be
refuted and convinced, will easily turn away the hearts of the simple. This
place makes against those men, who giving themselves to slouthfulnes, idl^nes,
and sleep, do think it a sin to read the Scriptures: and they contemn
those, which meditate upon the law of the Lord day and night, as bablers and
unprofitable persons: not considering that after that the Apostle had set down
the catalogue of the conversation of a bishop, he commands also that he
be learned.

1 The doctrine wherewith the pastors of Churches ought to be furnished, is
called by many The diverse names of this learning.
names in the scripture. Sometimes it is called the word of knowledge, wherein
a teacher ought to excel. Sometimes it is called the word of wisdom, which
is necessary for a pastor, whose duty is not only to teach men, but also 1.
Cor. 12. 8.
to comfort some, to reprove some, to exhort some.

In this word (Knowledge) we must not^ the diverse significations thereof. For
there is one kind of knowledge which is so called by equivocation, as that
which Paul says to be falsely so called, which consists upon false
doctrine, vain bablinges, and oppositions. Such 1. Tim. 6. 20.
is for the most part the schole divinity, wherein also the chief points of
faith (which are set without the doubtfulnesse of man's judgment) are handled
both ways, after the school manner. There is an other kind of knowledge,
which is the true knowledge, which is sometimes called Wisdom. Augustine
disputing about the trinity, says thus. This is the right distinction of
wisdom and knowledge, that unto wisdom does appertain the intellectual
knowledge of eternal things: and unto knowledge belongs the reasonable
knowledge of temporal things. And Aristotle in his sixth book of Ethickes
defining knowledge, says, that it is a demonstratiue habit. The same Metap.
1. says, that Wisdom is the knowledge of the first and highest causes. And
in his Rethorike Lib. 1. he says, that it is the knowledge of many and
marvelous things. But these words are taken in the holy scripture, for the
most part confusedly, whenas they entreat of the knowledge of the mystery of
our salvation. Therefore will not we distinguish the^.

2 The Genus of this understanding is the gift of the grace of God. Ephesians. 3. 7.
Whereof I Genus.
am made a minister by the gift of the grace of God which is given me,
according to the working of his power. But the word ( understanding) which the
Apostle uses in the same Chapter ver. 4. is taken somewhat more strictly.
Whereby when ye read ye may know my understanding in the mystery of Christ.

The difference.
3 The Difference may be fet from the end thereof, as in that saying of
Zachary: And thou may give knowledge of salvation to his people. Luke 1. 77.
Receiving the reward of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Of the
which salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched, which have sought
after the grace which should come upon you. 1. Pet. 1. 9. 10. Therefore this
doctrine is the understanding of our salvation, and the causes thereof: whereof
we will speak hereafter.

4 Amongst the other properties of this understanding, Propria.
these are rehearsed. First that it is Tit. 1. 1. 2.
an acknowledging of the truth which is according to godliness. That it joins
spiritual 1. Cor. 2. 13.
things with spiritual things. For it does not corrupt the sincerity of ye
celestial doctrine with any leaven.

5 The adiunct of this knowledge is, to lighten other men by godly instruction,
according to that saying of Christ. You are the light of the world. Mat. 5.
14. And again, The lips of the Priest keep knoweledge, and they shall require
the law at his mouth: because he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Mat.
2. 7. And now seeing that (as Chrysostom says in a certain place) the things
which were spoken to the disciples, were spoken to all: let us remember that we
also must in time by prayer obtain of God, and by earnest study get this
excellent gift of God, that we may use the same to the edifying of many. And
let us quake and tremble whenas we light upon the sayings which concern the
ignorance of the false Prophets. Isay. ^8. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge?
and whom shall he make to understand that which he has heard? They are as
weined infantes. That is they are rude, and ignorant of heavenly things as
infants. And again, His watchmen are blind, they are altogether ignorant.
cap. 56. 10.

The efficient cause.
God the father works by the holy ghost the gift of understanding in the
faithful pastors of the Church, as it appears both by certain testimonies
which I have alleged, and also by this promise of our Lord Christ. And that
comforter even the holy spirit whom the Father shall send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and shall bring all things to your remembrance,
which I have told you. John. 14. 26.

The material cause.
7 The matter of this knowledge is Christ Jesus, who in respect thereof is
said to be made unto us wisdom. And for this cause also our Apostle says, I
had not determined to know any thing amongst you, but Christ Jesus and him
crucified. 1. Cor. 2. 2.

The formal cause.
8 Thou may with the Apostle call the form of knowledge, and of truth in the
law, that is, the information of knowledge and truth in the law, the form of
this knowledge. To. 2. 20. And again, The form of doctrine. Romans 6. 17.

They which are furnished with this knowledge, may gather by testimonies and
reasons conferred together, that Jesus Christ is our life, our health, our
resurrection. As it is said of Paul being newly converted. But Saul increased
the more in strength, and confounded the Jews that dwelt at Damascus,
confirming by testimonies conferred together that this was Christ. Act. 9. 22.

The end.
The next end thereof is, that it may serve to the instruction, correction,
consolation, and exhortation of those men, which are coheyres, partakers of one
body, and partakers of his promise in Christ through the Gospel. Ephesians. 3. 6.

And the last end of this knowledge is the glory of God, according to that
saying of ye same Apostle: To the intent that that manifold wisdom of God may
be made known by the church, to the principalities and powers, in heavenly
places. Ephe. 3. 10. Therefore that doctrine wherein the pastors and doctors of
the Church ought to excel, is the gift of true understanding, which is
according to godliness, concerning our salvation, serving to instruct the
faithful that which the spirit of God, revealing Christ, works to our
restoring and the glory of God.

Learn first (says Hyerome) before thou teach. For no man shall ever be able
to teach those things whereof he is ignorant. Therefore they do offend
grieuouslie which being neither furnished with the knowledge of heavenly
things, nor with the use of spiritual things, do take upon them to teach in
the Church. And (as Bernard says) being more ready to take the chair, then
the charge, for their bellies sake, to the great hinderance of the Church: they
play the part of those men which get their food with their tongue, and also
they play the Parates, in that they learn by heart, and pronounce without
judgment, sermons penned by other men.

47. Lect. 36. May.
Now let us return in Gods name unto our purpose. For those things
aforegoing, which were spoken concerning the skill in the law of God, which
the Priests ought to have: tend only to this end, that we may understand
that the Priests unto whose consciences the prophet appealeth, did condemn
themselves.

Verse 13.
If any man shall bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his
skirte do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be
made holy? And the Priests made answer and said, No.

1 The Fathers, the Prophets, Christ himself, and his Apostles did often times
use a parable to reprove, and convince men by their own judgment.

There be parabolical examples extant. Iud. 9. which Iotham the son of
Gedeon uses of the kingly honor given to the Olive tree, the fig tree, the
vine, and the bramble. Which Nathan the Prophet uses when he did reprove
David for murder and adultery, of the rich man and the poor man: which the
woman of Thekoah uses, of her two sons. 2. Sam. 14. Which Christ Jesus
uses, of the two sons which were sent by their Father into the vyneyarde: of
the vineyarde and husbandmen: of the marriage of the kings son. Mat. 21. 22.

In this place we have an example of a Problem. And again in Mat. 21. 25. of
the baptism, or doctrine of John the Baptist. And in the Chapter following, of
Christ the Lord and son of David.

A Position.
It is a point of spiritual wisdom so to appeal unto an other man's
conscience, whether it be by a Parable, or a Problem, or by some other means,
that he may plainly confess that he is convict, and that giving the glory to
God, he may yield to the truth.

2 The meaning of the problem which Haggeus did propound to the Priests, is
this. Do you think that you have therefore been an holy nation, because you
have lightly executed the ceremonyall worship, neglecting the restoring of
the Temple. Nay I prove that you have been unclean, after this manner. Look
how much holy flesh which is carried in the skirt of the garment, does
sanctify other meats when the garment touches them: so much does your
superstition and bodily exercise sanctify you from the infection of sin. But
flesh which is wrapped up in a cloth does not sanctify other meats. Therefore
these ceremonies and bodily excercises do no whitt avayle to the sanctifying of
you. Some there be which by contradiction do take these words (holy, and to
hallowe, or sanctify) so, that they may signify, 1. Cor. 14.
(profane, or to make unclean.) Therefore the meaning shall be this. Unclean
flesh which is wrapped in a cloth does not pollute other meats. Let the godly
judge whether exposition is better. For the spirit of the prophets is subject
to the prophets.

1. Position.
The people of God must not acknowledge that their sanctification (whereby they
are cleansed from the infection, and uncleanness of flesh, and blood) comes
from the hungry and weak elements of the world.

2. Position.
All things are clean to the clean: but unto the profane and infidels there
is nothing clean: but even their mind and conscience is unclean. Tit. 1. 15.
Out of this saying may we gather, that only the faithful are clean, and that
all infidels are unclean.

3 Position.
The worship which profane men do unto God, (for-asmuch as it is unclean) it
can in no case please God, neither does he allow the same.

The answer.
3 The answer consists upon the denial which the priests make.

A Position.
In the confession of faith, and in our answers concerning religion, we must
use no dissimulation, ne feigninge, no feigned refusal. For it becomes us
freely to profess these things, which the Lord of his goodness has revealed
unto us. And it is manifest, and execrable impiety falsely to pretend
ignorance, least thou be enforced to confess the matter. As when the Jews
did say y^ they knew not whether the baptism of John were from heaven, or of
men. Mat. 21. 27.
Therefore let no man suffer himself to be so carried away into such
dissimulation (being moved with the example of those men, which walk not
rightly in the gospel of Christ, and are of some authority) that he feign
himself to be ignorant of the truth, and extinguish the spirit which is in
himself. Which thing (alas for woe) many have done, and in these days do,
to Latonus Hossmeisterut.
their utter ruin, as is too evident.

A digression. Distinctions concerning conference in divinity.
1 God will have us to stir up the gift of God by godly conference concerning
godliness, that we may profit, according to that saying o^ Paul, Col. 3. 16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentifully with all wisdom: teaching,
and admonishing one another etc. Now if all the faithful must do this, how
much more ought they to do it, whom God does separate to teach others?

And it must needs be that the holy spirit must be the author, the
taske-maister, and moderator of this conference. For the end of such godly
conference is the truth, which we must know and bring to light. And it is the
holy spirit alone that leads us into all truth.

3 The natural man is unfit for such conference. I call him the natural man
which follows in all things the reason of the flesh, being bee-witched with
the acceptinge of persons, and vain glory: and finally, which understands
not the things of God, but the things that are of men. I prove that he is
unfit for such godly conference, thus. No man can dispute rightly about these
things which he neither understands, nor yet allows: but the natural man
understands not th^se things which are of the spirit of God, for they are
unto him foolishnes, neither can he know these things which are judged
spirituallie. Ergo. etc.

4 But the spiritual man will speak truly, and proportionablie of the
matters which appertain unto God.

I call him the spiritual man which is led by the spirit of God, who
acknowledges Christ Jesus a-lone to be his master: and who in all things
(being lightened by faith) does ^eeke the glory of GOD. He is fit for such
holy conference, because comparinge Spiritual things, with Spiritual
things, he discerns all things.

5 The holy Scripture inspired by God, is unto him a mark, and most certain
rule. Whether prophecy, according to the proportion of faith. Romans 12. 6. We
have a most sure word of the Prophets: to the which ye do well, that ye take
heed, etc.

6 He declares his understanding according to the example of Christ Jesus,
both in apposing, and also in answering.

I call the word of wisdom and knowledge, or the excellent knowledge of the
mysteries of God, Understanding.

Apposinge serves to the findinge out, and pondering of things which concern
God. For as we must not answer before the opponent has plainly declared his
opinion: so must not the consent go before knowledge.

Answering must serve to the weighing and censuringe of matters, and opinions:
that we may freely testify what the Lord has revealed to us concerning the
same.

48. Lect. 31. March. 1580.
FOr-asmuch as the Lord does command us ^. The. 5. 21.
to try all things, and to retain that which is good: we must first
confer things together, and afterward lay them up in our heart. GOD will not
have us to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of
God ^ John. 4. 1.
or no. Therefore let us not take heed to those men, which do feign any
assertion (such as this is: Christ ascended, that is, he vanished out of
sight) and do command us to believe the same without any authority of
Scripture, or reason, saying that we ought not to ask for any proof thereof.

To confer, is diligently to compare one part of holy doctrine with an-other,
conferring the testimonies and the reasons together. For there is no one part
thereof repugnaunt to another. but they do all of them excellently agree
together.

Examples. He which affirms that there is free will in a man that is not
regenerate, he away original sin: and he which either denies, or
extenuateth * this, he takes away much Original sin.
from the merits of Christ. So he which includes in the bread of the Lords
Supper, the body of Christ corporally, he gaine-saith the article of the
Creed, He ascended into heaven: which we must understand historicallie, and
not allegoricallie. So he which will be justified by works, has no part,
nor fellowship with Christ.

To lay things up in heart, is to lay up deeply in the mind things which we
have considered upon, and which we do well know: that they may be ready,
and serve for our purpose when we have need of them: as it is said of Marie,
Luke 2. 19. But Mary kept all these things, pondering them in her heart.

8 When As the authority of Scripture is alleged, we must see whether we
ought to follow the written word, or the meaning thereof.

These two rules of Augustine delivered in his third ^ooke of Christian
doctrine Cap. 16. are worthy to be remembered.

The first is. If it be such a kind of speech as contains a commandment,
or forbids any wickedness or heinous offense, or commands profit or
bountifulnes, it is not figurative. The second. But if it seem to command
any wickedness or heinous offense, or to forbid commodity, or bountifulnes, it
is figurative. Unless (says he) you eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. This seems to command
wickedness, or an heinous offense. It is there-fore a figure, commaundinge us to
be partakers of the Lords passion, and sweetly, and profitablie to remember,
that his flesh was crucified, and wounded for us. Thus says he.

9 Also we must make and mark the choice of the instruments of Logic,
namely of a demonstration, and an argument.

We must not dispute pro and con after the manner of the Schools, (as do the
school divines,) about these matters, which are undoubtedly true, least the
duller and simpler sort be made doubtful. But things which are undoubtedly
true are to be handled demonstratiuely, that they may both be declared, and
also by most firm reasons be proved to be true. And false things are to be
brought to light, that they may be refuted, and they are also to be reproved,
that their falsehood being disclosed they may hurt no man.

10 It shall be a point of singular wisdom, to know these men well, which are
our adversaries. For some men there be which are delighted in the truth, other
some there be which are not so. Of the former sort was Apollos of Alexandria,
an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, whom Aquila and Priscilla
instructed more fully in the way of God. Of the latter sort are they of whom
our Apostle speaks. And as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so do these
men resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.
But they shall prevail no longer, for their madness shall be made known to
all men, as theirs also was. 2. Tim. 3. 8. 9.

As they which are willing to be taught, are to be instructed with all
meekenes: so ought also the mouths of the stubburne to be stopped. 2. Tim. 2.
24. But the servant of the Lord must not fight, but he must be gentle toward
all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil. Instructing them with meekenes that
are contrary minded, etc. Tit. 1. 9. 10. 11. Let a bishop hold fast that
faithful word according to doctrine, that he may also be able to exhort with
wholesome doctrine, and to convince them that speak against it. For there are
many disobedient, and vain bablers, and deceivers of minds, chiefly they
which are of the circumcision: whose mouths must be stopped etc.

12 We must only dispute about these things which are meet for wholesome
doctrine. According to that commandment of the Apostle. But foolish and
unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they breed strife. 2. Tim. 2. 23. And
1. Tim. 6. 20. 21. O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thee, and
avoid profane outcries about vain matters, and oppositions of sciences
falsely so called: which while some men have professed, they have erred
concerning the faith.

13 When As the truth of any opinion appears by a demonstration, we must
not doubt any longer. For as they which are past a tempestuous Sea, and are
arrived in a Haven, do lay away all fear: so let them which see the amiable
light of the truth, cast away the contrary opinion, and profess the known
truth, according Psalm. ^16.
to that saying, I believed, and therefore I spoke etc. I will say no more at
this time, but this, that I would have the studious youth to read oftentimes,
and attentively, that little golden book of ye most excellent man D. Lambert
Daneus, concerning the sophistical arguments of heretics, and diligently to
apply to their use his precepts touching the answeringe of false arguments,
gathering together examples thereof out of all authors, where-of there is
great store in the books of Calvin, Luther, Martyr, Bucer, and others.

Verse. 14.
Thus said Haggeus, if a man that is unclean, by reason of the carcas of a
man, shall touch any of these things, shall it be unclean? And they answered,
It shall be unclean.

Hierome interprets this place on this wise: There is an other question
propounded to the priests: because they answered well to the former, and there
is as it were a certain kind of problem or darcke question framed, where-in
an vn-skilfull person might easily err. For admit some man be ignorant of the
law, and like-as he answered touching the sanctified flesh, that the flesh,
or pottage, or wine, or oil, or other meats, are not sanctified: so will he
in like sort answer in this, and say: that he which is polluted in soul,
cannot pollute these things which the holy flesh could not sanctify.
Therefore he asks this question, and says, If he which is polluted in soul:
that is, if he which is made-vncleane by touching of a dead man, shall touch
any of all these things, as bread, or wine, or pottage, or oil, or other
meats, shall these things be made unclean by his touching of them? And the
priests, the chief where-of was Iehosua the son of Iehosadack, by whom they
knew the law, answered and said: All these things are unclean, which he
which is unclean does touch. Thus far goes Hierome.

The problem is, Are these things made unclean, which he which is unclean
by the law, does touch? The answer. They are. For as to those that are
clean, all things are clean: so, to the unclean and Infidels, nothing Tit.
1. 15.
is clean, but their mind and conscience is polluted. And that which the
Apostle speaks concerning the meat and drink which the faithful do use
with thankes-giuinge: For it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. 1.
Tim. 4. 5.) may be understood of the whole life, and functions of the same
men where-in they obey the counsel of God.

Further-more, here let the studious youth note this distinction of uncleanness.
For there was one kind of uncleanness which was ceremonial, and this might be
common as well to the true Israelites, as to the Hypocrites. As for example. If
any man had been present with a man which was a dying: if any man had been
troubled with an issue of Seed: if any man had touched a menstruous woman, or
a dead carcas, or any other unclean thing: he was unclean by the law. And
there was, and is an-other kind of uncleanness of the flesh, and of the
Spirit, which flows from original sin, and is joined with unbelief.

49. Lect. Verse. 15.
Therefore Haggeus began to say, So is this people, and so is this nation in my
sight, says the Lord, and so is all the work of their hands: and
what-soeuer they offer there, it is unclean.

THe Prophet applies the former problemes to his own purpose, and he
conuinceth the Jews of uncleanness, when as notwithstanding they seemed to
themselves to be an holy nation, and the peculiar people of God, whose words
and deeds, and especially their holy administration, were approved of God:
out of this place must we gather thus much.

1 That God does not allow of that worship which unclean men do unto him.

2 For God is pure and holy, and will only be worshipped of these men which
are holy.

3 That ye unclean are prophaue, of whom also the Ethnickes when they did their
sacrifice, said: Depart hence you profane persons.

4 And therefore have we need to be reformed and sanctified that we may worship
God aright.

5 Fifthly, we learn that the unclean, and infidels do worship God outwardly.

6 And that only the faithful do worship him with the reasonable service.

But for instructions sake, we will handle in this fifteenth verse, three
things: The proposition, the amplification, and the confirmation which
consists upon an induction.

1 The Proposition.
The Jews are unclean. These words seemed no less strange to the Jews in
times past, which worshipped God in the letter, and not in the spirit: then
these would be in these days: Many of the Christians are unclean, howsoever
they frequent Sermons, and use the Sacraments.

And let us note these aphorisms concerning uncleanness, which we must set
down according to the questions of a Method, An sit, quid sit, quare sit,
quod sit: Whether it be, what it is, wherefore it is, and that it is.

1 All men are unclean. Prou. 20. 6. What man can say: I have cleansed my
heart, I am cleansed from my sin?

2 There is uncleanness of the flesh, and there is uncleanness of the spirit. 2.
Cor. 7. 1. Hereby it appears that the whole man is defiled, and not the one
part of him only.

3 But this uncleanness proceeds from the flesh, and not from the spirit.
Therefore Paul recites uncleanness amongst the works of the flesh. Gal. 5. 19.

4 Not-withstanding, this uncleanness is attributed one way to the children of
God, and another way to the unbelievers. For the children of God are unclean
in some respect: first, because they are infected with original sin:
secondly, for-asmuch as they are not fully regenerated: lastly, because being
ouer-taken with some offense, they must pray with David: O God create in me a
new heart. Psalm. 51. But the unbelievers because they be destitute of faith
(where-by the heart is purified) they are, and are called simply unclean.

Now let us also briefly touch the causes of cleannes. The efficient cause
thereof is Christ Jesus. Heb. 2. 11. For both he that does sanctify, and they
which are sanctified are all of one. The helpers are the regenerate. Isa. 1.
wash you, be you clean. The sacrament or sign, is baptism. Ephesians. 5. 26. That
he might sanctify it, purging it by the washing of water through the word.
The principal subject, is the heart. Ps. 51. Create in me o God a new heart.
The form, the wiping away of the filthiness, and the act of continual
sanctification. The next end. That it may be a glorious Church, without spot
or wrinkle. * The last end, to see God. * Blessed Ephesians. 5. 7. Mat. 5. 8.
are the pure in heart, because they shall see God. Let it be sufficient to have
spoken thus much touching the proposition.

2 The Amplification.
This amplification is contained in these words, In my sight, says the Lord.
As if he should say, Although you seem to your selves to be clean in the
sight of the Lord our God, yet does he plainly testify, that you are
unclean. The judgment of God concerning the clean and cleanes, is not like
to the judgment of men. Men do oftentimes count them unclean, who in the
sight of God are clean, and on the contrary. But God who beholds the heart
knows best what ought to be thought of every man.

Further-more, it oftentimes falls out that a man deceives him self,
according to that saying of Solomon: There is a generation that are pure in
their own conceit, and yet are they not washed from their filthiness. Pro. 30.
12.

Object. The events are answerable to the counsels and judgments of God. But
the clean and unclean have all one event, according to that saying of
Solomon: All things fall out a-like to all. The just and unjust, the good and
clean, and unclean, he which sacrifices, and he which sacrifices not, have
one event: as is the good, so is the sinner, etc. Eccle. 9. 2. Therefore God
does not judge the clean and unclean.

An, I answer unto the minor proposition, where-in there is a fallacy from
that which is spoken in some respect, unto that which in spoken simply.
Certain events both prosperous, and unfortunate, are common as well to the
faithful, as to the unfaithful: but not all. Oftentimes both of them are in
adversity: sometimes both of them do enjoy prosperity for a season. But
like-as even prosperity turns to the ruin of the infidels: so adversity
does profit the faithful. These latter events are not common to the clean and
unfaithful.

50 Lect.
3 The Induction.
THe induction where-by our prophet confirms the proposition is this. All the
Jewish nation is unclean. All the works of the hands of this same people are
unclean. The offerings which the Jews have offered to God are unclean. And all
things what-soeuer they do are unclean. Therefore this proposition is true:
The Jews are unclean.

In this induction we will note these five points.

1 The order of things. He begins with the Jewish nation as with the Vine
which brings forth wild grapes, and not good grapes. That done he
proceeds unto the works of their hands, that is, unto their household and
civil affairs, which serve properly to the maintenance of this natural life.
Lastly, he ascends unto the highest degree, which comprehends the
administration of the priests, and he testifies that the Jews are unclean
in respect of all these things, and therefore are they subject to the wrath of
God.

The second thing which we have here to note, is, that under these words (
Nation, and People) the prophet comprehends the men of honor, of mean
estate, and of lowest degree. Isaias the prophet in his, 1. Cap. 5. 6. using an
allegory, accuses in these words all estates of men. Every head is weak,
and every heart is heavy: from the soale of the foot unto the head, there is
nothing whole there-in, but wounds, and swelling, and sores full of corruption.
You see how uprightly, and incorruptly the prophets behaved themselves, if at
any time they were to reprove sins which were committed by men of all
estates. Their foote-steps must we follow, and it is our duties to rebuke
sinners without flattery, or respect of persons.

3 Thirdly, we note that the works of our hands are unclean, unless they be
sanctified by prayer, and the word of God. Therefore David in the 90. Psalm
prays thus. Let the beutie of the Lord our God be upon us, and direct the
work of our hands. Faith acknowledges and professes that al our labor is in
vain, unless the Lord do bless the same, according to that which is written
in the 127. Psalm, 1. ver. If the Lord build not the house, their labor is
but in vain which build it: if the Lord keep not the City, the watchman
watches but in vain. 2. It is in vain for you to rise early, and to lie
down late, eating the bread of sorrow: so will he give his beloved sleep
etc.

4 Fourthly we have to note that there is the figure Synecdoche in the word (
offerings.) For he knitteth together as it were in one bundell all
ecclesiastical actions, sacrifices, sacraments, holy days, fastinges, etc.
And these actions are called unclean, not in respect of God who commanded
them, nor of the form: but in respect of men which did not do them in faith,
and which rested only upon the work wrought.

5 Fifthly, the end and use of the oracle. Let us remember that the Prophet
speaks these things to us, that discending first of all into our selves, we
may acknowledge and be heartily sorry for these evils and diseases wherewith
we are infected: secondly that we may call diligently to an account our
counsels, studies, affairs: and that we may not faltter our selves whenas we
perceive that we have rather sought earthly things then heavenly things: and
lastly that we may well weigh and consider with our selves, how, and with what
conscience we have worshipped God hitherto, and that we be heartely displeased
with our selves, if we shall understand that we have drawn nigh unto God
with our mouth, and in heart have been far from him.

A supposition concerning the study of diuinitle.
1 We must earnestly beg of God, and so much as ever we are able must we
endeavor, that our studies may be holy, not profane, and unclean. For we
are conuersaunt in Chrtstes school, wherein we must be most earnestly given
to holiness.

2 And our studdies shall be clean and holy to God, by this means, if GOD
shall so thoroughly sanctify us, that our spirit, soul, and body may be
perfect. Let us remember that we are the temples of the holy Ghost, which must
not be defiled with the filthiness of the flesh and spirit.

2 The works of our hands must be clean. For we must have the mystery of
faith in a pure conscience. Let therefore our thoughts, our words, our works
be chaste and pure* that we may be unto others a laudable example of integrity
and holiness: being students in the holy Scriptures, not in outward show
only, but in truth and in deed.

4 The same opinion must we have concerning our sacrifices, that is, our
prayers, our thanksgiving, our patience in trouble, and all our holy actions,
which must needs be lightened by faith and the knowledge of Jesus Christ the
mediator, that they may be acceptable to God, and profitable to us.

5 The author of our study is God, of whom it is often times said in the law,
Be ye holy as the Lord our God is holy.

6 The matter thereof is Christ Jesus, who is made unto us not only wisdom,
but also sanctification.

7 The form of the study of divinity appears not only in speculatio^, but
also in practice, that is, in the unfeigned and continual exercise of true
godliness.

8 The ends of this study are not gain, and these things which serve to the
feading of our belly: (for in Christ's warrefare we must not seek the
commodity of this world: as says Jerome:) but the glory of God, and our
own edification, and also the edification of the whole Church.

9 Let us not doubt, but be well assured that our studies are sanctified by
prayer, thanksgiving, and the continual reading of the holy bible.

Panormitanus says that Alphonsus king of Aragonia was wont to boast, y^ he
had red the holy Bible with the gloss fourteen times over. Let us therefore
give our selves to reading and meditating upon the holy Scriptures, which
entreat of the almighty God. For Plato says very well: Omnis scientia magis
obest quam prodest sine cognitione optimi. All knowledge hurts more then it
profits, without the knoweledge of the best.

10 Let us apply these things which we read in y^ scriptures unto our use,
that they may serve to our instruction, consolation, correction, and
reprehension. For the end of our study is not only to behold and consider
upon things, but also to practice the same. And God will have us not only to
be hearers, but also doers of his law.

The Lord Jesus grant that we may daily profit, and be made better then
our selves, bringing forth fruits meet for our holy profession, to the
sanctifying of his holy name, and the salvation of our souls. Amen.

51. Lect. Inn. 13. 1580.
Verse. 16.
Now therefore I pray you set your heart from this day upward, before the
workmen did lay one stone upon another in the Temple of the Lord.

THis phrase ( Set your heart from this day and upward) does signify thus
much, to call to an account our former led life, and to inquire and judge what
has been done according to the law, and what contrary to the same.

There is the same manner of speech used in the 4. Psalm. ver. 4, Speak in
your heart, that is, ponder these things with your selves. Our Prophet in
these words exhorts the Jews diligently to consider, what they have been,
and how they have behaved themselves heretofore: and he wills them not to
disceyue themselves being blinded and bewitched with selfeloue. For, as Paul
the Apostle says, whosoever seems to himself to be some thing when he is
nothing, this man is desceyued by his own mind: or as it is in the greek
text, He deceives himself. Gal. 6. 3.

Omitting the supposition or argument, we will proceed unto the position.

Of the judgment of the Saints.
1 It is without all doubt, that the Saints which live here upon earth, must
judge themselves. For this is most certain: If we did judge our selves, we
should not be punished. But when we are punished, we are instructed of the
Lord, least we should be condemned with the world. ^. Cor. 11. 31. 32. The
example of Paul is extant. Romans 7. who did most severely judge himself.

2 And least we be deceived in this our judgment, we must follow the rules
of faith, hope, and charity, appointed unto us by God. For it is meet that
we stand or fall by the judgment of God.

3 Of the trial of our faith it is said: Prove yourselues whether you be in
the faith or not, examine your selves. Know not ye your owneselues, how that
Jesus Christ is in you? Unless you be reprobates. 2. Cor. 13. 5.

4 And that must be understood of the words and deeds, and of the whole life,
which the same Apostle taught. 1. Cor. 11. 31. If we did judge our selves, we
should not be punished.

5 What the godly judge ought to think of the wicked which are in flourishing
estate, the Psalmist teaches in these words: Until I entered into the
sanctuary of God, and understood the last end of these men. Certaynely thou
have set them in slipperie places, thou make them to fall into desolation.
How sodaynely etc.

6 We may learn out of the 77. Psalm, not only what we ought to think of
the suddayne alteration, and fall of the saints from the coppe of dignity: but
also a remedy for the same. I numbered the days from the beginning, and the
years of old. I called my song to remembrance: I commened with mine heart in
the night season, and searched out my spirits. Will the Lord absent himself
for ever, and will he show no more favor? And again, ver. 10. And I said
this is my death, yet I remember the years of the right hand of the most
highest. 11. And I remembered the works of God: certaynely I remembered thy
marvelous works from the beginning. 12. And I did meditate upon all thy
works, and I did devise of thine acts. It is better for us to do thus then
to speak unto fortune in that old verse of Demetrius.

Thou have created me, and thou seem to fly from me.
This Censure teaches us, that it is good for us that the Lord does humble
us, that we may learn his iustifications. Sufferinges are made unto us
instructious, a^ he says in Herodotus. I will make an end after that I shall
have told you, that even Pythagoras taught his to discende into themselves, and
to try and examin^ themselves according to the verse: Wherein have I offended,
what have I done, or what part of my duty have I omitted. For we offend three
manner of ways. First when we do otherwise then we ought, as when Elye did
but lightly and for fashions sake rebuke his children, whenas they offended
grieuouslie and many ways. Secondly when we do that which should have
been left undone. As when Ahas king of Judah being not contented to have God
for his defender, did fly unto the king of the Assyrians, and became his
partner in war.

Lastly when as we leave that undone which we ought to have done. As if he
which is a professor of divinity, do not apply his study as he ought.

52. Lect. 14. June.
Verse. 17.
Before they were in that work, the husbandman came unto an heap of twenty
bushels, and it was but ten bushels. Also the dresser of the vineyarde came
unto the winepresse, that he might draw out fifty hogsheades of wine out of
the press, and there were but twenty.

IN this place we have an example of Gods curse, whereof mention is made Deuteronomy.
28. 20. The Lord shall send upon thee a curse, contrition, and destruction,
in every thing which thou handlest and do, until thou be quite put out, and
perish swiftly, because of the wickedness of thy works whereby thou have
forsaken me.

1 In this place we must suppose, that the blessing concerning things
appertayning to this life, was unto the people of Israel as the earnest of
spiritual things: the curse concerning the same was a most manifest token of
the want of spiritual things. The particular in place of the general.


2 Therefore let us think that one Species is put in place of the Genus, and
that the Church and common wealth were in like case, as were the private
affairs and husbandry.

3 Amongst the other kinds of curses, these also must be reckoned up, when
the hope which men have of their studies and affairs, is frustrate. Iam. 4. 2.
Ye lust and have not, ye envy and have indignation, and cannot obtain: ye
fight and war, and get nothing, because ye ask not. Prayers made in vain:
as the same Apostle tells us in the verse following: Ye ask and have not,
because ye ask amiss, that ye may spend them upon your lusts. ver. 3. 3.
Labor bestowed in vain. It is in vain to have to rise up early, and late to
take rest, and to eat the bread of sorrow: so shall he give his beloved
sleep. Psalm. 127. 2.

4 And in very deed that which is spoken concerning the harvest and vintage,
may well be referred unto other things also, as unto the study of divinity,
and unto the administration of the word of God. The Lord in his just judgment
does accurse many, so that seeing they will not love the truth, they are
always learning, yet are they never able to come to ye knowledge thereof. For
they prefer the opinion of men, before the manifest word of God: and being
addicted to heresy, they become blind and deaf, so that they can neither
see, nor hear these things, which notwithstanding other men do easily see
and hear: and furthermore they fall to railing, as Galene says very truly.
The same opinion must we have of the ministry of certain men, and of their
vain labor whereby they profit no man. For seeing that they seek themselves,
and the glory of this world, they rage, etc.

53. Lect. 17. June. 1580.
Verse. 28.
I smote you with drought, and meldewe, all the works of your hands: and ye
turned not unto me, says the Lord.

THis verse contains not only a recital of the causes of the former
scarcity wherewith the Lord has punished the Jews: but also a complaint of
their stiffeneckednes, which they did declare, whenas they were not bettered,
though they were moved thereto by the miseries whereof they tasted, Paul
calls this Hardness, and an heart that cannot repent.

We will first handle the rehearsal of the causes: secondly this notable
question: Whether Romans 2. 5.
adversity does make men better or no.

The recital of the causes.
This rehearsal of the causes comprehends in it self a treaty concerning
meteores, wherein we must consider the causes, and kinds of contrary
tempests.

The principal cause of such tempests, is God: who sometimes by the good
temperature of the air and heaven does bless us: sometimes he rayseth up
horrible tempests, and destroys the corn, and making the ground either too
dry, or too moist, he does send a curse upon us. Mat. 5. 45. Our heavenly
Father makes his sun to rise upon the bad and the good, and he sends
rain upon the just and the unjust, Act. 14. 17. God has not suffered himself
to be without witness, in doing good, giving us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with meats and gladness. But of the fearful
tempests of the a^re, and heaven when it is troubled, it is said Psalm. 29. 3.
The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God of glory makes it to
thunder, etc.

Let us therefore take no heed to these men which think that Devils and their
bondslaues magicians, and witches, are able to stir up te^pestes. Let us
rather think thus, that the wicked spirits which are conversant in the air,
and water, d^ forsee by the signs and causes, tempests which are at hand, and
so they persuade witches, to practice their deuillish charms at that very
instant, when the tempeste arises.

One kind of horrible tempest is hayle. And hayle (as Pliny in the second
book of his natural history chap. 60. does witness) is a shower congealed,
which falls oftener in the day time then in the night season, and is sooner
resolved De not. Deor. Lib. 30.
then snow. And that which Cicero says is false. But the Gods do not care
for the smaller things, neither do they destroy the small fields, and little
vines of all men: neither was it for Jupiter to take any heed to that, if
blasting or hayle have hurt any thing: neither do kings regard every small
thing which is in their kingdom. For both in this place, and also in many
other places of the holy scripture it is plainly affirmed, that God does
stir up, and also appease tempests, at his pleasure. Psalm. 78. 47. He
destroyed their vines (meaning ye Egyptians) with hayle, and wild fig trees
with the great hayle. He gave their cattle also to the halye, and their
possessions to the coals of fire.

Drought is called of the latins Vredo, of the Gretians (...), whereby herbs,
trees, and vines are spoiled. Pliny in his natural history, writes after
this sort, of diverse kinds of tempests. Ante omnia autem duo genera caelestis
iniuriae meminisse debemus, etc. And before all things we must speak of two
sorts of injuries which the heaven does. One which we^ call tempests, under
which are comprehended hail, storms, and such like: which when they chance,
it is called the greater violen^^. These proceed from the horrible stars, as
we have often times said, as from Arcturus, Orion, the Hoedi. The other is
the things which come to pass when the heavens are silent, and when the
nights are fair: which no man can perceive until they be done. These
things are common, and do much differ from the former, which some call
canker, some blasting, some the carbuncle, but all barrennes.

Ruellius in his second book of the nature Cap. 151. number. 40.
of stocks says, Plerique dixere etc. Most men have said, that the dew which
is burnt with the whote sun is the cause of canker in fruits, and of the
Carbuncle in Vynes, which Pliny supposes to be false in some respects, and
that all blasting comes by cold only, and that the sun does no hurt. For
first of all we see that this thing happens only in the night season, and
before the heat of the sun: and that it comes to pass altogether by
reason of the Moon: because this hurt is done only in the change, and in the
full of the Moon, etc.

Robigo does signify both a feigned goddess Or blasting.
whose feast was called Robigalia, and also a maledie which happens to Corn.
If any man be disposed to read of the three feasts of the Romans which were
called Robigalia, vinalia, Floralia, let him read amongst others books,
Pliny in the 18. book of his natural history. Cap. 29.

Quest. Whether does adversity make men better or no?

Ans. I answer first by a distinction of men, whereof some do love God, and
some do not. To those which love God, all things fall out for the best.
Therefore even sufferings are unto them Romans 8. 24.
instructions. For they know, and understand, that they are therefore judged
of God, that they may not be condemned with the world. 1. Cor. 11. 37.


Secondly by a distinction of afflictions, whereof some are sent for the
punishing of men, some for to try them. The godly being chastened both ways,
are made better. The Infidels when they are punished of the Lord, they are
angry, they rage, they murmr against the judgments of God. Thirdly they
only profit by the Lords gentle correction, whom the Lord end^weth with the
gift of repentance. But (as Moses proves by the example of many of the
Isralites) GOD does not give unto all men an heart to understand, eyes to
see, ears to hear. Lastly Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
Esayas proves the same thing by the example of the people of the Jews. cap.
9. 13. And the people returned not unto him that smote the^: neither have they
sought the Lord of hosts. Ob. Therefore they which do not repent, are to be
excused, seeing they cannot have the gift of repentance.

Ans. I deny the consequent, because here is a fallacy, in that that is
assigned to be a cause, which is no cause. For the cause of impenitencie is
unbelief, which is grafted in the natural man. And Oecolampadius says well,
That, where there is want of faith, there is also impenitencie, and want of
good works. In steed of an epiloge I will add certain excellent sayings of
the fathers, which serve somewhat for this purpose. Augustine entreating of
blasphemy against the holy ghost, concludes: Therefore this impenitencie (for
so may we after a sort call by some one name both Blasphemy, and the word
against the hole Ghost) is unpardoned for ever. Thereby we gather that there is
one kind of impenitencie which is unpardonable, and another which is
pardonable. And the reason of this diversity is fet from the knowledge, and
ignorance of those which do offend.

The same Augustine in his 7. sermon of time, says. Whilst that the wicked
are brydeled, the licentiousness of their sins is restrained. For oftentimes
the wicked are reformed by stripes, if the exhortations of the just do profit
nothing. Punishment does oftentimes keep back men from damnable factes, whom
the benefits of God can not keep in good works.

Cyprian. As a good master bestows a good alms by the ministry of an
evil servant: So also the merciful Lord will call unto repentance one by
means of another, although he be an unpenitent person. Thus much did the holy
Martyr most truly say of reaping fruit by the impenitencie of other men.

Chrysostom does by a metaphore testify that the deferring of repentance
does bring forth impenitencie. Hom. 9. If (says he) we shall proceed to
neglect a flame which is kindled: we build a fire against our selves, which we
cannot extinguish: for even in wickedness it comes to pass. etc.

54. Lect. 27. June. 1580.
Verse. 19. 20.
Set your heart from this day and upward, I say from the four and twentieth
day of the nynth month, that is, from the day wherein the foundation of the
Temple was laid, set your heart. Is there as yet seed in the barn?
Furthermore, the fig tree, and the Pomegranate, and the olyue tree have not
as yet brought fourth fruit: from this day will I bless you.

The argument.
Since that time* wherein (setting apart your worldly business) you laid the
foundation of the Temple, has the Lord blessed you, etc.

The positions which are to be noted in this place.

1 Likeas a curse does ensue too much carefulnes for earthly things: so the
blessing of the Lord does accompany the desire of heavenly things.

2 For as the Lord does worthily despise those which contemn him: so does he
never for-sake those which love him.

3 He wilt have the promises of this life, and of life everlasting, to be
answerable unto godliness, which is profitable unto all things.

4 This thing is so certain, that the time of the blessing agrees even with
the time of the conversion: as Haggeus teaches us in this place.

5 Further-more, the scarsitie and infirmity of the second causes, are no let,
or hinderance to the bountifulnes, and power of the first and principal cause.

Of the blessing of God.
1 The signification of the blessing of God. The blessing of God (which is
called in Hebrew BERICHA, in Greek (...)) signifies in this place, the
bountiful dispensation or bestowing of ye benefits of God, which who-soeuer
do enjoy, they are called, The blessed of the Father. Mat. 25. 34.

2 We gather first of all by the blessing which was promised to Abraham and
his seed, that God does bless us by bestowing upon us his benefits
abundantly. Secondly we gather this by the general experience of all the
saints, according to these sayings: I will make thee great, and I will bless
thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessinge. And again:
Therefore they which are of faith Genesis 12. 2.
are blessed with faithful Abraham. Gal. 3. 9. 2 Whether it ^ee.
And we do in very deed try, that so often as we descend into our selves,
God does also bless us, and that many ways, as that which follows shall
declare.

3 It is certain, that God does bless us by 3 What it is.
bestowing his benefits upon us. And he bestows his benefits upon us, when
he gives us hability to increase, and when he adorneth and furnishes us
most abundantly with all manner of commodities. Therefore we say that ye
blessing of God, is a participation of y^ gifts of God, which serves both to
the glory of God, and also to our own health: or that it is an effectual
dispensation of good things which serve both for this natural life, and also
for the spiritual life.

4 As the spirit is set against the body: so is 4 How many ^ites of Gods
^essings there ^e.
the spiritual blessing both set against the corporal blessing, and also
preferred before the same. Paul seems to note these kinds. Ephesians. 1. 3. He
has blessed us with all manner of spiritual blessings in the heavens, in
Christ. The same Paul also speaks briefly of the earthly blessing. Act. 17.
28. By him we live, and move, and have our being. Our election, and adoption,
our calling, and justification, ou^ sanctification, and all spiritual gifts
must be referred unto the spiritual blessing. But unto the corporal
blessinge must we refer all the helps of this natural life, which we call
things serving to the sustentation of this life.

5 The principal efficient cause of both these 5 Why it is. Iam. 1. 17.
blessings, is God, from whom comes every good and perfect gift. If you
respect the matter wherein, or the blessed, all men are not of like estate. The
earthly blessing is most times bestowed upon the children of this world. (
Luke 16. 25. Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy
pleasures, and like-wise Lazarus pains.) But they never have the spiritual
blessing given them, unless for a season they taste of certain gifts, as the
examples of Saul and Judas do testify.

The children of God do never want the spiritual blessing, but as for the
earthly blessinge, they enjoy not the same always.

If you respect the matter about which, or the objects of the blessing, the
spiritual and the temporal blessing do sometimes go to-gether, as the
examples of Abraham, Isaach, Jacob, Daniell, Job, and of other whom the Lord
did bless with all manner of spiritual, and earthly blessings, do testify.
Sometimes the saints must be content with the spiritual blessing alone, as
Paul says of himself, and of others: Until this time are we hungry, and
thirsty, and naked, and buffeted, and we wander in uncertain places, etc. 1.
Cor. 4. 11.

The next ends of this blessing is, that we may be holy and unblameable: the
last, the praise of the glorious grace of God. Ephesians. 1. 4. 6.

6 The effect. Of the earthly blessing it is said: The blessing of the Lord
makes rich: and he adds no sorrow therewith. Pro. 10. 22. The generation
of the righteous shall be blessed. Riches, and plenteousnes shall be in his house.
Psalm. 112. 2. 3.

But of the celestial blessing Paul says: But I know that when I shall come
unto you, I shall come with a full blessing of the gospel of Christ. Romans 15.
20. And again: Blessed be GOD, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all manner of spiritual blessing in heavenly things, in
Christ, etc. Ephesians. 13.

7 The adiunctes of this blessing, are described. Psalm. 112. His seed shall be
mighty upon earth, the generation of the just shall be blessed. Riches, and
plenteousnes shall be in his house, and his righteousness abides forever. To the
righteous there arises up light in darkness. A good man is merciful, and
lends: he orders his matters in judgment.

And as the approbation of these men which judge a-right, does accompany the
blessing of it self: so the hatred of the wicked, envy, and bacbytinges, do
follow the same accidentally. For as Josephus says, It is an hard matter to
escape envy in prosperity.

8 The curse is contrary to the blessing, whereby they are called accursed,
which the scriptures call commonly vessels of the wrath of God. Mat. 25. 41.
And they are called priuatiuely, or by taking away of the contrary, accursed,
which are destitute of the blessing of the life of God, and of spiritual good
things, being subject to sin, and to eternal death. Let the godly learn out
of Leuit. Cap. 26. and Deuteronomy. 27. 28. the contrariety which is between the
blessinge and the curse.

But, that we may come from speculation unto practice and use: let us persuade
our selves that we are called by the voice of God unto repentance: let us
give glory to God: let us be of the number of those which are Gods, and let us
rather seek heavenly things, then earthly things. If we do these things,
through the assistance and grace of God, Christ Jesus who is blessed, will
bless our studies, our counsels, and all our life.

We have seen now these many years, manifest testimonies of Gods curse, in
that scattering abroad of the Church, in the poverty of Commonwealths, and
in the private and public calamities of mankind. Therefore let us at length
turn unto him who smites us, and humble our-selues under the mighty hand of
God, and give glory unto the Lord.

55. Lect. June. 28. 1580.
The last oracle of Haggeus.

Verse. 21. 22.
And the word of the Lord came the second time unto Haggeus, the four and
twentieth day of the same month, that he should speak unto Zerobabell the
captain of Iehuda, etc.

IT shall be a point of your godly diligence (brethren, and hearers, beloved in
the Lord) together with me to mark the circumstances of God his oracles,
where-of Haggeus makes mention in this place also. We will speak briefly of
every one of them.

The Author.
1 To the end the godly might know from what fountain the true oracles did
flow, and also that their authority was most holy: the Lord of hosts does
plainly protest that he was the author thereof. GOD (says the author of the
epistle to the Hebrews) spoke sundry times, and diverse ways in times past to
our Fathers, by the Prophets: in these last days he has spoken to us by his
son. Heb. 1. 1. And this friendly conference is a manifest testimony of the
goodness of God, and of his love toward mankind, who though he dwell in
inaccessable light, yet does he reveal unto us by his plain word, and
evident testimonies, himself, and also his will, that he may bring us unto
eternal life by the knowledge of John. 17.
himself.

2 And to what end God does use the ministry, 2 The Crier.
and preaching of men, when it seems good to him to publish his mysteries,
Paul does teach us 2. Cor. 4. 6. 7. For GOD who co^mannded the light to shine
out of darkness, is he who has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of GOD in the face of Jesus Christ. But we have this
treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of that power might be of
GOD, and not of us.

3 Paul gives the Jews his prerogative 3 To whom the oracles of the Lord are
committed. Romans 3. 2.
above the Gentiles, that unto them were committed the oracles of GOD. And it
appears that certain were publicly pronounced before all the people, as the
former oracle concerning the causes and testimonies of blessing, and cursing:
certain were uttered to some certain persons only. It seems that this
oracle which was told Zerubabel, was of this sort: who strining both
publicly and privately with much grief and sorrow, had need of some singular
comfort. And seeing that God does promise great good things, as the giving of
the Messiah, ye preaching of the Gospel, the calling of the Gentiles, the
punishing of the world for striving against God: Zerobabell and other the
godly need not to doubt of the lesser good things, as the restoring and
preserving of the country and common wealth of the Jews, and of the beating
down of their enemies.

God, who has commanded his servants to give to his household their portion
of doctrine in due season: as he does all things in time, so does he
foretell the same in due time. Therefore, the marvelous wisdom, goodness, and
providence of God, appears both in the revelation of his will, and also in
executing of the same. God grant that we also may be given all our life
long to sanctify his name, and to obey his holy will, and pleasure.

Verse. 22. 23.
I will shake the heaven, and the earth. And I will ouer-throwe the throne of
kingedomes, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen,
and I will ouer-throw the chariots, and those that ride in them: and the horses,
and they that ride on them shall come down, every man with the sword of his
fellow.

Shaking does signify (as the Apostle does interpret it) the remoouinge of
things which are unstable, as of things made with hands, that Heb. 12. 27.
the things which are stable, may remain. By unstable things, he means the
Tabernacle made with hands, and the whole Leuiticall administration, which was
to be abrogated.

Theod. Beza, thinks that the heaven and earth are taken allegorically, so
that the shakinge of the heavens does signify, that both the Idolatry of the
Gentiles, and also the Ceremonies of the Jews should be abrogated: and by the
shaking of the earth is meant the renewinge of the men which are called to be
partakers of the estate of the saints in the light.

The proposition is this. When Christ shall begin to reign, then shall all the
worship of the Leuiticall sacrifice, and also the superstition of the Gentiles
be abolished, and the empires and kingdoms of the world shall come to an end.

Here-by it appears that all things which are made, are vn-stable, and that
only the kingedome of Christ can-not be abolished by shaking: Heb. 12. 20. Mat.
6. 33.
therefore must we choose the same alone, and seek it before all things.

Aphorisms concerning the shaking of the heaven, and the earth.
1 It is God alone who is able to shake the reasonable creatures, and others.

2 This shaking has two ends, the remoouing of things which are made with
hands, and the confirmation of things which are stable.

3 The remoouinge may be gathered not only by the for-bidding of the Idolatry
of the Gentiles, but also by the abrogating of the ceremonies of ye law, which
ought to have served for the instruction of the infancy of the Church of
Israel, as exercises of discipline.

4 The confirmation appears by the stability of the kingdom of Christ, and
of the reasonable worship.

5 Therefore this remoouing serves to the calling of the Gentiles, and the
rejecting of thos^ which were no true Israclites.

6 The end of this remoouing is the glorious liberty of the sons of God, a
new heaven, say. 66. 22. ^o. 8. 20. 21. 22.
and a new earth, and the deliverance of the creatures from the bondage of
corruption. For it is meet that all things serve to the everlasting kingdom
of Christ.

56. Lect. 29. June. 1580.
Verse. 23.
And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength
of the kingdoms of the Gentiles, and I will overthrow the charyots, and those
that ride in the^, and the horses and they that ride on them shall come down,
every man with the sword of his fellow.

THere is the like saying Dan. 2. 44. 45. Furthermore, in the days of these
kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed: and this kingdom shall not be given to an-other people, but it
shall break and destroy all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for-euer.
Like-as thou saw a stone cut of from the mountain, which was not cut of
with hands, and did break in pieces the iron, brass, clay, silver, and gold
etc.

The causes of the ends of the kingdoms of the world.
Further-more, it is certain that the chiefest empires of this world have
their ends, and that only the kingdom of Jesus Christ is perpetual, according
to y^ saying: He shall reign over the house of Jacob for-euer, and of his
kingdom there shall be no end. Luke. 1. 33.

1 The principal efficient cause is God: for 1 Why it is.
as he is the author of civil and private good order, so by his mighty arm
he brings mighty things to pass: he scatters abroad the proud in the
imagination of their hearts: he plucketh the mighty out of their thrones, and
sets up the Luke 1. 51. 52.
humble. And again. God changes the times and seasons: he takes away
kings, and sets up kings: he gives wisdom to the wise, and Dan. 2. 21.
vnder-standing to those which vnder-stand.

2 The helpers are the authors of tumults, and wars amongst men: as it is
said in this place: Every man shall be slain with the sword of his companion.
Here-of have we an example, Iud. 9. 23. And God sent an evil spirit between
Abimalech, and the men of Shechem, and the men of Shechem brake their promise
made to Abimalech.

Ob. Are not then (will some man say.) the men blameless, which are the
authors of civil wars, and tumults amongst men, seeing they are the
instruments of Gods wrath and vengeance? An. I answer, that they are blame
worthy seeing that they do these things, not for any desire they have to
execute Gods judgments, but that they may obey their blind affections.

Ob. But thou will say, seeing they work together with GOD, who works
always that which is good: they do that which is good, and therefore are they
blameless.

An. I answer, God does always that which is good: but these corrupt
instruments do offend, seeing that God (who is the best and most wise) does
one thing, in one and the same work: and the world and the bond-slaues thereof
an-other.

3 For-asmuch as civil discipline consists, 3 The mean.
first, upon order, and glory: secondly, upon aid against the unjust: when
these things are taken away, then must the state of the commonwealthe needs
fall to the ground. Therefore if at any time it seem good to God, to
overthrow and alter the estates of commonwealths, he powers out first of
all contempt of princes: and he makes them wander in y^ wilderness, wherein
there is no way. And this is to overthrow the Psalm. 107. 40.
thrones of kingdoms: to take from the princes their authority and grace,
where-of it is said in Diodorus: The dignity of princes is preserved by favor
and good will, and by the hatred of their subjects are their thrones
overthrown. After that he takes away their force, by taking from their
armies their strength, where-of it is said: I will destroy the strength of the
kingdoms of the heathen, and I will overthrow the charyots, and those that
ride in them: and the horses with their rider, shall come down. Thus did the
Lord spoil Darius the last Monarche of the Persians, of his kingdom,
strength, aid of armies, and of life, being thrice overcome in battle by
Alexander.

4 The final causes are, first the remoouing 4 The final causes.
of the kingdoms and things of this world, whereof it is said, The fashion of
this world passes away. Secondly, the punishment of the resisting of God,
whereof mention is made. Psalm. 2. Thirdly, the everlasting glory of the
kingdom of Christ. For, although Christ does reign in the midst of his
enemies, whilst the Church is yet militaunt: yet must Satan with all his
beetroden under his feet.

Ob. He which shall deliver up his kingdom to an-other, shall not reign
for-euer: but Christ shall deliver up his kingdom to God even ye father, when
he has put down all rule, and all authority, and all power etc. Therefore ye
kingdom of Christ shall not continue for-euer.

An. I answer unto the minor, where-in there is an equivocation in ye word
kingdom, which must be referred unto the office of his priest-hoode and
Mediatorship, and not unto his princely authority. There is also some
ambiguitie in this phrase, to deliver up the kingdom: which in this place does
not signify to put away, and lay away the princely person and dignity: but to
approve the office of mediation and intercession, which Christ has most
faithfully executed, as he shall manifestly declare.

57. Lect. Aug. 15. 1580.
Verse. 24.
In that day, says the Lord of hosts, will I take thee O Zerubabell my
servant, the son of Sealthiel, says the Lord, and I will make thee as a
signet: because I have chosen thee, says the Lord of hosts.

FOr instructions sake we will handle in this oracle, which is last in order,
not in excellency of the mystery, three things: first, what account we ought
to make of this oracle: scco^dly, what we must think of the figure and
history thereof: thirdly, what is the truth of this oracle.

I will entreat of the first point syllogisticallie.

The oracles which without al doubt do come from God the author thereof,
must be accounted most holy: for God can-not lie. Tit. 1. 2. Further-more, his
truth is ye foundation of our faith: for which cause Paul calls faith
periphraftically the knowledge of the truth. 1. Tim. 2. 4. But this oracle came
from God: for our prophet affirms thrice in this one verse that the Lord of
hosts spoke it.

1 We will here note, first, y^ the word, who was partaker of y^ eternity of
the father, is the fountain from whence do spring these oracles, which God
would have to be declared to the fathers.

2 Secondly, that the holy sermons which co^taine the interpretation of the
oracles of God, are most of all commended for the sanctifying of the name of
God.

Therefore I conclude that thauthority of this oracle is holy.

The considering here-vpon, serves both for our instruction, because if we be
wise, we learn nothing but that which God does allow of: and also for our
consolation: for our conscience cannot be quiet, unless it be certainly
persuaded of the favor of God.

Of the second thing* namely of the figure, and of the history thereof.
In this part we must observe two things. A brief description of a person,
and a most sweet promise, where-by God did make glad the heavy heart of
Zerubabell. Of the description of ye person there be three members, his name,
his father, his adiunct: where-of we will speak in order.

1 His name was Zerubabell, where-of we His name.
have oftentimes spoken before. Here let us note thus much, ye God does
sometimes speak unto by name ye whole Church, and company of his elect, and
that most kindly: as for example. Esa. 45. 1. Fear not because I have redeemed
thee: I have called thy name, thou art my people. Sometimes he speaks unto
some one of the faithful particularly. * His sheep hear his voice, and he
calls his sheep by name, and he leads them out. Let us therefore hear
the voice of Christ Jesus, who speaks in us by his holy spirit, and let us
receive the same with a pure heart, and let us rejoice in heart, that we have
this testimony of Gods favor toward us.

2 His father was Sealthiel. We will not His father.
stand about this man, whose history all men know which study the holy
scriptures as they ought. We will rather use that admonition which the Apostle
sets down. Heb. 12. 9. If we have had the fathers of our bodies which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much more be in
subjection to the father of spirits, and we shall live? For they verily for a
few days chastened us, after their own pleasure: but he chasteneth us for
our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. Therefore let us love
and fear with all our heart this father, let us readely and sincerely obey
him: and seeing that he is our treasure, let us sanctify his name.

3 The adiunct. My servant. Magistrates are the 3 The adiunct.
servants of God, first, because, they have God to be their Lord, and to rule
them: who is blessed, and prince only, the king of kings, and Lord of Lords.
Therefore Princes do offend most greeuouslie 1. Tim. 6. 15.
when they do not remember that they are men, but think that they are equal
with Psalm. 9. 1^.
God. As it is said of the king of Tire. Eze. 28. 2. Beccause thine heart is
exalted, and thou have said I am God, I have fit in the seat of God, in the
midst of the Seas: yet thou art but a man and not God: and thou have set
thine heart as the heart of God. etc. Secondly because they must serve by his
counsel. Act. 13. 36. For David when he had served his time by the counsel of
God, he slept, Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with
reverence. Therefore if you respect God and his commandments, princes are
neither free from making an account, nor yet from laws.

And let us also remember that we also are made the servants of God through
his grace, who has called us unto the fellowship of the saints, and that most
happily for our part, seeing that we have need of such a Lord as may
cherishe and defend us under the shadow of his wings, and lead us into all
truth by his holy spirit. Let us therefore fear him and love our fellow
servants, and living wisely in the perfect way, let us bestow the talant
committed unto us by God, well: that when as we shall hereafter give an account
of our factorshippe, and ministry unto the Lord, we may hear that amiable
voice, Well done good servant, thou have been faithful over few things,
therefore shall thou be appointed over many things, enter into the joy of thy
Lord. Mat. 25.

Lect. 58. Aug. 15.
The promise which was a medicine for sorrow.
WHen as Zerubabell through the difficulty of the times was very sad and
sorrowful, God Greg. We shall easily be comforted, if amiddest the stripes
which we suffer, we call to mind the faults which we have done.
cheared him up with this promise: I will take thee up: I will set thee as a
signet: because I have chosen thee says the Lord of hosts. We will handle this
promise according to the causes thereof.

1 The form of the benefit is civil authority, wherein the governors must
excel, even against their enemies will, whereof Zerubabell had great store. I
will take thee up, that is, I will lift thee up and exalt thee. The like thing
is said of David Psalm. 78. 70. He chose his servant David, he took him from
the sheepefoldes. 1. Sam. 16.
For David was called e caula in aulam, from the sheep coats to the court,
unto the office of a prince. Thou shall be my signet, that is, most dear, and
in great estimation, as precious stones and signets use to be. Furthermore what
things soever thou shall decree, they shall be established, as instruments
which are lawfully sealed: by an other metaphor did Isayas the prophet signify
the same authority, speaking of the choosing of Eliachim into y^ place of
Sobna. Isay. ^2. 22.
And I will put the key of the house of David upon his shoulder, and he shall
open, and there shall be none which shall shut: and he shall shut and there
shall be none that shall open. If you will know any thing which is worthy the
knowing concerning ye force of gold-ringes, read the first chapter of the three
and thirty book of Pliny his natural history. Let it be sufficient for us
to learn by this place, that we must be subject to the magistrate. We know
the verses of Philemon.

All servants subject are to Kings, Kings down before the Gods must fall:
The Gods to fate are subject eke, Small things to great are also thrall.
But we, as we do acknowledge and in spirit worship one God, who is Lord over
all things: so do we acknowledge him to be most free, and not subject to any
Stoicall fate.

The efficient cause.
2. The Lord himself will extol unto great dignity his servant Zerubabell.

The Position.
As God does punish proud princes with rebuke and shame, so does he also crown
the humble with glory and honor. Psalm. 107. 4. He powers contempt upon
princes, and makes them to wander in the wilderness wherein there is no way.
Psalm. 84. 12. For the Lord God is the sun and shield unto us, the Lord will
give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that walk
vprightlie. Although this be but a short verse, yet does it contain five
benefits which are sent by God. First the gift of understanding, wherewith the
sun of righteousness Christ Jesus, does illuminate our minds, according to
that saying I am the light of the world, he that follows me, walks not in
darkness: but he shall have the light of life, Ioh. 8. 12. The second is Gods
protection in the midst of dangers. Because thou Lord shall bless the
just; thou shall compass him about with good will, as with a shield. Psalm. 5.
13. The Lord is my shield and the horn of my salvation, and my lifter up. The
third is authority which the prophet calls glory. The fourth is grace, or
the good will and favor of the subjects toward their superiors. The fifth, all
manner of good things as well privative as positive, as some do term them.

The internal cause is the choosing to the office y^ The internal cause.
of a civil magistrate. I have chosen thee says the Lord. In like sort it
is said of the choosing unto the office of the Apostleship: Have not I chosen
you twelve, yet one of you is a devil. Ioh. 6. 70.

By this place we learn that we ought not to take upon us any function,
unless God do those us thereunto, according to that saying: A man can receive
nothing unless it be given him from heaven. Ioh. 3. 27. And we must judge of
the calling, by the gifts which are requisite and necessary for the due
executing of the office.

Of the third thing, namely of the verity of this figure.
No man does better expound the verity of the figure whereof we have briefly
spoken, then Paul the Apostle, whose words are these.

5. Let the same mind be in you, that was even in Christ Jesus.

6 Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.

7 But he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a
servant, and was made like unto man, and was found in shape as a man.

8 He humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of
the cross.

9 Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name.

10 That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.

11 And that every tongue should confess that Jesus is the Lord, unto the
glory of God the father. Phil. 2.

The similitude is this. As God will both marueylouslie defend, and also
wonderfully exalt in due time, his faithful servant Zerobabell, though all
the Samaritanes and other his enemies say nay: so in time to come shall he
extol unto great dignity the Messiah, when he has humbled himself, being
made obedient unto his father, even unto the death of the cross etc.

We see that the Lord did not only put his servant Zerubabell in good hope
by one and the same oracle, of obtaining civil, and other good things: but
also he foretells that the Messiah shall be revealed, and that all the Church
shall be enriched with his fullness.

We learn that the goodness and power of God, is not to be measured by our
weak faith, but that we must be certainly persuaded, that God is both able,
and also will (if it be for his glory, and our salvation) do more and greater
things for us, then we can promise to our selves, through the imbecillitie of
our faith.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by John Wolf, for John Harrison the younger, dwelling in
Paternoster-row at the sign of the Golden Anchor. 1586.




