A Declaration of the especial untruths contained in Morgans Bill exhibited in
Parliament against Bowd^^^ Meggs; Jones, and others, with Answers thereunto as
hereunder follows. Viz.
Objection.

THe title of his Bill and Brief, declares Morgan to be first Plaintiff
against Bowdler and the rest, and Bowdler to be Plaintiff against him
afterward, upon a Cross Bill.

Answer.

BOwdler was first Plaintiff against Morgan; and it was five Months after,
before Morgan preferred a Cross Bill against Bowdler, Meggs, Jones, and the
rest.

Object. 1609. 6. May.
Essington and Barlow were Partners with Bowdler, Turner, Jones, and Sir John
Bourchier, in the Farm of the Alloms.

Ans.Neither Essington, nor Barlow, were Partners with them, as by answer upon
Oath made in Chancery appears.

Object. Meggs lent his name and credit to Bowdler without limitation, to take
up Moneys to supply the Allom business, whereby Meggs, Bowdler, and the rest
became as one joint body, and were known both in England and in foreign
parts, by the name of the Allom Company, or Bowdler and Company.

Ans. Meggs being Father in Law to Bowdler, did out of love to him lend him his
name, to support his credit, yet was not Meggs a Partner with Bowdler, or any
of Allom Farmers in the Allom business, and therefore they were not as one
joint body.

Object. 1609. October.
Bowdler and Company made choice of Morgan to be their Factor at
Middleborough, and when Morgans credit would not serve to procure Moneys enough
to pa^ their Bills of Exchange; he wrote to them of it, directing his Letters to
Bowdler and Company, and what ever he required by the said Letters to be
performed by Meggs, Turner o^ any of them, the same was performed by them.

Ans. Morgan was Servant to Bowdler, long before he had any dealings in the
Allom business; and was by him employed at Middleborough, in other affairs,
and it is true that afterward he was also employed to pay Bills of Exchange for
the Allom business; but it was only by his Master Bowdler, and not by
appointment of the Allom Company. Besides when Morgan did direct some few Bills
of Exchange from Middleborough to be paid here in London by Meggs and Turner;
they severally wrote to him that he should do so no more, for if he did they
would not accept the Bills nor pay them, so that whatsoever Morgan required of
them was not performed.

Object. To enable Morgans credit at Middleborough, they sent him several
unlimited Letters of credit, some in one kind some in another; thereby
declaring to all men that whosoever trusted their Factor Morgan, they all
thereby obliged themselves for repayment thereof.

Ans. Albeit several Letters of Credit, were sent to Morgan, yet they were not
all unlimited. Neither all of them as general warrant to all men that would
tr^ Morgan. For Meggs did only subscribe to one Letter which was sent to one
particular man; and that was to remain in force but till it should be
recalled, which was recalled within three Months after, whereby neither any
man else could challenge Meggs for his Debtor, nor that particular man for
longer time then till repayment of (...) sum only which was lent within the
time aforesaid, so also, some other of the Partners never gave any Letter of
Credit to Morgan, and that which was given by oath them was also recalled, and
Morgan promised to make no further use of it.

Object. 1611. 5. February.
Morgan came into England, and accounted for all things which he had not
formerly accounted for. And was made free of London by Bowdler, and received up
his Inde and the Bonds of his Friends, and Bowdler publicly acknowledged
Morgans faithful service, which according to custom of London is a release
for all time past.

Ans. About that time Morgan came into England, and did deliver unto Bowdler a
Copy of an Account, which he pretended to be just and perfect; but Morgan
neythe^ required Bowdler to account with him the reupon, neither could Bowdler
then have done it. For he had not received Accounts from other his Factours in
ot^ parts beyond Seas; with whom Morgans Accounts must have correspondence in
many particulars; so that Morgan did only give the Copy of an Account, but did
account thereupon with his Master. Neither is any of the other pretenses, a
release for the time past.

Object. 1612. 23. May.
Morgan delivered to Bowdler and Company, his last general Account, and
therein did set down the particulars of 37794. l. 4. s. 7. d. Flemish Money,
which is 22600. l. sterling then owing by them by exchange and at interest;
whereof 6251. l. 10. s. 2. d. Flemish, which is sterling 3460. l. was due to
Morgan, and forth residue, Morgan was then engaged as their Factor.

Ans. Morgan did not deliver this last general Account before March, the 23.
An. 1612. which was 10. months after the time pretended; Neither does this
Account contain the particulars of 37794. l. 4. s. 7. d. Flemish, of debt then
owing, whererin Morgan pretends he was engaged. Forth collection of debts
therein made to be owing amounts to but 10180. l. 14. s. 3. d. to Strangers:
and 6251. l. 10. s. 2. d. to himself, against which last some he makes
recei^ed with his own hand in the said Account, 5266. l. 10. s. 8. d. in part
thereof; neither was he engaged for all the rest; but all Accounts being
audited he is fourd indebted to Bowdler.

Object. 1612. 29. May.
The said last general Account was examined and allowed of, and Bowdler sealed
unto Morgan a general Release.

Ans. The said Account could not be examined upon the 29. of May 1612. which
was not given until ten months after May, neither was it examined in some
time after, nor ever allowed. But it is true, that Bowldler sealed a general
release to Morgan upon the 29. of May, aforesaid: which was only upon trust and
conficience of Morgans promise to justify his former Accounts when they should
be examined, and to give up his last general Account within short time after.
For Morgan pretended that this release would be a means to procure him credit
from his brother Francis Morgan and other friends, whereby to follow his trade
and dealing, for which he had served the term of his Apprentice-hood, upon
proof of which trust in the Court of Chancery, he was ordered to account
notwithstanding the s^id Release.

Object. 1612. 31. May.
Morgan demanding payment of Meggs, he forswore his hand to all Bills of
exchange produced for above 40000. l. although since he has confessed, that
he ga^ Bowdler leave to subscribe the same.

Ans. Morgan did not demand any payment of Meggs before April 1617. which was
five years after the date aforesaid: at which tine, Neither in May 1612. were
any more of Meggs his Bills unpaid, which Bowdler had subscribed but for 940. l.
sterling: and they were all underwritten by M^ggs his authoity and with his
priuitie. Neither did Meggs deny his authority given to Bowdler in the
subscription; albeit he charged Bowdler with his promise, of saving him
harmless.

Object. 1618. 7. October.
One Commission being expired, and no end made, the Commissioners persuaded
Morgan to enter Bond to stand to their Award, whch he consented; provided, that
all the Defendants would do the like, whereupon, Meggs, Bowdler, and Turner,
only sealed Bonds, but the rest refused, which Morgan disliking, procued a new
Cmmission with direction a^ in the first Commission, but they refused thereupon
to proceed as Coommissioners, because Morgan was bound, and but three of the
Defendants.

Ans. The Commissioners did not persuade Morgan, but Morgan persuaded and
entreated the Commissioners to go on in an ar^itrary course: when the first
Commission was expired and he voluntarily did offer to seal new Bonds to stand
to their award; and he did accept of Meggs, Turner and Bowdler their Bonds
without the rest saying, that those were the men he aimed at, and desired the
Commissioners to proceed without the other Bonds, as by Morgans hand in the
Book of the Commissioners appears. And touching the refusal of the
Commissioners to proceed upon the Commission, which Morgan brought down; it
was because the Lord Chancellor did the next day superseade the same with an
other Commission of other content.

Object. 1618. 5. January.
They made an Award, and ordered Morgan to cease all Suits against Megs,
Jones, Essington, Barlow, and Sir John Bourchier, with diurs other things not
referred to them.

Ans. They did not in their award order any such matter; neither did meddle
with any thing which was not referred.

Object. 21. January.
The Award was ordered by the Lord Chancellor, to be spared for 11. Causes.

Ans. The order for suspending the said Award contaynes but five Causes, and
they are particularly and fully answered by the Cerificate of the
Commissioners, of the ninth of February, 1618. yet to give a particular answer
to them all; it follows.

Object. 1.

THey never took the Answer of Meggs and Bowdler, to Morgans Bill, whereunto
they had demurred, which was the first thing directed in t^eir Commission.

Ans. 1.

THe Commissioners did often call to Morgan, to declare his exceptions to the
said answers, but he said it should not be needful; if ^ey made an Award as he
hoped the would do. And so indeed, at last when they had examined all
Accounts, and found Morgan to be indebted to Bowdler, they did t^inke it
unnecessary.

Object. 2. They did not examine any Witnesses or Parties during all their
proceedings, but only John Greennowes, who is deeply engage for Bowdler, and
being chargeabl^ (...) these Moneys himself, swears to free himself by
charging Morgan therewith.

Ans. 2. They did examine or cause to be examined at Hambrough in Germany, one
John Qua^les, Factor to Alderman Gore, whose Depositions are as well returned i^
the Court, as those of John Greenowes, and are upon Record. Besides, when
Morgan refused to take his Oath, or to confess the truth before the
Commissioners; touchin^ moneys pretended by him to have been paid to Bowater,
Host, Cleave, and others, then the Commissioners did examine the said partis
who did confront Morgan face t^ face, and forced him to confess the truth, as
by their Certificate upon Record in Court appears. Also it is to be considered
that in exarining of Merchants Accounts, the (...) cannot be so full and
sufficient testimony produced upon Oath, as by the comparing of Factors
Accounts and Letters, who had weekly Correspondence one with the other Lastly,
John Greenowes was not chargeable to Bowdler, for such money as he received by
Morgans appointment, but he rather by his Oa^ made himself liable to the ^ai^
Morgan; so that he did not swear to free himself.

Object. 3. The Commissioners charged Morgan for all seven of the Defendants.

Ans. 3. It is untrue, that he is charged with one penny for any of the
Defendants, for the Accounts do concern Bowdler only; although Morgan had
maliciously made the rest Defendants.

Object. 4. They charged Morgan also for three others, viz. Pasfijld,
Greenowes, and Aniscombe Bowdlers Factors, who were mere strangers to the
Suite, and to their Arbitrament.

Ans. 4. These three Factors had conti^uall weekly dealings, and intercourse
with Morgan touching receipts and payments of money each for other, and Accounts
passed between them and Bowdler, and Morgan; so that necessarily Morgan must
be charged with such sums of money, as the said Factors or any of them did
pay to him or by his appointment, as on the other side, the Commissioners
discharged M^^gan of such moneys as he paid for Bowdler to the said Factors.

Object. 5. The Commissioners allowed Bowdler diverse great sums which they
pretend Morgan received for Bowdler, in Anno 1607. and 1608. which is before
the time that Bowdler demands relief by his own Bill, for he pretends Errors
of 1609. 1610. 1611. and 1612. only.

Ans. 5. There is but only one parcel allowed to Bowdler before Anno 1609.
which is only for 112. l. 13. s. 4. Flemish money, and it was apparently proved
to the Commissioners against Morgan by his own Letters that he was to be
charged with it. Besides, before the Commissioners did enter into examination
of the Accounts and differences of the parties, they caused each party to set
down in writing his demands against the other, at which time Morgan made no
such exception.

Object. 6. The Commissioners Awarded Morgan to allow to Bowdler great sums
which he never demanded by Bill or otherwise; which Morgan never heard off
till after their Award, whereby he could not answer them.

Ans. 6. This accusation is most false, For the Commissioners have not allowed
to Bowdler any one sum, which at the first meeting before the Commissioners,
was not demanded in writing but they have given Bowdler much short of his
demands, and caused him to particularize his demands of interest, whereby the
sums are varyed from the first demand, and made less, but not more then at
the first, and likewise a Copy of the said demands was given to Morgan, and he
did answer thereunto before the Commissioners.

Object. 7. They allowed to Bowdler 8000. l. more then he did demand by Bill,
for he demands but 3000. l. and they have given him 11000 l.

Ans. 7. The Commissioners according to the manner of Merchants; at first
meeting required both parties to express their demands in writings, and
accordingly they proceeded in the examining of their Accounts; for the order of
reference to the Commissioners, was to examine the Accounts and not the Bill.
Also Bowdler demands by Bill: relief for 3000. l. which Morgan should owe him;
accompting it over and above all that Morgan had paid for him; of which kind
of payments, the Commissioners allowed to Morgan, 8000. l. Flemish at the
least. Besides, by way of account exhibited in writing before the
Commissioners, Bowdler did demand much more then 11000. l.

Object. 8. They Awarded, Turner, and his Company to free Morgan from Peter
Courten, and 40. other Creditors of theirs in all for above 18000. l. sterling,
yet they never mention who that Company was for those that truly were of that
Company, viz. Meggs, Jones, Essington, Barlow, and Sir John Bourchier, they
Award Morgan to cease all Suites against them by name, but order not them to
cease Suite against Morgan.

Ans. 8. First, of the pretended some of 18000. l. there was paid to Courten
12000. l. and diverse other sums to other men; but Morgan was never engaged
for any part thereof, except to Courten, although to satisfy his clamorous
di^position, the Commissioners did Award him to be saved harmless.

Secondly, Morgan had the same security under the name of Bowdler and his
company which his Letter of Attorney did mention; and he did know the company
better then the Commissioners.

Thirdly, Meggs, Essington and Barlow were none of the Company. Neither did the
Commissioners order that Morgan should release to them or to Sir John
Bourchier, as truly is alleged.

Object. 9. They Awarded Morgan to seal a Release unto Bowdler, whereby
Bowdlers Counterbond of a 1000. l. sealed to Morgan to save him harmless of
the Bond of 50 which he sealed to Meggs, for Bowdler should be discharged
without giving Morgan any allowance for it, or Awarding Meggs to deliver up the
said Bond, or seal Morgan a Rel^

Ans. 9. By order of Court at the Rolls upon the 22. of April 1618. it was
ordered that the Accounts between Bowdler and Morgan being then under
exam^tion, before Master Barkehouse and other Commissioners; if upon perfecting
of the said Examination it should appear that Morgan was indebted to Bowdler
500. l. order; then he should pay to Meggs so much as he should be to Bowdler
indebted and no more; but if Bowdler were found indebted to Morgan, then the
Bond of Morgan Meggs of 500. l. should be cancelled; Now considering this
order and that M^rgan had only sealed Bond before these Commissioners to pay to
Meggs. Wha^ should be found indebted to Bowdler, and not to p^y Bowdler any
thing; he is not wronged by this Award in this point. For by Morgans paying of
the Awarded sum^ Meggs, his Bond is discharged, and he being found in Bowdlers
debt; Bowdlers counter-bond ought to be discharged.

Object. 10. They Award Morgan to pay 579. l. 6. s. 0. unto Bowdler within
three months; yet they limit Bowdler, Turner, and his Company no time to free
Morgan of engagements for them, for above 18000. l. sterling.

Ans. 10. The engagements are only imaginary and not real; yet the
Commissioners did provide; that if any suite were commenced against Morgan; he
should thereof saved harmless; from time to time upon notice by him given to
Bowdler or Turner, of the said suite, etc. If they failed herein; he might take
remedy upon the Bonds according to the Award. For the Commissioners did not
order Morgan to seal any release to them or they to him before; all Articles
of their Award were respectively performed.

Object. 11. Lastly, the Commissioners did not pursue the directions of their
Commission in any one particular, but did proceed most erroniously.

Ans. 11. They did not vary from the directions of the Court in any thing,
except by the entreaty and consen of all parties, as by their Certifcate of
the ninth of February 1618. appears. Besides, being at last, become
Arbitrators; and the said course undertaken by persuasion of all parties and
Bonds mutuall^ sealed to abide their Award; they were no longer bound to the
formal proceedings, and directions of the Court; but for their better
satisfaction they might proce^d as Merchants in t^^ examination of Merchants
Accounts.

Object. 1618. 6. February.
The five Arbitrators petitioned the Lord Chancellor that they might not
certify the particulars of their Award.

Ans. This is most untrue, for at this time they were not ordered to certify
any particulars, and did not require any other thing of the Lord C^ancellor,
but that they might keep their day Book and other Papers, whereby they might
be able at all times to justify their Award, and to show the Reasons thereof.

Object. 19. Februay.
The Commissioners or Arbitrators would not obey any of the orders of Court for
redeliuery of Morgans Papers.

Ans. As Morgan upon one day procured an order which commanded the redeliuery,
so Bowdler the next day procured a counter-mand. But at ^^ct when the order wa^
settled they did obey.

Object. 1619. 15. Aprilis. 16. ^^ne.
The Commissioners being ordered to certify to the Court, the Reasons of their
Award, they still refused until Morgan forced them by an Attachmen^ of the 20.
of July, 1619.

Ans. They were never served with Attachment; neither was their any cause why
Morgan should press them to bring in their Reasons, for that order was begot
upon the motion of Bowdlers Council and not of Morgans; besides, the said
order for certifying the particular Reasons of their Award was made but upon
the 16. of June 1619. And they returned a Certificate upon the fifth day of
August following, which contained the particular labors of 160. days spent in
that examin^tion, and filled 150. sheets of Paper, so that less time could not
be allowed for such a Certificate which was so exactly and fully declared.

Object. 1619. 5. August.
They certify the particulars of their Award, and certify that Master William
Towerson, and Master Ralph Freeman, were privy to all the^r said Proceedings.

Ans. They did not certify them to be privy to all their proceedings, but did
particularly set down what parcels they were privy unto.

Object. 18. December.
That six other Commissioners were appointed, who assisted with the Auditor of
the Chancery, were to examine all Accounts, Letters and Writings, as also the
Award of the Arbitrators.

Ans. It is true that six other Commissioners were appointed, but two of them
were Masters of the Court, and appointed to be continually presert, or no
meeting without them, who out of their formalitie, ouer-ruled the Merchants.
And the order of Reference made unto these Committees was so full of
restriction, that thereby Morgan false Accounts could not be perfectly
discovered, neither could the truth of Bowdlers case be made apparent, as by
the order it self appears. And the said Commitees, because the Certificate
of the first Commissioners was damned by the Lord Chancellor, before he
referred the consideration thereof unto them, therefore they could not allow of
their testimony in the said Certificate; so that it was to no purpose that
they were to examine it. And likewise other Accounts, Letters and Writings of
Factors could not be admitted, because not proved in Court.

Object. That the six last Committees with the Auditor had often conference
with the first Arbitrators.

Ans. 13. Marc.
The Committees and the Arbitrators never had meeting together, for Master
Towerson one of the last Committees, did often move the Masters of the Court
that they might have called the Arbitrators unto them; but they would not
consent thereunto.

Object. The Cause being heard in open Court, in presence of all parties and
their Council, neither party nor Council denied the truth of the last
Certificate, as by order appears.

Ans. 1620. 6. May.
Many Objections were made against the said Certificate, by every one of the
parties, and also their Council; albeit the order does untruly otherwise
declare, but the corruptions of those times was such that truth could take no
place, either in orders or otherwise.

Object. The Cause being heard i^ open Court, it was finally decreed.

Ans. 19. June. 24. Dict^.
The Decree was made after the 26. of June, but not in open Court, neither at a
Seal, but very privately in my Lords Chamber, no one of the parties being
present at the pronouncing thereof.


