A true and perfect Discourse of the overthrow of certain companies of
Burgonions both horse and foot men at Villefranche, a town situate on the
borders of Champaigne, upon the river of Meuze, between Sunday at night and
Monday morning being the 4. day of August 1597. together with the certain
number of how many are slain and taken prisoners.

Translated out of French into English, By W.P.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by E. Allde for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his
shop under the Royal Exchange.

A true and perfect discourse of the overthrow of certain companies of
Burgoinions both horse and foot men, at Villefranche, a town situated on the
borders of Champaigne, upon the river of Meuze, between Sunday at night and
Monday morning being the 4. day of August, 1597. together with the certain
number of how many are slain and taken prisoners.
IT is not in few but in many places that the hatred and secret envy of the
King of Spain does daily and hourly show it self against the country of
France, or rather the great desire he has to possess the Crown and Diadem
thereof, as being the fairest piece of ground in all Europe: But God, that
until this time, has kept and preserved the same, will still defend and
maintain it: yea, and restore it, unto the pristinate glory and splendour
thereof: whereof he fails not to put us still in comfort, by diverse and sundry
effects, and those in many places, as now lately at Villefranche a small town
situate upon the river of Meuze, between Astehay and Dun, towns belonging to
Monsieur de Corraine, and about seven small miles distant from the Town of
Sedan. This town is very little, and was in time past built by King Francis
the first, in form four square like a sconce, seeming rather a small Forte to
hold a court of Guard then a town, which he caused to be made only to hinder
the incursions of the Burgonions into the Country of Champaigne. In the last
Ciuiil wars, it was taken by the Duke of Lorraine, and since that time by
certain composition and agreement made, delivered up again unto the King of
France, the governor thereof at this present is one Monsieur de Tremelet a
Gentleman of that Country, whose valor and fidelite is much renowned, through
the services by him done and accomplished for his Majesty, during his wars:
namely under the Regiment of Monsi^ur the Duc de Neuers. The Garrison he has
under him within the town, is three companies of foot and one of horsemen. The
Burgonians (for so all that serve ye king of Spain in those parts are called,
namly those of the Duchy of Luxemburg,) which of long time have desired to set
foot in the country of Champaigne, wherein they make daily incursions,
adressing all their intents and Forts against the towns situate on the river
of Meuze, as Meziers, Seda, Mouzon, Villefranche, or rather Rocroy and Maubert
fontaine, which are not far from them, as yet could never attain unto their
purpose, through the diligent watch and provident care, by the governors
thereof daily had and maintained. And perceiving that by policy and arms they
could not prevail, they thought to prove if treason would work any better
effect: which likewise in ye end returned upon themselves. Of late they have
still aimed at Villefranche, as a most fit place for their entrance into
Champaigne: and for the same cause addressed themselves to certain soldiers of
ye garrison, with many Spanish promises to make them rich for ever, if they
would deliver the town into their hands. Those soldiers seemed to yield to
their request, but imparted it to Monsieur de Tremelet their Governor: who
considering what good might follow for the Kings service, together with the
counsel of other Governors near him, commanded those soldiers that had moved
it unto him, to go forward with Captain Gauchet, (being the man on the
Burgonians behalf that laid the plot). This Gauchet is an aduenturous soldier,
yet within these ten years that he has used wars, it has been his fortune
to attain to the reputation of a Captain, and at this time serves under the
K. of spain, although by birth either a Frenchman or a Lorraine. On this
commandment of Tremelets the soldiers agreed with Gauchet both of the time,
hour and means, when and how they would deliver the town, receiving of him
some ready money, with promise of more upon the obtaining the same. The time
appointed was upon Sunday night being the 3. of August, and Monday morning
following. In the mean time Monsieur de Tremelet slept not, but sent unto the
Governors of the towns about him for some of their soldiers to help in a case
so needful. Which Monsieur le Conte de grandpre, Monsieur de Rumesnil, and
Monsieur De Estingue Governors of the towns of Mouzon, Maubert and sedan
willingly agreed unto, some lending him their own persons, and some their
soldiers. For Monsieur de Rumesnil an old yet valiant Gentleman, took the
charge to lead the troops of the neighboring garrisons, and coming to sedan
the 3. of August, departed in the Evening from thence toward Villefranche,
sending certain footmen into the town, and ambushed with the rest of his
foot and horse about half a mile off, on the same side where Gauchet and his
troops must pass. The sign given by the soldiers of Villefranche unto
Gauchet, whereby he should know when to enter the town, was a cannon shot:
and the like to Monsieur de Rumesnil to issue out of his Ambuscado. Now when
the time drew on that the thing must be effected, every man prepared
himself. Gauchet caused all his horsemen to a light a quarter of a mile from
Villefranche, to conduct them unto the Ditches, and from thence by the
soldiers means into the town. And Monsieur de Rumesnil prepared to charge
them behind. To conclude, the signs were given, and all Gauchets men that
entered the town or the ditches, were slain or sent flying into the air by
certain Instruments of wild fire made for the same purpose, or drowned in the
ditches. Mean while Gauchet that made have to follow those that had entered the
town, was much amazed that he and his troops were charged behind: and had it
not been that one led his horse after him (whether it were done by policy or
good fortune it is not known) he had likewise stayed behind: but he got on
horseback, and saved himself by flying. At this overthrow there was slain to
the number of 300 and 120. taken prisoners. All the Leaders and Captains
except Gauchet were slain, and all their horses taken: so that of between
five or six hundred men that the said Gauchet brought thither, there escaped
not above fifty, which saved themselves by the favor of the night. A most
happy overthrow for his Majesty's service, being done without the loss of
any man: which will procure great peace, quietness and means unto the Country
to gather in their harvest with more security about the Frontiers of
Champaigne. In this sort do all the enemies both of God and the Country of
France perish and decay: but such as love God and public peace, are like the
Sun when it is in greatest force.

FINIS.

