An Abstract of the Doctrine of the Sabbath.

Briefly, yet fully and plainly set forth; Together with the uses of the same
Doctrine; with the usual Objections and Answers thereunto.

All which for the help of Memory, are drawn into sundry chapters.

AT LONDON, Printed by V. S. for Nicholas Ling. 1606.

To the right Worshipful and religious Knight, Sir Francis Knolys, one of the
Lievtenants, and Justices for the Peace in Barkeshire; and to the virtuous Lady
his wife; W. B. wishes increase of Gods favor in this life, and full fruition
of the same, in the life to come.
RIght Worshipful, having had so long experience of both your sincere
affections to true religion, and your religious dispositions, to the exercises
of Gods worship, both publicly in the holy assemblies, and privately in your
family, I knew not to whose Patronage I might better commit this short Treatise
of the right observation of the Lords Sabbath, than unto you both. It is for
matter, substantial and sound; for memory, short and methodicall; for
understanding, perspicuous, and plain; for use, most necessary and profitable;
and in all, like unto the meat that Jacob provided for his father Isaac, which
was so savory, that his father both loved it after a more special manner than
he did other meats, and also blessed him that brought it unto him: So will
this doctrine of the Sabbath be unto the religious taste of your inward man;
so savory, yea, so savoring of the spirit of God, that I am assured your souls
will delight in it, and bless God for them that have prepared it for you. As
for my part, I have but gleaned in the fields of other godly and learned men,
who have more copiously labored in this argument: neither is this my Abstract,
any other than the fragments of their sumptuous feasts: yet, through the
blessing of God, it may prove like the remainder of the five Loaves and two
Fishes in the Gospel, which being reserved at Christ's appointment, to the
glory of God, filled twelve baskets full; that is, were abundantly blessed to
a greater quantity than the former. And as for your parts, (without flattery
be it spoken) seeing God has given you both the hearts to honor him, by a
more careful and constant observation of his Sabbaoths, than many other; (yea,
than any other I might say) of any note amongst us; I see no reason, but notice
should be taken thereof, that as God by you is glorified, and his Church by
your good examples edified: so others also, hearing of the same, may, by your
examples, be stirred up to the like zeal, and to give you that commendation,
that is due to those that love the truth. For him that honors me, (says
God) I will honor. And since God has awarded you Honor, for honoring him, by
walking in the religious steps of your honorable father: How can I deny it
you, or others envy you for it? And as the blessed Apostle tells Philemon: so
I may (not unfitly usurping his words) say unto you; That both thanks and
prayers, are, and shall be rendered unto God for you, by many which hear of
your love and faith, which you have toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all his
Saints; that so the fellowship of your faith, may be made fruitful, and that
whatsoever good thing is in you, through Christ Jesus, may be known; for we,
yea all we in this populous Town of Reading, and the Country about, which
unfeignedly fear the Lord, and desire in truth of heart, to make straight
steps to godliness, and to profit in his ways, have great joy and
consolation in your love, to the Gospel of Christ; because by you also the
Saints hearts are not alittle comforted. It is pitiful to see in diverse
places, how many which are advanced by the bountiful providence of God, unto
places of dignity and honor, in the Commonwealth of our English Israel, do
bear themselves in hand, that having been at the House of God, to hear
common Prayer, or a Sermon, are for this their eare-service, and lip-labor,
notable Sanctifiers of the Sabbath. And whereas they ought to sanctify it
also at home, by conference with their families, prayer, and meditation,
singing of psalms, and other holy duties, both of piety, and charity; yea,
and to carry themselves in all grave and sober manner, as having authority in
their hands to terrify vanity and profaneness, and not to countenance them,
do suffer themselves to be made companions to all vain men, a thing which holy
David detested: Psalm. 15. Psalm. 26. Psalm. 101.
and like Esopa block, to lie drenched in the love of vain sports, and
smoakie recreations, (vexations indeed to a sanctified heart) with the loss
of precious Time, and check of their own conscience. Whereby it oftentimes
comes to pass, that their base desire of winning other men's money, is
recompensed with the loss of their own substance, to verify Gods Proverb by
Solomon; Pro. 21.17
He that loves pastime, shall surely be a poor man: their hearing of Sermons
is also accursed, their souls grow barren in holy knowledge, and heavenly
wisdom; and when time serves, they have not so much as one arrow in their
quiver, to shoot at a treacherous Papist, or a wicked Atheist, or any other
heretical depraver of the Truth, which are too rife in every corner, with
popish persuasions, and divelish sophistications, watching where men are weak,
or faint-hearted to resist, there to break in, and make spoil of all: or if
they have a piece of any argument in store, to give an assault withal, or can
make some answer to repel the ill-affected in religion: yet, through their
want of practice, or through their inexpertnesse in the word of Truth, either
they have no heart to encounter with them, or else they want strength to
continue the conflict; or for want of holy wisdom, they utterly shame
themselves, and the Lords cause in the handling. But you (right Worshipful)
have not so learned Jesus Christ. And if I have found favor in your eyes, (as
I am sure in times past, with thanks I acknowledge, that both I, and my poor
ministry have) let me be bold in the Lord to exhort you, still to continue
constant in your holy courses, for the honoring of God in the sanctification
of his Sabbaoths, and by your godly examples and zealous persuasions, to be a
means to stir up others, that lie securely asleep, in the opinion they have
of an outward formality in religion, and to draw on others amongst us, that be
Masters in Israel, yet too backward in these holy duties, and are in danger of
losing their first love to holy religion, if ever they had any; whereby the
fame of our Town begins to be at a low ebb, in comparison of that it has
been; yea, we begin to be like the Church of Sardi, that had a name of living
to God, but indeed was dead: Revel. 3.^
many keeping the Sabbath to the halves, in the fore noone at the Temple, in
the afternoon at home; in the fore-noone prayers, in the afternoon plays,
etc. resembling those monstrous pictures, which being looked upon one way, show
very beautiful faces of men and women; but another way, bruit beasts, and
ugly birds. I write not this as doubting of your constancies, but because I
have learned of Saint Peter; 2. Pet. 1.12.13.
That a sound faith has need of a strengthening, a wary heart of a warning,
and a pure mind of a stirring up: and therefore I use this boldness in the
Lord toward you. Wherefore, though you see some amongst us with the Rubenites,
abide like earth-wormes, Iud. 5.16, 17, 18.
amongst their sheepe-folds, and some with Gilead, lie hovering beyond Jordan,
and looking which way the world will sway: and others with Dan, lurking
cowardly in ships prepared for flight: and others with Ashur, lie skulking on
the sea shore, expecting a day, and ready to entertain some foreign arrival
of Italienated wild Boares, to root up the Lords Vineyard: yet I doubt not,
(and to that end my prayer shall be) that you may with worthy Zebulon and
Nephthalie, be (as you have been) most forward in the high places of the Lords
field, and that all of us may ieopard our lives in the defense of the Lords
quarrel, against the Cananites. You, even the Kings of Canaan: the God of
heaven give you both increase of his holy spirit, and prosper you in all well
doing, and sanctify all our hearts, that we may so show forth the power of his
Gospel, in our holy conversation, that the adversary may be ashamed of his
gainsaying, and depraving humor, and we may have comfort and boldness in the
day of the Lord, which approaches apace, and slacketh not.

Your Worships in all good affection, William Burton.

To the Christian Reader.
COnsidering that the profanation of the Lords holy Sabbath is one of the
general and capital sins of the land, which not a little provokes the
high displeasure, and deep vengeance of God against our whole Nation, for that
wheresoever it goes, it is accompanied with the contempt of all religion,
piety, and good order, to the letting in of Popery, Atheism, impiety, and
all iniquity. I doubt not (good Reader) but thou will easily confess, that it
is high time for every man to put to his helping hand for the remooving, or at
least, for the abating (if it may be) of this high contempt of the Lords day.
And to use all good means, whereby those which yet sin of ignorance, and
weakness, rather then of any settled wilfulness, may be brought in some
measure to the sound knowledge, and holy obedience of this most glorious
commandment of God. That so (at the least) for their sakes so fearing God, and
in his fear drawing near unto his true worship (which yet are likely, no
doubt, to prove the smallest number) the Lord may in his mercy spare the whole
land, as he spared ripe sinning Sodom, for just Lots sake. To which end and
purpose, it has pleased God to stir up many of his servants, both godly and
learned, to travel, both by speaking and writing in the former argument. And
among the rest, D Bound. Ma. Grenham. Ma. Widly.
some have labored as I suppose (without prejudice to any be it spoken) more
abundantly then the rest, and that both learnedly and godly, having soundly
prooved the doctrine by authority of the word, and consent of the best
Writers, and consent both of antiquity, and of later years, as also urged the
same by many religious and patheticall persuasions unto the conscience. For
whose painful travels I must acknowledge my self (the least of all) amongst
many other most highly bound to give God praise. But such is the corruption of
our nature in general, (but especially of the sluggard, to whom a few lines
more then ordinary in spiritual matters, seem to be so many Lions lying in
his way to keep him from reading the same) that few of many will hardly take
the pains to travail to the end of any learned discourse, though it be
likely to prove never so profitable unto them at their iourneyes end And many
again are induced rather to read such things as are short and compendious,
like men that love to go the nearest way home with a light burden. In which
respects I have presumed to offer unto thee this short abridgement of the
doctrine of the Sabbath: partly to thrust on the sluggard, and partly to toll
on the weary and faint, and partly to help the memories of those that have
read and forgot again: but chiefly to stir up them with my self to a more
careful and conscionable practice of the same. Herein know that I have but
imitated those travelers, who having been in other Countries, have made a
brief collection of such things as they have observed, and deemed memorable:
telling the world of many a fair City which they never builded, of many a
goodly Orchard which they never planted, of many stately Monuments which they
never erected, and of many curious works which they never invented, etc. And
all this yet, not without some comfort to themselves, and some delight to
others, and not without some provocation perhaps unto some to take the like, or
greater iourneys to their further benefit and delight: having learned, that if
a man do but even speak the same things again, which have been spoken
before, it is not altogether a fruitles labor. If I have added of mine own
(as in some places I have) though very little, and followed mine own Method
and order in the contriving of this poor ahridgement. I have not done it
without the approbation of many godly and learned, both in the ministry, and
otherwise, (whose judgment I must, and do every way prefer before my own)
who having perused the same, have not only affoorded thereunto thear good
approbation, but have also earnestly entreated me (many of them) and encouraged
me all of them, to publish the same. Whatsoever it be, I do humbly submit both
my self and it to the charitable and Christian censures of the reverend
Fathers and Brethren of the Church of Christ, and to the gracious blessing of
the Lord our heavenly father, who will witness with me against all that shall
be contrary minded, that my principal care and desire herein has been, and
is, the advancement of his own glory, in the edifying of his church: but
especially of that people, and congregation, amongst whom I have (through his
merciful providence) my standing and abiding. Make thy best use of it, and
assist me with thy prayers:

Thine in Christ, W. Buiton.

Of the manner and matter of the fourth Commandment in general.
CHAP. I.
THe fourth Commandment lays forth the doctrine of the Sabbath, and is
duly to be considered of every one: First, for the manner of commanding:
Secondly, for the matter commanded.

For the manner of commanding, this Commandment differs from the other
Commandments three ways; and yet every way it is most forcible to persuade
and moove the conscience. For, 1 The Lord says here: Remember, etc. that is,
think of it before hand: to show, that except it be thought upon before it
come, for the ordering of our business accordingly, we cannot keep it as it
should be kept. 2 Those things which in the other Commandments are understood,
are expressed in this. For first, in this Commandment, both the good is
expressly commanded, and the evil expressly forbidden: in the other Commandment
it is not so. Secondly, here we are expressly charged with our selves, and
those that belong unto us: in the rest it is not so. 3 Here be more reasons
used, than in all the rest: and they be in number 3. 1 The first is drawn from
the equity of the thing commanded: for seeing as God gives us six days for
our own business, reason requires, that we should keep the seventh day for
his Majesty's use. 2 The second is drawn from Gods example: that we may be
like our Creator, in that point of resting the seventh day. 3 The third reason
is taken from the end of that blessing which the Lord bestowed upon that day:
for he blessed this day with a spetiall blessing, to this end only, ( viz. to
his service,) and to no other.



From this multiplicitie of reasons here used, we may gather four things.

1 The greatness of Gods goodness, who persuades us by reasons, when he
might compel us by his only and absolute authority. 2 The excellency of that
duty which is here so many ways enforced. 3 The necessity of it. 4 How
rebellious our nature is, (especially against this Commandment) that must be
drawn to the liking of it by so many reasons.
So much for the manner of Commanding. Now of the matter that is Commanded: and
that is double.

1 That a day of rest must be kept. 2 That this rest must be sanctified.
Concerning the day of rest, four points are to be considered.

1 That a Sabbath day, or day of rest, must of necessity be continued in the
Church of God, unto the end of the world. See chap. 2. 2 That this rest must be
upon one certain day: and what day that must be. See chap. 3. 3 What manner
of rest it is that must be kept. See chap. 4. And what works may be done that
day, See chap. 5. 4 To whom the observation of this rest is enjoined. See chap.
6. With objects answered. chap. 7.
Concerning the sanctifying of this rest, four points are to be considered of.

1 What is meant by sanctifying the Sabbath day. See chap. 8. 2 By what means
the Sabbath day must be sanctified, which must be by performing of duties.
1 Public, and they be of two sorts. 1 Of Piety. See cha. 9. 2 Of Pity. See
cha. 10.
2 Private, and those are also two fold. 1 More private, and such as are to be
done by every man alone. See chap. 11. 2 Less private, or such as are to be
performed with others. See cha. 12. and 13.
3 By whom those means must be put in practice, whereby the Sabbath is to be
sanctified See chap. 14. 4 What objections commonly are made against the
sanctification of the Sabbath, or any part of the doctrine thereof. See chap.
15.
Of the Continuance of a Sabbath.
CHAP. II.
THe Continuance of a Sabbath must be granted, and not be doubted of, or
else in vain do we exhort to the keeping holy of a Sabbath. Now the
Continuance of a Sabbath, or day of Rest, may be prooved two ways.

1 By the antiquity of the Sabbath. 2 By the ends, for which it was first
ordained.
The antiquity of the Sabbath day, is very great: for, 1 So soon as there was
a seventh day created, so soon was it made a Sabbath day, and sanctified to a
holy uses. 2 From the first institution of it, it was kept among the Hebrews
by tradition, until the b Law was given. 3 From the law, until Christ's time,
it was kept by the Jews, according to the fourth Commandment of the moral
law. 4 Our Savior Christ, at his coming, by his practice, did establish it, c
and his Apostles after d him. 5 The christian Churches ever since the Apostles
time, have kept a Sabbath day, according to the practice and writings of the
Apostles.


So much of the antiquity of the Sabbath day. Now of the ends for which a
Sabbath, or day of Rest was first ordained: and those were two.

1 The first was, a more principal end, and that was to further both Adam at
the first, and Adams posterity for ever, in the true worship of God. Now, so
long as the worship of God must continue in the Church; so long must the
Sabbath continue, which was made a subordinate means and help unto the same.
But the worship of God, must continue for ever in the world. Therefore also,
while the world stands, a Sabbath day must be continued.
2 The second end of a Sabbath, was less principal, and that was to help
Nature, and to maintain bodily strength: Exodus 23.12. And in regard of these
two ends, it is still most necessary, which may appear by reasons. 1 General,
and those may be drawn; 1 From the greater to the less: For if Adam in his
best estate, had need of a Sabbath day, wherein he might serve God, by
meditating upon his works, by praying unto him for the continuance of his
grace, and by praising his name for benefits received, etc. and all because
he might fall; then much more need have we of a Sabbath day, being so
grievously fallen, that so we may recover our selves again. 2 From the
effects of sin. For after sin had entered, the first strength decayed: then
came in corruption and weakness, pain and weariness, and all forerunners of
death, with death it self: in regard whereof, we all crave help of ease and
rest, without which we cannot long endure. And therefore, look how much we are
weakened and broken, more then our forefathers were, and Adam in Paradise, so
much more need have we of a Sabbath, (that is, a rest) then they had.
2 Special, and these in regard: 1 Of the wicked, who upon the six days,
never read the scriptures, nor hear them, nor pray, nor meditate, nor confer
of religion; but by this merciful ordinance of a Sabbath, they are driven to
do that which they would not otherwise do: by which means, either some good
may be wrought in them, if they belong unto God, or else they shall be left
without excuse in the day of the Lord. 2 In regard of the godly themselves, who
oftentimes also neglect the exercises of Gods worship in the week days; but
are driven by this means of a Sabbath, to supply their former wants, to their
greater good.


THE PROOFS.
a Genesis 2.3. So God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it: because that in
it, he had rested from all his work, which God had created and made.

b Exodus 16.23. And he answered and said, this is that which the Lord has
said: To morrow is the holy rest of the Sabbath unto the Lord, bake that to
day which ye will bake, etc.

c Luke 4.16. And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and as
his custom was, went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to
read.

d Acts 13.14. But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antiochia, a
City of Pisidia, and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat
down. ver. 15. And after the lecture of the Law and Prophets, the Rulers of
the Synagogue sent unto them, saying; Ye men and brethren, if ye have any
word of exhortation for the people, say on. Then Paul stood up, etc. verse 42.
And when they were come out of the Synagogue of the Jews, the Gentiles
besought that they would preach these words to them the next Sabbath day.
verse 44. And the next Sabbath day came almost the whole City together, to
hear the word of God.

Chap. 17.2. And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath
days disputed with them by the Scriptures.

e Six days thou shall dee thy work, and in the seventh day thou shall rest,
that thy Ox, and thy Ass may rest, and the son of thy maid, and the
stranger may be refreshed.

Deuteronomy. 5.14. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, thou
shall not do any work therein, nor thy son, nor thy daughter nor thy man
servant, nor thy maid, nor thy one, nor thy usse, neither any of thy cattle,
nor the stranger that is within thy gates, that thy man servant, and thy maid,
may rest as well as thou.

Mark 2.27. And he said to them, the Sabbath was made for man, and not man
for the Sabbath.

Of the day that the Sabbath must be kept upon.
CHAP. III.
AS there must be a Sabbath, or day of rest continued in the Church of God,
while the world continues: so this Sabbath must be upon one certain day of
the week, and that is the seventh day, for so God has appointed: first, at
the creation: a secondly, at the giving of the Law in Mount Sinai. b

But not that seventh day, which was from the first creation of the world: for
that was once changed unto the first day of the week, the day after the Jews
Sabbath, which we now keep for the Sabbath day: Acts 20.7. concerning which
change, three things are diligently to be considered.

1 That it was made by the Apostles, and could be made by none, so fitly as by
them, and that for two causes. 1 Because they had the best gifts; for they had
the spirit of truth to lead them into all truth. c And therefore could see
further into things, the^ the rest of the church. 2 Because, by reason of their
great and Apostolical authority, they could prevail more then there is.
2 That the Apostles made this change of the day, upon good reasons made known
to the Church, and those were cheefely two.
1 In memory of the second creation of the world by Christ, because on that
day, the Lord Jesus did most gloriously rise again, and so conquered death,
sin, and hell, and finished the work of man's Redemption; which was a second
creation. 2 Then the Lord Jesus having as it were made the world new again,
he did, 1 Cease suffering, as God at the end of the first creation, ceased
working. 2 Begin his glorious rest, and so continues in rest and glory for
ever. In which respects, 1 The time of the Gospel is called, the world that was
to come. d The heavens and the earth, are called New: e and all things, men and
all, are called new f creatures. 2 This new Sabbath also, is called by a new
name, viz. the Lords day: g of the Lord Jesus: concerning which name, two
things are to be noted. 1 That it must be retained with the day; because part
of the honor and estimation of the day consists in giving it his right name.
2 That it does no whit abate the glory of the first creation, nor of the first
Sabbath; but being added unto it, as a further honor, does increase the
dignity of it, even as Jacob was more renowned of God, when he was also called
Israel.

3 That this first day of the Jews week, which we now keep for the Sabbath,
is that Sabbath day which was ordained by the Apostles, through the direction
of Gods spirit: and therefore must remain for ever, and never more be
changed. For, 1 Upon this day, the Primitive churches, with the consent of the
Apostles, used to assemble, and to exercise all the parts of Gods worship,
which were proper to the Sabbath day. h 2 The Apostle Saint Paul, wills that
to be done upon this day which is most fit for the Sabbath day: and that is,
collecting for the poor, i as more at large is showed in chapter 10. 3 This
day has been kept of all Churches ever since the Apostles time; and in all
the new Testament, is nothing found to control the same: neither was it ever
resisted by the Apostles, but has been by their writings approved, and by
their practice confirmed unto us.

THE PROOFS.
a Gen 2.3. So God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, etc.

b Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, etc. verse 10. But
the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

c John 16.13. Howbeit, when he is come, which is the spirit of truth, he will
lead you into all truth.

d Heb. 2.5. For he has not put in subjection unto the Angels, the world to
come, whereof we speak. e Esa. 65.17. For lo, I will create new heavens, and
a new earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. verse
18. But be you glad and rejoice for ever, in the things that I shall create:
for behold, I will create Jerusalem as a rejoicing, and her people as a joy. f
(...) Cor. 5.17. Therefore, if any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature:
old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.

g Apoc. 1.10. And I was in the spirit on the Lords day.

h Acts 20.7. And the first day of the week, the Disciples being come
together, to break bread, Paul preached unto them.

i 1. Corin. 16.2. Every first day of the week, let every one of you put aside
by himself, and lay up as God has prospered him, that then there be no
gatherings when I come.

What manner of rest must be kept.
CHAP. IIII.
IT is not enough to keep a rest, but we must keep a most precise and exact
rest, and that may appear unto us two ways.

1 By the manifold Commandments, even for the keeping of the Sabbath. 2 By
the urging and repeating of the word [Rest] in so many words, so often, and so
a particularly.
All the Commandments, given for the keeping of the Sabbath, are two fold,
General, whereof some be without b penalties expressed: and some be with c
penalties annexed. Special, wherein the Lord forbids his people to work on
such things, and at such times, as might carry the greatest show of being
exempted: as namely.


1 Gathering of Manna, d when they were fed but from hand to mouth, (as they
say.) 2 Making of the Tabernacle, e though it were the place wherein the Lord
should be served. 3 Working in harvest time; f yea, though it comes but once
a year, and for man's life is most necessary. 4 Keeping of faires and markets,
g carrying of things to be sold, and selling of victuals there, though then
indeed much might be gained.
As it appears by the manifold Commandments, both general, and special
for the Sabbath, what manner of rest it is that must be kept; so also is it
made evident, by the urging and repeating of the word so often, in so many
words, and so particularly, as we have seen before, in Exodus 16.23. etc. which
rest thus urged, is two fold.

1 Outward, and of the whole body, and that is two fold. 1 From doing any of
the foresaid things, forbidden by special command: or other works whatsoever
we use, or may do lawfully on the six days: and they be of two sorts. 1
Works of our Vocation. And therefore, it is not lawful on the Sabbath day,
for Carriers to travel with their carriages, h for Schoolemaisters to teach or
study humanity, for Physicians to read books of surgery or physic, for
Lawyers to study the case, peruse evidences, etc. nor for Judges and Justices,
to ride their circuites, or sit in judgment; because all these are the
ordinary duties of their vocation, which belong to the six days, except in
cases excepted in the next chapter. 2 Works of our Recreation; yea, though they
be honest, and at other times lawful. For 1 If the duties of our vocation,
without which a Commonwealth cannot stand, must cease when we should attend
upon the Lords work, much more must our pleasures cease, without which, men
may continue, though not well. 2 As the works of our recreation are less
needful than those of our vocation: so they do more hinder us from the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, by reason of the excessive delight, which our
corrupt nature does take in them.

2 From speaking and hearing of worldly business, and that for two causes. 1
Because much talking and hearing of worldly business, do as much hinder the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, as much working do for, 1 We may work alone, we
cannot talk but with others: and so we hinder both our selves, and others
too. 2 Our minds cannot be set wholly upon the worship and service of God, as
they should, and at the same time be talking, and hearing of i worldly matters.
2 Because this Commandment must be no more restrained then the other. And
therefore, vain words, and worldly speeches, are here also forbidden, k as
well as profane speeches in the first, as naming of false gods in the second,
as vain oaths in the third, as contemptuous speeches in the fifth, as railing
words in the sixth, as filthy words in the seventh, as covetous speeches in the
eight, and slandrous words in the ninth.
2 Inward, and of the mind: viz. from studying, and th^^ ^^th day, worldly
matters; and great (...) there is so to believe. For, 1 The whole law was given
to the whole man. 2 The creation, redemption, and preservation, to the
glorification both of body and soul, do bind us to obey God, both in body and
mind. 3 The law cannot else be perfect and absolute, like the Lawgiver, who
as he is a spirit, so he will be served in spirit and mind. 4 Except our
minds be emptied of all worldly affairs, there can be no room for heavenly
meditations to dwell in. 5 The very end why we dispatch our hands of our
business, is, that our minds might not be disturbed with them.

THE PROOFS.
a Exodus 16.23. To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord: and
chapter (...) days shall men work, but the (...) day is the Sabbath of the
holy rest unto the Lord: whosoever does any work in the Sabbath day, shall
die the death: and 35.2. as before.

b Exodus 20.10. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it
thou shall do no manner of work, etc.

c Exodus 31.14. He that defiles it, (meaning the Sabbath) shall die the
death. Therefore, whosoever works therein, the same person shall be even cut
off from among his people. Ier. 17.27. But if ye will not hear me to
sanctify the Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, nor to go through the
gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the gates
thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and shall not be
quenched.

d Exodus 16.26. Six days shall ye gather it, but in the seventh day, is the
Sabbath, in it there shall be none. 27. Notwithstanding there went out some on
the seventh day to gather, but they found none. 28. And the Lord said unto
Moses; How long refuse ye to keep my Commandments and my laws? 29. Behold
how the Lord has given you the Sabbath: therefore he gives you the sixth
day, bread for two days: tarry therefore every man in his place, let no man
go out of his place the seventh day. 30. So the people rested the seventh day.

c Exodus 31.12. Afterward the Lord spoke unto Moses saying; 13. Speak thou
also unto the children of Israel, saying; Notwithstanding, keep ye my
Sabbaoths, for it is a sign between me and you, etc.

f Exo. 34.21. Six days thou shall work, and in the seventh day, thou shall
rest, both in earing time, and in the harvest thou shall rest.

g Nehe. 13.15. In those days saw I in Judah, those that trod wine presses on
the Sabbath day, and which brought in sheaves, and laded Asses also with wine,
grapes, and figs, and all burdens, and brought them into Jerusalem on the
Sabbath day; and I protested to them in the day that they sold victuals. 16.
There dwelt men of Tyrus also therein, which brought fish and all wares, and
sold on the Sabbath day, unto the children of Judah, even in Jerusalem. 19.
And when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, I
commanded to shut the gates, and charged that they should not be opened until
after the Sabbath, etc.

h Ier. 17.21. Thus says the Lord; Take heed to your souls, and bear no
burden in the Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem. 22.
Neither carry forth burdens out of your houses on the Sabbath day.

i Math. 6.24. No man can serve two masters.

k Esa. 58.13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
will on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it as
glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thy own ways, nor
seeking thine own will, nor speaking a vain word: then shall thou delight in
the Lord, etc.

What works may be done upon the Sabbath day.
CHAP. V.
FRom that strait and severe Law of resting, (handled in the former chapter)
are exempted all works of necessity, as lawfully to be done upon the
Sabbath day: which by the doctrine and practice of our Savior Christ, in Math
12.1. to 13. appear to be of two sorts.

1 Works of religion or holiness. 2 Works of compassion or charity, which
cannot be deferred unto another day, nor could be provided for, nor prevented
before.
All religious works of necessity, are of two sorts.

1 All bodily labor, that directly concerns the worship of of God. So in the
time of the Law, did the Priests labor when they did slay the beasts, prepare
the sacrifices, and offer them on the altar. And so, in time of the Gospel,
may, and ought Christians to travel, though far, and faintly, to the places
of Gods worship: and so also ought the Preacher then to labor in preaching the
word, etc. yea, though it be in the sweat of his brows, and to the wearying of
his body, as many do. For though to travel and to speak, as in manner
aforesaid, be each of them a laboursome work to the body, yet is that labor
lawful: because, 1 It is warranted by the example of our Savior Christ, and
his disciples, who went from town to town, to preach, until they were both a
hungry and faintie. As also by the example of the Shunamite, who traveled from
home upon the Sabbath, to the place of the Prophets: b because she had no
teaching at home. 2 The holy work, about which this labor is employed, does
sanctify the labor and make it holy, even as the Temple did sanctify the
gold that was laid upon the Temple; and as the Altar did sanctify the gift of
the Altar. Math. 23.17, 19.
2 All other bodily labor, whereby the people of God are both called together,
to the service of God (as in the time of the law, they were by sounding of
trumpets. Numb. 10.2, 3. And in time of the Gospel, by ringing of bells:) as
also comfortably refreshed and fitted for the service of God; as receiving of
necessary and convenient food to strengthen nature: c as also to sleep a
little after dinner, (though it be no bodily labor, but ease:) I doubt not is
lawful for the preventing of sleep and drowsinesse at the holy Assembly. And
if any will say, that by the same reason some recreation may be allowed to some
persons on the Sabbath day, for dullness and infirmity sake, I will not
contend greatly with them, so it be privately, sparingly, and moderately taken,
and that by weak and sickely persons, used only to make them more fit for the
service of God: which end, howsoever it be commonly pretended in the world, by
men of vanity and pleasure, yet doubtless is it the thing that is least
regarded amongst them, they being such as commonly addict themselves to all
sports and pastimes, both openly and secretly, as hunting, hawking, bowling,
shooting, carding, dicing, tables, etc. and therefore this allowance,
whatsoever it be, does no way make for them, but against them.
So much concerning works of religion or holiness, which of necessity must be
done upon the Sabbath day. Now to works of compassion or charity, and they be
of two sorts.

1 Such duties as tend to the preservation of man. First, of our selves, as
Eliah did save himself by fleeing forty days together, (wherein were many
Sabbaoths) from Iezebel, 1. King. 19.8. next, of others, as generally of our
Country, as when enemies invade, when tumults arise, robberies are done, etc.
specially of our friends; as when any fire breaks out, or when any is
dangerously sick, etc. yea, and of our foes too, in the cases aforesaid, or
the d like. 2 Such duties as make for the preservation of other creatures, viz.
the e beasts, etc. as fothering, watering, seeking, curing, etc. Provided
always, that we abuse not this liberality of God, and liberty of Christians,
as too many do. 1 By imagining a necessity where none is apparent, as
Clothiers, and Cloth-workers do, which for greedy covetousness only, set
their rackes, and work hard upon the clothes being set, and that on every
Sabbath through the year, if work and weather serve, for fear forsooth (as
they pretend) of foul weather the week following, or losing their markets, or
masters custom, etc. when there is indeed, no necessity apparent; but that,
(if they durst, or could trust the Lord) they might well let them stay until
the next day. So do Husbandmen also imagine a necessity, where none is,
working in harvest time on the Lords day, for fear of rain the next day, etc.
2 By bringing a necessity upon them, which God has not laid upon them, as
many do, through, 1 Carelessness, as those which care not to remember the
Sabbath day before it come, that they might accordingly, lay for the doing of
their work, being artificers, etc. and for their weariness, being to travel.
2 Slothfulness, as those that drive off, either all, or part of their business,
until the Lords day.


THE PROOFS.
a Math. 12.1. At that time, Jesus went on a Sabbath day through the corn,
and his Disciples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn,
and to eat. 2. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him; Behold, thy
Disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the Sabbath. 3. But he
said unto them; Have ye not read what David did when he was an hungered? etc.
Mar. 2.23, 24, 25. Luke 6.1, 2, 3. as before.

b 2. Kings 4.22. Then she said to her husband; I will haste to the man of
God, and come again. 23. And he said; Wherefore will thou go to him to day?
It is neither new Moon, nor Sabbath day, etc.

c Exodus 12.16. Also in the seventh day, shall be an holy Assembly unto you, no
work shall be done in them, save about that which every man must eat, that
only may ye do. See Math. 12.1. etc. as before at a

d Levit. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful of wrong, against the
children of thy people, but shall love thy neighbor as thy self, etc. Math.
5.44. But I say unto you; Love your enemies, etc. See Luke 6.27. to. 36.

e Math. 12.11. Which of you having a sheep fall in a Sabbath day into a pit,
will not take it and lift it out? Mar. 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man, and
not man for, etc. Luke 13.15. Hypocrite, does not each one of you on the
Sabbath day loose his Ox, or his Ass from the stall, and lead him away to
the water?

Of the persons to whom this Rest is enjoined.
CHAP. VI.
THe persons commanded to observe this holy Rest, are two fold.

1 All Governors, whether they be public, as Princes, and other Magistrates;
or private, as parents and masters of families. 2 All that be in subjection.
Of Governors, two things are required.

1 That they rest themselves. 2 That they see the Rest kept by those that are
under them.
That themselves must rest, there is great reason: for,

1 The Law of God does no more privilege them to break the Commandments of
God, than it does other a men.

2 Their example is dangerous, if they do not keep the Rest: and profitable,
if they do keep it.

3 They must punish those that offend in this point; which they cannot do
well, if they offend themselves therein.

As they must keep the Sabbath themselves, so they must also see it kept by
those that are under them.

1 The Magistrate in the Commonwealth must see it kept, and that two ways;
First, by making of good laws for the preservation of the rest, with penalties
and punishments for the offenders. Secondly, by looking diligently to the
execution of the same; for whose encouragement, the Lord has recorded in his
word, two singular things. 1 A special promise of singular blessing upon
themselves, and upon their b people. 2 A notable example of Nehemiah, doing the
like. In whom, two things are to be observed.
See Nehe. 13.15, 16. etc. 1 What zealous courage should be in a Magistrate,
for the suppressing of such abuses as do profane the holy Sabbath, and
dishonor the name of God. 2 What a blessed success God sends upon the godly
endeavors and encounters of all such: (all enemies and hindrances
notwithstanding.)
2 Masters of families must see it kept, and that two ways. First, by
commanding their families to observe the Sabbath. Secondly, by punishing those
that disobey their commandment. Provided always, that their commandments
and punishments be free from hypocrisy and cruelty, to which end they must
take heed of three things. 1 That they cause not their servants or others, to
work for them, when themselves do rest; as many hypocrites do, which upon
the Sabbath day, compel their servants to work in harvest time, send them to
faires, and cause Shoomakers, and Tailers, and such like, etc. to work, and
bring home their work on that day. 2 That they leave it not to their servants
choice to keep it, or not to keep it; but to take an account of them. 3 That
they overlay not their servants so with their work in the six days, but that
they may have some time spared them to do their own in; as to visit their
friends, when need requires, to mend their apparel, and buy their
provision, etc.

So much of Governers duties, in regard of the holy Rest. Now of those that be
in subjection, and they (as they are mentioned in the Commandment) are of two
sorts.

1 Such as are endued with reason. 2 Such as are void of reason.
Those that are endued with reason, are of two sorts.

1 Those that are of our family. 2 Strangers.
Those that be of our family, are likewise two fold.

1 Such as are of us, as our wives and children. 2 Such as are not of us, but
with us, as soiorners and servants.
That servants should then rest, as well as their masters, there is great
reason, and is three fold.

1 Their condition were else intolerable. c And seeing God has appointed them
one whole day in seven, we can give them no less. 2 The place and calling of a
servant, requires great duty and thankfulness, both to God and man: both
which are to be learned upon the Sabbath day, and that cannot be done without
rest both of body and mind. 3 God will be honored in the sanctification of
the Sabbath, as well by servants, as by d masters.
Strangers also must keep this Rest with us, of what Country or religion
soever they be, if they be under our government; and that for two reasons.

1 They (being joined to Gods people, and under their government) must be
subject (at the least) to the outward discipline and order of the e Church. 2
Otherwise they should become snares to entangle Gods people, by working when
they rest.
So much for those that are endued with reason. Now it remains to see
further, that those things also which are void of reason, must rest when the
Sabbath day comes; and they are also of two sorts.

1 Things living, as cattle, and they must rest for two causes. 1 For the
renewing of their strength, for man's further benefit. Exodus 23.12. 2 Thereby to
keep men the better unto the obedience of this rest, seeing the beasts
themselves might not break it.
2 Things without life, as the ground from being f dug, tilled, etc. that
men might learn thereby, of what weight and moment the Sabbath is, when all
creatures should stoop unto it; yea, the very insensible ground, not free from
the subjection of it.

THE PROOFS.
a Esa. 30.33. For Tophet is prepared of old, it is even prepared for the King.

Deuteronomy. 17.18. And when he shall sit upon the throne of his kingdom, then shall
he write him this Law repeated in a book by the Priests of the Levites. 19.
And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all days of his life,
that he may learue to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of
this Law; and these ordinances, for to do them. Iere. 17.20. And say unto
them; Hear the word of the Lord, ye Kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates. 21. Thus says the
Lord; Take heed to your souls, and bear no burden in the Sabbath day, etc.

Math. 3.10. And now also is the axe put to the root of the trees, therefore
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
fire.

b Ier. 17.25. Then shall the Kings and the Princes enter in at the gates of
this City, and shall sit upon the throne of David, and shall ride upon
Charets, and upon horses; they and the men of Judah, etc. 26. And they shall
come from the Cities of Judah, and from about Jerusalem, and from the land of
Benjamin, and from the Plain, and from the Mountains, and from the South,
which shall bring burnt offerings and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and
incense, and shall bring sacrifice of praise, unto the house of the Lord.

c Deuteronomy. 5.14. The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, thou shall
not do any work therein, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man
servant, nor thy maid, nor thy ox, nor thy ass, neither any of thy cattle,
nor the stranger that is within thy gates, that thy man servant and thy maid,
may rest as well as thou. Exodus 23.12. In the seventh day thou shall rest, that
thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy maid, and the stranger
may be refreshed.

d Ephesians. 6.9. And ye masters, do the same things unto them, putting away
threatenings, and know that even your Master also is in heaven: neither is
there respect of person with him; and verse 8. Whatsoever good thing any man
does, that same shall he receive of the Lord, whether bond, or free. See Col.
3.11.

e Exodus 12.49 One Law shall be to him that is borne in the land, and to the
stranger that dwells among you.

f Levit. 25.3. Six years thou shall sow thy field, and six years thou shall
cut thy vineyard, and gather the fruit thereof. 4. But the seventh year shall
be a Sabbath of rest unto the land: the Lords Sabbath: thou shall neither
sow thy field, nor cut thy vineyard.

Objections against the first part answered.
CHAP. VII.
Objections which are commonly made against the doctrine of the Rest, are of
two sorts: viz. such as arise, 1 Of some scruple, or doubt of conscience among
the better sort. 2 Of minds possessed, either with a proud persuasion of man's
own sufficiency to keep the Law, as the Papists and popish Protestants are,
or else with greedy covetousness, and distrustfulnesse of Gods providence, as
worldlings be.


Objections of the first sort, are chiefly two, which with their answers, are
as follows.

1 Objection. Christ's observation of the Sabbath day, makes no more for the
continuance of a Sabbath, then his observing of Circumcision, the Passover,
the sacrifices, and other Jewish ceremonies does make for the continuance of
them. But they were all abolished by his death, being typical and ceremonial;
and so might the Sabbath too, being but ceremonial neither.

To this objection we answer two ways.

1 So much of the Sabbath day as was Jewish and ceremonial, is taken away; as
namely the restraint of a meat dressing, and b kindling of fires: but as for
the day of Rest, serving unto Gods worship, it was not ceremonial, but
moral: and therefore was not taken away. 2 The Sabbath day stood upon a
surer ground then the whole ceremonial Law; namely, the public worship of
God, and the relief of nature; which ends of the Sabbath are perpetual: and
therefore the Sabbath day also must be perpetual: neither could it with the
ceremonial Law be taken away. Now, that it was not taken away, appears by
the practice and writings. First of all, the Apostles in general, long after
Christ's death, and after they had received the holy Ghost, Acts 13.14, 42, 44,
and 17.2. as has been showed in chap. 2. at the letter. d Secondly, of John
who wrote 97. years after Christ's ascension, and does plainly avouch the
continuance of it, by this new and honorable name, the Lords day: Apoc. 1.10.
a name then best known to the Church.
2 Objection, The Sabbath was a memorial to the Jews, of their deliverance
out of Egypt: c therefore that people being now gone, to whom that deliverance
did belong, the Sabbath is also gone with them.

To this Objection we likewise answer two ways.

1 That the Jews having that reason to move them, besides the other before
mentioned, were the more straightly bound to the keeping of the Sabbath: but we
also are bound to keep it as well as they.

2 That it was required of all men long before those reasons were annexed unto
it: yea, for many hundredth years before the Jews were a people: and
therefore, though those people be gone, yet the Sabbath is not gone with them.

3 Objection. Col. 2.16. Let no man condemn you in respect of an holy day, new
Moon, or Sabbath. It seems by these words, that we are set free from
keeping any Sabbath at all.

Answer. The Apostle means the time of the Jewish Sabbath, and other Jewish
feasts, which being typical, the abolishing whereof, may by this place be
justly warranted: but yet the Sabbath is not abolished with the Jewish day,
since Christ has warranted the whole Law, and every jot or tittle of it to
remain.

4 Objection. The Sabbath it self is ceremonial. Exo. 31.13. it is made a
sign of our sanctification.

Answer. There is some difference between a sign and a shadow: for shadows
signify things to come, but signs, things already come, as well as to come.
The signs in Egypt, were tokens of Gods anger; the Sacraments are signs to
confirm our faith. Romans 4.10. and Christ's miracles were signs to show forth
his glory. Ioh. 2.11. yet none of these were shadows. So the Sabbath is a
sign memorative, to put us in mind of our sanctification, but yet no shadow.
Indeed the strict keeping of the Rest by the Jews commanded, Exodus 16.23. was
a shadow as well as the seventh day: yet the Rest commanded in the fourth
precept, was not so, neither had it any ceremony annexed thereunto.

5 Objection. Gal. 4.10. Paul says; He is afraid that he has bestowed his
labor upon them in vain: Because they observe days and times. Where the
Apostle seems to disallow set times.

An. The Apostle condemns not al set times, for he both kept set times himself
with others. Act. 20.7. and appointed the first day in the week for
collectio^s, both at Corinth, and Galatia. 1. Cor. 16. But he speaks of those
Jewish dais and times, and years, which he says were shadows of things to
come. Col. 2.17. and done away by the coming of Christ, who was the body of
all those ceremonial shadows; of which sort were their Sabbaoths of years,
as namely every seventh year, wherein the ground did rest from tilling, and
every year of Iubile, wherein bond men went out free, and alienated
possessions returned again to the owners. Levit. 25.10. And next, their
Sabbaoths of days, which also were of two sorts, ceremonial, and moral. Of
the first sort, were the Passover, Penticost, the new Moon, and the feast of
Tabernacles, which in Levit. 23. are called Sabbaoths: and also their moral
Sabbath, as touching the time of it, and the strictness of keeping the rest
upon it: and between these ceremonial Sabbaoths, and the moral Sabbaoths,
was great difference, as appears Levit. 23.37, 38. These are the feasts of
the Lord, which ye shall call holy Convocations, etc. besides the Sabbath of
the Lord.

6 Objection. Romans 14.5, 6. The Apostle seems to make all days alike, either
to be observed, or not observed.

Answer. He says, that some men did count them so; but the Apostle makes no
such account: and the question moved there, is not between the Jew and the
Gentile, (as some think) but between the stronger Christian, and the weaker.
chap. 5.1. The Stronger esteems one day above another, which appears, in
that there was a day, both commanded, received, and approved in the Church;
then the weaker is he that holds every day alike: So that if men count all
days alike, it is an argument of their weakness, whose infirmity, as yet
must be borne with, so long as it may be for their good to edification. chap.
15.2. But if any shall obstinately, and with a high hand, hold and defend, that
the Lords day, is but as another day, we are to rebuke them sharply, that
others may fear.

Objections of the second sort are as follows.

1 Objection. If it be thus strait, as that we must rest in thought, word, and
deed, who can keep it or abide it? But we can perfectly fulfill the Law; so
says the Counsel of Trent. Sess. 6. cha. 18. Therefore the Sabbath day is
not so straightly to be observed.

To this objection we answer three ways.

1 That no man can perfectly fulfill the Law of God; and yet every one is
charged to keep it perfectly, purely, and perpetually; because it is all men's
duty so to do.

2 The harder it is, the more we must strive to keep it. Luke 13.24.

3 By this strait and exquisite rule of resting, we see: first, our deserved
misery, by the infinite breaches of this Commandment, besides all the rest of
our sins. Secondly, we see Gods undeserved mercy in Christ, who has both
fulfilled the Law for us, as also freed us from the curse of the Law, and
purchased for us, the blessedness of heaven. Of whose benefits, we are
assured to be partakers, when we are persuaded of the forgiveness of our sins,
by him alone. 2. When we have power from him, to die unto sin, and live unto
righteousness, in some measure, as well in this Commandment, as in any other.

2 Objection. The world is hard (say poor men) we have a great charge of wife
and children, and little earnings, we may not starve, we hope God will not be
against the earning of a penny or two on the Sabbath day, etc.

To this Objection a double answer may be framed.

1 We cannot serve God, unless we cast away those worldly and distrustful
cares: For Satan would make men believe, that if they serve God, they shall
famish, or beg, etc.

2 We must have faith to believe: 1 The General promises of d God. 2 The
special promise that is made to the strict keeping of the e Sabbath. Where
also this very doubt is taken away.


3 Objection. Our servants must have some time of recreation, they work hard
all the week, etc.

Answer. It is true indeed, and some recreation sometime, is almost as
necessary, as their meat, drink, and sleep; but then be bold of think
own, and not of the Lords, allow it them in the six days, and not upon the
Lords day.

4 Objection. He that is bound (says the servant, and he that lives at the
commandment of another) must obey, if we do not, we shall lose our masters
good will, and get their displeasure.

Answer. If thou be a servant fearing God, and desirous in truth of heart to
sanctify the Lords day, then do this:

1 Consider with thy self, whether it be a work of necessity that thou art
commanded to do: if it be, then thou must obey thy master, if not, thou must
take another course. But thou will say perhaps, that thou see no necessity
in that thou art commanded. What then? There may be a necessity apparent to
thy master, and not to thee: neither is he bound to give thee an account of all
his purposes and business; as for example: thy master commands thee to
carry a letter for him, or to fetch home and make ready his horse, or to go
with him abroad, or the like; thou not knowing the matter, nor occasions of
those thy masters business, art bound to obey him, not demanding a reason of
his so doing, but conceiving, both in reverence, and charity of thy masters
doings, that if he saw not some great necessity in the matter, he would not so
employ thee; for charity does ever judge the best; where it knows no evil,
it thinks no evil. 1 Cor. 13.5.

But if thou be assured that it is no work of necessity, which thy master
would set thee about, when thou should rest unto the Lord, but that it
comes only of a greedy desire, to get the world, etc. as to plow, to carry
wares about the town, to keep open the shop, to set rackes, and to work upon
clothes usually upon the Lords day, or the like, whereof others can judge as
well as thou, then thy course must be this.

1 In all dutiful and reverent sort, on Gods behalf, expostulate and reason
the matter with thy master, and entreat him, not to compel thee against thy
conscience, to violate the Lords Commandment, but to give thee leave to keep
the holy Rest; as the Israelites craved leave of King Pharao, to go and serve
the Lord. And surely, if thy master has any fear of God at all in him, or
any spark of desire to please the Lord, and has not seared his conscience, as
it were with a hot iron, or sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of
God, he cannot choose but grant thee thy request.

2 If thy master be so hard hearted, and void of religion, that he will not
hear thee in thine humble suite, then solicit the Magistrate and the
Minister, and make them judges of thy cause, and see, if by their means, thy
may ermay be persuaded to let thee serve the Lord, in keeping the holy Rest:
and cease not thou all this while to pray unto God, that he would, by his
spirit, move and turn thy masters mind.

3 If the Magistrate be of thy masters mind, (as many are, that have as
little religion, as who have least) so that thou can not be releeved at his
hands, then I think thou ought to venture thy masters displeasure, or else
change thy service, knowing that it is better to obey f God, than men. Acts
4.19. Therefore, seeing as God commands thee to keep the holy Rest, and thy
master commands thee to break it, thou must in this case obey God, rather
then thy master. For the keeping and sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath, is no
matter of circumstance and ceremony, (as some would have it:) and therefore, to
give place unto the obedience of masters, being a matter of substance in the
fifth Commandment: but it is also a matter of the substance of Gods worship and
service, unto which, both thou and thy masters will must give place. And in
this case, the godly minded servant is not so much to stand upon terms, of
losing, or inioying his masters good will or service, but rather, to fear the
Lord, whose service is the best service, and freedom it self, and whose
displeasure is more intolerable, than the weight of all the world: neither
will he ever forsake those that trust in him.

Reply. But where shall I become, if my master turn me out of service?

Answer. Comfort thy self with the answer of Abraham to his Son Isaac; Genesis
22.8.
God will provide a sacrifice my Son: so God will provide a service for his
servants: and indeed, God did provide a sacrifice for Abraham, though he knew
not of it till it came; Verse. 14.
whereupon the name of that place is called God will provide, to this day: and
such a place has God in store for all that in truth of heart obey his will, as
Abraham did.

THE PROOFS.
a Exodus 16.23. Bake that to day which ye will bake, and sees that to day
which ye will sees, and all that remains, lay it up for you till the
morning. etc.

b Exodus 35.3. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout all your habitations, upon
the Sabbath day.

c Deuteronomy. 5.15. Remember that thou were a stranger in the land of Egypt, and
that the Lord thy God, brought thee out from thence by a mighty hand, and a
stretched out arm. Therefore the Lord thy God commands thee to observe the
Sabbath day.

d 1. Tim. 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the
promise of this life present, and of that that is to come. Matt. 6.33. First
seek ye the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other things
shall be ministered unto you.

Levit. 25.18. Ye shall obey mine ordinances, and keep my laws, and do
them, and ye shall dwell in the land in safety. 19. And the land shall give
her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, aad dwell therein in safety.

e Levit. 25.20. And if ye shall say; what shall we eat the seventh year, for
we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase? 22. I will send my blessing
upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years.
23. And ye shall sow the eight year, and eat of the old fruit until the
ninth year: till the fruit thereof come, ye shall eat the old.

f Acts 4.19. But Peter and John answered unto them, and said; Whether it be
right in the sight of God, to obey you rather than God, judge ye. 20. For we
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.

The second part of the fourth Commandment, requires the sanctifying of the
seventh days rest.
Of the sanctifying of the Sabbath in general.
CHAP. VIII.
COncerning the sanctification of the Sabbath day, four things are to be
considered of. 1 Of the meaning of the word Sanctify, which in Scripture is
applied. 1. To such things as are separated from common and profane uses, and
consecrated to uses a holy and religious. 2 To all other things which are made
lawful for believers to use to their own benefit, by the rule of the b word
and prayer.
2 That the sanctification of the Sabbath, stands in two points. 1 In not
using it about the affairs of this life, either for carnal pleasure, or
profit. 2 In consecrating it generally to holy uses: for the keeping of a Rest,
without a sanctification of it to holy exercises, is but to retain a shadow
without a body, specially to Gods worship and service, and to nothing else:
for, 1 This is the law of things consecrated to the Lord, that they may not be
employed to any other use but the Lords. 2 For this cause it is called a holy
Sabbath, and the Sabbath of the Lord; not only because the Lord did ordain
it, but cheefely, because it was ordained to the Lords use.

3 By what means the Sabbath day must be sanctified, and those means are two
fold. 1 By assembling our selves together in Gods house or c sa^ctuary. 2 By
doing such duties as God in his Sanctuary shall by his ministers teach us:
which duties are two fold.
1 Public, and those be also two fold, viz. exercises, 1 Of piety and
religion. 2 Of charity and compassion.
2 Private, viz. religious exercises, to be practiced when the congregation is
dissolved: and great reason, for, 1 It is against reason, to think a little
piece of the Sabbath day enough for Gods service, and to bestow the rest of the
day at our own pleasure. 2 It is not simply said; Remember the Sabbath, but
the Sabbath day; that is, the whole day, to sanctify it.

4 By whom it must be sanctified: viz. by all, both governors, and all that
be in subjection. See chap. 14.


THE PROOFS.
a Exodus 29.44. And I will sanctify the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and
the Altar: I will sanctify also Aaron, and his sons to be my Priests. Exodus
40.13. And thou shall put upon Aaron, the holy garments, and shall anoint him
and sanctify him, that he may minister to me in the Priests office.

Levit. 27.28. Nothing separate from the commen use, that a man does separate
unto the Lord of all that he has, (whether it be man, or beast, or land of his
inheritance) may be sold nor redeemed, for every thing separate from the common
use, is most holy unto the Lord, verse 30. Also, all the tithe of the land, of
the seed of the ground, of the fruit of the trees, is the Lords, it is holy to
the Lord.

b 1. Timoth. 4.4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanks giving. 5. For it is sanctified by the word of God
and prayer.

c Levit. 19.30. Ye shall keep my Sabbath, and reverence my sanctuary. And
chap. 23.3. In the seventh day shall be the Sabbath of Rest, an holy
Convocation, (or Assembly.)

Of the public duties of Piety.
CHAP. IX.
COncerning the public duties of Piety and Religion, which are to be
practiced in the open assemblies of the Church, we are to see three things.

1 How it can be proved, that God will be served by public assemblies. 2 Why
he will be worshipped in public assemblies. 3 How we must frequent the
public exercises of the Church.
Of the first.

That God will be served in the public assemblies of his people, may be proved
two ways.

1 By the Commandments of God in the holy Scripture, requiring the a same. 2
By the practice of Churches. First, of the Jews after the b captivity.
Secondly, of the c Christians.
Of the second.

Why God will be worshipped in the public assemblies of his people, there may
be many reasons yielded, and principally these five which follow. 1 That the
Church may be discerned a far off from the Synagogs of idolaters, and
conventicles of Schismatikes: for which cause, the visible Church of God is
called in Scripture; 1 A Mountained exalted. 2 A e Holy mountain.
2 That Gods dispearsed people spying the Church a far off, might repair
together unto f it. 3 That the wicked, which through contempt, should not join
themselves unto the Church, or through Apostasy should revolt from it, might be
left without all excuse, it being so visible unto them. 4 To show that we must
be no more ashamed of the true service of God, then we are of that which we do
openly, and in the view of all the world. 5 To represent unto us, our unity
with Christ, and of one with another, in the g Gospel of Christ.


Therefore they do err which hold:

1 That the public exercises of religion are needelesse, which Christ did
usually h visit, and had not so much need of them as we have: which David
also made so i special account of, and for want whereof, he was so k
exceedingly greeved.

2 That it is not fit for great persons, to go to the common Assemblies of the
Church: as if any were better than our Savior Christ, or the Prophet David,
who was also a Prince, as well as a Prophet.

Of the Third.

How we must frequent the public exercises also, is a point necessary to be
considered. For it is not enough, as many imagine, to come to some part of them
only, nor to continue there from the beginning, to the ending: but we must
come at the beginning with the first, and tarry by them with the last, and not
to depart till all be l finished, (except necessity does hinder us.)

Again, we must take heed how we come, m before we do come: and how we
hear, when n we are come: Luke 8.18. And therefore we must come.

Not as most do, only outwardly, and customably; but as the best do,
inwardly also, and of o conscience, and so, as we may profit by our hearing,
etc. in the ways of godliness and p salvation.

THE PROOFS.
a Psalm. 107.32 And let them exalt him in the Congregation of the people, and
praise him in the assembly of the Elders. Nu. 28.9. But on the Sabbath day, ye
shall offer two lambs of a year old, without spot, and two tenth deals of
fine flower, for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering
thereof. 10. This is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, besides the
continual burnt offering, etc. [In which last place, some things is expressed,
and some things are understood: there is expressed the doubling of their
sacrifices, in the public service of God. The things understood are three.
First, the word which gives life to the sacrifice. Secondly, prayer, which
made their sacrifices acceptable. Thirdly, confession of sins, without which,
they could be assured of the forgiveness of them.] b Nehe. 8.1. And all the
people assembled themselves together in the street, before the Watergate, and
they spoke unto Ezra the Scribe, that be would bring the book of the Law of
Moses, which the Lord had commanded to Israel. c Acts 13.14. But when they
departed from Perga, they came to Antiochia, a City of Pisidia, and went into
the Synagog on the Sabbath day, and sat down. 15. And after the lecture of
the Law, the Rulers sent unto them, etc. Chap. 17.1. They came to Thessalonica,
where was a Synagogue of the Jews: and Paul, as his manner was, went in unto
them, and three Sabbath days disputed with them, etc. and chap. 18.4. And he
disputed in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, and exhorted the Jews, and the
Craecians, and chap. 20.7. And the first day of the week, the Disciples being
come together, to break bread, Paul preached unto them, etc. [In which places
also, under one kind, is noted the whole action of the public service of
God.] d Esa. 2.2. It shall be in the last days, that the mountain of the
house of the Lord, shall be prepared in the top of the mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills. e Psa. 2.6. I have set my King upon Sion, my holy
mountain. f Esa, 2.2. And all Nations shall flow unto it. Psalm. 122.1. I
rejoiced when they said unto me; Come, let us go unto the house of the Lord. g
Acts 4.32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of
one soul. h Luke 4.16. And he came to Nazareth, etc. and as his custom was,
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, etc. i Psalm. 84.1. O Lord of
Hosts, how amiable are thy Tabernacles! verse 10. For a day in thy Courts, is
better then a thousand elsewhere: I had rather be a door keeper in the house
of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness. k Psalm 42.2. My
soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before the presence of God? 3. My tears have been my meat day and night,
while they daily say unto me; Where is thy God? verse. 4. When I remembered
these things, I powered out my very heart, because I had gone with the
multitude, and led them into the house of God, with the voice of singing, and
praise, as a multitude that keeps a feast. l Ezech. 46.10. And the Prince
shall be in the midst of them, he shell go in when they go in, and when
they go forth, they shall go forth together. m Eccles. 4.17. Take heed to
thy foot, when thou entrest into the house of God. n Luke 8.18. Take heed how
ye hear. o John 4.24. They that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth. p 1. Cor. 11.17. Now in this that I declare, I praise you not, that ye
come together, not with profit, but with hurt. And 14 26. What is to be done
then brethren? when ye come together, as every one of you has a psalm, or
has doctrine, or has a tongue, or revelation, or interpretation: let all
things be done unto edifying. verse 31. For ye may all prophecy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may have comfort.
Of the public duties of Love and Compassion.
CHAP. X.
COncerning works of mercy, which make for the sanctification of the Sabbath
day, two things in general are to be considered of.

1 What those works are.

2 After what manner they must be done.

For the first we are to know, that works of Charity are of two sorts.

1 Corporal, and such as tend to the comfort of men's bodies.

2 Spiritual, belonging to the soul.

Works of mercy, tending to the comfort and releeving of the body, are to be
put in execution.

1 By the Collectours for the poor.

2 By other Christians.

To the Collectours belong two things. Collection. Distribution.


Concerning the Collectours duty, two circumstances are wisely to be weighed.

1 The time when to make them.

2 The persons for whom to make collection, etc.

The time must be fit and convenient, and that is; the Sabbath day, which is
appointed partly to that a end.

1 Because then the word is preached, which is powerful to stir up men's
minds to charity. 2 Because then most mercies in Christ, are offered unto us,
which also should not a little b move us.
Not the time of divine service, because: 1 So to do, is to bring in a
confusion of diverse actions, of which confusion, God is not the c author. 2 It
is against order and decency, which must be in the d Church of God.


So much for the time when to collect and distribute. Now the persons for whom,
and unto whom the Collectours are to gather and distribute, are, 1 Of our own
Congregation. 2 Of others, generally for all that need, specially for the
godly poor, that are of the e household of faith.


So much for the Collectours duties. Now works of mercy, for the comfort of
men's bodies, are to be done also upon the Sabbath day, by other Christians,
as well as by the Collectours, and that two ways.

1 By themselves, if they be able, or may conveniently, by reason of their
place and calling. 2 By others for them, (if they cannot themselves.)
Those works which they are to do by themselves, are cheefely two.

1 To visit the poor, whether such poor as are at liberty, yet in misery,
by reason of sickness, trouble, poverty, etc. Math. 25.35. etc. or in prison,
and that especially by going unto them; because, (as the sight of the wounded
man, much moved the f Samaritane to pity) so it will move Christians much,
when they shall see their ruinous houses, their hard lodgings, their naked
bodies, their thin diet, their cold yrons, their loathsome dungeons, their
extreme torments, etc. 2 To releeve the fore said poor, and that two ways. 1
By words of g Consolation. Instruction.
2 By deeds of mercy, that is; by feeding their bellies, clothing their
backs, curing their sores, persuading with their creditors, h and such like.

So much for corporal works of mercy. Now of spiritual compassion, which is
to be showed unto the souls of men, and that consists cheefely, in teaching
the ignorant, in admonishing the unruly, in bringing home the stray, in
comforting the broken hearted, in strengthening the weak, in encouraging the
well doers, etc.

Concerning which mercy showed to men's souls, two things are to be noted.

1 That it is the greatest mercy, and that for three causes. 1 Because it is
more excellent then the body. 2 Because the souls wants, are more general
then the bodies. 3 Because the souls wants are more dangerous, and less felt.
2 That all those which by those means aforesaid, have converted any, are thus
greatly honored, that they are, 1 Reckoned of, as of men that have saved i
souls. 2 Promised to shine as the Sun in the firmament; that is, to be
rewarded with k great glory.

So much of the works of Compassion, as touching the matter of them. Now the
manner of doing them is to be considered, and that must be such, as that our
works may be, 1 Profitable to men, and hurtful to none. 2 Pleasing to God.


That our works may be profitable to men, and hurtful to none, we must in
doing of them, take heed of six things.

1 That we give of our own, and not other men's l goods.

2 That we give speedily, and without delay.

3 That we give liberally, as we are able, without nigardlines, prodigality.


4 That we give of a loving affection, heartily.

5 That it be done cheerfully, without m grudging.

6 That it be willingly, without compulsion.

That our works may be pleasing to God, there is required a mind, 1 Purged
from hypocrisy, n and vain glory. opinion of our own o merit.
2 Sanctified with 1 A holy desire, to glorify God in the obedience of that
which he requires, and to win others to the like. 2 A lively faith in christ's
merits and righteousness, which purifieth the heart. Acts 15.9.



THE PROOFS.
a 1. Cor. 16.2. Every first day of the week, let every one of you put aside
by himself, and lay up as God has prospered him, etc.

b Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, etc.

1. Cor. 14.33. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as we see
in all the Churches of the Saints.

d 1. Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done honestly, and in order.

e Gal. 6.10. While we have time, let us do good to all men, especially to
those that are of the household of faith.

f Luke 10 33. Then a certain Samaritan, as he iournied, came near unto him,
and when he saw him, he had compassion on him.

g 2. Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
father of mercies, and God of all comfort. 4. Which comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction,
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

h Math. 25.35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye
gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me. 36. I was naked, and ye
clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto
me.

i Iam. 5.20. Let him know, that he which has converted the sinner from going
astray, out of his way, shall save a soul from death, etc.

k Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
stars, for ever and ever.

l Luke 19.8. And Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord; Behold Lord,
the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken from any man by
forged cavillation, I restore him four fold.

m Romans 12.8. He that shows mercy, with cheerfulness.

n Math. 6.1. Take heed ye give not your alms before men, to be seen of
them, etc.

o Luke 17.10. When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say;
We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.

Of the private Sanctification of the Sabbath day, by a man alone.
CHAP. XI.
THe private Sanctification of the Sabbath day, stands in such duties, as
every one is to put in practice.

1 Alone by himself. 2 In company with others. See chap. 12.
Of every man alone, two things are required.

1 Preparation before they come to the public assembly. 2 Meditation, when
they are gone from them.
Concerning Preparation, two things are to be considered.

1 How it may be proved, that it is required. 2 Wherein it consists.
That it is required, as a thing very necessary, may be prooved two ways.

1 By the express Commandment of God. 1 In the a old Testament. 2 In the b
new.
2 By an argument, from the less, to the greater. First, among Princes; for if
Hester durst not go into the Kings presence, before she had c prepared her
self, much less ought we to come into Gods presence, without due
preparation. Secondly, in all worldly matters of any moment, we use
preparation, as in taking of physic, tilling the ground, etc. much more ought
we to use preparation in heavenly things.
So much for the proof of the matter. Now let us see wherein it consists,
and that is in three things.

1 In a private examination of our own hearts, before the Lord, and that for
four things. 1 How we have spent the week past. 2 What sins we have
committed day and night to humble us. 3 What duties we have performed to
comfort us. 4 What graces we want, and what infirmities we be troubled withal.
2 In private prayer, for others, and for our selves. 1 For others, and
cheefely for the Minister, that he may speak both boldly, and plainly to
our consciences, and that his prayers may meet with d our wants. 2 For our
selves, we must also use private prayer; and namely, that our hearts may yield
unto the word, and surely great cause there is, that we should so pray: for, 1
We cannot of our selves rightly understand the word, because the word of God is
high, and full of e hidden mysteries, and we are full of f darkness. 2 When
we understand it, we affect it not: and therefore we must pray also for
affection. 3 When we like it, we soon forget it: and therefore memory must be
also prayed for. 4 When we remember it, we want obedient hearts: and then
obedience must be prayed for.
3 In private reading of the Scriptures, that so we may, 1 Be acquainted with
the whole body of the Scripture, to our further g comfort and instruction. 2
The better understand the preaching. 3 Make the better use of that we hear.


So much of preparation before we go to the public exercises of religion. Now
of meditation when we are gone from them, which duty, that we may the better
put in practice, we are to know four things.

1 What meditation is.

2 How hardly men are drawn unto it.

3 How it is commended in the scripture.

4 That we must meditate, as well upon the works, as upon the word of God.

Of the first.
Meditation is an exercise, neither of the eye, nor of the ear, nor of the
tongue; but of the mind only, after speaking, reading, hearing, and beholding;
whereby,

1 We call to mind that which we have h heard, read, or seen.

2 We do further muse and reason of the same with our selves.

3 We do apply it to our own use, and make practice of it.

Of the second.
That men naturally are hardly drawn unto meditation, (the devil envying the
great good of it) is most certain: for,

1 Most men naturally desire to pass the time as merrily as they can, and to
avoid muzings and melancholy dumps, (as they call them)

Secondly, lest they should fall unawares into meditation, they will, 1 Cut off
all means that might procure meditation, by being always in pleasant company.
2 Maintain foolish and profane jestures in their houses, (if they be able) of
purpose. 1 To feed their own profane and irreligious humors. 2 To keep them
from meditating and studying of mortification.



Of the third.
Meditation is commended unto us in the Scripture, as a thing that is, 1 A
special good means to cause us to keep the Commandments of God, and to
prosper in that we take in i hand. 2 A true note of a man, that is both truly
godly, and truly k happy. 3 The practice of the godly, when they would
withstand the force of slanderous tongues, and other l wicked devises, and
when they understand more of Gods law, than m other men.


Of the fourth.
We must not only meditate upon the word of God, which we read and hear, but
also of his works, which we behold in the heavens, in the earth, in the sea,
in our selves, etc. that so we may, 1 Learn the invisible things of God, as
well by experience, as by n doctrine. 2 Thereby be confirmed in o godliness,
and be assured of p Gods truth and favor.


THE PROOFS.
a Exodus 19.10. Moreover, God said unto Moses; Go to the people, and sanctify
them to day, and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes.

Eccles. 4.17. Take heed to thy foot, when thou entrest into the house of
God, etc.

b Luke 8.18. Take heed how ye hear.

1. Cor. 11.28. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat, etc.

c Hest. 4.10. And fast ye for me, and eat not, nor drink in three days, day
nor night: I also and my maids, will fast likewise, and so I will go in to
the King, etc.

d Ephesians. 6.18. And pray, etc. for all Saints. 19. And for me, that utterance
may be given me, that I may open my mouth boldly, as I ought to speak.

e 1. Cor. 2.7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, etc. 8. Which
none of the Princes of this world has known, etc.

f Ephesians. 5.8. For we were once darkness.

g Acts 17.11. These were also more noble men, than they of Thessalonica, which
received the word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so.

h Luke 2.19. But Mary kept all those sayings, and pondred them in her heart.

i Ioshu. 1.8. Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to
all that is written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and
then shall thou have good success.

k Psalm. 1.2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he
meditate day and night.

l Psalm. 119 23. Princes also did sit and speak against me, but thy servant
did meditate in thy statutes. 78. They have dealt wickedly and falsely with me,
but I meditate in thy precepts.

m Psalm. 119.99. I have had more understanding than all my teachers, for thy
testimonies are my meditation.

n Romans 1.20. For the invisible things of Him; that is, his eternal power and
godhead, are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his
works, etc.

o Psalm. 92.4. For thou Lord, have made me glad by thy works, and I will
rejoice in the work of thy hands. 5. O Lord how glorious are thy works? Psalm.
77.11. I remembered the works of the Lord: certainly I remembered thy wonders
of old: I did also meditate all thy works, etc. Psalm. 8.3. When I behold thine
heavens, the works of thine fingers, the moon, and the stars, which thou
have ordained, 4. What is man, say I, etc.

p Esa. 40.12. Who has measured the waters in his fist, and counted heaven
with a spanne, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed
the mountain in a weight, and the hills in a balance, etc. Math. 6.25. Be not
careful for your life, what ye shall eat, etc. 26. Behold, the fowls of the
heaven, etc. 28. Learn how the lillies of the field do grow, etc.

Of those duties that are to be performed with others: and first of Conference.
CHAP. XII.
THose duties which are to be performed with others, for the private
sanctifying of the Sabbath day, are two.

1 Conference of Gods word and works, which on the Lords day we read, hear,
see, and hear of.

2 Singing of Psalms. See chap. 13.

Concerning Conference, five things are well to be observed.

1 With whom to confer.

2 Why conference must be had upon the Sabbath day.

3 Why it is so little used.

4 How to confer.

5 What is the fruit of conference.

Of the first point.
With whom to confer.
Conference is to be had with two kinds of persons.

1 With our a own families, and that for two causes. 1 To whet our own
memories. 2 To convey religion unto our posterity.
2 With other persons, namely, our neighbors b that fear God: and our c
Ministers.
Therefore it follows, that the Minister must not be unlearned: for then he
cannot resolve men's doubts, nor satisfy men's consciences, etc. nor proud and
disdainefull, for then he will not admit any conference, especially with poor
simple men.

Of the second point.
Why on the Sabbath day.
Conference is good and necessary at all times, but especially on the Sabbath
day, and that for two causes.

1 Because we have then lately heard the word, and after a more special
manner, and so have greater occasion and provocation to confer. 2 We have then
more leisure, by reason that we are not to be interrupted with worldly matters.
Of the third point.
Why it is so little used.
The cause why this kind of conference is so little used, is two fold.

1 The corruption of our nature; which is so great, that it will neither
provoke our selves, nor others unto it, nor take occasion being offered; but
will cause us, ey there to interrupt those that speak religiously, by turning
our talk to other odd matters of worldly profit, or vain delight, or else
to be stricken so dainely into heavy dumpes, having not a word to maintain
conference withal. This negligence and untowardness breeds, 1 Unfruitful
hearing and reading. 2 Ill memories in the best things. 3 Careless and loose
living.
2 Our barrenness in heavenly wisdom and understanding, and that by reason
of two things. 1 That the word is not hidden plenteously in our d hearts, to
keep us from sin. 2 That through the just judgment of God, (upon spirits
that are proud in condemning, bitter in reprooving, too swift in censuring,
uncharitable in misconstruing, obstinate in erring, vain in reasoning, subtle
in entrapping) many conferences have prooved either vain janglings, without
edifying, or odious brawles, and vnre concileable, or contentions, both
endless, and needelesse, without any profit.

Of the fourth point.
How to confer.
In conference we ought so to behave our selves, as that our conferences (so
much as lies in us) may prove, 1 e Peaceable, to which end we ought to avoid
as much as possibly may be, all quipping, and girding, and disgracing, and
biting speeches, with all personal matters that tend to no end, but the
stirring up of strife, and all disorderly and rumultuous assemblies of
multitudes, tending to faction and schism, commonly called Conventicles, must
be avoided. 2 Profitable, to which end, we must examine our selves, whether we
be able in some measure, to speak to the purpose or no, and accordingly to
proceed.


If we cannot speak so well as others in place, then (to maintain conference)
we may, 1 Ask questions, and so procure conference, as, What is the meaning of
such a word or place? How prove you such a point, etc.
2 Listen to others, with desire to learn. 3 Give our consent, with show of
liking, by saying, yea, or no.


If we find our selves able to speak (by the grace of God) to the purpose,
then we must take heed, 1 To the matter of our conference, that it be not
either too high f for us, Psalm. 131.1. or such as concern g us not. John
21.22. 2 To the manner of our conference, that it be, 1 In good sort. First,
modestly, choosing rather to hear then to h speak James 1.19. Then orderly,
and in our turn, staying until others have i done. Acts 15.13. or shall
refuse to k speak. See Job 32.4, 5, 6, 7, etc. 2 To a right end, and that must
be only the glory of God, in the manifesting of truth, and the Churches good,
viz. increase of faith and godliness, in our selves, and others.



Of the fifth point.
The fruit of conference.
Christian conference about matters of religion, is like a tree that bears
much and manifold fruit, as namely, increase of good knowledge, and sound
judgment, perfect memory, and good affections, godly unity, with quietness
of conscience; all which are well to be considered, both for quantity, and
quality. 1 For quantity, they are very great, like to a great sum, that
arises of many littles, at a common gathering, or to a great heat, arising of
many firebrarnds put together, which being cast asunder, would die out. 2 For
the quality, the fruit of conference is most excellent, and yet in the growing
and gathering, somewhat harsh and unpleasant; because, 1 Most men desire to be
counted rather teachers, than learners. 2 Few will acknowledge willingly,
either ignorance, or error. 3 Conference can yield no good fruit, without some
earnest gainsaying, and striving, and is like to the striking of flint and
steel together; both which do suffer violence and enforcing: but without this
violent enforcing of each other, no fire can be kindled: but yet the benefit
of the heat and light of the fire does recompense the suffering and loss of
both: even so of conference, etc.



THE PROOFS.
a Deuteronomy. 6.6. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart. 7. And thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall
tacke of them when thou tarriest in thy house. Chap. 12.19. And ye shall teach
them your children, speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, etc.

b Mal. 3.16. Then spoke they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbor,
and the Lord harkened, and heard it, etc.

c Mal. 2.7. For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. And
Hag. 2.12. Thus says the Lord of Hosts; Ask now the Priests concerning the
Law, and say, etc.

d Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy promise in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. 13. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy
mouth. Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously, in all
wisdom.

e Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all
men. Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love
thee. Cant. 8.4. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that you stir not
up, nor waken my love, until she please.

f Psalm. 131. Lord, I have not walked in great matters, and hid from me.

g John 21.22. What is that to thee? follow thou me.

h Iam. 1.19. Let every man be swift to hear, and slow to speak.

i Acts 15.13. And when they held their peace, James answered, etc.

k Job 32.4. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, for they were more
ancient in years than he. 5. So, when Elihu saw that there was no answer in
the mouth of the three men, his wrath was kindled. 6. Therefore Elihu, the
son of Barachel, the Buzite, answered and said; I am young in years, and ye
are ancient, therefore I doubted, and was afraid to show you mine opinion. 7.
For I said; The days shall speak, and the multitude of years shall teach
wisdom, etc.

Of singing of Psalms privately on the Sabbath day.
CHAP. XIII.
THat singing of Psalms, is to be used for the private sanctification of the
Sabbath day, shall the better appear, if we consider in general, how singing
of Psalms is both commanded, and commended in the Scripture.

1 It is commanded by the spirit of God.

1 In the a old Testament. Psalm. 95.1. and Psalm. 92. which was appointed for
the Sabbath only. See the title. 2 In the b new Testament.
Which Scriptures have in them to be considered, matter, 1 Of substance, and
that is double. 1 The matter subject of our singing, viz. holy Psalms, godly
Hymns, and spiritual songs. 2 The chief end of our singing, which must be to
admonish, and to be c admonished. And a scco^d end must be, to stir up our
dulled spirits, more cheerfully to praise God.
2 Of circumstance, and that chiefly is twofold, of The time when. The manner
how.



1 Of the time when to sing Psalms, etc. and that is, generally at all times
of prosperity and d rejoicing: but yet not only then, for we read also of
songs of e mourning; specially upon the Sabbath day, (as appears by Psalm.
92. the title of it) a day of greatest joy, and then we must sing for joy
indeed of the Lord Jesus. 1 Publicly at the Temple; because we have then, all
the means whereby this joy is conveyed unto us. 2 Privately at home, thereby to
revive and renew our joy and thankfulness.


2 Of the manner how, which must be, 1 In our hearts, unfeignedly. 2 With a
grace, modestly and comely. 3 Unto the Lord, reverently, and religiously.


So much for the Commandment for singing. Now, as it is commanded, so also is
it commended unto us, and that two ways.

1 By the testimony of the Psalmist. 2 By holy examples.
The testimony which the Psalmist gives, of singing praises unto God, is in
Psalm. 147.1. where he says, that it is good, pleasant, and comely.

It is good; 1 In regard of the Author; for it is a thing appointed by the
Lord: who being all goodness it self, cannot ordain any thing, but that
which is good. 2 In regard of the end, which is double. 1 To make us more
cheerful and lively in the service and worship of God. 2 To comfort and
edify our souls in the promises and mercies of God.



It is pleasant, because, 1 Here is pleasure without pain: not so in carnal
songs. 2 The pleasure of this abides for ever: not the pleasure of fleshly
songs.


It is comely, both in regard of that which is sung, which are the praises of
God, which are full of heavenly majesty and grace, as also in regard of that
excellent beauty and grace, which God has graced his own gift and ordinance
withal, the music, (I mean) of voices. Which things, though they be comely
and full of grace in themselves, yet do they not become the wicked, more than
a gold ring becomes a swines snowt, or a parable the mouth of a fool. Prove.
and that because, 1 They hate to be reformed. Psalm. 50.17. 2 Their howling does
but profane and pollute sacred songs.


But it becomes well the f righteous, who when they sing the praises of God,
must look to two things especially, whereby this holy ordinance of singing
Psalms, may the more become them.

1 That their hearts be prepared to sing feelingly, with a holy affection, and
good understanding. 2 That it be done in comely manner, with a grace: and two
things there be to grace it with all. First, Reverence. Secondly, Order: both
which are requisite in regard of, 1 The matter sung, which is holy, spiritual,
and the word of God. 2 Him to whom we sing, and that is to the g Lord.

So much for the testimony, which the Psalmist has given of singing Psalms:
it is further commended unto us by examples, 1 Of our h Savior Christ
himself. 2 Of the i Apostles, and other of the godly.


By which examples, we may further observe, that Gods children have sometimes a
time,

Of rejoicing only, and then singing is fittest to express our k joy. James
5.13.

Of mourning only, and then prayer is more necessary.

Of singing and praying together, and that is, when God does temper the
afflictions of his children, with the joy of the holy Ghost: as he did unto
Paul and Silas, Asts 16.25. who sung in prison after their whipping, where they
had cause both to sing, and to pray: to sing, because their cause was good, and
God was with them: to pray, because their enemies malice was great, and their
present state was very hard.

THE PROOFS.
a Psalm. 95.1. Come, let us rejoice unto the Lord, let us sing aloud unto the
rock of our salvation.

b Col. 3.16. Teach and admonish your own selves in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual etc. Iam. 5.13. Is any man merry, let him sing.

c Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing your selves in Psalms, etc. as before.
d Iam. 5.13. Is any man merry, let him sing.

e 2. Chron. 35.25. And all singing men, and singing women, mourned for Josiah,
in their lamentations, etc.

f Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for it becomes well the
upright men to be thankful.

g Exodus 15.1. Then sang Moses and all Israel this song unto the Lord. Also,
Col. 3.16. Singing with a grace unto the Lord.

h Math. 26.30. And when they had sung a Psalm, they went out to the Mount of
Olives.

i Acts 16.25. Now at midnight, Paul and Silas prayed, and sung a Psalm unto
God, etc.

k Iam. 5.13. Is any man merry, let him sing.

What persons must sanctify the Sabbath day.
CHAP. XIIII.
BY whom the Lords day must be sanctified, may appear by these words: Thou,
and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man servant, etc. Where we have two things
to consider.

1 What doctrines do arise from these words. 2 What Objections are commonly
made against the said doctrines. See chap. 15.
The doctrines arising from the former words of the Commandment, are two.

1 That all superiors must sanctify the Sabbath themselves, and be as
careful, that all their inferiors, which are under their authority, may do
the same. 2 That Masters of families, and their whole families, (or so many as
shall come at all) must go together, to the public sanctifying of the
Sabbath day.
Of the first.
That all superiors may with their inferiors, sanctify the Lords Sabbath,
they have, 1 Means to effect the same. 2 Reasons to move them to execute the
said means.


The means whereby they may effect it, are two.

1 Enacting of orders and laws for it. 1 Public in the Church and
Commonwealth. 2 Private, in men's houses.
2 The diligent execution of the same laws, whereby all that are under
government, may be compelled to sanctify the Lords day.
The reasons whereby they may be moved, are drawn two ways.

1 From the law of equity and common reason. For as God has made them our
servants, so we must endeavor therefore to make them his. And as they have six
days served us; so we on the seventh day, should cause them to serve the
Lord, or else we do for our servants no more than, 1 Infidells and heathen
people, do for theirs. 2 We do for our beasts, to whom we give foder, rest,
etc.
2 From the examples of Gods servants, who always had this care over their
families. And according to this Commandment, did Joshua promise, that a God
should be served. 1 By himself. 2 By his family; because he knew, 1 How many
good means he had to effect it by: as, 1 Godly exhortations. 2 Loving
admonitions. 3 Severe chastisements. 4 Authority to expel them his house, if
they would not obey him.
2 How the Lord would bless the said means, which he purposed to put in
practice for Gods glory. And according to this rule also walked b David,
Cornelius, and Abraham.



But so do not many now, in the light of the Gospel: for, 1 Many have no care
at all, to sanctify the Lords day themselves, (though they be content for
their ease sake to rest:) and therefore cannot with any conscience, require it
of their families. 2 Others, though they have some care of it themselves, yet
they think, that the urging of it to their families, is a thing not belonging
to them. 3 In great men's houses, it is much neglected: for there we shall see;
1 Many idle Servingmen, having little to do on the six days, are never
looked unto for the seventh day. 2 Others of office and great attendance: as
Cooks, etc. seldom, or never, or by halfes, come to sanctify the Lords
Sabbath, with the Congregation.



So much for the first doctrine. The next doctrine follows, and that is; that
all which do come, must come together, to the public sanctifying of the
Sabbath day, which readiness to serve God, is further confirmed two ways.

1 By Scripture. 2 By common reason.
By the Scripture it is confirmed, where we shall see that it has been, 1
Practiced by c Gods people. 2 Prophesied to be in Gods people, in the time of
the d Gospel.


By common reason it is also maintained: for, 1 There is but one law made for
the master and his family: therefore, if he think it time for himself to come
to Church, when the divine service shall begin, then is it time also for all
his family to come with him, that shall come at all. 2 When men go to faires,
(and feasts especially,) they will be careful to go with their neighbors and
wives together: much more ought they to go together to the e Lords markets,
and to the f Lords feasts.


But great is the ssackenesse of our age in this respect, one coming so long
after another, which would be reformed, if men would consider but, 1 The cause
of this slacknesse, which is want of, 1 Zeal to Gods glory. 2 Love to the
salvation of their brethren.
2 The cursed effects of it in families, which are much, Rebellion and
unfaithfulness in wives. Stubbornness and disobedience in servants and
children. Wickedness and disorder in all, to the shame of them all.



The reason is this: It is a just thing with God, to pay men with the same
measure, that they have measured to his Majesty. Seeing then, that they will
not give unto God his due, they shall want of their own due: and those which
are rebellious and negligent in the service of God, shall find the like
service at the hands of their inferiors.

1. Sam. 2.30. Those that honor me, I will honor (says the Lord) and they
that despise me, shall be despised.

THE PROOFS.
a Ioshu. 24.15. And if it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you
this day whom ye will serve, whether the gods which your fathers served, that
were beyond the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, among whom ye dwell: but I,
and mine house, will serve the Lord.

b Psalm. 101.6. Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the Land, that they
may dwell with me: he that walks in the perfect way, he shall serve me. 7.
There shall no deceitful person dwell within mine house: he that tells
lies, shall not remain in my sight.

Acts 10.2. Cornelius, a devout man, fearing God, with all his household. So
Abraham, Gene. 18.19. I know that he will command his sons, and his household
after him, that they keep the way of the Lord.

c Psalm. 42.4. I powered out my very heart, because I had gone with the
multitude, and led them into the house of God, etc. Psalm. 122.1. Come, let us
go into the house of the Lord.

d Esa. 2.2. It shall be in the last days, that the Mountain of the house of
the Lord, shall be prepared in the top of the mountains, and all Nations shall
flow unto it.

e Esa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that
have no silver, come, buy, and eat: I say; buy wine and milk without silver,
etc.

f Math. 22.4. Again, he sent forth other servants saying; Tell them which are
bidden; Behold, I have prepared my dinner, mine oxen, and my fatlings are
killed, and all things are ready, come unto the marriage.

Objections against the doctrine of the former chapter answered.
CHAP. XV.
THose Objections are made commonly by irreligious persons, and yet in outward
show, willing to have the Sabbath sanctified by all: but for the not
practicing of the former doctrine, they allege two things.

1 An impossibility, or great difficulty of the matter at the least.

2 A sequel of great inconvenience.

They which plead the former, are of two sorts.

1 Great persons, for place and calling; whose Objection, with the Answer,
follows in this manner.

Objection. In a great family, many must needs be absent, by reason of great
provision, and much business, etc.

Answer. 1 It is true, at sometime, and upon some occasion, but ordinarily, and
continually, they may not: for the Lord has not laid any such calling upon
any man, that should keep him in a continual breach of the Sabbath day. 2
Where there is great care to please and serve God by prayer, the Lord will give
such wisdom, that they shall redeem, if not the whole, yet a great part of
the day, which else would be misspent: as namely, 1 By letting pass many
needless things. 2 By preparing much before hand. 3 By rising the earlier in
the morning. 4 By taking interchangeable help of other servants. 5 By
contenting themselves with so much the less, though not in quantity; because
many must be relieved, yet in quality with less curious dressing, which
cheefely takes up the time.



The second sort of men which plead impossibility and difficulty, are
inferior householders, and they object in this manner.

Objection. We would have it as you say it should be (Sir,) but we cannot
bring it to pass, because our wives are froward, so that we cannot rule them,
and our children and servants are stubburne and obstinate.

Answer. 1. Such a man's case is to be pitied, as one that is rather to be
governed, than to govern; and they might do well to set up one of them in
their a stead, seeing they (having so great authority,) do suffer themselves
to be so abused, and overruled in the best things.

2 That this abuse might be reformed, the man is wisely to exercise his
authority, and not to let his wife and servants come after him, at their
pleasure, but to say unto them; Come, let us go together, and not leave, till
it be performed.

So much for those that allege difficulty. Now there be others, which plead a
sequel of great inconvenience that would follow: and they object as follows.

Objection. To deal thus straightly with servants, is the next way to be rid of
all our servants: And how then shall our work be done?

Answer. 1. It is a great impiety, to think, that the Lord would require that
of us, which will drive us to such inconveniences, and not to be persuaded
rather of the b contrary. See 1. Tim. 4.8. Math. 6.33.

2 The diverse natures of servants, being considered, this objection will be of
no force: for all servants are either wicked, or religious, or falling away, or
indifferent.

If they be Wicked, and will not serve God, their room is better than their
company: for they will never do us faithful service, which are so unwilling
to serve God.

If they be religious, this is the way to keep them.

If indifferent, this is the way to win them.

If falling away, this is the way to recover them.

3 We shall no more be left servantlesse than our godly forefathers, who vowed
to serve God with their families, and yet had servants inow; as Joshua, David,
Abraham, Cornelius, etc.

Reply. Those times were better than these, and good servants were then more
plentiful than now they are.

Answer. 1. Our forefathers used more good means to make their servants Gods
servants, whereby Gods blessing was more upon them.

2 The Lord is no respecter of persons, times, or places: therefore let us use
such means as they did, and we shall have as good servants as they had.

THE PROOFS.
a 1. Cor. 6.4. Set up them that are least esteemed in the Church: I speak it
to your shame.

b 1. Tim. 4.8. Godliness is profitable for all things, and has the promises
of this life present, and of that which is to come. Mat 6 33. First seek the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be cast
unto you.

FINIS.

