THE EPIstles and Gospelles with a brief Postil upon the same from after Easter
till Aduent, which is the Somer part, setforth for the singular commodity of
all good christen men and namely of Prestes and Curates.

Roma. i. Euangelium est virtus dei in salutem omni credenti

The Gospel is the power of god to the salvation of every faithful Christen
man.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The preface of Richard Tauerner to the reader, declaring how this book is to
be red.
Forasmuch as diverse and sundry light parsons at this day contrary to the
mind and sentence of the ancient doctors and also against the expectacion
of moderate writers of this time, do wonderfully wrest all that they read into
the worste sense in mayntenaunce of their carnal liberty and dissolute kind
of lyuinge: I have thought it very expedient, yea (and as the case requires)
more then necessary, that since this Postille is by me though not made, yet
recognized and in diverse places augmented: brefely to admonish the reader, how
it ought to be red and received. Ye shall therefore understand, that this work
is set forth to your profit and edification, and not to your hurt and
destruction.
It is I say setforth not that by the same ye should maynteyne any erroniouse
doctrine contrary either to the kings majesty's laws and proclamations, or to
the determination and sentence of the catholic church. Ye shall not learn here
to despise gods laws and man's, nor the decent and laudable ceremonies and
rytes of the church. What is taught in this Postil.
Here is taught no lawles liberty to do what you lust, but obedience to God
and to his commandments, obedience to the kings majesty and to his laws,
obedience to the wholesome traditions of the church. The sacrament of the
altar, the sacrament of penance with the other sacraments of the church be
here not heretically contemned, but catholikely auaunced. Feyth is here not so
nakedly extolled, but that good works also be necessarily required to be in a
christen man. Neither yet be good works here in such sort magnified, that
fayeth which ought to be the fundatio^ of the christen religion is defrauded of
her due place. Only this one thing I require of you, that you wol not rashly
judge of a piece of the writing without the hole circu^stau^ce, but that ye will
deliberately confer one place with an other, and then I doubt not but if any
sentence shall happen to be either obsurely or incircumspectly spoken, yet by
the conference of places ye shall perceive the true meaning and sense of the
same. Certeynely as touching mine own opinion in matters concerning the
christen religion, I protest to all the world that as I submit my self in
all things to the censure and determination of the church, so I think it
unlawful for any man of his own private authority either to speak or write
against the same. Yet I wol not deny, but man's infirmity shall otherwhiles
err. Hierome, Ambrose, and Augustine were men of excellent lernyng and also
holiness, yet some faults escaped them in their writings. Yea saint Austine
openly retracted many things. This I dare say with saint austine, Err^ ^n my
writings I may,
but an heretic I can be none. For being ones admonished of my error, I wol
not obstinately defend the same, but submit my self to ye ingeme^t of ye
church. Which I would heartily wish that other would do ye same, Then these
diverse sects of Anabaptists, of sacrame^taries, and of other heretics
should not thus swarm abroad. Then should ye christen church be in much more
quiet then it is. Then should Christ's religion be more truly kept, and Christ
him self better pleased with us. Which thing I beseech God, bring to pas.
Amen.

A TABLE OF THE EXHORTACIONS UPON the Epistles and Gospels contained in this
present part.
First a sermon of the resurrection. The Epistle on the first sunday after
Easter, called low sunday. The.i. epistle of Ioh. the.v. cha. fol. i. The
Gospel on the first sunday after Easter, the.xx. chapter of John fol. iii. The
Epistle on the second sunday after Easter, the first epistle of Peter the.ii.
chapter fol. vi. The Gospel on the second sunday after Easter, the x. chapter
of John. fol. viii. The Epistle on the third sunday after Easter, the first
epistle of S. Peter the.ii. chap. fol. x. The Gospel on the third sunday
after Easter, the xvi. chapter of John fol. xv. The epistle on the fourth
sunday after Easter, the first chapter of James fol. xviii. The Gospel on
the fourth sunday after Easter, the xvi. chapter of John fol. xxi. The epistle
on the.v. sunday after Easter, the first chapter of saint James fol. xxvi.
The Gospel on the.v. sunday after Easter, the.xvi. chapter of John fol.
xxviii. A sermon in the Rogacion weke fol. xxxii. The epistle on the Ascension
day, the first chapter of the acts of the Apostles fol. xxxv. The Gospel on
Ascension day, the.xvi. chapter of saint Mark fol. xxxviii. The Epistle on
the sunday after the Ascension day, the.i. epistle of Peter the.iiii. chap.
fol. xlv. The Gospel on the sunday after the Ascension day the.xv. chapter of
John. fol. xlvii. The Epistle on whytsondaye, the second chapter of the acts
of the Apostles fol. l. The Gospel on whytsondaye, the.xiiii. Chapter of
Johan. fol. liii. The Epistle on the second day of Pentecoste, the.x. chapter
of the acts fol. lix. The Gospel on the second day of Pentecoste. The
third chapter of John fol. lxi. The Epistle on the third day of Pentecost,
the.viii. chapter of the acts fol, lxiiii. The Gospel on the third day of
Penticoste, the.x. chapter of John fol. lxvi. The Epistle on the fourth day of
Pentecoste, the.ii. chapter of the acts fol. lxvii. The gospel on the fourth
day of Pentecost, the.vi. chapter of saint John fol. lxix. The Epistle on
Trinity sunday, the fourth chapter of the Apocalypse fol. lxx The Gospel on
Trinity sunday, the third chapter of John fol. lxxiii. The Epistle on Corpus
Christi day, the first epistle to the Corinthyans, the xi. chapter fol. lxvii.
The Gospel on Corpus Christi day, the.vi. chapter of John fol. eodem The
Epistle on the first sunday after Trinity sunday ye.i. epistle of John
the.iiii, chap. fol. lxxvi. The Gospel on the first sunday after Trinity,
the xvi. chapter of Luke fol. lxxviii. The epistle on the second sunday
after Trinity, the i. epistle of John the.iii. chapter fol. lxxxi. The Gospel
on the second sunday after Trinity, the viii. chapter of Luke fol. lxxxiii.
The Epistle on the third sunday after Trinity, the i. epistle of Peter
the.v. chapter. fol. lxxxvi. The Gospel on the third sunday after Trinity,
the xv. chapter of Luke fol. lxxxviii. The Epistle on the fourth sunday after
Trinity, the viii. chapter to the Romans. fol. xci. The Gospel on the fourth
sunday after Trinity, the vi. chapter of Luke fol. xcv. The Epistle on the
fyfth sunday after Trinity, the.i. epistle of S. Peter the.iii. cha. fol.
xcviii. The Gospel on the fyfth sunday after Trinity, the v. chapter of Luke
fol. xcix. The Epistle on the syxte sunday after Trinity, the.v. chapter to
the Romans. fol. ci. The Gospel on the syxte sunday after Trinity, the.v.
chapter of Mark fol. cvi. The Epistle on the seventh sunday after Trinity,
the vi. chapter to the Romans fol. cix. The Gospel on the seventh sunday
after Trinity, the viii. chapter of Mark fol. cx. The Epistle on ye eight
so^day after Trinity, the.viii. chapter to the Romans fol. cxii. The Gospel
on the eight sunday after Trinity, the vii. chapter of Mark fol. cxiiii. The
Epistle on the.ix. sunday after Trinity, the first epistle to the Corin.
the.x. chap. fol. cxvi. The Gospel on the.ix. sunday after Trinity, the.xvi.
chapter of Luke. fol. cxviii. The Epistle on the.x. sunday after Trinity, the
first epistle to the Corin. the.xii. chap. fol. cxxviii. The Gospel on the.x.
sunday after Trinity, the.xix. chapter of Luke fol. cxxx. The epistle on
the.xi. sunday after Trinity, the first epistle to the Corin. xvi. chap. fol.
cxxxii. The Gospel on the.xi. sunday after Trinity, the.viii. chapter of Luke
fol. cxxxiiii. The epistle on the.xii. so^day after trinity, the second
epistle to the corin. the.iii. chap. fol. cxxxv. The Gospel on.xii. sunday
after trinity, the seventh chapter of Mark fol. cxxxix. The Epistle on
the.xiii. sunday after trinity, the.iii. chapter to the Galathians fol.
cxlii. The Gospill on the.xiii. sunday after trinity, the.x. chapter of Luke
fol. cxliii. The epistle on the.xiiii. sunday after trinity, the.v. chapter
to the Galathians fol. cxlviii. The Gospel on the.xiiii. so^day, after
trinity, the.xvii. chapter of Luke fol. cl The Epistle on the.xv. sunday after
trinity, the.v. vi chapter to the Galathians fol. cli The Gospel on the.xv.
sunday after trinity, the syxte chapter of Matheu fol. cliii The Epistle on
the.xvi. sunday after trinity, the.iii. chapter to the Ephesians fol. clvi.
The Gospel on the.xvi. sunday after trinity, the.vii. chapter of Luke fol.
clviii. The Epistle on the.xvii. sunday after trinity, the.iiii chapter to the
Ephesians fol. clix. The Gospel on the.xvi. sunday after trinity, the.xiiii
chapter of Luke. fol. clx The epistle on the.xviii. sunday after Trinity,
the.i. epistle to the Corin. the.i. chapter fol. clxii. The Gospel on
the.xviii. sunday after Trinity, the xxii. chapter of Matheu fol. clxiii. The
epistle on the.xix. sunday after Trinity, the.iiii. chapter to the Ephesians
fol. clxv. The Gospel on the.xix. sunday after Trinity, the.ix. chapter of
Matheu fol. clxvi. The epistle on the.xx. sunday after Trinity, the fyfth
chapter to the Ephesians fol. clxviii. The Gospel on the.xx. sunday after
Trinity, the.xxii. chapter of Matheu fol. clxix. The epistle on the.xxi.
sunday after Trinity, the.vi. chapter to the Ephesians fol. clxxii. The
Gospel on the.xxi. sunday after Trinity, the.iiii. chapter of John fol.
clxxcii, The epistle on the.xxii. so^day after Trinity, the first chapter to
the Philippians fol. clxxiiii. The Gospel on the.xxii. sunday after Trinity,
the xviii. chapter of Matheu fol. clxxvi. The epistle on the.xxiii. sunday
after trinity, the.iii. chapter to the Philippians fol. clxxvii. The gospel
on the.xxiii. so^day after trinity, the.xxii chapter of Mathewe fol.
clxxviii. The epistle on the.xxiiii sunday after trinite, the.i. chapter to
the Colossians fol. clxxx. The gospel on the.xxiiii. sunday after trinity,
the.ix chapter of Mathewe fol. clxxxi. The epistle on ye.xxv. sunday after
trinity, the xxxiii. chapter of Ieremias fol. clxxxiii. The gospel on
the.xxv. sunday after trinity, the.vi. chapter of John fol. clxxxv.
POSTILLES OR HOMILIES UPON THE EPISTLES AND GOSPELS FROM ESTER until TRINITY
sunday, with certain other fruitful and godly SERMONS drawn forth by
diverse learned men for the syngular edificacion and commodity of al good
CHRISTEN parsons and in especial of prestes and CVRATES.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XL.

THE COPY OF THE KINGS graciouse privilege.
HENRY the eight by the grace of god king of England and of France,
defensour of the faith, Lord of Ireland, and in earth supreme head immediately
under Christ of the church of England To all prynters of books within this
our Realm and to all other our officers, ministers and subjects, these our
letters hearing or seeing: Gretynge. We let you wit, that of our grace especial
we have given privilege unto our well-beloved subject Richard Banks, that no
manner person within this our Realm, shall prynte any manner of books, what so
ever our said subject shall prynte first within the space of seven years
next ensuyng the printynge of every such book so by him prynted, upon pain of
forfetynge the same. Wherefore we woll and command you, that ye nor none of
you do presume to prynte any of the said books during the time aforesaid, as
ye tender our pleasure, and woll avoid the contrary.

A SERMON OF THE RESVRRECTION.
CHRISTVS traditus fuit propter peccata nostra and resurrexit propter
iustificationem nostri. Roma. iiij.

Christ was delivered for our sins, and rose again for the justification of
us. Romans iiij.


IF ever the greatness or excellency of any matter has styred up your minds
to give diligent ear at any time (good christen people well-beloved in our Lord
and Savior Christ) I doubt not, but that I shall have you now most diligent
and ready hearers of that matter which I have at this time to open unto you.
For I am come to declare that great and most comfortable article of our faith,
the resurrection of our Lord Jesus. So great is this article, and of so great
weight and importance, that it was thought worthy to keep our said Savior
still on earth after he was risen from death to life, to the confirmation thereof
in the hearts of his disciples. So that as Luke testifyeth in the first
chapter of the acts, he was conversant with his disciples by the space of
forty days continually together to enstructe them the truth thereof, before he
would ascend up to his father in heaven to receive the glory of his conquest
and victory. So comfortable is this article to our consciences that it is the
lock and keye of all our faith. If it were not true (says S. Paul) that
Christ arose again: our preaching were in vain, i. cor. xv
your faith were but void, ye were yet in the danger of your sins. If
Christ be not risen again, says the Apostle, than are they utterly peryshed
that be entered theey sleep in Christ, than are we most miserable of al me^ if
we have our hope fixed in Christ, if he were under the power of death not
restored to bless again. But now is he risen again from death, says he, to
be ye first fruits of them that be aslepe, to raise them to everlasting life
again. Yea and if it were not true, that Christ is ryse^ again: than were it
neither true, that he is ascended up to heaven, nor yt he sent down the holy
ghost, nor that he sytteth on the right hand of the father, having the rule
of heaven and earth, reygnynge as the prophet says from see to see, psa. lxxi
nor that he should after this world be a judge of living and dead: to give
reward to the good, and judgment to the evil.

That these lynkes therefore of our faith should all hang together in
steadfast confirmation: it pleased our savior not straight way to wythdraw
himself from the corporal sight of his disciples, but chose out forty days,
wherein he would declare unto them by manyfolde and most strong arguments and
tokens that he had conquered death and was truly risen again to life. lu.
xxiiij
He began (says Luke) at Moses and all the prophets, and did expoune them
the prophecies that were written in all the scriptures of him, to confirm the
truth of his resurrection long before spoken of, which he verefyed in deed, as
it is declared manyfestly by his often appearaunce to sundry persons, at sundry
times. Math. xxviij.
First he sent his angels to ye sepulcher, which did show to certain women,
that the stone of the grave was removed from the door thereof: and showed them
the empty grave saving that the burial lynnen remained therein, and of these
signs were these women fully instructed yt he was risen again and so did they
testifye it ope^lye. Ioh. xx.
After this Jesus himself appeared to Mary Magdalene, and after that to other
certain women, straight afterward he appeared to Peter: than to the two
disciples which were going to Emaus. i. cor. xv lu. xxiiij
He appeared to the disciples also as they were gathered together for fear of
the Iues the doors shut. Ioh. xxi
At an other time he was seen at the sea of Tyberias of Peter and Thomas and
other disciples when they were fyshynge. i. cor. xv
He was seen of more tha^ five hundred brethren in the mount of galile, where
Jesus appointed them by his angel when he said: behold he shall go before you
into Galile, there shall ye se him, as he has said unto you. Actu. i.
After this he appeared unto James, and last of all he was vysiblye seen of all the Apostles, at such time, as he was taken up into heaven. Thus at sondrye
times he showed himself after he was risen again, to confirm this article,
and in these revelations sometime he showed them his hands, his feet, and his
side, and bad them touch him, that they should not take him for a ghost or a
spirit. Sometime he also did eat with them, but ever he was talking with them
of the kingdom of God, to confirm the truth of his resurrection. For then he
opened their understanding to perceive the scriptures, and said unto them: Thus
it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from death the
third day, lu. xxiiij
and to have preached openly in his name penance and remission of sins to
all the nations of the world. Ye see, good christen people, how necessary
this article of our faith is: seeing it was proved of Christ himself by such
evident reasons and tokens by so long time and space. Now therefore as our
savior was dilligent for our comfort and instruction to testify it, so let
us be as ready in our believe to receive it to our comfort and instruction. As
he dyed not for himself, no more did he rise again for himself. He was dead,
says saint Paul, for our sins and rose again for our justification. O
most comfortable word evermore to be borne in remembrance. He dyed, says
he, to put away sin, he rose again to endewe us with ryghtuousnes. His death
took away sin and malediction, his death was the ransom of them both His
death destroyed death and overcame the devil which had the power of death in
his subjection. His death destroyed hell with all the damnation thereof. Thus is
death swalowed up by Christ's victory: thus is hell spoiled for ever. If any
man doubt of this victory: i. cor. xv
let Christ's glorious resurrection declare him the thing. If death could not
keep Christ under his dominion but that he arose again: it is manifest that his
power was overcome. If death be conquered: than must it follow, yt sin,
wherefore death was appointed as the wages: must be also destroyed. If death and
sin be vanished away, then is the deuels tyranny resysted which had the
power of death and was the author of sin and the ruler of hell. If Christ
had the victory of them all by the power of his death, and openly proved it by
his valiau^t resurrection, as it was not possible for his great might to be
subdued of them, and than this true that Christ dyed for our sins and rose
again for our justification: why may not we that be his members by true faith
rejoice and boldly say with the prophet Osee and the Apostle Paul, i. cor, xv
where is thy darte O death? where is thy victory O hell? Thanks be unto God,
say they, which has given us the victory by our Lord Christ Jesus. This
mighty conquest of his resurrection was not only sygnifyed before by diverse
fygures of the old testament, as by Sampson, when he slew the Lion, Iu. xiiij.
out of whose mouth, came out swetnes and honey, and as David bare his figure,
when he delivered ye lamb out of the Lions mouth, and when he overcame, i.
Reg. xvij. Ion. ij.
and slew the great giant Goliath, and as when Jonas was swalowed up of the
whales mouth and cast up again on land to live: but was also most clearly
prophesied by the prophets of the old testament, and in the new also
confirmed by the Apostles. He has spoiled (says saint Paul) rule and power
and all the dominion of our spiritual enemies. Col. ij.
He has made a show of them openly and has triumphed over them in his own
person. This is the mighty power of the Lord, whom we believe on. By his death
has he wrought this victory for us, and by his resurrection has he
purchased everlasting life and ryghtuousnes for us. It had not ben enough to
be delivered by his death from sin: except by his resurrection, we had been
endowed with ryghtuousnes. And it should not avail us to be delivered from
death, except he had risen again, to open for us the gates of heaven to enter
into life everlasting And therefore saint Peter thanketh God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ for his abundaunt mercy, i. Pet. i.
because he has begotten us (says he) unto a lively hope by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from death, to enjoy an inheritance immortal that shall never
perysh, which is reserved in heaven for them that be kept by the power of God
through faith. Thus has his resurrection wrought for us life and ryghtuousnes.
He passed through death and hell to put us in good hope, that by his strength
we shall do the same. He paid the ransom of sin, that it should not be
laid to our charge. He destroyed the deuell and all his tyranny and openly
triumphed over him, and took away from him all his captives, and has raised
and set them wych himself among the heavenly cytesins above. Ephe. ij
He dyed to destroy the rule of the deuell in us and rose again to send down
his holy spirit to rule in our hearts, to endow us with perfyte ryghtuousnes.
Thus is it true that David song. Veritas de terra orta est, and iustitia de
coelo prospexit. Psalm. lxxxiiij.
The truth of gods promise is in earth to man declared, or from the earth is
the everlasting verity gods son risen to life: Ephesians. iiij Captiua^ duxit
captiuitatem.
and the true ryghtuousnes of the holy ghost lokynge out of heaven and is in
most lyberall larges dealt upon all the world. Thus is glory and praise
reboundinge upward to god above for his mercy and truth: and thus is peace
come down from heaven to me^ of good and faithful hearts. Luce. ii.
Thus is mercy and verity as David writes, met together, Psalm. lxxxiiij.
Misericordia et veritas obui auerunt sibi. etc.
thus is peace and ryghtuousnes, embrasynge and kissing themself together. If
thou doutest of so great felicity that is wrought for the O man, call to thy
mind, that therefore haste thou received into thine own possession, the
everlasting verity our Savior Jesus Christ in form of bread to confirm
to thy conscience the truth of all this matter. Thou have received him: if in
true faith and repentance of heart thou haste received him, if in purpose of
amendment thou haste received him for an everlasting gage and pledge of thy
salvation. Thou have received his body: which was ones broken and his blood
shed for the remission of thy sin, thou have received his body, to have with
in the the father, the son, and the holy ghost to dwell with the, to endowe
the with grace, to strength the against thy enemies, and to comfort the with
their presence. Thou have received his body to endowe the with everlasting
ryghtuousnes, to assure the of everlasting bliss and life of thy soul. For
with Christ by true faith art thou quyckened again (says saint Paul) from
death of sin to life of grace, Ephesians. iiij
and in hope translated from corporal and ever lasting death, to the
everlasting life of glory in heaven: where now thy conversation should be
and thy heart and desire set. Doubt not of the truth of this matter, how great
and excellent so ever these things be. It becomes god to do no little deeds:
how impossible so ever they seem to the: pray to god that thou may have
faith to perceive this great power of Christ's resurrection, yt by faith thou
may certainly believe nothing to be impossible with god. Only bring thou
faith to Christ's holy word and sacrament, Lu. xviij
let thy repentance show thy faith, let thy purpose of amendment and
obedience of thy heart to gods law herafter, declare thy true believe.
Endeavor thy self to say with saint Paul from henseforth: Phil. iij.
our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a savior even the
Lord Jesus Christ which shall change our vile bodies that they may be
fashioned like to his glorious body, which he shall do by the same power,
whereby he rose from death and whereby he shall be able to subdue al things unto
himself. Thus good christen people, forasmuch as ye have herd these so great
and excellent benefytes of Christ's mighty and glorious resurrection how that
he has raunsomed sin, overcome the devil, death, and hell, and has
victoriously obtained the better hand of them all, to make us fre and saufe
from them: and knowing, that we be by this benefyte of his resurrection risen
with him by our faith to life everlasting, being in full surety of our
hope, that we shall have our bodies likewise raised again from death, to have
them glorified in immortality and joined to his gloryouse body, having in the
mean while his holy spirit within our hearts as a seal and pledge of our
everlasting inheritance, by whose assistence we be replenyshed with all
ryghteousnes: by whose power, we shall be able to subdue al our euel affections
yt rise against the pleasure of God. These things I say well co^sydered, let
us now in the rest of our life declare our faith ye we have to this most
fruitful article, by conformyng us thereunto, in rysynge daily from sin to
ryghtousnes and holiness of life. For what shall it avail us (says S. Peter)
to be escaped and delivered from ye fylthynes of the world thorough the
knolege of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ if we be entangled again
therwyth and be overcome again, ij. pet. ij
it had been better (says he) never to have known the way of ryghteousnes,
than after it is known and received, to torn backewarde again from the holy
commandment of God given unto us. For so shall the proverb have place in
us, where it is said:
ye dog is returned to his vomyte again and the sow that was washed, to her
wallowynge in the mire again. What a shame were it for us, being thus so
clearly and frelye washed from our sin, to return to the fylthynes thereof
again? What a folly were it, thus endowed with ryghtousnes, to lose it again?
What madness were it to lose the enherytaunce that we be now set in, for the
vile and transytory pleasure of sin? And what an unkindness should it be,
where our Savior Christ of his mercy is come to us to dwell within us as our
geste, to drive him from us, and to expel him violentlye out of our souls,
and instead of him (in whom is all grace and virtue) to receive the
ungracious spirit of the devil, the author of al naughtynes and myschefe. How
can we find in our hearts to show such extreme unkindness to Christ: which
has now so gently called us to mercy, and offered himself unto us, and he now
entered within us. Yea how dare we be so bold to renounce the presence of ye
father, the son, and the holy ghost now received in this holy sacrament (for
where one is there is God al hole in majesty together with al his power wysdo^
and goodness) and fear not I say the danger and peril of so traytorous a
defiance? Good christian brethren and systers advise your self, consider ye
dignity yt ye be now set in. Let not folly lose the thing yt grace has so
preciously offered and purchased. Let not wylfulnes and blyndnes put out so
great light that is now showed unto you. Ephe. vi
Only take good hearts unto you and put upon you all the armoure of God, that
ye may stand against your enemies which would again subdue you and bring you
into their thraldom. Remember ye be bought from your vain conversation and
your fredome purchased neither with gold nor silver, but with the price of ye
precious blood of that most innocent lamb Jesus Christ, i. pet. i.
which was ordained to this same purpose before the world was made, but was so
declared in the later time of grace, for your sakes, which by him have your
faith in God, who has raised him from death and has given him glory that you
should have your faith and hope toward god. Therefore as ye have hitherto
followed ye vain lusts of your minds and so displeased god to the danger of
your souls, now like obedient children, thus purifyed by faith, give your
selves to walk that way which god moves you to, that ye may receive the
end of your faith the salvation of your souls. i. pet. i.
And as ye have given your bodies to unrighteousness, to sin after sin, now
give your self to ryghtuousnes: Romans vi
to be sanctified therein If ye delight in this article of your faith that
Christ is risen again from death to life: So follow you the exemple of his
resurrection, as S. Paul exhorts us sayng: Romans vi
As we be buried with Christ by our baptism into death, so let us daily dye to
sin mortifynge and killing the evil desires and motions thereof. And as
Christ was raised up from death by the glory of the father: so let us rise to a
new life and walk continually therein, that we may likewise as natural children
live a co^uersacion to move men to glorify our father which is in heaven. Math.
v
If we then be risen with Christ by our faith to the hope of everlasting life:
so let us rise also with Christ after his exemple to a new life, and leave our
old. We shall then be truly risen, Col. iij
if we seek for things that be heavenly, if we have our affection upon things
yt be above and not on things that be on earth. If ye desire to know, what
these erthly things be, which ye should put of, and what be the heavenly things
above, that ye should seek and ensue, S. Paul in ye epistle to the Collossians
declares, when he exhorts us thus: Mortify your erthly members and old
affections of sin, as fornication, uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil
concupiscence and covetousness which is worshippynge of ydols for which things
the wrath of God is wont to fall on the children of unbelieve. In which things
ones ye walked, when ye lived in them. but now put ye also away from you,
wrath fearsenes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your
mouths. Lie not one to an other that the old man with his works be put of
and the new put on. These be the earthly things which saint Paul moves you
to cast from you and to pluck your hearts from. For in following these, ye
declare your selves earthly and worldly. These be the fruits of the earthly
Adam. These should ye daily kill by good diligence in wythstandynge the desires
of them, that ye might rise to ryghtuousnes. Let your affection from
henceforth be set on heavenly things. Sue and search for mercy, kyndnes,
mekenes, paciens, forbearynge one another, and for gyuynge one another. If any
man have quarrel to another, even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. If
these and such other heavenly virtues ye ensue in the residue of your life, ye
shall show plainly, that ye be risen with Christ, and that ye be the heavenly
children of your father in heaven, Iaco. i.
from whom as from the gyuer comes these graces and gifts. Ye shall prove by
this manner that your co^uersacion is in heaven where your hope is, phil. iij
and not on earth, following the beastly appetites of the flesh. Ye must
consider that ye be therefore cleansed and renewed that ye should from henceforth
serve God in holiness and ryghtuousnes all the days of your lives: Luc. i.
that ye may raygne with him in everlasting life. If ye refuse so great grace
whereto ye be called, what other thing do ye, then heap your damnation more
and more, and so provoke God to cast his displeasure unto you and to revenge
this mockage of his holy sacraments in so great abusyng of them. Apply your
self good fre^des to live in Christ, that Christ may still live in you: Ioh. v
whose favor and assiste^ce if ye have, tha^ have ye everlasting life already
within you, than can no thing hurt you. What soever is hitherto done and
committed, Christ ye se has offered you pardon and clerly received you to his
favor again: in full suertye whereof, ye have him now inhabytynge and
dwelling within you. Only show you your self thankeful in your lives, Col
iij.
co^pounde with your self to refuse and avoid al such things in your
conuersations that should offend his eyes of mercy Endeavor your self that
way to rise up again, which way ye fell into the well and pyt of sin. If
by your tongue ye have offended, now thereby rise again and glorifye God
therwyth. Accustom it to laud and praise the name of God, as ye have therwyth
dishonored it, and as ye have hurt the name of your neighbor or otherwise
hyndered him, now entende to restore him again, for without restitucion God
accepts not your shryft nor yet your repentance. Psalm. xxxvi.
It is not enough to forsake evil except ye set your courage to do good. By
what occasion so ever ye have offended, turn now the occasion to the
honourynge of God and profytynge of your neighbor. Truth it is that sin is
strong and affections unruly, hard to subdue and resyst our nature so
corrupt and leuened with the sour bitterness of the poison which we received by
the inheritan^ce of our old father Adam, Mar. vi
but yet take good courage says our Savior Christ: for I have ouercommed the
world and al other enemies for you. Romans v.
Sin shall not have power over you, for ye be now under grace says saint
Paul. Though your power be weak, yet Christ is risen again to strength you
in your batel, his holy spirit shall help your infirmities. In trust of his
confidence take you in hand to purge this old leven of sin that corrupts
and soureth the swetnes of your life before God, To. viij
that ye may be as new and fresh dowe void of all sour leven of wyckednes:
i. cor. v
so shall ye show your self to be sweet bred to god to have his delight in you.
I say kyl and offer you up the worldly and erthly affections of your bodies,
for Christ our Ester lamb is offered up for us, to slay the power of sin, to
deliver us from the danger thereof and to give us exemple to dye to sin in
our life. As the Iues did eat their Ester la^be and kept their fest in
remembrance of their deliuerau^ce out of Egypt: Eue^ so let us keep our Ester
feast in ye thankful remembrance of Christ's benefytes which he has
purchased for us by his resurrection and passing to his father: whereby we be
delivered from ye captivity and thraldom of al our enemies. Let us in like
manner pass over the affections of our old conversation to be delivered from
ye bondage thereof to rise with Christ. Exo. xij
The Iues kept their feast in absteynynge from leuened bread by the space
of.vij. days: let us christen folk keep our holy day in a spiritual manner yt
is in absteining not from material leuened bread, but from the old leven of
sin the leven of maliciousnes and wyckednes. Let us cast from us ye leven of
corrupt doctrine yt will infect our souls. Let us keep our feast ye hole term
of our life with eating the bred of pureness of godly life, and truth of Christ's
doctrine. Thus shall we declare yt Christ's gifts and graces have their effect
in us and that we have ye right believe and knowledge of his holy resurrection,
whereunto if we apply our faith to ye virtue thereof, and in our life conform
us to the exemple and signification meant thereby, we shall be suer to rise
hereafter to everlasting glory by the goodness and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost. etc.

On the first sunday after Ester. The Epistle on the first sunday after
Ester day, called low sunday. The first Epistle of John, and the.v. Chapter.
Thargument of this Epistle. Of the excellency of faith and how it overcomes
the world.
MOst dear beloved brethren, all that is borne of God overcomes the world.
And this is the victory that overcomes the world, eue^ our faith. Who is it
that overcomes the world: i. cor. x.
but he which believes, that Jesus is the son of God? This Jesus Christ is
he that came by water and blood, not by water only: but by water and blood.
And it is the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit is truth.
(for there are three which bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and
holy ghost. And these three are one.) And there are three which bear record (in
earth) the spirit water and blood: and these three are one. If we receive the
wytnes of men, the wytnes of God is greater. For this is the wytnes of God
(that is greater) which he testified of his son. He that believes on the
son of god has the wytnes in himself.

An exhortation upon this Epistel.
OVre Epistle taken out of the first epistle catholyke of saint John good
christen brethern does show unto us that we have a generation from god which
is that which proceeds of faith, and this ouercommyth the world that is to
say the concupiscences of sins, which be pride, covetous, and lecherye.
Assuredly my friends there is I trust no man among us but knows that of
nature we be al born in sins,
in unrighteous, in utter ignorance of al ghostly and spiritual things. And
therefore Saint Austine writes on this wise. The words of S. Austine.
Behold my brethern behold the generation of mankind from the first death
of that first man. For sin from the first man has entered into this world and
by syn^e has death entered and so has passed thorough all men as witnesses
thapostle. But mark (says saint Austine) this word passed through. Pertran
sijt.
Sin is ru^ne through upon all the ofsprynge of Adam, and for this cause is
the newborn child gylty of eternal damnation, he has not yet done syn, but
he has caught sin. For surely that first sin of our foreparentes did not
still remain in the headsprynge, but it passed through into the ofsprynge not
into him and him but into al men. The first sinner the first tra^sgressour
begat sinners subject to death. Than came the Savior of a virgin to heal
and save them, he came to the, but not the way that thou ca^mest. For he
proceeded not of the concupisce^ce of the male and female, he came not of that
bond of concupiscence. Because therefore he came to the not by yt way that
thou cammest:
therefore he delivered the. But where did he find the? He found the sold
under sin, lyenge in the death of the first man drawing up the sin of the
first man being gylty and having condemnation yer thou could discern good
and evil asunder. Hitherto I have rehearsed unto you the words of saint
Austyne. Wherefore to return to my purpose: forasmuch as we be borne in sin
which brings with it ignorance, blyndnes, and infidelity, therefore we can
not challenge this to our own power and virtue that we believe Jesus to be
Christ, but for the beleuynge hereof we have need to be borne again and to be
renewed through the holy ghost and by ye word of God to the intent we may purely
understand the things that be of God and that we may by faith take hold of
the promyses of Christ and so finally with sure confidence determine with our
selves that Jesus is Christ, Ioh. iij.
that is to say, the anointed King and Savior of the world. Before we be
new borne again by spirit we be al Nicodemes.
For no doubt before we be thus borne again, we be all but Nicodemes, that is
to say, we may well believe that Christ came as a great master from God and
that noma^ could do the signs and miracles that he did. But this is but an
historial faith, and they that have it do as yet walk out of the kingdom of
heaven with Nicodemus, to who^ Christ answers. Verily, verily, I say unto
the, onles a man be borne again from above he can not se the kingdom of God,
Ioh. iij.
which self thing the holy apostle saint Ihon does in this place declare in
other terms saying: i. Ioh. v.
he can not believe Jesus to be Christ. For he that believes not this, can not
se the kingdom of god. To believe yt Jesus is Christ, is surely to determine
and conclude with thy self that Jesus is first to the a Savior: and secondly,
What it is to believe that Jesus is Christ.
that he is a king anointed with the oil of gladness, perpetually to rule, to
preserve, and to defend the so saved by him, And here saint Ihons intent and
purpose is to declare unto us a difference between the historiall faith
concerning Christ (which the devil also has, A difference of faythes.
and so all hypocrites) and between ye true and saving faith which believes
that Christ does both save us and also takes a continual charge and regard of
our salvation. To this faith we be borne again when through the holy ghost we
be called by the word to the knowledge of Gods will,
to the intent we may understand that Jesus is Christ, I mean, that he is
such one in whom is reposed all grace, health, defense, and sauegarde against
sin, death, Satan, the world and so forth. This he that believes, Borne of
God.
is said to be borne of god, as though saint Ihon should say: To believe yt
Jesus is Christ is not a work of humane power and strength, but it is such a
work whereunto is required the power of God and an heavenly renewyng or
regeneration whereby the holy ghost transformeth us into new creatures. And
what is this faith which is so mighty? It is (as I have said) the same that
makes us believe that Jesus is the son of god that was baptized (which thing
is to be comen by water) that suffered death and passion for the redemption of
men (which is to be comen by blood) That Jesus Christ is verite (for the holy
ghost does witness it) that is to say both true god and true man. And that he
is true god, three things does witness it in heaven, the father the son
(which is him self) and the holy ghost, and these three be one self witness.
And that he is true man, three things does witness it in earth, the spirit
which he has bequethed into the hands of his father at his death, the water
with which he was baptized, and the blood which he has shed with water when
his side was percyd after that he was dead. And these three things be one
self witness. And if we receive the witness of men, why should we not take
the witness of god (which is infinitely greater than ma^s) that he is the
son of god? This witness was made by god the father in his baptism. Mat.
iij.
And also he has testified yt in the mountain, he has testified it by the
law and by the prophets. Who so ever then believes that he is the sone of
god, he has the witness of god in him, he receives the record and
testimonye of god, he is borne of god and in the spirit of his faith, he is
far stronger over ye world and victorious of the world. Follow we then good
brethren and systers this generation of God, of faith and of baptism and lo we
have overcome all things, that is to wit the world the flesh and the
concupiscences. Now if we be rydde and not combred with these things surely
the yuel spirit can have nothing in us but than the spirit of god only may
all and does all in us. Unto god then be all thanks honor and glory
accordingly. Amen.

On the first sunday after Ester. The Gospel on the first sunday after
Ester day, called low sunday, the.xx. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument of this Gospel. How Christ appears to his disciples which were
assembled together, and of their commission that was given them to preach.
THe same day at night, which was the first day of the Sabbothes, when the
doors were shut (where the disciples were assembled together for fear of the
Jews) came Jesus, and stood in the mydde, and says unto them: Peace be unto
you. And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands, and his side.
Then were the disciples glad wha^ they saw the Lord. Esa. lxi. Mat. xi Ioh.
xvii
Than said Jesus to them again: Peace be unto you. As my father sent me, even
so send I you also. And wha^ he had said those words, he brethed on them and
says unto them: Receive the holy ghost. Whoseouers sins ye remytte, they
are remytted unto them. And whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.
But Thomas one of the twelve (which is called Didimus) was not with them, when
Jesus came. The other disciples therefore said unto him: we have seen the
Lord. But he said unto them: except I se in his hands the prynte of the
nails, and put my fnnger into the prynt of the nails, and thurst my hand
into his side, I will not believe. And after eyghte days, again his disciples
were with in, and Thomas with them. Then came Jesus when the doors were shut,
and stood in the mids, and said: peace be unto you. After that said he to
Thomas, bring thy finger hither, and se my hands, and reach hither thy
hand, and thirst into my side, and be not faythlesse, but beleuyng. Thomas
answered and said unto him, my Lord and my God: Jesus says unto him: Thomas,
because thou haste seen me, thou haste believed: blessed are they that have not
seen, and yet have believed. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the
presence of his disciples, Ioh. xxi
which are not written in this book. These are written, that ye might believe,
that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that (in beleuynge) ye might have
life through his name.

An exhortacion upon this Gospel.
THe Gospel of this day good people does declare unto us the appearyng of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto his disciples after his resurrection, that is to wit how
he came and showed himself unto them, the doors being shut for fear of ye
Iues. And here truly he did show the diversity of bodies, and what difference
there shall be between the sensual bodies, and between the spiritual, between
the material and corruptible bodies in this world, and between the spiritual
bodies and incorruptible after the resurrection. Troth it is also that we
ought not to suffer any infideles as were the Iues to enter in among us from
whom the Apostles did shut their doors. Now Jesus being in the mids of
them did salute them in gyuynge unto them his peace with which gretynge or
salutation he conforted and confirmed his disciples minds that they should
nothing doubt of his resurrection which as the Evangelist Luke witnesses they
counted but for a dream. Luke. xxiiij.
Wherefore he showed unto them his hands and his side perced. And by this
showing of his hands and feet, Christ opens two things. First by these
signs he would be known. For in affliction is Christ truly known. Second by
them he would assure his disciples of his glorious resurrection. And verily
this shall be the sign of salvation unto the faithful at the great day of
judgment, and the sign of lamentation and of sorrow unto the infidels which
tha^ shall se whom they have percyd. The faithful shall be greatly comforted in
seeing him as his disciples were at this time. To these disciples I say he did
ones give his peace and made them his apostles that is to say his legates or
ambassadors not only of Iurye, but of all the world, in like manner as god the
father had sent him and made him apostle in the world. And he gave them the
holy ghost for to remytte sins, and to pardon in his name, and whose sins so
ever they pardoned should be forgyuen in heaven. The pardone of the apostles
assuredly was but a sign of the true pardone, which was made on high alredye.
And unto them to whom they would not remytte here in earth they should not be
remytted nor pardoned in heaven. And this that they did not pardon them, was
sign that they were not pardonyd on high. S. Cyprian.
Surely it is not man of him self that forgiueth, but God. For as saint
Cypriane says. Non potest seruus remittere quod in dominu^ commissum est, that
is to say the servant can not pardone the thing that is trespassed against
the master. S. Ambrose.
And therefore saint Ambrose says in his book of Cain and Abell, that sins be
forgiven by the word of god whereof the pressed is as an interpretour and certain
executour. But who were they whom they did not forgive? Truly all those which
did not give feith and credence to their words. Now in this apperinge Thomas
called Didimus was not present. Wherefore when the disciples did show him that
they had seen our Lord rysyn again to life, which had showed unto them both
his hands and his side percyd, he answered that he would not believe them,
onles he might se him and put his finger in to the holes of the nails and his
hand into his side. So eighte days after our Lord the doors being shut,
did again apere in the mids of them as he had done before and gave them for
gretynge his peace according to the usage of the Iues, Pax vobis.
by which is understand quietness of conscience and all goodness. And now
Thomas was there also unto whom he said (answering him unto the words which
he had said by his vnfeithfulnes) behold my hands and put thy finger into
the holes, hold forth thy hand and put it into my side. Be no more feithles,
but faithful, hereby declaringe unto him that he sees all, that he hears
all, that he is in all places, and that he may do all. Which done, Thomas did
confess him to be his Lord and his God. And truly not so much Thomas as the
spirit of faith which with the faith entered into him. At that time our Lord
gave witness of faith unto Thomas which has believed in seeing of him, but
he does give far greater praise and co^mendacion unto them which have
believed, and yet have not seen him in person corporally, but only spiritually
with the eye of feyth or mystically in form of bread in the most blessed
sacrament of the altar, and also unto them which shall believe him. Then let
us believe him, by seeing him spiritually, and so doing we shall be more happy
then Thomas, in this that he has seen him corporally. Now, says the
Evangelist, al these things be written unto us, to the end that we should believe
that Jesus is Christ the son of God: The use of miracles.
and in beleuyng this, that we should have everlasting life by his name. For
as much as the end and use of all the signs and miracles of Christ is that by
them we should be brought and allured to the true faith in Christ, which thing
shall make us to enjoy everlasting bliss through his name that is to wit, by
his word. Romans i.
For verily Gods word is the virtue and power of God unto the health and
salvation of all that believe on Christ Jesus our Lord and redemer. To who^ with
ye father and holy ghost be glory and praise for ever. Ame^

The Epistle on the second sunday after Ester. The.i. Epistle of Peter
the.ij. Chapter.
Thargument The Apostle saint Peter does exhort us here to follow Christ in all
things, even as sheep follow their shepherde.
MOst derely beloved brethren, Christ also suffered for us leaving to us an
exemple, that ye should follow his steps, which did no sin, neither was there
gyle found in his mouth: which when he was reuyled, reuyled not again: when
he suffered, he threatened not, but committed the vengeance to him that
judges ryghtuously which his own self bare our sins in his body on the
tree, that we being delivered from sin, should live unto ryghtuousnes. By
whose strypes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astraye, but are now
turned unto the shepherde and bishop of your souls.

THe Epistle of this day (good christen people) which be the words of saint
Peter does put before our eyes the liefe of our Lord Jesus Christ to this intent
and purpose that we should follow him as a perfect president and exemplar. For
it is he which dyed for us, which has done no sin, according to the saying
of the prophet Esaye, and in whose mouth has been found no gyle nor
deceipte. Esa. lij.
And which when any said harm by him, he said no harm again. When he
suffered, he did not threaten, but committed the vengeance unto him that
judges justly, that is to wit unto God the father. No doubt God iugeth
ryghtly, neither regardyng men's persons (as does the world) neither only after
the outward works but after the heart and outward works to. And therefore is
gods judgment according to the truth as Paul says. Romans ij.
Furthermore it is Christ which has borne our sins on the tree of ye
cross that our sins might be so by him taken away and we being dead unto
sin should live unto justice. But what justice? Truly unto the justice or
ryghtuousnes that proceeds of faith which is from above. For we be healed of
our sin by his wounds, by his passion, by his sacrifisyng for us. Wherefore
this is the final use of our deliverance or iustificacion by Christ that we
should no longer live unto sin, but unto justice and virtue. As though saint
Peter would say. Ye wol be christians who^ Christ has redeemed,
than go to, it shall not become you any longer by disobedience toward your
rulers and superiors to live unto sin but unto ryghteousnes, to the intent ye
may be obedient unto them and suffer persecution, vexacio^, yea and death of
them if occacion be given, even as Christ did. And this is even the right use
of Christ's passion, to live a new life and to become just and rightuous in all
our living. For as the Apostle saint Paul witnesses writing to the Ephesians,
Ephe. ij
we be the workmanshyp of God created and made to do good works. But to
return to the text, S. Peter allegeth here unto you (good people) the works
of the prophet Esaye, where he says, Esa. liij.
that by the strypes and wounds of Christ ye were healed. O most comfortable
words. Bitter verily were these strypes to our Savior Christ, but they were
sweet to us, so sweet yt without them we should have been in most paynfull
misery and anguyshe. Let us than never put out of our minds this most
comfortable tidings, this sweet and merry Gospel that Christ bare our sins
in his body on the tree. This treasure I mean the knowledge of this thing who
so wants is most nedy and pore yea he has nothing at all. For this is (no
doubt) that preciouse perle that Christ speaks of in the Gospel of Matheu,
where he says, mat. xiij
that the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly
perles which wha^ he found one precious perle, went and sold all that he had
and bought it. Now though this thing be plain enough and apparaunt: yet
with your patience I will declare unto you what the most excellent doctoure
of the church saint Hierome writes upon this place. The words of. saint
Hierom
Surely (says saint Hierome) there is one perle most precious of all, that
is to wit, the knowledge of our Savior and the mystery of his passion and
resurrection, which when a marchaunte man has found (as saint Paul the
Apostle did) he despyseth all the mysteries of the law and prophets and his
old obseruauncies wherein he lived without reproach, yea and he regards them
no better tha^ the parings of his nails or chyppes to the intent to win
Christ unto him. This Christ (as Ihon baptist witnesses) is the lamb of God
which takes away the sin of the world. Ioh. i.
Where as before his coming we were as sheep wandering without a sheperde but
now by faith we be converted unto our sheperde which is the only good
shepherde, and unto the bishop of our souls which is eternal, always
mediatoure and intercessoure for us, always presentyng and offering himself
for us. Let us than good people follow his conversation. Let us bear patiently
al things for the love of him, which has suffered so many tribulations and
extreme pains for us. Let us not sin wyllingly Let us not speak any
untruth, fraud, dissimulation, and lies. Let us not curse, if any say evil
of us. Let us not threaten if any do grieve us. Let us give up all vengeance
unto God. Let us remember ye good which he has done us by his glorious
passion, that we may be dead with him as to him, and mortified by his spirit
as to us. Let us live no more in beastly wise to our selves but in most clenly
sort to him, which is our justice, for we be the sheep which he has converted
from wandering forth of the right path, from error and infidelity, unto
faith. He is our shepherd, let us worthily follow him unto ye pasture of life.
He is our bishop, our mediator our intercessour, our oblacion. And how do we
fear that we should not be exalted to his glory? Let us have this faith that
none is refused which follows him mekely and patiently. Who so ever has this
faith can not peryshe, yea there was never so great a sinner but that this
mediator and raunsomer has satisfied from him, if being truly converted and
penitent for his sins he be garnished and cladde with this fruitful faith
and brenning charity and hope in him which is our only savior and redemer. To
whom with the everlasting father of heaven and holy ghost be glory without
end, in secula seculorum. Amen.

The Gospel on the second sunday after Ester day The.x. chapter of Ihon.
Targument. Christ is the true shepherde.
Jesus said to his disciples. I am the good shepeherde. A good shepherde gives
his life for his sheep. An hired servant, and he which is not the shepherd
neither the sheep are his own, sees the wolf come and leueth the sheep and
flees and the wolf catches and scatters the sheep. The hired servant
flees because he is an hired servant, and cares not for the sheep. I am the
good shepeherd and know my sheep, and I am known of mine. As my father
knows me, even so know I also my father. And I give my life for the sheep,
and other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, Them also must I bring,
and they shall hear my voyse, and there shall be one fold and one shepeherde.

IN this Gospel good people our Lord does show us, that he is the true and
right shepherd. And it is good reason, for he only has given himself unto the
death, and has quyckened all his sheep. He alonly does nourish with his
doctrine all his sheep with the fode of everlasting life. If the wolf does
come, that is the great deuell of hell or any of his members, he never
forsakes his sheep but does defend and deliver them from the force and might
of the enemy, for he is strong above all, and is more mighty then all. And
also the sheep be his, and he has bought them with a great price, which is
above all prices. He does love them according to the price, yt is to say, more
than any thought can think or tongue express. And he has not alonly boughte
them again, but he has made them and created them so that they be his own
works and his own sheep. He surely is the shepherde by who^ al things been
made. Wherefore naturally he ca^ not hate them. He is no forgetful shepherde,
but he is a shepherde knowing all, he can forget nothing. For as the eternal
father knowith al: so in like manner he knows al. As ye father eternal knowith
al in giving him al, in like manner he knowith his sheep in giving the^ all. For
he gives them life, wisdom and might. Yea and such life, wisdom, and
might, as is above the capacity of the world. For those that be according to
the world be but shadows of them. And by this wisdom which surmou^teth ye
world, his sheep know him. This is ye good herdina^ giving life to al, knowing
al and which is almighty. But the hired shepherd is none such. He woll not dye
for his sheep. He does not give them life. Yea when the wolf comes he does
leave them forasmoch as they be not his own. He has neither made them nor yet
bought them again. He therefore rennyth away, and lets them be lost, and
devoured with the wolf, and finally go into everlasting damnation. He is
vnmighty. He is ignorant and clean unlike unto the good herdma^. Furthermore
this hired shepherd has but a little and a particular flock. But ye good
herdma^ has a great flock, he has the slocke of ye nation of Israel and of
al other nations. He has the universal flock, which from day to day he
leadethe and gatheryth to gether, that they may hear his sweet voice and his
holy doctrine (which is the doctrine of the gospel) till time that all the
world shall be but one flock, and that there be but one herdman, which is
our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is said here. And there shall be made one shepecote
and one herdman. Now by this parable good friends we be taught and informed of
the true office of Christ, and wherefore he came into this world. His office
whereunto he was sent of his father was to teach us and also to save us. As
touching his doctrine and teaching, who ever in fedynge of his flock was
more vigilant, more busy, more paynfull than he was? Who ever ministered to his
sheep more diligently the fode of the evangelical verity? All that herd him
speak and preach were astonnyed upon his doctrine. For he taught them not
after the fashion of the scribes and pharisees which nevertheless were the
great doctors and learned men of the law but as one having a wonderful
grace and authority. Yea even his very enemies were compelled to testify of
him that he taught the way of God in troth, as appears in the.xxij. chapter
of Matheu. Neither did Christ only teach his sheep, that is to say, those that
followed him like sheep that were well nere lost, but he also healed them
bestowynge even his very life for them. For I pray you did he not dye for our
sins? Was it not he only which with his blood washed away the fylthynes of
our sins? Yea doubtless. But who be these hyrelynges which when they se the
wolf come to devour the sheep they ru^ne their way? Surely these be those
which preach ye word and that also purely and syncerely, but they prech it for
lucre, for honor, for glory, or for the belyes sake. These I say be no true
herdmen but hyrelynges, for these drive not away the ravenous wolves that is
to say the devil and his lymmes I mean the Antichrists which persecute and
devour Christ's flock, but as soon as persecution and trouble for the word
comes, Ier. xxiij
anon they are gone. Of these do the prophet Jeremy speak, saying: Woe be
unto the shepeherders that destroy and skatter my flock. I will therefore
vysite the wyckednes of their ymaginations. It is true that the Apostle
writes. Episcopatus quid sit.
Qui episcopatu^ desiderat bonu^ opus concupiscit, that is to say: He that
desires an ouersyght or a cure over a flock (which after the greek word is
called a byshoprych) coueteth a good work. Lo says saint Jerome writing to
Oceanus) the Apostle calls a byshopryke a work and not a dignity, Saint
Hierom
a labor and not a deyntenes, a work whereby through humility he must be
lowly and not to swelle in pride. For a bishop or curate must be fautles,
sobre, full of good doctrine, not given to foul and fylthy gaynes, but meke,
diligent, full of charity according to thexemple of Christ the high and
supreme shepeherde of all and the shepeherde of shepeherdes which as this
Gospel says gave his own life for the sauegarde and health of his sheep
that is to say of all us that follow and believe on him. Wherefore my brethren
and systers to conclude how happy be we for to have such a herdman and for to
know to love, to follow, to hear his sweet voice that gives life, to hear
his doctrine, to be refectioned and fed with the meat which gives
everlasting life, to have wisdom and might that surmou^teth the world by
the said our herdmen, lyghtenyng us in him by faith, drawing us to him by
hope, and inflamynge us by charity. Unto him therefore be glory in all the
nations within the compass of ye earth for ever and ever. Amen.

The Epistle on the.iij. sunday after Ester. The first epistle of saint Peter
the.ij. Chapter.
Thargument. Peter exhorts to lay aside all vice, to absteyne from fleshly
lusts and to obey worldly rulers.
Dearly beloved brethren, I beseech you as strangers and pylgrems, abstain
from fleshly lusts, Gala. v.
which fight against the soul, To. xiij.
and se that ye have honest conuersacio^ among the Gentiles, that where as they
backbyte you as evil doars, they may se your good works, Mat. v.
and praise God in the day of visitation. Submytte your selves therefore unto
al manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, To. xiij. Tit. iij.
whether it be unto the King, as unto the chief heed: other unto rulars, as
unto the^ that are sent of him, for the punysheme^t of evil doars: but for the
laud of them, that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye
may stop the mouths of folysh and ignoraunte men: as fre, and not as having
the liberty for a cloak of maliciousnes, but even as the servants of God.
Honor al men. To. xij.
Love brotherly feloshyp. Fear God, honor the King. Servants obey your
masters with fear, not only if they be good and courteous: but also though
they be froward. For it comes of grace in Christ Jesus our Lord.

This Epistle, good christian brethern and systers is very excellent and
notable. For in it is handeled the second part of Christianity that is to wit,
how in this liefe after we have ones received and taken the euangell or glad
tidings of our salvation (which thing we call commonly in english a gospel)
we ought to live. In the process that goes before this epistle, saint Peter
taught and showed ye other part of Christianity, which is of faith and how
we ought to believe the gospel and also how we be edified and builded upon
Christ the corner stone, whereas before that time we were the children of
vengaunce and as abiectes and castawayes in gods sight but now we be made the
children of God by Christ. Which treasure truly saint Peter does extolle and
lift up with praises above measure, so that it were well with us, if after the
knowledge of so great riches we might be lycenced forth with to depart out of
this miserable life. But forasmoch as we dye not by and by after the receiving
of so great commodities and felicities, therefore now does saint Peter teach
us how and by what means we should live here in earth that we dye not eternally.
For Satan our mortal ennemy never slepeth but ever watches that he may either
quite and clean pluck us from gods word, or at lest way that he might weary
us and make us slauthful and negligent in doing of good works. For assuredly
it commethe so commenly to pass, that forthwyth when we hear by the preaching
of the gospel, that we be set at peax with God and justified in his sight by
only faith in him, then noman will do any longer any goodness at al, which thing
no doubt chanced even in saint Peter's time. The occasion of this epistle.
By reason whereof he took occasion to write these things concerning the
institution of the christian liefe. As though this holy Apostle Peter would say.
Good brethern sith ye have now received the gospel, and sith ye be justified
by faith in Christ, now it shall be very good and necessary for you to goo about
to redress your manner of living, and to absteyne from carnal and flesshely
desires and lusts. But it is an horrible thing to be spoken, that fleshly
disires and lusts do not cease no not in the justified persons. Yea we se by
daily experience that then more and more carnal desires do break forth, not
because this fault comes by the gospel,
as many enemies of the Gospel and papystes blasphemously do allege, but
because Satan is the ennemy of the gospel and of the justice which the gospel
teaches. He doubtless never slepeth though we sleep never so sou^dly and
carelessy, but like a roryng lion he runnyth and leapeth about, seakyng whom
to devour as thapostle S. Peter does testify in the end of this first
epistle. i. pet. v.
But forasmoche as the power of desires and lusts is so great yea and that
after justification received, saint Peter uses certain warlyk words wherewith
he expresses the strength and power of these carnal and worldly desires, which
he says do war against us and (as the greek word purporteth) do daily
exercise with us a pyched field, militant
which thing the scripture otherwhyles calls the conflycte of the flesh and
of the spirit, against which no outward works can do any good. As the holy
fathers also have confessed and complained of themselves. Note this exemple of
saint Hierom
For saint Hierom himself when he sought every where a present remedy against
the desires of the flesh, at last after long delyberation departed into the
wood, trusting that by this mean he should eschew and shake of from him his
carnal and fleshely desires, but it would not be, for even in his very mysery
and vexation of his body which he took upon himself for that purpose, he yet
thought he satte at Rome among the Roman ladies and fair wenches, and that
he daunced with them. Wherefore sith here in this life it is not in our powers
utterly to do awey carnal desires: the holy fathers and prophets desired with
high lamentation that they might be lycenced to depart out of this vale of
tears to the heavenly and perfyte joys. For here they thought themselves
only strangers and as pylgrimes or wayfarynge men. Which thing thapostle
Paul in his second epistle to the Corinthians does wonderfully well declare,
writing on this wise. We know, ij. cor. v.
says he, that if our erthy mansion of this dwelling were destroyed, we have
a building of God, an habitation not made with hands, but eternal in heaven.
And therefore sygh we desiring to be clothed with our mansion which is from
heaven, so yet if that we be found clothed and not naked, and so forth. Now,
such strangers S. Peter here wylleth us to be, which ought continually to
look up, to contend, and labor thither, setting aside all earthly things,
all cares and worldly desires, and ever to stand ready in hope to be delivered
out of this our earthly tabernacle or hostrye, and to enjoy the everlasting
inheritance. Howbeit yet in the mean season, good people, we teach not (as
do these Anabaptists) that he that has riches, should cast them away, but
that he cleave not in heart unto them, like as other places of holy scripture
do teach us and namely this present epistle of S. Peter, which by a similitude
of strangers or pylgrimes, does declare unto us, that in ye hostrye of this
present world, we should be in love with nothing, we should vaynly and
ambiciously require nothing, that is in our hoostes house which is the world,
even none otherwise, than a stranger, a pawmer, or wayfarynge body does, which
knows yt nothing in his ynne or lodging does pertayne unto him,
but only makes have homewarde into his own country. Now they which be in
love and admiration with any thing in this world, they can not be called
forenners, strangers, or pylgrimes, but cytizens and inhabitauntes of this
world. Wherefore it is great folly now among christen men to be in love with
the things of the world, and to seek pleasure in carnal desires, What be
carnal desires.
sith such things belong no more to christians. But I pray you what vices
does saint Peter call here desires? Surely not only those gross faults, but
also ye inward crooked affections, which doubtless be the very causes of those
outward and gross vices. Saint Peter therefore writing especyally to the Jews
which were disperpled abroad in diverse countries and by them unto us English
men and to all others right te^derly exhorts them (calling them his most
derely beloved brethren) to absteyne as forenners and pilgrims, from all
fleshly lusts, that is to wit, all vices, which of nature do stycke to the
flesh, which vices do keep continual war and batell against the soul and
spirit of man that ever more tends and labors to do the will of God. And
he wylleth them that they have honest conversation among the Gentyls or
paynems which worshipped false Gods among whom at that time when saint
Peter wrote this epistle the christen men lived. Saint Peter therefore will not
that christen men should depart from the panyms, but that they should live
honestly among them, to the intent that where as they backbyte them as evil
doers, they might se their good works and might praise and glorifye God in
the day of visitation, In the day of visitatio^
that is to say, that the paynyms being more ryghtly instructed and taught by
the honest life of the christians, might by gods visitation be called also to
the Gospel and so to have a better opinion and judgment of gods word, which
thing in deed came to pass in the primative church by the godly exemple of
the good Apostolical fathers and christen people in Rome and else where. Where
as now the paynims and infidels as be turks and Iues be rather plucked from
the Gospel then allured unto it by thexemple of those that woll nevertheless be
called the successors of Peter and Paul and ye vicares of Christ. Wherefore it
is to be feared, lest God will visit them, not by heapynge upon them his
benefytes and graces which they refuse and neglecte, but by pourynge upon them
his just ire and vengeance according to their deserts. Be you subject
therefore good christen people to the word of God. Obey his commandments
prescribed in the same. Let your light shine before me^ and namely before the
proud Pharisees and infidels (which think there is no God) that they may se
your good works and honest conversation and glorifye your father in heaven.
Submytte your selves, Mat. v.
according to Peter's counsel here, unto every humane creature, that is to
say, unto all manner ordinance or power which humane creatures do administer,
and that even for the Lords sake. For it pleases the Lord ye should so do,
lest your conscience should be polluted and defiled with sin through
disobedience. And even here may ye learn good people that when ye obey the
publyke ruler and magistrate ye do please God by this obedience. Be obedient
therefore says S. Peter whether it be unto ye king as unto ye chief head, or
unto rulers as to the^ yt are sent of him for the punyshme^t of euel doers. To.
xiij.
And surely as witnesses S. Paul, whoseoeuer resysteth power, resysteth the
ordinance of God. For he is the minister of God to take vengeance on them
that do evil. Wherefore ye must obey (says Paul) not only for fear of
vengaunce, but also because of conscience.

For as it follows here in the text so is the will of God, that with well
doing ye may stop the mouths of folyshe and ignorant persons, which
oftentimes judge such things as they understand not, and which esteem the
gospel and the word of god by the manners of the gospellers (which of humayne
frayltie mnay times do fall into foul vices) and do not esteem it by the own
proper nature. Romans i.
Whereas in very deed it is the power and virtue of God to the health and
salvation of al them that believe. Let us then good christen brethern so be free
and use the liberty of the gospel, that we have it not for a cloak of
maliciousnes, workyng (under the pretense of it) all naughtynes according to
our foul lusts and desires, as many gospellers and evangelical brethren do,
which be in deed no gospellers but bablers no true brethern but false
brethern, no christians but antichrists and sklau^ders to gods holy word. Let
us then be no feyned christians, but right christians and servants of God.
Let us honor and have in reverence all men. Fraternity.
Let us love fraternity not fraternity of monks, friars, nuns, and such
other cloystered and disguysed people which under ye cloak of fraternity
devoured pore wydowes houses and the lyuinges of other in their fratryes, and
of whom the christen people were fowly mocked and seduced while they persuaded
them that they could not do better then be of their brotherhode or fraternity,
which in deed was nothing else but a swarm of idle dranes that lived not by
the swette of their face (as gods commandment wylled them) but by other men's
labors under the pretense of long prayer, but let us love such brotherhode
and fraternity as gods word allows, which is yt we should love one an
another after a gentle and christian manner, al lordlines and proud lokes laid
down, and when we make a dinner or feast, not to call the rich which may quyte
us again but our poor christen brethern and systers which cannot acquit us,
but our father in heaven shall acquit it us. This is the fraternity or
brotherhode that Christ allows and that saint Peter does here speak of. Let
us then fear God which does prospere our obedience and helps us that we may
truly honor all men, that we may love brotherhode and give due honor to our
king which is our supreme hedde next under Christ none excepted, neither
bishop of Rome nor other. For if there were,
saint Peter would not have passed it over with silence. Neither is it to be
thought that Peter which was one of Christ's Apostles and that of the chefest
knew not the bishop of Romes power or his own power. He agnized no such
supremacy as the bishop of Rome does challenge unto him as S. Peter's
successor. Saint Peter byddeth us here fear god and honor the king. If the
bishop of Rome were to be honored next God and before kings, why does saint
Peter set the king next God? Yea why does he speak nothing at all of the
bishop of Romes authority? So ye se good christen people that saint Peter
makes nothing with the bishop of Rome, and yet he says he is his
successor. But what should I speak more of this matter? I doubt not but long
ago there is none of you but regards the bishop of Rome none otherwise then
an other bishop in his byshopryche ought to be regarded. Let him meddle with his
own flock, with us he has no thing a do, any otherwise then one christen man
has to do with an other. Let us therefore charitably pray for him that he may
execute his office in his own diocese and not enter into other men's officies.
Let us tha^ honor our king next unto God as our supreme hedde according to S.
Peter's counsel in this epistle, and according to the advice of saint Paul in
the place before alleged. Let also servants obey their masters not only if
they be good and courteouse, but also though they be froward, not doing
service to the eye (as Paul says writing to the Ephesians (and as they do
that go about to please men, phe. vi
but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart with
good will, seruinge the Lord and not men. For it is then thank worthy, says
saint Peter. Hitherto have I brefly declared unto you the meaning of this
Epistle. Now therefore good people if ye wol be true christians, if ye woll be
true feithfull persons, boost not of your feyth in words only, but declare in
your deeds and works that ye have the feith of Christ. Show your believe in
such works as this Apostle saint Peter does here exhort you unto, and then
shall we believe that you have the right belefe and faith in Jesus Christ, which
in whom so ever it is in, can not but fructify and bring forth fruct even as
sede does that is sown in the good ground, mat. xiij
some an hundredth fold some syxty fold some thyrty fold. And this feyth shall
justify you and make you the children of god and inheritours of his heavenly
kingdom which was prepared for you before the beginning of the world by the
father of heaven, Math. xxv..
to whom with the son and holy ghost be glory and praise eternally.

The Gospel on the third sunday after Ester. The.xvi. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument Of the spiritual reign and kingdom of Christ.
Jesus said to his disciples. After a while ye shall not se me, Ioh. vij.
and again after a while ye shall se me, for I go to the father, Then said
some of his disciples between themselves: what is this that he says unto us,
after while, ye shall not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me, and
that I go to the father? They said therefore: what is this that he says: after
a while? we can not tell what he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask
him, and said unto them: Ye inquire of this between your selves, because I
said after a while ye shall not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me.
Verily verily I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament, but contrary wise, the
world shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, Ioh. xx.
but your sorrow shall be turned to joy. A woman when she trauayleth, has
sorrow, because her hour is come. But as soon as she is delivered of the
child, she reme^breth no more the anguysh, for joy that a man is borne into
the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will se you again, and your
hertes shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you.

IN the Gospel of this present day (good christian people) it is first to be
considered and marked, how Christ shows his loving disciples of his cross
and passion that he should suffer for the redemption of the world, and also of
his most glorious vprysynge again from death to life. And furthermore how and
in what wise by his vprysyng or resurrection he should co^mence his reign and
have access to his father. And assuredly the preaching and fore showing
hereof was right necessary to the Apostles of Christ to be often made and
driven into their heads. For the flesh (as Christ says himself) is weak,
and again the articles of our religion be such that they surmount the
sklender capacity of man's wit neither can they easily be perceived. This is
the cause why Christ like a faithful master never cease to drive into his
disciples heads the su^me and content of our faith, to the intent he might fully
execute thoffice that he came for. Now this is his sentence and mind which he
declares to his disciples, Within a little while O you my loving scholars and
disciples I shall be betrayed unto the Iues, as I have often times heretofore
showed unto you that I should be condemned, Mat. xij
scourged, bobbed and at last nailed to the cross. And for as much as even like
as Jonas was in the whales belly three days and three nyghtes I must in likewise
be buried in the ground for the space of three days and three nyghtes: Christ's
reign.
Therefore for a little while in deed ye shall not se me. But again after a
little while, that is to wit, the third day after when I shall rise again ye
shall verily se me, how be it that shall not be long, for I must away to my
father and begin with him my spiritual raygne. Ephe. i. and.iiij.
Lo my dear friends with such words Christ teaches his apostles what manner
thing his kingdom should be and how ye coming is to ye same. Assuredly ye
kingdom or reign of Christ is none other thing tha^ that Christ has
conquered the world, syn, death, satan, and hell, and furthermore has taken of
his father all power both in heaven and in earth in such sort as hensforth he is
to be ye most puissaunt and mighty king over the mount Sion, Psalm. iiij
leading and gouernyng his subjects with the holy spirit of comfort. Into
this his kingdom it behooved him to enter by the cross, by sheding of his
most precious blood and by death, even as the prophet David long before
had prophesied of him, saying, he shall drink of the floude in the way, Psa.
cix.
and therefore he shall lift up his head. Now this spiritual kingdom was not
much known to his apostles. For they thought rather that the kingdom of
Christ should have been a worldly and an outward kingdom which thing they
still looked for, until the spirit was given them which taught them the knowledge
hereof, and how they ought to come unto it and to get it, and how to persevere
and continue in the same. If we therefore good brethren and systers be likewise
minded to enter into this kingdom, and by Christ to vanquysh sin, death,
Satan, and hell: we must needs acknowledge and take Christ for our Lord and
savior, for our king and high bishop, fastelye believing that we be
reconciled and made at one again with the father of heaven by his blood and in
suffering and doing the things that Paul speaks where he says. i. tim. ii.
If we shall suffer together with him: we shall also reign with him.

Second, An exe^ple of our ignorance
we have here (good people) an exemple of our ignorance and blyndnesse and
that in thapostles. For look how little they attained the mystery of the gospel
without the holy ghost: so little can we also attain by our own powers to
justice or soul health. But harke^ your selves out of the very text the
rudenes or ignorance of the appostles. Christ had showed them that after a
little while they should not se him, and again after a little while they should
se him again for he must go to his father. This must needs be understand of
his death and resurrection and of his spiritual kingdom. What it is to go to
the father. Ps. lxvij.
For assuredly to go to his father is nothing else, but to fulfill all
things (as it is declared in the.v. chapi. to the Ephesians) and by his holy
gooste to exalte gloryfie and save mankind, or (to speak the words of ye
prophet) dona dare hominibus to give gifts to men. But I pray you, how do
thapostles understand this? They talk and confer with themselves what means
that he says, after a while ye shall not se me: and again, after a while ye
shall se me, we know not (say they) what he speaks. Lo my friends the
apostles do here confess their ignorance and that they atteyne not to ye
words that he spoke albeit he had spoken often times before of his cross
death and resurrection unto them. Wherefore I do not a little wonder, what these
men mean which fight so strongly for the defense of their own natural and
carnal power sith they se here so manyfestly yt the apostles themselves which
had Christ so much conuersaunt among them could not by their own mere
power before the holy gooste came unto them, understand the spiritual
kingdom of Christ. So that it manifestly appears that while they woll be
doctors and teachers of other, they be them selves full of all blyndenes and
ignorance.

This therefore is the sum and effect of this place, that the flesh in such
things as perteine to justification can do no good, onles the holy ghost being
communitate by the word be received and had. For as the prophet Jeremy
records, Ier. xiij.
they shall be taught of God and not of themselves.

Thyrdly Christ does prevent his apostles when he espied them not to atteine
his words and that they would ask him the meaning of the same, saying unto
them in this wise. Of this ye do question among your selves that I said a
little and ye shall not see me and again a little and ye shall se me. Verily
verily I say unto you ye shall weep and lamente, but the world shall rejoice.
Ye shall sorrow but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Lo how Christ tendereth
his apostles, he shakes them not of for their rudenes and ignorance but most
gentlye instructs them, shewinge them how his format words ought to be
understand, saying unto them in this wise. Ye shall weep and be sorry but why?
because ye shall see your Lord and master apprehended and taken nailed upon
the cross and put to death. Cross and persecution
Then shall calamity and sorrow begin, and principally this shall trouble
you, that the world shall rejoice at your adversity and your masters
adversity. And even as Christ had spoken, so it came to pass concerning both
his own cross affliction and heuines and also his apostles. For do ye think
yt a little cross unto him when yt he was reviled and vpbrayded of the Iues
saying unto him, let God deliver him if he woll have him? I omytte and pass
over with silence the thing that he himself complayneth of where be says by
his prophet David, Psa. cxx
I am a worm and not a man a laughing stock or an obprobrie of men and the
refuse of the people. As many as behold me mock me, they shake their hedes at
me. What is this but to cast Christ into trouble and heaviness and not only him
but also his apostles and loving fre^des, which kept him company? And albeit
Christ does specially in this place speak of the time of his own cross
which should be the occasion of weping and mournyng to his apostles, yet his
mind was hereby to show what state and fortune is to be looked for in this
world unto all true christians. True christians no doubt can not but suffer in
this world much displeasures and persecution, whereas the wicked persons and
such as care neither for God nor deuell make good chere and live according to
their hearts ease. Prou. iij
Hereunto agrees Solomon in his proverbs saying. Cast not away the
chastisement of the lord. Lo ye se how Christ instructs his apostles and
armeth them with patience to abide and suffer thobprobriouse words scorns and
persecutions of the wicked persons and Antichrists. And that he wills the
apostles to do, the same he commands and speaks even unto us so many as
wolbe his disciples and folowers. Sorrow turned to heaviness.


Fourthly forasmoche as Christ has told his apostles of the sorrow and
heuines and of the persecutions that should happen unto them for his sake: he
now again does comfort them declaringe unto them what shall happen after
such storms of affliction. Your heuines says he shall be changed into joy, as
who should say the world as soon as they shall have killed me woll think they
have won the spurs and that they have put me down, but it shall not be so:
for ye third day after shall I rise again from death maugre their heads. I
shall comfort you, and in your heaviness pacify you, and make you glad. And
albeit, after that time also ye must still suffer much wrong and reproach for
my name and for the gospel sake: yet your affliction and cross shall not last
long, but eternal joy shall anon ensue and follow. An exemple of this
thing I wol ye take in a woman that traueleth with child: The parable of the
trauelynge woman.
A woman wha^ she traueleth ye know is in heaviness and pain, for her hour is at
hand. But as soon as she has brought forth into the world a child and is
delivered, she remembers no more her pain and grief for the joy she has of
the child that is borne into the world.

In semblable wise ye be now sad and heavy for my departure, but I shall come
see you again, and tha^ your hearts shall leap for joy and no man shall be
hable with all the displeasure he can do you, to take away this your joy from
you. Assuredly (my friends) this similitude which is here brought forth of
Christ, is excedingly comfortable. For first of all yt shows that persecution
trouble and cross must as surely follow the confession of the gospel, as it
is sure that a trauelyng woman cannot bring forth her child without sorrow and
grefe, but in the mean season the Christen man thorough the word of God must
needs afterward have great comfort and joy. Furthermore this trouble cross
affliction and persecution of the true christians shall not be continual and
everlasting, but it shall endure but for a season. And on the contrary part
the world shall joy for a season. But their joy shall not long last as
Christ himself in an other place witnesses where he says: Luc. vi.
Woe be to you which laugh here, for ye shall weep and lamente. Albeit in very
deed the christian man shall not be clean void of joy in this world but
what joy is this? I woll (says Christ) see you again, and your hearts shall
joy and no man shall take your joy from you. Undoubtedly the joy that Christ
here speaks of is the gladness and peace of conscience that the true
christians shall have in asmoche as they know that God shall be merciful unto
them through Christ and shall keep and preserve them into everlasting liefe
which was prepared for them before the world was made as Christ himself
witnesses by the father of heaven. To whom with the son and holy ghost be
thanks and.c.

The Epistle on the.iiij. sunday after Ester day. The.i. chapter of James.
Thargument. Saint James shows that Gods word is an heavenly gift and how
it ought to be received.
MOst derely beloved brethren, every good gift and every perfect gift, is from
above, and co^methe down from the father of lyghtes with whom is no
variablenes, neither is he changed unto darkness. Of his own will begat he
us with the word of troth, that we should be the first fruits of his
creatures. Wherefore (dear brethren) let every man be swyfte to hear, slow to
speak, slow to wrath. For the wrath of man works not that which is ryghteous
before God. Wherefore lay a part all fylthynes and superfluity of
malyciousnes, and receive with mekenes the word that is grafted in you which is
hable to save your souls.

The holy Apostle saint James (good christian brethren and systres) in the
epistle of this day does first open and declare unto us the causes of gods
word from whence it comes, and then he commends and sets out the
authority of the same as a mean or instrument, whereby through new birth or
regeneration we be the children of god and as saint James here speaks the
first fruits of gods creatures. As towching the causes of gods word, ye shall
understand that the gospel or word of God is no human thing, it is the
word neither of Emperor, King, Prince, Duke nor other temporal ruler,
neither is it any meritorious word which ca^ chance unto us for our own
deseruinges or merits, neither yet is it an vnpythy weak or imperfect word
which either of it self is not strong enough, or needs any other word to
the perfection and accomplyshement thereof, but it is a divine or heavenly word
a good gift of God and perfect, that is to say which has almighty god for
author of yt, which god gives of his mere grace and favor and which is
strong and full of efficacy and power according to saint Paul which says it
is the power of god to the health and sauetye of all such as believe the same.
Rom i.
It is perfect forasmoche as it neither needs any other word neither yet can
it suffer any other to be matched with it. Now al this tends to this purpose
and intent, that saint James woll commend and set forth unto us the authority
of gods word, lest by errynge and strayeng out of the way we might happen to
deceive our selves thynkyng it enough and sufficient to hear the word of god
with out any manner of regeneracion and new lyefe. For the word is a far
greater thing, it is even an heavenly divine good and perfect gift which
comes from above even from the father of lyghtnes, with whom is no
transmutation of light and of darkness, neither can he suffer that we should
mengle our dreams and darkness with his lyghtsome word, I mean our own
inue^tio^s, our blindness, our careless manners, our carnal liberty, our euel
liefe and so forth. We be also here admonished and taught of the final use of
gods word and wherefore it serves. Yt serves doubtless, that by it we should
be regenerate and be made the first fruits of the creature of god, which
comes not of our own deservings, but it is the work of god the father,
which does renew and regendre us with ye word of troth that we may be the
first fruits of his creature. Saint James therefore in this place wylleth us to
set aside and lay down all security and slauthfulnes toward the word of
god, and that we should pray god that he woll vouchesaue to open and disclose
unto us the understanding of his word, and that he wolle give us also
increase in the same, that we may hear the word with fruit, understanding
it, and being regenerate thereby, Nolite errare.
might be made the first fruits of ye creature of god. Do not then err my dear
brethren as though it were inoughe only to hear the word of god and not to
understand it with the heart, not to catch hold of it by faith, not to
work well outwardlye. Every good and perfyte gift is from above, that is to
say, the word of god is perfyte, it needs none other word to stey it, and
to make it perfyte. Yea thou ca^nest neither take it nor understand it
perfytly, onles it be given the of god. Yt is of it self most perfyte, and it
is it also which only can make us perfyte. Yt proceeds from the father of
lyghtes, that is to wit from god which is ye only cause of all light in such
sort that ye thing which we se in understanding the word, is of god. Yt is
also the gift of god that his word does lyghten, for the father is of
himself light. With whom is no variablenes nor change into darkness, that is
to say, he can not abide nor suffer that the light and darkness should be
confounded or myngled together. For he is the father of light only, and not of
darkness, Neither can he suffer that we should glory and brag of his word
as of a gift and in the mean season do the works of darkness. And by this
the apostle saint James does move us from evil works by thexemple of god
which is intransmutable and inconuertible that is to say he is not now light
now darkness. And therefore ought not we to follow both light and darkness
together. For wyllyngly be gatte he us with the word of his troth, that we
should be the first fruits of his creature. As though saint James would say.
Because god has regenerate us by the word of troth that we might be now his
first fruits, then seeing we be his first fruits, it becomes us not to follow
the darkness, it becomes us no more to lead our lyefe in vice and
naughtines, but it behooves us to be doers and not only hearers of the word. In
that he says, voluntarily, or of his own will, Voluntary.
he excludes marite. It is called the word of troth as well because of it self
and of the own nature it is true as because it makes other true. Secondly. Ye
shall diligently note and mark (good people) that thappostle James in the
latter part of this epistle does stir us to new liefe and to such works as
the word of god and regeneration would ask. For it is even due and annexed to
new birth that a man should do good works, as also Paul testifies saying.
Romans vi
What shall we then say, shall we abide in sin yt grace might abou^d? God
forbid. We that be dead to sin, how shall we hereafter live in the same?
Eph^. ij.
Also to the Ephesians he says. We be gods ha^dworke created in Christ to do
good works which god has prepared that we should walk in them. Col. iij.
And to the Colossians. Wherefore if ye have risen with Christ, seek ye the
things above, regard heavenly things and not erthly things. wherefore dear
brethren (says saint James) let every man be swyfte to hear, slow to
speak. By which words he forbyddeth chefely much talkyng and pratlynge whereby
in saint James time many did brag (as they do at this day) of the gospel
without changing of their former liefe and without lyuinge after the gospel.
Slow to speak.
Such persons saint James would have swyft to hear and slow to speak till
time they rightly understand the word and do deeds worthy for the same. He
wills us also to be slow to wrath, but he wol we should be meke and pacie^t.
For the wrath of man works not that which is rightouse before god, that is to
say. Ire or wrath and the effects thereof can not do the things which be just
before god, or which god requires of us. And saint James calls here the
justice of god, not that where by we be justified before God, but that which
god requires of us being already justified to the declaration of that justice
which justifies and which is gotten by faith. Wherefore casting away all
uncleanliness and superfluity of maliciousnes se ye receive with mekenes the
word that is grafte and implanted in you of god the father of heaven. In
mansuetudine.
Receive it (he says) with mekenes that is to say with all modesty and
reverence, not after a ryottouse and sediciouse sort as though ye would fight
for it, nor again with an euel and struglyng mind (as many Papists do) but
gladly thankfully and gently. For it is the thing which is hable to save your
souls. which thing also saint Paul proves wrytinge to the Romans where he
teaches that we be justified by faith by the ministry of gods word. Romans x.


Now therefore good people let us according to the meaning of this epistle
which I have brefly declared unto you imbrase this word of truth that saint
James does here speak of, and so embrace it that we may be counted doers and
not hearers only. Thus doing we shall declare our selves to be the chosen
people of God and we shall enjoy at last the kingdom prepared for us of
almighty God. Who be lauded and.c.

The Gospel on the.iiij. sunday after Ester. the.xvj. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument. Christ promyseth to send the holy gooste. and of his office.
Jesus said to his disciples. Now I go my way to him that sent me, and none
of you asks me whyther I go. And because I have said such things unto you,
your hearts are full of sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you the troth, it is
expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, that co^forter will
not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is
come, he will rebuke the world of sin, and of ryghtousnesse, and of
judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me. Of ryghtousnes, because I
go to my father, and ye shall se me no more. Of judgment, because the prince
of this world is judged already. I have yet many things to say unto you, but
ye cannot bear them away now. Howbeit, when he is com (which is the spirit
of troth) he will lead you into al troth. He shall not speak of himself, but
what so ever he shall hear, that shall he speak and he will show you things
to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show
unto you. Why tholy ghost was promised.


THe chief part of this day gospel good brethren and sistres consistethe in
the declaration of the office of the holy ghost which for that purposis sent
of Christ that he might reuelate and open the spiritual kingdom of Christ
and might detect the blyndnes of the world concerning this kingdom. For the
spiritual kingdom of Christ because it consysteth in feyth is not perceived
of the world, no more then is his justice and beatitude, forasmoch as the
world, because it is led with reason, requires an other kingdom, an other
justice, and consequently an other bless, even such as be most agreeable to the
judgment of reason and may be seen with the carnal eyes and groped with the
fleshely hands. Such things because reason allows them, they flatter the
world, and they be lettes and impedimentes, that the true spiritual reign or
kingdom of Christ can never be rightly understood of the world. And
assuredly the disciples did here gayly represente the world, for they also did
as yet after a carnal sort trust and hope upon the carnal presence of
Christ as though he had come into the world to set up some carnal reign or
Empire that all the world should have looked upon and seen.
Wherefore when they hard Christ say he would go again to his father from
whom he was sent, their hearts were cold and replenished with care and
heaviness. As though they should say unto him: We trusted that thou woldeste
have commenced and set up here a galant and triumphante kingdom, and now thou
say that thou wolt depart hence to thy father. Assuredly my brethren all we
be even thus naturally affected and disposed before the sendinge of the holy
ghost that we still dream upon some carnal thing concerning Christ's
kingdom. But when the holy ghoost come, he shall teach us that the kingdom of
Christ consists in feyth and spirit and not in an outward dominion or
worldly power. The^ also shall our justice shrynke and quake which we feyne we
have before the lightenyng of the holy ghost, and our judgment shall appear
whereby according to reason we judge of the reign of Christ. Finally also our
sins shall be disclosed concerning our incredulity or misbelefe which we
had toward Christ the only Savior, when we se that those be sins which
before we iuged for righteousness as for exemple the affiaunce and trust in our
works and such like. And lest a man should feyne to himself some peculiar
vision and illumination I wot not what, ye shall understand that the holy ghost
comes when the word is preached which word no doubt is the work of the
holy ghost. This holy ghost does lyghten us and leads us to the knowledge of
gods word. But now I go etc.
Now therefore (says Christ) I go my wey to him that sent me, to thinte^t I
might come again and begin a new and spiritual reign in reuerting by
death. And notwithstanding that I say unto you that I must depart and go my
ways from you, ye ask me not whether I go. As who should say, if ye were not
blinded with the care of the flesh and sought not for worldly things, ye
would undoubtedly have asked me whether I go, sith I told you I must depart.
Nevertheless because I have said such things unto you, your hearts be full of
sorrow, not so much because of my departure, as because ye se that ye shall
lack those outward and worldly pleasures and promocions which ye hoped to
have received in my kingdom. Expedi^ vobis.
Howbeit I tell you the troth, it is expedient for you that I go my way, as
who should say, your opinion concerning my reign is false and clean wrong.
But I wole show you the treuth why I must depart, partly because ye may
understand what manner kingdom my kingdom is, and partly what ye ought to look
for in it. I say it is expedient and profitable for you that I depart.
Brethren here ye see that all things which Christ does, he does the same for
our vtilite and profit, insomoche that even his departure out of this world
yt is to say his death was so profitable to us that without it we should
never have been delivered out of our damnable state of everlasting death. He
adds. For if I go not away, that comforter shall not come unto you. The
profit of Christ's death.
Lo good people in this place is contained the great utility and profit of
the death and departure of Christ unto his father. For therefore departed he out
of this world, because he would begin a spiritual kingdom, which
nevertheless could not help, if he had not also sent the holy ghost. For
where there should be a spiritual kingdom, and we yet carnal, we could in
no wise understand nor perceiueit. No more then even at this day we
understand it but by the help and aid of the holy gooste. Wherefore let us
remember that Christ has for our cause sent the holy ghost which might lead
us into all truth that is to wite, which might disclose and open unto us our
sins that do naturally stycke in us and yet nevertheless we take them for no
sins, which holy ghost also might bewrey our ryghtuousnes to be before god
more unrighteous, and finally which might show the deuell to be iuged by
the ouerture and openyng of the gospel, all which things noman should have
understood, had not Christ sent his holy ghost, Actu. i.
whom in this place he surely promises should come and he came in deed
according to his promise upon the day of Pentecoste as it is read in the
first chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Now the holy ghost is called a
comforter which in the Greake is called Paracletus of his effect or office
forasmuch as his office and feate is even from time to time so long as this
spiritual kingdom shall endure, Paracletus quid fit.
to comfort men's consciences in this world. When this comforter comes, says
Christ, he shall rebuke the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.
Three lettes.
Here ye se good people, three lettes or obstacles, which by thoffice of tholy
ghost must be moved awey to thintente this spiritual kingdom might be
understand, that is to say, sin which is, not to believe in god, and this
thing noman does understand by his propre nature, and yet onles it be
understand noman can have access to the kingdom of Christ. The second is
the ignorance of the true justice which pleases god, and this also can no man
take nor perform of himself. The third is judgment, whereas we understand not
naturally that the deuell is iuged by the disclosing of the gospel. These three
lettes and impedimentes be roted naturally in every man's mind which no man can
understand of himself or take them away by his own power. Wherefore to the
doing hereof is the holy ghost promised in this gospel. Now for asmoch as the
kingdom of Christ is hear conuersaunt among men which be sinners and which
of nature can do naught but sin but love their own rightuousenes and judge
after their own faschion of the gospel: therefore the holy ghost in executinge
his office does not move the to depart out of this world that thou may
have no occasion to sin, neither woll he that civil justice or humane
judgment should not be executed in this world, but he teaches the, truly to
know, what thing sin is.

For every man of his own brain, and by his own power and wit feyneth this
or that to be sin, as it has been sufficiently proved under ye kingdom of
the Bishop of Rome. But when the holy gooste comes and repryueth us by gods
word, our own imaginacions and fantasyes destroyed, then we know that to be
sin which no man judged before to be sin. So we know now that it is
sin, if a man believe not in only Christ concerning justice, which thing
before the receyuynge of the holy gooste none of us all knew. In semblable
wise it is to be spoken of ryghtousnes and judgment, which two things, we
utterly co^sydered not before ye openyng of the gospel, whereby the holy gooste
reproves the world. But lest ye should suspecte this interpretacion to be not
grounded of scripture, harken how Christ himself expouneth this thing: Of
sin
The holy gooste (he says) shall rebuke the world of sin. Why? because
they believe not (says Christ) on me. Loo how Christ expouneth himself what
he means by sin, that is to wit incredulity or mysbeleue toward him,
which only thing does condemn men, like as on the contrary part the only
belefe in Christ saves.
The papists have wrested this text (as they do al other) to the mysbeleue of
ye Turks and Sarasynes, and such people as be far from us, but they ought
to remember that in this behalf they do sin worse then the Turks, forasmoch
as they would be counted Christianes, and yet in ye mean season they labor to
be made rightouse and just before god by their own works without faith in
Christ. Of this abominable sin, the world knows nothing at all. Of
ryghtuosnesse shall the holy ghost rebuke ye world. Why? because says
Christ, I go to my father, and ye shall se me no more: That is to say,
because I shall begin my new reign, wherein an other manner of justice then
ye ymagine, must be required and shall be of valor before god. Of judgment the
holy ghost shall rebuke the world, why? because (says Christ) the Prince of
this world is judged already. Judgment
And he calls judgment the blyndnes of man whereby the world allows
naturallye the reygne and the works of Satan, for the world has a corrupt
judgment by Adams fall, so that it sees not what things god aloweth and what
not. Adhuc multa habeo.
But (says Christ) I have yet many things to speak unto you meaning of his
cross and of his glory but by reason of your weakness and infirmytie ye are
not able to bear them now. As who should say ye be yet carnal and therefore
ye perceive not the things that be of the spirit But when the spirit of
troth that is the holy ghost shall come he shall lead you into all troth.
The spirit shall teach you things spiritual. He shall transform you and of
carnal persons shall make you goostly. For surely because ye be yet carnal,
ye cannot perfytly perceive the scriptures concerning my death and gloriouse
resurrection, which is to be fulfilled for your rede^ptions sake. Here ye se
plainly good people, yt this place makes nothing at al for the confirmation
of the papisticall traditions but rather against them. For I pray you what is
this troth that the holy ghost shall teach you? Man's traditions? no not so.
In them is no certayntie. It is Christ and his word that is the only troth.
Wherefore he shall teach only Christ and the word of god, for this is all
truth. Chrysostom.
For (as Chrysostom says) the gospel conteyneth al together. And the office
(says he) of a good preacher is truly to prosecute all that is in his
commission and not to change,
put to, or take away any thing. But this ye Bishops of Rome in times paste
have done, and yet at this day do presume to do. Wherefore they are no
interpretours but deprauers of scripture, no vicars of Christ, but of the
deuell. They speak of their own heddes their own inventions and dreams,
whereas the holy ghost which here is promised by Christ unto us shall speak
nothing of himself, but what so ever he shall hear, that shall he speak,
that is to say, he shall speak none other word or gospel, only he shall open
and declare the word that is already spoken by Christ. This do not the
papists, for they expou^de not Christ's word, but they bring another word
besides Christ's word. This spirit of troth shall also show of things to
come, that is to wit, of the spreading abroad of Christ's gospel throughout the
hole world even unto the Gentilles or hethe^ persons as well as to the Jews,
whom yet the Iues despised and took for refuse and abiecte persons and counted
them selves only for Gods elect and chosen. This holy ghost shall glorify
Christ, that is, he shall expoune him, he shall make him clearer and shall
auaunce and set him forth. But the bishop of Rome does clean contrary for he
obscureth and darkeneth Christ and his doctrine. This holy ghost (says
Christ) shall receive of mine and shall show unto you. And all that the father
of heaven has are mine. This is to say good people that the holy spirit of god
wherwyth every christen man must be renewed (according to Christ's
communication with Nicodemus) shall breath or inspire nothing into the minds
of christian folk but that which Christ's gospel and word wylleth. Ioh. iij.
He teaches no new thing Wherefore my friends, if we woll be true christians
not only in name but also in deed, let us put of our carnal and old man, and
let us be led with the spirit of god which is here called ye spirit of
troth Which spirit by the instrument of gods word as here is declared shall
open and disclose unto us all troth necessary to our salvation and soul
health. Which thing also the ancient doctor Ihon Chrysostom witnesses,
Chrysostom in cap. mat xxij. homi. xli.
saying. What so ever is sought to the soul health the same is al together
contained and accomplished in holy scripture. He that is ignorant shall find
there enough to learn. He that is stubborn and a sinner shall find there the
skourgies of the judgment to come that he may fear. He that labors shall
find there the gloryes and promises of lief everlasting, by chawyng whereof, he
may be more and more kyndled to do good works as becomes a christian man to
do. Let us pray then to god with pure hearts that he woll vouche save to send
us this holy ghost this co^forter unto our minds which may open unto us al
troth. To whom be glory and praise immortally and.c.

The Epistle on the.v. sunday after Ester. The first chapter of saint James.
Thargument Saint James exhorts christen men to declare their feyth with good
works. And he shows what thing true Religion or devotion is.
MOst dear beloved brethren, every good gift and every perfyte gift is from
above and comes down from the father of lyghtes, with who^ is no variablenes,
neither is he changed unto darckenes. Of his own will begat he us with the
word of troth, that we should be the first fruits of his creatures. Wherefore
(dear brethren) let every man be swyft to hear, slow to speak, slow to
wrath. For the wrath of man works not that which is ryghtouse before god.
Wherefore lay aparte all fylthynes and superfluity of maliciousnes, and
receive with mekenes the word that is grasted in you, which is hable to save
your souls.

THe holy Apostle of God saint James good christen people in the epistle of
this day does discern the true hearers of gods word from the false hearers.
And ye shall understand that the true hearers of gods word be they which take
it with faith, who be the true hearers of gods word mat. xiij
which understand it in their heart and which do garnishe it outwardely with
such works as be prescribed and appointed them to do, and (as the parable of
Christ declares) which do hear the word of god and understand it, which
also bring forth fruit some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, some thyrty
fold. Psalm. i.
And it is he (according to the words of the prophet David) which is like a
tree planted by the river side, bearyng his fruit in due time. But the false
hearers of the word be they, the false hearers.
which hear it, but they receive it not with faith, they understand it not
in their heart, neither do they furnyshe and declare it to the world with good
works and as the parable of ye sower says, they suffer the devil to take
the word out of their heart. These be only temporal hearers and but for a
season, they be but starters, they stycke not by it. They be also such as when
they have perceived and taken the true word of god, they choke it with the care
of this world and with the disceitfulnes of riches and so make the word
unfruitful, for they receive it not with full mind but by snatches and myndyng
other things, even as he which beholds his bodily face in a glass, and
forthwith goes his way and forgets by and by what manner thing it was.
Estote factores verbi.
Be ye then doers of the word, that is to wete, declare with good works that ye
truly understand it, and be not hearers only, as who should say. Ye that
hear the word of god with your ears and do boste and glory in the knowledge
thereof, and nevertheless be occupied and entangled in other matters ye do nothing
else but deceive your selves which thing he declares with a wonderful goodly
and apt similitude.
For like as it nothing helps a man to stand before a glass and to se him
self fair, when he goes away forthwyth, and forgets strayte his beawtie,
So it helps a man nothing at all to hear gods word, onles he receive it in
his heart, and take hold of it by faith, depely printyng in his mind the
beauty thereof, and be delyted therein, and finally declare with good works
that he does truly understand it. Furthermore he that stands before a glass
may well glory and brag of his beautye for a time: So he that hears the
word may well rejoice and glory of it. But when the glass is taken away
anon the beauty is out of the mind. So in time of necessity and
tribulation, if the true glass of gods will that is to wit the word of God be
taken away and not co^sydered, anon the promyses and gospel that is to say
the glad tidings concerning our redemption is out of mind, the beauty of
gods goodness is forgotten, and finally the will and pleasure of the Lord is
neglected. But on the contrary part who so looks in the perfyte law of
liberty and continues therein, if he be not a forgetful hearer but a doer of
the work, the same shall be happy in his deed. As who should say: He that
rightly hears and under stands the word and does express the same with
worthy works in such wise as he shows himself to have a firm and sure
understanding of the same whereby he may vaynquish and chase away death,
Satan, and sin: he shall be happy in his deed or work, he shall be declared by
his deeds to be a justified person and saved. For deeds and works in christian
men be testimonies and witnesses of our iustifyeng faith and that we do
understand ryghtly and truly gods word. Augus.
For (as saint Augustine affirms) faith ought to go before works. Yea he
declares plainly ye works without faith can not be good, and he allegeth for
his purpose that text of saint Paul: To. iiij.
Omne quod non est ex fide peccatum est. That is to say, what so ever is not
of faith, the fame is sin. Chrysostom de fide et Lege.
Hereunto also agrees Chrysostom where he says: Faith ought to shine before
works, and works must be the handmaydes or waiting servants and folowers
of faith.

True religion.
Second, in this epistle saint James does teach us (good people) what the right
and perfyte religion of a christian man or woman is. If any man (says saint
James) woll seem to be religiouse among you, not refraynynge his tongue, but
seducynge and deceyuynge his own heart, this man's religion is vain.
Pure and undefiled religion before God the father is this: to vysite the
fatherless and wedowes in their adversity, and to keep thy self unspotted in
the world. Lo good people here ye have a true definicion of religion. It is
not to be locked up in stone walls and to depart from the company of the
world, as those disguysed and false religiouse persons lately in this realm
did, but it is to be conuersaunt among men without spotte or reproufe, it is
to vysite orphans and fatherless children, to go and succor the poor
wydowes, to go about and to win ye people to Christ, to fysh men's souls and
to bring them into the kingdom of Christ out of the tyranny and raygne of
Antichriste. I call Antichrist whosoever teaches other devotions and
holynesses then Christ did ordeyne. For he that is not with Christ is against
Christ. Wherefore good brethren and systers, let us be according to saint James
monition here, not only hearers but also doers of the word, but of what
word? of the bishop of Romes word, of Antichrists word which is contrary to
Christ's unspotted and sincere word? no but of gods word, to the intent we may
look into the perfyte law which breaks out of fre spirit and faith into
works of charity. Let us embrace ye true religion that is here prescribed and
set forth unto us Let us vysite the orphans, the desolate wydowes and our
poor neighbors that be destitute of comfort and relyfe. This let us do of a
fre and frank heart not as constraynedly but wyllyngly and gladly. This doing
we shall declare by our deeds that we have the lively faith that shall justify
us in gods sight. In these our deeds, but not by these our deeds nor through
these our deeds, we shall as saint James assures us be happy, and so happy
that noma^ shall be able to take our joy and bliss from us. For we shall not
only live here in this world in peace of conscience and in the kingdom of
Christ, but we shall also in an other world inherit the unspeakable joy and
felicity of heaven, where lives and raygneth the father the son and holy
ghost perpetually Amen.

The Gospel on the.v. Sunday after Ester day which is the next sunday before
the cross days, the.xvi. Chapter of Ihon.
Thargument Prayers are hard through Christ.
Jesus said to his disciples, after a while ye shall not se me, and again
after a while ye shall se me, for I go to the father. Tha^ said some of his
disciples between them selves: what is this that he says unto us, after a
while ye shall not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me: and that I go
to the father? They said therefore: what is this that he says, after a while?
we can not tell what he says. Jesus perceived that they would ask him, and
said unto them. Ye inquyre of this between your selves, because I said after a
while ye shall not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me. Verily,
verily I say unto you: ye shall weep and lament, but contrary wise, the world
shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to joy. A woman
when she traueyleth has sorrow, because her hour is come. But as soon as she
is delivered of the child she reme^breth no more the anguyshe for joy that a
man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will se
you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take
from you.

IN the first part of the Gospel of this day (good people) is a commau^deme^t
and promise set forth unto us whereby we be allured and sturred to pray. The
virtue of prayers
And surely since a christian person can no where have better coumforte in such
things as he is troubled in, and in time of necessity and adversity, then
instantly to pray and to open his affliction and grefe with ardent peticion and
humble suit to God, who only will and can help him in his distres and give
him comfort, undoubtedly it is right necessary that we thoroughly perceive and
know the institucion and intent of this present gospel, to the intent we might
be the more inclined and disposed unto prayer. For who would reiecte and
despice prayer as a thing little necessary, seeing it is so much auaunced and
commanded by Christ unto us? Yea this commandment does as straytly bind
us, as the first commandment of the Decalogie does. This to be true we may
se in another place where Christ byddeth us always to pray and that without
ceasing or intermission. lu. xviij.
Mark that it is necessary then and convenient that we should pray. Wherefore
as we be by special word and commandment of Christ drawn and enforced to
pray: So also this gospel allureth us to the same with a special promise. For
it is here promised us by Christ that our prayers that is to wete the prayers
of christen persons shall not be vain ne frustrate, but that we shall be surely
herd and shall obtain our suits. For why else would Christ have bound this
his word and promise with an oath, saying, verily verily, What so ever ye ask
the father in my name he shall give it you. Also ask and it shall be given you.
Do ye not hear how our prayers shall not be vain nor frustrate? Who then would
now be slothful to pray seeing Christ by his special commandment has
wylled us to the same? Forthermore, ye shall here understand that because we
should not think that the labor of our prayers should be in vain: therefore
does Christ here in this place allure us with a notable and special promise as
is before remembered. But herin are two things to be considered and pondered of
us. The one is yt we should pray in none other name the^ in only Christ's name.
we must pray only in the name of Christ.
Now we pray in the name of Christ when we approach to god in the faith of
Christ and do comfort our selves with the trust and affiaunce in him, that is
to wete, that he only is our mediator or advocate, by whom all be forgyuen us,
and without whom we can deserve nothing but gods indignacion and wrath. For I
pray you what saint, what holy man is there either in heaven or earth which
sueth makes intercession and is mediator to the father of heaven for us in
such wise as Christ is? Assuredly it is Christ only by whose merit and
intercession not only we obtain pardon of our sins and ryghteousnes but also
he takes us in the place of his brethren communicating unto us the room or
office of presthoode as testifyeth also S. Peter in his first epistle so that
we also by authority and virtue hereof may likewise have access to the father
and seek of him in our afflictions grace help and comfort. i, Pet. ij.
This thing confirms also Christ himself where he says I say not unto you
that I shall be an intercessour or suter for you to my father. For the father
himself loves you because ye have loved me in beleuyng that I am come from the
father. Wherefore good christen brethren sith we have such an advocate and
mediator for us yea sith we also our selves be admitted by Christ to the
function and office of prestes: I pray you why should we so much depe^de upon
confidence of others to be means and suitors for us? This thing also does the
ancient and holy father S. Chrysostom full well declare in his homely De
profectu euangelij Where he writes in this wise. Chrysostom.
Thou shall need no patrones or advocates with god, neither shall thou need to
run hither and thither to flatter other that they may entreat for the, but
albeit thou be alone and have no patron or intercessour, but prayest to god by
thy self alone, yet shall thou thoroughly obtain thy suit and demand. For
god does not so easily grant when other men pray for us as when we pray our
selves although we be full of many vices and sins. Lo what this holy doctor
says. He certifieth the that thou art sooner herd when thou praiest for thy
self then when thou make other to pray for the. Theophilactus in Johan. ca.
xv.
Which thing Theophilactus affirms also, where he says. Mark that albeit
saints or holy men pray for us, as the Apostles did for the woman of Cananee,
yet we be rather herd when we pray for our selves.

Furthermore we must take heed good people that we be suitors unto god in our
prayers for nothing that is repugnaunt to the glory of god to our own
salvation and to gods will. For in this behalf that god almighty will neither
admytte nor hear our prayers it is manifestlye showed by that he teaches us
in our pater noster to say. Fiat voluntas tua, Math. v.
thy will be done. Wherefore we shall then be hard when in our necessities we
desire and require gods help having respect ever and casting our eyes to his
will to his commandment and promise and not alleging our own worthynes
(which is nothing at all) but only the merit of Christ, then I say our
petition and suit shall surely be admitted and hard. Forasmoch as all the
promises in Christ be est and amen that is to say most certain and sure, ij.
cor. i.
as Paul in his second epistle to the Corinthians writes. Moreover because
oftentimes we be so untoward and folyshe, that we cannot espy our own
necessity and need: Therefore Christ will likewise teach us what manner thing
our petition ought to be, To. viij.
(pray says he) that your joy may be full. What joy I pray you is this?
undoubtedly it is no worldely or corporal leaping or daunsing and reioising,
but it is a spiritual joy whereof saint Paul makes mention where he says.
Phi. iiij.
Reioise in the lord. And again I say reioise. From whence then proceeds
this joy? Surely of faith. But how is this? Truly if at any time I hear the
gospel taught wherein is offeryd by Christ to all men remission of sin: I
must believe it if I woll that that sermon or preaching of Christ should do me
good. But believe it I cannot, onles by the word the holy ghost be given me
which may work such feith in me. That if the word and the spirit workethe
in me faith, I need not to doubt any thing at all herein, but that Christ
has not only perdoned me my sins in such wise that they can no more be
called into judgment and condemn me, From whence the peace of conscience
springs.
but also that he has reconciled the father in heaven unto me and made him my
special good lord and father in such sort as he now knowledgeth and reputeth
me for his son and that he wol preserve and conserve me unto everlasting
liefe, and from hens afterward spryngeth out peace of conscience unto me and
the spiritual joy whereof in this gospel our savior Christ speaks, but
such joy ought alweyes to grow and to be increased if it wolbe made
perfect and full. ij. pe. iij.
Wherefore that it may grow and with perpetual increase wax greater and
greater, undoubtedly god of his most bountiful mercy will bring to pass, if
so be we instantly call upon him with co^tynuall prayers. Sith therefore (good
christen people) Christ has given us in commandment that for such joy of
heart we should pray to thentente it might be made consu^mate and fully
perfect, we must here obey him that we may truly say with ye blessed virgin
Marye. Luce. ij.
Et exultauit spiritus meus in deo salutari meo. That is to say. My spirit
reioyseth in god my savior.

Finally (my brethren) Christ does here again setoute the rudenes and
ignorance of his apostles before their eyes, and confesses that his lessons
and teachinges have been hitherunto but as ridles and parables unto them, and
that to the understanding of such things as he taught them it was necessary
that he should not speak unto them in parables and ryddelles, but that he
should speak of his father unto them openly and freely, that is, that it was
necessary that he should send them the holy ghost who might make them able to
attain his words.

And suerly good people this kind of ignorance and blyndnes was not only in
the apostles before they were confirmed with the holy ghost, Psa. xiij Ioh. iij.
but it is also naturally planted in all men in so much that there is not one
which can either understand or work any thing that good is, onles he be
transformed by the spirit of god unto a new creatute. We think our selves
nevertheless very prudent and wise even as the apostles did in this gospel
saying, lo now thou speakeste freely and openly, neither speak thou any
parable, now I know that thou know al things. etc. But no doubt this was a
very folyshe rashness and arrogauncie even as that was, that Peter did when he
would go with Christ both into prison and into death by which rash promise he
shamed himself when before the cock crewe he denied his Master Christ thryse.

Wherefore all this hole thing is written for our cause that we should not
arrogau^tly presume to take any thing upon us rashely and temerariously, but
that we should rather walk in an humble mind and spirit, confessinge and
knowledginge continually that we be both miserable and ignoraunte persons in
such things as concern Christ's glory, forasmoche as without the spirit of
god we can never understand the mystery of the gospel. For assuredly the
wisdom of the flesh is folly before god, and the more knowledge it boasts and
pretendith in spiritual and divine things, so much the more is the folly of it
declared and uttered. Let us then my good brethren and sisters in all our
necessities and troubles pray according to the words of this gospel, but to
whom? To the father of heaven. In whose name? In Christ's.
And what shall we pray for? that our joy may be perfyte and full. What is
this to say? that by Christ our sin being taken away, our conscience may
be quiet and sure of everlasting life, which is a right perfect joy. Let us
pray that we may be taught openly and plainly without proverbs or parables,
that is, yt we may receive the holy spirit of comfort into our souls which
in gods word may instruct us of all troth. Which grant us God the father
of heaven. Qui viuit et regnat in secula seculorum. Amen.

A sermon in the Rogation weke or a brief instruction for the weak in the
faith what they ought to do in these days of Rogation.
GOod people this weke is called the Rogation weke, because in this weke we be
wo^te to make solemn and general supplycatio^s or prayers which in Greek be
called Lytanyes. litanies.
Now therefore I exhort you and in the Lords name I require you, that in all
your Litanies or supplications ye wol so do, that the thing may agree to the
name, and that this our Litanye, this our supplication and rogation may be
made with such true and ernest faith, that we may admonish god and put him in
mind of his fatherly promises. He that will not endeavor himself to do this,
let him tarry still at home, let him keep him and absteyne from this holy
processio^ lest he happen to iritate and to anger god more, then other men
shall be hable to pacify and still him. The abuse of these days.
Albeit (alack for pity) these solemn and accustomable processions and
supplications, which we use commonly as in this weke to make, be now grown
into a right foul and detestable abuse, so that the most part of men and
women in these solemn days of supplication do come forth rather to set out
and show themselves and to pass the time with vain and unprofitable tales
and merry fables than to make general supplications and prayers to god for their
necessities. I let pass the other enormities and vices, which on these days
be customably perpetrate and done. I will not speak of the rage and furour of
these vplandysh processions and gangynges about, which be spente in ryottynge
and in belly chere. Furthermore the banners and badges of the cross be so
irreverently handled and abused that I maruayle greatly God destroy us not all
in one year. What shall I say? Surely they are now grown into such abuse that
there be far greter causes to take them away and utterly to abrogate them
with the other holidays, than there were in times past to institute and ordeyne
them. And assuredly it is the part of bishops, of parsons, of vycares, and
curates, yea and also of ye profane Magistrates to se that those unchristian
and ungodly abuses be avoided and taken away, or, if the thing be past
remedy, utterly to abolish and abrogate these letanies and supplicacio^s thus
abused. For assuredly it were much better and more christian like,
that christian men and women were gathered and assembled together in the
church there to make their supplications and prayers to god, than after such an
hethe^ and unruly fashion to mock God and his holy signs. And (no doubt) such
as be curates and herdmen of Christ's church shall render a sharp reckoning
and accomptes to God for wynkynge at these abuses.

Now in these Rogation days, What is to be demanded in supplications.
two things are to be asked of God and prayed for. The first is, that God of
his goodness and cleme^cy woll defend and save ye corn in the field, and that
he woll purge the air, to the intent that not only the lap of the earth may be
replenished with seasonable rain, and that the air may be tempered to the
utility and furtheraunce of the corn, but also that it be not infected and
that by the eating and drinking thereof neither we nor our bestes do catch
any pestilence, pox, fevers, or other diseases. i. Timo. iiij.
For as testifyeth saint Paul in his first epistle to Timothy, gods creatures
as meat, drink, corn,
and such other things be sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer. For
from whence come pestilencies and the other kinds of diseases and of
syckenesses than that the noisome spirits do infecte the aier? And by reason
hereof commonly our corn and grain be peryshed, infected, and blasted, and so
we (God permyttynge the same) by eating and drinking our own grain do get
us death and greuouse affections of the body. For this cause be certain
gospels read in the wide field among the corn and grass, that by the
virtue and efficacy of gods word, the power of the wicked spirits which keep
in the air may be broken, and the air made pure and clean, to the intent the
corn may remain untouched and not infected of the said hurtful spirits but
serve us for our use and bodily sustenaunce. Wherefore (my dear brethren) we
ought to make these solemn processions with ernest minds and with all
reverence, and in especial we ought to handle and to hear the word of God
with devout and religiouse minds. Thus doing, doubt we nothing, but that
gods word wol utter and execute his virtue upon the corn and air, that those
noisome spirits of the air shall do no hurt at all to our corn.

Second, this is also most of all to be desired and humbly to be prayed for
in these rogation days, that God woll vouchsaue to bless his creatures not
only (as before is said) for the commodity of our bodies, but also for our
souls health, lest our miserable souls do herby catch unto themselves
pestiferous infection and damnable contagion. I mean as thus: The poison and
infection of the soul is sin. Now when God pours upon us plentyful croppes
and increase of all things: forthwyth we being most ingrate and unkind
persons do vylaynously give our selves to daily bankettes and feastynges and
to most beastly fyllynge of our pa^chies, hereof by and by ensues ydelnes, and
of it spring whordomes, adulteries, blasphemies, cursings, periuries,
murders, wars, and all myschiefe, so that it were much better for us if our
corn and cattle did not so happily and plenteously prosper and take. So the
thing that we demanded in our processions and supplications we do find, for
god makes us here aboundauntly in this behalf to enjoy our requests and
desires and does minister al things to the body with a large blessing,
which thing nevertheless is most present poison and pestilence to the soul
and it is the occasion of great myschefe. For doubtless surfettynge and ydelnes,
of all noughtynes be the rotes, and the fountaynes of all euels. But alake,
alake, this goostly infection we nothing at all regard, we pass not of it. No
man regards the spiritual pestilence.
The pestilence which noyeth the body we eschew it with great care and we study
to drive it away with often prayers and supplications laynge unto it all the
medicines and remedies we can deuyse. But in this spiritual pestilence we go
still on and proceed without care or thought and even for this purpose as it
seems we desire of God large sustentacion and abundance of al things and to
be delivered from the corporal pestilence and infections that we may the more
freely and aboundau^tly endure after a delicate sort in ye spiritual
infection. But assuredly (my friends) almighty god the sercher of hearts while
he seyth us slepynge in such careless wise and that we nothing regard this so
pestilent a pestilence: he also winketh at our destruction according to our
own vows and requests, he grants us copye and abundance of all things
and so blyndeth us with the prosperous success of all things and drowneth us
in the synke and puddell of sins till at last our sins by long use run
into a custom and that the name of sin be forgotten.

Wherefore most dearly beloved brethren and systers albeit every day we ought
to exhibit supplications and prayers to the Lord with a rough chastisement of
our body to drive away from us so horrible floudes of all myschefe, namely in
this region most addict and given to co^messacions, to bankettynges, to
reuelynges, to surfettynges, to ydelnes, and to the vices that ensue of them to
the intent that god ones at last may lyghten us with his grace that we may use
his gifts to the health of our soul and to the holsomnes of our body, in such
sort, as these goods of the country, I mean our corn and cattle might be
auaylable as well to the tuicion and defense of our body as to our souls
health. But as I have said and say again God has made us so blind and so
unsavory, The abuse of gods gifts.
that we are waxen plain Epicures utterly void of all fear or care of God
most shamefully abusing his gifts to the riot of the body and destruction
of the soul. And for as much as this our detestable wickedness and abuse of
this godly institucion is not amended but waxes yerly worse and worse,
therefore God has given us up in to a disalowed mind so yt we make these
letanyes and rogation days by our sins utterly unprofitable and unfruitfully
unto us. Romans i.
Behold how angrye and how sore displeased God is with us, neither is there
any to aswage and appeace his fury, sith our letanyes, our supplications,
processions, and prayers wherewyth we rather mock god tha^ worship him,
spending our time and abusing his benefits in this wise: be rather
kyndlynges and nouryshmentes of gods indignation and vengeance, tha^
mitigacions and swagynges thereof. God grant therefore and be presently at hand
and assystent to us (good people) that ones at last we may come home again to
our selves and to return to the heart and that we may being instincted and
kyndled with ernest and sure faith put from us his wrath and displeasure, to
whom be praises and glory, in secula seculorum Amen.

The epistle on the Ascension day. The first chapter of the acts of the
Apostles.
Thargument. Christ's Ascension into heaven is here described.
IN the former treatise (Dear Theophylus) we have spoken of all that Jesus
began to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, after that
he, through the holy ghost, had given commandment unto the Apostles whom he
had chosen, Ioh. xx.
to whom also he showed himself alive after his passion (and that by many
tokens) appearing unto them fourtye days, and speaking of the kingdom of
God, lu. xxiiij
and gathered them together, and commanded them, that they should not depart
from Jerusalem: Ioh. iiij.
but to wait for the promise of the father whereof (says he) ye have herd of
me For Ihon truly baptized with water: Ioh. i.
but ye shall be baptized with the holy ghost after these few days. When they
therefore were come together, math. iij
they asked of him, saying: Lord, wylt thou at this time restore again the
kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them: Math. xxiij. lu. xxiiij
It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the father has put
in his own power: but ye shall receive power after that the holy ghost is come
upon you. Ioh. xv.
And ye shall be witnesses unto me, not only in Jerusalem, but also in all Iewry
and in Samary, and even unto the worlds end. And wha^ he had spoken these
things, while they beheld, he was taken up an hye, Mar. xvi
and a cloud received him up out of their sight. And while they looked
steadfastly up toward heaven, as he went, behold, two men stood by them in
white apparel which also said: Math. xxiiij. mar. xiij Apoc. i.
ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gasynge up into heaven? This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, even as ye have seen
him go up into heaven.

Well-beloved brethren and systers in our Savior Christ, this day is called
the Ascension day, because that as this day, Christ our Savior and redemer
mounted or styed up to heaven after his resurrection leaving his Apostles and
disciples upon the earth which thing is one of the articles of our Creed or
believe. And albeit saint Luke the holy Evangelist does ascertayne us of this
thing in the end of his Gospel which he wrote of the acts and life of
Christ, yet for as much as he touched the thing but brefly and lightly there,
therefore he does here in the lesson of this day which is the beginning of an
other book that he wrote for our instruction of the deeds and acts of the
Apostles, entreat the matter more at large.

First therefore ye shall mark and observe (good people) that the Euangelical
histories do paynt out Christ unto us as yet covered with the burden of ye
flesh,
and as yet not glorified, how be it in the mean season he declared himself
as well by his heavenly doctrine as by many his miracles which he showed that he
was very God. But in the acts of the Apostles he is described and set forth
unto us as one that now raygneth and is glorified. Thus therefore saint Luke
begins his description. In the former treatise or book which I wrote dearly
beloved fre^d Theophilus (which by interpretation sygnifyeth a lover of God) we
have spoken of all that Jesus began to do and teach. Theophilus.
He says not of all that Jesus began to teach and do. For our Savior
Christ first did practyse and work such things as he afterward taught. He
went to Ihons baptism. Mat. iij.
He wythdrewe himself for a season out of the company of the world before he
would take upon him to preach, and to teach other. Mat. iiij
The spirit led him into wilderness, where he fasted forty days and forty
nyghtes. He suffered there most sharp honger to arm himself with abstinence
and patience. He there endured the most bitter assaults and temtacions of
our goostly enemy the deuell, as appears manyfestly in the fourth chapter of
Mathewe. Al this he did to show us an exe^ple how we ought to do. We have many
teachers but few doers. Thou (says Paul) which teach another, Romans i.
teach not thy self. Thou preachest a man should not steal, and thou
stealest thy self. Thou that say a man should not commytte adultrye,
co^myttest horedome thy self. Thou abhorrest images, and yet thou do rob
God of his due honor. Christ byddeth his Apostles and preachers that their
light should shine before men. Math. v
He would have them to be the salt of the earth. But if the salt (says he) be
unsavory, wherewith shall it be sauered? it is good for nothing but to be cast
out of the doors and trode^ under fete. And in conclusion he says in this
wise. Whosoever does and teaches, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven. Yea he furthermore assures us, Math. v
that onles our ryghtuousnes do pass the ryghtuousnes of the scribes, and
pharisees: we shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. But wol ye know
good people what be scribes and pharisees? Harken what Christ says in
the.xxiij. chapter of Matthew. The scribes and pharisees sit in Moses chair.
All therefore that they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not ye
after their works, for they say and do not. Yea they bind together heavy
burthe^s and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's backs, but they
themselves will not heue at them with one of their fyngers.

But let us now se, whether there be any such scribes and pharisees among
Christian men, Origene
as were in old time among the Iues. Origene that ancient doctor, Who be
scribes.
writing upon this place of Matthew, says, that those be scribes, which
depart not from the letter of the law. These be such persons as teach nothing
but the outward observing and as who should say the bark of the law, where
as according to saint Paul the law kylleth and the spirit quyckeneth. To.
vij.
For as saint Austine does very well declare, Austine.
the letter of the law without the spirit is not enough. It is the spirit
that quyckeneth, Ioh. iij.
of whom, onles a man be borne again, he can not enter into the kingdom of
God. This spirit is wont to lead men into al troth, he discloseth and opens
unto us the pyth of the law, that is to say, the lively and ernest faith in
Messiah that was promised so long before by the prophets, even our savior
Christ Jesus, for whose love we ought frelye to fulfill and work the law and
not constrainedly like slaves and bondmen, forasmuch as the spirit of God has
infranchised us and made us Christ's freemen. They than which teach not this
fredome and enfranchisement of christian men, that is to wit which teach not
the pyth or karnell of the law but the bark or houske, be no better than
scribes. The papists be scribes.
Now I pray you, what other be al papists but even such and worse, for they
can skant abide to teach so much as the letter of gods law, which nevertheless
being taught nakedly and alone does but kill, it quyckeneth not. Yea they wol
teach welnere nothing but their own traditions, customs and beggarly
eleme^tes. I have brefly showed you (my friends) which be scribes, according
to the definition of the ancient doctor Origene. Let us now se, What origene
calls pharisee.
what he calls a Pharisee. Such as professynge (says he) some greater thing
do divide themselves as better from the multitude and common sort of men, be
called pharisees, which by interpretacion be as much to say as diuisi or
segregati, that is to wit, divided or severed persons. For Phares in Ebrue is
called a division. Now according to this definicion whether there be any
pharisees in Christendom I report me to your selves. Lord God what
divisions, what sects what sundry suits of holy holy persons have we had in
England now of late which thought themselves better and holyer than the rest
of people, yea which would suffer none to be called religiouse but themselves,
where as after the diffinitio^ of saint James, they were as far wide and
differed as much from religiouse persons, as an ape differ from an owl.

But let us return to our lection. These scribes and pharisees did teach but
they did not ye things which they taught. Christ (as saint Luke does here
witness) first did the things, and after he taught them. And of all these
things (says Luke) which Jesus began to do and teach until ye time of his
ascension have we spoken in the former treatise. This treatise we call commonly
the Gospel of saint Luke. Now than when the Apostles were as on this day
assembled and come together they asked Christ, saying: Lord will thou at
this time restore again the kingdom of Israel? Lo (good people) here ye have
a right notable exemple of the Apostles infirmity and weakness. The wekenes of
the apostles.
For albeit they had herd oftentimes that Christ's kingdom or raygne should
be spiritual yet they continued still to dream of a certain corporal
Monarchy or rule. But now what does Christ unto them? Albeit they thought and
spoke foolyshly, yet he rejected them not, but right gently he plucketh them
away from those carnal thoughts, saying: It is not for you to know the
times or the seasons which the father has put in his own power, as who should
say, meddle ye with your office whereunto ye be appointed. Your office is to
testifye of me and of my doctrine. Ye shall be witnesses (says Christ) unto me,
not only in Jerusalem, but also in all Jury and in Samary, The office of
apostles or preachers.
and even unto the worlds end. And here is to be noted that Christ woll not
have his preachers curiouse upon idle questions or vain philosophy. For their
only office and feate is to preach Christ and his doctrine, that is to wit,
to set forth and propowne only such things as Christ has taught and done to
be believed of the ignorant people for which cause also the holy ghost was
given unto them, eue^ to the intent to make the Apostles mete to teach and us to
receive their teaching.
Now when Christ had spoken these things, while his Apostles beheld him, lo
suddenly he was taken up on high, and a cloud received him up out of their
sight. The fruit of the asce^sion
Here (my brethren) ye shall mark the fruit and profit of our savior
Christ's Ascension. For by his styenge or ascendynge up into heaven he wrought
two things for us. The one was, he had a most goodly and gloriouse triumph
upon our mortal enemy the deuell. The other was, he anon sent down the
holy ghost to his Apostles, as also the prophet David witnesses, saying:
Ascendit in altum, captiuam duxit captiuitatem, dedit dona hominibus. That is
to say. He ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, he gave gifts to
men.

Finally, ye shall mark yt our Savior Christ at his departure from his
disciples when he mounted up to heaven, comforted them by his angels, surely
promising them, that even such one as they saw him ascendyng now up to
heaven, they should in the last day se again, at which time undoubtedly he
shall render to every man his reward according to his deeds. They which have
done wyckedly, and would not believe, shall be condemned into hell fire, where
shall be weeping and gnashynge of teth. But they that have believed on Christ Jesus
and with worthy deeds have expressed and declared their faith to the world,
they shall inherit the kingdom of heaven and shall enter into the joy which the
father of heaven has prepared for them. To whom with the son and holy ghost
be glory and laud in infinita secula. Amen.

The Gospel on Ascension day. The xvi. chapter of Mark.
Thargument. Of the commission that Christ gave to his Apostles to preach his
gospel through out the hole world. And how Christ ascended up to heaven.
AFter this Jesus appeared again unto the eleleue^ as they sat at meat: and
cast in their teeth their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed
not them which had seen that he was risen again from the dead. And he said
unto them: Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to al creatures:
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. He that believes not shall be
damned. And these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall
cast out deuels, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away
serpe^tes. And if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They
shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then when the
Lord had spoken unto them he was received into heaven, and is on the right
hand of God. And they went forth, and preached every where: the Lord
workynge with them and confirmynge the word with miracles following.

THe Christian man's life in this present Gospel (good people) is set before our
eyes. For faith and charity are here propouned unto us as in all ye rest of
the gospels. Wherefore sith the Gospel brings ever these two with it, we
ought also continually to preach and entreat of them. For he says who so
believes and be baptized shall be saved, which things we shall now in order
peruse and consider.

First of all Christ vpbraydeth in this Gospel his Apostles of their faynte
believe and hardenes of heart and consequently blames them declaryng what they
wanted and yet he rejects them not neither is moved rygorously and hastily
against them but he gently blames them none other wise than if one of us would
say to an other. Incredulity.
Art thou not ashamed to do the thing thou go about? speaking after this
sort to bring him to know himself and to make him ashamed that he may leave
of his euel enterprise or work, and yet we reiecte him not nor hate him nor
yet pluck our love from him. Neither was it a light matter why the Lord
rebuked his disciples,
for surely infidelity or lack of believe is of all sins that can be named
the greatest. And he expresses unto them the manner of their mysbeleue when he
says, that their hearts were hardened, and yet notwythstandynge he handles
them gently and myldely. All these things were done to our comfort and
consolation that we should not be discoraged though we be any thing fautye in
our faith as if we doubt, stomble, or fall, but rather that we should quyckly
rise again, establysh our faith and run to God taking trust and affiaunce
at him and constantly also retainynge it, namely sith he deleth with us not
according to rygoure, but can wynke at our falls and infirmities. And he that
reputeth him to be such shall also find him such one: I say if he can take
him for a merciful God he will suffer himself to be found such one, he woll
so declare himself toward him. Contrary wise an evil conscience and an
unfaithful heart does not so, he bears no such affiaunce toward God, but
flies from him, reputing him a sore and rygorouse judge, and therefore also
find him such one. The same we must also do with our neighbors. If we se any
swerve from the faith he is not to be beloved in his malice but we ought to
reprove and lay his fault and shrynkynge before his eyes but yet not after
such sort that we should hate him or be against him or turn our frendshyp and
love from him. Gal. vi.
For thus says saint Paul. Brethren although a man be found in any fault,
you that be spiritual redress such a person with the spirit of mekenes. But
the most holy father or god rather, the bishop of Rome which wol be called
Pope, his bishops, his prestes his monks, his chanons, his freers, and his
nonnes can not abide when that they be found in any notable crime, to be
reproved. For what so ever euel do chance they pretend and allege for them
that it come not through their fault but through the fault of their subjects.
Evil ought to be punyshed.
Their subjects and such as be under their obedience shall be cruelly and
roughlye handled. Summa summarum any injury and wyckednes ought to be punyshed,
but love and verity must be kept toward every man. Neither ought we to
suffer our mouth to be stopped. For none of us all shall so live as long as we
be in this flesh that we can be found on every part blameles. But I am fauty
in this thing, and an other in that. Namelye sithe it is right manifest to
all men that even thapostles themselves lacked that which was chyfe and the
highest point of al, where as notwithstanding, they were the corner stones and
the rocks of foundation. Yea and the best and the most excellent part of
christendom. No man yet thinks that thapostles were utterly and all together
infideles. For they believed the things that were written in the law and in the
prophets, albeit they had not yet the full perfection of faith. Faith was in
them and it was not in them. Faith therefore is a thing which always grows
bygger and bygger according to the parable of the mustarde sede. So the
Apostles were not utterly void and destitute of faith for they had a part of
it. For it is with faith as it is with a man that is sick and begins by
little and little to crepe and up wax strong. The lord than expresses and
declares to his apostles where in they believed not and what they wanted,
which doubtless was that they perfytly believed not his resurrection. For albeit
they believed all the rest, yet in this behalf they remained infideles. For
happily they believed also this that God would be merciful unto them, but yet
this was not enough. Christ vpbraydeth his apostles of their infidefitie.
For it was necessary also that they should believe Christ's resurrection.
Wherefore he vpbraydeth them of their infidelity saying that albeit they had
seen altogether yet they believed it not, and that they yet wa^ted this article
of resurrection. What it is to believe the resurrection of Christ.
What is it than to believe the resurrection of Christ which bears so great a
stroke and is of such importance that ye disciples were called infideles and
mysbeleuynge persons for the defaute of it? Certes, to believe the resurrection
of Christ is nothing else than to believe we have a reconciler before God which
is Christ which makes us at one with God the father and iustifyeth us in his
sight. For what so ever is in man of his own nature and birth without
regeneration is but sin and death whereby he heapeth upon himself gods
vengeance. Again, God is the eternal justice and clerenes, which of his
nature hates sin. Hereof it comes that between God and man is perpetual
enmity neither can they be friends or agree together. Christ therefore being
incarnate did both translate our sins upon himself and drowned ye wrath of
the father in himself to reconcile us to his father. Without this faith we be
ye children of ve^geaunce, we can do no good work that may be acceptable to
God, neither will God hear our prayers. For thus in the.xviij. psalm it is
written. They cried and there was no helper, to the Lord, and he answered them
not. Yea the most excellent work whereby we thought to obtain grace, help,
and comfort of God was imputed unto us for sin, as the prophet in the.cix.
psalm says: Oration eius in peccatum fiat. Be his prayer counted for sin,
for surely we can not with al our powers of our own nature pacify god. We
neded therefore Christ to be mediator for us to the father, and to make us at
one with him, and finally to obtain what so ever is necessary for us. By the
same Christ it behooves us to ask of God what so ever thing we need, Ioh. xvi
as Christ himself enstructeth us saying: What so ever ye ask the father in
my name it shall be done unto you. What soever we demand of God, surely by this
Christ (which has satisfied for our sins) we must obtain and get it. For
Christ is he which lays a garrison about us,
he is the defense and bukler under whom we be hydden, even as the chekens be
nouryshed and hid under the wings of the hen. By him only our prayer is
allowed before God. By him only we be herd and get the favor and grace of
the father. This is now to believe upon Christ's resurrection if as it is
recited we believe that Christ has borne upon him as well our sins as the
sins of the hole world and has drowned in himself the one and the other
and also their of the father whereby we be reconciled to God and made
ryghtuouse before him. Now ye se your selves how few christian men and women
there be which have this faith whereby all men be delivered from their sins
and be made ryghtuouse. All outward christen men believe not in the
resurrection.
For they believe not in the resurrection of Christ, that their sins be taken
away also by Christ, but go about to be justified by their own works. This
man enters into the cloister and is made a monk or freer, she a nonne some
one thing, some another, that they may be delivered from their sins, and yet
they say they believe in the resurrection of Christ, where their works do
show clean contrary. Wherefore this article have the holy fathers preached and
inculked specially before other. For thus saint Paul in the.xv. chapter of his
first epistle to the Corinthi. says. If Christ has not risen from death to
life tha^ vain is our preaching, vain also is your faith, And a little after.
If Christ have not risen vain is your faith, ye be yet in your sines. What
manner co^seque^s is this? how do this follow? Thus truly, if Christ rose not
from death to life, it follows, that sin and death did swalowe him up and
killed him. After that we could not ryd our selves out of our sins, Jesus
Christ took them upon him to tread under his fete death and hell, and to be
made Lord over them. Now if he rose not again, than surely he overcame not
sin, but was overcome of sin. And if he rose not again, he redeemed us not,
and so we be yet in our sins. Furthermore in the tenth to the Romans he
says thus. If thou confessest with thy mouth Jesus to be the Lord, and
beleuest in thy heart, that God has raised him from death,
thou shall be saved. Hereunto agrees all scripture both old and new. But it
is not yet sufficient to believe the resurrection of Christ. For all wicked
persons believe this, yea Satan doubts not but that God suffered and rose
again.
But we must also believe the sum of the resurrection and also what fruit and
profit we have taken thereby, that is to say, pardon of our gylt and as it
were a gayle delyuerey of all our sins that Christ passed thorough death and
by it overcame sin and death, yea and what so ever could hurt us he trod
under his foot and is constitute and made at the right hand of the father in
heaven the mighty Lord over syn, Satan, death, hell, and what soever hurts
us and that all these things be done for our sake which thing the wicked
persons believe not. Ye se than (my fre^des) how much is laid in this article
of resurrection so that we may better want all the rest than this one
article. For what were it to believe all the artycles, as that God was borne of
the virgin Mary, that he dyed and was buried: if thou do not also believe
that he rose again? Abac. i.
And this God means in Abacuc where he says: I shall work a work in you
which no man shall believe when it shall be told. And this is the cause why Paul
in all his epistles handles no work or miracle of Christ so diligently, as he
does the resurrection of Christ. Yea he lets pass all the works and
miracles of Christ, and chefly teaches us the fruit of it, so that none of
thapostles has so painted Christ unto us as Paul. Actu. ix
Wherefore not without cause Christ said to Ananias: This is my vessel of
election to bear my name before the Hethen people, and kings and the children
of Israel. It follows in the text: Go ye into the hole world, and preach
the Gospel to every creature.

What shall they preach? none other thing, but that Christ is risen from
death, and that he has vaynquished and taken away sin and all mysery, What
is gospel.
he that believes this, is saved. For ye gospel (which in the Greek sounds a
glad tidings) is nothing else, but a preaching or showing of Christ's
resurrection, he that gives faith unto it is saufe, he that does not, is lost.
Faith constrayneth no man.
And here consider me the nature of faith. Faith constrayneth none to the
gospel, but leaves every man to his own liberty and choice He that
believes, may freely believe, he that comes let him come, he that will not,
chose him. And here again ye shall mark that the Romysh bishop erreth and
does naught, in that he goes about by violence to draw men to the christen
faith. For besides the preaching of the Gospel, Christ gave nothing in
commission unto his disciples. So they preached it accordyngly to their
commission and left it in men's free liberty to come to it or not. They said
not,
either believe it or I will kill the. So ye se ye infidels as turks, sarase^s,
and Iues ought not violently to be drawn to our faith, but louyngly rather
invited and allured. But here is a doubt, how this text ought to be
understand (go into all the world) sith the Apostles never passed through out
all the world. For none of the apostles came so far as to us. Furthermore
there be many Islands found out now in our time which be inhabited with people
to whom gods word was never preached, where as yet the scripture confirms,
Ps. viij
saying: In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, that is, their sou^de went forth
into all the world. I say their preaching went out into al lands although
it be not yet come into the hole world. And this coming out is begone,
albeit it be not yet fynished and ended, but it spredeth continually more and
more and shall do till the last day. And it is with this commyssion or
ambassadie of preaching as it is with a stone, when it is cast into the water,
for it makes waves about it, and one wave dryueth forth another, till they
come to the shoore, and albeit there be in the mids a great caulme, yet the
waves cease not, but go continually forth. Even so it is with the preaching of
the gospel, it began by thapostles, and it still goes forth, and by preachers
it spreads further and further, it suffers in the world persecution and
chasynge away, yet it is always opened more and more to such as herd not of
it before, though in the mydde journey it be driven down and be made stark
herisie. Or it may be lykened to an embassage that one sends out, as if our
soueraygne lord the king of England should send his ambassadors into
France, or Spain, we say that an ambassadie is gone forth from our king
thither, all be it the ambassadors be not in deed as yet come thither. It
follows in the text. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Signs
joined to the word.
Here ye shall note that god does hang an outward sign to his word which
sign makes his word to be the stronger unto us, so that it confirms our
hearts and makes us not to doubt thereof. Thus God did set ye rain bow for a
sign to Noye to assure him he would no more destroy the world with floudes. So
that this rain bow is as it were a seal or suretye both to Noye and to al us
none otherwise than a seal is put to wrytynges to make them sure. And like as
princes and noble me^ be known by their colors, badges, and arms: even so
deals god with us and has stablished his words as with a seal yt we should
nothing doubt He gave to Abraham circumcision for a sign of Christ's coming
that should bless the world. Ge. xvij
Likewise has he done here by putting to this promise of salvation an
outward sign, I mean baptism For baptism is as it were a watchword to put
god in remembrance of his promise, which if it can be had, Austine.
ought in any wise to be taken (as saint Austine says) and not to be
despised. But if it can not be had, or if it be denied a man, yet he shall not
be damned so that he believes the Gospel. For where the Gospel is, there is
baptism and all that pertayneth to christianity. And therefore the Lord
says. He that believes not shall be damned. He says not, he that is not
baptized. For baptism without faith is nothing worth, but it is like to a
paper that has a seal hanging to it and has no writing in it. Wherefore
they that have signs (which we call sacraments) without faith, they have
seals without wrytynges. Furthermore ye se here (good people) what is thoffice
of such as wolbe called Christ's apostles, that is to wit, to go into the
world and preach Christ's Gospel. And so here ye may judge whether the bishop
of Rome with his galant prelates which ride like princes upon their moyles and
never preach one word but rather stop the mouths of true preachers, ought
to be called Apostolyke persons or no. It follows in the text.

And these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall cast out
deuels, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall drive away serpents. And
if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay
their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

My friends how shall we verefy this text, that he that believes shall have
power to work all these signs? for the Lord says that these tokens shall
follow the beleuers. Moreover it is certainly known unto us that not all ye
Apostles wrought them. For it is recorded of none to have dronken poison but of
Ihon the Evangelist. Furthermore if this saying of Christ must needs stand,
few shall be saved for very few of the saints have done al these. Some therefore
to avoid this inconvenience do expound these signs mystically, A mystical
interpretacion.
saying that they do speak with new tongues which where as before they taught
deuelysh doctrines, now they confess Christ and so they be new men. By
taking away of serpents they understand the destroyenge of pestiferouse
doctrines, heresies and sects. By drinking of poison without hurt, they
understand that the readyng or hearing of false doctrines shall not hurt them.
By healynge and curing of sick persons they understand the healynge of the
soul. Albeit this interpretation is honest and a matter of troth that such as
believe shall work these feats, yet it is not the right sense and meaning of
this text. This than is the meaning. Where a christian man has faith, he
shall have power to work these signs and they shall follow him, as Christ
himself says in an other place: Io. xiiij.
Verily verily I say unto you, he that believes in me the works that I do he
shall do, yea and he shall do greater then they be. For the christen man has the
same power with Christ, Christ is a co^munitie, he is set in the same goods
with Christ. Furthermore Christ gave them power against wicked spirits to cast
them out and to heal al manner of syckenesses as it is read in the tenth of
Matheu. Also in the.xix. psalm ye read: Thou shall walk upon Lions and
Dragons. Wherefore where a christen man is, the power to work these signs and
miracles is not taken away, as by many exemples it has been proved. But no man
ought to do them, onles it be necessary and the case require it. For the
Apostles themselves wrought not these miracles but only to the testification of
gods word that so by miracles the Gospel might be confirmed, as the text
says. They went and preached every where, the Lord workynge with them and
confirmynge the word with miracles following. But now after yt the Gospel is
spread abroad and opened to the hole world, miracles be not necessary as they
were in the Apostles time. It follows: when the Lord had spoken unto them, he
was received into heaven. That is to say, he went up to begin his spiritual
and heavenly kingdom, and drew with him our hopes into heaven that thither,
whether we saw him ascend we should also follow. And he sytteth on the right
hand of God. This is a manner or figure of speaking and it sygnifyeth, he is
God, egall and of like power with the father. And as the prophet says, he
ascended up on high and has led captivity a prisoner. So that now, we be no
longer in thraldom, for Christ has carried it away with him and made us the
children of his father to live eternally with him in heaven. To whom be glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Epistle on the sunday after the Ascension day. The.i. Epistle of Peter
the.iiij. chap.
Thargument. An exhortacion to do good works according to thexemple of Christ.
Most dear beloved brethren. Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. But
above all things have fervent love among your selves. For love shall cover
the multitude of sins. Be ye herberous one to another, without grudgynge. As
every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as
good ministers of the manyfolde grace of God. If any man minister, let him do
it as of the ability which god ministers unto him, that god in all things
may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

GOod brethren and systers in our savior Christ the lection of the epistle of
this day read in ye church is taken forth of the.iiij. chapter of the first
epistle of ye Apostle and messanger of Christ S. Peter.

Ye shall therefore understand that forasmuch as this holy man S. Peter had now
in the chapters going before this place sufficiently taught the Iues and
others whom he wrote this epistle unto, The occasion of this epistle.
of the faith and justification which comes by Christ, he does now in the
chapters following monysh them of good works,
according to the manner of sincere and pure preachers, which before they give
any precepts of good manners, woll first entreat of ye causes of new life.
Wherefore this present lesson is nothing but an exhortation to good works
after the exemple of Christ. Thus than he says:

Be ye therefore sobre and watch unto prayer.

This text contains a general exhortacion to all such things as become
christen men to do in this life. Sobrenes and modesty.
For modesty and sobrenes be not so greatly good works, as they be the self
rules whereby al good works be tempered. Ye shall therefore understand here by
modesty and sobrenesse first those civil virtues which have contrary vices,
arrogancye and pride. In like wise does also Paul understand them in the.xij.
to the Romans where he writes. I say unto you by the grace which is given
me to every one of you, that none think proudly of himself above that it
becomes him to think but let him so think that he be demure and sobre
even as God has bestowed to every one the measure of faith. Second, ye shall
understand by modestye and sobrenes here, also the sou^dnes of mind so that
ye think modestly and soberly of gods word, lest through your own
ymaginations and good intencions ye go away from the true understanding of
gods word, or suffer your selves to be plucked away with any manner wind of
new doctrine. Now wha^ we be modest and sober as well in life as in doctrine it
follows consequently that we must needs watch and give our selves to prayer.
It follows.

But before all have fervent love among your selves, for love shall cover the
multitude of sins.

As though saint Peter should say. It may happen peradventure that a man may
feign with himself that he is sober, Charity
modest, and busye in prayer. Therefore before al things se ye have charity
without which, your demurenes, your sobernes, your prayer may be but feigned
and cloked works, with out which charity also they be nothing worth nor yet
thankful to God according to the saying of Christ. Math. v
When thou shalt offer thy offering at the altar and remembrest, that thy
brother have ought against the, leave there thy offering, and go and be at one
with thy brother first, and then come and offer thy oblation. Doubtless (my
brethren) charity is to be preferred before all other works for without it
none of all our other works can please God as Christ himself witnesses
Math. v. And also the prophet Esaias in the first chapter. Thou shall no more
offer to me sacrifice and so forth, but learn to do right, help the nedye.
etc. Vehement charity.
And saint Peter will that our charity be vehement or fervent, not cold and
negligent such as theyrs is, which with their mouth make as though they love a
man, but with their heart they hate him as euel as a tode. And he adds the
cause,
for love or charity covers ye multitude of sins. This sentence is taken
forth of ye x. chapter of the proverbs. For the most proper office of
charity is to hyde the infirmities of the neighbor. Furthermore hospitality
and harbourynge without murmuring or grudgynge is also one of the effects of
charity. It follows in the text.

As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another
as good dispensours or stewardes of the manyfold grace of god.

Here good people, the Apostle Peter exhorts every man particularlye to do
his office in his calling. He that is a preacher of gods word, ought to be
content with his gift and to execute his duty in his vocation, that is to
wit, he ought to preach not his own dreams, but the sermons and words of
God, and so of all other offices in Christ's congregation, which if they were
done according to S. Peter's advise here, we should both have gods word more
purely set forth, and also the church in better unity and concord. Then
according to every ma^s gift, and (as Paul says) even as God has allotted
every man according to the measure of his faith, To. xij.
so let him serve in his calling. As good stewardes or dispensours let them
behave themselves in executynge their office. Good stewardes.
I pray you is not he a foolysh steward which of other men's goods would
glory and take a pride,
where he is but only ye steward and not the owner of them? Now they be good
stewardes which be faithful and prudente, which know what, how, to whom and
what time they ought to preach and lay out the treasure of gods word, the
treasure I say of the manyfolde grace of God according to the sundry and
manyfold gifts. He that speaks let him speak the sermons and words of
almyghtye God, let him not preach his own gloses, his own inuencions his own
dreams and fancies. And to what so ever ministracion he be called and
appointed in the church, Ex virtute.
let him do it (says saint Peter) as of the virtue, power, and ability
which God ministers unto him, and not as though he were able by his own wit
and prudence to execute his ministry. It follows.

That God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

Here saint Peter declares the principal end of all our gifts offices and
good works, which is that by them should rise contentions, stryfes, debates,
and discordes. How god is glorified by our gifts and works
Now God is glorified by our gifts, offices, duties, and works, when we so
use them that the congregation may take profit and edificacion thereby, and may
take occasion by the good distribution of the same to glorifye God by Jesus
Christ. For our Savior Christ Jesus ascendynge up to heaven distributed and
gave gifts unto men as the prophet says. Ps. lxvij
To whom be all glory, al praise, all imperie and dominion as well to save as
to rule and govern his faithful ones, together with the father and the holy
ghost for ever and ever AMEN.

The Gospel on the sunday after the Ascension day. The.xv. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument. The holy ghost is promised to be sent by Christ to his Apostles.
Jesus said unto his disciples. But when the comforter is come whom I will
send unto you from the father (even the spirit of troth, which proceeds of
the father) he shall testifye of me. And ye shall bear witness also, because
ye have been with me from the beginning. These things have I said unto you
because ye should not be offended. They shall excommunicate you: yea the time
shall come, that whosoever kylleth you, will think that he does god service.
And such things will they do unto you, because they have not known the father
neither yet me. But these things have I told you that when the time is come,
ye may remember them that I told you.

FOr as much as our Lord Christ in his maundie (good people) with many promyses
had bequethed and deputed the holy ghost to his Apostles, Paracletus.
he does now at last name him more plainly with his proper name of office,
declarynge thereby what profit and commodity he shall bring to the world. He
says: when the comforter is come. This propre and true name he gives the
holy ghost calling him paracletum, that is say a comforter. For who else
certifyeth our conscience, To. viij.
that we should believe yt by Christ we be the children of God and cry Abba
father, but this only comforter? I pray you, who makes us both desyrefull and
also hardy to confess this faith? Who comfort us in all such mysfortune and
afflictions as we suffer in this world for this confessions sake? Surely the
same self good spirit, which proceeds from ye father does al this, this is
his feate and office. For thobteynynge of which spirit, the prophet David so
busely prays in the.l. psalm. But ye may more lively behold the nature and
workynge of this holy ghost or spirit in the apostles, which before the
coming of the holy ghost, in tribulation fled from the Lord and utterly
denied him. For they hyd themselves in corners, some here some there. But wha^
this spirit, this comfortour was ones confirmed in them: then they confessed
Christ freely and his resurrection in so much that they also took pleasure and
delight in the cross or affliction that was laid upon them as appears
plainly in the Acts. Act. v.


Now this comforter, The spirit of truth.
because by the virtue of his office he makes men truth tellers, yea and
comfort and strengthens the faithful in the confession of the troth, by
the virtue also of his office he shall testify of Christ. So ye must here
mark that ye holy ghost ought to bear witness of Christ. But what shall he
testifye, what shall he teach of Christ?
Undoubtedly none other thing but yt which Christ preached and taught before,
that is to say, he shall make them which before could not perceive Christ's
doctrine, now to understand it, by writing the gospel in their hearts. A man's
own wisdom can here do nothing, it must be this holy spirit and comforter
which must do the deed, The prophecy of Ieremye.
even as Jeremy the prophet in the.xxxi. chapter says: I shall plant my law
in the inward parts of them and write it in their hearts, and wylbe their God
and they shall be my people. And from thence forth shall noman teach his
neighbor or his brother and say: know the Lord. But they shall all know me
from the lowest to the highest, says the Lord. Of all these things it is
gathered manyfestly that without the holy ghost we neither can know the truth
nor bear wytnes unto Christ Jesus.

Second, ye may espy here (good people) very plainly thoffice of Apostles or
Christ's messangers That is to wit, that they ought to bear witness of
Christ.
For to testifye or bear wytnes in scripture sygnifyeth to teach and speak
not the thing that pleases us but the thing that almighty god has
commanded. After this sort is Christ named in the psalm a faithful wytnes
in heaven. Psalm. lxxxviij. Esa. lv.
Also Esaias the prophet speaks of Christ in the person of the father. I have
set him for a wytnes to the people for the prince and master of the gentyls.
Wherefore sith the record and wytnes of Christ and of his apostles ought to be
egall and agreeable togethers: surely they must have one tenure of their
testimonies, and furthermore it must needs follow that the holy ghost executed
his testimony and record by ye apostles as in the.x. of Matthew it appears.
It is not you (says Christ) which speak, but the spirit of my father which
shall speak in you. Where be now these fellows which here tofore have cried
that the holy ghost have reuelated and disclosed to thapostles and fathers
certain secreter and higher things which be not comprised in the gospel? To
whom will ye give more credence? To Christ or to these vain tryflers?
Christ says that the holy ghost shall testifye of him to the world and
shall make me^ mete and apt to receceyue his gospel and shall teach none other
thing than that which he himself has taught. But these tryflers babble that
the holy ghost ought to teach some thing of more excellencye than that which
is comprysed in ye holy gospel. Surely I would think it most convenient that
we should obey and believe him to whom the father of heaven bare wytnes saying:
math. iij
This is my well-beloved son in whom I am right well pleased hear ye him. But
they that can not be satisfied with Christ's doctrine to whom not only
thapostles but also the holy ghost has borne witness, let them at their
parell chose them other doctrines.

Certes I will not counsel you like owls to wa^der in darkness but rather to
fyxe stedfastlye your fete in the light.

Last of all ye shall consider and note (good christen brethren and systers) in
this gospel, yt the word and institution of Christ, of which the spirit and
the apostles do testifye, can in no wise b grateful and acceptable to the
world. For those that wol admyt this word, the world wolle cast them out of
al honest men's company (as they call honest men) they woll as heretykes drive
them out of their churches and assembles, they woll excommunicate them, they
woll curse them with book bell and candell. Yea if they may with all kind of
punishment and death persecute the true Apostles and messe^gers of Christ they
will think to do a high service to God, and that their zeal has hyghly
served gods will. But what says Christ in the mean season? Therefore I will be
with you. They shall so handle themselves toward you, because they know
another me nor my father. Here ye se with what success and fortune in this
wicked world the most precious word of the gospel with the imbrasers thereof
be commonly received. For thou may not look to live a sweet an idle and a
delicate life if thou wolte confess Christ For he that woll live after a
godly sort (as says saint Paul) must needs suffer persecution. ij. tim. ij
And in an other place he says: Gala. ij.
If I would please men I should not be the servant of Christ.

Wherefore if persecution shall invade us for co^fessynge of Christ: it is good
that we be armed with gods word that we may know how persecution hangs
over our heads by the proper will of God to thyntent our faith might thus by
such persecution be clarifyed, tried, and purged. For if we be full certifyed
hereof, we can not easily be offended with temptation but with a pacient mind
we shall suffer all the wrong that the world for Christ's cause woll put us
to. And surely this shall be a comfort unto us, that our persecuters for all
their proud bragges and vauntes neither know Christ nor his father. Finally we
be right well assured that ye trouble and affliction of this time (as Paul
says) can in no wise be compared with the glory to come that shall be disclosed
unto us. To. viij.
With this our knowledge comfortynge our selves we shall remain quiet in our
conscience, still awaytynge with steadfast hope for the immortal crown of the
said glory which the father of heaven has prepared for us. To whom with the
son and holy ghost be al glory and praise for ever and ever. AMEN.

The Epistle on wytsondaye. The.ij. chapter of the acts of the Apostles.
The holy ghost is here given according to Christ's promise before.
When the fyftye days were come to an end, they were all with one accord
together in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had
been the coming of a mighty wind and it filled all the house where they sat.
And there appeared unto them cloue^ tongues, like as they had been of fire, and
it sat upon each one of them: and they were all filled with the holy ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues, even as the same spirit gave them
vtteraunce. There were dwelling at Jerusalem, Iues, devout men, out of every
nation of them that are under heaven. When this was noysed about, the
multitude came together, and were astonnyed, bycuase that every man herd the^
speak with his own langage. They wondered al and marueled, saying among
themselves: behold are not al these which speak, of Galile? And how hear we
every man his own tongue wherein we were borne? Parthians and Medes, and
Elamytes, and the inhabyters of Mesopotamia, and of Jury, and of Capadocia, of
Ponthus and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parties of
Lybia which is beside Siren, and strangers of Rome, Iues and Proselytes,
Greeks and Arabians: we have herd them speak in our own tongues the great
works of God.

CHrist had oftentimes (good people) promised unto his disciples the holy ghost
to confirm them in the true doctrine. For without ye holy ghost noman can
ryghtly either understand or certainly believe the word of God, neither can
stycke by it constantly without staggerynge or shrynkyng from it. It is the
holy ghost doubtless that teaches al things and that puts men in mind of
gods will. Io. xiiij
And therefore Christ says in the.x. Chapter of Matthew. It is not you that be
the speakers, but it is ye spirit of your father which speaks in you.
Wherefore this often promise of sendynge the holy ghost which was made to the
disciples, Christ now in this day of Pentecost perfourmeth. But because it
helps little to know that the disciples received the holy ghost, onles we draw
this receyuyng also to our profit and advantage, therefore it were good to know
the causes why the holy ghost was sent.

Ye shall therefore understand (good people) that the holy ghost was not sent to
thapostles nor at this day is sent as some men do dream, to teach a diverse
or strange doctrine from Christ's doctrine which Christ either taught not
before or had forgotten to teach: The causes why the holy ghost is sent.
But he was sent and is sent for three causes. The first is that he should
teach and put in mind and expou^de all such things as Christ taught And of
this fynal cause and office of the holy ghost our Savior Jesus Christ in
the.xiiij. and.xv. chapters of Ihon very copiously and at length speaks.

The second cause that the holy ghost is sent, is to confirm, strengthen,
and as it were to seal us and to make us full assured and certain of the
verity of gods word. Of this office the epistle of this day makes mention,
while it declares that the holy ghost sat upon every of them and filled them,
which thing betokens nothing else, but that the holy ghost confirmed and
certifyed the minds of the Apostles upon the verity of gods word, Ephe. i. i.
cor. i.
and therefore he is called of Paul the gage and the ernest.

The third cause that the holy ghost is sent, is that in temptation he might
comfort us and preserve us from desperacion, and therefore he is called
paracletus that is to say a comforter. Now therefore if ye couete to know, who
and what the holy ghost is which is called the third person in trinity,
consider well the foresaid offices of him, and ye shall ryghtly answer: A
description of the holy ghost.
The holy ghost is God equal with the father and son, which was to this
intent sent of them both, that he should more clearly expoune the divine will
of the father which was openly publisshed to the world by Christ, and that he
should put men in remembrance of the same and confirm it in their hearts to
the intent they might boldlye confess it. But let us now approach to the text
of this present lesson.

When the day of Pentecoste. Pentecost.


That is to say the fyftye day from Ester was a fulfyllyng which was one of
three solemn feasts in which all the Iues were wont to be assembled according
to the law of Moses in Deuteromye in the.xvi. chapter, which feast we christen
men do observe with an other liberty and for an other respect then it was
kept of the Iues. For we do solemnize and keep this day only in memory of
the special and wonderful sendynge of the holy gooste as on this day. When
this feast (I say) of the Jews called Pentecost otherwise named the feast of
wekes was in the complyshynge and doing, the Apostles were all with one
accord together in one place, as Christ had commanded them before to do,
Actu. ij.
that they should not depart from Jerusalem but that they should awayte for the
promise of the father.

And suddenly there came a sou^de from heaven, as it had been the coming of a
myghtie wind, and it filled all the house where they sat.

My friends this soden coming of the holy ghost does admonyshe us of the
manner or form of his coming which is not humane nor chau^ceth after man's
fashion, but as the similitude declares in the third chapter of Ihon. The
spirit or wind blows where it woll, and thou hear his voice, but thou
know not whence it comes nor whether it goes. Now for as much as Christ
applies this similitude and says: So is every one that is borne of the
spirit, therefore ye must also understand here, that the holy ghost in deed
comes unto us, but how or after what sort it passes man's wit and capacity
which neither can comprehend the manner of his coming neither yet the
quality of his accion, albeit of the accion and presence of the holy ghost we
be made certain even as we may be certain of the blowynge of the wind.

Finally it is here to be considered in what wise the holy ghost is to be
received of us.
Surely he is not to be received simpliciter as a dove that must be
miraculously sent from heaven, (as certain heretykes at this day do think)
neither is he to be taken as a virtue of God procedynge from the father and
from the son (as Campanus thinks) neither yet in a prescribed and divised
form as the papists have prefixed him before all their counsaylles were they
never so contrary to gods word, but he is to be received as very god of the
self same essencie and godhed with the father and son. It follows in the
text:

And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as they had been of fire and
sat upon each one of them.

Here (good people) ye may learn the effects or fruits of the holy goostes
coming, for he comes not in vain but makes dispertite or cloven to^ges
and fyry, he makes men to speak with other tongues, that is to say, he
regendreth them, he creates in them new motions, he assures them of the word
that they hear, he opens their mouths and makes them boldly and without
fear to confess the troth. And al they that is to wit the Apostles that were
assembled together for this purpose were forthwyth and suddenly al at ones
replete and filled with the holy ghost in such strange sort that by and by
they began to speak with sundry and new tongues, Diverse tongues.
not with old tongues and such as the tongue of Moses the lawspeaker is
discribed to be that is to wit hard and unpleasant, as it is written in the
fourth chapter of Exodus. And here may ye note the dyuersitie and difference
of the law and gospel. Moses tongue was sengle and but one,
for one certain people. But the tongues of the gospel be soundry, whereby is
sygnifyed the liberty of the gospel. They spoke therefore with sundry to^ges
even as the spirit gave them vtteraunce. The holy ghost gave not all to all,
To. xij. i. cor. xi.
but (as Paul says) according to the measure of faith as it seems good unto
him. It follows in the text.

There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews devout men out of every nation of
them that are under the heaven and so forth.

Here be contained the common and vulgar effects which be wont to follow the
works of ye holy ghost. These effects be stoynynge and wonderyng, and they
declare unto us ye power of the holy gooste in them which were moved with the
works of the holy ghost. For the rest of people were rather more and more
offended with the works of the holy gooste than kyndled to embrace them. They
said then, how happens this yt we hear every one in his own tongue which be
of sundry nations, speak the great wonders and high works of God, Magnalia
Dei.
that is to say, the things that God has wrought in his Christ. For to this
intent surely was the holy ghost come even to expou^de and declare Christ to
the disciples, and no doubt he exhorted them freely and boldlye to preach him
unto the hole world, which thing afterward they manfully executed, as the
sermon of Peter immediately after made, does declare and show. Surely the holy
ghost sent from heaven make men freely to confess the Evangelical troth
before kings and princes, which thing the flesh otherwise is not able to do.
For it is to much afraid, that it can wyllyngly and gladly suffer the hatred
of this world which is knyt and joined with this confession. Finally ye shall
understand that ye holy ghost was given to the Apostles in a vysible form.
But it is now given to the chosen and elect persons inuisiblye only by the
word. Wherefore good christen people I heartily exhort you, that ye woll
earnestly embrace and love gods word, and not mock and deryde it as certain
of the Iues here said that the apostles were dronken and full of new wine.
Neither do I exhort you only to read and praise the word, but also to work
after it, to declare by your deeds and procedynges that ye have an unfeigned
and right faith in Christ. So doing, no doubt the holy ghost shall come and
dwell within you and declare and open unto you all truth necessary to your
souls health, to the extirpacion of all wicked doctrine and auauncement of gods
glory. Unto whom be all honor and praise world without end. Amen.

The gospel on Wytsondaye. The xiiij. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument. Of the word of Christ and of the holy ghost
Jesus said unto his disciples, If a man love me, he will keep my saynges, and
my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him He that
loves me not, keeps not my sayenges. And the word which ye hear, is not
mine, but the fathers which sent me. These things have I spoken unto you,
being yet present with you. But the comforter which is the holy ghost whom my
father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance what so ever I have said unto you. Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give you. Not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let
not your hertes be grieved, neither fear. Ye have herd how I said unto you: I
go, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice, because
I said: I go unto the father. For the father is greater then I. And now have I
showed it you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye might believe
Hereafter will I not talk many words unto you. For the prince of this world
comes, and has naught in me. But that the world may know that I love the
father. And as the father gave me commandment, even so do I.

BEfore we touch the gospel (my brethren) we shall speak somewhat of this days
feast. The original beginning of Pe^tecost.
This feast which they call Pentecost, began in this wise. When God should
lead the Israelites out of Egypt, ye night before he ordained Passover which
we call Ester to be solemnised, and commanded that every year about that time
yt day should be kept holydaye for a memory of their departure out of Egypt.
And from that day afterward for the space of fyfty days they walked in the
wyldernes, till at last they came to the mount Sinay, where by Moses the law
was given them of God. For this cause they kept that solemn holydaye which
we call in Greek Pentecost that is to say the fyftye day and in Englysh
Wytsonday. Now therefore fyfty days from Ester being accomplyshed and the
memory of the law which god had promulgate to the people in the mount Sinay
fulfilled: the holy ghost came and gave an other law. Now therefore, this day
is celebrate of us not because of ye old fact but because of the new, I
mean, of ye se^ndyng of ye holy ghost. So we declare a certain difference
between our Pentecoste, and the Iues Pentecost. First the Iues kept this
day, because the law written was then given unto them. But we ought to
celebrate our Pencecoste because the law of God was then spiritually
delivered unto us. For the better understanding hereof, ij. co. iij and iiij.
Saint Paul is to be brought forth which also puts the same difference,
where he speaks of two manner prechynges. And as there be two manner
preachynges, so be there two sorts of people. First was the law written, which
God commanded and comprised in lettres and therefore it is called the law of
the lettre, because it remains in lettres and enters not in the breast,
neither do any works follow it save hypocritical and constreyned works, and
therefore the people also remain still but lyterall and fleshly. And because it
was comprysed only in lettres and was all together in dead writing, it
killed and made a dead people, for the heart was dead because it did not of the
own accord the commandment of god. For if every man should be left to his
own will to do what him lusts without all fear of punyshement there should
be found none but would rather be fre and louse from the law then bound
thereto. For thus he naturally thinks. Lo God will surely punyshe me, yea and
drive me into hell, onles I keep his commandments. Tha^ nature feleth it
self vnwyllynge, and to do them with no manner love or delectation, wherefore man
is forth with made enemy to god by reason of the penaltye when he fealeth
himself a sinner, and that he walks not ryghtly before God, so that he would
rather that there were no God. This bytternes is infixed in the heart against
God, though nature goes about never so much to garnysh her self with fair
works. It appears therefore how that the law co^prysed in scripture and
letters does iustifye noman nor yet can enter into the heart.

The law spritual.
The other law is spiritual which is written not with pen or ynke, nor is
declared with ye mouth after the fashion as Moses wrought the matter in tables
of stone, but like as we se in this story. The holy ghost comes down from
heaven and fylleth them all together, making them to have cloven and fyry
tongues and to preach frankely and freely far otherwise then it was done
before, so that all the people was astonnyed thereat and wondered. The holy
gooste I say comes and replenisheth ye heart, he changes the man which
loves God and does gladly all that ever is acceptable unto him. Wherefore al
things be there lively, quycke is the understanding, the eye, the mind, and
the heart, which brenneth and is rapte with the desire of all goodness. And
this is the true difference between ye law comprysed in letters and the
spiritual law, and here is it seen which be the works of God. Wherefore here
is all the craft set to discern and preach ryghtly of the holy ghost.
Heretofore men have preached of him that he brings to pass and prompteth all
things what so ever either the counsayles decerne or the B. of Rome in his
canonical law commands where as nevertheless al those things be only externe
and outward which he ordeneth or governs.

Wherefore this order of things is clean ouertwharte and preposterous, in that
they make of the works of the holy ghost a lettered and a dead law where it
ought to be spiritual and lively, and so there is made of it a Mosaicall and
humane tradition. The cause is that they know not what ye holy ghost is,
wheru^to he was given, or what his feate and office is. Let us learn then and
consider well what he is, to the intent his office may be discerned. The office
of the holy ghost.
In the epistle of this day it is showed how the holy ghost is sent down
from above, and fylleth the disciples which before sat in heaviness and fear, he
cleueth their tongues, he kyndleth, he enflameth them, that they might take
strength of heart and freely preach the Gospel without fear of any man. Here
thou see it is not the office of the holy ghoost to make books and to enacte
laws, but that he is such a God that only writes the thing in ye heart, yt
kyndleth it, that creates a new mind, making man to rejoice before god and
to be ravished with a new love toward him, and consequently with glad mind to do
his duty and service to all men franckly. After this sort the parts of the
holy ghost be ryghtly preached, he that paynteth them otherwise, believe him
not. For where he comes thus thou see he takes away the letter and makes
men fre from sin and from the compulsion of the law so that he raynynge in
their breast makes the^ in whom he is resident to do without compulsion all
that the law commands. But thou wylt ask whereby he brings to pass and
what thing he uses thus to change and renew the heart? Surely by that he
shows and preaches of Jesus Christ (as Christ himself in the.xv. chap. of
Ihon says) when the comforter comes whom I shall send you from my father
I mean the spirit of troth which proceeds from ye father he shall bear
wytnes of me. Now oftentimes ye have herd that the gospel or Euangel is the
thing which god suffers to be preached in the world and to be told to every
man that is to wit that none can be justified by the deeds of the law but
rather yt a worse thing come thereby, and therefore he sent down his most
dear son to dye and to shede his blood for us because we of our own powers
could not rub out the spotte of sin nor be delivered from it. But to the
preaching hereof another thing yet is required, even the holy ghost whom God
must send. He printeth in the heart this sermon and preaching to make it fixed
and roted in it, for it is most sure and certain yt Christ has done all
this gear, he has taken away our sin and ouerco^men all, that by him we
might reign over al, and even here in one heap is all the treasure hurded.
This treasure we can not get onles the holy ghost be given us which may put in
our hearts and minds to believe and say:
And I also am of the nombre of them to who^ so great treasure does belong.
When we have ones felt this, that God has thus helped us and bestowed upon us
so great treasure: then the matter goes well forward, neither can it otherwise
be but man's mind must be rauyshed with a pleasure toward God and lift up
himself and say: Oh good father, if this thy will be that thou haste showed
so great love and such exceeding kyndnes toward me I must needs again love
ye with my hole heart and reioise, and gladly do what so ever thy pleasure is.
Then the heart is no more waywarde nor crooked in the meditacion of God, it
thinks not to be driven down to hell of him, as before the coming of the
holy ghost it thought, when it felt no goodness no love no fydelitie, but still
a pace the wrath and indignacion of God. Now therefore while the holy ghost
prynteth into the christen ma^s heart how he has God his merciful and
graciouse Lord, it is a pleasure for him for Gods sake boldly to execute and
suffer any manner of thing. After this wise thou shall learn to know the holy
ghost and his office which is to distribute ye great treasure Christ and all that in him is which is, given and declared unto us by the Gospel to the intent
thou may put him into thy heart to make him thine own good. Hitherto I have
declared unto you, the history of the holy ghost. Now what we shall do in it,
we shall know further in the gospel. Thus says Christ

If a man love me he woll keep my saying, and my father shall love him.

Lo good people here ye may se (as I have often times preached unto you) that
the fruit of faith is charity, Charity is the fruit of faith.
which thing can not be denied. For charity or love perfourmeth and does
even of the own accord all that ever scripture commands. And this does
saint Paul declare Gal. v. He that loves his neighbor has fulfilled the
law. Wherefore they that have not faith and charity, do not fulfill the law,
albeit they seem in outward appearaunce to perform all the works of the
law. The word which Christ preaches he says is not his word but his
fathers word declarynge herby yt nothing ought to be added nor taken away
from it. And these things (says Christ) concerning as well your love
toward me, as the keeping of my word have I spoken unto you, being yet
present and dwelling among you. But that same comforter of whom I have made
so much mention unto you, I mean the holy ghost, whose feate and office shall
be to sanctifye and lyghten you unto all troth, which holy ghost my father
shall send in my name that is to say for my cause, he shall teach you
altogether and shall put you in remembrance of all that ever ye have herd of
me. A question.
Thou wolt say unto me. Why? knew not the disciples all before, which were
so long time with Christ? I answer, that ye disciples ought needs to have
been taught by the holy ghost, for without him they were yet imperfecte and
carnal, for they understood neither Christ's glorificacion by the cross nor
yet his raygne or kingdom. Wherefore they neded the holy goostes teaching, yt
is to say,
his sanctifyenge and making the things lively in them which they had learned
of Christ For ye disciples were as yet but (litera) they perceived not the
things that were of the spirit of God, and therefore they neded the holy ghost
to quycken them, according to the saying of saint Paul. The letter sleeth,
but the spirit quickens. Ye may not then understand by this word (teach)
that the holy ghost shall set abroch a new doctrine that Christ had not taught
before, docebit
but ye must understand by it that the holy ghost shall interpret the
doctrine already taught by Christ and declare it to the spiritual
understanding. And therefore Christ expouneth himself and says he shall put
you in remembrance of all the things that I have showed you. So that ye can
not gather herby that ye holy ghost shall add any thing to Christ's doctrine,
as the wicked papists do wyckedly gather. It follows.

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives,
give I unto you etc.

My friends what is Christ's peace? The peace of Christ.
Surely (to be short) it is nothing else but the quiet and tranquillity of
conscience. This peace the world can not give, man's traditions can not give,
ma^s own voluntary works can not give, no mo^kery, no pylgrimage, no popysh
pardons, no pardon beads, no relyques, brefly no fleshly thing can give this
peace of conscience. It is only Christ that can give us this peace when we
spiritually eat him and drink him, that is to say, when we know wherefore
Christ serves us and so suffer him by true faith and charity to enter into
our souls and to dwell within us which thing he promyseth us here in this
gospel that he woll do, in case we declare the fruit of our faith and keep his
word.


Furthermore ye shall observe (good people) in this gospel, that Christ here
showed his disciples that he must go away from them, but yet he says he woll
come again. But I pray you when comes Christ again unto us? Surely he
comes again, when he sends his word and his spirit unto us. For look
where the word is and there is Christ most presently. So in an other place he
says: Math. xxviij.
Lo I am with you even to the end of ye world. Finally where Christ says
that the father is greter then he, ye shall understand, that Christ
otherwhyles speaks as a man, otherwhyles as God, which thing ought
diligently to be observed of such as woll study holy scripture. For that he
here says: My father is greater than I, ye must refer it to his humanity.
But of his divinity in an other place he speaks in this wise. Ioh. x.
I and my father be one. And now says Christ calling back his disciples to
his word whereby they might comfort themselves after his departure, I have
told you of it before hand, to the intent that when it is come to pass ye
might believe that I wolle surely come unto you again. Herafter woll I not
speak much unto you, Pri^ceps mundi.
that is to wit, presently and in person with man's voice. For the prince of
this world comes that is to say, my mortal enemy and yours Satan the deuel
which treads upon my hele is at hand. Genesis iij.
And he calls him the prince of the world of his effect, because he
commands and rules ye world after his will and pleasure, and draws it
whether he woll as he lust himself. But this prince of the world this Satan
(says Christ) has naught in me. As who should say, albeit the prince of ye
world is coming against me to utter and work all that ever he can devise to
put me down, yet sure I am that I shall overcome him. So he makes his
disciples afraid in that he tells them that the prince of this world is
marchyng forward against him, but again he comfort them when he says, he
has naught in him. And in these few words is expressed the pyth of the hole
gospel. Wherefore to conclude, of this victory of Christ all we good christen
people shall be partakers, in case we believe according as in this Gospel we be
taught. And consequently the holy ghost who is the true and only comforter in all troubles and affliccion shall make his mansion and abode within us, and put
us in mind of all Christ's will and pleasure, to the glory of God the father
of heaven and his only begotten son Christ Jesus our Lord. Qui viuit and
regnat in infinita secula. Amen.

The Epistle on the second day of Pentecost. The.x. chapter of the Acts.
Thargument. How the Heythen received the holy ghost and were baptized.
PEter opened his mouth and said. Jesus commanded us to preach unto the
people, and to testifye, that it is he, which was ordained of God to be the
judge of quycke and dead. To him give all the prophets wytnes, that through
his name who so ever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. While
Peter yet spoke these words the holy ghost fell on all them which herd the
preaching. And they of the circumcision which believed, were astonnyed, as
many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentyls also was shed out the
gift of the holy ghost. For they herd them speak with tongues, and magnifye
God. Then answered Peter: can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized which have received the holy ghost as well as we? And he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord.

The su^me of S. Peter's prechi^g
GOod people the sum of saint Peter's sermon here is, that Jesus Christ which
for his benefytes and wonderful virtues that he showed among the Iues, was
crucified, that is to wit, nailed most vilanously to the cross (which was the
most paynfull and cruel death that the Iues could ymagyne) did
notwythstandynge rise again from death to life and that who soever wol believe
in him shall be saved. And he says furthermore that God anointed this Jesus of
Nazareth with the holy ghost and with power. Whereby he declares him to be the
true Messiah which was promised to the fathers and of whom the prophet David
spoke: I have anointed my king over Zion my holy hyl He declares also that
Christ's office is to do good to all. Now this resurrection of Christ he
confirms both with his own witness and with the wytnes of all that saw the
thing with their eyes. And lest a man should reiecte them as parciall
witnesses because they were his servants and disciples, he fetches out a
most sure record of scripture saying: that all the prophets do testifye of
this Christ. Finally lest a man woll find cauillacion and say they came forth
of their own mind uncalled to bear wytnes of this thing, he adds that they
were commanded and sent by God to preach to the people, and to testifye that
it is this same Jesus Christ which was ordained of God to be the judge of the
quycke and dead. Which thing is also an undoubted article of our faith. To
this Christ (says Peter) give all the prophets wytnes that through his name
who so ever believe in him shall be saved. And among other, the prophet Esaye
who writes of Christ in this wise. Esa. liij.
He only has taken on him our infirmity and borne our pains. The pain of
our punishment was laid upon him, and with his strypes are we healed. Surely
we have gone all astray like sheep, every one has turned his own way. But
through him, the Lord has pardoned all our sins. Lo here ye may se plainly
as well by the words of saint Peter in this place as by this prophet Esaias how
we get remission of sins by beleuynge in Christ. This does also saint Paul
in many places declare and namely through out his hole epistle to the Romans.
Origene in epist. ad To. li. iij. ca. iij.
Whereupon the ancient doctoure Origene writing, says: Man therefore is
justified by faith, whom the works of the law do nothing help to
ryghtuousnes. For where faith is not which iustifyeth the beleuer, although a
man have works of the law, yet because they be not builded upon the
foundation of faith, albeit they seem to be good, they can not iustifye the
worker, if faith be away which is the seal of all that be justified of God.
Ambrose of the calling of the gentyls.
Saint Ambrose agreyng hereunto says, that the redemption of Christ's blood
were very vile, if justification which is done by grace should be due to the
merits going before, so that it should be not the gift of the gyuer but the
reward of the worker. Also Jerome writing upon the epistle to the Galathians
says: Jerome.
None is saved by the law, but we be all saved by faith. Austine.
Neither does saint Augustine disagre from this, saying: Our faith that is to
say the catholyke faith discerns the ryghtuouse from the vnryghtuouse not by
the law of works, but by the self law of faith. But what go I about to
allege a few doctors? All the prophets (as Peter here says) Christ
himself, all the Apostles yea all the holy scripture through out, all the
ancient and ecclesiastical doctors and holy expositours of scripture do give
witness to Christ that through his name whosoever believes in him shall
receive forgyuenesse and pardon of their sins. It follows in the text.

While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy ghost fell on all them which
herd the preaching And they of the circumcision which believed were astonnyed.
etc.

Brethren ye shall note that Christ was peculiarly promised to the Iues as he
himself also says in the.xv. Chapter of Matthew. I am not sent but to ye lost
sheep of the house of Israel. Howbeit the calling of the Gentyls was long
before prophesied of by the prophets, and here also it was opened to saint
Peter by a vision of a shete sent down from above unto him. Actu. x.
And therefore he began his sermon on this wise. Of a troth I perceive that
there is no respect of persons with God, but in all people he that fears him
and works ryghtuousnes is accepted with him. Now so many as believed of the
circumcision that is to wit, the Iues not knowing hereof but being ignorant
that the Gentyls also were to be admytted to the fellowship of the Gospel
wondered, when they saw that on the Gentyls also was shed out the gift of the
holy ghost, and herd them speak with tongues and magnifyed God. Here ye shall
also mark,
yt this gift of tongues wherwyth at the sendynge down of ye holy ghost ye
Apostles and other were so endowed yt they were understood of the people of
al nations, is now ceased, but in ye mean season the praise of gods name
cease not nor ought not to cease. It follows in the text.

Then answered Peter, can any man forbid water that these should not be
baptized which have received the holy ghost as well as we?

Here ye se manyfestly (good people) that ye Gentyls by Peter's preaching of
gods word were replenyshed with the holy ghost before they were outwardly
baptized with the water, for with the spirit it is plain that they were
baptized. Saint Peter therefore to confirm them, and as it were to seal them
with an outward sign, commands them to be baptized with water in the name
of the Lord For baptism is not only a sign of mortificacion and of remission
of sins, What is baptism.
but it is also a badge or knowledge that we be received into the number of the
children of God. Wherefore as al holy doctous and expositours do agree, there be
two manner of baptismes. Jerome super Esa.
Now as also saint Jerome affirms, man only gives the water, but God gives
the holy ghost whereby the fylthe is washed away, and the sins of blood
purged. The same Jerome also writing upon the Epistle to the Galathians, says
in this wise. If then they that be baptized in Christ have done on Christ, it
is manifest that they which have not put on Christ, be not baptized in Christ.
For it was said to them which were counted faithful and which were supposed to
have had the baptism of Christ: Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. If a man
takes only this corporal washyng of water which is seen with the eyes of the
flesh, he is not clad with the Lord Jesus Christ. For albeit Simo^ Magus in
the acts of the Apostles had received ye washing of water, yet because he had
not the holy gooste, he was not baptized in Christ. Wherefore (as I declared
unto you on the Asce^sio^ day) baptism without faith is as who should say, a
paper sealed without any writing in it. But ye shall always understand that I
except and speak not of the baptism of infauntes or babes. For they (as
saint Austine and the other expositours of scripture do full well declare) be
saved if after baptism they chance in their infauncy to dye, by the faith of
the catholyke church. And furthermore we say against the wicked Anabaptists
that the baptism of children is not vain but necessary to salvation. For no
doubt the promise of salvation perteyneth also to children or infauntes. But
it pertayneth not to them that be out of the church where is neither the word
nor the sacraments. And here upon do all learned men agree. Now therefore (good
christen people) sith your baptism woll not serve you without faith, no nor
all the works ye can do, I ernestly exhort you that according to saint
Peter's declaracion here for the obteynynge of remission of your sins ye woll
fastlye believe in Christ. So doing no doubt the holy ghost shall enter into your
hearts and make you even of love without compulsion of law, to work well to
the glory of God, and health of your souls eternally. Amen.

The gospel on the second day of Pentecost. The.iij. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument. The most comfortable glad tidings of Christ is here wonderfully
well described.
Jesus spoke unto a ruler among the pharisees. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perysh, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his son into the
world, to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be
saved. He that believes on him, is not condemned. But he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten
son of God. And this is the condempnacion: that light is come into the
world, and me^ loved darkness more tha^ light because their deeds were evil.
For every one that evil does, hates the light: neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does troth, comes to the
light, that his deeds may be known, how that they are wrought in God.

THe Gospel of this day, good people, is in very deed an Euangell or gospel
that is to say a glad tydinges. For in few words it declares unto us the
sum of the Christen man's religion.

First therefore it shows the cause that moved God to send down his son to
the earth. The words here spoken be Christ's words unto Nicodemus. Thus he
says: God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son that who
soever believes in him should not perysh, but have everlasting life.
Here ye se that the cause which moved God to send Christ to redeem us was
love and not man's merit, as also saint Austine notes. And surely the deed
self declared gods exceeding love toward us in that he sent his only son
to deliver us out of bondage. For true love stands not in fair words and
amiable countenance or gesture, but in the deed self. Now the more mysery we
were in before Christ's coming: the greater is his benefyte and the more
bound be we unto him. God (as writes saint Paul) sets forth his love
toward us, Romans v.
seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Now Christ himself
assures us that who so ever believes in him thus sent of the father down
unto us, shall not quayle, shall not be confounded, shall not peryshe, but
shall be sure to attain everlasting life. Seeing Christ himself does assure us
of everlasting life for our belefe or faythes sake, why should we doubt? Why
should we go about to seek heaven by other ways than Christ appoints us?
The sentence is universal, all that believe in him shall not perysh. Wherefore
let noman think himself exempted as unworthy. Here is no respect either to
thy worthynes, or to thy unworthiness. If thou have faith, thou shall be sure to
be of the chosen company. Only take heed thou mockest not God, and dissemblest
not before the face of the world, saying thou have faith, and have it not in
deed. If thou have faith in deed, thou must needs bring forth the fruits of
faith, thou can not but declare thy faith with works of charity both to God
and man, whom for God thou can not but love as thy natural brother. If thou
beyst a good tree, thou must needs bring forth good fruit. But a bad tree
brings forth bad fruit. Math. v.
Christ goes further and says: For God sent not his son into the world
to condemn the world but to save the world. Here ye se the fynall cause of
Christ's coming which was to save that was lost. Howbeit this text is to be
understand of Christ's first coming and of the time of grace, ye may not
understand it of his second aduent or coming which shall be at the last
day, for tha^ he shall without fail come to judge according to an other place
where he says. Ioh. v.
The father has given all judgment to the son. Nevertheless in the mean
season whosoever believes not is already judged and condemned, whereas on the
contrary part they that believe can in no wise be condemned. But why is the
infidele already condemned? Because (says Christ) he has not believed in
the name of the only begotten son of god. Lo here ye se again how faith
saves, and lack of faith condempneth. And this is the condempnacion that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light, because
their deeds were evil. Who is this light? Christ. Who is ye darkness? Ioh. i.
The world. The light then shyned in ye darkness, and the darkness did not
comprehend it. Do not men love still darkness more then light? Had they not
rather walk in their own fanseys and wylworkes then in Christ's doctrine?
Alack for pytie. Yea though the light never so much shine, though the Gospel
be never so much in the hand, if Christ by his holy spirit do not teach the,
thou art still but darkness, and why so? for thou love still darkness better
than the light, for thy deeds are evil, and therefore thou must needs convince
and damn thy self of infidelity. It follows. For every one that does evil
hates ye light, neither woll he come to the light that is to say to Christ
and his word lest the bryghtnes of the light should reprove his deeds. This is
the cause (good people) why these papists are so loath that the scripture of
God should be read of you lay people, lest ye might happen to espy their
hypocrisy and crafty iugelynge against Christ and his troth. For scripture
is the rule or touchstone whereby ye may easily try and discern the chafe
from the corn, the chalk from chese, that is to say, hypocrisye from true
religion. They have (good people) long holden you in ignorance and in
blyndenes to auaunce them selves and to raygne like kings over you, contrary
both to gods law and man's law. Wherefore I blame them the less though they
hate scripture, which discloseth their hypocrisy and usurped authority, lest
(as Christ here says) their deeds should be rebuked and reproved. But he
(says Christ) that does troth, comes to the light, that his deeds may
be known, because they are wrought in God, as who should say. He that is
justified and declared a good person by his faith which he has in me and for
declaracion thereof does the truth that my word moves him to do, and works
not after his own fa^sey, this man comes to the light, that is to wit, he
gladly suffers his works and procedynges to be tried and examined by the rule
of my word, because they be done in God and be godly works. Where as contrary
wise the hypocrite does so much abhor from the judgment of my word, that he
flees by all means he can from it, and woll suffer none other to look upon
it. Math. xxiii.
He woll neither enter into the kingdom of heaven himself nor yet suffer
others that would enter. Such persons under pretense of holiness have long shut
up the kingdom of heaven from many men. But now thanked be God ye light has
somewhat shone again. Wherefore good people let us not hate this light and love
darkness still as we have done in times past, when we were deceived by the
iuglynges of these papists. Let us believe in this Christ sent down from the
father of heaven to redeem us. And if gods word be true we shall surely be
saved and raygne with him in heaven, world without end. etc.

The Epistle on the third day of Pentecost. The.viij. chapter of the Acts.
Thargument Peter and Ihon be sent into Samaria, where after baptism the
Samaritanes received the holy ghost.
WHen the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard say, that Samaria had
received the word of god, they sent unto them Peter and Ihon Which when they
were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the holy ghost. For
as yet he was come on none of them: but they were baptized only in the name of
Christ Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy
gooste.

This lesson (good people) is taken forth of the eight chapter of the Acts of
thapostles, for a more perfyte understanding whereof, ye shall know that in the
self chapter a little before it is showed, how S. Philip thapostle entered into
a city of Samaria and preached there to the Samaritanes the glad tydinges of
our Savior Christ Jesus, how he being the son of God came down for the
rede^pcion of mankind. This his preaching he did also confirm with miracles.
For (as the text also declares) the unclean spirits cryenge with loud
voice came out of many that were possessed of them And many taken with palfeis
and many that halted were healed. Now the people gave great head to the things
which Philip spoke. And as soon as they gave credence to Philips preaching of
the kingdom of God and of the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both
me^ and women. Here ye se (good people) how the Samaritanes which were Hethen
persons yea and such persons as the Iues which were the peculiar and proper
people of god took for very contempt and vile persons, received the gospel of
Christ forthwyth at the preaching of saint Philip and were by and by baptized.
Thus farforth are the Samaritanes brought. Now the lection red in the church
this day goes further and says, that when the Apostles which were gathered
together at Jerusalem herd say that the Samaritanes had received the word of
God, they sent unto the^ Peter and John, which when they were come down from
the high city of Jerusalem thither unto the^ they prayed for them, to
the intent they might receive the holy ghost. For as yet the holy ghost was not
come on none of the^, only they were baptized in the name of Christ Jesus. Tha^
laid these two Apostles their hands upon ye Samaritans, and anon they
received the holy ghost. This is the history read in the church as this day.
But now my friends what fruit and profit shall we bear away of this lesson?
What is here to be gathered? Nothing? Yes truly for there is nothing written,
To. xv.
says S. Paul: but it is written for our learning, that by patience and
confort of scriptures we should have hope.
First therefore ye shall note how glad the Apostles were to hear, that these
Samaritans were turned to the Gospel of Christ, and they were not only glad,
but also careful for them, lest they might happen to go back again to their
old baguage and blyndnes. And therefore in all have they sent these two
Apostles Peter and John to confirm and strengthen their faith. Here we be
taught what ye office of true and good Apostles, yea of all good Christen men
is. For we ought in likewise to be careful for our brethren yt they may be
brought to the perfeyte knowledge of gods word. And namely such as call them
selfs Apostolical persons and Apostles fellows and successors (as the
bishops of Rome do) ought in this behalf to follow thexe^ple of thapostles
charity. But they do clean contrary, they rather pluck me^ from the Gospel,
then allure them unto it.

Second, ye shall note, that before the resurrection of Christ, when as yet
the Iues and Gentyles were not joined together by all one faith, Math. x
the Apostels were forbidden to enter into the cities of the Samaritanes. But
after the resurrection, when they were bydden for the spredynge abroad of the
gospel to go into all parts of the world, then that former commandment
which was but temporal and which did serve but for a time, was taken away
and cessed.

Thyrdly, in this historye ye shall mark, that the Samaritanes received
forthwyth the holy ghost as soon as they believed and were baptized. For
assuredly true and perfect baptism can not be without the holy ghost.
Furthermore it is not possible that faith can be in that person where the holy
spirit of God does not inhabit, as many places as well of scripture, as of
ancient fathers do witness. Yea S. Austin affirms plainly in his book, de
presentia dei, Austine
that the holy ghost does dwell and inhabit in infauntes or children yt be
baptized. Wherefore how much more is he resident and abiding in persons of age
and discretion which have faith and be baptized? So it is no doubt, but these
Samaritanes at the preaching of S. Philip received the holy ghost, except
perchance ye woll say, that S. Philippes preaching had less virtue and
efficaciem it, then the preachynges of the other Apostles had, which in no wise
is to be granted. the historye red in the Church this day, that after the
Samaritanes had received the word of God, the holy Ghost as yet was not come
on none of the^. And therefore the Apostles eue^ for that purpose sent Peter and
Johan, which prayed for them that they might receive the holy Ghost. My
friends, what shall we say to this? Did the Samaritanes receive gods word,
did they believe, were they baptized, and yet were they void of the holy ghost?
How ca^ this be? Christ him self says, he that believes and is baptized
shall be saved. mar. xvi
But onles a man be renewed with the holy ghost, he can not be saved, as the
same Christ also testifyeth in the third Chapter of John. Wherefore it must
needs follow that the Samaritaynes had received the holy ghost, forasmuch as
true baptism can not be without the holy Ghost How than says S. Luke here
that the holy ghost was not yet come on the Samarytanes. To this doubt I
answer in few words, The solution.
that this text in this place that the holy Ghost was not yet come upon them,
is to be understand not of the substance of the spirit or holy Ghost,
but of those manifest and notable gifts of the holy Ghost. They had the holy
Ghost to comfort them, and to lead them to al truth necessary to their
salvation, but they had him not yet to do miracles and speak strange tongues
as in the primatyue Church they had for the confirmacion of Christ's doctrine.
Neither is it at this day necessary, the Gospel being now stablyshed, that
men should have such wonderful gifts of the spirit.

Wherefore good christen people I exhort you, and in the name of Christ I
require you, that according to the exemple of these Samaritanes here, ye wol
lay down your supersticion and blyndnes of heart, wherein ye have wandered,
and with glad minds receive the word of God, according to your profession
and promise which ye made at the fount stone, and put on Christ, renouncing ye
world, the flesh, and the deuell with steadfast and earnest faith. And no doubt
ye shall be endowed with ye holy ghost who in all your trouble and afflictions
shall comfort you and direct you in your way to heauenwarde where is our
dwelling place prepared with the father, son, and holy ghost. To whom be
all glory without end. Amen.

The gospel on the third day of Pentecost. The.x. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument. Christ is the true shepeherde.
Jesus said unto his disciples. Verily verily I say unto you: he that enters
not in by the door into the shepefolde, but clymmeth up some other way, the
same is a thief and a murderer. But he that enters in by the door, is the
shepherd of the sheep: to him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his
voice, and he calls his own sheep by name, and he leads them out. And when
he has sent forth his own sheep, he goes before the^ and the sheep follow
him, for they know his voice. A stranger will they not follow, but will flee
from him: for they know not the voice of strangers. This proverb spoke Jesus
unto them, but they understood not what things they were which he spoke unto
them. Than said Jesus unto them again: Verily, verily, I say unto you: I am
the door of the sheep. Al (even as many as came before me) are thieves and
murderers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by me if any man
enter in, he shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. A thief
comes not but for to steal, kill, and to destroy. I am come that they might
have life, and that they might have it more abou^dau^tly

IN the Gospel of this day (dear friends) our savior Christ declares his
own property or office and he sets out unto us the exceeding love and
kyndnes which he bears to mankind by a very proper and feate parable or
similitude, whereby he resembles himself to a good shepeherde, and the false
preachers or prelates to thieves and murderers. Certainly all false doctors,
all false prophets, all proud pharisees that woll iustifye them selves by
their own works and all hypocrites be here wonderfully touched. And why?
Because they enter not into the shepefolde by the door, but clyme up an other
way. What call ye clymmynge up an other way? Surely it is to seek forgyuenes
of thy sins, ryghtuousmakynge, and everlasting life by other means then
Christ (which is the way, Io. xiiij.
the troth, and the life) has taught. Wherefore if thou enterest not in by the
door, that is to say by Christ, but an other way, I mean, if thou wylt
justify thy self and promise thy self soul health, bearing thy self bold of
thyn own proper works, and not cleaving to the mercy of God (according to
thexemple of the publicane) nor dependynge upon the merytes of Christ's
passion, art thou not, trowest thou, by Christ's own judgment and sentence
here, a thief and a murderer? But what a great thief art you if thou also
teach other folk to think ye same that thou do? By me, says Christ,
he that enters in, shall be saved. But what is this shepefolde that he
speaks here of? surely the shepefolde is the church, it is the congregation
and assemble of Christen people. He that wol enter into this congregation, into
this church, into the holy communion and fellowship of christen persons any
other ways than by Christ, he is a thief and no christian person. He that also
woll teach any other doctrine in Christ's church than such as Christ has
taught, is no pastoure, no bishop, no true shepeherde, but a thief rather, a
murderer, a wolf. And it is much to be feared, lest there be at this day
many mo wolves and thieves, than be true herdmen and feders. I say I am sore
afraid lest the prophecye of saint Paul be yet still veryfyed and in force in
christendom. For when S. Paul should depart from Ephesus, Act. xx.
and knew by the spirit of God, that his death approached, he called together
the prestes or elders of the congregation and among other words he says
thus. Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock wherein the holy ghost
has made you bishops that is to say overseers, to feed or guide after the
manner of good shepeherdes the church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood. For I am sure of this, that after my departing shall greuouse
wolves enter in among you, not sparynge the flock. But who is the porter of
this shepefolde which opens ye door to the good and faithful shepeherde of
Christ's flock? Surely it is ye holy ghost,
for he opens unto him the scriptures of God, he leads him into al troth
And his sheep, that is to say, his paryshners, hear his voice, Prouer. xxvij.
and he calls his own sheep by name, according also to the counsel of
Solomon in his proverbs, where he says: Se that thou know the nombre if thy
catell thy self, and look well to thy flocks. Moreover this good shepeherde,
this good curate, this bishop, this ouerseer goes before his sheep and his
sheep follow him. What is this to say? Truly he that is a good bishop, a good
pastoure, and curate woll make himself comformable to his doctrine, he wol
lead them the way, that by his steps and good exemple of lyuinge, they may
walk in Christ's grounds and pastures. He woll not play the crabbe fysh
which would have taught her daughter to go straight, but would not lead her the
way her self and teach her by her exemple how to go, as it is in Esopes
fables. I am afraid we have many crabbes. Saint Paul would have a bishop yt is
to say an ouerseer or curate to give good exemple of living himself and to
have a good and honest report of strangers, i. tim. iij Tit. ij.
lest his living be a slander to his doctrine. So doing, his sheep shall
follow him, and shall know his voice. For assuredly, they that be godly
persons woll knowledge none for their shepeherde, but such as teach gods word
True teachers of Christ's Gospel be easily discerned of good christen men. And
again the good christen me^ be easily discerned and known of true preachers.
This proverb or parable nakedly and vnapplyed spoke Jesus to his disciples.
But they understood not what things they were which he spoke unto them, and
no maruayle. For (as saint Paul says) the flesh perceyueth not ye things yt
be goostly. The disciples were as yet but carnal. And therefore our Savior
Christ like a good master declares unto them the meaning of his parable, and
says, that he himself is the door of the sheep, by him who soever enters
in, shall be saved and shall go in and out and find pasture, as who should say,
whether so ever he turns him, whyther so ever he casts his eyes, he shall
find that shall be for the behoufe and edificacion of his flock, brefley to
speak, God shall be with him, the holy ghost shall prompt him and put him in
mind of such things as he ought to teach his paryshners and flock that is
committed to his charge. But (says Christ) as many as came before me are
thieves and murderers, and the sheep did not hear them. Here does our Savior
Christ show us the difference between the doctrine of the true preachers and
the doctrine of heretics,
of false prelates, and hypocrites. Now, they go before Christ which bear not
Christ with them, and which woll seem wyser than Christ, as Peter did when he
rebuked Christ because he said that he should suffer death. And therefore
Christ called him Satan, Mat. xvi
and bad him come after him. Wherefore mark the difference of Christ and of the
false Apostles. Ioh. i.
Christ is the preacher of grace, the pseudapostles preach ma^s merytes. Ioh.
viij
Christ is careful for the fode of his sheep, the false Apostles seek their
own lucre and gaynes Christ seeks the glory of the father, the false
Apostles steal from God his glory. Ioh. xi.
Christ quyckeneth with his word, the false Apostles kyl men's souls with
wicked doctrine. For the thief comes not but to steal, to kill, and to
destroy. Hitherto I have brefly and plainly declared the parable of the
shepeherde. Now it shall be your parts (good people) so to acquaynte your
selves with gods word, that ye may know the voice of the shepeherde from the
voice of the thief and murderer according to our Savior Christ's words
here. So doing ye shall at last be conducted to the most sweet and pleasant
grounds of the lyuinge, and shall sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with
the angels in heaven, where ye shall se God face to face and have fruicion of
all joy with God. To whom be al honor and glory world without end. AMEN.

The Epistle on the.iiij. day of Pentecoste, that is to say, on the
wednesdaye in wytsonweke. The.ij. chapter of the Acts.
Thargument The sermon of saint Peter, containing the prophecye of Iohel.
PEter stepped forth with the eleven, and lift up his voice, and said unto
them: Ye men of Iurye, and al ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto
you, and with your ears hear my words. For these are not droncken as ye
suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day. But this is that which
was spoken by the prophet Iohel: And it shall be in the last days, says
God: of my spirit I will pour out upon all flesh. And your sons and your
daughters shall prophecye, and your young men shall se visions, and your old
me^ shall dream dreams. And on my servants, and on my hand maidens I will
pour out of my spirit in those days, and they shall prophecye. And I will
show wonders in heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneth, blood, and
fire, and the vapor of smoke. The Son shall be turned into darckenes and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come. And it
shall come to pass, that who soever shall call on the name of the Lord,
shall be saved.

IN the lesson of this present day (good Christen people) is contained the
right godly sermon of ye holy Apostle saint Peter, wherein he soberly, coldly,
and lernedly makes answer and defense to the vnreuerent talking and hurly
burly of the people of all nations which when they herd Christ's disciples
speak with new tongues the great works and wonders of god, were partly abashed
and wondered thereat, and partly gested upon them and said they were dronken
and full of new wine.

Saint Peter therefore which of a fysherman is now become a great bishop and
pastor ryseth up, not alone yet, but the.xi. apostles standing up with him,
lest (as Erasmus does full well note) he might be thought to usurp any
tyranny or raygne over his fellows. Erasmus in paraphrasi.
He only spoke ye words, but he spoke them in the name of all his fellows,
even as he alone did also before Christ's passion in the name of al his fellows
confess Jesus Christ to be the son of the living God. Who would have
thought that so simple a creature and that a fysherman should have had such
audacitie ones to have looked upon so great a multitude. Oftentimes great
Orators when they bring their oration that they have long studied for
before, to speak in a great audience of people or before a great ruler, change
colors, be asto^nyed and utterly dismayed. Truly this was that heavenly
dro^kennes which they had caught of that heavenly cup whereof the prophet
says. Calix meus inebrians q^ praeclarus est. This fysher man I say stood
before so great a multitude, he joined with him in commission the eleven
Apostles, not to aid him but to accompany him, he fixed his eyes upon the
people which were unknown unto him, he lyfted up his voice and without any
premeditacion at al, he spoke unto them according as the Lord had commanded
him to do. Neither speaks he for himself, but being the shepherde he
defends the flock, which thing he does not with humane craft or eloquence,
but with the aid of holy scripture. Now ye hose multitude awayteth to hear what
he woll say. Let us also attend, for asmoche as these things be spoken to
all. First after he had ones with mouynge his hand assuaged the murmuryng of
the people, he began with such a proheme as might make them attente and
desirous to hear without any rhetorical flattery at all.

O ye men (says he) of the Iuysh nation, The oration of Peter.
whom it behooves not to be ygnoraunte of the law and of the prophets and
namely you which be inhabitau^tes of the city of Jerusalem where the head of
our religion and knowledge of the law is: Ye have cause perchance to wonder,
but ye have no cause to sklau^der. Wherefore so many of you as be here, give
atte^tiue ears a little while unto me, and know ye matter as it lies. For it
stand you all upon so to do. For these men of Galilie whom ye se here with me
be not dronken nor full of new wine, as some of you think, sith it is now
morning and but ye third hour from the son rysynge, at which time noma^ is
wont to be drunk. But in these men ye se now the thing accomplyshed which
God long ago promised by Iohel his prophet should come to pass. Harken to
the prophecye, and consider whether the thing be fulfilled or not. Sklaunder
not, because ye se a thing unwont, but receive rather the grace which almighty
god offers unto you. Iohel. ij
For Iohel being inspyred with the holy ghost and seeing, that the time should
come that God which at sundry times before had imparted his spirit to Moses
and to many prophets for your comfort and instruction would ones at last
when his only begotten son should come, pour out most plentefully the same
spirit not upon one or two (as hertofore) but upon all nations of the world
even as many as with sincere faith should receive this glad tidings which at
his commandment we bring now unto you: thus uttered the heavenly prophecye.
Erit in nouissimis die bus.
It shall come to pass in the last days, says the Lord. I shall pour out
plentefully of my spirit upon all flesh, and suddenly your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy and your young men shall se visions, and your old
persons shall dream dreams. And truly upon my servants and my handmaydens I
shall pour out of my spirit and they shall prophecy. And I shall give wonders
in heaven above, and tokens in earth beneth, blood and fire, and the vapoure
of smoke. The son shall be converted into darkness and the moon into blood,
before that great and renowned day of the Lord come. And whosoever shall call
on the name of the Lord shall be saved. This my friends has ye prophet Iohel
so long ago prophesied unto us. And hitherto goes the lesson of this present
day which conteyneth the first part of S. Peter's sermon. Now as touching the
first part of Iohels prophecy concerning the sendynge down of ye holy
ghost after such a plentyful sort, the scripture teaches us that it was
fulfilled about this time of Pentecost, as in our sermons before we have fully
and at large declared unto you. And as for the rest of the prophecy
concerning the great calamity and terrible tokens that shall come against
domes day, there is no doubt but it shall come to pass, as our savior
Christ has also certifyed us. Math. xxvij. lu. xxiij.
But my friends let us be nothing dismayed nor troubled with the remembrance
of this dradfull time, which no doubt yet approaches nere and shall steal upon
us or ever we be ware, we know not how sone. Only let us do as the prophet
teaches us here, and we shall not need to fear. Let us call on the name of ye
Lord and we shall be saved. Let us tha^ in all our adversity woo, and trouble,
yea and also in our wealth, prosperity and felicity remember God, love God,
praise God, call on God with faith. But let it be such faith as shall work by
charity. Let it be a lively faith and no dead faith, that may bring forth
good works. If we thus do, we shall not need to fear these terrible tokens,
but we shall be sure to be translated from this myserye unto immortal joy with
God. To whom. etc.

The Gospel on the.iiij. day of Pentecost. The.vi. chapter of S. Ihon.
Thargument. Christ teaches us here yt onles we be renewed by the holy ghost,
we can not come unto him.
Jesus said to his disciples, and to the company of the Jews. No man can come
to me, except the father which has sent me, draw him: And I will raise him
up at the last day. It is written in the prophets: and they shall be all taught
of god. Every man therefore that has herd, and has learned of the father,
comes unto me. Not that any man has seen the father, save he which is of
god: the same has seen the father. Verily, verily, I say unto you: he that
puts his trust in me, has everlasting life. I am that bread of life. Your
fathers did eat Ma^na in the wyldernes and are dead. This is that bread which
comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye. I am that
living bread which came down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. And the bread that I will give, is my flesh which I will
give for the life of the world.

IN this Gospel (good people) our savior Christ making answer to the
murmourynge of ye people against him, because he said he was the bread of
life, and declarynge that their thoughts could not be hyd from him, expouneth
and also fortifyeth the word yt he spoke, saying unto them, yt they had no
cause to murmoure among themselves of the thing yt he spoke. For therefore
his word did not synke into their minds because of their mysbeleue Seeing,
Nemo potest venire ad me.
they saw not: and hearing, they herd not: and being present they were
absent. Whosoever comes to Christ shall attain everlasting life. But there
is no way to come unto him but by faith.

This faith is not lightly had, but comes by the inspiracion of the father,
who like as by ye son he draws men's minds unto him: so with secret
inspiracions of faith he draws them to the son. He bestows not so great a
gift but to such as be willing and gredy.
Whosoever then shall merit by his prompte will and devout mind to be drawn
of ye father, the same shall attain by Christ to everlasting life. For our
savior Christ shall also raise ye dead to life again in ye last day. A
great thing takes he that believes Christ, but without the help of the
heavenly father, he can not do it. Yet nevertheless they are not excused because
they be not drawn. For the father as much as in him is coueteth to draw all.
He yt is not drawn, is in fault himself, because he with draws himself from
him yt would draw him. Humane things be learned with humane study, but this
heavenly learning is not perceived, onles ye secret inspiracion of the father
makes him an apt and teachable heart. And this is it yt long sythens was
prophesied of the prophets to come to pass. Esa. liiij
And they all shall be taught of God. But the desire of this world do make many
unapt. I say it is the gift of god, but the endeavor must be ours. A man
hears with his bodily eyes Christ's words in vain, onles he hear wtin first
ye secret voice of ye father, which breaths the mind with an insensible grace
of faith. For god is a spirit and is neither herd nor seen, but of spiritual
persons. Many have seen and herd Christ to their damnation. And albeit the Iues
boasted yt god was both seen and herd of Moses and of ye prophets: yet no
mortal man ever saw or herd god as he is. For this is only granted to the
son of man our savior Christ. Let us then shake of the care of this life
and not so much seek for the bread whereby our bodies be fed, as this bread
which gives everlasting life. We count the old fathers happy which did
eat Manna, yet this Manna preserved them not from death, Austine.
and why? Not because Manna was evil (says saint Austine) but because of
their evil eating. Christ is the bread which descends from heaven, which
is signified by Manna. He that eats of this bread, shall live for ever. But
ye wol ask who this is? Saint Austine answers in this wise: Augu. de
ciuitate dei li. xxi. cap. xxv
He that is in ye unity of Christ's body, that is to wit, in the felowshipe
of the christen me^bres: the sacrame^te of which body all faithful persons be
wont to receive, when they communicate at the altar and come to gods board,
does truly eat the body of Christ, and drink the blood of Christ. Now
therefore let us by all endeavors we ca^, make ourselves mete and apt to
receive ye holy spirit of god, whereby we may be drawn to Christ. Let us
also take part of his passions, and follow the conversation which he had in
his flesh. Austine. Bernard
Which thing (as S. Austine and others expoune this place) is to eat his
flesh and drink his blood. To whom with the father and holy ghost be all
glory. AMEN.

Imprinted at London by Richard Banks, and are to be sold in Fletestrete at
the sign of the white Heart.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

THE EPIstles and Gospelles with a brief Postyll upon the same from Trinity
sunday till Aduent, drawn forth by diverse learned men for the singular
commodity of al good christians and namely of prestes and Curates.

Christus Mat. iiij. Poenitentiam agite, appropinquauit enim regnum coelorum.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XL.

THE COPY OF THE KINGS GRACIOUS PRIVILEGE
HEnry the eight by the grace of God king of England and of France, defensour
of the faith, lord of Irelande, and in earth supreme head immediately under
Christ of the church of England, To al Printers of books within this our
Realm and to all other our officers, ministers and subjects these our
letters hearing or seeing greatyng. We let you wete, that we of our grace
especial have given privilege unto our welbiloued subject Richard Banks
that no manner parson within this our Realm, shall prynte any manner of books,
what so ever our said subject shall prynte first within the space of seven
years next ensuyng the prynting of every such book so by him printed upon
pain of forfeture the same. Wherefore we wol and command you that ye nor none
of you do presume to prynte any of the said books during the time before said,
as ye tender our pleasure and woll avoid the contrary.

The Epistle on Corpus Christi day. The first epistle to the Corinthyans,
the.xi. chapter.
Thargument. The institution of the most blessed sacrament of the Altar is
here by S. Paul described unto us.
BRethren, that which I delivered unto you I received of the lord. For the
Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread and when he had
given thanks he brake it and said. Take ye and eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you. This do ye in the remembrance of me. After the same manner also
he took the cup when supper was done saying. This cup is the new Testament in
my blood. This do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. For as often as
ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye shall show the lords death till
he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat of this bread and drink of this cup
unworthily shall be gylty of the body and blood of the lord. But let a man
examyne him self, and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the cup.
For he that eats and drynketh unworthily, eats and drynketh his own
damnation, because he makes no difference of the lords body.

The exhortacion upon this epistle ye shall find immediately before the Epistle
on Easter day. The Gospel on Corpus Christi day.

The.vi chapter of John^.
Thargument. Christ is the true bread of life.
Jesus said unto his disciples and unto the company of the Iues. My flesh is
meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. He that eats my flesh and
drynketh my blod, dwells in me and I in him. As the living father has sent
me, and I live for the father: Even so he that eats me, shall live by the
means of me. This is that bread, which came down from heaven: not as your
fathers did eat Manna, and are dead. He that eats of this bread, shall live
ever.

IN this present Gospel (good people) our savior Christ which is the true
shepherd and feder of our souls goes about to shake of from our minds the
fylthy cares of this corporal life, willing us rather to apply our selfs and
to labor with the gredy desire of the heavenly and gostly riches, to obtain
everlasting life. He bids us cast out of our minds the worldy bread
wherewith our bodies be fed and covet that heavenly bread which gives and
conferreth unto us everlasting and immortal life of the soul. This bread is
taken by faith, and faith is to be obtained and gotten of almighty god. For it
is undoubtedly his gift. Whosoever therefore believes in Christ, he already
has everlasting life, inasmuche as he has the fou^tayne of immortality. I
am (says Christ) the bread of life. As who should say. I am that same fode
which gives life not only corporal, but rather the life of the soul and
eternal. The Iues (among whom Christ was conuersau^t, and unto whom he had
this co^municacion) bosted much in the Manna, yt was sent down from heaven
unto their ancestors. But what says Christ unto them? Your fathers did
eat Manna in the wyldernes, and dyed. Austin.
Your fathers (says S. Austine) because you be like them murmuryng fathers of
murmuryng children. For assuredly this people in nothing offended god more then
in grutchyng and murmuryng against God. Now they therefore dyed because they
believed (says S. Austin) the thing that they saw,
but the thing they saw not, they believed not nor yet understood. O
sacramentum pietatis, o signum vnitatis, The words of saint Austine.
o vinculum charitatis. Qui vult viuere habet vnde viuat, accedat, credat,
incorporetur, vt viuificet. O wonderful sacrament of godlynes, o wonderful
token of unity, o wonderful bond of charity. He that will live he has whereof
he may live, let him draw nigh let him believe and let him be incorporated that
he may be quickened. Let him not depart for the frame of the members, let him
not be a rotten member worthy to be cut of, nor yet crooked whereof he may be
ashamed Let him be a fair member, open, sound and cleaving to the body. Let
him live to god. Let him now labor in earth, that he may afterward live in
heaven. The sacrament of this thing (says this holy doctor) that is to say,
of the unity of the body and blood of Christ, is taken at gods bourde of
some men to their salvation, and of some to their damnation.
The thing it self is ordained to the salvation of al men and to the
destruction of none. For my flesh (says Christ) is very meat, and my blood
very drink. This bread came down from heaven and has an heavenly power of
workynge given it of god, that who so ever worthily do eat it, shall live
eternally and never dye. Wherefore good christen people, we have no need to
demand from heaven any Manna sithe we have the very heavenly bread in deed,
that is to say, the body of our savior Christ ready unto us, to give us
everlasting life, if so be we wol take it worthily and with faith. For
undoubtedly Christ is that heavenly bread which gives immortality to our
souls, and which for our sakes was betrayed and crucified. He is the word of
god in whom who so ever steadfastly woll believe, shall have everlasting life.
Who so ever shall convey this heavenly bread into the bowels of his soul,
shall be nourished and grow up to everlasting life. For assuredly this is the
lively bread, which is descended down from heaven, even the most preciouse
body of our savior Christ which was betrayed and put to death to redeem the
life of the hole world. Let us believe it, let us take it and we shall live.
The mystery of this thing is right strange and wonderful to the world. But
suerly onles thou be by faith ingrafted and incorporated into this mystical
body and stycke fast in the same (even as a branch does in the vine tree)
thou shall have no life in the. Let us not (my friends) murmoure within our
selves as the Iues did, and say how can he give us his flesh to eat? The Iues
(says saint Augustine) because they understood not the bread of concord:
Austin.
therefore they discorded, and fell at variaunce within themselves. But suerly
they that eat this bread, do not strive nor contend within themselves, for by
this most blessed and heavenly bread god makes them to dwell in his house in
full unity and concord together. Christ assures us, that onles we eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, we shall not have life in us. Ioh. vj.
But how shall we eat his flesh and drink his blood? Truly (as all holy
doctors expound this text) we eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood,
August. lib. iij. de doct. Christ. S. Ambrose.
when we communicate and take part of his passion, and swetly and profitably
lay up in our memory that his flesh was crucified and wounded and that his
most precyouse blood was shed for us. He that believes not thus in him (says
saint Augustine) eats not Christ, and therefore he has not the Christen
faith, without which he can have no pardon of his sins.

Wherefore (my fre^des) let us daily eat this heavenly bread this Christ our
loving savior in spirit and by faith. Let us I say take hold of him let us
apprehende him by faith, let us take the benefit and use of his passion and
resurrection,
let us make him all ours. Let us suffer him to enter into us. Spiritually we
ought daily to receive him. But both spiritually and also sacramentally and
corporally we must receive him with most high reverence in form of bread at
such time as the church appoynteth, and namely at the feast of Easter. I
say, when we come to the aultare of god, and to his holy board, let us take heed, that we worthily receive in form of bread his most preciouse body, i.
cor. xj.
lest we take him to our da^nacion, not discerning the lords body. Which thing
we can not do without penance, steadfast faith and full purpose of ame^ding our
former life. Let us first or ever we approach to this blessid sacrament examine
our selves by knowledging our sins against god, Contricion of heart.
whereunto we shall be brought by heryng and considering gods will declared in his
laws and perceiving in our conscience ye god is displeased with us for ye same
and thereupon co^ceiuing not only great sorrow, but also great fear of gods
wrath toward us, considering we have no worthy merits to lay before god as
sufficient satisfaction for our sins, which done, we must conceive sure hope
and faith yt god yet will forgive us our sins not for our own worthiness but
for ye only merits of his blood and passion which faith we shall confirm by
ye applieng of Christ's promise contained in his gospel and namely in ye
institucyon of this most blessed sacrament where it is said (given for the
remission of our sins. Faith and hope of forgiveness.
Math. xxvj.
) But to the atteining of this faith, the second part of penance, yt is to
say, confession to the pressed is necessary, Confession to a priest
inasmuch as the absolucion given by him is ordained of Christ to apply the
promises of gods grace to us, according to these textes. Ioh. xx. Luce. x.
Whose sins soever you forgive shall be forgiven, whose sins ye retain,
shall be retained. Also. He that hears you hears me. Finally being thus truly
penitent co^trite and confessed, we must also bring forth ye fruits of
penance, The fruits of penance.
as prayer, fasting and alms deed. We must also make restitucion or
satisfaccion in will and deed to our neighbors in yt we have done them wrong.
We must also do al other good works of mercy and charity and express our
obedient will in fulfylling of gods commandment outwardly when time and
occasion shall be given us. Thus we shall examine our selves and so receive this
most holy sacrament worthily. Otherwise we shall receive our own damnacion.
Wherefore my fre^des do as I have here declared unto you and ye shall receive
forgiveness of your sins and at last the croune of everlasting life. Unto
which. etc.

THE EPISTLE ON TRINITY SUNDAY. THE IIII. Chapter of the Apocalypse.
Thargument. Gods Majesty is here described.
I Looked up and saw a door open in heaven, and the first voice which I herd
was as it were of a trompet talking with me, which said: come up hither and I
will show the things, which must be fulfilled herafter. And immediately I was
in the spirit and behold a seat was set in heaven, and one sat on the seat.
And he that sat, was to look upon, like a Iaspar stone, and a Sardyne stone.
And there was a rain bow about the seat, in sight like to an Emeralde. And
about the seat were.xxiiij. seats. And upon the seats.xxiiij. Elders
sytting, clothed in whyt raiment, and had on their heads crowns of gold. And
out of the seat proceeded lyghtenynges, and thundrynges, and voices, and there
were seven lamps of fire, burning before the seat, which are the seven
spirits of God. And before the seat there was a see of glass, like unto
Crystal and in the mids of the seat, and round about the seat were four
beasts full of eyes before and behind. And the first beast was like a Lion,
and the second beast like a Calfe, and the third beast had a face as a Man,
and the fourth beast was like a flyenge Egle. And the four beasts had each
one of them.vi. wings about him, and they were full of eyes within. And they
had no rest day neither night, saying: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty
which was, and is, and is to come. And when those beasts gave glory and
honor, and thanks to him that sat on the seat (which lives for ever and
ever) the.xxiiij. Elders fell down before him that satte on the trone and
worshypped him that lives for ever, and cast their crowns before the trone,
saying: thou art worthy o Lord our God to receive glory and honor, and
power, for thou have created all things, and for thy wylles sake they are, and
were created.

GOod people we be sure by scripture, that there is but one God. For it says.
Harken o Israel, thy god is one. Deu. v.
But forasmuch as the scripture does attribute godheade and divine essencie to
three: therefore the fathers have found out the word (person) for the avoiding
of many errors. Why the feast of Trinity was institute.
And hereof for discernynge the said persons is the name of Trinity come into
the church, whereby we sygnifye not.iij. unequal persons, but three persons
coequal of one in diuisible substance and essencie. And as touching the use
of this feast, our predecessors thought it good, to have some certain time
appointed in the church, wherein they might entreat of the offices of those
three persons egall in godheade. And because the fourth chapter of the Apocalypse
seems to set forth wonderfully well the majesty of God and not obscurely to
touch the mysterye of the Trinity, the church of England condescended to
have the same red in the church this day, which brefely, God willing, we shall
declare unto you. Thus it begins After this I looked, and behold a door open
in heaven, and the first voice I herd, was as of a tro^pe speaking with me,
saying: Come up hither, and I shall show the what shall be done herafter. This
door which saint Ihon saw open, no doubt is the intraunce and coming to the
new and heavenly life, which Christ our Savior has made us, as the Epistle
to the Hebrews the.x. phil. iij.
chapter witnesses. For our co^uersacion ought now to be in heaven. And saint
Ihon does here describe the Judicial power of Christ given him of the
heavenly father wherewyth he defends his church from the power of the
adversaries. And he says: There was a seat set, and upon it a sytter, whereby
he sygnifyeth the stabilitie of Christ's raygne. For his seat or trone is (as
David says) world without end. And he that satte upon this glorious and
princelye trone or seat was to look upon like a Iaspar stone and a Sardyne
stone. Psalm. lxxxiiij.
By this is understood nothing else, but a certain heavenly and royal bewty
showing as well the majesty as the power most excellent of the judge Christ.
For the cloth of estate and royal seats of kings be wont to be most rychely
decked and furnyshed for the setting out of their Majesty and authority.
Now, the Iaspar stone they say bears the semblaunce of water, and the
Sardyn stone of fire, whereby is understood that the Lord is wont to make his
judgments in water and in fire, as appears Genesis vij. and.xix. Exo. xiiij,
and in the second Epistle of Peter the last chapter and in many other places
of scripture.

The raynebow.
And a raynebowe was about the seat in sight like to an Emerald. The raynebowe
is a token, that god the father is made at one with us by Christ and reconciled
to mankind, emerald
as appears Genesis ix. Now the Emeralde they say is of such grenenes and
virtue that it makes all things about it to floryshe and grow. Lactantius.
Even so by Christ the world is renewed and it reflorysheth, as Lactantius does
very elegauntly and well declare in a certain Hymn.

And about the seat were.xxiiij. seats. And upon the seats.xxiiij. elders
sitting, clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads crowns of gold
Saint Ihon does here allude to the manner of a realm well ordered, where kings
and princes which are to give sentence in matters of weyghte, woll not do it
without the assistence of certain ancient personages that have good
experience of things and knowledge of the best laws, lest they might seem to
condemn any man of their own private lust and pleasure. Wherefore by this
allusio^ he declares that God is a most just judge, whose sentence all just
persons shall approve and praise as most ryghtful and true. By the.xxiiij.
elders ye shall understand as well the patriarchs and prophets of the old
synagoge, as the Apostles, Evangelists, and doctors of the new Testament,
Exodus xxiiii. Nu. xi. Act. xx.
and also the godly kings and iuges of both peoples. For they in scripture be
called Elders. Now by the sitting of these Elders is understand the fellowship
of the judicial power with Christ, according to Christ's own saying. Mat.
xix. Ye shall also sit upon the.xij. seats, judging ye xij. trybes. i. cor.
vi.
Also saint Paul witnesses that saints shall judge of this world. By their
white garments or robes, wherewyth they were clothed, is sygnifyed pureness of
mind, innocencye, and indifferent judgment without affection. Exodus xviiij
By their crowns of gold upon their heads I understand the most pure
sense of faith, whereby they shall judge of al, according to the arbitrament of
God, so that what so ever they shall judge upon earth, shall be ratifyed also in
heaven, according to that sayng of Christ, Matthew. xviii. What soever ye bind
on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and what soever ye louse on earth, the same
shall be loused in heaven. Furthermore they sygnifye the fellowship of the
victories and raygne of Christ, Cap. xi.
according to that in the Epistle to the Hebrews. The saints have vaynquyshed
realms by faith. It follows in the text.

And out of the seat proceeded lyghtenynges, and thonderynges, and voices. And
there were seven lamps of fire burning before the seat which are the seven
spirits of God. The preaching of the Apostles and of men apostolical is
compared to lightening and thondrynge, because by it is proclaimed the
fearfulnes of gods judgments the which hang over the heads of infideles and
such as believe not. By the.vii. lamps of fire brennyng before the trone I
understand the septiforme spirit of God, that is to wit, the fulness and
perfection of the heavenly graces wherwyth the kingdom of Christ is furnyshed.
Esa. xi. i. cor. xij
It follows.

And before the seat there was a see of glass like unto Crystal, and in the
mids of the seat and round about the seat were four beasts full of eyes
before and behind. etc. My friends the calamities of this world, wherwyth ye
stynch of the flesh is repourged and the naughtye affectes of the same utterly
mortifyed, must needs be passed over of us, even as it behooved the people of
God to pass the red see, before they could enter into the land of
promission. Wherefore those heavenly and spiritual waters be here sygnifyed,
wherwythal ye pourgynge of the souls and the spiritual regeneration is made.
Ioh. iij. i. Pe. iiij
For onles a man be borne again of water and spirit he can not se God. And he
calls it a see after the Hebrews fashion, which be wont to call al
gatherynges of waters sees, as in the third book of kings it is called the
brazen see wherein the prestes in their ministracion washed, and in certain
other places. Now glass is a bright thing whereby is meant that the water of
baptism purifyeth and makes bright not so much the body as the hearts, yea
eue^ in the outward conversation of manners according to that of Christ. Let
your light so shine before me^ that they may se your good works. But why is
this see of glass lykened to Crystal? Surely because Crystal is a water
which by continuance of time is turned into the hardenes of a stone, such
ones ought they that be baptized to be brought unto, that is to say, strong
and hard in faith.

By the.iiii. beasts full of eyes before and behind, some do understand
the.iiii. Evangelists, other, (whose judgment better agrees to the scripture
as it seems) do understand those heavenly and ministratoriouse spirits or
angels which be appointed to stand at the four quarters of heaven (by which
the kingdom of Christ, that is, Heb. ij.
the church is spread) to execute the things that be determined by the
unsearchable and eternal counsel of God to be done in men's things. These be
full of eyes before and behind, that is to say, they be replenyshed with the
science and knowledge of things passed and things to come. And the first beast
was like a Lion, the second like a Calfe, the third had a face like a Man, and
the fourth was like a flyenge Egle. Brethren, ye shall understand, that in a
lion is courage and strength, in a calfe labor and diligence, in the face of
a man prudence and right judgment, in an egle swyftnes and also facility in
doing their ministeries, al which virtues they have need of,
which wol administre well and prosperously any kingdom. And for this cause in
the psalms the Lord is said to sit and ride upon Cherubim, because yt by them
he executes his judgments courageously, diligently, prudently, and with
great swyftnes. To this interpretacio^ does the scripture agree. For the
prophet Ezechiel in the.x. chapter does understand by ye.iiii. beasts ye
Cherubim, and he makes also the four beasts one, having yet four faces or
forms for the forsayde virtues wherwyth those ministrynge spirits, whose
service Christ uses in ye administracion of his kingdom, were endowed. In
that they have six wings a piece, is betokened their swyftnes of obedience to
execute the things that they be appointed unto. Esa. vi.
In like manner does Esaias describe Seraphim. These a^gels, or if ye list, these
four Evangelists which also be angels that is to say messangers, by whom
Christ the great conqueror of the adverse powers is carried through out the
hole world as it were in a triumphall charette, have no rest neither day nor
night but cry without ceasing Holy,
holy, holy, that is to say, holy father, holy son, and holy spirit
comforter, one Lord and God almighty, Math. xxviij.
in whose name all we that believe be baptized. And when those beasts gave
glory, honor and thanks to him that sat on the seat which lives for ever
and ever, the.xxiiii. elders of whom mention is made before fell also down
before him which sat on the trone, and worshypped him that lives for ever.

Now therefore good christen people, sith those holy spirits or angels, and the
hole quere and church triumphant in heaven do without ceasynge, laud, praise
and magnifye the high majesty of the Godheade, let not us which be the church
or congregation militant here in earth be behind with our praises,
co^mendacions, and thankesgyuynge. The holy angels do cry before, let us
answer in ye same note and say. Holy father, holy son, and holy ghost
co^forter Let us, I say, according to the exemple of ye.xxiiii. elders cast
our crowns before the trone, that is to say, confess the crowns and
rewards which we that be justified persons have, come of Christ's mere
goodness and no part of our own deseruynge, and say: Thou art worthy o Lord
our God to receive glory, and honor, and power. For thou have created all
things and for thy will they be. etc.

The gospel on Trinity sunday. The.iij. chapter of Ihon.
Thargument. A conflicte between the justice of the flesh and the justice of
the spirit.
THere was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. The
same came to Jesus by night and said unto him: Rabbi, we know that thou art a
teacher come from God, for no man could do such miracles as thou do except
God were with him. Jesus answered and said unto him: Verily, verily, I say
unto the, except a man be borne from above, he can not se the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus says unto him: how can a man be borne when he is old? can he enter
into his mothers womb and be borne again? Jesus answered: verily verily I
say unto the, except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he can not
enter into the kingdom of God. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and
that which is borne of the spirit is spirit. Maruayle not thou that I said to
the, ye must be borne from above. The wind blows where it lysteth, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes and whether it
goes. So is every one that is borne of the spirit. Nicodemus answered and
said unto him: how can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto him: art
thou a master in Israel and know not these things? Verelye verelye I say
unto the: we speak that we do know, and testifye that we have seen: and ye
receive not our wytnes. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not:
how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things? And no man ascends up
to heaven, but he that came down from heaven even the son of man which is in
heaven. And as Moses lift up the serpent in the wyldernes, even so must the
son of man be lift up, that who so ever believes in him perysh not, but have
eternal life.

IN this Gospel (good people) is contained a sore disputacion upon the justice
of the spirtye, and the justice of the flesh. Christ teaches and defe^deth
the spiritual justice, Nicodemus the other, but so yet that he suffers himself
to be taught and instructed of Christ.

First therefore we shall consider the person of Nicodemus, as the Gospel
describes him, and how folyshly he speaks of ye new birth. The description
of Nicodemus.
For hereby we shall espy what we also can do of our own power in godly and
spiritual matters. Now the Euangelyst certifyeth us that Nicodemus was a
Pharisee, and a ruler of ye Iues, meaning herby, that for the outward
conversation he was fautles in living and floryshed in such apparaunce of
honesty and holiness, that he was nombred of the Iues even amongst ye chefest
and first. Lo here thou have the descripcion of Nicodemus person which before
the world is both prudent and ryghtuouse. And yet nevertheless this worldly
wise and holy man is not so hardy nor so strong, that he dare openly come to
Christ or speak unto him, albeit he judges Christ a teacher sent from God,
and can not deny his signs and miracles. I pray you, why does not reason
here come forth, openly to confess Christ's doctrine? For this thing does
Christ in any wise require where he says. He that confesses me before men,
The flesh is fearful.
I shall also confess him before my father and the angels of heaven. Surely
reason can not do this, it far passes her powers to subject herself to the
hatred of the world for Christ's sake. And therefore Christ requires of us to
hate our own selves, to kill our old Adam, Math. x
that we may so be transformed into new creatures. But what knowledge has our
flesh and our nature of such transfourmynge or new birth? Surely no knowledge,
no feeling, no understanding at al, as this sayntly Nicodemus this holy
prelate trusting to his own good works full well declares. Christ talks of
the spiritual and new birth, and Nicodemus looks upon the carnal birth,
saying thus. How can a man be borne again when he is old? Shall he crepe
again into his mothers womb? Harken how foolyshly, how unwisely for all his
outward holiness this noble prelate speaks of godly things? Yea Christ is
feign to expound unto him, how it comes to pass that we be made new
creatures. Howbeit he yet understands him not and therefore he asks again
how it can be. I pray you what synguler point do ye se in this Nicodemus, or
what other thing do ye find in him but ignorance, blyndnes, and infidelity?
Wherefore though his outward conversation shyneth never so much before the
world yet it can not please God. God beholds not the outward face and
vysoure, but the mind and faith, Iere v. To. xiiij
as also Heremy says. And what so ever is not of faith is sin. The inward
ryghtuousnes and goodness must go before, or else ye outward can not please God.
If thou have not the inward justice, forthwyth Christ says: Onles your
ryghtuousnes be better then ye ryghtuousnes of the scribes and pharisees ye
shall not come into ye kingdom of heaven. Wherefore like as Nicodemus is here
found unskillful, rude, and foolysh in matters concerning the honor of God
and our health: eue^ so be all we, old Adams, and all fleshly (according to
Christ's saying, what so ever is gendred of flesh is flesh) onles we be
lyghtened of the Lords spirit. What the scripture calls flesh To. viij.
We call flesh here the hole nature of man, the body, mind, reason,
understanding, will, beside the holy ghost. Such a man and such a body of sin
surely can do naught but sin, seem he never so gay to other men, and be he
decked with never so many good works, which thing saint Paul declares
copiously to the Romans, and in this place this Nicodeme full plainly shows
by his wise talking

New birth
Secondly, Christ teaches us in this Gospel the new birth, which thing
Nicodemus could not attain unto, and first he so speaks of this new birth
or regeneration that he makes it plainly necessary to our souls health. What
it is to se the kingdom of God
For thus he says: Onles a man be borne again, he can not se the kingdom of
god Now to se the kingdom of God is as much as to be justified. Wherefore
consider here with the eyes of thy mind what Christ speaks of this manner
iustificacio^, and again what Nicodemus thinks against it. Christ reasons
and gathers thus. No work, no reason, no outward conversation iustifyeth,
it is only the new birth that must work this. Against this conclusion Nicodeme
thus obiecteth. If so be my outward conversation, works and life, be
comfortable to the law, tha^ for such works sake God can not but iustifye me
and make me eternally blessed. But surely this saying of him is excedingly
both false and wicked, psa. cxv
for as much as all men be liars, and only God true. Wherefore let us consider
the nature of this regendrynge in what sort it is. Onles (says Christ) thou
beyst borne again of water and spirit thou can not come into the kingdom
of heaven. Baptism
Mark yt in baptism this new birth begins. For it is a token of sleynge
the flesh, as Paul witnesses Romans vi. And this is one part of the new
birth. Now in baptism the holy ghost also is given and where as we be thus
killed, he rayseth us up again, he dryueth, draws, alters, and so works
in us, that we be led no more with fleshly affections but with goostly, and that
we should breath and think no longer upon earthly things but upon heavenly
things, and should live hensforth only to ryghtuousnes. And this is the other
part of this new birth. It follows hereof, What it is to be new borne
that to be borne again is naught else but to dye to sin ward, and by spirit
and faith to live to justice ward. Where this chau^ceth there is the kingdom
of god espied, there is the realm of heaven entered into. What gloriacion than
is left here to the ryghtuousnes of Nicodemus? Surely it is not worth a rushe,
nor to be set an hawe by, Phil. iij.
none otherwise than Paul esteemed his ryghtuousnes that he gat in his Iewysh
life no better than donge. For not the thing that comes of our own reason,
but that which the spirit works in us is acceptable to God. The thing that
is gendred of the spirit is spirit, and is only of valor before God. Ephesians,
iiij
And therefore saint Paul says to the Ephesians. Do of the old man according
to your former manners and conversation, and put ye on the new man. How can
reason do or compryse these things, sith it can not perceive things corporal
and outward, as from whence the wind comes and whyther it woll? To conclude,
this new birth is a work of the spirit, though the Papists do never so much
preach the justice of their flesh.

Christ has purchased us the spirit
Thyrdly, we be here taught, who has gotten, given, delivered, and communicated
unto us this spirit, even the son of man Christ, who only came from heaven
and returned into heaven. By what thing then has he gotten and deserved
unto us this spirit? Truly herby, that he was likewise exalted as the serpent
in wyldernes. Nu. xxi.
But what manner serpent is this? The people of Israel ones grudged against god
and blaspehmed him so heynously that he sent upon them fyery serpents. And who
so ever was bytten of any such serpent, dyed thereof. Here God at last moved
with the prayers and requests of Moses, commanded a brazen serpent to be
erected for a sign that whosoever being stryke^ of any such serpent should
look up to that brazen serpent, should be healed. This figure Christ draws to
himself, and this in sentence he says: I shall be delivered to mine
adversaries to be crucified and at last slain, for this intent, that by my
cross and death God the most loving father might be reconciled to the
world. Whosoever therefore being stryken with the poison darte of sin,
looks up to me that is to say, believes on me, shall not than perysh, but
shall attain everlasting life. Lo such one is Christ unto us, he forgyueth us
our sins, and bestows on us his spirit, he tra^sformeth us to new
creatures,
he ordeyneth us the sons and heirs of God, so that we cleave unto him and
believe on him without doubting. Wherefore good people that God of his endless
goodness woll vouchsaue to create in us a sincere and a right faith, let us al
pray. To whom be all glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

The Epistle on the first sunday after trinity. The.i. epistle of Ihon
the.iiij. chapter.
Thargument How God loved us first, and how we ought by his exemple to love our
neighbor.
Most dearly beloved brethren, God is love: In this appeared the love of God
to us ward because that God sent his only begotten son in to the world, that
we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God: but that he
loved us, and sent his son to make agreement for our sins. Dearly beloved,
if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man has seen god at
any time. If we love one another, god dwells in us, and his love is perfyte
in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his spirit. And we have seen and do testifye, that the father sent
the son to be the Savior of the world. Whosoever confesses, that Jesus is
the son of God, in him dwells God, and he in God. And we have known, and
believed the love that God has to us. God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him. Herin is the love perfect in us, that we
should have trust in the day of judgment: For as he is, even so are we in
this world. There is no fear in love but perfyte love casts out fear, for
fear has paynfulnes. He that fears, is not perfyte in love. We love him,
for he loved us first.

If a man say: I love god, and yet hate his brother he is a liar. For how can
he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not
seen? And this commandment have we of him: that he which loves God, should
love his brother also.

MY friends this hole lection is a commendacion of gods love toward us, by
whose exemple we also be commanded to love one another. He that loves not
(says saint Ihon which wrote this epistle) knows not God though he never so
much bosteth himself to be a christen man, for god is love. Yea herin appeared
the great love and charity of God toward us men, that he sent his only
begotten son into the world, to the intent, that by his merit we might live
through him which else should have dyed with perpetual death. But happily ye
wolle here say, that we provoked God with our love and merytes first to love
us. No not so says saint Ihon, that is a false opinion and a stark lie. For
in this is the love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us first, and
sent his son to be a sacrifice and a purgynge for our sins. Aug. co^tra
Pela cap. xx
But harken what S. Austine says of this matter. What good merytes could we
than have when we loved not God. For that we might take love to love with, we
were loved, when as yet we had it not. There be no merits before grace.
This (says he) does Ihon thapostle most openly affirm. Not that we loved
God, but that he loved first us. Truly (says saint Austine) this is most
ryghtly and well spoken. For we could not have to love him onles we had taken
this of him, in that he loved us first. How can we do good, if we love not? or
how do we not good, if we love?
For albeit gods co^mau^demente seems sometime to be done of not lovers but of
fearers: yet there is no love, no good work is imputed, neither ryghtly is it
called a good work, for all yt is not of faith is sin. And faith works by
love. Hitherto speaks Austine. Wherefore my dearly beloved (says Ihon) if
God has so loved us, we ought also to love one another. where charity is
exercised. Exodus xxxiii.
noman ever saw God, seeing it is red in scripture that many of ye fathers
have seen him face to face, as Jacob, Moses, and other. The spirit of God
and he in us. But here ye must mark that this knowledge can not chance but
to such as be endowed with the holy ghost. For he says: Herby we know yt we
dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. And we have
seen and do testifye (says S. Ihon) that ye father has sent his son to be
ye Savior of the world. O glad and joyful tidings. What an exceeding
charity and love was this? Then sith God is so loving unto us, yea sith he is
the self love, if we woll dwell in him, we must love, not only hi^, but also
for him, our neighbor. For that we do to our neighbor he cou^teth it done to
himself. Now it is a most certain token of our love toward God if we
boldly and with confidence look for the day of judgment. For if we fear, we
declare that we be no perfyte lovers. For fear is not in love, but perfyte
love casts out fear. My friends harken again what saint Austine says
herin. He that fears hell, fears not to sin, Aug. ad Anastasiu^ epi.
cxliiij.
but to brenne. But he fears to sin, which hates syn as hell. This is the
chaste fear that remains for ever and ever. For that fear of punishment has
torment and paynefulnes in it and it is not in charity, but perfyte charity
casts it out. And surely a man so much hates sin, as he loves justice,
which he can not do, the law fearing him by the letter, but the spirit
healynge him by grace. This writes the most excellent doctor of the church
saint Austine to ye confusion of the vain sophistes which blasphemously write
and speak against the iustifienge spirit of God which works by pure and
lively faith.

Wherefore good brethren and systers let us not think trusting to our own
merytes and works, that we loved God first and so deserved kyndnes at his
hands. For if ye think so, saint Ihon reproves you, saying: We love God,
because he first loved us. Now if a man says, he loves God, and hates his
brother, he is a liar. For he that loves not his brother whom he sees, how
can he love God whom he has not seen? And this commandment (says saint
Iho^) we have of God, that he that loves God, must also love his brother. But
I pray you how do we love our brother and se so many lie in every corner
without comfort? Yea we se Christ an ho^gred, Math. xxvi.
and we give him no meat. We se him thyrstye, and we give him no drink. We se
him harbroughles, and we take him not in, naked, and we cloth him not, syck,
and we vysite him not, in prison, and we come not to him. For in as much as we
do it not to one of these our poor brethren, Christ count it undone to him.
Wherefore if we unfeignedly love God, let us declare our love with worthy
fruits, let us love our brethren, as we be here wylled to do. Then shall we
with confidence and full hope look for the day of judgment without fear, at
which time the heavenly king shall say unto us. Come ye blessed of my father
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. To
this heavenly king the son of man our Lord and Savior be given al glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel on the first sunday after Trinity. The.xvi. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Of the rich man and of poor Lazarus.
Jesus put forth a parable unto his disciples, saying: There was a certain
rych man, which was clothed in purple and fine white, and fared deliciously
every day: And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which lay at his
gates full of sores, desiring to be refreshed with the cromes, which fell from
the rych man's board, and no man gave unto him. The dogs came also, and lycked
his sores. And it fortuned that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the angels
into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also dyed, and was buried. And being in hell
in torments, he lift up his eyes and saw Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in
his bosom, and he cried and said: father Abraham: have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the typpe of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue: for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said: Son remember that
thou in thy life time, receyuest thy pleasure, and contrary wise Lazarus
received pain. But now is he comforted, and thou art punyshed. Beyond all
this, between us and you there is a great space set, so that they which would
go from hence to you can not: neither may come from thence to us. Then he
said: I pray the therefore father, send him to my fathers house (For I have
five brethren) for to warn them, lest they also come into this place of
torment. Abraham said unto him: they have Moses and the prophets, let them
hear them. And he said: nay father Abraham: but if one come unto them from
the dead, they will repent. He said unto him: If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they believe, though one rose from death again.

GOod people this Gospel as it is right comfortable to the poor godly persons:
so it is right fearful to the ungodly rych persons. The sely pore godly person
is much vexed with troubles and diseases in this life, he lies otherwhyles
beggynge at rich men's gates, full of sores, desiring to be refreshed with the
cromes which fall from their tables The ungodly person lives all at pleasure
and florysheth. But se the end of these two in their death. The poor Lazarus
is forthwyth carried by angels into Abraham's bosom. The rych man is buried in
hell. What is this, to be borne up of angels and to be laid in Abraha^s bosom?
Surely it is nothing else, but to dye in the faith of Abraham, whose souls
must needs be in the hands of God. What is it to be buried and to lie in hell
in torments? To dye with an evil conscience. These things do chance in
death,
what time we pass out of this world. Albeit ye shall yet understand, that
it was not poverty that saved Lazarus, nor the riches that damned the rych
man, but it is the faith that saves and which works patience and hope, and
again it is ye lack of faith and despisynge of the neighbor that da^neth.
As long as the rych man lived he was so choked with worldly pleasures, that
he could not se what was what, but when he was in hell and in torments than
he lyfted up his eyes, then he saw Abraham afar of, and Lazarus in his
bosom. Surely my friends in death first we espy our ungodliness and damnacion.
Tha^ we se the felicity and joy of the godly persons. esa. lxvj Math. xxv.
This is that worm that dies not, which the prophet Esaye speaks of. Tha^
first the unwise virgins se that the wise have oil Then it comes to our
mind, to whom we have done good, and to whom we have done euel. Then does
the law show it self, where as the gospel is taken away, then first, but
to late and in vain, we seek favor. Prou. i.
Then thou rych man thou can speak fair and say: Father Abraham, have
mercy on me But harken o thou ungodly rych man, what father Abraham shall
answer the again. Son remember that thou in thy life time receyuedst thy
pleasure, and contrary wise this poor Lazarus received pain. Lo the sentence
of the sharp judgment of God. For as saint James says: Iaco. ii.
Judgment without mercy shall be to them, which have showed no mercy. Also the
wise man says in his proverbs. He that stops his ear at the cryenge of
the poor, shall also cry, and not be herd. Furthermore the prophet says:
Ps. xxxij
For this shall every godly person make his prayer unto the in due season, but
in the great water floudes they shall not come nyghe him. So good people ye se
by this parable, that after this life we shall come short to make intercession
either for our selves or for others. For the soul of this rych glutto^ here
espyenge he could nothing prevail for himself began to entreat for his five
brethren, and desired that Lazarus might be sent to his fathers house for to
warn them, lest they also come into that place of tourme^t. But what was
answered unto him again? They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear
them, as who should say, they have gods word among them, which teaches
them how to eschew everlasting punyshmentes, and how to be saved, if they wol
not regard it, there is no recovery in them. Undoubtedly this answer teaches
us two things. First,
that ye will of God ought not to be learned of the dead, as Moses also
forbyddeth in Deuteronomye, saying: Deuteronomy. xviij
Let noman search the troth of the dead, for God abhors it. And surely not
without cause, for he that ensercheth the troth of dead men, shows himself
not contented with gods word, which is a sin against the second
commandment. Also to search the troth of dead men, is to put other means
tha^ preachers, by whom God wol have his word known and spread abroad. This
thing does the exemple of Saul teach us, i. Reg. xxviij
which after he was cast up of the Lord and utterly wicked in his heart, by
the help of a wytche raised up the prophet Samuel from death, that is to
wit, a certain person resembling Samuel in voice and vysage.

Secondly, this answer of Abraham teaches us, that beside the word written,
none other is to be looked for or to be herd, though an angel should come from
heaven, or a ghost rise from death to life. Wherefore good christen brethren and
systers, I exhort in the Lords name you that be rych, to make your selves
friends of your wicked Mammon, Luc. xvi
that is to say, of your worldly goods that when ye dye, they may receive you
into everlasting tabernacles, lest ye be served as this rich man was. And
again I exhort you that be poor to have sure faith in the Lord and patience
in your adversity and poverty And doubt ye not, but at your departure out of
this transitory world, according to the example of this poor Lazarus, ye
shall be carried by angels into the bosom of Abraham, abraha^s bosom
that is to say, into everlasting life, in which after the exemple of the
father Abraham, who is the father of al beleuynge children, the godly be
received as into the bosom of the heavenly father. To whom with the son and
holy ghost be all honor and glory. Amen.

The Epistle on the.ij. sunday after trinity. The.i. epistle of Ihon the.iij.
chapter.
Thargument Of the syngular love of God toward us, and how we ought again
to love one another
MAruayle not my brethren though the world hate you. We know, that we are
translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loves
not his brother, abides in death.

Who so ever hates his brother, is a mansleer. And ye know, that no mansleer
has eternal life abiding in him. Hereby perceive we love: because he gave
his life for us: and we ought to give our lives for the brethren. But who so
has this worlds good and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
compassion from him: how dwells the love of God in him? My babes let us not
love in word, neither in tongue: but in deed and in verity.

FOr as much as (dear brethren and systers) even from the beginning of the
world it has been seen, as the exemple of Abel witnesses, that the godly
have suffered persecution, trouble,
and vexation of the ungodly and wicked persons: therefore the holy Apostle of
God saint Ihon does here exhort us to patience in persecution and in
adversity, and that we should not be false hearted and discouraged because we
se we be evil and unworthily handeled and entreated of the wicked world. And
it is not without cause that saint Ihon moves us to patience, for of truth it
is a right hard thing a man to stand fast in trouble and not to despair, or
at least way not to doubt of the troth of gods word for all that he sees so
many evil and unhappy chances unto him on every side. And besides that he
exhorts us in this place unto patience, he also therwythall comfort all that be vexed and troubled for trouthes sake with the great benefyte and
profit which they have taken through gods word, that is to wit that they be
translated from death to life, and be now made the beloved sons of God, to
which commodities and profytes all the persecutions in the world be not able to
be compared.

Maruayle not (says S. Ihon) though the world hate you. We know that we are
translated from death unto life, because we love our brethren.

O what an unspeakable solace and comfort is this (my friends) unto us to know
that we now live unto God ward, albeit before the world we be daily
mortifyed and even killed none otherwise tha^ sheep that go to the slaughter.
And again on the contrary part what a fearful and horrible thing is it yt
the wicked persons which pursue the godly be dead to god ward? We be than
translated from death to life Wherefore? Because says Ihon we love our
brethren. Surely my friends, the loving of our brethren is an open declaracion
and token to the world, that we be the children of God. For he that says he
has faith and love toward God, and yet loves not his neighbor makes a
stark lie. For a good tree, must needs bring forth good fruit. He then that
loves not his brother abides in death, that is to say, Romans vi
he is not yet risen from death to life with Christ unto a new life. Yea saint
Ihon goes forther and says:

Who so ever hates his brother is a manslayer. The law is spiritual


Surely my friends the law is spiritual, and requires also the inward
affections as Ihon does here testifye. For not only he that kylleth by layeng
on of hands and violence upon his brother is in danger to the law of murder,
but also he that pursues his neighbor with hatred. So though that he be not a
murderer and ma^sleer in outward deed, yet in heart he is. But no mansleer
has eternal life abiding in him. For look with what measure we meat to
other, Mat. vij
with the same shall it be measured again to us.

Now in the doctrine and teaching of charity ye shall understand, that it is
the manner of thapostles ever to bring us to the exemple of Christ, whereby to
frame our life, lest we should invent and devise of our own heads new forms
and fashions of loving our brethren. S. Ihon therefore does here preuente us and
sets forth Christ for an exemple to be followed of us, The love of god toward
us
which loved us his brethren not after a light and base sort, but even with
the peril of his own life. He wol have us than in like wise to love our
brethren not lightly, but so vehemently yt when need requires, we should not
stycke to venture our goods yea and our life also for their sauetie and wealth.
By this we know charity, that is to say, the love of Christ toward us and
what our love and charity ought to be, in as much as he gave his soul or life
for us, O what exceeding and vehemente love was this of Christ? And shall we
then show our selves churlysh and unkind again to him and not to express
our love toward him upon our brethren according to his commandment? For
that which is done to them he counts it done to him self.

Who so ever then has this worlds good and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of god in him? As
who should say, if we be not beneficial and good to our nedy and poor
neighbor, it is a sure token that we love not God and consequently that he
neither loves us. And in contrary wise, if we be beneficial and good to our
neighbor for gods sake it is a right sure sign and declaracion of our faith
toward God and that god loves us Wherefore (dear brethren) let us be
merciful according to thexemple of the heavenly father as Christ monysheth us
Luc. vi. And let us not (as Ihon says here) love in word, i. tim. i
neither yet in tongue, but in deed and in troth, and as saint Paul says, of
a pure heart and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. Which thing he
calls the end of the commandment. These be the worthy fruits of faith.
These fruits if we bring forth we declare our selves to be good trees planted
by the river side which brings forth fruit in due season, psalm. i
we declare our selves to be of the nombre of them which S. Ihon here speaks
of, that be translated from death to life everlasting. Where we shall live
eternally with the father, son, and holy ghost. To whom be all glory. AMEN.

The gospel on.ij. sunday after Trinity. The.xiiij. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Christ in this parable declares that he is not apt to the
kingdom of heaven which will ones lay his hand to the plough and look back
to his affections.
Jesus put forth a similitude to his disciples, saying: A certain man
ordained a great supper, and bad many, and sent his servant at supper time,
to say to them that were bydden, come: for all things are now ready. And they
all at once began to make excuse. The first said unto him: I have bought a
farm, and I must needs go and se it, I pray the have me excused. And another
said: I have bought five yooke of oxen, and I go to prove them I pray the have
me excused. And another said: I have married a wife, and therefore I can not
come. And the servant returned and brought his master word again thereof.
Then was the good man of the house displeased, and said to his servant: Go out
quyckely into the streets and quarters of the city and bring in hither the
poor, and the feeble, and the halt, and the blind. And the servant said:
Lord it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is rowme. And the Lord
said to the servant: Go out unto the hye ways and hedges, and compel them to
come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto you, that none of those
men which were bydden, shall taste of my supper.

Our Savior Christ (good christen people) considering the vanity of men's
minds in the world: which for the most part are wont rather to talk of
God, of his word, and of the blessed state of the life to come: tha^ ernestly
to appoint their minds to remove out of their lyfes such impedime^tes as might
hinder them from God and his word and shut them out in conclusion from the
kingdom of heaven, declares in this gospel as in a proper parable the great
folly of such as so content themself with words only and vain praises, and
consider no further to temper their lives in such wise that an other day they
may enjoy in deed the everlasting life in the kingdom of heaven wherein they
confess so much bliss and felicity to be: as one there was which was
sitting at the table with Christ hearing him talk of the resurrection of
the just, said unto him: Blyssed is he which eats bread in the kingdom of
God. Christ taking occasion of his words taught both him and all other in
him, that many there were which could confess with their mouth such to be happy
yt should be received there, but yet in the course of their lives seemed not
much desirous to be partakers of that bliss, how great so ever it be and how
freely so ever it be offered: or how kyndly so ever they be called there to,
whose unkindness, and forgetfulness of their own wealth and commodity he
resembled and lykened to such gestes as were gently and louyngly called to a
rych feast well and aboundauntly prepared in all things, and yet refused to
come: having very vain excuses for them selves, whose unkind behavior was
reported to the feastmaker and moved him to displeasure and to renounce them
for their unworthiness and to take other to sit at his feast. Which although
they were but of poor estimation, yet because they were ready with great thanks
to receive the lyberalitie of the feast maker so gently offered without their
deseruynge, they were admytted to sytte at his own table with himself and had
the fruition of those delicates, which the other that were first called refused
and despised. Here is matter (my friends) for us that be Gentyles to consider
with great thanks to almighty God,
that where as the people of the Iues were first called by the servants and
messangers of his word, to the great supper of the joy of heaven, and they
refused to come: that then it pleased the father of al mercy to send his
servants to call us to his said feast, which of al people were most
unworthy, and furdest from him, in so much as we were wide of all truth and
light, sitting in most blind darkness of error and ydolatrye, wandering in
the bye paths and crooked ways of our own lusts and ymaginations, so poor
and void of all grace that instead of the true God we honored mortal men and
brute beasts as our God. Thus provoked we him first, these were our merytes
and deservings unto him: And yet pleased it him to send his servants to
preach us his gospel and by the violence of so great gentylnes offered us and
earnest calling on us by his Apostles, we were brought into his holy house and
church of his elect: and there plenteously were set before us to receive freely
ye innumerable graces and benefytes contained and promised in the word of the
gospel: so that now Christ with al his ryghtuousnes, with all his justice and
holiness is freely given us to our wealth and commodity if we will apply our
selves by faith and charity to our calling. If we se the want of
ryghtuousnes in our self and be anhongred therefore, let us sue unto Christ and
he shall replenysh us therwyth. If we be stu^ge with sin, and would be
delivered from the danger thereof: in Christ shall we find clear remyssion
and shall be quyte discharged. If we want strength to fight against our
invisible enemies, the world, the flesh, and the deuell, in Christ's power
and assystence shall we no fail have the victory and over come them all. If we
desire to be delivered of this transytory world and to be present with God to
sit at his table, let us a while tarry in hope until the Lord call us and we
shall not doubt but be carried thither with his holy angels, with him to dwell
for ever. He has not prepared this supper of everlasting life of his fre
mercy only but has also as freely prepared all necessary helps and means
for us to use to the better attaynynge of this supper. Only let us be ware by
the exemples of the Iues that we be not unkind to so merciful a calling
lest we be refused as they were. We be not more in gods favor than they were.
They were gods elect people, we were not so. They were ye children of the
house, we were foryners and strangers and none of the householde. They were
the natural branches, we are but grafted in their stocks and received in
their rowmes. We ought to fear the more, that we shall not be spared, if we
show unkindness as they did. Ye have herd what were the lettes, whereby the
Jews were drawn abacke from their salvation: One had bought a farm and was
so holly bente to improve and enlarge that, to bear rule and raygne in the
world, that he had no leisure nor space to give ear to the feastmakers
calling, and to come to his supper. An other was so busely set about his oxen
and other possession, couetously gatherynge lucre and gaynes, to enrych
himself, that he chose rather to lose the commodity of that delicate supper
then to lose his gaynes. An other excused himself that he had married a wife,
and therefore answered he that he could not come. He desired not to be excused,
as the other two did, but said flatlye that he could not come, so hard it is
for him to come to Christ, which has his heart set upon ye flateryng vanities
and pleasures of the world. Let us take heed my friends that we be not so
overcome of these euel affections before rehearsed, that we follow not them and
refuse to come to the supper of everlasting life whereunto we be called. Lu.
xiiij
Let us call to mind what our savior Christ says, except we renounce all
that we possess, we ca^ not be his disciples. It is not evil to have rule and
dominion in the world: but so to set our hearts upon our dignities and
preeminence, that we shall for the sauegard of them forsake the truth, and
peruerte justice: that is abominable before God. So to ensue honor and
worship, that we shall labor by falshode and sedition, by secret conspiracye
to get it, that is abominable before God, and wylbe surely revenged: i. pet. v
for God ever hates the proud in heart, he sets himself a part against
them, Psalm. xxxvi.
ever to depose such. Though (says David) the ungodly shryne himself never
so hye yet I saw him when he was exalted above the Cedre trees, brought down
again to the ground: I sought his rowme and place, but he was wasted and
vanyshed away like the smoke: Keep therefore (byddeth David) innocence and
behold equity: for the godly man has ever permanent issue. It is not evil
to have riches and possessions: to use the course of lawful occupyenge, but so
to ensue our gaynes that we shall not spare by right or wrong to get them,
yt is wyckednes before God. So to possess riches that vnmercyfully we shall
keep them and not relief the poor with our superfluities, as Christ
commands us to be stewardes of his goods committed in our trust, Math. xxv.
that is the thing which provoke him to displeasure to pronounce that it is
very hard for a rych man to enter in the kingdom of heaven: mat. xix
more easy for a camel to go through a nedles eye. Of all myschyfe is couetyse
the root and fou^tayne says S. Paul, i. tim. vi
and says that they which desire to be rych fall into temptacion and snare of
the deuell and to diverse lusts hurtful and foolyshe, which drown men in
death and destruction. It is that affection says saint Paul which make the
suers thereof to err from their faith: They can never have leisure to wait
upon Christ and his word that follow this affection: say, and call Christ what
ye will they have no lust nor desire to come unto him. And the reason of this
thing he opens in an other place where he says, ii co. iiij
that the Gospel is not received of these worldly men because the God of this
world has blinded their understanding lest the light of the gospel should
shine and appear unto the^. As these.ij. evil affections I mean the desire
of dominion and authority, and the insaciable desire of riches be great
impedimentes and lettes that hinder many a man from salvation: so is the
affection to pleasures of this world as great a let, in whom it raygneth, to
cause them set little by the calling of God to this great feast of the glory
to come.

This affection is so subtle, that where the other two can not alter and
occupye the mind of many men, yet of this they be overcome. A beastly
affection to be led with the volupties of this world, and therefore Christ
compares them to swyne walowynge in the myer of beastly and carnal life, and
would have no perles cast before them, for they can none otherwise do but trede
them under foot and despise them. Let us therefore good people take good
aduisement, let us consider of what gentleness and mercy we be called. Let us
consider whereto we be called, not to pain and mysery, but to feastynge and
bankettyng in the kingdom of heaven. We provoked not God to call us by our
merytes which were nothing but blyndnes and Idolatry, but he of his mercy
prevented us, only to have ye praise of our salvation which will come at his
calling. Let us consider how great a zele God bears to our health which seems
to be angrye when we refuse to come at his calling, and not only calls us
and leaves us there, but has provided all things to help us to come thither
whereunto we be called, his word we have, his sacraments, and his holy spirit
workynge in our hearts we have, to be present with us, to strength us to come.
If we come we be saved and shall be blessed for ever, if we com not but make our
excuses, we deceive our selves, and for the love of vain and transytory
delytes and pleasures lose the life everlasting. And what shall it avail to win all the world and lose our souls If we refuse to come to this feast,
let us not look to be bydden to any other: for it is ye last feast and none
other to be looked for after. No better messanger could he send to us to move
us to come to this feast than his own well-beloved son. God grant us all
grace so to hear the calling of almyghtye God to this his merciful feast,
that we may be ready to come unto him in this life by grace and in the life to
come to be at the feast with him in his heavenly kingdom in glory. To whom
with the son, and the holy ghost be evermore honor and praise world
without end. Amen.

The Epistle on the.iij. sunday after Trinity. The.i. epistle of Peter the.v.
Chapter.
Thargument An exhortacion to humility.
BRethren, submyt your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalte you when the time is come. Cast all your care upon him: for he
cares for you. Be sober and watch, for your adversary the deuell as a roarynge
Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resyst steadfast in the
faith, knowing, that the same afflictions are appointed unto your brethren,
that are in the world. But the God of all grace which has called us unto his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, shall his own self (after that ye have
suffered a little affliccion) make you perfyt setle, strength, and stablysh you.
To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

This epistle (good people) is a right comfortable lesson, exhorting us to
lowlynes and modestye by the hope of everlasting rewards which remain unto
us. First therefore saint Peter byddeth us here to be humbled under the mighty
hand of god. But what calls the scripture to be humbled? What is to be
humbled.
Surely to be humbled sygnifyeth in holy scripture to be thrown down, to be
depressed, and utterly to be brought to naught, so that dispayryng of al ma^s
help, we perceive both that we be nothing and that we can do nothing, upon
which humility also a certain outward sobernes and mekenes follows toward
the world. They that in this wise being humbled, do cast the hole trust and
affiau^ce of their heart upon God shall at length no doubt be promoted and
auaunced up on high. Let us then my friends be humbled, let us submytte our
selves under the mighty hand of God, that is to say let us know, that while we
submytte our selves one to another,
we exhibit and do this office of obedience not to me^, but to God himself.
And assuredly this ought to be a right syngular comfort unto us, if we know
that we by our obedience do please not me^ only, but also God himself. But ye
woll obiecte against me. Who would not wysh to be obedient unto God? Ye say
well, but we worship God with thoffice and service of obedience, when we
honor our neighbor with obedience, whom god commands to be honored. Let
us then my friends be meke and humble as well in weal as in woe, and let us
evermore have in remembrance the mighty hand of God, wherewyth we know that
we shall ones be delivered, yea and also be exalted. But when? surely in due
time, not when it seems good to us, but when God shall se it most convenient
for us. And let us cast all our care upon him, let us (I say) commend and
commytte our cause to God, which shall fight and care for us.

Second, for as much as the deuel hates nothing worse then mutual obedience
and subjection in the congregation:
Saint Peter also in this epistle monysheth us that we should be sobre and
watch, lest ye deuell disturb our concord, and while we be aslepe come and
sow tares according to the parable of Christ in the.xiij. chapter of Matheu.
Let us tha^ be sober as well in our doctrine, as in our outward conversation and
manners of life. Let us be vigilant and prudent in all our doings and
procedynges. And why? For our adversary (I say not ye worlds adversary but ye
adversary of the^ which follow godlynes,) I mean the deuell busely without
ceasynge walks about like a roarynge Lion on every side, Tanq^ leo rugiens.
to what end? to devour and utterly to destroy us. Surely (good people our
mortal enemy the deuell is ever lyenge in wait not against the world but
against such as renounce the world and follow Christ I mean such as be right
christian me^ and women to the intent he might chase and drive them away from
the confession of the Gospel unto foul and unclean lusts, whom onles we
resyst with faith, sobrenes, watchyng, and warenes, he wol surely have the
upper hand of us, and cast us down hedlong. How then shall we chase away the
deuel? with outward and carnal things? No truly, but with steadfast faith,
which comes from the heart cleauyng fast to Christ the Lord and conqueror
of Satan our enemy, knowing this,
that the same affliccio^s be appointed to ye hole christen brotherhod through
out the world. Wherefore we ought not to think that we only be tempted and
troubled, but we suffer it in common with so many as are earnest beleuers of
Christ's holy word.

Finally we be here comforted against the cross and temptacions and be put in
mind by saint Peter, yt the God of all grace which has called us to his
eternal glory by Christ our Lord, woll at last deliver us, and not suffer us
to be tempted above our powers, and where he suffers us to be tempted, yet he
will make perfyte our temptacions and will confirm, strengthen, and stablysh us
in them, lest we perysh or take a fall and so be utterly vainquyshed of our
enemy and be confounded. To him be glory, praise, and dominion world without
end. Amen.

The Gospel on the.iij. sunday after Trinity. The.xv. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. The parable of the hundred sheep and of the grote.
THen resorted unto him all the publicanes and sinners, for to hear him. And
the pharisees and scribes murmured, saying: He receives sinners, and eats
with them. But he put forth this parable unto them, saying: What man of you
having an hundred sheep (if he lose one of them) does not leave nynty and nine
in the wyldernes, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when
he has found it, he lays it on his shulders with joy. And as soon as he
comes home, he calls together his lovers and neighbors, saying unto them:
Rejoice with me for I have found my sheep, which was lost. I say unto you,
that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, more than
over nyntye and nine just persons, which need no repentance. Either what woman
having ten grotes, if she lose one does not she light a candell, and swepe the
house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when she has found it, she
calls her lovers and her neghbours together, saying: Rejoice with me, for I
have found the grote which I had lost. Likewise I say unto you, shall there be
joy in the presence of the angels of god, over one sinner that repents.

IN this Gospel (dear brethren) is set before our eyes the notable exemple of
the loving kyndnes and mercy of Christ toward us wretched sinners and lost
sheep, unto whom only this gospel is propouned for a synguler comfort. For
the pharisees and scribes which be blinded with their own proper justice, be
not only no partakers of this most comfortable Gospel, but more over they
utterly understand it not. Yea when they se that Christ bestows his Gospel
upon sinners, they grudge thereat, and inuye that they should have such favor
and grace at his hands.

The publicanes then, that is to say, customers, Publicanes.
tribute gatherers, or baylyfes, which among the Iues and namely among the
religiouse pharisees were counted unholy persons, and the other notorious and
open sinners resorted to Christ, to hear him. They had herd much of him, and
what wonders and miracles he had showed among the people, and namely they had
herd of his comfortable doctrine. Wherefore they come now, knowing them selves
sinners, and therefore not quiet in their conscience, to seek rest to their
souls, and to hear Christ, whom forthwyth he louyngly receives, and like a
tender and a good phisician goes about to lay his medecin and salve to their
diseases. All his pacient hearers and humble suitors he heals, not only in
body, but also in soul. But the most holy and religious pharisees and famous
doctors of the law and scribes are nothing content herewt, they murmoure,
they grudge, they snouffe at him, and what say they? Lo this fellow, which is
reported to be the son of God and which makes himself so perfyte and holy a
person receives synful persons in to his company, and eats and drynketh
with them. But he put forth this parable unto them. etc. Good people ye shall
understand, that our master Christ because he would not give a just cause of
offense to the pharisees and scribes, studyeth to heal them with two feate
parables, by which he teaches, that not without cause, he receives sinners
and eats with them. Yea he declares, that his office requires to preach
glad tidings to the poor, not to break a broused read, nor to quench the
smokynge flax, as Esaias had prophesied of him. Esa. xl.
Moreover that his office and feate was to feed his flock like a shepeherde,
to gather together the lambs with his arm to releue them in his bosom,
Ezechi. xxxiiii.
also such as be lost to seek up, such as go astraye to bring again, such as
be wounded to bind up, such as be weak to make strong, and so forth. Al
these offices of Christ be every where recorded in scripture, and he does
express them here in the parables insuynge, to thinte^t he would show that he
does not amysse in that he receives sinners and takes meat with them. In
deed Christ might have made answer to the pharisees and scribes without
parables even with open textes out of the prophets concerning his offices But
this he does not, that hearing they should not hear, and seeing they should not
se, but at last should peryshe by the just judgment of God. And in these
parables lies hyd the right dradfull judgment of God against these proud
religious and holy pharisees that woll evermore iustifye themselves which
shall be rejected and shaken of with their iusticies, where as the penitent and
lowly sinners shall be received. What man of you, (says Christ) which if he
have an hundred sheep and fortune to lose one of them will not forthwyth leave
the fourscore and nyntene in wilderness, and go after that which is lost
until he find it? And when he has found it, for joy he lays it on his
shulders, and he comes not so sone home, but he calls together his friends
and his neighbors and desires them to rejoice with him for the finding
again of his lost sheep. So says Christ, joy shall be in heaven over one
sinner that repents more then over four score and.xix. persons which need no
repentance. My friends what means this parable? The declaracio^ of the
parable
who is this sheperd or shepemayster? Surely it is our master Christ, he
fedeth his sheep, he teaches all men in the wylsome and deserte world, of
these sheep, one strayth abroad and is lost, the other in their own conceytes
and judgment err not but be still in the right way and therefore they need
not to be sought and to be redeemed. And truly (good people) the number is very
small of them yt shall be saved, for the rest of the people think themselves just
and ryghtuous persons by the merytes of their own works. The sheep that goes
a straye sygnifyeth them which know themselves sinners, these does Christ seek
up, yea he came for these men's sakes that he might redeem them. Here then ye se
the fynall cause and use of Christ. Esa. xlij
The son of man came to seek and save that was lost, he came in to this
world to save sinners. So then there be.ij. sorts of just or ryghtuous
persons in the world. He that knowlegeth his sins and unworthiness, and
believes on him that iustifyeth the wicked, is just by faith, and he is the
true just and good person. The other is he that woll be justified and made good
by the works of the law, Justice pharisaicall.
this justice is called the pharisaicall justice. Of this justice Christ
speaks thus. Onles your ryghtuousnes pass the ryghtuousnes of the scribes
and pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God. Math. v
And in the.xvi. chapter of Luke he says. Ye be they which justify your
selves before men, but God knows your hearts. The second parable of the
woman which had lost a grote, and after much seeking, found it again, means
the same thing, that ye other parable does In deed the woman is a weak
vessel.
So Christ applies himself to the weak and imperfect persons. The woman
lyghteth a candell, swepeth her house, seeks diligently her coigne that she
has lost she never cease till she has found it again. Even so careful and
desirous is our Savior Christ to call sinners to repentance.
Now if ye woll know the cause of our repentance, ye shall understand, that
it is not our own work nor our own merit and deseruynge, but because Christ
our shepeherde seeks us, yea we should utterly perysh strayenge in the
wyldernes, if Christ our herdma^ sought us not up. But how does he seek us?
Truly by his word, which being preached unto us reproves us of our
wandrynge and strayenge abroad, which known, we be brought again by Christ
our pastoure and shepeherde to the flock, that is to wit, we be made the true
members of the true church. And after we be ones reduced and brought home
again to the flock, we be not set in a field alone by our selves, where we
alone shall feed, but together with yt rest of the flock and under our
shepeherde we seek all one and the same fode and do the same that the rest of
the sheep do. Finally forasmuch as Christ says, that the angels in heaven do
joy upon such as repent, we be here taught yt repentance is a work very
acceptable and pleasynge to God.

Wherefore my friends let us not be lykened to these religiouse proud and
presumptuouse Pharisees and scribes which murmured and grudged at the tender
heart and kyndnes of our Savior Christ, and which justified themselves;
despysynge all other in comparison of them, because of their own tradicions
and obseruaunces and therefore thought they had no need of Christ. But let us
humbly and thankfully at the preaching of Christ's holy word, which it has
pleased him now in these last days to disclose and open again unto us, to
repent us of our wandrynge out of the right way. And tha^ doubtless the
angels in heaven shall have more joy over us, tha^ over all those which were
counted most holy and perfyte persons in the sight of the world. Which angels
also at our departure out of this vale of mysery shall carry up our souls into
heaven, where we shall have the most full fruition of all joy with Christ our
Lord. To whom with the father and holy ghost be all glory. Amen.

The Epistle on the.iiij. sunday after trinity. The.viij. chapter to the
Romans.
Thargument In this epistle we be comforted to bear adversity well in worth,
seeing it is the way to everlasting glory.
BRethren, I suppose that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the
glory, which shall be showed upon us. For the fervent desire of the creature
abides, lokynge when the sons of god shall appear, because the creature is
subdued to vanity, against the will thereof, but for his will which has
subdued the same in hope. For the same creature shall be delivered from the
bondage of corrupcion into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For we
know, that every creature groneth with us also, and trauayleth in pain, even
unto this time. Not only it, but we also which have the first fruits of the
spirit, mourn in our selves also and wait for the adoption of the children
of god even the delyueraunce of our body.

THe holy Apostle saint Paul well-beloved brethren and systers consyderyng the
state of true christen men which live godly in this world to be full of
adversities and troubles which be offered unto them both by the world, Psalm.
xxxiij.
the flesh, and the deuel, and knowing the weak power of frail men to be
far unable to stand steadfastly in them, onles they be armed and fensed with
the armoure of gods word, exhorts us therefore in this epistle by diverse
reasons to patience and sufferau^ce: and comfort us with the great joy and
glory that shall be declared unto us in the world to come. He affirms unto
us that what so ever we can suffer in this world is but short and transytory:
but the joy that we shall receive is durable and everlasting. How great so
ever the pain be of our adversity that we suffer here, I think it nothing
(says saint Paul) to ye glory that shall appear unto us, which is so great
and infinite that it can not be comprehended of any man's understanding. i.
cor. ij Esa. lxiiij.
It far passes the eye of man to se through it, or the ear to hear ye
greatness thereof or the heart of man to understand the glory that God has
prepared for them yt love him, which are content after the exemple of his
well-beloved son Christ to suffer and to bear their cross with good heart and
will. Let us therefore behold not so much the grefe and despyte of persecution
and despleasures of this world, as the bryghtnes and excellency of the glory
that we shall be in, which although we se it not with our corporal eye, yet
with the eye of our faith in the myrrour of gods word we se it much more
clerly, and shall more surely enjoy it tha^ we se and enjoy those things,
which be under our corporal sight. If the greatness of adversity fears us,
let us call to mind that when we suffer innocently, we suffer with Christ and
Christ with us. If we be of the body by true faith, than may we be sure that
the head bears part with us and helps us in our adversity. In his power
and assistence we shall overcome. Of our self we be to weak, but in his power
says saint Paul in whom is my comfort phil. iiij
I can do all things. Let noman think it impossible to bear patiently the
loss of name, of goods, of wife and children, to bear the great assaults of
the deuels temptacions: for to overcome the strong and unruly affections of
our corrupt nature, and thereupon in cowardnes to give over and suffer our
selves to be led under their captivity, nay there is nothing to hard to be
performed of a christian man in whom the spirit of God is abiding.

Ioh. xvi
Take good heart says our Savior and captain Christ I have overcome the
world and al these for you. It is not impossible for you to resyst and to have
the victory: for faith subdueth all things and has the victory of al things
that be against you, for all things be possible to faith. Mat. ix.
This is the comfort that a christian man may have to consider that it is not
his adversity alone which he suffers, but Christ his head and captain
suffers with him. As he said to Saul wha^ he persecuted the christian men,
Act. ix.
Saul Saul, why do thou persecute me? It ought to be no strange thing to
us to suffer. i. tess. iij Heb. xij
For saint Paul says that we be ordained for this use and purpose. In
chastisement does god nurture his children whom he loves. If our life be in
chastisement and adversity and we live in patience: we may have good hope that
as we be made like to Christ in trouble and affliction, so shall we be like to
him in glory. The way to pleasure is by adversity, to wealth by infirmity,
to glory by rebuke and shame, to riches everlasting, by transitory poverty.
After none other sort walked our savior Christ in this world. Math. ^
It were unmeet the disciple to be above the master. It were not mete the
souldioure to be more delicatly handled than his captain. To. viij.
Who can require of God to be spared from his cross, where god spared not his
own dear and well-beloved son Christ? He suffered al reproffes and afflictions
and suffered to the death of ye cross and yet deserved it not, Phil. ij.
why than should not we that be sinners content our selves to suffer, whether
God ordeyneth adversity to fall upon us, for our sins to the intent to purge
us of them, or whether he would have us suffer for the trial of our faytht,
hat so by our patience, we might glorifye his name and edify our neighbor by
our exemple? Let us bliss our selves in the name of the father, of the son,
and the holy ghost, and offer our selves to bear what so ever he thinks
mete for our soul. Let us pray that we may have faith to stand and not be
ouercomed of the temtacion of adversity. It is no small comfort to us that we
suffer not alone. Such an unity and consent is there between the members of
Christ's mystical body, that what one member suffers, i. co. xij Heb. iiij
all the resydue feel the grefe of the same: and bear their part of the
burden And if this seems not enough all the creatures of God, seem to feel
our adversity and to suffer with us: and desire and tarry for (in hope) their
delyueraunce. They seem to understand, as they be abused in the world, that
so also be the elect. They se themselves created of God to the use and
necessity of man, whom they serve with right good will, and they se themselves
otherwhyles sore abused in excess and riot, and therefore they be grieved
therwyth. And yet though it be against their wylles, they are still subject for
his sake that ordained them, and are content for his pleasure to be subject to
mutabilitie and bear patiently the vanity of me^ in their abuse in hope yet
ones of delyueraunce. They desire not to be above ye dignity of gods dear
and chosen servants, whom they se unworthily dealte wythal in the world, but
bear their bondage and captivity well in worth, taking such part as gods
most worthy creatures do, for they know that they shall ones be delivered,
not only from their pain and travail in chau^gynge and renewynge themselves
from time to time for man's use and commodity, in perpetual generation and
corruption: but shall also be delivered from the abuse which the ungodly hold
and occupye them unjustly in. A liberty and delyueraunce they look for in
hope, which they know certainly shall than chance to them, when they shall se
ye children of god delivered from their labors and trauayles and set in their
glory of joyful rest. This is the delyueraunce which all creatures sorrow and
wayle daily for, and are in as feruente desire to se this delyueraunce, as the
woman which is in travail of her child longs for the delyueraunce thereof.
In a parable (good friends) thus saint Paul speaks unto you, to comfort
you, that for some solace of your pain and adversity, ye have all ye
creatures of god suffer with you. Count it not for any vayn invention feigned of
saint Paul, for he said that he knew it to be thus in deed, that al creatures
do suffer part with gods elect in their troubles. Which thing might we
learn and know also if we woll consider with better aduysement the thing which
he speaks. For consider me what does it sygnifye to us: when we se the weary
ox wayle and pante under his yooke: the horse groan under his burden, and the
poor lamb blete when he is drawn and driven to his slaughter: wha^ all
beasts travail with pain and doloure to increase in their kind, when al
creatures are subject to such continual alteration, formed and reformed from
one fasshion to another, what sygnifyeth it unto us but that they be partakers
of such pains as gods servants be put to?

They suffer and resyst not, for so they se such portion to fall to the elect
of God. And therefore in hope of delyuerau^ce they abide what so ever the use
and necessity of man requires of them, or yet what soever abuse and tyranny
man's malice put them to. And thus in their paynfull travail they continue till
the day come when gods children shall be delivered of all their mysery, which
they long for both for the electes sake and their own also. This desire and
carefulnes is not in unreasonable creatures only, neither do they alone suffer
such vexacion and abuse in the world to be wrongfully dealt with: but we our
selves (says saint Paul) which have the first fruits of gods spirit,
endowed with singular prerogatyues above other of gods householde, being the
heads and teachers of the people and made of God ye vessels to receive and
keep the most worthy and excellent treasure of his gospel, ij co. iiij
we our self are in danger and subject to manyfolde adversities in the
world, in so much that we are as men daily in danger and judged to death, and
are reputed as sheep evermore ready to the slaughter. We se so many unworthy
things done in ye world, To. viii.
that we desire to be out of the world and to be with Christ. Such combraunce
and greuau^ce we feel in this corruptible body, that we sygh and daily long to
be delivered. We desire much to have this tabernacle of our bodies to be
changed and altered that we may be endowed with our heavenly house from above.
ij. cor. v.
Now (my friends) these things well considered, Ephesians. vi
let us take upon us ye armure of God, to fight against our invisible enemies.
Let us patiently abide all griefs and displeasures of this life, that we may
raygne with Christ another day. It is no small joy that we be called to. It
is far passing all the passions that we can suffer here. And let us as I
said call to mind, that we suffer not alone. Christ our head suffers with
us, by whose assystence, we shall be able to stand. And such communion and
fellowship is there between the members of Christ's body, that what the one
suffers, all other suffer with it. Yea al ye creatures of god are partakers
with us, and in hope to be delivered they suffer patiently. No creature should
desire to be exempte from trouble in this world: seeing Christ gods natural
son, was not exempt, seeing gods holy prophets and apostles were not
exempt. Let us tha^ committee our selves into the hands of God, and arm our
selves with patience, so that we may glorifye gods holy name by our well
doing, that an other day, we may be taken for his well beloved children. To
whom be all glory for ever and ever. AMEN.

The Gospel on the.iiij. sunday after Trinity. The.vi. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Christian laws be here described.
Jesus said unto his disciples. Be ye mercyful, as your father also is
merciful. Judge not and ye shall not be judged: Condemn not, and ye shall
not be condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgyuen. Give, and it shall be given
unto you: good measure and pressed down, and shaken together and runnynge over
shall men give into your bosoms For with the same measure that ye mete
wythall, shall other me^ mete to you again. And he put forth a similitude unto
them. Can the blind lead the blind? Do they not both fall into the dycke?
The disciple is not above his master. Every man shall be perfyte, even as his
master is. Why seyst thou a moate in thy brothers eye, but co^syderest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? Either how cannest thou say to thy brother,
Brother, let me pull out the moote that is in thine eye, when thou see not
the beam that is in thine own eye. Thou ypocrite cast out the beam out of
thine own eye first and rhen shall thou se perfytly, to pull out the moat that
is in thy brothers eye.

GOod people our Savior Christ in this gospel sets forth unto us certain
christian laws that is to say certain officies or duties of charity and
fruits of faith.

First he byddeth us be merciful and tender of heart But after what sort? As
paynyms or publicanes be? No, but even according to thexemple of our heavenly
father. Why, how merciful is our heavenly father unto us? Surely he when we
were his enemies and had deserved no kyndnes at his hands, yet of an excedyng
mercy which he bare to ma^kynd, vouchesaued to send down his only begotten
son to redeem us with his most precious blood. He also from time to time as
often as by frayltie we offend his majesty, if we humbly ask mercy,
forgyueth us. Math. v
Yea he sends his rain, he causes the Son, the moon, the stars, and
his heavenly planetes to shine, as well upon his enemies as friends and lovers.
But yet (says Christ) blessed and happy be the merciful, for they shall
again receive mercy. He that has the substance and goods of this world,
and sees his brother in need, and shuts up the intrayles of his heart from
him, how can the love and charity of God remain in such a person, i. Io. iij
says ye Evangelist Ihon? Certes, he that has compassion and pytie of the
poor, is a great gayner and who so fedeth, shall be fed again.

Second, Christ byddeth us here not to judge, and we shall not be judged. For
he shall have iudgeme^te without mercy (says saint James) which shows no
mercy. Iaco. ii.
Let me alone therefore with vengeance says the Lord, and I shall requyte.
But mark my friends that this is only spoken of private judgment and private
condemnation, that is to say, I may not be mine own judge, I may not
revenge mine own quarrel, but I must committee the cause to God and he shall
judge my quarrel and punysh accordyngly. It is not meant of publyke judgment.
For such as be rulers and publyke officers represent not their own persons,
but they represent the person of almighty God, and they be his deputies and
ministers. To. xiij
And for this cause saint Paul woll that every soul should submytte himself
to ye authority of the high powers. For there is (says he) no power but of
God. Yea the judges and Magistrates in scripture be called Gods. Also saint
Peter thapostle says. i. Pet. ij
Submytte your selves unto every humane creature for our Lords sake whether it
be unto a king as unto ye chief head, or unto rulers as unto them that are
sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, and praise of well doers By
this text of S. Peter ye se plainly yt it is lawful for rulers to punysh. But
punysh they can not, onles they judge and condemn the gyltye. So tha^ it is
lawful for rulers, to judge and to condemn, because they do it not in their
own name, but as gods ministers and vycares. To this do all the ancient
expositours and doctors agree, as saint Austine,
Hierome, Ambrose, Chrysostom and the rest. Wherefore the wicked Anabaptists
are to be banyshed which condemn temporal or civil judgments. It follows
in the text.

Forgive and ye shall be forgyuen. Here my friends ye se, that onles we forgive
other me^ their offenses, which they have trespassed against us, our heavenly
father woll not surely forgive us. And therefore we say in our pater noster
called ye Lords prayer. Dimitte nobis debita nostra, Math. v
sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris. That is to say: Forgive us our
dettes or sins, even as we forgive them that trespass against us. So, if
thou cannest not find in thy heart, to forgive thy neighbor his faults thou
may be right sure, that god will not forgive the thy faults. He byddeth us
also give, and it shall be given unto us. Math xviij To. xiiij
For freely have we taken and therefore freely we ought to give. What have thou
(says Paul) but thou have received the same before of almighty God? ij. cor.
ix
Surely, he that sows skantly and nygardly, shall repe skantly. If we be
faithful stewardes in little, God will surely reward us in much. But he yt is
unfaithful in little, how can he be faithful in much says Christ? Wherefore
look with what measure that we mete wythall to others, with the same shall other
men mete to us again. I pray you (says our Savior Christ) can the blind
lead the blind? Here he teaches us to be content with his doctrine, for else
we shall wander like blind betels. He is blind which has not the pure and
right understanding of gods word, if this man teaches, he teaches not
well, he can be no good leader or guide.

Why see thou a moate in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam in
thine own eye? O how uncomely, how wicked, how ypocrite like, how uncharitable
a thing is it, to judge our neighbors of light matters, where as we be an
hundred times worse our selves? Why do we not rather ge^tly bear, dissemble,
and interpret well the small error and fault of our brethren? Why do we not
rather go down to the intrayles of our own heart, Esopes wallet
and se our own stuff? Esope the fable writer does very well paynt us, he
fayneth that every man has two pookes or wallettes, the one hanging before
him, the other hanging behind him. In that which hangs before us be put
other men's faults. Into this pooke we be always perynge and lokyng, but in
the other pooke of the wallet which hangs at our back wherein our own
faults be put, we never look. Wherefore he would have us turn the wallet an
other while the contrary way. Assuredly he ought to be void of all faults,
that should be ready to speak against other me^. Also it is dyrectly against
the eight commandment of God, to speak any false testimony or word against
thy brother. Yet this notwythstandynge it is lawful for the charitably to
monyshe thy neighbor of his fault, according to saint Paul's lesson. If a
man be found in any fault, ye that be goostly, reprove such a person after a
gentle sort. Also he says: Reprove, i. tim. v. Esa. lviij
beseech, blame tymely untimely in all patience. Cry, cease not, as a trompe
lift up thy voice. If thy brother (says Christ) trespass against the, Math.
xviij
go and tell him his fault between the and him alone. If he hear the, thou
have wo^ne thy brother, but if he hear the not, than take yet with the one or
two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter may be
establyshed. If he hear not them, tell it unto the congregation. If he hear
not the congregation, let him be unto the as an hethen man and as a publicane.
Lo good friends here ye be taught by Christ, to be tender hearted or merciful
according to thexemple of the father in heaven, not to judge, not to condemn
but to remytte all to God and to gods minister the temporal ruler, we be
taught to be perfyte and not to be captiouse but gently to wynke at the small
offenses of our brethren. These be the precepts of our Savior Christ, whereby
a christian man shall be known. Wherefore let us earnestly imbrase them and
execute them in our living. So doing we shall declare our selves, that we be
in deed ye children of the father in heaven whose properties we follow. To
whom with the son and holy ghost be all glory in infinita secula. Amen.

The Epistle on the.v. sunday after Trinity. The.i. epistle of S. Peter
the.iij. chapter.
Thargument
BRethren, be ye all of one mind, of one heart love as brethren, be pytiful,
be courteous meke not rendrynge evil for euel, or rebuke for rebuke: but
contrary wise, bless: knowing that ye are there unto called, eue^ that ye
should be heirs of the blessing. For he that does long after life, and loves
to se good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lyppes that
they speak not gyle. Let him eschew evil, and do good: let him seek peace, and
ensue it: For the eyes of the Lord are over the ryghtuous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers. Again the face of the Lord is over them that do
evil. Moreover who is it that will harm you, if ye follow that which is good?
Yea happy are ye if any trouble happen unto you for ryghtuousnes sake. Be not
ye afraied for any terroure of the^, nether be ye troubled, but sanctifye the
Lord God in your hearts.

IN this Epistle good people thapostle Peter instructs us in a generaltye
what it becomes all good christen folk to do. Brefly therefore to conclude
(says saint Peter) se ye be all of one mind, as who should say, be not
contentiouse and stryuynge one against another, neither in learning, nor yet in
your other worldly matters, but be ye compaciente, Compacient
that is to say, suffer together and bear one with an other, be ye endowed
with brotherly love and charity, be ye tender of heart and pytifull, easy to
forgive all offenses, easy to depart your goods and money, as ye may spare
it, to the relief and succoure of your pore neighbor, se ye be also meke,
courteouse, affable, gentle to speak unto. Moreover se ye render not euel for
evil, but bear ye iniurye and wrong patiently, according to the example of
Christ, resignynge and committing the punishment and vengeance to gods hand,
or to the correction of the ruler which is gods minister and which bears not
a swearde for naught. Yea rather contrary wise, To. xiij
se ye do good, and bless you them, that wrong you, and which work you
displeasures, knowing this, that ye were called by the frank election of God
and of his special grace and mere goodness even before the fou^dacions of the
world were laid, Ephe. i.
that ye should receive not the blessing of the world but the blessing of the
heritage of God, that is to wit, everlasting life, which heritage pertayneth
unto us not as unto natural children but as children of adoption and election.
For assuredly, my friends, he that woll be happy and be counted just either in
this life before men, or in the life to come with God, and with his holy
angels, what shall he do says saint Peter. Let him refrain and temper his
tongue from euel, so that he break not charity, and let him hold in and
repress his lyppes, yt they utter no gyle, no deceypt, no fraud, no
dissimulation, no hypocrisy, no untruth. Let him, I say, eschew from euel,
and do the thing that is good and honest both before God and man. Let him seek
not after discord, variau^ce, and debate, but after peace, after unity, after
concord, and let him follow and ensue it. For be ye right well assured, that
the eyes of the Lord God are over the ryghtuouse, and his ears are open to
their prayers. And again, the terrible visage and face of ye Lord is over all
them that do evil, as who should say: God loves and favors al such, as do
well and which live after a godly and honest sort, and being in perfyte love
and charity with their neighbors and even christen, he hears their prayers,
he accepts their oblacions and sacrificies, as our Savior Christ has
taught us in the.v. chapter of S. Mattheu. But on the contrary side God hates
and abhors all such as be euel doers, yea and also he punysheth them when he
sees his time.

Finally, the Apostle Peter does here propou^de and set forth unto us two great
commodities and profytes, which follow them that work well, the one is a
temporal pleasure and commodity to be taken here in this world, which is,
that no man shall harm them, if they live after a civil and honest fashion
among men in the world, the other is an everlasting and heavenly commodity
to be taken in the world to come, which is, everlasting bless. But
peradventure ye woll say:
What if we do well and yet we be wrongfully vexed and troubled in ye world?
Saint Peter answers, and says. Happy are ye, if ye suffer for
ryghtuousnesse sake, and therefore he wylleth us, not to be affrayed for any
terror of the^, neither yet to be troubled, but thankfully to praise and
glorifye God in our hearts.

Hythervnto my friends, I have brefly declared the mind of S. Peter unto you,
which exhorts you in this epistle to good works. But ye must consider that
in the former part of his epistle he taught and spoke of faith to be reposed
and set in our Savior Christ. For as saint Austine affirms, Austine
it is the intencion that makes the good work, and it is the faith that must
direct the intencion. Let us tha^ do good works, according to saint Peter's
exhortacion here, of pure love and faith unfeigned. So doing, we shall be sure
to be crowned with immortality by god the father of heaven. To whom be glory
and praise for ever. Amen.

The gospel on the.v. sunday after Trinity. The.v. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Christ declares the power of his word.
When the people preassed unto Jesus to hear the word of God, he stood by the
lake of Genezareth: and saw two ships stand by the lake side, but the
fysshermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets. And he
entered in to one of the ships (which perteyned to Simo^) and prayed him that
he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down and taught the
people out of the ship. When he had left speaking, he said unto Simon:
Launche out into the deep, and let slyppe your nets to make a draught. And
Simon answered, and said unto him: Master we have labored all night, and have
taken nothing. Nevertheless, at thy commandment I will louse forth the net.
And when they had this done, they enclosed a great multitude of fysshes. But
their net brake, and they beckned to their fellows (which were in the ship)
that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the
ships that they sonke again. When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at
Jesus knees, saying: Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was
astonnyed and all that were with him, at the draught of fysshes which they had
taken: and so was also James and Ihon the sons of Zebede, which were
parteners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simo^: fear not, from hence forth
thou shall catch men. And they brought the ships to land, and forsook all,
and followed him.

IN this Gospel (good people) Christ teaches the virtue and power of his
word, to thyntent to confirm the faith of his disciples, that he is the true
Messiah, God an man. Furthermore he takes care for their bodily sustenaunce
sygnifyenge, that nothing can well prosper, onles he furthereth and puts his
hand thereunto. Now tha^ after that Christ had preached in Galilie (as in the
chapter before is mentioned) it came to pass, when the sinful people which
were troubled in conscience with their offenses, preassed upon him, to hear
the word of God, that their conscience might be healed by the medicine
thereof, he stood by the lake of Genezareth which is a water of Galilie, and he
saw two ships stand by the water side, but the fyshermen were gone out of
them and were washing their nets. For they had labored al night in vain
and had caught no fyshe. Wherefore they now utterly despayred to take any there,
and therefore they were about to have left work. But our Savior Christ,
knowing all within himself, and seeking herby occasion, to show his power
(for tha^ is god wont most of al to help, when man can do no good) entered
into one of ye ships which pertayned to Simon, whom afterward Christ named
Peter. And Christ, Rogauit eum.
whereas he was the son of God and had all in his hand, and might have
commanded, and taken away all, yet he did none of all this, but mekely and
gently prayed this Simon, that he would thurst out his ship a little from the
land, to the intent he might the more quyetly sit himself down and teach. But
ye will ask, Sedens docebat.
why Christ sat when he taught? Surely, syttinge is a sign of a meke and
peacible preacher, he was not a busye and bragging stryuer or contender, as
many preachers be, but he taught in most quiet and sober wise. And when he had
left speaking, he bad Simon launche out into the deep and let slyppe their
nets to make a draught. Here ye shall mark,
that Christ first feadeth the soul with his preaching, or ever he feade the
body with meat, for else forthwyth, when he had seen ye fyshermen washyng
their nets, he might have wrought the miracle following. But Christ is ever
wont to prefer the fode of the soul, before the things pertaining to the
sustentacion of the body, Mat. vi.
and therefore he wylleth us first to seek the kingdom of heaven and the
justice thereof, and all shall be cast unto us. Wherefore after he had fed the
people with preaching, he confirms it with a miracle. The use of miracles.
For the use of all miracles is that by the same the doctrine of Christ should
be confirmed. Now this miracle tends hereunto, that all our labor and
travail for our bodily sustenau^ce is in vain, onles the blessing and
helpinge hand of God be put thereto. Wherefore these fyshermen, because they
first sought the kingdom of god, be now bydden to lau^che out into the deep,
and to let slyppe their nets to make a draught. And albeit that Simon Peter
dispayred that the lettynge down of the nets could do any good, seeing they
had labored all the night before in vain, yet anon he believes Christ's
word and applies himself by faith to the bidding of Christ. So they did
cast down their net and caught an exceeding great nombre of fyshes. Here we
be exhorted to labor, and also to faith, that we should believe the word of
god, which if we do, there shall be no doubt at al for our living, but it shall
follow, not skasely, but ple^tyfully, so that it shall be enough for Peter,
and that Peter may give part to other. Now when Simon Peter saw the great
miracle that Christ wrought here with him, he fell down at Jesus knees,
saying: Lord, go from me, for I am a sinful man. Here good people we be
taught, what we owe to the Lord for his benefits and large blessing of
food. First to be thankful unto him according to thexemple of Peter.
Secondly, that we should acknowledge our unworthiness, how we be far unworthy
that God should bestow so high benefytes upon us. Repentaunte heart.
And this unworthiness ought to spring of the knowledge of our sins, as Peter
here like a good penitent person said: Lord depart from me, for I am a
sinful man.

Thus a man to show his kyndnes and to knowledge himself a sinful person
before God, the scripture calls it the sacrifice of praise most acceptable
to the Lord of heaven.
But what did our Savior Christ answer again unto Simon Peter? Fear not
from hence forth thou shall catch men. Here we be warned by thexemple of Peter,
James, and Ihon, to set all things behind the study of the Gospel, and if
by the state of our life we be called to the office of preaching, to obey our
calling. But man's reason, as it woll rule all: so it is here also very busye,
which when it hears, Solutio^
For they changed not the condition and state of their life. For the
Evangelist does not express that. But admytte they changed the state of their
life: Ye must consider that they were called to an other state for they were
called to catch men, that is to say, to preach gods word. Howbeit here is
not prescribed in these Apostles a commandment for us to follow the same,
albeit they left al yt they had. The faith of saints or holy persons is to be
followed of all men generally,
but it is not necessary that the works should be egall in all. For else we
should be compelled to become first fyshermen, and afterward to leave
fyshyngcraft as these disciples did. Ye must understand then that the Gospel
perteyneth to the conscience, and therefore it teaches not ye change of the
temporal life or state which civil ordinance allows. Let us then (my
friends) follow the faith of this Apostle Peter, and his penitent heart,
confessing our unworthiness. And then doubt we not, but we shall be called to the
great feast, where we shall sytte at table with the hole company of heaven in
the heavenly palace of God the father. To whom with the son and holy ghost
be praise and glory. AMEN.

The Epistle on the.vj. sunday after Trinity. The.vi. chapter to the Romans.
Thargument Of the spiritual signification of our baptism.
BRethren, know ye not that all we which are baptized into Jesus Christ, are
baptized to dye with him? We are buried then with him by baptysme, for to dye:
that likewise as Christ was raised up from death by the glory of the father,
even so we also should walk in a new life. For if we be grafte in death like
unto him: even so shall we be partakers of the resurrection: knowing this,
that our old man is crucified with him also, that the body of sin might
utterly be destroyed, that henseforth we should not be servants unto sin.
For he that is dead, is justified from sin. Wherefore if we be dead with
Christ, we believe, that we shall also live with him: knowing, that Christ
being raised from death, dies no more. Death has no more power over him. For
as touching that he dyed he dyed concerning sin once. And as touching that
he lives, he lives unto God. Likewise consider ye also, that ye are dead as
touching sin, but are alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AFter the holy Apostle saint Paul (good christian people) had declared to the
Romans the profit of these two great artycles of our faith, that is to say,
christ's death and his resurrection, showing them, that Christ by his most
precious death purchased the everlasting remission of our sin, and by his
resurrection ascended up to heaven to open the gates thereof for us, and apeased
ye wrath of the father and made us in favor again with him and that by this
his deed we be justified,
made gods loving children and the right enheritours of the kingdom of
heaven: now in this epistle he teaches us an other lesson to be co^sydered in
Christ's death and resurrection, and sets it before us as an exe^ple to
follow the manner thereof in our own self, meaning it should not avail us to
believe that Christ dyed and rose again from death: except we woll conform
our life to his death and resurrection. Do ye not know (says saint Paul)
what further thing is sygnifyed unto you in Christ's death? or to what end ye
be baptized? Verily so many as be christened in the name of Christ Jesus and by
baptism be grafte in the number of his servants, be therefore baptized that
in a certain similitude they should dye with him. Such a signification and
figure has Christ's death unto us, that beside that it is the price of our
sins, it monysheth us daily to dye to sin, daily to mortifye and to slay
ye evil affections and motions of sin and concupiscence rysynge up in our
hearts against the will of God. And verily such a sygnification has the
ceremonye of our baptysme also unto us. The significacion of baptism
For when we be plonged under the water, and be lift up again: it means
nothing else but that our sin is washed and slain by Christ, and we by his
grace lift up from death (which our sin deserved) to everlasting life. It
sygnifyeth furthermore that we there promise to dye to sin and daily to rise
up again out of sin to a new life, the life of ryghtuousnes. And this is the
virtue and figure of baptysme, which if we take not after this purpose, we do
but deceive our selves with the outward token of the sacrament and lose the
inward commodity thereof. Wherefore my friends consider the spiritual meaning
of this holy sacrament, and let it put you in mind that ye have promised there
a perpetual mortificacion and penance of your sin: whereof it is a sign. Ye
be ones baptized, and need no more to receive the sacrament, but yet the
sygnification thereof must ye daily fulfill, that is, to dye to sin, and to
rise more and more to perfytnes of life. For we be not washed from our sin by
the blood of Christ shed for us in his death, that we should return again
thereto but therefore be we cleansed, that from henseforth we should defoule our
self no more with sin. And as Christ dyed and was buried for us, so should we
dye and be buried with him, that is to say, sin should dye in us and be
utterly as buried, never to be seen again in our life. And as Christ was
raised up from death by the glorious spirit of the father to life again, so
should we daily rise up from the fruits of sin to a new life and walk
continually there in. And as the power of gods holy spirit raised Christ up
again from death to life which work redounded to the great glory and
praise of God: even so by the power of the same spirit, shall we be able to
rise from death of sin to the newnes of virtuous life. In which our doing
we shall in some manner, work to the glory of god when men shall se our well
doing: and praise the father of heaven for his grace that he works in us.
Let then noman refuse to mortifye his evil affections that he fealeth in him.
That if it be paynfull for him to abstain from sin: let him consider that
else he can not be the child of God. For he is none of Christ's yt has not his
spirit, and by this token is it known who is grafte in Christ, and is in the
state of salvation. For it is not he which follows the lusts of his flesh,
but he which walks after the spirit. Let us consider what saint Paul says
here: If we be like Christ in the similitude of his death: we shall be partakers
with him in the general resurrection, for if the self same spirit rules in
us to fight against sin which raised Christ from death to everlasting
life, it shall also raise us from the corporal death of our body to life
again and that to life everlasting. And let us know this of suertye that as
Christ has not slain sin and crucified it upon the cross, that we should
live in it and serve the desire thereof but that we should be delivered from the
danger of it: even so ought we to slay our old Adam, that is to say, all
evil motions and lusts of sin which we inheryte by that we be Adams
children conceived and borne in sin. I say we ought to subdue him all our
life time and keep him under by the cross of wylful penance and affliction,
so by little and little to abolysh and expel out of our souls the hole body and
lompe of sin and viciouse nature wherein we be borne. In deed so to mortifye
sin, that we should feel no motions thereof so long as we be in the body, it
can not be: but yet by gods holy spirit if we take good head, we may so
live that we shall not serve sin and be led wylfully under the dominion
thereof. Wherefore they which so love their evil affections, yt they strive not
against them to subdue them to God: want gods spirit (the gage of their
salvation) and so serve sin as their lord and master: and therefore be under
the danger of sin and deserve the stypende thereof which is everlasting death:
Romans vi
but he that with good heart and will studyeth to resyst and fight against sin
and the motions thereof and labors to kill it daily more and more, is now
justified from sin that is to say delivered from the danger and penaltye
thereof. Romans ix
For saint Paul says plainly to the Romans. If ye mortifye the deeds of
the flesh and lusts of the corruptible body, ye shall live, and in this
epistle he says the same, that if we be folowers of Christ in his death, that
is in dyeng to sin, we believe certainly that we shall live with him. Christ
ones was risen from death and dies no more, death shall no more have power of
him, for in that he dyed (says our epistle) he dyed ones for all, and by his
ones dyenge he destroyed sin for ever. He dyed ones to sin and after he was
ones dead he was never assauted of sin after, but quyte discharged of it and
now lives to God and evermore shall he enjoy the life which he is now
attained unto, and shall never dye again. Even so suppose you your selves
dead to sin, that is to say, think your selves so to be discharged from
sin and that Christ has destroyed the power thereof for you, as ye conform
your self to the life of virtue. In baptysme ye dye to sin and promise to
live to ryghtuousnes: and therefore if ye keep your promise you be dead to
sin and sin is utterly dead in you, so that ye follow not the lusts
thereof. Even so the life which you now live, is to God and to his pleasure Ye
live now by your faith in ryghtuousnes, which comes by Jesus Christ our Lord
not of any works of ryghtuousnes which we have done says S. Paul, lest we
should glory in our self for this life of grace wherein we live before God.
Titu^. iij
But of his mercy has he saved us through the fou^tayne of baptysme wherein we
be newborn again and renewed by the holy ghost, to live this new life
acceptable before god. And as by the mercy of our Lord we be set in this life
of grace and strenghthed by his gracious spirit to continue us therein, no
more to return and fall to sin and to the lusts thereof: even so is the life
of glory which we now tarry for in hope the gift of almighty God through the
merits and purchasing of Christ Jesus, Romans vi i. cor. i
that all might be of God: and no flesh should glory in his sight but he
that will glory, let him glory in the Lord. Now my friends, these things
before rehearsed well considered, let us diligently labor with our selves to
mortifye and subdue the evil desires of our flesh. If we will have any part
of Christ's death and resurrection, let us keep batayl with the flesh and
beware we be not subdued thereof. We do boast of Christ in vain, if we serve
the desire of sin. For it is not enough to say that we be christen men and
that we pertayne to Christ, i. Io. ij.
for he that says he abide in Christ (as writes saint Ihon) must in such
wise walk in his life as Christ walked in his, for it is not he (says our
Savior) which says to me Lord, Mat. xij
Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will
of my father which is in heaven. How much then are they deceived which in such
wise do fansye of Christ and his death, that they care not into what sin they
fall and continue in only trustyng vaynly upon the merytes of the same: where
here saint Paul affirms that we shall never live with Christ, except we
mortifye our evil affections and desires, and live in ryghtuousnes. Heb. xi.
For though God requires faith as ye first enter to come to Christ, yet he
requires also, yt out of this faith should spring good and virtuous living.
First he says in the gospel of saint Mark. Marc. i.
Repent and believe the Gospel: It is no faith that has not repentance. It is
a vain repentance wherein be espied no works of repentance. Now the works
of true repentance be fear and dread of God, hatred of sin, purpose of
amendment, and diligence to watch against the evil motions of syn Surely
there is no faith, where the spirit of God is not: And there is not the spirit
of God but the spirit of the deuell: where such fruits be raygnyng, as be
adultery, fornication, wantonness, hatred, strife, envy, wrath, contention,
sedition, partestakyng, Gal. v.
murder, dronkennes, and excess. The doers of these, if they repent not:
shall never be inheritours with Christ how much so ever they boast of Christ. And
against these must we daily fight to subdue them, if we will be of Christ's
flock. For as saint Hierom writes: Ne semel putemus ardorem fidei posse
sufficere: Hiero. super mathe. x.
semper crux portanda est, vt semper Christum amare doceamur. Ita apostolus
portabat iugiter carnis mortificationem in corpore suo, quod qui facit omni
tempore semper orat, semper poenitet. etc. Let us not think that the
feruentnesse of faith can ones suffyse, evermore must the cross be borne, that
so we may be taught ever to love Christ. Thus did the apostle bear
continually the mortification of the flesh in his body: August. ad Iuli. lib.
iiij. cap. iij
which thing he that does: does pray always and repent always. Also saint
Austine says: Whosoever is without the faith which works by charity
(though he seem to repent doing it but faynedly) is an euel tree, and of such
a tree what says saint Ihon baptyst. Mat. iij.
Every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut up and cast into
the fire. Let us my friends (all vain presumptions and false trustes cast
away) labor to perform our promise which we made at the fount stone, let us
I say renounce the deuell and his suggestions, and serve Christ our Lord and
master by the true works of ryghtuousnes. Let us watch daily against our
evil dispositions, that we may like obedient children of God glorifye God in
our life. i. Ioh. iij
In so doing we shall persuade our own hearts that we pertayne to him and
that we have the true faith which is of value before God. To whom with the
son and the holy ghost be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel on the.vj. sunday after Trinity. The.v. chapter of Matheu.
Thargument. Christ corrects the false doctrine of the pharisees and teaches
the true justice.
Jesus said unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you: except your
ryghteousnes excede the ryghteousnes of the scribes and pharisees, ye can not
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ye have herd that it was said unto them of
the old time: Thou shall not kill: who soever kylleth, shall be in danger of
judgment. But I say unto you: that who soever is angrye with his brother
(unadvisedly) shall be in danger of judgment. And whosoever say unto his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of a council. But whosoever says, thou
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Therefore, if thou offrest thy gift at
the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against the: leave
there thine offrynge before the altar, and go thy way first, and be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gift

IN this Gospel (good people) our savior Christ corrects the corrupt
doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, and utterly disproueth their
ryghtuousnes, and teaches us which is the true ryghtuousnes, saying: Onles
your ryghtuousnes pass the ryghtuousnes of the scribes and pharisees, ye can
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. As who should say, onles your
co^uersacion, your good living in love and charity, your study and zele to
follow gods commandments be above the pharisees, think not to come to
heaven. First ye must mark the difference between gods commandments and
man's, which is touched in this self chapter a little before, where Christ said.
Whosoever shall break one of these lest commaundentes, shall be called the least
in the kingdom of heaven, that is, he shall be sure never to enter into heaven.
Here ye may not gather, that these be little or small commandments of God.
For Christ speaks here after the judgment of the people. For the scribes
and pharisees had so taught and entysed the people to follow the laws and
constitutions of men, that gods law was little or nothing regarded. So that
Christ there did speak after the manner and reputacion of them. But surely he
that shall teach so, shall be called the lest in heaven, that is, he shall not
come there at all. For the pharisees had auaunced the laws, commandments,
ceremonies, tradicions, and inuencions of men above the laws and
commandments of god. How Christ expouneth the law.
Christ therefore expouneth the law according to the mind and sentence of
God, which requires eue^ most pure affections of the heart, whereas the
pharisees thought it enough to fulfill ye law in outward work after their
exposition. Ye have herd (says Christ) that it was said unto them of the
old time. Non occides.
Thou shalt not kill. etc. My fre^des first ye must note, that it is the
father of heaven yt speaks these words, and that he speaks them to every
one of us. Now what means he by these words? Surely he means plainly
herby, that thou may not slay neither with thy body nor with any member. But
seeing these words were spoken to man, let us consider, whereof man is made.
Every one of us is made of body and soul. To the body longs the head,
feet, arms, and the other members. In the soul or mind of man do raygne
affections, as rancour, malice, hatred, grudge, wrath, and envy. To the body
I say perteyne all thy members. Then thou may kill noman with thy head,
that is, thou may give no token to any other man to kill, nor yet give
counsayll to any other to do it. Nor thou may kill noman with thy hands. So
in like wise of the mind, thou may not be wroth, nor out of charity with
thy brethren, nor desire or will them any hurt by corrupt affections of thy
mind, if thou do, thou surely breakest this commandment. Now the Iues and
pharisees did not understand their law, but took it carnally. For they
thought if they did not kyl outwardly with sword, all was saufe. But because
they were so blinded with ignorance, therefore Christ expouneth them this
commandment saying:

But I say unto you that whosoever is angry with his brother without cause
shall be in danger of judgment, Racha is a sign or a gesture of an angry person
and who soever says to his brother (racha) shall be in danger of counsayll
But who so ever says fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Surely my friends
to bear malice and ire in heart secretly against thy neighbor is not so great
as to speak it also, as to call thy brother Racha, as who should say, ah, or
well. For undoubtedly it is a token of a greater malice when it breaks out
and is spoken. But it is a more offense to speak it with a greater violence,
as to say fool to thy brother in despyte and malice willing him hurt, and
it is undoubtedly right damnable, and so be they al three but yet there be
degrees. For look how the grefe of the offense be spoken and done: so shall the
pain be distributed. I say they be all damnable, but the one is deper then
the other. The greater the offense be, ye more pain in hell. But now a days we
go further then to say fool. For we call in despyte hooremayster, thief,
horeson, vilayne, yea traitor, heretic, pharisee, infidele, and not alonly
in speaking, but also intending to avenge and execute our malicious mind. Oh
what a deep damnation hangs over these men. How high a presumption is this,
to compare with God, to auaunce our selves in gods rowme and to avenge our
selves, which thing only perteyneth to him. For he says: Let me alone with
vengeance and I shall pay it. It follows: Therefore if thou offerest thy
gift at the aultare, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
the, leave there thine offering before the aultare. etc. Good people I pray
you mark well this manner of speaking that Christ uses. He byddeth us leave
there our offering. He differreth no time, but says, go by and by, and
reconcile thy brother, or else I hate the and thy offering. Therefore first
reconcile thy brother and then come and offer up thy gift. Reconcile.
By reco^cilyng of thy brother is meant to make him at one, when thou haste
brought him out of charity, or have separated him out of Christ's flock and
made him the child of everlasting da^pnacion. And this making at one, in to
bring him again into Christ's flock and to make him ye child of salvation.
Furthermore if thou perceyuest thy brother offended and angrye with the, though
thou have given him no cause: yet thou art bydden here of Christ to go, and
make him at one and then come and offer up thy gift. After this manner thou
must offer thy gift to the aultare and with a good mind and glad heart and
not grudgyngly. For else, all is naught that thou do. For where the spirit
of god is, there is liberty. So that we must do all things that God
commands us to do, freely with a good mind and a loving heart.

Christ says, if thou offerest thy gift. Here therefore thou must consider
first and know whether it be thine or no, for if it be not thine, bring
none. Surely as long as thou gettest thy goods with true labor and with no
deceyte, nor breakyng gods commandments, and if the poor man has no need
of thy goods, so long it is thine own and thou may offer it. But if thou
kepest it away from the poor man wha^ he needs it, or gettest it by any
false means deceyuynge the people, than it is not thine, but thou art a thief
and do steal it. Therefore then offer none, but restore it again, for if
thou offerest it, it is in vain, and God abhors both the and thine
offering.

But as touching thy tithes and such offerynges as the law compels the to
pay unto thy curate, Tithes ought to be paid truly.
surely thou art bound faithfully and truly to pay them. Thou may not take
from the prestes duetye, and give it to the poor, for then thou art a thief
and thou robbest Peter to pay Paul. Give therefore to every one that which is
his. Give to thy king his duetye, to thy poor and nedye brother that which
charity wylleth the to give, and pay thy curate his duetye, yea though he be
never so naughty of living, though he be viciouse, proud, ambiciouse, and
though he live never so gloriously and voluptuously.

Peradventure thou wylt say. Why, shall I pay my tithes and offerynges to
such a curate to maynteyne his ungracious living? Yea forsooth. Why? For the
church has so decreed and the laws has ordained and commanded. Therefore
pay him his duetye with a good will, and no doubt thou art discharged toward
God. But he for receyuynge and spending it on that manner is a strong thief
and shall be hanged in hell for it, if he make not ame^des. In deed if thou
gyuest to such a curate more then his duty,
then thou may be a maynteyner of his evil lyuinge and naughtynes. But if
he be a good curate doing his duetye, preaching to his paryshners the word of
God, gyuing them exe^ple of good living and teaching them Christ's rule, that
they may know it and follow it: forsooth to such one thou can not give to
much. Why? For thou shalt be sure to have it again when so ever thou shall
have need of it. For such a charitable man woll surely not se the poor man
want.

Thus my friends I have declared unto you the true ryghtuousnes that Christ
requires of us. Ye be here taught to mortifye the affections of ye heart. If
ye do this, ye shall show your selves to be in deed right and perfyte
christen people, the children of salvation and the enheritours of the kingdom
of God. To whom be honor and glory. Amen.

The Epistle on the.vij. sunday after Trinity The.vi. chapter to the Romans.
Thargument An exhortacion to good works.
BRethren, I will speak grossly, because of the infirmity of your flesh. As
ye have given your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity (from one
iniquity to an other) even so now give over your members, servants unto
ryghteousnes, that ye may be sanctified. For when ye were the servants of
sin, ye were not under ryghteousnes. What fruit had ye than in those
things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things, is death.
But now are ye delivered from sin and made the servants of god and have
your fruit to be sanctified, and the end everlasting life. For the reward of
sin is death: but eternal life is the gift of god, thorough Jesus Christ
our Lord.

IN this lesson (good christen people) thapostle S. Paul exhorts the
Romans and in them us al, that now sith by the benefyte of Christ's
redemption we be made fre from the condempnation of sin and be justified and
reconciled to God the father of heaven by the mediacion of Christ's blood
which was shed on the aultare of the cross for our transgressions and
offenses: we woll give our selves to good and virtuous living. For albeit
says S. Paul, ye be enfraunchysed and made fre from sin and as who should
say manumissed as bondmen be wont: yet ye be not so utterly fre, but ye be
still in bondage and servitude to ryghtuousnes, that is to say, to good living
and honest conversation. So ye be free and not free, free from sin, but bond
to ryghteousnes and good living. I speak grossly and after an humane fashion
says Paul to call you the bondmen and servants of ryghtuousnes But to this
impropre and homelye manner of speaking I am dryue^ because of the weakness of
your flesh. humanu^
I am, I say, feign to apply and frame my words according to your capacity
and understanding I know right well the infirmity, and the weakness of your
flesh, which as yet is not come to ye perfection, no nor can not come to ye
full perfection so long as ye be in this mortal and frail life. Yea our
savior Christ himself a little before his departure out of this world,
complained of the infirmity of the flesh. Wherefore my friends, like as before
ye received the Gospel of Christ ye have freely and volu^tarely given and
exhibited your members as slaves and bond to serve all naughtynes, all
uncleanness and wyckednes, and that from one wyckednes to an ather every one
worse then other. So now, where as ye be under grace, and become christen
persons and have received Christ's Gospel, I exhort you that ye woll an other
while serve ryghtuousnes, that is to say, that with all your might and force,
ye woll study and apply your selves to virtue, honest conversation and good
living. If ye do this, undoubtedly ye shall be sanctified and made holy in gods
sight, while through ye work and operation of the holy ghost new motions be
created in you, which after a certain manner shall answer to the law and
satisfye the same though in great infirmity and weakness, making you with
your heart to love God even of a good conscience and faith unfeigned. For so
long as ye were in your former state, and knew not Christ, but lived in
ydolatrye and blyndnes of heart, serving sin: ye were as fremen to
ryghtuousnes, that is to say, ye served her not, ye had no justice, no
ryghtuousnes in you, ye were not under her power and dominion. I pray you then
my friends what profit, fruit, and commodity took ye at that time of your
louse and fre living, I mean of your sin which ye commonly then hau^ted,
whereof now that ye be in the state of grace and have received the title and
also the religion of christen persons, ye be ashamed of. And why be ye
ashamed? Truly because ye perceive yt the end of such loose and unruly living
is death, and what death? death everlasting, eternal dampnacion in the fire of
hell, where is continual weeping and gnasshynge of teeth. But now good people
seeing ye be infrau^chysed and delivered from the bondage and consequently from
the condemnation of sin: and are become the servants of God: ye have your
fruit into sanctification, that is to say, this fruit, this commodity this
advantage ye have thereby, that ye be now sanctified and made holy and just
persons in gods sight, and your end shall be everlasting life. For truly so
long as ye were servants to sin, ye could look for none other reward,
for none other stypende or wages, then death. Death I say is the undoubted
stypende of sin and of beastly living But contrary wise, Death is the wages of
sin.
if ye woll be folowers of ryghtuousnes, and force your selves to serve God,
utterly renouncing the stynkynge service of sin: ye shall surely have a
far contrary reward, that is to wit everlasting life, Aug. in Enchiri.
capi. cvi
which (as writes saint Austine) is a certain reward of good works, albeit
the Apostle calls it not so here, but he calls it the grace or gift of
God. Therefore harken what saint Austine says further. The words of S Austine.
A stypende or wages due for the work of a souldioure is paid and not given,
and therefore the apostle says, the stypende of sin is death, to show that
death is not vndeseruedlye put but due to sin. But grace if it be not freely
is no grace. Ye must therefore understand that even the self good merytes of
man be the rewards of God unto which when eternal life is yielded, what is
re^dred but grace for grace? These be saint Austines words. Wherefore good
people let us not think yt we be fre from good works, by the blood of Christ
but rather clean contrary that we be now bound to good works according to
saint Paul's doctrine here which affirms that if we serve sin, we shall be
sure to have the wages of sin even everlasting death. But if we live
virtuously and justly and serve God, we shall be sure to have everlasting life
not as a reward of duty but as a gift and grace of god, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. To whom be all glory. Amen.

The gospel on the.vij. sunday after Trinity. The.viij. chapter of Mark.
Thargument. The miracle of the.vij. loves.
When there was a very great company, and had nothing to eat, Jesus called
his disciples to him, and said unto them: I have compassion on the people,
because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat and if
I send them away fasting to their own houses, they shall faint by the way.
For diverse of them came from far. And his disciples answered him: where
should a man have bread here in the wilderness to satisfye these? And he
asked them how many looues have ye? They said: seven. And he commanded the
people to sit down on the ground. And he took the seven looues: and when he
had given thanks, he brake, and gave to his disciples, to set before them. And
they did set them before the people. And they had a few small fyshes And when he
had blessed, he commanded them also to be set before them. And they did eat
and were suffysed. And they took up of the broken meat that was left seven
baskettes full. And they that did eat, were about four thousand. And he
sent them away.

IN this gospel, good christen people, ye shall note, that they which first and
formest do seek for the kingdom of god and the ryghtuousnes of ye same, can in
no wise peryshe and dye for honger, but that the grace of God does preuente
them in all things, as we se in this hystorye how tenderly and buselye our
Savior Christ provides for the peoples bodily sustenau^ce, even before they
ask it, sayng: I have compassion over the people forasmuch as they have been
now with me three days and have nothing to eat. This then is Christ's order of
fedynge, first to repast ye soul with his word, and then to releue the
body. Horatius in epist.
But the worldly care is contrary, according to a Poets saying: O ciues
ciues, quaere^da pecunia primum est, virtus post nummos. That is to say: O
citizens citizens, first seek for money, and after money for virtue. But Christ
says: First seek for the kingdom of God and al these things shall be cast
unto you. An exe^ple of infidelity


Secondly, here is described unto us an exemple of infidelity in thapostles
and under them in all such as woll do as they did here, which leaving gods
word and forgetting all the miracles which Christ had done before, by which
they ought well to have gathered that Christ might have fed this multitude
without any vytayll at all, be deceived by the judgment of reason which only
looks upon the thing present, and thinks things only to follow of sure
occasions only. Surely while reason judges thus, it judges well before the
world in civil things. But before Christ and in his presence to call reason
into judgment, and thereupon to despair of Christ's power: is certainly a
point of infidelity, namely sith before God there is nothing impossible. Mat.
xix
And here furthermore we have an exemple in Christ of great gentleness and
patience, The time of gods help.
which rejects not the unfaithful disciples.

Thyrdly, here is prescribed unto us the time when Christ is wont most of all
to help, which is even then when no occasion is present, but when reason
utterly despayreth of her arguments or conjectures. So Christ in this
historye suffers his Apostles a little while to delude themselves with the
arguments of their own reason, that he might bring them to the vttter
denial of themselves and also that they might learn to flee to the
almyghtynes of god whereby he is able to help, even there where no occasion of
helping is offered.
We be nevertheless here taught and admonished, not to despise such occasions
of temporal living as be offered unto us. For Christ of his omnipotency might
have made bread of stones, or might have caused food to have rayned down from
heaven, or if he had would, he might have fed the people only with the
virtue of his word. But Christ does none of all these, but takes the bread
and the few fyshes which by occasion was ministered unto him, and by his
blessing of bread, makes bread: and of fyshe, fyshe.

Finally we be here instructed and taught, that bodily food and sustenaunce
with all other necessaries of our life comes unto us by the only providence
and blessing of God, yea even then when we think lest of it.

Wherefore good people according to the lesson of this Gospel, let us first
seek for our soul health and food, as we se the people did here, and doubt we
no thing, but God will provide well enough for our bodily food. Let us not do
as the Roman citizens did which first sought for money and then for virtue,
but let us first seek for virtue and for the kingdom of God, and then without
much seeking the rest shall be aboundauntly given us. Let us not trust to much
to our own carnal reason as the Apostles did here, but let us think nothing
impossible to God, yea let us be full assured that he wol help wha^ he sees
best his time, being thoroughly persuaded that all things come by the large
blessing of god To whom be all glory. Amen.

The Epistle on the.viij. sunday after Trinity. The.viij. chapter to the
Romans.
Thargument Of the mortification of the flesh.
BRethren, we are detters, not to the flesh to live after the flesh. For if
ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. But if ye (through the spirit) do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the
spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage to fear any moare, but ye have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry: Abba, father. The same spirit certifieth our
spirit that we are the sons of god. If we be sons, then are we also
heirs: the heirs I mean of God, and heirs a^nexed with Christ: if so be
that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together with him.

First in this Epistle we be taught, good christen people, We ought to mortify
our lusts.
that after we be ones grafted by the sacrament of baptysme into the holy
communion of christen persons and thereupon through the intercession and merytes
of Christ's most holy blood shed for us be iustyfyed and reconcyled to the
father of Heaven: we ought now not to live according to the lust of the
flesh, but utterly to mortyfye the deeds of the same, and to do the works of
the spirit, that is to say, not fleshly works but spiritual works, honest,
virtuous, and charitable works, the stypende and reward whereof is everlasting
life, whereas the reward of them that do otherwise and that live after the
flesh is death without end. And here the Apostle Paul sets before our
eyes as well the promyses as the thretnynges and terrors, wherewith he frayth us
away from carnal works, and exhorts us to the mortyfycacion of the flesh
and unto ghostly works which be semynge for christen men to use. To the
carnal works he yeldeth for reward death, and consequently eternal damnacyon.
To spiritual and good worckes in place of reward he ascrybeth life, wherein
the godly parsons do here in this world live holyly, and after this world
shall enjoy eternal life.

Secondly, we be here taught by S. Paul that if we be right Christians, I
mean, if we live not after the flesh, but after the spirit and christianly:
we be sure to be the sons and children of God. And on the contrary side if we
live otherwise, we be undoubtedly the children of Satan. Two spirits.
And forasmuch as there be two sorts of spirits, the spirit of fear or
bondage, and the spirit of adoptyon, whereof the first pertayneth to wicked
persons, and the other pertayneth to the good and godly persons: therefore ye
shall understand that they which have the spirit of bondage do all that they
do coactly and not of a fre heart these be the children of the law or letter and
be mere hypocrytes. But they which do good works even of a fre heart and not
as compelled by fear of the law but even of love, these be the right children
of god, these be the true christians, these have the heart and the grace in all
their necessities to cry to God their father and to call him Abba father and
to ask of him with certain and sure faith all that they want which is
necessary for them to have. These have peace of conscience, whereby they being
iustyfyed and led of the spirit of god, be thoroughly persuaded in their
conscience, that by the merits of Christ they have God their merciful Lord
and father, which will both help them and here them in their need. Of this
peace speaks S. Paul in the.v. Chapter of the Romans, saying. Now then
that we be iustyfyed by faith, we have peace toward God by our Lord Jesus
Christ. But of the seruyle fear wherewith all hypocrites and no true christians
by endowed, saint John writes in this wise, i. Io. iiij.
fear is not in love but perfect love casts forth fear, because fear
has torment. The office of the holy ghost


Thyrdly, we be here taught what is the most propre office of the holy ghost,
that is to say, to certyfye us of our enheritaunce which we receive in Christ
Jesus. With this confyrmacyon of the holy Ghost were all saints and holy men
sealed even as many as constantly stood and persisted in the confession of
Christ and which at this day do persyst. And for this cause does the
Apostle oftentimes wyshe and desire to such as he wrote, the strengthnyng of
the holy ghost, Ephesians. iij
as to the Ephesians, where he says.

For this thing do I bow my knees that ye may be strengthened by his holy
spirit. And of this office or property which the holy ghost has, Ephe. iij.
cor. i.
he is oftentimes called the ernest, the pledge, the gage, the seal, or
certificate.

Finally we be here instructed, the way of glorifyenge us.
that albeit we surely know we be the heirs of God and fellow heirs with
Christ, yet nevertheless it behooves us to be glorified by tamynge and
mortifyenge of our lusts, by pacient suffrynge of tribulation and
displeasures as the apostle says here. Heirs with Christ if so be we suffer
with him that we may also be glorified with him. Wherefore my friends if we
covet to be of the saved nombre: let us according to S. Paul's exhortacion,
kill the lusts of our flesh, to thyntent we may live and walk spiritually.
Then in all our needs we shall as loving children be bold to call to our
most tender and kind father for succoure. Then shall we be certifyed by the
holy ghost, that we be the sons and heirs of God, and joint neyres with
Christ with whom, if we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified. To whom
be honor and glory per infinita secula. Amen.

The Gospel on the.viij. sunday after Trinity. The.vij. chapter of Matheu.
Thargument. Signs whereby to discern false teachers.
Jesus said unto his dysciples. Beware of false prophets, which come to you
in shepes clothing, but inwardly they are rauenynge wolves. Ye shall know
them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns? or fygges of thystles?
Even so every good tree brings forth good fruits. But a corrupt tree, brings
forth evil fruits. A good tree can not bring forth bad fruit: neither can a
bad tree bring forth good fruits. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit,
is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall
know them. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my father, which is in
heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Forasmuch as (good christen people) it is hard to know false teachers and
their doctrine: therefore our Savior Christ thought it not enough to bydde us
beware of them, but he adds also certain tokens and signs whereby we may
easily discern and know them. They come (says Christ) unto you in shepes
clothing, but inwardlye they are rauenynge wolves. They come uncalled,
vnappoynted, unsent of God, nay sent rather of the deuell to blase and sow
abroad the wicked learning and doctrine either of the bishop of Rome, or of
the cursed Anabaptists, or of the sacramentaries, or brefly to conclude of
some other ungodly and detestable here tykes. The Lord of heaven keep us and
preserve us all from their infections. They come I say unsent for, according
to the saying of the prophet Hieremye. Ier. xxiij
Currebant and ego non misi eos. They ran and I sent them not, says the
Lord.

In outward appearaunce they seem most holy men and of great simplicity. But
surely according to the common proverb they be foxes or rather wolves cladde
in lambs skynnes. They be like painted and gaye sepulchers, which be fair
without and full of all stynche and caren within. They come in shepes
clothing. What beast is more simple, more harmeles, yea more profitable also
to the commonwealth then the sheep? But what be these false teachers inwardly?
Inwardly says Christ they be rauenouse wolves. The wolves property is to
raven, Ioh. x.
to rent, to spoil, to devour the sheep. But now how shall we keep us and
beware of these woluyshe preachers? By their fruits, says Christ, ye shall
know them, as who should say. If they be good men in deed and right teachers
and no hyprocrites I mean no counterfeyte nor deceiuable preachers, they must
needs bring forth good and godly works, even such works as God commands
them to do, and not works of their own deuysynge and fantasyenge, but such as
God allows, and which proceed of a faith unfeigned. And not only they woll do
them but also teach the same to other, eue^ as Christ and his Apostles would
have them taught and as they themselves taught them, not that by them we should
iustifye our selves as the proud and gloriouse pharisee did that Christ
speaks of in the.xviij. chapter of Luke, lu. xviij.
but that we should according to thexemple of the lowly publicane confess our
selves sinners, and desire gods mercy. The good and right preacher woll teach
the people unfeignedly to trust and repose themselves in Christ, to stycke to
the merytes of his passion, and utterly to reuounce their own ryghtuousnes and
merytes in gods sight. He woll teach them nevertheless to mortifye their carnal
afections and to do good works even of a fre heart or else yt according to
Paul's rule they declare them selves not to be the children of God. To. viii.
For if says Paul, ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. But if ye
mortifye the deeds of the body through the spirit, ye shall live. But again
he wol teach them not to claim heaven as of duetye for their works sake,
Romans vi
but rather for the promise sake. For though death be the wages of sin, yet
eternal life is no wages but (as Paul calls it) the gift of God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Yea he woll teach them when they have done altogether,
yet to confess and say that they be unprofitable servants. These I say be
the fruits of good teachers, these be the grapes, these be the figs that come
of the good trees. They that teach or live otherwise be naughtye and corrupt
trees, and their fruits that they bring forth be thorns and thystyls. And I
pass not though diverse false teachers have dyed most constantly and
patiently in their erroneous opinions, as many papists, and also Anabaptists
and sacrame^taries have done in our time, and as it is read that certain
heretics named Donatistes did in old time. Whose error S. Augustine
confutynge writes, Austine.
that in a christian man the sufferyng of death is not to be considered, but
the cause of sufferynge, that is to wit, whether his doctrine be such that he
ought to suffer death for, by the commandment of God.

Second, we be here taught that wicked and euel doctrine can not endure but as
an evil tree which bears no good fruit is hewn down and cast in to the
fire: even so it is with euel doctrine and with the teachers thereof. Let men
build upon the foundation of Christ what they woll, surely if their building
be stubble or hay that is to say if it be no sound and sure doctrine, i.
cor. iij
the fire at length woll bre^ne it up. But if the building be gold silver, or
preciouse stones, it shall stand against all tempests. As we se at this day
how the papistical doctrine at the touch stone of gods word appears in the
lykenes what it is, and how it begins to vanyshe away euerywhere, where the
gospel is preached. But the pure word of God abides for ever.

Finally Christ does teach us here, that these gloriouse and holy hypocrites
which in outward apparaunce and in name appear christians speaking always
of god, but doing nothing yt god byddeth them do, shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. But they shall come thither, which have Christ, and the
gospel not in their mouths only, but in their hearts also, which do the will
of Christ and live as the gospel teaches them. These shall enheryte the
kingdom of heaven, where they shall live eternally in all joy with the
father, son, and holy ghost. To whom be glory. Amen.

The Epistle on the.ix. sunday after Trinity. The.i. Epistle to the Corin.
the.x. Chap.
Thargument. Gods vengeance upon evil lyuers and ydolaters is here set forth
in exemples unto us.
BRethren, we should not lust after euel things as they lusted. And that ye
should not be worshyppers of images, as were some of them, according as it is
written: The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither
let us be defiled with fornication, as some of them were defiled with
fornication, and fell in one day.xxiij. thousand. Neither let us tempte
Christ, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of serpents Neither
murmr ye, as some of them murmured and were destroyed of the destroyer. All
these things happened unto them for exemples: but are written to put us in
remembrance, whom the ends of the world are come upon. Wherefore let him
that thinks he stands, take heed, lest he fall. There has none other
temptacion taken you, but such as follows the nature of man. But God is
faithful which shall not suffer you to be tempted above your strength: but shall
in the mids of the temptacion make a way, that ye may be able to bear it.

This lesson my friends of the holy apostle saint Paul conteyneth certain
notable exemples of gods vengeance and punyshme^t which he took upon the
unfaithful fathers of old time, which where as God had most plentyfully
heaped upon them his innumerable benefytes and graces: yet they ever abode
unfaithful and would not in any wise change nor amend their naughty and
beastly living. And therefore they suffered horrible punyshementes as well for
their mysbeleue as for their evil and detestable living.
All which things (as says thapostle) chanced unto us in figure, that is to
wit, that we should thereby learn to fear God, to believe in God, to amend our
life, to give our selves to good works, and not (bearing our self bold upon
vain and ydell faith) to force not how we live as many sweet brethren and new
gospellers or rather false brethren and false gospellers at this day do, False
gospellers.
which think they offend not what so ever they do, but that they have full
remission of their sins even in the mids of their abominable living
because they persuade themselves to be chosen and sanctified before the
beginning of the world. O Lord, what a deuelish and damnable persuasion is
this? What spirit of error, what deuel occupies and vexes these men thus
to think? And yet they woll be counted great clerks and allege nothing but
scripture for them, they be full of saint Paul. But they belie saint Paul and
they falsefye scripture. For saint Paul mysreported, is not S. Paul. Nor
scripture that is wrested is not scripture. Let these persons then beware the
soden vengeance of God which hangs over their head. For if God spared not
the Israelites upon whom he had heaped so many benefytes and which were his
chosen and peculiare people, surely he will not spare us, neither shall our
baptism, our hearing of gods word nor his grace yt we have received any
thing help us, onles we constantly continue and abide in our religion and
change our life into better. So then we be here monyshed, that those alonly be
saved and do enter into the land of promysse, which stand fast to the end,
as Christ says in an other place. He that continues to the end, shall be
saved. These exemples then of the fathers be warnynges and fygures unto us,
that we should not lust after evil things as they lusted, as that we should
not be ydolaters that is to say, that we should not give to creatures such
honor as is due only to God the creator and maker of all things, as the
Israelites gave to their golden calfe, and as the bishop of Rome do claim at
this day to have, which woll have Emperors, Kings, and Princes, to fall
down prostrate on the ground and to worship him, even as the deuell would have
had Christ to do to him. Mat. iiij
Wherefore in so doing he resembles the deuell and is no better then an
Antichrist, forasmuch as such honor is due only to God, As Christ there
declares alledgynge scripture for him. Furthermore yt we should not commytte
fornicacion, Nu. xxv
as they did, as the historye of Phinees tells, for which defylynge of
themselves there fell in one day.xxiij. thousand. Also that we should not
tempte Christ, that is, that we should do nothing contrary to faith and
despice such means and remedies as God has appointed for us to use in all
things, as the Israelites did, and therefore were destroyed of serpents, as it
is red in the.xxi. chapter of Numeri. Finally that we should not grudge and
murmoure against God of an ambiciouse mind, seeking sediciously and
contenciously an other calling then God has appointed us unto, as Chore,
Dathan, and Abyron did, and were destroyed of the destroyer. All these things
I say befell, to be exemples, presidentes and fygures, to admonysh us, how God
takes vengeance upon such dissolute and careless lyuers, and to put us in
remembrance which be now in the later days of ye world Wherefore my fre^des he
that thinks that he stand that is to wit, Stare.
that he ryghtly perceyueth and understands all things and walks now
surely in the knowledge of God, so that he despyseth al other in comparison of
himself and judges every man at his pleasure, let him take heed lest by
reason of his surenes and pride he fall again from grace, from understanding
and from the knowledge of gods word. Now albeit many temptacions have assaulted
us, and that we have thereby also gone astreye, yet we ought to comfort and
lift up our selves with this right comfortable sentence of saint Paul, that
the temptacion which has taken us is humane, and such as commonly chances to
men. But God is faithful and just of the promise which he makes to such as
fear and stand in awe of him. For surely he woll not suffer us to be tempted
over that we be able to bear,
according to the peticion in our pater noster Let us not be led into
temptacion. For doubtless God tempts no man to euel, but every man is tempted
of his own concupiscence and flesh when god permytteth it so to be. But God
shall in the mids of the temptacion (if with ernest prayer ye woll desire
him) make a way that ye shall be able to bear it. Let us then (good people) if
we be true christen persons and do answer to our name, stand in awe ever of
God, not tempte him, not provoke him to anger and vengeance, but mekely and
louynglye work and walk as he has commanded us to walk So shall we have
eternal bless with God. To who^ be all glory, praise, and imperie for ever
and ever. Amen.

The gospel on the.ix. sunday after Trinity. The.xvi. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Of the rych man and of his steward.
Jesus put forth a similitude unto his disciples, saying: There was a certain
rich man which had a steward and the same was accused unto him that he had
wasted his goods. And he called him, and said unto him: How is it, that I
hear this of the? Give acomptes of thy stewardshype: For thou may be no
longer steward. The steward said within himself: what shall I do? For my
master takes from me the stewardshyp. I ca^ not dygge, and to beg I am
ashamed. I wotte what to do, that when I am put out of the stewardshyp, they
may receive me into their houses. So when he had called all his masters
detters together, he said unto the first: how much oweste thou unto my
master? And he said: an hundred tonnes of oil. And he said unto him: take
thy byl and sytte down quycklye, and write fyftye. Than said he to an other:
how much oweste thou? And he said: an hundrede quarters of wheat. He said
unto him: Take thy byl, and write four score And the Lord commended the
unjust steward, because he had done wyselye. For the children of this world
are in their nation wyser, then the children of light. And I say unto you,
make you friends of the vnryghteouse mammon, that when ye shall have neade,
they may receive you into everlasting habitacions.

GOod people, because these words before rehearsed are so spoken in parable,
and are so wrapped in wrinkels that yet they seem to have a face of a thing
done in deed and like an history: I think it much profitable, to tarry
somewhat in them. And though we may find in our hearts to believe all yt is
here spoken to be true: yet I doubt whether we may abide that these words of
Christ should perteyne to us, and admonysh us of our duetye, which live after
such sort, as though Christ when he spoke any thing regarded not the time
that came after him, neither provided for us, or any matters of ours, as some
of the philosophers thought, which said, that God walks up and down in
heaven, and thinks never a deal of our doings. But err not you so, stycke
not you to such imaginations. For if ye inwardly behold these words, if ye
diligently roll them in your minds, and after vnwynde them, ye shall se our
time much touched in these mysteries Ye shall perceive that god, The parables
of christ perteine to us.
by this exemple shakes us by the noses, and pulls us by ye ears. Ye shall
perceive very plain, that God sets before our eyes in this similitude,
what we ought most to flee and what we ought soonest to follow. For Luke
says, the Lord spoke these words to his disciples. Wherefore let it be out
of doubt, that he spoke them to us, which even as we woll be counted Christ's
disciples, so we be, if we be good stewardes and do our duty. He said these
things partly to us, and he spoke them partly of himself. For he is that
rich man which not only had but has and shall have evermore, I say not one
but many and sundry stewardes even to the end of the world. He is man, saying
he is God and man. He is rich, not only in mercy, but in all kind of
richesse. For it is he, that gives us all things abundantly. It is he, of
whose hand we received both our lives, and other things necessary for the
conseruacion thereof. What man has any thing I pray you, but he has received
it of his plentyfulnes? To be short, it is he, that not only gives unto us in
most ample wise his benediccion, but also opens his hand, and fylleth al
beasts with his blessing. Neither can his treasure be spente, how much so
ever he lashe out, how much so ever we take of him, his treasure taryeth
still, ever taken, never spente. He is also the good man of the house. The
church and congregation is his household which ought with al diligence to be
fed not only with bodily meats but also with his word and his sacraments.
These be his goods most precious, the bestowynge and mynistracion hereof, he
would bishops and curates should have. Which thing saint Paul affirms,
saying: Let me^ esteem us as the mynisters of Christ and stewardes of gods
mysteries. ii. co. iiij
But I pray you what is to be looked for in a steward? This surely, that he be
found faithful, and that he truly lay out the goods of ye lord, that he
give meat in time, give it I say, and not sell it: meat I say, and not poison.
Finally let him not slack and differ the doing of his office, but let him
do his duty when time is, and when need requires it. This is also to be looked
for, that he be one, whom God has called and put in office, and not one that
comes uncalled, unsent for, not one that of himself presumes to take
honor upon him, he must I say be a steward of office and not a steward at
liberty. What is to be looked for? Surely, if all this yt I say, be required
in a good minister, it is much lyghter to wysh them all in every one, than to
find one any where that has them al. Who is a true and faithful steward? He
is true, A faithful steward.
he is faithful, that coyneth no new money, but takes it ready coined of the
good man of the house, and neither changes it, nor clyppeth it, after it is
taken to him to spend, but spends even the self same that he had of his
lord, and spends it as his lords commandment is, neither to his own
auau^tage vtterynge it, nor as the leude servant did, mat. xxv
hydyng it in the ground. Now if a faithful steward ought to do, as I have
said, I pray you ponder this well, whether in christendom there have been
hitherto faithful stewardes or no? I pray you was there not some, that
despisynge the money of the lord, as copre and not curraunt, either coined new
themselves or else uttered abroad newlye coined of other, some time either
adulteratynge the word of God, or else mynglyng it (as tauerners do,
which brewe and utter the evil and good both in a pot) sometime in the
stead of gods word, blowynge out the dreams of men: while they preached to
the people, the redemption that comes by Christ's death to serve only them
that dyed before his coming that were in the time of the old testament, and
that now redemption and forgyuenes of sins purchased by money, and devised
of men, is of efficacy, and not redemption purchased by Christ. Be these the
faithful stewardes of gods mysteries, and not rather falls dissipatours of
them? whom god never put in office but rather the deuel set them over a
miserable family, over an house miserably ordered and entreated. Happy were
Christendom, if such preached seldom. And yet it is a wonder to se these, in
their generation, to be much more prudent and politic, than the faithful
ministers are in their generation, while they go about more prudently to
stablyshe men's dreams, than they do to hold up gods commandments. Thus
it comes to pass that works lucratyue, wylworkes, men's fansyes reygne, and
christian works, necessary works, fruitful works, be trodden under foot.
Thus the evil is much better set out by euel men, than is the good by good
me^: because the evil be more wise, than be the good in their generation.
These be the false stewardes, who^ all good and faithful men every day accuse
unto the rych master of ye household, not without great heaviness, that they
wast his goods, whom he also one day woll call to him and say unto them, as
he did to his steward when he said, what is this that I hear of the? Here God
partly wondereth at our unkindness and perfidie, partly chideth us for them and
being both full of wonder, and ready to chyde axeth us: What is this that I
hear of you? As though he should say unto us, all good men in all places
complain of you, accuse your auaryce, your exactions, your tyranny. They have
desired in you a long season, and yet desire diligence and synceritie. I
commanded you, that with all industry and labor ye should feade my little
ons both bodyly with your temporal goods and rentes which ye have for that
purpose delivered unto you, and also gostlye with my word. But what do you? ye
ernestlye feed your selfs, from day to day, wallowynge in delytes and
ydlenes. I bad you teach my commandments and not your fansyes, and that ye
should seek my glory and my vauntage: you teach your own tradicyons, and seek
your own glory and profit. You preach very seldom, and wha^ ye preach, ye
do nothing but snappe them that preach truly, asmoch as lies in you, so that
it were much better such not to preach at all, than so to preach. Oh, what
hear I of you? You that ought to be my stewardes, what other thing do you,
than apply all your study to bring my little ons to envy, shame, contempt,
yea more then this, ye pulle them into peryls, into prysons, and as much as in
you lies, to cruel deaths. To be short, I would that my people should hear
my doctrine, and at their co^modytie read it also as many as would: your care
is not, that all men may hear it, but all your care is, that none should
read it, because ye be afraid lest they by the reading should understand
it: and understanding, learn to rebuke your nygardnes, infidelytie, and
slouthfulnes. This is your generation, this is your bestowynge of my treasur:
this is your wisdom. In this generation, in this dispensacion, you be most
politic, most wyttye. These be the things that I hear of your demeanor. I
wyshed to hear better reaporte of you. Have ye thus deceived me? or have ye
rather deceived yourselues? Where I had but one house, that is to say, ye
church, and this so dearly beloved of me that for ye love of her I did put
myself forth to be slain and to shede my blood: this church at my departure,
I committed unto your charge to be fed, to be noryshed, and to be made much
of. My pleasure was, ye should occupye my place: my desire was, ye should have
borne like love to this church, like fatherly affection, as I did. I made you
my stewardes, yea in matters of most importance. For thus I taught openly:
Luce. x.
He that should hear you, should hear me: He that should despice you, should
despice me. Mat. xvi
I gave you also keys, not erthly keys, but heuenlye. I left my goods yt I
have evermore most highly esteemed, that is, my word and sacraments, to be
dispensed and ministered of you. These benefits I gave you: and do ye give me
these thanks? Can ye find in your hearts thus to abuse my goodness? Have ye
thus deceived me? No no, ye have not deceived me, but your selves. My gifts
and benefytes toward you, shall be to your greater damnation. Because ye have
conte^pned the lenity and cleme^cy of the master of the house, ye have right
well deserved to abide the rygoure and severity of the judge. Come forth than,
let us se account of your stewardship. An horrible and fearful sentence: ye
may have no longer my goods in your hands. A voice to weep at, and to make
me^ tremble. You se my friends, you se, to what euel, ye euel stewardes must
come to, your labor is paid for, if ye can so take heed, that no such
sentence be spoken to you. Nay we must al take heed, lest these threatenynges
one day take place in us al, as well us of the clergy for myspendynge the
spiritual treasure, as you of the laytie for myspendynge the temporal
treasure, whereof god has made us stewardes. Wherefore good people at the lest
way let us take exemple and follow the policy of ye worldly steward yt our
savior Christ here tells his tale of, to the intent we should do the same.
This worldly steward when he saw he was accused to his lord that he had
wasted his goods, thought thus with himself. What shall I do? my lord wol
surely take from me my stewardshyp. Dygge I can not, and to beg, I am
ashamed. Well, I wol at lest way make me friends of my lords goods, which when
I am removed out of mine office, shall take me into their houses for the
kyndnes and benefyte that they shall have received at my hands. So when he had
assembled together all his lords detters, he said to the first. What owe
thou to my lord? He answered, an hundred tonnes of oil. Than the steward to
him said: Take thy writing and sit down quyckely, and write for an hundred,
but fyftye. My lord is very rich, I woll that by my means thou shalt win the one half. This done, he said to an other. How much owe thou? He
answered, an hundred quarters of wheat. The steward also bad him: sit down and
wryt in his byll but four score. For (says he) my lord shall not espy
twentye taken away, but to the, which art a poor man, it may do pleasure.
In semblable wise he did with the rest of his lords detters. Now this disceyt
and polycie if this temporal rych man had espied, he would surely have punyshed
his steward. But yet the Lord Jesus for an exemple of lyberalitie, commended
and praised unto his disciples the disceytfull but yet wise policy of this
steward, and to the imitacion and following of him he provoke all us
christen men and rebukes our slouthfulnes, in as much as worldly wise men and
such as serve this world are wyser and more busye in prouidynge for
themselves the sustenaunce of the body, then we be which ought to forsake the
vanities of this world and follow the things yt be eternal. The children of
this world (says he) are wyser than the children of light in their nation.
My fre^des ye shall understand yt our savior Christ in this saying, touched ye
sloth and fluggishnes of his: he did not allow the fraud and sudtyltie of
other, neither was he glad yt it was in deed as he had said, but co^playned
rather that it should be so: as many men speak many things, not that they
ought to be so, but that they are wont to be so. Nay, this grieved Christ, yt
ye children of this world should be of more polycie than the children of light,
which thing yet was true in Christ's time, and now in our time is most true.
Who is so blind but he sees this clearly, except perchance there be any yt
cannot discern the children of the world from the children of light? The
children of the world conceive and forth bring more prudently, and things
conceived and brought forth, they nourysh and co^scrue with much more polycie,
than do ye children of light. Which thing is as sorrowful to be said, as it
seems strange to be heard. When ye hear ye children of the world, you
must understand the world, as a father. The world
For ye world is father of many children not by first creacion and work, but
by imitacion and love. He is not only a father, but also the son of another
father. If ye know ones his father, by and by ye shall know his children. For
he yt has ye devil to his father, must needs have dyuelyshe children. The
deuell.
Now ye devil is not only taken for father, but also for prince of ye world,
that is, of worldy folk. It is all one thing or not much differe^te to say
children of the world, and children of the deuell, Io. viij.
according to that, that Christ said to the Iues. Ye are of your father the
deuel: where undoubtedly he spoke to children of this world. Now seeing the
deuell is both author and ruler of darkness in which ye children of this world
walk, or rather wander, they hate deadly both the light, and also the children
of light.
And hereof it comes, that the children of light never or very seldom do
lack persecution in this world, whereunto the children of the world, that is,
of the deuell, brings them. No man there is but sees, that these use much
more policy in procuring the hurt and damage of the good, than those in
defending themselves. Therefore gather you the disposition of the children, by
the disposition of the fathers. You know this is a proverb much used, An euel
crow, Proverb.
an evil egg. Than the children of this world that are known to have so
euel a father the world, so evil a grandfather the deuell, can not chose but
be euel. Surely the first head of their auncester was that deceytful serpent
the deuel a monster monstrous above all monsters. A description of the deuell.
I can not holly express him, I wot not what to call him, but a certain
thing al together made of the hatred of God, of mystrust in God, of lyenges,
deceytes, periuries, discordes, manslaughters, and to say at one word, a
thing congeled, heaped up, and made of all kind of myschefe But what go I
about to discriue particularly the deuels nature, when no reason, no power of
man's mind, can compryse it? This only I can say as in a gross sum, of the
which all we (our hurt is the more) have experience, yt the deuel is a
stynkyng puddel of al vices, a foul filthy channel of al myscheues: and that
this world, his issue, even a child mete to have such a pare^t, is not much
unlike his father. Than this deuell being such one, The genealogy of the
deuell.
as can never be unlike himself, Lo of envy his well-beloved lemman begat the
world, and after left it with discord at nours. Which world, after it rain to
ye full grow, had of many concubynes, many sons. He was so plentyfull a
father, and had gotten so many children of lady pride, dame glotony, maystres
avarice, lady lechery, and of dame subtyltie: that now hard and scante, ye
may find any corner, any kind of life, where many of his children be not. In
court, in country, in city, i^ village, i^ college, in te^poraltie, i^
clergy yea where shall ye not find the^? How be it they that be secular and
lay men are not by and by children of the world: neither yet be they
forthwyth the children of light, that are called spiritual and of ye clergy.
No no, as ye may find among the laytie many children of light: so among
the clergy (how much so ever we challenge these holy tytles unto us, and
think them only due to us: Math. v
Vos estis lux mundi, peculium Christi. etc. Ye are ye light of ye world the
chosen people of Christ, a kyngely presthode, i. pet. ij.
an holy nation, and such other) Ye shall I say among us of the clergy yet
find many children of ye world, because in all places the world gets many
children. Among the lay people the world ceasseth not to bring to pass that
as they be called worldly, so they are worldly in deed dryue^ headlonge by
worldly desires, in so much that they may right well seem to have taken as
well the manners as the name of their father. In the clergy the world also
has learned a ways, to make of men spiritual, worldlynges, yea and there also
to form worldly children where with great pretense of holiness and crafty
color of religion they utterly desire to hyde and cloak the name of ye
world, as though they were ashamed of their father, which do execrate and
detest ye world (being nevertheless their father) in words and outward
signs, but in heart and work, they colle and kiss him, and in all their
lives declare themselves to be his babes: in so much that in all worldly
points, they far pass and surmounte those, that they call seculars, lay
men, men of the world. The child so diligently follows the steps of his
father, never destitute of the aid of his grandfather. The children of light
have policy, Children of lyghtes policy.
but it is like the policy of the serpent, and is joined with douuyshe
simplicity. They iugender nothing but symply faithfully, and plainly, even so
doing all that they do. And therefore they may the easylyer be combred in
their ingendrynge, and be ye more ready, to take wro^ges. But the children of
this world, have worldly policy, foxely craft, lyonnesh cruelty, power to
do hurt, more than either aspis or basiliscus, ingendrynge and doing all
things craftly, deceytfully, gylefully. Which as Nembrothes and such sturdye
and stout hunters, being full of simulation and dissimulation, before the
lord, deceive the children of light, and combre them easily. Hunters go not
forth in every man's sight, but do their matters closely, and with use of gyle
and deceyte wax every day more craftier than other. The children of this
world be like crafty hunters, they be mysnamed children of light, for as much
as they so hate light, and so study to do the works of darkness. If they were
ye children of light, they would not love darkness. It is no maruail, yt they
go about to keep other in darkness seeing they be in darkness, from top to toe
overwhelmed with darkness, darker tha^ is ye darkness of hell. Wherefore it is well
done in all orders of men, to put a difference between children of light, and
children of ye world, because great deceyte aryseth in taking the one for the
other. For is it a little deceyte, when they that the common people take for the
light, go about to take the son and the light out of the world? But these be
easily known, both by the diversity of minds, and also their armours. For
where as the children of light are thus minded, that they seek their
adversaries health, wealth, and profit with loss of their own commodities, and
oftymes with ieopardye of their life: The children of the world contrary wise
have such stomakes that they woll sooner se them deed, yt does them good, then
sustain any loss of temporal things. The armure of the children of light,
Armure of the children of light
are first the word of God, which they ever set forth, and with all
diligence put it abroad, that as much as in them lies, it may bring forth
fruit: after this, patience and prayer, with the which in all adversities the
Lord comfort them. Other things they commit to God, unto whom they leave
al reuengeme^te. Armure of worlds children
The armure of the children of the world, are sometime frauds and deceytes,
sometime lies and money: By the first, they make their dreams, their
traditions: by the second, they stablyshe and confyrme the same, be they never
so fond, never so against scripture, honestye, reason. And if any man resist
them, even with these weapons they procure to slay him. Thus they bought
Christ's death, the very light it self: and obscured him after his death.
Thus they bye every day the children of light, and obscure them, and shall so
do, until the world be at an end. So that it may be ever true, that Christ
said. The children of the world be wyser in their nation then be ye children
of light. These wordlynges pull down the lively faith which works by
charity and love, and set up an other faith, an other confidence of their
own making as in pardons and such trompery: the children of light contrary.
These wordlynges set little by such works as God has prepared for our
salvation, but they auaunce traditions and works of their own invention: the
children of light contrary. The wordlinges, if they espy profit, gains,
lucre in any thing, be it never such a tryfle, be it never so damnable, they
preach it to the people: and defend it with toth and nail. They can scarce
disalowe any abuses of things, albeit they be intolerable, lest in
disalowynge the abuse, they lose part of their profit. The children of the
light, contrary put all things in their degree, best highest, next, next, ye
worst lowest. They extol things necessary, christian, and commanded of God.
They pull down will works feigned by men, and put them in their place. The
abuses of all thing they ernestly rebuke. But yet these things be so done on
both parties, and so they both do gendre, yt children of the world show
themselves wyser than the children of light. Neither the children of the world
be only wyser, than the children of light, but are also some of them, among
themself, much wyser then the other in their generation. For albeit, as
touching the end, the generation of them all, is one: yet in this same
generation, some of them have more craftily inge^dred, tha^ the other of their
fellows. For what a thing was yt, that ones every. C. year, was brought forth
in Rome of ye children of this world, and with how much policy it was made it
is a wonder to hear. How some brought forth Canonizations, some Expectations,
some pluralities and unions, some totquottes, and dispensations, some pardons,
and these of wonderful variety, some stationaries, some Iubilaries, some
pocularies for drynkers, some manuaries for handlers of relyques, some pedaries
for pylgrimes, some oscularies for kyssers: some of them engendered one, some
other such fetures, and every one in that he devised, was excellent, politic,
wise, yea so wise, that with their wisdom they had almoost made al ye world
fools. But yet they that begotte and brought forth yt their old au^cie^t
purgatory pick pourse, I mean that which was swaged and cooled with a graye
freers coule put upon a dead man's back, to the fourth part of his sins,
that that was utterly to be spoiled, and of none other, but of the most
prudent lord the bishop of Rome, and of him as often as him lysted: they, I
say, that were the wise fathers and brochers of this purgatory, were
doubtless, the wyseste of all their generation: and so far pass both the
children of light, and also the rest of their company that they both are but
fools, if ye compare them with these. It was a pleasant fiction, and from the
beginning so profitable to the feyners of it, that almost, I dare boldly say,
there has been no emperor that has gotten more by taxes and tallages of them
that were alive, than these the very and right begotten sons of the world
got by dead men's tributes and gifts.

But what go I about particularly to recou^te unto you the wonderful crafts
and policies of the children of this world? Certes no tongue, no oration is
able to express them, they be so many and so sundry. Wherefore my well-beloved
fre^des, were it not a right foul shame for us English men, for us, I say,
that pretend utterly to detest and renounce the frauds and policies of the
byshope of Rome and of all his limbs, and to ensue the true religion of Christ
and which count our selves the children of the light, were it not I say a
shame yt these worldlinges should have such a forsyght, prudence, and wisdom in
their kind for things transitory, which be of small valor and mere
vanities, and that we should be stacke and negligent by doing of our officies
and duties toward our neighbors to get us the rewards of everlasting
life, namely sith every one of us because of the uncertain term of this life
ought ever to be in a redynes and to awayte when the Lord of heaven wol say
unto us as was here said to the Stuard. Give accomptes of thy stuardshippe, for
thou maiste be no lengar stuard. This time, because it is both uncertain to
every man and also short, we must therefore hasten us to bestow our erthly
substance upon the pore whereby to get us a pasporte to eternal life. For so
shall it come to pass, that the good deeds and benefits which other folk
have done, we shall be made partakers of, whyl we help them with our goods. For
assuredly he that with his wordlye substance helps the prophet I mean him
that sets forth Christ's word, the same shall receive the reward of the
prophet, and shall be reliued in semblable wise in the kingdom of heaven with ye
good deades of the prophet or preacher. And therefore the Lord says here in
this place: Make you friends of the wicked Ma^mon.
Make you friends of the Mammon of iniquity. As who should say: Se yt ye
provide for yourselues in time, according to thexemple of this prudent and
politic steward. Get you good friends of an euel thing, that when at the
lords commandment ye shall be compelled to depart from this tente and
pauilion of your body, they may receive you into everlasting habitacions. It
is an happy change, when earthly things be permuted for heavenly. What
thing is vyler, or goes further from virtue, tha^ the goods of this world?
They are skant at any time gotten without fraud, without deceyt, and craft,
neither is there any other way of keeping and augmentynge them, than of
getting them. It is (no doubt) an onerouse, and a chargeable possession, and
in ye mean season neither sure nor long lasting. For truly they follow not
their master, when he departs hense. But with these yet may he bye the
thing, that is everlasting, and that may do him good in the life to come. So
shall it come to pass, that that thing, which if it be laid up, makes a man
wicked and subject to many cares, the same if it be well bestowed, is become an
instrument of the evangelical ryghtuousnes, while both he is relyued of his
necessities which serves the gospel, and a reward retourneth with much gaynes
to the gyuer. Wherefore my friends to conclude, if we will not be like these
children of the world, whom I have spoken of, let us heartily love the light,
let us walk in the light and let us so be the children of light while we are
in this world, that we may shine in the world yt is to come bright as the
Son. Let us according to our savior Christ's advertisement and counsel
here, play the parts of the wise steward. Let us make us friends of our
money and worldly goods in bestowynge them not upon pardons as ye bishop of
Rome teaches us, but upon our poor and nedy neighbors, to the intent that they
may receive us again, whither? into their own houses to give us dinner for
dinner, cote for cote, money for money? No but into everlasting habitacio^s and
tabernacles in heaven, there to have fruition of all celestial joy with the
father, son, and holy ghost. To whom be all honor, all glory, al imperie
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Epistle on the.x. sunday after Trinity. The.i. Epistle to the Corin.
the.xij. Chap.
Thargument. The diversity of the gifts of ye holy ghost.
BRethren, ye know that ye were gentyles, and went your ways unto domme
images, even as ye were led. Wherefore I declare unto you that no man speaking
by the spirit of God, defieth Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the holy ghost. There are diversities of gifts, yet but one
spirit. And there are differences of administracions, and yet but one Lord.
And there are diverse manners of operacions, and yet but one God which works
all in all. The gift of the spirit is given to every man, to edify wythall.
For to one is given through the spirit, the vttraunce of wisdom. To an other,
is given the vttrau^ce of knolege by the same spirit. To an other is given
faith, by the same spirit. To an other, the gifts of healyng, by the same
spirit. To an other power to do miracles. To an other, prophecy. To an other,
judgment to discern spirits. To an other, diverse to^ges. To an other, the
interpretacion of tongues. But these al, works even the self same spirit
diuidyng to every man a several gift, even as he will.

THe ancient fathers (good people) which ordained this epistle to be read
this day in the church, thought it (no doubt) right necessary, that there
should be some certain time appointed in the church, to entreat of the gifts
of the holy ghost, wherwyth he has adourned and furnyshed one member of the
same before another to thyntent that they which have the mo gifts, should the
more labor and the rather help other. And therefore Christ said to his
disciples. He that is the greater man of you, be he the servant of the other.
The occasion of this epistle.
The occasion that moved saint Paul to write these things of gifts seems to
be this. The word of God when it is purely and syncerely preached, can not be
abyde^ ne suffered of the deuell, who is the most sworn enemy of the pure
word. He comes therefore by and by, and attempteth all the means possible,
either utterly to destroy it, or at least way to blotte it with false
doctrine, as we se ye thing to have come to pass in our time not without
great confusion. The Apostle to remedy these inconueniencies, writes these
things concerning gifts, because that of pride and vayneglorye which is
conceived by great gifts of God, sundry sects and co^tencions, be wont to
rise. Yea the deuell has no redyer way to take away gods word, than to make
us puffed up with pride in our learning and knowledge, and so to set us together
by the ears, which mean also the deuell used in the church of the
Corinthians, in which one pursued an other very unchristianly for their gifts.
Some there were which despised the gifts of the holy ghost, as at this day
there be some which despice the expositions and interpretacions of all holy
doctors and fathers of the church, leaning only to their own wit and
exposition, some which despice ye lyberall sciencies, and good arts, some
which say that the knowledge of the tongues do no good in the church. But this
is the straight way to take away gods word. For wha^ preachers yea or lay
me^ shall strive among themselves of vain glory: there must the pure word
of God needs be adulterated and corrupted with infinite sects.

First therefore saint Paul in this epistle puts the Corinthians in
remembrance of the state of their former life that they lived in before they
came to the knowledge of gods word. For there is surely no argument either
greater or stronger to stey men from taking pride of their gifts, than is
this, to put them in mind of their former state and conversation that they
were in, while they were out of grace and walked in blyndnes and ydolatrie.
For what other thing were we, before the knowledge of gods word, than wicked
panyms and ydolaters? From which inconueniencies and euels, when we are
delivered by grace, I pray you what occasion does now remain for us to be
proud? In that we be turned of wicked panyms into christians, it is not our
merit. Furthermore where as of ydolaters we be made the true worshippers of
God, neither can we ascribe this to our own powers. That we have gifts now
being under the Gospel, by whose benefyte comes it? Surely not by our own
merit. By whose than? By the bountifulnes and benefyte of the holy ghost. What
gloriacion than remains unto us? Forsooth this, that we may say we were
wicked panyms, worshippers of ydols, and enemies of God, but now through the
grace and favor of god we be delivered from so great euels. Before ye world it
would seem a great folly and madness, a man to glory and boast in other men's
benefytes. But what a greater folly and madness is it, as the Corinthians did, to
glory in the gifts of god, which do chance unto men of mere grace, and that
but only for a time of this life? The cause of arrogancye in gospellers.
Assuredly my friends the chief arrogancy inflacion or puffynge up with pride
which some men upon their syngular gifts at this day have, springs
principally herby, that they consider not what they were before the opening
and reuelacion of the gospel. Hitherto pertayneth the saying of Paul in
the.viij. chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians. Scientia inflat.
Scie^tia inflat.
Knowledge makes a man swell in pride, as who should say: When men know that
they be no longer under the condemnation of the law but in the state of grace,
this knowledge namely if it be not ryghtly understood makes many men proud,
arrogant, puffed up, negligent, slack in the office of charity, and ouermuche
spiritual, which oftentimes with great contempt of other do glory of their
gifts and take a pride in them. But against this inflacion and pride (as I
have said) there is no remedy more present for us, then often to call again to
our remembrance our pristine and former state of life, which thing ye apostle
Paul before the rest of the Apostles does most diligently in all his epistles
and namely in this epistle. To this agrees that which he says in the fourth
chapter of this epistle. i. cor. iiij
What haste thou that thou have not received the same before? And if thou have
received it, why do thou brag?

Secondly, we be here taught and informed of the author and cause of these
gifts, that is to say, ye holy ghost and of his principal office: and in
especial of the greatest gift of all, which is to endowe us with the knowledge of
Christ, out of which gift ye other special gifts do flow none otherwise
then out of a quycke spring.
For Christ being known and apprehended by a lively faith, which is ever in
a redynesse when occasion serves, to work by charytye and to fructify, is
the cause that we receive the holy ghost and all his gifts, according to the
sayng of the prophet. Psalm. lxxvi.
When he ascended up to heaven, he led captivity a prisoner, and gave gifts to
me^. This ascension is yet daily accomplyshed in us, when by ye aid of the
holyghoste we know Christ and take hold of him by lively faith, who being
known and apprehended, sends unto us more abundantly the holy ghost, and
endoweth us with gifts. To say then that Christ is the Lord, is the very
gift of ye holy gooste whereupon all the rest of the gifts be founded and
laid, as appears by the verse of ye psalm above remembered: Ascendit in
altu^ captiua^ duxit captiuitate^, dedit dona hominibus. And surely, who soever
has this gift of the holy ghost, that he can say Christ to be the Lord,
may sone be made also partaker of the other gifts. But he that defieth
Christ, he yt calls Christ Anathema he can be partaker of no gifts of the
holy ghost. They call Christ Anathema, which deny him to be Lord, which
thing is as much to say, as to deny him to be the Savior of the world,
which has overcome death, and which now with great power raygneth over sin,
death, and the deuell. It is also to deny Christ to be our justice,
sanctification, and redemption, who furthermore like a most valiau^t Lord
protecteth, defends, and saves us from all euels. Anathema what it is.
Anathema is a Greek word and signifies a layenge aside or separacion of
gifts which were offered up to gods and which was lawful for no man to
remove out of their place. Even so do hypocrites set aparte Christ, and use not
him,
but the works of their own invention, to such hypocrites Christ is Anathema,
that is to say, a cast away a thing accursed, abhorred, and detested as in
likewise the Iues by Anathema do sygnifye an execracion or cursynge, as saint
Hierome also witnesses. Hierom


Thyrdly the apostle does here teach us the final use and end of all gifts,
which is unity and concord, so that we must know, that the holy ghost as he
is one, so he gives his gifts to men to the unity and edificacion of the
church and not that men should after a contenciouse and uncharitable sort be
proud and glory of their gifts and talentes yt God has endowed them with.
These men preach rather for vain glory and to win them praise of men, than
to edifye the christen flock. Wherefore they have their mede and reward. Let
us then my well-beloved brethren, cease of all such contenciouse and uncharitable
boastyng and despysynge of others that have not the knowledge which we have. If
they offend, let us rather gently and charitably monyshe them between them and
us, and not rail, triumph detracte and defame them with vnsemynge names. Let
us call to mind what we were our selves and what we be of our selves. Let us
remember that what so ever we have, the same we have received of gods grace and
not of own proper powers. Thus doing, we shall edifye our brethren and
systerne, we shall declare, that we be in deed the persons that we be named,
that is to say, christen men and women, folowers of Christ, and finally
inheritours of everlasting bless prepared for us by the father of heaven. To
whom be all glory and praise world without end. AMEN.

The gospel on the.x. sunday after Trinity. The.xix. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. The punishment of such as despice gods word and how Christ
casts out buyers and sellers in the temple.
When he was come near, he beheld the city and wept on it, saying: If thou
had known those things which belong unto thy peace, even in this thy
day, thou would take heed. But now are they hid from thine eyes. For the
days shall come upon the that thine enemies also shall cast a bank about
the, and compass the round, and keep the in, on every side, and make the even
with the ground, and thy children which are in the. And they shall not leave in
the one stone upon an other, because thou know not the time of thy
visitacion. And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that
sold therein, and them that bought, saying unto them: It is written, my house
is the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves: And he taught
daily in the temple.

MY well-beloved friends in Christ ye shall understand yt God is right good and
much mercyful toward us. Father of mercy and God of all consolation is he as
saint Paul says. And yet for all that we must take good head, that we do
not abuse the high benefyte and commodity of his mercyfulnes and goodness as
they of Jerusalem has done, like as in this storye we read. We se how Jesus
Christ was come for to bring them grace for to teach and to save them, and
they have refused him. It was for that cause only that he wept when he did
behold the city as is now made mention in the gospel. And in that yt he has
wept he has well showed yt he would not couete the death nor the damnation of
the sinner. He did not weep for the ruin and fall that he knew should ensue of
the fair houses, of the towers, and great edifices and buyldynges, but he
bewailed the loss, the ruin, and damnation of the people He said O Jerusalem
if thou dyddest know the things that belong unto thy peace even in this thy
day, thou would take heed. As if he had said, if thou knew thy mysery,
and the confusion, and desolation which is to come to the, and specially if
thou dyddest know it in these days when I am descended from heaven for to make
thy peace with god my father and get the remyssion of thy sins, if thou (I
say) dyddest know it: thou should have good cause for to weep with me. But
now all this is hydden from the, thou fear nothing forbycause that thou
carest for nothing. But ye days shall come in the and thine enemies shall
enuiron the with bulwarks. etc. Now my friends by desolation and confusion
temporal of them of Jerusalem which would not believe nor receive Jesus Christ,
is fygured ye spiritual confusion which shall come unto them which yet will not
receive him nor follow him and which make resystence against him and his gospel
of whom the number is great. For whom also Jesus Christ knowing their
destruction that was to come has wept. Those which think to be saved by any
other means then by him and which have their faith and their hope in any other
then in him and by him, surely they have not yet received him, and evil shall
come unto them. For God alone is the obiecte of the faith, hope, and charity
of christen men. Then follows that after he was arrived there, he entered into
the temple and drove out of it the buyers and sellers. God (if his pleasure
were) I hertely beseech him to vysite again his holy temple I mean the
church of christen men and women and the house of prayer where as he alonly
ought to be served and worshipped by his subjects in spirit: Ioh. iiij.
and verity. And that it would please him to cast out those which shall be
found buyers and sellers by simonye and covetousness and that woll resyst his
most holy and sacred word and that will let that the service of god in
spirit and verity be not accomplyshed according as he would by his right
holy word and ordenaunce to be served and honored. Unto him be al glory and
honor in infinita secula. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xi. sunday after Trinity. The.i. epistle to the Corin.
the.xv. chapter.
Thargument The resurrection of the dead.
BRethren, as perteynynge to the gospel which I preached unto you, which ye
have also accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which also ye are
saved: I do you to wit, after what manner I preached unto you, if ye keep it,
except ye have believed in vain. For first of all I delivered unto you, that
which I received: how that Christ dyed for our sins, agreynge to the
scriptures: And that he was buried, and that he arose again the third day
according to the scriptures: and that he was seen of Cephas, than of the
twelve. After that was he seen of mo then five hundred brethren atonce: of
which many remain unto this day, and many are fallen aslepe. After that
appeared he to James, then to all the apostles. And last of all he was seen of
me, as of one that was borne out of due time. For I am the lest of the
Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
congregation of God. But by the grace of god, I am that I am. And his grace
which is in me, was not in vain.

THe thing good people wherefore saint Paul being in this world took most
thought for, and the which he had most at his heart next Jesus Christ, was for
to know how every church did govern and entertayne themselves in the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, to thinte^t that if perdauenture any went out of the way of
troth, he should be forth with redressed as specially he does show in ye
epistle of this day. He admonysheth and reduces in memory unto the
Corinthia^s principally two things on the which all the faith and all the
assurau^ce and hope of christen men is founded. The first is that Jesus Christ
is dead for our sins. It is a word which ought well to be imprinted in the
hearts of christen people, or else one ought not nor is not worthy to be called
christened. Jesus Christ is dead for our sins (says saint Paul.) Then we be
no more in debt for our sins sith that Jesus Christ has satisfied and paid
for us. Nor also we ought no more to serve unto sin seeing that by his death
he has wylled to cause sin to dye in us if so be we believe stedfastlye in
him. The second thing which he reduces in memory unto the Corinthia^s and to
us, is that Jesus Christ has been buried and is risen to life again. This is
it where on ye hope of the christen people ought to be founded. For if the
head be risen again to life in triumph and glory, in like case shall the
members rise again. They shall rise again unto grace and unto spiritual life
in this world and unto glory and life eternal in the other. Apo. xx
As saint Ihon says in his Apocalypse. Happy shall they be and holy is he
which has part in ye first resurrection, the second death has no power over
them. Some false preachers would have turned the Corinthians from the said
faith and for this cause does saint Paul warn them so busely, saying: My
brethren I do you to understand and I do reduce to your memory the good news
which I have preached unto you I mean the gospel which ye have received by
faith to ye which ye have stayed your selves and by the which ye shall be saved
if you follow it. I let you to wit for what reason and in what fashion I have
preached it unto you if ye have remembrance thereof, yea if ye have not believed
in vain. First that which I have received of God which has been to me
reuelate. What? Christ is dead for our sins according as it is written as
it has been said before and written by the prophets. Then he says he has
been buried and is risen again to life. And for to confirm the same ye more,
he says more over, that Jesus Christ after his resurrection has been seen by
Peter and after by the xij. apostles and sythin has been seen by.v. hundredth
brethren being together. As if he had said: You ought to be well assured of
this for as much as these mysteries have not ben showed unto me alone, but the
holy wrytynges does witness ye same. And also they unto whom he has appeared
after his resurrection which be of great number. Certes who soever leseth the
hope of resurrection the same also leseth all spiritual consolation and
comfort. Then after he comes to speak (in a great humility) of the grace
which Jesus Christ has given him. And after all (he says) he has been seen
by me, he has appeared unto me which am as an abortiue creature. For I am the
least of the Apostles which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, for I have
persecuted ye church of God, but I am that I am, apostle among the Gentyls in
faith and in troth. I am that that I am not by my works, not by my merytes,
but by the grace of God. And his grace (says he) has not ben idle in me. As
if he would say: I have not hyd the talent of gold which my master and lord
Jesus Christ took me to bestow, but I have made it to gain more then any
other. I have labored more abundauntly then they all. But not I yet but the
grace of God which is in me. Saint Paul in speaking of his own person and of
his grace which he received of God speaks unto us teaching us by his exemple
that we ought to presume nothing of our selves but to yield all unto God and
understand that all comes from him. The ecclesiastes says speaking of the Sea. The waters return unto the place from whence they come forth to the end
that they may run again. In like manner we must send again and knowledge God
to be all grace to the end that he may always augment it unto us unto the time
that we may come with him into his glory for to praise him, exalte him, and
perpetually to glorifye him. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xi. sunday after Trinity. The.xviij. Chapter of Luke.
Thargument. The parable of the Pharise and Publicane.
Jesus put forth this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that
they were perfect, and despised other. Two men went up into the temple to
pray: the one a Pharise and the other a Publicane. The pharise stood and
prayed thus with himself: God, I thank the, that I am not as other men are,
extorsioners, unjust, aduoutrers, or as this publicane. I fast twyse in the
weke. I give tyth of all that I possess. And the publicane standing afar
of, would not lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying:
God be merciful to me a sinner: I tell you: this man departed home to his
house justified, more tha^ the other. For every one that exalts himself,
shall be brought low: And he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

MY friends and brethren in our Savior Christ Jesus, I do you well to
understand, that there was sometime among the Iues and is yet at this day
among christen folk a certain pharisaicall kind of just or ryghtuous
persons, which have their confidence and trust in their own works, and which
presumptuouslye seek to themselves laud and praise of justice thereby, Psalm.
xiiij.
where as before God as witnesses the prophet there is no ryghtuous person.
Neither did they only stand foolyshly in their own conceytes and pleased well
themselves, but also in comparison of themselves they dispraysed and also
despised others as synfulle and worldly persons, where as in very deed the
humblenes and modesty of such as be sinners and the comdemnation of
themselves with request of mercy is much more regarded and is more acceptable
to God, than is ye proud and arrogant workynge of such pharisaical persons.
Wherefore against such pharisaical rightuous folk and for the comfort of such
sinners as displease themselves and be heartily sorry for their mysordred life,
our savior and Lord Jesus Christ did propoune this parable or similitude unto
the Iues and by them to all the world. It befell so (says Christ) that two
certain persons went up to the temple or church for to pray, the one was a
Pharise (that is to say one that divides himself as better from the
multitude and common sort of men, Origin
according to Origenes interpretacion) the other was a publicane, that is to
say, a customer, a gatherer of toll or tribute, or such other common officer
deputed for such purposes. The pharise standing nigh to the high aultare, as
one that thought himself worthy to talk presently with God, thus began to
pray with himself. God I thank the, that I am not like to ye rest of folk,
which live by rauyne, pyllage, and extorcion, which do increase their
substance by fraud and craft, which defyle other men's beds with aduoutrye,
or finally which bearing any sklaunderouse rowme or office do pyll and poll
the people of God or holy church, as is this publicane, this tribute gatherer,
this collectour. I am not riottouse and sumptuous in my fare and apparel, as
is the common sort of people, I fast twyse a weke, and in so much defraude I
noman, that also I distribute the tenth part of my goods upon the poor
people. This was the prayer of the swellynge and proud pharise, which albeit
he reapported of himself the troth and thanked God: yet he displeased the
eyes of God even because he pleased himself, flattering himself, and being
co^tumeliouse against his neighbor. On the contrary, the publicane
altogether displeasyng himself for the knowledge of his sins stood a great
way of from the aultare, being so ashamed of himself and penitent, that he
durst not ones lift up his eyes to heaven but struck his breast, saying: Deus
propitius esto mihi peccatori. That is to say, God, be thou merciful unto me a
sinner. The pharise thought it enough to give God thanks, supposing that he
lacked nothing, that should be requisyte unto perfyte holiness, and therefore he
confessed no offenses, whereas in very deed even in his self prayers he sinned
most greuouslye in that he boasted of himself and despised the penitent
person, being an arrogant prayser of himself and a rash accuser of his
neighbor. Contrary, the publicane made no rehersall at all of his good deeds.
Only acknowlegynge and confessing his naughtynes, he knocks his breast,
condemnyng himself and humbly beggynge grace and pardon of his offenses. My
friends, woll ye know the conclusion and end of this sondrye and diverse
prayer? That same publicane, which came a sinner into ye church, by Christ's
own sentence and determination went home in the sight of God more just and
ryghtuouse than that pharise, which thought himself most ryghtuouse. For
assuredly whosoever auaunceth himself with himself, shall be dejected and cast
down in the eyes of God. And whosoever deiecteth and casts himself down
with himself, shall be high in the eyes of god. By this parable then (good
people) let us learn to humble and lowly our selves. Let us learn, when we be
out of gods favor for the haynousnes of our sins, by due penance to
reconcile our selves again and to purchase remission of the same. Austine.
I call penance (according to saint Austines definicion) a daily pain and
grieve of the good and lowly christians wherein we knock our breasts, saying:
Math. vi
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive the^ that trespass against us. And by
these words (says saint Austine) humblynge our souls we cease not after a
manner to do daily penance. But it is to be feared, lest many of us play
rather the pharisees part, thinking our selves hyghly in gods favor and in
the mean season despysynge our neghbours which by their humble submission and
penitent hertes shall get up before us. Heaven is given not to such as justify
themselves by their own deeds, but to such as mekely and penitently call for
mercy, pardon, and grace whereby they may afterward work that may be
pleasant in gods sight. Who wol surely in heaven crown them with glory
immortal. To whom be honor and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xij. sunday after Trinity. The.ij. Epistle to the Corin.
the.iij. Chap.
Thargument. The ministration of ye gospel is here praised
BRethren, such trust have we through Christ to godwarde, not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves: but if we be
able unto any thing the same comes of God, which has made us able to
minister the new testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit. For the
letter kylleth, but the spirit gives life. If the ministracion of death
through the letters fygured in stones, was glorious, so that the children of
Israel could not behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance
(which glory is done away) why shall not the ministracion of the spirit be
much more glorious? For if the ministrynge of condemnation be glorious: much
more does the ministration of ryghtuousnes excede in glory.

FOr because that saint Paul well-beloved brethren in our savior Christ had a
little before the beginning of the epistle of this day praised the Corinthians
saying unto them that they were his epistle in Jesus Christ in as much as they
had received his gospel and had written and imprinted his faith in their
hearts by his administration and preaching. Ministered by us (says he) not
written with ynke but by the spirit of the living God. Not written in tables
of stone as those that Moses had, but in tables of flesh in the heart: therefore
to thyntent to give them none occasion that they should wax therwyth proud
and to hope and glory in themselves and not in God, and also for to hold them
in humility under the sauegarde of God: saint Paul says: We have truly
such hope in God by Christ not that we are sufficient of our selves. etc. As if
he had said. This yt I say, I do not speak it arrogantly, presumynge of mine
own wits, but I have such hope in God by Jesus Christ, that this that I say,
is true, and shall abide true. I do not say it of my self, as of my self,
for we be not sufficient to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves,
but our sufficientnes, and all that which we may think, speak, and do,
touching goodness, comes and depends from God, which is beginning, mids,
and end of all goodness. The which has made us and given us power to be
ministers and preachers of the new testament, of the new and good promises
which are by Jesus Christ. He has given us authority and commission to be a
preacher, not of the letter, but of the spirit, for the letter says saint
Paul sleeth the soul, and the spirit does quycken it. We ought here to note
well the difference that there is to preach the letter and the spirit. For
unto ye time that the lively word of God be by fervent faith rooted in our
hearts, unto the time I say that we serve God no more with evil will, but
joyfully and freely what study or lections soever we take, yea if we knew the
old and new testament by rote of heart: yet follow we the letter. But the
spirit of God, the spirit of scripture, the spirit of the which S. Paul
speaks of here, is out of fear, it serves in liberty For where the spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty and fredome. Saint Paul now after that he
bare the light of God I mean the word of Jesus Christ being desirous and
willing, not to hyde it under a bushel, but exalting it and setting it up
to be bruted and praised of angels and of men: comes to compare the eternal
gospel unto the transitorye law of Moses. He calls the law of Moses the
executynge or administracion of death and damnation. Not but that the law is
good and holy, if it be used lawfully: but forbycause the Iues have abused it
to their damnation. And for the same cause, by occasion, it is called
administration of death. He says than, if the administration of death, that
is to say, if the ancient law was delivered and given in light in puissaunce
and in glory: what shall ye law of the gospel be which is the administration
of the spirit, of life, and of justice, But forasmuch as diverse heretics
and unlearned persons have mysvnderstanded this writing of saint Paul in
this place: therefore I think it not amysse brefly to make a faithful reapport
unto you of S. Austines words concerning the interpretacion of this place.
Thus he writes in his second book against the adversary of the law and
prophets.

The law albeit it be holy, just, and good, The words S. Austine.
yet it brings death to the transgressors and breakers thereof, whom the
grace of God helps not to fulfill the justice of the law. For it behooved,
that in the old testament a law should be laid upon the proud and stubborn
Iues and on such as trusted upon the power of their own will, which law should
not give them ryghtuousnes, but should command unto them ryghtuousnes, and so
being wrapped and in tangled with the death for transgression, that they might
fle to grace, which grace not only commands but also helps, this grace in
the new testament is reuelate and opened unto us. And of this occasion do these
blasphemours of gods word think, that the law was naught which was given by
Moses, because it is called the ministration of death fygured in stony letters.
They consider not that it was so called because of them which thought by
their own fre will to satisfye the law and not helped with the spirit of
grace were holden gyltye of transgression under the letter of the same law.
For assuredly the transgression or breakinge of the law should not be evil:
onles the law it self were good. What maruayle is it than, if it be called the
ministracion of death, where the letter kylleth in prohibitynge evil which is
done, and in commaundynge good which is not done, and on the contrary side that
the other is called the ministracion of the spirit which quyckeneth, that we
might rise from the death of preuarication and read, not gyltie, in tables
ryghtuousnes,
but being fre, might have it in our hearts and manners, that is to say, the
new testament, differrynge from the old, in as much as in the one, the old man
is hedged in with the straytes of fear, but in the other the new man walks
at large in the wydenes of charity. For the prohibicion of sin, because it
is a law, undoubtedly increases the desire of sinnynge, which is not quenched
but by the contrary desire of doing well, where faith works by love.
Hythervnto I have reported the words of S. Austine, which does full well
expound and declare unto us the sentence and meaning of the Apostle Paul in
this epistle, whose only mind and purpose is to provoke us to love, esteem;
and follow the holy and sincere gospel, by the which the holy ghost is given
unto us, and by ye which we be newly borne again and living in spirit or
ghost and no more after a fleshly sort. God give us the grace that it may be
shed over all the world, as the four floddes of paradyse, as a see
flowynge, as floddes rysynge in life eternal, that every body may drink
plentefully of eternal life, to this end and purpose that we may altogether
praise and glorifye God euerlastyngly, by our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom be al
honor, Amen.

The Gospel on the.xij. sunday after Trinity. The.vij. Chapter of Mark.
Thargument The healynge of the deaf and dombe man.
Jesus departed again from the coasts of Tire and Sidon, and came unto the sea of Galile through the mids of the coasts of the ten cities. And they
brought unto him one that was deaffe and had an impedimente in his speech,
and they prayed him to put his hand upon him. And wha^ he had taken him aside
from the people, he put his fyngers into his ears, and did spyt, and touched
his tongue, and looked up to heaven, and syghed, and said unto him: Ephata, that
is to say, be opened. And straight way his ears were opened, and the string
of his tongue was loused, and spoke plain. And he commanded them that they
should tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so much the more a great
deal they published, saying: he has done all things well, he has made both
the deaf to hear, and the dombe to speak.

THe Gospel read in the church this day good christen people teaches us,
that after that our savior Christ had privily stolen away out of Iewry and had
among the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Cananites secretlye sown there the sede of
his holy word, he reflected his journey, and came again to the lake of
Galilee, taking in his way the region of Decapoly, where before that time he
had healed a man possessed of a deuell. When he was come hither, they brought
unto him a right miserable spectacle, that is to say, a man both deaf and
dombe. For he must needs be dombe, which is of nature deaf.
But he is more myserably deaf, which has no mete ears to hear gods word,
he is worse do^be, which has no tongue to confess his fylthynes and gods
mercy. By hearing of the faith, is the beginning of health and salvation, and
by confession of the mouth is the perfection of health. The Iues, albeit they
daily herd Jesus speaking, yet hearing they herd not, for as much as
according to thexemple of the serpent called the Aspik which stops her
ears against the voice of the wise inchaunter, The property of the Aspike.
they would not believe such things as they herd, And therefore they had a
tongue to backbyte and detracte, but they had no tongue to the wholesome profession
of faith. But what shall this sely poor man do, which has no tongue wherewyth
he may crave his soul health of the Lord, which has no ears whereby he may
perceive the voice of Jesus which is wont to raise even the dead to life?
They that had tongues and ears do help the sely man, they bring him to Jesus.
They beseech him of his tender mercy, that he woll vouchsaue to lay his hand
upon him. Thus it pleases the most merciful Lord, that even other men's
faith should help sinners. Other men's faith otherwhyles helps
In likewise the hethen person which is about to leave his hethen life and to
become christianed in which state he is called of ye ancient fathers of ye
church catechumenus is brought to Jesus, he has stynted to do euel, he has
stinted to speak euel, but he has not yet learned to do well, he has not yet
learned to confess ye goodness of ye gospel. For how ca^ he do this, if Jesus
lay not his hand upon him? Me^ labor in vain, onles the secret power and
virtue of Christ be put thereto It was an easy thing for the Lord, even with
the bare word of his mouth, to give health to the deaf and dombe man, but this
form of things is purposed and set forth unto us. For like as for ye most
part, it is a parable, that Christ speaks: so oftentimes it is a parable, yt
he does. He took the man by the hand, and led him aside from ye multitude of
people. He is saufe, whom Jesus takes up, who^ he leads away from ye hurley
burly of this world. He put his fyngers into his ears, and with his spyttell,
touched his tongue. Assuredly, my friends,
health and salvation is then at hand, when our savior Christ Jesus, by the
virtue of his spirit, The allegory.
which is the finger of God, vouchsaueth to touch the ears of our mind, and
as often as with the spyttell of the heavenly wisdom, which is himself,
coming out from ye mouth of the father above, he vouchsaueth to touch the
tongue of our mind, to the intent that those things might savor unto us, which
belo^ge to God and be godly. For without this humor is made no taste, and man's
spyttell, if it be infected, has a perverse judgment. This spettell not only
louseth the tongue, but also opens the eyes of him, that is borne blind, as
often as, being myxed with earth it be laid upon the eyes, whereas on the
contraryesyde,
the spettel of philosophers and of pharisees, do rather put out the eyes. The
same thing in manner do also the teachers of the gospel. They take men and
lead them away from the multitude, wha^ out of the broad way, wherein the
most part of people do walk into their own damnacion, they call them back
and bring them again to the fellowship of the little flock. They put their
fyngers into their ears, when by calling them away from the vanities of this
world, they stir them to receive the heavenly doctrine. They lay spettell
upon their to^ges, when they exhort them to profess the evangelical faith,
they lay their hands upon them, wha^ they give the holy ghost to such as be
baptized, by whom their sins be wyped away, and innocence is conferred.
But all these things the curate or bishop does outwardlye in vain, if Christ
work not within and send out his godly virtue from heaven. Of this thing
Christ Jesus, willing to declare unto us as it were a certain image or
token, after he had taken the man unto him, after he had put his fyngers into
his ears and had spetted on his tongue: he lyfted up his eyes to heaven and
syghed. This syghynge was no mystrustynge, Why Christ syghed.
but a bewailing of man's mysery and calamity. For what thing can be more
miserable, than they, which have ye ears of their mind so encombred and
occupied with earthly lusts, that they can not hear the word of God? and
which have their tongue so entangled and infected with vicious affections, that
they sauer not of heavenly things, that they be dombe to confess their
naughtynes, dombe to auaunce gods mercy? Wherefore the syghynge of Jesus
admonysheth us what we were,
and his lokynge up to heaven plucketh away desperation, declarynge from
whence help comes unto us, and also whom we be bound to thank, that
whereas before we had our ears open to detraction, backbytynge, to rybaudrye
and foul words; to foolysh fables, to pharisaicall doctrine, to vain
philosophy, to the suggestio^s of the deuel: we have them now open to receive
the heavenly doctrine of the gospel, and whereas before we had our tongue so
infected with the spettel of flesh, that ye delicate food of the gospel was
loothed of us, so bound with the bonds of Satan, that we could neither
confess our own sins, nor yet auaunce the glory of god: we now confess,
that of our own merytes we deserve nothing but hell, and that it comes
holly of gods goodness, that we be chosen to the name and inheritance of the
children of god. Wherefore in like wise does every good curate and priest
bewail rather then rage upon men's sins, he is rather sorry than angrye,
neither does he arrogantly calenge to himself the power of assoylynge, but he
looks up to heaven, confessyng and testifyenge, that all that ever is done
through the rytes of holy sacraments, is done by gods virtue, and not man's
power. It follows in the text, that Jesus said unto him: Ephata, that is to
say, be opened. And forthwyth the virtue followed ye word. For straight his
ears were opened, and the string of his tongue loused, and he spoke
distinctly. They had open cares, which when the Lord said unto them: Come
after me, Actu. ij.
left all, and followed him. They had an vntangled and louse tongue, which after
they had received the holy ghost, spoke with sondrye tongues the wonders of God,
and which answered ye ruler that charged them no more to preach ye name of
Jesus, in this wise. Act. iiij.
Whyther it be right in the sight of God to obey you rather then God, judge
you. Now these things that Christ did, were done aside from the multitude.
For he thought it not best to make the rude multitude a wytnes of the
evangelical begynnynges, lest they should mock the thing that as yet they
knew not. Jesus therefore commanded them that they should tell noma^ hereof, not
because he would not that the thing were known that was done, but because the
thing self speaks better the heavenly virtue, than does the brute and
reapporte of men. They knew all well enough the deaf and dombe man. Now he
herd and spoke plainly, so he not disclosynge the thing yet bruted ye
benefyte of Christ. Furthermore Jesus bare here the image of man,
to the intent he would instruct men what they ought to do. An exe^ple for us to
follow.
What soever excellent thing a man does, let him covet to have his deed
unknown, that the glory of man might be huyshed, and the glory of God
preached. Man is ieopardously praised, but the power and goodness of God is
worthily auaunced. Albeit neither is man's glory huyshed (if yet he has any
glory) but ofte^tymes ye more it is eschued, the more it follows. Yet
nevertheless a christian teacher ought to be thus affected, that as much as in
him lies, he couette to be known d^ly of God. And herin he is the worthyer to
be praised among all men. For who soever seeks for glory among men, is
even for that cause unworthy thereof. Wherefore that Jesus forbad them which
brought ye do^be man, that they should tell no body what was done, the self
same thing provoked them the more, to bl^se it abroad, and so much the more
also they magnifyed and auaunced Christ which whereas he had so great virtue and
power, and did them therwyth such pleasure not only required no reward of
them for the same, but also would not ones inioye the glory of so noble a
far. But as it is the part of a weldoer not to require praise for his
benefyte: so again it is the office of a kind man so much the more to give
thanks, in that that he which did ye benefyte look for no thank. Wherefore
they never ceased to blase abrod the name of Jesus in every place where so ever
they came, saying: He has done all things well. He has restored as well
hearing to the deaffe, as tongue to the dombe. Assuredly my friends this praise
agrees only upon God. There is no earthly, no mortal person, that does all
things well. All Christ's miracles no doubt were our benefytes, which
miracles, if ye way and expende them after the outward face of corporal
things: in deed there were many miracles which he did that were of much more
excellency and worthynes than this yt of a deaf man he made an hearer, of a
dombe a speaker.
But according to the spiritual sense, the sum of all a christian ma^s
felicity stands in this point, that with his ears he might hear the word
of the gospel, and speak that he has learned and believed. This thing, good
christen people if we do, we shall surely at length in heryte the kingdom of
heaven prepared for us. Where God the father, the son, and holy ghost three
persons in deytie raygne eternally. To whom be al glory. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xiij. sunday after Trinity. The.iij. chapter to the
Galathians.
Thargument. The law saves us not but Christ.
BRethren, to Abraham and his sede were the promyses made. He says not in the
seeds, as many: but in thy sede, as of one, which is Christ. This I say, that
the law which began afterward, beyond four hundredth and thyrtye years, does
not disanull the testament, that was confermed before of God unto Christward, to
make the promise of none effect. For if the inheritance come of the law, it
comes not now of promise. But God gave it unto Abraham by promise. Wherefore
than serves the law? The law was added because of tra^sgression (till the
sede came, to whom the promise was made) and it was ordained by Angels in the
hand of a mediator. A mediator is a mediator of one. But God is one. Is the
law than against the promise of God? God forbid. For if there had been a law
given which could have given life: than no doubt ryghtuousnes should come by
the law But the scripture concluded all things under syn, that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ should be given unto them that believe.

Saint Paul my well-beloved friends in the epistle of this day declares unto us,
that they change the testament and the everlasting will of God, which
testament, will, or covenant god has concluded in Christ our only iustifyer
and savior, which seek salvation and justification by the law and not by
Christ I speak (says saint Paul) after man's fashion, that ye may the
better understand me. Though it be but the testament and last will of a man,
yet if it be ones authorized and allowed, noma^ cutteth it of, or adds any
thing thereto. Ambrose.
Here saint Ambrose notes, that the Apostle uses this comparison or
similitude, to the intent he would declare that they be falsifyers of gods
testament, which whereas they believe in Christ, yet mengle with Christ the law and
which hope to be partly saved by the law. For in very deed the hole cause of
our salvation is Christ Jesus, and no jot of the law, as the Apostle saint
Paul does in this epistle very fully and effectually prove. If man's testament
ought to be of such strength, that we ought nether take ought therfro, nor put
ought there to: how much rather ought gods testament and will to be such? But in
gods testament to Abraham was the promise of eternal salvation and
justification made and unto his sede. Ge. xxij
In thy sede (said god to Abraham) shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. He says not in the seeds as many, but in thy sede, as of one, which
is Christ. Now tha^ seeing this writing, this testamente and couenaunte makes
mention but of one heir in whom God promised, that we should all be saved and
justified: then we ought to allow none other thing to our justification to
our bless and salvation but only Christ.

Secondly, S. Paul proves by the circu^stau^ce of the time, that the law
blessed not nor justified mankind. For the promise or writing of the testament
was proved and confirmed by god in the only heir Jesus Christ before the law
was given. For the law was given long after, that is to say (as Paul here
witnesses) above four hundred and thyrty years after. Wherefore if the law
were any cause of our justification: then the people which were before ye law
was given, could not be justified, which thing is false, To xiiij
as ye Apostle manyfestly proves in his epistle to the Romans. For Abraham
was justified long before the law came, yea and that before he was
circumcised. It is therefore plain, that the everlasting inheritance can not
come by the law. For if it were by the law, (as reasons saint Paul) than it
can not come by promise. But so it is, that god gave it unto Abraham by
promise. Ergo the heritage of heaven and salvation comes by promise and not by
the law.

An objection.
But here (says he) ye wol ask me, sith the law is not the cause of
salvation, but Christ is the only gyuer of it to such as cleave fast unto him
by true faith, hope, and charity, wherefore then serves the law, Solutio^
what good do it? Surely much good my friends. The use and profit of the law
is great, though it be not cause of our justification. I say the works of the
law save us not, but it is only the merytes of Christ that saves us, that
justifies us if we stycke unto him by ernest and quycke faith which works of
love and not of compulsion. In deed a true and right christon man, I mean a
person that is clean turned into a new man and which has so great faith and
charity in him, that for Christ's love, he is ready to do all things, such as
man need no law. i. Tim. i.
For the law (as the Apostle also testifyeth) is not given unto the ryghtuouse
man but unto the vnryghtuouse and disobedient, to the ungodly and unto sinners,
to unholy and unclean, to murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, to
mansleers, to whoremongers, to beastly persons, to thieves and so forth. The
law than is rather a restrayner from evil, than a iustifyer, it is, as it
were a brydell till Christ come and be settled in us which may cause us to
work even of love without co^pulsion of law. The law (says Paul) was added
because of tra^sgression till Christ, which was ye sede that was promised came.
So the law is not against ye promise of God, but it stands with the promise,
it is as it were our schole master and leader to Christ. For (says saint
Paul) if there had been any law given which could have given us life, that is
to say, which could have justified and saved us, than (no doubt) should
ryghtuousnes have come by the law. But that could not be. And therefore the
scripture concluded al under sin to the end that the promise by the faith of
Jesus Christ should be given to al such as believe the same. The law than was
added not to iustifye, but to brydell us in, to lead us like a scholemayster
unto Christ. And it was ordained and given (says Paul) by angels (as is
wytnessed also in the Acts) in the hand of a mediatoure, Actu. vij
that is to say, in the hand of Moses, which went between as a spokesman
between the angels and the people. The people could not hear the law that
was ordained and given of the angels from god without a mediator. Wherefore
now we have much more need of the mediator Christ which may bring us the
way to God.

Here therefore good people, ye learn in this epistle two things, the one is
wherefore Christ serves and the other wherefore the law serves. The law must
be our brydell our stay our scholemayster to direct and lead us to the true
and unfeigned faith in Christ which faith may make us to work even of love. But
Christ must be counted our only iustifyer, and the only cause of our salvation.
We must do ye works of the law not as compelled by law, but as provoked by
love which we bear first to God and consequently to our neighbor for Christ's
sake. This doing we shall surely be justified and sanctified persons, and
shall inherit the eternal inheritance of God. To whom be glory. etc.

The Gospel on the.xiij. sunday after Trinity. The x. Chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Of the lawyers question and of Christ's answer.
Jesus said to his disciples. Happy are the eyes which se the things that ye
se. For I tell you that many prophets and kings have desired to se those
things which ye se, and have not seen the^: and to hear those things which
ye hear, and have not herd them. And behold a certain lawyer stood up and
tempted him, saying: Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? He
said unto him what is written in the law? How redest thou? And he answered and
said: Love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy self.
And he said unto him: Thou have answered right. This do, and thou shall live.
But he willing to iustifye himself, said unto Jesus: And who is my
neighbor? Jesus answered, and said: A certain man descended from Jerusalem
to Hierico, and fell among thieves, which robbed him of his raiment and wounded
him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And it chanced, that there came
down a certain pressed that same way, and when he saw him, he passed by. And
likewise a Leuite, when he went nigh to the place, came and looked on him, and
passed by. But a certain Samaritane, as he iorneyed, came unto him: and wha^
he saw him, he had compassion on him and went to, and bound up his wounds
and poured in oil and wine and set him on his own beast, and brought him to a
common ynne, and made provision for him. And on the morrow, when he departed,
he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him. Take cure
of him and what so ever thou spendest more, wha^ I come again I will
recompense the. Which now of these three thynkest thou, was neighbor unto him
that fell among the thieves? And he said: he that showed mercy on him. Than
said Jesus unto him: Go, and do thou likewise.

BLessed be the eyes which se that you have seen etc. Well-beloved audience these
be the words of our Savior Christ spoken to his disciples in the x. chapter
of Luke which be red in the church this day. For the better understanding
whereof, ye shall mark, that Christ a little before the speaking of these
words reioysyng in spirit, gave praises and thanks to his father of heaven,
because he had hyd the mysterye of the gospel from the proud Pharisees which
were counted the wise and wyttye persons of the world, and had disclosed and
opened it to simple and unlearned persons, as to fysherme^, publicanes, and so
forth, such as were his disciples. And speaking these words, he turned
himself to his disciples apart, and said the words before rehearsed. Blessed
be the eyes that se, which you do se. For I tell you that many prophets and
kings would have seen that you se, and saw not, and would have herd that you
hear, and herd not. I pray you what herd, what saw these disciples that
the prophets and kings which were before them, herd not nor saw not? Truly,
they saw not, they herd not Christ as did thappostles. They busely waited and
looked for him, they knew such one should come to redeem and save them from
everlasting damnation and death whereof they were gyltie by the sin of Adam
their first father. But they could not se him personally. For the time was not
yet come, that the father of heaven had set and determined to send him. And
among other holy fathers which looked for this redemption, Luce. ij.
we read in holy scripture of one Symeon a ryghtuouse and devout man, which
had received an answer of the holy ghost, that he should not se death, till he
had seen with his eyes the Christ of the Lord, that is to say, the Messiah
that should save and redeem the world, which thing came to pass. For when
Christ our savior was brought to the temple on the eight day to be
circumcised according to the custom of the Iues, this Symeon in spyred with
the holy ghost came into the temple and taking the child in his arms praised
God and said: Now thou lycencest me thy servant to depart (o Lord) according
to thy word in peace. For mine eyes have seen thy saving stock, which thou
have prepared before the face of all people. etc. We read also of a certain
wydowe prophetisse named Anne daughter of Phanuell, Luce. ij.
which was also in the temple the same time, and praised the Lord in like wise
and spoke of this Christ unto all those that waited for the redemption of
Israel. These I say and such other which were in Christ's time reioysed to
se yt they saw, and to hear that they herd. But this could not the holy
prophets and kings which were before Christ's coming into this world se,
because ye time was not yet come. So Christ might very well call the disciples
blessed because they saw things and also herd doctrine taught them which were
not seen nor herd before. Now when Christ had spoken these words and was
come again to the people to teach and instruct them his doctrine behold, a
certain scribe which was a lawyer sterte up to take Christ in a trippe and to
tempte him, saying: Master, what shall I do to inherit everlasting life?
Christ perceiving wherabout he went answered and said to the lawyer. What is
written in the law? Deuteronomy. vi.
How do thou read there? He said: In the law thus is it written. Thou shall
love ye Lord thy God with thy hole heart, and thy hole soul, and with thy hole
might, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. Than said
Christ unto him: Thou have well answered. This do, and thou shall live. As who
should say: Thou art a doctor a teacher and master in Israel. Do the thing
that thou teach other to do, be a worker of the thing that thou read.
For not the hearers of the law be just before God, Romans ij.
but the doers of the law shall be justified. Think not, for all my new and
strange doctrine to your ears, Math. v.
yt I am come to destroy the law and the prophets as many do think of me. No
no, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Ye scribes and pharisees
commonly set little by gods hestes and commandments, all your busye study
and labor is to auaunce and set up your own laws, your own rytes and
traditions. But I tell you, and take it for a warning, that who so ever
breaks one of these little pretty commandments of God (for so ye count them
in comparison of yours) and teaches men to do as he does, as commonly ye
scribes and pharisees do, Math. v
believe me, he shall have lest to do in heaven. But that person which first
does himself, and afterward teaches other men these commandments of God,
of which thou have rekened up the chefest of all and that which conteyneth all
the rest, doubtless, this fellow shall be called a great man in heaven. Now good
people, ye shall understand, that the scribes and pharisees among the Iues
in deed taught, wha^ they sat in Moses chair, the law of God and his
commandments, but they added many gloses, interpretacions, and additions of
their own heads. They corrupted gods word with their own traditions, as
tauerners be wont to brewe and corrupt the pure wine with other unwholesome
things for their own gaynes and advantage. And therefore when our savior
Christ came among them he went about to restore all again to the right
sense and pureness, and to sever and wede out the fansyes dreams and leven of
the pharisees wherwyth they had ensoured and corrupted ye sweet bread of life,
and he openly told the people, that onles their perfection, their goodness and
righteousness passed the ryghtuousnes and good living of the scribes and
pharisees, they should never come to the kingdom of heaven. Whereupon he went
on, and taught the commandments of God and the pure and right understanding
of them as in his most excellent and sweet sermon which he made to his
disciples on the mountain, which the holy Evangelist saint Matthew sets
forth unto us in the.v.vi. and.vij. chapters, more at large does appear. Mat.
vij
A good tree (says Christ) brings forth good fruit. For not every one, that
says unto me, Lord Lord, shall enter in to the kingdom of heaven, but he that
does ye will of my father which is in heaven. Thou read in ye law. Thou
shall love thy Lord God with all thy heart, with al thy soul, with al thy
power and mind. Do this says Christ, and thou shalt live eternally in
heaven. Thou may not speak of God with thy mouth or pray unto him with thy
lyppes, and thy heart be far from God. Nay, thou must love him with thy hole
heart, mind and power, and not fayntly. And thou must love thy neighbor as
thy self. Who soever does this, shall live. And who soever has not done this,
let him repent and become a new man. Let him ask grace of God that he may be
able through his aid and help to do it. He that seeks shall find, he that
asks shall obtain, to him that knocks, it shall be opened. There is nothing
impossible to God. So long as we be carnal and unrenewed by the spirit it is
not possible for us to love God with heart. We may well dread him as a Lord
and punysher of sin, but love him as a father we can not. We may well like
servants fear him, but reverently love him like sons and daughters, we
cannot. It is not possible (I say) for a carnal man to fulfill the law which
is spiritual. Romans vij
The law (as ye have herd) requires ye heart. We must love God with heart,
and not dread him for fear of punishment, as bondmen and bondwomen do their
lord. If we woll consider what God has done for us, first he made us of
naught, he prouydeth for us all things necessary to our souls health, he
has made our souls not as be the souls of beasts without reason and which
peryshe and dye with ye body, but reasonable, but immortal, he sent also his
own son from heaven to redeem mankind from the tyranny and thraldom of the
deuel, and to teach them how to live a godly and an innocent life. If I say we
woll consider all this, how can we but love god even with heart and do his
sweet will and pleasure, onles we be harder then the Adamant stones, onles we
be made of such a churlyshe nature that nothing can move us. But the
pharisees for most part were carnal and fleshly persons They observed the
letter of the law, they kept the outward words, they did no lechery
outwardlye, they committed no theft, no murder, no perjury nor such other
vices outwardlye, they did sacrifice to God, they offered unto him, they
sensed, they pyped, they played, they prayed after their fashion, but none of
all this was done with the heart. For inwardly they were full of all
abhominacion, as Christ himself wytnessed unto them. For they did it only
for fear of punyshme^t and not for any hearty love that they had to God. They
fulfilled the letter of ye law outwardly. But their mind, their spirit,
their heart was upon other things, that is to wit, upon worldly vanities and
pleasures. So they could not fulfill the law so long as they were in that
case. For as Paul full well declares, the law is spiritual, Romans vij.
and ought to be done and executed with the heart, with the spirit, and mind,
and not only outwardly. Yet nevertheless all the Jews were not in this case,
for there were holy and just persons in all ages, as appears full well in the
books of holy scripture. And there were also many, which had good intentes, but
they were so drowned with the blyndnes, supersticion, gloses, tradicions,
interpretacions and dreams of the pharisees and elders that they espied not
the true honor and worship of God, of which sort was Nicodemus, Ioh. iij.
which came by night to Christ to learn of him and to dispute with him. But
Christ perceiving that he was yet carnal and that he observed but the letter
of the law, and not the spirit and mind of the law, said by and by unto
him: Verily verily I say unto the, onles thou be (as who should say) newborn, not of thy mother, but of water and spirit, thou can not enter into
the kingdom of god. That that is borne of flesh is flesh, but that which is
borne of spirit is spirit. A fleshly man a natural man, a man unbaptized,
unrenewed with the spirit can not smell nor have any savor of things
spiritual, he can not work ye will and pleasure of God. He may well for
fear satisfye the outward words, but he shall never do the will of God
wyllyngly, heartily, and with spirit, as it is required of God that he should
do. For as I have said, the law is spiritual and requires the heart. And
surely it appears well that this lawyer took but the letter of the law and
not ye spirit, by the question following where he asks Christ who is his
neighbor. For if he had loved God hertely he should have counted every man
his neighbor as Christ's similitude byddeth and not only his own nation as
commonly the Iues did. Wherefore my friends if we wol have everlasting life,
let us do as Christ here byddeth us. Let us not be speakers nor hearers of ye
law but doers, and not outward and lyterall doers, but hartye, but spiritual
doers, not for fear as bondmen but for love as freme^ and sons and heirs.
This let us do and we shall live euerlastyngly in heaven with God. To whom be
all honor and imperie for ever and ever. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xiiij. sunday after Trinity. The.v. chapter to the
Galathians.
Thargument The batell between the spirit and the flesh, and the fruits of
them both.
BRethren, walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lust of the flesh. For the
flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the flesh:
These are contrary one to another, so that ye can not do what soever ye would.
But and if ye be led of the spirit, than are ye not under the law. The deeds
of the flesh are manifest, which are these, aduoutrye, fornication, uncleanness,
wanto^nes, worshyppynge of images, wytchcraft, hatred, variaunce, zele, wrath,
strife, sedicio^, sects, enuyeng murder, dronkennes, glottony, and such
like: of the which I tell you before as I have told you in times past, that
they which commytte such things, shall not be inheritours of the kingdom of
God. Contrarely they fruit of the spirit, is love, joy, peace, long
sufferynge, gentleness, goodness, faythfulnes, mekenes, temperancy. Against such
there is no law. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.

MY well-beloved brethren and systers in Christ, ye must well consider and
understand, that the life of a christen man and woman in this present world
is as who should say a continual warfare, a daily batell and fighting,
according to the saying of Job. Job. vij
Man's life is on earth a warfare. And ye shall furthermore understand, that the
greatest adversary, the greatest enemy ye man has, is him self. Neither
has man any thing so hard and so strong an enemy to overcome as his own
flesh, his own stubborn and rebellous mind and lust, forasmuch as of our
own corrupt natures we be inclined to al naughtynes and euels as it is written
in the book of Genesis. Ge. viij.
The understanding and ymaginacion of man's heart is evil even from his youth.
The flesh lusts contrary to the spirit and the spirit to the flesh. Ioh. iij
Wherefore if we be not regenerate, if we be not borne again, if we be not
purged, cleansed, and renewed by the spirit of God and so governed and directed
in all our procedinges and doings of ye same surely we shall never enter into
the kingdom of heaven, and this is it that saint Paul does here tell us of. He
byddeth us walk in the spirit, that is to say, cast away our old corrupt
nature, and put on us a new nature, that is to say, a spiritual nature, a new
man, so shall we not fulfill the lusts and desires of the flesh. As who should
say. Albeit your flesh wrastleth and fyghteth against your spirit which ye
have obtained by Christ and again your spirit against your flesh because it
is not yet throughlye mortifyed nor crucified in such wise that sometime ye do
not the thing that ye would feign do through the infirmity and weakness of the
flesh which ye have not yet fully conquered: yet this notwythstandynge se ye
go still on, and walk according to the spirit. Follow I say the things of
the spirit, as holy meditacions and readynges of scripture, devout prayers,
abstinence of the body, and all godly exercises. Thus doing, ye shall grow
strong in ye spirit, ye shall be hable by gods grace and assistence to
wythstande the lusts and desires of the flesh and of the corrupt nature, yea
ye shall be new me^, spiritual men, conducted, led and governed by the holy
spirit of god, ye shall then embrase the will of God frelye without compulsion,
and not as bondmen to ye law. Ye shall then be enfraunchised from the thraldom
of the deuell. Then shall charity work more in you than any outward law can
do. i. tim. i.
For a law is not made for just and parfyte persons, but to brydel and
repress the lusts of sinful persons of carnal and beastly folk, for as a
certain Philosopher says: Plato.
Of the evil manners of men did good laws take beginning. For if all men would
do as they ought to do, we should need no laws. Good men therefore be not under
the law. For to be under the law is to be in servile fear and not to do the
law freely.

And because ye should know the better when ye walk fleshly and when
spiritually, the Apostle S. Paul sets forth unto us the fruits of the
flesh and the fruits of the spirit. Works of the flesh.
The works of ye flesh (says he) be easily known, which are these,
aduoutrye, letchery, uncleanness, ydolatrye, wytchcraft, poysonynge, hatred,
strife, hartbrennynge, fume, chafynge, discord, heresies, sects, envy,
dronkennes, ryotte, surfettynge, and such like. Of these foul vices and fruits
of the corrupt nature, I tell you before (says saint Paul) that who so ever
do them (onles he rise again by dew penance) shall never inherit the
kingdom of God. On the contrary side, the fruit of ye spirit is love,
charity, joy, peace with all men, patience, sufferaunce, myldnes,
lyberalitie, faythfulnes, meknes, temperau^ce. And against such persons says
S. Paul as show these fruits, surely there is no law. i. tim. i.
For (as said is) the law is made for the other sort of men which be iniust
and disobedient, it is not ordained for the children of the spirit which be
infraunchysed and which be wyllyngly without compulsion obedient enough. For
the children of the spirit, I mean all such which belong unto Jesus Christ
have mortifyed and crucified and do continually mortifye and crucifye their
flesh, their vices and concupiscences by the power of the spirit that
raygneth in them, as S. Paul did saying: i. cor. ix.
I tame my body and bring it into subjection. Assuredly my friends the
children of the spirit be now no more subject to the flesh, but ye flesh
rather is subject unto them or at lest ways unto the spirit which is in
them. Our Lord grant, that his spirit may so work in us by his lively word
that we may eschew the works of the flesh and follow the fruits and works
of the same spirit by our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and holy
ghost three persons and one God, be re^dred all honor, glory, praise, and
thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xiiij. sunday after Trinity. The.xvij. Chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Christ heals the.x. lepers.
AS Jesus went to Jerusalem he passed through Samaria and Galile. And as he
entered in to a certain town, there met him ten men that were lepers. Which
stood afar of, and put forth their voices and said: Jesus master, have mercy
on us. When he saw them, he said unto them: Go show your selves unto the
prestes. And it came to pass, that as they went, they were cleansed. And one
of them, when he saw that he was cleansed, turned back again, and with a
loud voice praised God, and fell down on his face at his fete, and gave him
thanks. And the same was a Samaritane. And Jesus answered, and said: are there
not ten cle^sed? But where are those nine? There are not found that returned
again to give God praise, save only this stranger. And he said unto him:
arise, go thy way, thy faith has made the hole.

GOod christian people not only the words of our Lord be full of great
mysteries and significacions, but also his miracles and his works be as it
were parables and full of mystery, and by them we ought to nourysh and increase
our weak faith more and more and to make it strong, as one may se and
consider in the gospel of this day, which makes mention of.x. lazers or
lepers, whom at that time our Lord cleansed of their leprye, and of his large
mercy made them hole. But what sygnifye these.x. lazers or lepers unto us?
Truly in the law of Moses God had forbidden that none should keep company with
them which were infected and sick with bodily leprye but commanded that they
should be put forth from among them and from the company of the rest, lest
they should infecte and pollute other as it is read in the book of Numeri
where it is written in this wise. Number. v
The Lord god spoke to Moses saying: Command the children of Israel, that
they put out from their tents all lazars or lepers. But certainly we ought a
great deal more to take heed that we do not communicate nor keep company with
such as be lazars spiritually. The spiritual lepry is infidelity, heresy, and
ignorance of God. For like as the bodily leprye does corrupt all the body, even
so does infidelity corrupt all the soul, and by the stynkynge breath thereof,
that is to say, by the words and conversation of such as be corrupted
therewith, be other corrupted ye company with them, according to that saying.
Corrumpu^t bonos mores colloquia praua, that is to say, evil communicacions
do corrupt good manners. Wherefore al such ought to be eschued and fled from, as
lepers and lazars, they must be excommunicate and put out of the assemble and
congregation of christen people. Yet this notwythstandynge, there is no
sycknes, no malady, no lepry so grievous, but that the most excellent
phisician and surgeon our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus both can heal and will
heal, if he be faithfully sought and called upon, as by exemple is well showed
in this gospel. But I say it is our parts, to seek and call upon him, it is
our office to go and mete Jesus Christ, if we woll be cured. We must cry afar
of after him, we must with deep lowlynes and humility of heart, pray unto him
and say: Jesus, Savior, and master, have mercy on us, take pytie and
compassion over us. By this means after that we have ones offered and presented
our selves unto the prestes, which have authority and power of God for to
discern and judge,
according unto the scripture, between the lepry and not lepry, that is to
say, between heresye and verity, between vice and virtue, and according unto
the scripture, to assoyle, as saint Paul did assoyle a sinner of which is made
mention in the second epistle unto the Corinthians, ij. cor, ij
we shall be received again into the number of the faithful, even into ye flock
of Jesus Christ But after that we shall be assoyled of God in troth, and of men
in signs, we must yet beware that we be not ingrate, churlysh, nor
unthankful to God, as the.ix. lazars were which did not return, for to yield
thanks and praises to Christ, and for to give glory unto god for the great
benefit and goodness that they had received of him. Let us be like the lazar
Samaritane, which fygured the christen ge^tyls, and let us say that which the
spirit of God says by the prophet David in the.cij. psalm. My soul,
bless thou the Lord God and do not forget all his rewards, which makes hole
all thine iniquities and all thy syckenesses. This let us do, to the intent our
Lord may semblably say unto every one of us. Rise up, and go thy way, thy
true ernest and catholyke faith has preserved and made the hole. Hense forth
se thou sin no more, walk no more after the flesh, but after the spirit. If
we thus do (my fre^des) doubt we not, but we shall have the reward of ever
lasting bless, which is endless joy in the heavenly Jerusalem with the
father, son, and holy ghost. To whom be all glory and imperie, in infinita
sesecula. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xv. sunday after Trinity. The.v. and.vi. chapter to the
Galathians.
Thargument. An exhortacion to good works.
BRethren, if we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. Let us not
be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, enuyenge one an other.
Brethren, if a man also be taken in any fault ye which are spiritual: help
to amend hymin the spirit of mekenes: considering thy self, lest thou also
be tempted. Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ.
For if any man seem to himself that he is somewhat, when in deed he is
nothing, the same deceyueth his own mind. Let every man prove his own
work, and then shall he have reioysynge, only in his own self, and not in
another. For every man shall bear his own burden. Let him that is taught in
the word, minister unto him that teaches him, in all good things. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked. For what so ever a man sows, that shall he al so
reap. For he that sows in his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corrupcion:
But he that sows in the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting
Let us not be weary of well doing. For when the time is come, we shall reap
without werynes.

While we have therefore time: let us do good unto all men, and specially unto
them which are of the household of faith.

Well-beloved friends in our Lord Jesus Christ, ye shall understand, that our
Savior in the Gospel of saint Mattheu says, mat. viij
that every tree is known by his fruit, for a good tree bears good fruit,
but an evil tree brings forth evil fruit. Therefore the holy Apostle of God
saint Paul does in this epistle admonyshe us christen folk, that if we be good
trees we ought to bring forth good fruits, and if we live in the spirit, as
christian me^ ought to live, that we must walk also in spirit. For surely it
is not enough for us to be called christen folk, onles we do also the deeds
and works of christen folk. It is not enough for the to say, I have received
the holy ghost, or I have faith,
if thou show not worthy works and fruits of the spirit. Now one of the
first and principal fruits of the spirit, is love and brotherly supportacion
or bearing of one another, which thing saint Paul does admonysh us here of,
that we should keep, where he says: Let us not be desirous of vain glory.
etc. Certes it is not possible for a man or woman yt is vain gloriouse and
that loves to be auaunced and praised of the world, either to supporte, or to
forbear much an other man, for he will always covet to be herd before all
other, and to be obeyed in all places, wheresoever he goes or rydeth.
Certainly my friends vayneglorie is an appetyte or lust of all lusts the
most dau^gerouse and the most subtyle and secretest that may be ymagined, in
so much, that those persons, which be esteemed for most spiritual, most holy,
most godly, be oftentimes infected therwyth. Let us (says Paul) not be
covetous of vayneglorye, prouokyng one another, nor having envy one at an
other. But if any one among you be taken in any fault or offense through
frayltie of nature and not by obstinate euelnes, you (says Paul) which be
or ought to be spiritual, teach him and help to amend him in all meekness,
in all swetnes of spirit, considering in your selves, that ye also may fall in
to like temptacion. As if he should say: Do not brag nor vaunt your selves
in the fall of another body, but rather consider that even the same or like
error may happen unto you. And therefore saint Paul says in another place.
i. cor. x.
He yt thinks himself to be standing, let him take heed he fall not. Se ye
bear and supporte one another burden and charge, and so ye shall accomplysh
the law of Jesus Christ.
Whosoever loves his neighbor, he has fulfilled the law, To xiij.
as witnesses the apostle in his epistle to the Romans. Abuse not then your
selves in trusting in your selves and thinking your selves to be any thing.
For surely ye be nothing, ye can do nothing, ye are worth nothing, if God put
not his hand unto you. So then of your selves ye can worthily challenge
nothing. He that allows and praises himself, is not forthwith approved and
allowed, but he is praise worthy, he is allowable, whom god prayseth and
allows. ij. cor. x.
Wherefore let every body look on himself and well consider himself, and he
shall have none occasion to brag and glory with himself over the frailty
and weakness of other persons. What so ever it be, every man shall bear his
own fardell, his own burden. Mat. xvi
The son of man shall yield unto every man according to his works as he
himself testifyeth.

After saint Paul had thus greatly praised and commended brotherly
supportacion or bearyng one with another, he now exhorts christen men to be
helping and releuynge to all the bodily necessities of them that do teach the
faith and the gospel of Jesus Christ. He says: Do not err, abuse not your
selves, for god can neither be mocked nor begyled. For what thing so ever a
man sows, the same shall he also reap and gather again, as who should say.
All that which a man does or sows in this world, he shall find it and reap
it in the other world, Two feldes
whyther it be good or evil. Certainly my friends there be two manner of feldes
which men do sow, there is the fylde of the flesh, and the fylde of the
spirit. He that sows in his flesh, that is to say, he that does the works
of the flesh, which be evil works, deuelysh works, ungodly works, shall of
the flesh reap corruption and everlasting curse and damnation But he that
sows in the spirit shall of the spirit reap everlasting life. Wherefore in
the mean time, while we have space to sow, let us sow in spirit, let us sow
good seeds, christen seeds, charitable seeds, let us do well without fayntynge,
without being weary, not only to them, which do good unto us, but unto all,
and principally unto the good and faithful christen men. And doubt we not,
but we shall gather in, and reap in time convenient good and full harvest in
eternal life to the glory of the eternal father of heaven. Unto whom be
thanks. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xv. sunday after Trinity. The.vi. Chapter of Matheu.
Thargument Christ forbyddeth us here to seek carefully for worldly things.
Jesus said unto his disciples. No man can serve two masters. For either he
shall hate the one, and love the other, or else lean to the one, and despyce
the other: ye can not serve God and Mammo^. Therefore I say unto you: be not
careful for your life what ye shall eat or drink, nor yet for your body,
what rayme^t ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth than meat, and the
body more of value than raiment? Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow
not, neither do they reap, nor carry into the barnes: and your heavenly father
fedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? Which of you (by taking
careful thought) can add one cubyte unto his stature? And why care ye for
raiment? Consider the lylyes of the field, how they grow. They labor not,
neither do they spynne And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
royalty was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if God so cloth the grass
of the field (which though it stand to day, is to morrow cast into the
furnace) shall he not much more do the same for you O ye of little faith?
Therefore take no thought, saying: what shall we eat, or what shall we drink:
or wherewith shall we be clothed? after al these things do the gentyls seek. For
your heavenly father knows, that ye have need of all these things. But rather
seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the ryghtwysnes thereof, and al these
things shall be ministered unto you.

GOod people if we were christen men and women with hearts and with works, I
say if we did believe sufficiently as we boast our selves to believe in Jesus
Christ and in his blessed and pure word, we should without fail not be so
troubled nor dysmayd nor yet so pensyfe and so careful when we have any
mysfortune and necessity. Jesus Christ our savior does command us that we
should in no wise take thought what we should eat, or what we should drink, or
wherwyth we should be clothed. And that they be the carnal men, the paynyms
and infideles which take thought for these things: and not the true and
faithful christen men. He says and assures us in the Gospel of this day,
that God his father and ours, shall nourysh us and arraye us: And for all this,
as if he were a liar and an abuser, we do not believe in him nor in his words.
Certes the infidelity of the world is great. The world I say is blind,
which thinks to believe so well and so fermely, and yet believes never a
deal. We do great injury unto Jesus Christ in mystrustynge him. But it is to be
noted for the understanding of this text yt our Lord forbyddeth christen me^
to take thought: but he does not forbydde them to labor: but commands that
every body should labor according to the grace and might that god has given
him. In the sweat of thy vysage thou shall eat thy bread (says he in
the.iij. chapter of Genesis) And for all the rest let him cast all his hope in
god. And as S. Peter shows us in the.v. chapter of his first Epistle, and the
Prophet in the.liiij. psalm. Cast thy care upon the Lord God, and he shall
nourysh the. And saint Paul says in the.iiij. chapter unto the Philippians.
Be not careful for any thing but in all prayer and petition with
thankesgyuynge let your prayers be known unto God. And saint Peter in ye v.
chapter of ye aforesaid epistle says: Cast al your thought in him which has
care of you. And for this cause saint Hierome expounynge this place says in
this wise. Hierom.
We be here commanded by Christ, not to be careful what we should eat, for
in the swet of our face, we prepare unto us bread. Labor ought therefore to
be exercised, Chrysostomus super Mattheum.
but care taken away. Here with agrees Chrysostom saying: Not with
spiritual cares, but with bodily labors, we must seek our fode, which fode
abundeth to such as labor for it by gods gift for a reward of their
diligence, and on the other side it is wythdrawe^ from such as despyce labor,
by gods doing for a punishment. But this that Christ speaks here (says
saint Hierome) is to be understand, of the bodily meat and raiment. For of
the goostly fode and raiment we ought always to be careful. Our Lord for to
rebuke us the more of our little faith byddeth us behold the birds, and the
lylies of the feldes, unto who^ God provides. And be we no more worth then the
birds: or then the flowers of lylies of ye feldes? He does then defend us to
take thought for earthly things, to the end that our spirit may the better be
lift up unto the heavenly things: for a man to take thought and care for the
one and the other, it is impossible. Who so ever has tasted of the true
goodness of God, he does vntaste and myslyke the flattering and vain goodness
of the earth. For none can serve two masters at ones. He can not serve both
God and also Mammon. Mammon in the Syriake spech (says S. Hierom) is called
riches. Hierom.
Let the couetouse person tha^ hear this, that he can not both serve Christ
and riches, and yet he says not, he that has riches but he that serves
riches. For he that is the servant of riches, keeps riches as a servant or
bondsman, but he that has shaken of, the yoke of bondage or servitude, Austine.
he gives them as a lord. And saint Austine says: He that serves Mammon,
that is to say, riches, serves him which by the merit of his peruersitie is
called of our lord the prince of this world that is to say the deuell.
Wherefore here be reproved all covetous folks, which do set and fix so much
their hearts unto the world: and so little unto god. Let us then believe at the
lest Jesus Christ which does not lie: and care we not for to gather goods, but
let us rather care for the kingdom of God only and for his justice: and to
obtain his grace and for the rest there shall be given us as much as we shall
lack for to pass soberly this life with patience. Chrysostom
Seek ye than first (says Christ) the kingdom of god and the justice thereof
The kingdom of God, Kingdom of God.
as holy Chrysostom expouneth, is the retribucion or reward of good works,
and the justice thereof, is the way of godlynes, whereby says he, we go to the
kingdom of God. If tha^ thou wylt consider, how great the glory of the
saints shall be, it must needs follow, that either for fear of pains thou must
go from evil, or for desire of glory, thou must hasten the to do good. And if
(says this holy doctor) thou will consider, what is the justice of God, I
mean, what God hates and what he loves, the self justice shall show unto
the her ways which follows such as love her. For we shall not be called to a
reckoning whether we be rich or poor, but whether we have done well or euel,
which thing (says he) is in our fre will. Wherefore good people se ye do not
care for your bodily sustenau^ce, for our Lord does promise you, that it
shall be given unto you, you need not to doubt of it, if ye cast from you this
fleshly and worldly thought full of mystrust of the provision of God. Do ye
rather the contrary, have no trust in your selves, but al in God: and you
shall be truly faithful and the children of almighty God: and you shall lack
nothing in this present time nor in the other to come by our Lord Jesus
Christ unto whom be glory and thanks world without end. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xvi. sunday after Trinity. The.iij. chapter to the
Ephesians.
Thargument Of the power, heygth, breadth, and depth of Christ, that is to say,
that he is every where, and potent in all things.
Saint Paul wrote unto the Ephesians saying: I desire, that ye faint not
because of my tribulacions that I suffer for your sakes: which is your
praise. For this cause I bow my knees to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is father over all that is called father in heaven and in earth, that he
would grant you according to the riches of his glory, that ye may be
stre^gthed with might by his spirit in the ynner man, that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith, that ye being roted and grounded in love, might be
able to co^prehe^de with all saints, what is that breadth and length, depth and
heyght: and to know the excellent love of the knowledge of Christ, that ye
might be fulfilled with all fulness, which comes of God. Unto him that is able
to do exceeding aboundauntly above all that we ask or think according to the
power that works in us, be praise in the congregation by Jesus Christ,
thorowout all generacions from time to time. Amen.

THe charge my friends of a bishop or of a curate, is to teach continually,
and to pray for the people, which is committed unto him, to the intent that it
would please God to redress, comfort, and assure them against the temptacions
of this world, as saint Paul does teach us, by all his epistles and in the
epistle of this day he says: I pray you my brethren, that you do not
discomforte your selves for my tribulacions, which I suffer for you. That is to
say, if you se that I do suffer much harm, injuries, and persecutions
forbycause that I do preach unto you the gospel, do not discourage your
selves, but persevere in ye faith of the same. If the master has been evil
entreated, by good right the servant must be in like manner. Our Lord Jesus
Christ says in the.x. chapter of S. Matthew. It suffiseth unto the disciple
for to be like unto his Master. For this cause to the end that you should not
discourage your selves I pray and require humbly the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great father of household of the heaven and of the earth, which is
the spring and fountain of all goodness. For I know well, that without him,
you nor I can do nothing. I pray him, that by the rychesses of his glory and
grace, it woll please him, to give unto you by his spirit, strength not bodily
but spiritually and inwardly, for to endure and to suffer. And that it wol
please Jesus Christ, the glory of the father, the glory of ye angels and of
men, to abide in you by fervent faith in your hearts, founded and rooted in
charity to thyntente that you may know and understand the incomprehensible
graces which by him be given unto us the largeness and length of the same, for
the earth is full of the mercy of the Loroe God (says ye prophet David) and
the highness and depthnesse: Psalm. xxxij.
for they do perse the heavens and the hills. He which is descended is he
which has ascended above all the heavens says saint Paul. Ephesians. liij
To the intent also that ye shall know the great charity of Jesus Christ toward
us (the which knowledge is more to be esteemed than all the science of the
world) and that you should be replenyshed in all abundance with the graces
of God. In this epistle saint Paul declares in short conclusions the
perfection of the christen life, unto the which we ought to breath and to sygh.
He does not pray that god should give them much temporal goods for to live
at their ease, but he desires and prays, that they may have strength for to
endure and to bear with him the cross of Jesus Christ For all the life of a
christen man is to endure. In the conclusion of the epistle, with profounde
heart and with great spirit he yeldeth graces and loving thanks unto God,
saying: Unto him which is able for to give us more than we can demand or
think, according unto the might the which puissantly and strongly works and
labors in us, unto him be yelden all glory by all the church, by the means
of his son Jesus Christ. For even as by him al grace is given us from the
father, so it must needs be that by him, which is the beginning and the end,
all glory be unto him rendered. Then my brethren, let us not discourage our
selves of the word of God, of the doctrine of the gospel, for any tribulation
or worldly vexacion that may happen unto any of them by which it shall have
pleased God yt they should bear it: if it be his pleasure to make them to bear
his cross: and unto them which shall bear it, but so much the more let us be
founded steadfast and ferme, and rooted in faith, hope, and charity, and we
shall know the inco^prehensible graces of God. And he that surmounteth all
might, shall deliver us from al evil, and shall lead us unto his glory, unto
his heavenly kingdom, where in eternal joy we shall yield perpetual graces
and praises unto the father of heaven by our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom. etc.

The Gospel on the.xvi. sunday after Trinity. The.vij. Chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Christ rayseth a dead man to life again.
Jesus went into a city which is called Naim, and many of his disciples went
with him, and much people. When he came nigh to the gate of the city: behold,
there was a dead man carried out, which was the only son of his mother, and
she was a wedowe, and much people of the city was with her. And when the Lord
saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her: weep not. And he came
nigh, and touched the coffyn: and they that bare him stood still. And be said:
Young man, I say unto the, arise. And he that was dead, sat up, and began to
speak. And he delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on them all.
And they gave the glory unto God, saying: A great prophet is risen up
among us, and god has vysited his people.

THe thing (good people) which is most agreeable unto god, and that which he
demands and requires of us principally, is to believe his word, as saint
Paul saythin the.xi. chapter of his epistle to the Hebrews. It is impossible
to please God with out faith. For this cause all the miracles which were at
any time done, as well by Jesus Christ in earth as by him in his members, it has
not ben for to attribute the honor unto his members, or that his members has
done miracles, but for to approve ye word of God, and for to manifest his
glory and might, to the intent that he should be honored and reverenced of
every body, and in every place, as the prophet says: Lord god all the earth
does worship the. For this cause our Lord has raised up from death to life
the wedowes son, of the which is made mention in the gospel of this day. He
has here raised one from bodily death: for to make us to believe, that he has
the power also for to raise us again from spiritual death. And also he shall
raise us up again bodily at the day of dome: As he said unto Martha: I am the
resurrection and life, who so believes in me, he shall not dye eternally. Ioh.
xi
All they therefore which do not live according unto the spirit, which follow
the old life of Adam, which accomplish the desires, concupiscences, and
works of the flesh (of the which was spoken in ye epistle of the last sunday)
they be dead spiritually. For who that has not the holy ghost, he has no
life, he does not belong unto Jesus Christ which is the life. If any has not
the spirit of Christ, he is not Christ's. To. viij. He is borne and conducted
of evil spirits to the pytte of hell: If Jesus Christ do not come quyckely for
to touch him with his hand, the which sygnifyeth his great puissaunce and
might conjoined with his word. If he do not speak and touch lively the heart,
it is impossible, that the said creatures should have power to rise again, or
that they should ever change from the death of the soul unto newnes of life
and state of grace. For surely so long as we be in deadly sin and under the
thraldom and subjection of the fend, so long we be as dead persons. S.
Ambrose
And therefore says saint Ambrose. We lie dead in secret, when either the
fire of unreasonable lust brenneth us, or the cold humor drowneth and as it
were with a certain slothfulness of the body the sharpness of the mind
is accombred and overwhelmed, in which case we can not rise out of our drousye
slomber but by Christ. And if says this holy doctor saint Ambrose, An
allegory
it be an heuye and greuouse sin which thou thy self art not able to wash
away with the tears of thy penance and repentance, let thy mother the holy
church weep for the. Let the people also be assistente unto her. And fortwyth
thou shall rise again out of the coffyn or beer and shalt begin to speak
with an other life, and all that hear it shall fear and shall be corrected by
thexemple of one. They shall also praise God, Bid
which has given us so great remedies to eschew death. And here says Bid is
the error of the heretics called Nouatians confounded, which while they go
about to destroy the clensyng of penitent persons, do deny yt our mother ye
church weeping for ye spiritual death of her children ought to be comforted by
hope of restoryng again to life Which damnable opinion the wicked
Anabaptists at this day have renewed in diverse places of christendom, which
deny, that they that fall into deadly sin after baptism can by due penance
or any other means come again to the state of grace whom we pray God to
bring out of their foul heresye. Let us than good people instauntly and
humbly pray to almighty God the father of heaven that it would please him so
often as we fall into sin to touch and speak to us so virtuous and pythy
words that may quicken us, and raise us from death to life, in yeldynge and
restorynge us living truly in spirit unto our mother, which is the church of
faithful men, and that we may speak continually the word of praise and of
grace unto God: in such wise that by occasion of us, our neighbors may be
edifyed and exhorted for to praise and glorifye god with us, knowing that God
has vysited his people by Jesus Christ. Unto whom apperteyneth glory and
honor eternally. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xvij. sunday after Trinity. The.iiij. chapter to the
Ephesians.
Thargument. Of the unity of faith that there be no dissension among
christen people.
BRethren, I which am a presoner of the lords exhort you, that ye walk
worthy of the vocacion wherwyth ye are called, with all lowlynes and meekness,
with humbleness of mind, forbearinge one another through love, and be diligent
to keep the unity of the spirit through the bond of peace, being one body,
and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there
be but one Lord, one faith, one baptism: one God and father of all, which is
above all, and through all, and in you all.

MY brethren and systers in Jesus Christ, let us consider the benignity
loving kyndnes and swetnesse of the holy ghost, the which does not commau^de
us with rygoure and sharpness (as men do often) but does desire us louyngly by
his great messanger the apostle saint Paul, that we should walk worthily in
the vocacion or calling unto which we be called. Of this vocacion is spoken in
the first chapter of the first epistle unto ye Corinthias, where he says:
God is true and faithful, by whom you are called into the company of his
son our Lord Jesus Christ. This companyenge with Jesus Christ, is the christen
and catholyke church, the which is called a body, whereof he is the head,
and we be his members: in case we be conducted and lead by the holy ghost. For
he is the sturrer, the life and the conductour of all the catholyke church,
for to make it to walk worthily with the head in all humility, meekness and
swetnesse. He does teach us also by true love and charity, in all patience to
supporte and bear ye faults and infirmities of our neighbors. And saint
Paul induces us to do this in the.vi. chapter of the epistle unto the
Galathians. Bear the burdens one of another and so ye shall accomplysh the
law of Christ. The which does admonysh us above al things that we should
endeavor our selves to keep the unity of the spirit of faith in a bond of
peace and co^corde: that is to wit in sauourynge in faith one self thing.
And what is yt that we should all savor? That we be one body, one spirit, and
all called into one hope of salvation by Jesus Christ. That there is one Lord,
one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is above al, and over
all things, and in us al, which is he that is blessed in the world of
worlds. This is ye faith in the which we ought to be vnied and knytte with the
holy ghost, and to have steadfast peace and concord The which things if we
have, we shall be conducted by this holy ghost in all graces and virtues for to
bless, laud, and glorifye this right high and sovereign father by our Lord
Jesus Christ unto glory of all the Trinity without end. Amen.

The gospel on the.xvij. sunday after Trinity. The xiiij. chapter of Luke.
Thargument. Christ heals on the sabbath day and commended humility unto us.
When Jesus went into the house of one of the chief pharisees to eat bread on
a Sabbath day: and they watched him. And behold there was a certain man before
him which had the dropsy And Jesus answered and spoke unto the lawyers and
pharisees, saying: Is it lawful to heal upon the sabbath day? And they
held their peace. And he took him and healed him, and let him go: and answered
them, saying: which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pytte
and will not straight way pull him out on the sabbath day? And they could
not answer him again to these things. He put forth also a similitude to the
gestes, when he marked how they preased to the highest roumes, and said unto
them: When thou art bydden of any man to a weddinge, sit not down in the highest
room, lest a more honorable man tha^ thou be bydden of him, and he (that bad
him and the) come, and say to the: give this man room, and thou than begin
with shame to take the lowest rowme. But rather when thou art bydden, go and
sit in the lowest rowme: that when he that bad the, comes, he may say unto
the: friend sit up hyer. Tha^ shall thou have worship in the presence of them
that sit at meat with the For whosoever exalts himself, shall be brought
low. And he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

AT the beginning of our gospel good christian people Jesus Christ does
commend unto us syngularly love and charity toward al men, when we se that
so familiarly he hau^ted and frequented with them that were his enemies and his
evil wyllers, that also he did eat and drink with them for to have occasion
to teach them and to convert them unto God his father as the ancient doctor
Cyrillus notes. Cyrillus
And here be rebuked and checked those which have hatred, malice, and rancor
against their christen brethren, and do not vouchsaufe to company with them,
nor also to speak unto them, when yt by the divine commandment of almyghtye
God they be bound for to to remytte and to pardon al injuries, math. vi
and ought by all means they can for to reco^cile them, or else God shall never
be reconciled with them. Consequently Jesus Christ does instruct us that we
ought at al times to accomplysh and do the works of mercy toward our
brethren and neighbors. And specially that the sunday be not in any wise
violated by the said works of charity. The which he showed well, when that
upon the sabbath day he did heal the poor man of the dropsy. Which as holy
doctors do expoune is truly the figure of all humane nature, The spiritual
dropsye
which was spiritually full of the dropsye, and full of waters of concupiscence:
whereby it peryshed and drew unto eternal death. Moreover in this gospel
Christ does advertise us of these couetouse and proud scribes and pharisees
which by their ambition at the feasts and banckettes did take the first and
most honorable places. For the which cause Jesus Christ does correct them,
and instructs them, and us also, willing us when we shall be called unto
marriages and feasts, that we do not sit in the highest places but in the
lowest. The which may be unto us very well a moral doctrine as to the exterior
work, as the holy doctors of the church do full well declare it, and in
especial the great clerk Basilius declares it on this wise. To take the
lowest place at feasts according to the Lords commandment is convenient,
but again contenciously to run into it, is a thing reprouable as a
disturbaunce of order and occasion of hurly burly. And surely says this
clerk if contencion be moved who should sit lowest among you, ye shall diffre
nothing from those that strive to sit highest, for all is one matter. Wherefore
like as our lord says here, it is expedient for him that makes a feast to
appoint the order of sitting. So shall one of us in patience sustain each
other honestly, and doing al things in order and not after the fansye of some
we shall neither seem to conterfayte humility by ouermuche gaynsaynge but
rather by humility we shall obtain patience. For surely it is a greater token
of pride, by overmuch repugnauncie and refusing not to sit in such place as the
feastmaker thinks mete for us, and contenciously to occupy the lowest rowme,
than it is to sit in the highest place wha^ we be commanded so to do. This
saying therefore of Christ morally is thus to be taken. Yet for all that
spiritually, it may be well understood as Bede and other expositours also do
godly apply it of the marriage of the son of God with humayne nature: which
is the union and the marriage of him and all faithful souls. Math. xxij.
Of the which it is written in an other place. That many be called but few
elected. The which sentence of God ought to astonny us, and we ought diligently
to consider what they be which be chosen, in desiring to be of their company.
Truly Jesus Christ himself does show us, saying: That whosoever does humble
himself in making himself servant unto all and doing the works of
charity to his brethren for the honor of him, he shall be elected or chosen
and exalted. And on the contrary who soever shall exalte himself in willing
by pride to have maystershyp and lordshyp over al, and uncharitably neglecting
and despysynge his even christen and poor brethren he shall be humbled put
down, and cast back from the marriage, for God resysteth proud men, and
gives grace unto the humble. Wherefore my fre^des let us at al times do good
works, and mercy unto all. Let us not be ambitious of worldly honor. Let us
humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and after this life we shall be
by him exalted when it shall be his pleasure and godly will into eternal glory
with the company of all those that be happy for to praise him and bless him
without end.

The Epistle on the.xviij. sunday after Trinity. The.i. Epistle to the Corin.
the.i. Chap.
Thargument A gratulacion or thankesgyuynge for ye true knowledge of godlynes.
BRethren, I thank my God always on your behalf: for the grace of god, which
is given you by Jesus Christ, that in all things ye are made rych by him, in all
vtteraunce, and in all knowledge, by the which things the testimony of Jesus
Christ was co^fermed in you, so that ye are behind in no gift waiting for the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall also strength you unto the
end that ye may be blameless in the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Saint Paul good christen people in the epistle of this present sunday does
teach us, yt he which has ye grace of God in his heart, when he sees the
poor sinners leave their evil life, and that they convert them unto God in
grace, is excedyngly joyful, and continually yeldeth graces and thanks unto
God. For it is written in the.xiij. chapter of his first epistle unto the
Corinthia^s. Charity does not rejoice at iniquity, that is to say, of the
estate of sinners but is in heaviness, pytie, and compassion But it rejoices
of truth, which is when they leave their sins and the vanity of this world,
and that they convert them unto God which is all verity. And also joy is
made in heaven among the angels of God, as it is written in the.xv. chapter
of S. Luke. It is joy before the angels of God for a sinner that does
penance. Also saint Paul here yeldeth graces and thanks unto God for the
Corinthians: knowing yt it was not by any works that they had done, that they
were converted, but by the only mercy of God not deserved on their behalf. And
thus it is of us. In our converting by true faith unto Jesus Christ we be made
rich in him in all things, in all words, and in all sciences, that is to
say, in the doctrine of the gospel, by the which is confermed unto us, the
wytnes of our salvation: knowing certainly, that the might of god is in the
Gospel for to save all them which shall believe in it. But before that we be
worthy to have such, and so great rychesses, we must renounce and utterly
forsake the vain confidence and trust in the rychesses and delytes of this
world. For Jesus Christ himself says unto us, math. vi
that we can not serve God, and also the rychesses of this world. Moreover in
an other place he says, that if we do not renounce in our mind and affection
all the goods that we do possess we can not be his disciples. Let us tha^
hold us by faith in our conversion to God: the which faith, follows so many
gifts and graces of God that there lacks nothing for salvation. And we
shall abide in all suertie and in peace of conscience, the coming of Jesus
Christ, which shall be particulerly at the day of our death and departing from
this world, and generally at ye day of dome, at the which time he shall come
and give unto us his great and inestimable rychesses, the which we do now
tarry for by faith and hope, that is the eternal glory of his heaven. Into the
which that we may all come by the graces and merytes of our Lord Jesus Christ.
etc.

The gospel on the.xviij. sunday after Trinity. The.xxij. Chapter of Matheu.
Thargument. The pharisees question to Christ, and again Christ's question to
the pharisees.
THe pharisees went unto Jesus, and one of them which was a doctor of the
law of Moses, asked him a question, temptynge him, and saying Master which is
the great commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him: Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with al thy mind. This is the first and
great commandment And the second is like unto it. Thou shalt love thine
neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets.

While the pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, saying: what
think ye of Christ? Whose son is he? They said unto him: the son of David.
He said unto them: how then does David in spirit call him Lord, saying: The
Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies
a footestoole. If David than call him Lord, how is he then his son? And no
man was able to answer him any thing: neither durst any man (from that day
forth) ask him any mo questions.

THe Gospel red in the church this day good christen audience does rehearse
unto us, how the pharisees, Hierom
hearing that Jesus Christ had confounded the Saducees, which as saint Hierome
notes were of contrary opinions within themselves and as it were enemies one
to another, yet they come and join together against Christ to the intent as
Ihon Chrysostom says they might overcome him by multitude, Chrysostom
whom they could not convince with reasons. And so says he they confessed
themselves to be naked of the troth which armed themselves with multitude.
They come than all together. And one among them a doctor of the law
speaking for all the rest (to the intent if that one overcame they might al
seem to have the vpperhande) in te^ptynge our Lord Jesus Christ, did put this
question unto him, saying: Master which is the greatest commandment of the
law? Here you may se what fashions these false foxes and ypocrites had.
First they called Jesus Christ master: whose disciple for all that, they had
no desire to be. And they did demand him of the greatest commandment (as
Chrysostom says) which never had accomplished the least: Chrysostom.
but rather by their cursed and auaricious constitucions had transgressed all
the law of God. And they thought that it was enough for to dispute the one
against the other by pride and vanity, for they did not desire but all only to
be seen and praised of men, yet for all this the sweet Savior desiring their
salvation does give them here true and sound doctrine and healthful
correction, answering them mekely, that they ought to love God with all their
thought, the which they did not: and their neighbor as themselves, but they
did clean contrary. For he which was their God, and their neighbor in as
much as he was man, they would put him to death. In which he showed them to be
sinners, ypocrites that is to say counterfayted holy and transgressors of all
the law and of the prophets. And according unto saint Mark in the.xij.
chapter, they wist not what to answer, but their own doctoure gave sentence
against them, saying: Master, in truth thou have said well. For there is one
only god, and there is none other but he. And to love him with all the heart,
with all the understanding with all the soul, and with all the strength, and
the neighbor as himself: is a greater thing then all the brentofferynges and
sacrifices made unto God. Here may you se, how he himself gives judgment
against the covetousness of the scribes and pharisees which loved so well the
sacrifices for the profit that came thereof unto them. And on the contrary side
he approves the answer of Jesus Christ, the which they thought to have
interrupted and checked. Thus it appears that the craftye be taken in their
craftynes, and yt there is no counsel against god And then finally our Lord
demanded of the pharisees being all there together, whose son Christ was.
And forbycause they were carnal they knew nothing in Christ and in Messiah
but flesh, and they answered him that he was the son of David.

And then our Lord would show them and teach their salvation. For it was
not enough for to believe that he was a man common of royal blood, but also it
must be believed that he was God vnied unto humayne nature for to make the
redemption of men. And therefore he shows them by ye witness of David self
that he is God, Psalm. xix
where David says in spirit. The Lord god has said unto my Lord. Sit on
my right hand unto the time that I put thine enemies a foot stool to thy
feet. David calls Christ his Lord sitting on the right hand of God which
is to understand (as the ancient doctor S. Remigius and other does expoune
it) not that God is corporal that he should have a right or left side but to
sit on the right hand of God, Remigius.
is to remain in the same honor and dignity egall with the father, so that
herby he confesses that he is God. And this the pharisees understood not to be
said of Christ: but they were those which ye spirit of god calls the
enemies of Christ, for to be put under his feet. Than my brethren let us not
tempt Jesus Christ. Let us believe, that the greatest and the first
commandment: is to love God with all our heart, with all our thought, and with
all our soul, that he is true God and that he is true man. And we shall be of
the nombre of the chosen for to laud the heavenly father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ syttyng on his right hand. Unto the which with the holy ghost be
glory without end.

The Epistle on the.xix. sunday after Trinity. The.iiij. chapter to the
Ephesians.
Thargument How we ought to put of our old Adam, and put on the new.
BRethren, be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and to put on that new
man, which after God is shapen in ryghtuousnes and true holiness. Wherefore, put
away lienge, and speak every man troth unto his neighbor, for as much as we
are members one of another. Be angry and sin not: let not the Son go down
upon your wrath, neither give place unto the backbyter. Let him that stole,
steal no more but let him rather labor with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may give unto him that needs.

MY well-beloved friends in our savior Christ ye shall understand that in the
text immediately going before this epistle of this present day, the Apostle
does admonysh us for to leave the old man, that is to say our first nativity
or birth by ye which we be borne children of the ire and wrath of God, and we
be fulfilled with sins, with euel desires, and with concupiscences, the which
woll turn us unto corrupcion and eternal death. After in our epistle he
exhorts us, that we should be renewed, not according unto the body, but in
the spirit of our soul. For it is the spirit of God that will inhabyte there,
and do his works. Then we must, for to be renewed in our hearts have need that
the gifts and graces of God may abide there instead of the concupiscences
which the deuell has put there by the sin of Adam. As against
covetousness, mercy and lyberalitie. Against lechery, continence, and
chastity. Against pride and rygoure, frendshyp mekenes and all humility.
Against hathered and rancor, love and charity. Against iniquity and sin,
justice and al grace. And thus we shall be newly arrayed with the new man Jesus
Christ: which by his holy spirit shall make us also new men, holy men, and
virtuous me^ living no more in foul and stynkynge sin as we were wont to
do, but walkyng in newnes of life by the grace of God by whom we shall be
justified and truly sanctified. And for because he is all troth, if we would
abide in him, we must cast out and put from us al lies and false tales, the
which from our birth is conjoined and even knytte fast unto our flesh. Omnia
homo mendax
For as the prophet says. All men be liars, they have spoken vanities and
false things from their birth, And god alone is veritable and eue^ troth it
self the which wylleth that we speak troth one to an other for we be all
members of his body, which is his church and spouse, which spouse ought to be
governed led and conducted by the spirit of troth. And this spirit of
troth if it dwell in us, shall doubtless give us all holy zele and a certain
godly anger against sin which shall be without sin. As in seeing the blyndnes
and the unhappiness of the poor sinners, we shall be sorrowful and heavy. As it is
written in the.iij. chapter of saint Mark, that our savior Jesus Christ when
he did se the wyckednes of the scribes and pharisees he was sore troubled and
heavy with anger for the blyndnes of their hearts. But here my friends we must
be well ware, that this anger be not against our christen brother but against
the wicked enemy and the sin. And also that it do not abyd ouerlonge in our
hearts for fear that it should happen that the son of justice, which is Jesus
Christ, should bide and go down from us for our anger and ire, for in
leaving god, we should give place to the deuell. Finally the Apostle does
admonysh us that they which have been thieves and robbers, that they should do
no more theftes and robberies: but rather that they should labor with their
hands in good works, not by auaryce or covetousness for to wax rich, but for
to aid charitably and relief their christen brethren which have need and
poverty. And in doing this God shall be in likewise merciful unto us, and
shall have pity of us. For he loves mercy more than sacrifice as our savior
Christ himself records. After this wise if we fynyshe the course of our
life, we may trust that the crown of justice is laid up for us which our
Lord shall render unto us who is a just judge as S. Paul says. ij. ti. iiij.
For he shall render unto every man according to his works. We shall says
Paul be set before the trone of Christ to bear a way according as we have
done in our body, ij. cor. v.
either good or evil. Let our faith then bring forth worthy fruits of
christianite that by gods grace we may be crowned accordyngly. To whom be al
glory and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xix. sunday after Trinity. The.ix. chapter of Matthew.
Thargument. Jesus forgyueth the sick man of the palsy his sins, and
heals him.
Jesus entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city: and
behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsye, lyenge in a bed. And
when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said unto the sick of the palsye: son,
be of good chere, thy sins be forgyuen the. And behold, certain of the
scribes said within themselves: this man blasphemeth. And when Jesus saw their
thoughts, he said: wherefore think ye euel in your hearts? Whether is easyer
to say, thy sins be forgyuen the, or to say arise and walk? But that ye
may know, that the son of man has power to forgive sins in earth. Then
says he unto the sick of the palsye: arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thy
house. And he arose, and departed to his house. But the people that saw it,
maruayled, and glorified God, which had given such power unto men.

MY well-beloved brethren and friends, the city of Jesus Christ as notes
Chrysostomus the holy doctor of the church is Capharnaum, Chrysostom
the which is called his city forbycause that in leuynge Nazareth he went
and dwelled there, and also for the noble sermons, and great miracles which he
did often there, as also now he does one, which we ought well to mark and note:
for therein is comprysed for us noble and helthfull instruction. First of all
then we ought to consider that our Savior Jesus Christ, has perceived and
beholden the faith of them that did bear the man having the palsy, but here
is no mention at al made of the great pain that they took. For saint Mark in
the second chapter, and saint Luke in the.v. chapter do reherce this self
miracle and say that they uncovered the house, and so did let down the bed
wherein the sick man of the palsy lay before our Lord, for because that
there was so great multitude of people that did follow him that they could not
come nere unto him Notwythstandynge all this, there is made no mention here but
of their faith and trust: instructynge us, that God does not so greatly esteem
our outward works, though that they be fair and in apparau^ce good, if we
have not faith by charity workynge in us, the which only and her works he
estemeth. For certes what soever proceeds not of faith which is the root and
foundation of al good works is sin as thapostle S. Paul does witness. To.
xiij.
And therefore the prophet Hieromie says: Iere. v.
Lord God thy eyes do behold ye faith. Therefore said our lord unto ye
paralitique. Son have hope, be of good chere thy sins be forgyue^ the,
showing unto us yt our sins is ye sycknes yt god will principally heal and of
ye which above al things we ought to desire ye healyng, which is the
remission: which we shall have not by outward works done without faith, but by ye
faith and co^fide^ce yt we shall have in Jesus Christ in returning again unto him
for all our businesses as well spiritual as corporal, as unto our creator and
redemer, which is only mighty enough for to help us, and pri^cipally for to
pardon our sins, which is ye most dangerous syckenesse that can be to
mankind, for by the same we dye of everlasting death. And forbycause that the
scribes and doctors of the law did not believe that Christ was God, they
said in their hearts, that he blasphemed in forgyuinge and pardonynge the
sins unto the palsye man. And it may be that they had red that which god had
said in the.xliij. chapter of Esaias: It is I, it is I my self that pardone the
sins because of me. Then God did show himself true God, in rebukinge them
of their evil thoughts, and seeing their hertes (the which apperteyneth unto
God only, of whom is said. It is thou Lord God which sercheth the hearts and
the raynes. And yet more outwardly he showed himself. For visibly and by his
only word he healed the sick man, and did give him suddenly bodily strength,
and without being in any manner weak of his syckenesse, he commanded him to
bear away his bed and to go unto his house, showing that it was he of whom
it is said. He has said and they were done. This poor paralitique is the
figure of all sinners, the which be unable as of themselves to do any good, and
they be borne in their beds, that is to say in the flesh of their
concupiscences. But when they have faith unto the word of God which
apprehe^deth gods promise with an ernest repentance of their former life and a
study of a new life they receive full health: and where as before they were
subjects unto their flesh and fleshly desires, they be now masters, and
hold them subjects, and finally they go by the grace of God and the virtue of
his word being conducted and fortifyed by the same in newnes of life walkinge
in the precepts and ordinances of god, they go I say unto their house which
is the most blessed and joyful kingdom of heaven. And the people wha^ they
saw this miracle had fear and great reverence unto God: and espyenge his
great benefytes to ma^kinde gave to him glory, knowing that the men could
not do such works which be above nature, if God do it not by them: and in this
doing, they glorified Jesus Christ which is true God and true man, and which
undoubtedly is the justice, the glory, and perfection of all men, which not
trusting in themselves as did the proud pharisee whom the Gospel makes
mention of but with sorrowful heart and due penance according to thexemple of
the publicane lamenting their sins have steadfast faith and confidence in him
being in full mind and a redynes not only to be hearers of the law and
Gospel but also to be doers and workers of the same as Christ has appointed
us to do. God grant us that grace To whom be all glory imperie and peace in
infinita seculorum secula. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xx. sunday after Trinity. The. v. chapter to the Ephesians.
Thargument. An exhortacion to virtuous living.
BRethren, take heed therefore how ye walk circumspectly: not as unwise, but
as wise men: avoiding occasion, because the days are evil. Wherefore, be ye
not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, and be not drunk
with with wine wherein is excess: but be filled with the spirit, speaking
unto your selves in psalms and in hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and
making melody to the Lord in your hearts, gyuynge thanks always for all
things unto God the father, in the name of our lord Jesus Christ submyttynge
your selves one to another in the fear of God.

MY good brethren and systers the wise man says in his proverbs that there is
a way the which seems unto me^ to be straight and good, but it leads unto
eternal death. Certes this is ye way of the worldly people, which live
according to the desires of the flesh, not reme^brynge, how they shall
desce^de in a minute of an hour unto hell. Therefore in our epistle which this
day is read in the church The apostle does exhort us that we wol walk
prudently and wisely as becomes christian men in the mean time, while we
shall be in this world and vale of mysery: not as the foolysh folk that shall
perysh but as the wise folk replenyshed with the true and heavenly sapience,
we be here exhorted to good works.
followyng the steps so nere as God shall give us grace of our Savior Jesus
Christ, seeking by all means we possible can occasion and opportunity to do
well, as works of faith works of mercy and pytie toward our even christen.
And in thus doing undoubtedly we shall redeem or bye again the time which we
have ill bestowed. And certainly we should be moved unto this namely forbycause
that the days be euel, not in themselves, but for the sins that be committed
in them. For the deuell does all he can to turn us from the good way: which
be the commandments of God and the observation and executyng of his holy
word unto the which we must dyrecte our hole life if we will be saved and not
perysh eternally. Let us not tha^ good people be as brute and unreasonable
beasts, imprudent, recheles, vncircumspecte and without understanding: but
let us understand what the good will of our Lord Jesus Christ is, the which
wylleth that we should be saved all. And for yt cause he has suffered death,
unto the which we must be confourmable in dyenge to our sins lusts and
concupiscences, to the end that we be sober and chaste, and replynyshed with the
holy ghost, the which shall cause us to say in our selves praysynges and
spiritual songs unto God: and that with a pure and a clean heart and not
alonly with outward voices and open devotions, the which be often full of
hypocrisye and pride: and for that cause displeasaunt unto God. And our Lord
says in the Gospel of saint Matthew, Mat. xv
where he speaks of the pharisees which did all that they did either by
hypocrisy or by covetousness. This people (says he) does honor me with
their mouth, but their heart is far from me, showing herby unto us that
above all things he would have and require of us the good desire of the heart
which is true praise and prayer. And thus we shall yield graces and loving
thanks always unto God for all things in our Lord Jesus Christ as well for
aduesitie and tribulation, as for prosperity and wealth. For we shall savor of
god in all goodness: in such wise that al things that it shall please him to
send us, we shall believe it to be right good ordained unto his glory and
honor, and unto the salvation of our souls. And yet we ought to do all this
in the name of Jesus Christ, that is for to say, that all the goodness that we
shall do, we do knowledge that it is he which does it in us, and we ought to
give him the honor and the glory. For it is in him only that the father has
taken pleasure. And also we shall suffer all things ioyously for the love of
him which has suffered so much for us. And in his fear and charity we must be
subjects the one to the other, for he himself that was master and Lord by
charity was made minister and servant unto all. God give us then grace good
people to acco^plyshe in all things his will. To whom be given al praise glory
and thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xx. sunday after Trinity. The.xxij. Chapter of Matthewe.
Thargument The kingdom of heaven is resembled to the wedding of a kings
son. etc.
Jesus said unto his disciples. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that
was a king, which made a marriage for his son and sent forth his servants,
to call them that were bid to the weddyng and they would not come. Again, he
sent forth other servants saying. Tell them which are bydden: behold, I
have prepared my dinner: mine oxe^ and my fatlynges are killed, and althynges
are ready come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their
ways: one to his ferme place, another to his merchandise, and the remnaunt
took his servants, and intreted them shamefully and slew them. But when the
king hard thereof, he was wroth and sent forth his me^ of war and destroyed
those murderers, and bre^t up their city. Then said he to his servants: the
marriage in deed is prepared. But they which were bydden, were not worthy. Go ye
therefore out into the hye ways: and as many as ye find bid them to the
marriage. And the servants went out into the hye ways, and gathered together
all, as many as they could find, both good and bad, and the weddyng was
furnyshed with gestes. Then the king came in to se the gestes, and when he
spied there a man, which had not on a wedding garmente, he said unto him,
friend how cameste thou in hither not having a wedding garmente? And he was
even spechlesse. Then said the king to the ministers: take and bind him hand
and foot, and cast him into utter darkness there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teth. For many be called but few are chosen.

THe most soueraygne goodness of god (good christen people) has been so
great and large toward us sely poor sinners that when we all worshipped
ydoles, serving the deuell of hell and for our reward and stipende descendinge
with him unto eternal death and perdition, it yet has pleased him of his
clemencye for to have pity and mercy on us. And thereupon he vouchesaued to
send none other but even his own son into this world for to take our flesh
upon him and to be made man for to be the spouse (as saint Gregory says) of
our nature then being so vile and unhappy. S. Gregorye.
This has been for to take upon him all our sins and myseryes: and for to
give and distribute unto us all his graces and richesses. And this as holy
doctors expound is the weddinges whereof our gospel speaks, which be truly
weddinges: of the which the bodily and worldly weddinges is but a figure.
For as we say, who weddethe the woman, weddethe the debtes, and is bound for
to pay them: in like manner our most merciful Savior Jesus Christ in weddinge
our souls is becommyn debtour and payer of al our sins, and debtes. And
also all the goods of the husbonde be commyn unto the wife, therefore he has
made us possessours and heritours with him of all his goods and his realm, in
which shall be truly solemnised the weddinges, and there shall be made the great
everlasting banquet which he shall make unto al them that shall have been in
this world perseuerantly conjoined and vnied unto him by faith. Unto the which
weddinges the Iues were called and invited which have despised them, and would
not comme thither, but have vilanously slain the prophets, and also Jesus
Christ himself, and some of his apostles and dysciples that did call them
unto the everlasting feast. And therefore god has sent his men of war that
is to say, as saint Hierom and other expositours do expound this place, the
romans, Vaspasian and Titus, the which have put the Jews to death that were
such murderers and homicides and have put their city in ruin and destruction.
And when the Jews showed them selves thus unworthy of the grace of god which
was thus freely offered and presented unto them: the apostles and disciples by
the commandment of god went to preach unto the Gentilles which as then
were idolaters, and out of the ways of god, and did assemble a church, the
which is called catholic, a church of faith and of christendom. And by the
visitation that this king makes for to se them that be set: is figurid unto
us the examination which God shall make of all them that be in his church,
which shall do rigorous justice upon al them that shall be found without the
wedding garmente: that is to wit without faith workinge by charity or (as S
Gregory expouneth) without charity. What the doctors call the weddi^g
garme^te Gregorye. Hierom Chrysostom.
He therefore (says this holy doctor) enters to ye marriages or weddynges
without the wedding garmente which in the church has faith but has not
charity. Or after the mind of saint Hierome the weddyng garment be our Lords
commandments and the works which a man is bound to do by the law and
gospel and which make the garment of a new man which garmente at the day of
judgment he that shall be found under a christen man's name not to have, is
forthwyth taken awey. And the king says unto him. Friend how come thou
hither or what makeste thou here not having the weddyng wede? He calls him
friend forasmoch as he was bydde to the marriages as he had been a friend by
faith. But he reproves him of folly because with his fylthy garmente he has
defiled the cle^nes of the marriage. For those that our Lord God almighty the
father of heaven does call unto this most noble and blessed wedding he woll have
them come not with fete (says Chrysostom) but with faith and manners. This
wedding garment then they ye lack I mean they yt have not ye lively faith
which by charity works ye will pleasure and commandments of our Lord,
albeit in outward apparaunce they have done many goodly works and also
miracles: yet for all that they shall be given unto the mynisters and hangmen of
hell, for to be sent unto the torments eternal, having their fete and hands
bound, that is to say, that they shall never desire nor do any thing that
shall be pleasant unto God. And for the end and conclusion of our gospel
because (as saint Hierom says) not the beginning but the end is to be sought,
S. Hiero^
therefore our sauyoure Jesus Christ says that many be called, For assuredly
all they that have herd the apostles and disciples (whose words have been
herd over all the earth) be called but yet few be chosen and elected, The
which sentence ought to be a wonderful cause of humilite before god: and
specially a cause for us to despise all the things that be in this world for
to win Jesus christ. Therefore the apostle in the.iij. chapter of his epistle
unto the Colossia^s does exhort us saying: Arraye you as chosen of God holy
and beloved from the entrayles of mercy, benignite, humilite, meekness, and
patience. Supporte the one the other, and pardone and forgive one an other
among your selves, if any has quarrel to other. So as god has pardonyd, so
pardone you. And above all things have charity which is the bond of
perfection. If we do thus we shall at last comme unto his bankete of the
weddinges of the son of God and his spouse, and we shall have the weddinge
garment where shall be nothing reproched unto us: but we shall be in the nombre of
the chosen people, and shall have the pleasures of the kingdom of heaven. Unto
the glory of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost which conueyth
all them that does good unto this glorious weddinge, whereunto he bring us al.
Qui viuit et regnat in infinita secula. Amen.

The Epistle on the.xxj. sunday after Trinity. The.vj. chapter to the
Ephesians.
Thargument. Sayncte Paul does here describe unto us the armor of the
christian souldioure.
MY brethren, be strong through the Lord and through the power of his might.
Put on all the armor of God, that ye may stand against the assautes of the
devil. For we wrestle not against blood and flesh, but against rule, against
power, against worldly rulers, even gouerners of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual craftynesse in heavenly things. Wherefore take unto you the
whole armoure of God, that ye may be hable to resist in the evil day, and
stand perfect in all things. Stand therefore, and your loins gyrde with
the troth, having on the breast plate of ryghteousnes, and having shoes on
your fete, that ye may be prepared for the Gospel of peace. Above all, take
to you the shild of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fyrye darts of the
wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which
is the word of God.

MY brethren and friends ye shall mark and consydre that our enemy the deuel
does war contynually against us, and sercheth by all wyles and means
possible to bring us to co^fusyon and death, and that we may be unable to
resist his assaults and powers: The apostle does therefore teach us what
thing we have to do in such and so great peryls: that is, that we should
comfort and lift up our selves in God and in his most comfortable might and
power. Ps. xxiij
For as it is said in ye.xxiij. psalm: The Lord God is strong and mighty:
The Lord god is mighty in battle. Certes my fre^des it is our Lord Jesus
Christ yt the prophet here speaks of which by his most triumphante and
gloriouse death and passion has been mighty in surmountyng our enemy, I
mean, our mortal enemy the Devil. Then in this bitter conflycte and
battle that we have against both him, the world, and the flesh, let us take
good courage and heart unto us: not in trustyng so much unto our own power and
strength, but in the strenght and puysaunce of Jesus Christ which shall fight
for us, and which shall not leave us that be his members: but in him and by him
we shall be made mighty to resist and valiauntly to withstand all temptacions,
yea and all the maliciouse powers of any princes and mighty men that govern
the darkness of this world which would enforce us to ungodliness or for
ungodliness would persecute and afflycte us. Let us then take the armor and
herneys of god wherewith we may make resistance and stand steadfast against the
strenghtes assaults and embushementes of the devil. For if we be knights of
Jesus Christ certeynly we must enter in to battayl with him, for there shall be
none crowned,
but they that shall have fought worthylye. The armor of a christian soldier.
And what is the armoure of god? Certes it is this. First we must have
against all corrupt lusts and concupiscences our loins or raynes gyrthed with
truth. Against sin, the brene plate of justice and innocencye. For shoes, we
must have pure affection, which is the preparacion for to walk in the gospel
of peace. And in all things, we must take faith for our shield: by which we
may put out the vehement temptacions of the deuell, wherewyth he does assail
us as with darts inflamed, the which shall by no means annoye us, if we have
steadfast faith in Jesus Christ and in his holy word. For helmet, we must have
hope of salvation. And thus armed yet must we have the sword of the spirit,
that is the word of god, by the which sword all the puissances and force of
the evil spirit shall be cut. And furthermore we must never leave these armours
as long as we be in this world: for we shall alweyes have battle. But by
these armours we shall vanquyshe in Jesus Christ, and by Jesus Christ: and not
by our own strength, unto him then be perpetual glory together with the
father and holy ghost, in infinita seculorum secula. Amen.

The gospel on the.xxi. sunday after Trinity sunday. The.iiij. chap. of John^.
Thargument. Jesus heals the rulers son.
THere was a certain ruler, whose son was sick at Capernaum. As soon as the
same herd that Jesus was come out of Iewry into Galile, he went unto him and
besought him, that he would come down and heal his son. For he was even at
the point of death. The^ said Jesus unto him: except ye se signs and wo^dres
ye will not believe. The ruler says unto him: Sir, come down or ever that my
son dye. Jesus says unto him: Go thy way, thy son lives. The man
believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him. And he went his way. And as
he was now goinge down the servants met him and told him saying: thy son
lives. Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they
said unto him: Yester day at the seventh hour the fever left him. So the
father knew that it was the same hour in the which Jesus said unto him: Thy
son lives. And he believed and al his household.

IN this gospel (good christen audience) our Lord Jesus Christ does rebuke him
which desired the health of his son, forbicause that he did not believe
sufficiently, that is to say, that he had not hope in him as he ought to have.
And did reproach him that if they se not tokens, they would not believe. But ye
wol say, Why he that desired Christ to heal his son did not believe? Saint
Austine
To this doubt thus answers S. Austine. Ask not me but ask Christ what
he thought of this man. For it follows in the text that Jesus said unto him.
Onles ye se signs and wonders ye will not believe. So (says S. Austine) he
reproves him because he was cold in faith or at least way neither hot nor
cold forasmoche as he thought our Savior Christ could not help his son
except he went home with him, where as in very deed Christ was able by the
only word and commandment of his mouth to heal him namely since with his will he
created and made al things of naught wherefore by this he rebuked all them that
do demand outward signs. For he will not give us any signs, but only the
token of his death and resurrection, as only sufficient for our temporal
consolation and eternal salvation, knowinge (as says saint Paul) that our
old man (that is our sins and concupiscences) is crucified and dead with
him: to the end that we serve no more to sin, but yt we should walk in
newnes of lyffe as risen again with him. This is the token that is given unto
us for our salvation And albeit that he of whom we speak, had not such faith
unto Jesus Christ as he ought to have had (for he demanded his bodyly presence
as neadefull for to help his son) yet for all that by his inestimable
goodness, he showed himself unto him such as he was, that is to say, God,
which is not absent from any place, having might by his only word to heal all
maladyes and infirmities as well spiritual as corporal, and said unto him: Go
thy way, thy son lives and he believed his word. And in going, did mete with
his servants the which gave him witness of the life and health of his son.
And when he had demanded of them the hour of the health of his son, and
that he knew yt at the self hour that Jesus Christ had spoken the word he
was healed, he believed the more, and his faith was augme^ted, and he did not
only believe, but also all his household. Degreis in faith after. S. Bid.
Wherefore my fre^des, the excellent clerk Bid notes here in this place that
in faith there be degrees like as in other virtues which have initiu^
incrementum et perfectionem, that is to say, a beginning, an increase, and a
perfection. The faith then of this man had beginning, when he asked his
sons health: increase, when he believed Christ's words, saying, thy son
lives: perfection, when his servants brought him tidings yt his son was
hole in deed and about what time he recovered. O how the word of god is
mighty and of great power, the which destroys thus al syknesses, principally
infidelite, which is the greuoust syknes that may be: for yt is cause of death
not only bodily but eternal. Let us then have faith and steadfast hope in our
Lord Jesus Christ, which sees all and knows all and which is in all places.
And with one only word shall he give us life both bodily and gostly, unto the
glory of the celestial father which heals all and will heal all that be
sick by him. Qui uiuit et regnat. etc. Amen.

Thepistle on the.xxij. Sunday after Trinity sunday. The first chap. to the
Philippyans.
Thargument Paul wishethe that the grace of god and charity might increase in
us.
BRethren, we trust in our Lord Jesus Christ, that he which has begone a good
work in you, shall perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, as it
beco^methe me so to judge of you all, because I have you in my heart:
forasmoche as ye al are companyons of grace with me, even in my bonds, and in
the defendinge and stablyshynge of the gospel. For god is my record, how
greatly I long after you all from the very heart rote in Jesus Christ. And this I
pray, that your love may increace yet more and more in knowledge and in all
understanding, that ye may accept the things that are most excellent, that
ye may be pure, and such, as hurt no man's concsiens until the day of
Christ: being filled with the fruit of ryghtousnes, which fruit comes by
Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of god.

THe apostle saint Paul good people does here teach us that we must abide and
wait for from God the perfection and accomplyshyng of all good works begone,
saying: that it apperteyneth unto him to make an end of the work that he
has begone, the which is without doubt the work of faith which works by
charytie. For Jesus Christ says in the.vj. chapter of saint Ihon: Ioh. xj.
Yt is the work of God (says our Lord) that ye believe in him that he has
sent. And also Jesus Christ is called auctor of faith. Also it apperteyneth
unto God for to give us perseverance and contynuau^ce in the same faith unto
the day of Jesus Christ, as it is written in the.xxxvi. psalm. The
afflictions of man shall be redressed in wealth by god, whereby we may lightly
understand that man as of himself cannot do any good: and that all they which
vaunte them of their power, do err and blaspheme against God, when they
attribute unto themselves yt which apperteyneth unto God, whose power it is
when we do any good. The day of Jesus Christ is the day of the death of every
body: The day of Jesus Christ.
and to speak generally, it is domes day at the which day he shall yield unto
every one according unto his faith, or infidelity, that they shall have
followed: unto the faithful, life eternal, and unto the unfaithful, the
death eternal. And the apostle might justly think of the Philippians that
god would do unto them this grace for to make them to persevere unto the end, for
the charity that he had unto them, the which believe lightly al things that is
to the honor, and forbycause also that themselves did rejoice, when they had
understand that in prysonmente at Rome he defended him after such a sort
that it was unto the confirmation of the gospel, and the great joy of the
same.

And therefore he prayed them that this charytie toward god, and love unto his
word might abou^de and increase always more and more, in the knowledge of god,
and in all spiritual sense for to discern and approve the meruelouse things,
and for to be pure and clean, and without offending and rebuke at the day of
our lord Jesus Christ, both particular and universal, al replenished with ye
fruit of justice which is ye justice of faith by our lord Jesus christ unto ye
glory of ye eternal father. In this saint Paul gives us to understand how yt
al beginning and the ends of good works ought to be attributed unto God. And
ye charytie which one ought to have to another when one hears or
understands that the word of God does grow, it augmenteth and confirms,
which is the doctrine of the Gospel, for in the same is the true science and
knowledge of god, and the wit of the holy ghost: whereby one may prove and
assaye the better things which be the welthes spiritual and heavenly. The
which grant us the heavenly father by our lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The gospel on the.xxii. Sunday. the xviij. chapter of Mathewe.
Thargument. The parable of the king that forgave his servant which was
found in arerages unto him upon his accomptes.
Jesus put forth a similitude unto his discyples, saying, the kingdom of heaven
is lykened unto a certain man that was a king, which would take accomptes of
his servants. And when he had begone to reken, one was brought unto him
which ought him ten thousand talentes, but forasmoche as he was not able to
pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and his children, and
all that he had, and paymente to be made. The servant fell down and besought
him saying. Sir have patience with me, and I will pay the all. The^ had the
lord pytie on that servant, and lowsede him and forgave him the det. So the
same servant went out, and found one of his fellows, which ought him an
hundredth pence, and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying:
pay that thou owe. And his fellow fell down and besought him saying: have
patience with me, and I will pay the al. And he would not, but went and cast hi^
into preso^, till he should pay the det. So when his fellows saw what was done,
they were very sorry, and came and told unto their Lord all that had happened.
Then his Lord called him and said unto him: O thou ungracious servant, I
forgave the all that debt when thou desyredst me: should not thou also have
had compassion on thy fellow even as I had pytie on the? And his lord was wroth
and delivered him to the ^aylers till he should pay all that was due unto him.
And his Lord was wrooth, and delivered him to the iaylers, till he should pay
all that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly father do also unto
you if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

In the parable declared in the gospel of this day good people is showed unto
us how god shall make his judgment of sinners that shall not have asked him
mercy, Again al those which shall knowledge themselves sinners before him and
shall demand mercy and grace of him he shall pardone them of al their sins,
if so be they do remytte and pardone also with good heart and in charity for
the love of him the sins and offenses that their neighbors have committed
against them. For it is the rule to obtain pardone of god for to forgive. As
it is written in the prayer that our lord Jesus Christ has given us for to
pray unto his father and ours, when we say, Mat. vj.
Et dimitte nobis debita nostra sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris,
that is to say Forgive us our trespssaes as we forgive them that trespass
against us. And after our lord says, if you pardon men their sins, your
father also that is in heaven shall pardone you your faults. And if we do not
pardon nor forgive othr men, no more woll your father pardon nor remytte you of
your sins. Alas my fre^des how many be there now a days which think little
on these words, as if they were vain and of none effect. And yet for all that,
they be so true that it is a judgment given from ye mouth of god, which is al
troth. There be many which oftentimes do say this most holy prayer without
having any will to forgive the offenses committed against them, the which
suerly were better not to pray so against themselves. This is well showed unto
us by the parable of the kingdom of heaven in this present gospel, of the
servant which ought ten thousand talentes unto his king. And when he had not
wherewyth he might pay it, the king commanded, that he and his wife and his
children and al his goods should be sold, to thentente that he might be paid
of that that was due unto him. The servant seeing this kneled down and prayed
the king that he would take patience and tarry and he would pay him all. The
lord that was pitiful and merciful had mercy on him, and sent him away and
forgave him the debt. But the servant departinge from his lord, was not
pitiful nor merciful as was his lord. For in meting an other yt was servant
with him which ought him only an hundredth pens, he took him and strayned him by
the throat and misintreatinge him said, pay me that, that thou owe me. And
the pore servant knelyd before the first servant, and prayed him to have
patience and to tarry and he would pay him all. But he would not hear him,
but forthwith sent him to prison, unto the time that he had paid him. but
what did the lord when he herd these news? He keste in his teth the mercy
which he had used toward him, when he prayed him, and on the other side the
cruelty which he had used against his fellow servant. And thereupon he did
give him to the kepars of ye prison, until he had paid al his duty. And this
parable our lord declares himself. This king, is god the father almighty.
This first dettour: is a great sinner to god. This second dettour is a little
sinner to man. And what may the offense be unto man, but only a little offense
to the regard of that which is to god? And that yt is to god what may it be
but a right great offense? For as the ancient douctour of the church John^
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom
there is as great difference between the sins which be done to men and the
sins which be committed against god, as there is difference between ten
thousa^de talentes of gold and an hundredth pense. But God is so meke and so
merciful, that if alonly one do pray him, he forgiueth all sin and offense
how great so ever it be, if that in following of his meakenesse and
mercyfulnesse we pardone one little offense against us unto our brother. But if
any of us do not pardon, God shall ask of him the great debte, quousque pro
infinito.
and he shall be in pains until he shall have paid it out, which word
(until) is taken of holy doctors, pro infinito. And this is the meaning and
sense of this text says Remigius ye ancient doctor, semper soluet, sed
nunquam persoluet, Remigius.
et semper poenam luet, that is to say, he shall ever pay but never pay it
out, and he shall evermore suffer pain. Then my brethren and friends, though
that it be so that all the offenses against us in the world be nothing in
regard of one only offense against God: let us then pardone them lightly not
alonlye by mouth and outwardly, but with good will, and in our hearts inwardly.
And if we thus do, assuredly God shall pardone us them that be so great (for
who is it that has not offended him many times) and we shall be finally made ye
children of God and followers of his sweetness, meakenes, and mercy. The
which it shall please this great king to grant us (unto whom we be all so
great detters) the father of mercy, by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom he
has done and does mercy unto all. To whom be given al honor glory and praise
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Pystle on the.xxiij. Sunday after Trinyte sunday. The third chapter to
the Philippians.
Thargument Paul exhorts us to follow him and such other holy men in lyuinge.
Brethren, be folowers together of me, and look on them which walk even so,
as ye have us for an ensample. For many walk (of whom I have told you often,
and now tell you weeping) that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is da^nacion, whose belly is their god, and glory to their shame,
which are worldly minded. But our co^uersacion is in heaven, from whence we
look for the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile
body, that he may make it like unto his glorious body: according to the
workyng, whereby he is hable also to subdue all things unto him self.

Saint Paul my well-beloved friends, does exhort us in this epistle, that we
should be his folowers that is to say, that we should live like unto him,
following the word of faith and of grace, which is the truth of the gospel,
and that we should so follow the form and rule which is given unto us and
that we should take exemple of them which live according to the same. For there
be some other which be enemies unto the gospel and unto the cross, that is to
say of ye tribulatio^s suffered by Jesus Christ loving the glory of the world,
which is confusion, making god of their belly, and they be not to be followed,
but occcasion to vepe. For our glory, our life and conversation is not in
earthly things, but in heavenly things from whence also we do abide our Lord
Jesus Christ at his second coming: which shall form our body of new, being
now vile, abject corruptible and mortal, into a body noble, profitable
incorruptible, and immortal. And he shall figure and change it unto the
similytude of the clearness and glory of his body, by the power that he has
for to make all things to obey at his will.
Wherefore the apostle prays us (and it is good reason yt we should so do) that
we do keep ourselves steadfast in the rule and conversation of ye Gospel.
Paul's glory.
And this he reputeth and takes to be his crown and his glory, if that by
his exhortation and motion we do thus. Yt is charity yt thus constreyneth the
hearts of faithful men for to desire the salvation of every body. And this
charytie did not alonly extend unto men, but also unto women, of the which
here he prays so^me of them, that is to wit, Euodia and Synticha, that they
should understand none other thing, but only this form and rule of the
gospel. And yet furthermore he prays an other which he calls his dear
beloved fellow that she would help all them which had labored with him, and
with Clement unto the furtheraunce and promotion of the gospel, of whom
(says he) the names be written in the book of liefe. And what help does he
desire that she should do unto them but only to comfort and strength them in
this purpose, for to draw alweyes the other, as well the virgins as the old
women unto the faith and unto ye doctrine of the gospel, the which is the only
rule of lief, and that of eternal life. Then my fre^des as well men as women,
let us hold this only rule. Let us teach them yt be not so perfect as we our
selves be. Let us take exemple of them which be just and steadfast in faith
and ernest lovers of the Gospel. Let us have in abomination the life of the
enemies of the Gospel, and of them yt do not set by the pains trauayles
afflictions death and passion that our Lord has suffered for to redeem us and
them, and for to give us the celestial treasures. And let us weep in our
hearts for their myscheuous and abominable life, prayeng unto God yt he will
give them light, and that they may not trouble any by their evil life and
wicked exemple. Let our hearts be where our treasure is, which is in heaven
and not in the earth. Let us be steadfast and unchangeable in this faith and
purpose of the Gospel. Let us labor as well men as women that all may come
unto this light, unto the only word of God living. Let us comfort them in
this yt we all have but one doctrine, one God, and one helper. Let all our hope
be there, as was the hope of saint Paul, and of Clement, of Euodia, of
Syntycha, and of all the other faithful and true christen people of the first
and primatyue church. And be we then well assured yt our names shall be written
with them in heaven even in the book of liefe, unto the glory of the father of
heaven and our lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xxiij. sunday after Trinity. The.xxij. Chapter of Matthewe.
Thargument. Christ is demanded whether it be lawful to pay tribute to
Caesar or not.
THe pharisees went and took council how they might tangle him in his words.
And they sent out unto him their disciples with Herodes servants, saie^g.
Master we know that thou art true and teach the way of god truly, neither
careste thou for any man, for thou regardest not the outward apparaunce of
men. Tell us therefore, how think thou? Is it lawful that tribute be given
unto Caesar or not? But Jesus perceiving their wickedness said. Why tempte ye me
ye ypocrites? show me the tribute money. And they took him a penny. And he
said unto them, whose is this image and superscription? They said unto him,
Cesars. Then said he unto them. Give therefore unto Caesar, the things which
are Cesars, and unto god those things that are gods.

THe Gospel of this present sunday good people puts before us, the malice
of the pharasies which did send their disciples with the Herodians, S. Hierome.
which herodians after the mind of saint Hierom were the soldiers of Herod
(for the pharasies durst not go themselves for fear of ye people) wherefore
they sent their disciples with these soldiers, for to attrappe our Lord and
to find out some occasion for to deliver him to death. And they came subtylly
according to the malice of the world and of the flesh flattering and saying,
master. This is the first simulation of hypocrites (says Chrysostomus) to
praise them whom we go about to destroy and undo. Chrysostomus super Mat.
And therefore they break out into praise saying Master we know that thou
art rightful and a teller of troth. They call him master to thinte^t that
being now honored and praised of them he might open simplely the secrets of
his heart unto them as desyrouse to have them his dyscyples. We know (say
they) that thou art rightful and yt thou teach the doctrine of God in
troth, and regardest no person, as who should say, thou haste respect
neither to Herod nor yet to Caesar, which exacteth tribute of us but only
teach freely ye troth. Therefore show us plainly we beseech the if it be
leful for us to give tribute unto Caesar or no? Our savior and master Jesus
Christ which knows all men's thoughts said unto them. Wherefore do ye tempte
me you hypocrites? He answers them, not fayerly according to their fayer
words but roughly according to their cruel conscience. For god is wont to
answer to the will and not to the word. And he says unto them. Show me ye
money of the tribute? And they did give him a piece. And he demanded of them
(to the end that he should shame them with their own words) whose was the image
and the superscription? And they answered, of Caesar. And then he answered
them. The^ yield ye unto Caesar, the things that apperteyne unto Caesar. And
pay to god that which belongs to god. But these dissemblers surely did not
understand this answer, for they looked that he should have said either ye
or no. If he had said that they ought for to have given tribute unto Caesar,
they might have accused him as speakinge against the lybertye given unto the
children of Israel and also as a transgressour of the law, and if he had said
that it had not been lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, the Herodians would
have accused him forthwyth of treason and sedicion against the emperor of Rome.
And so in all fashions they might have had open occasion to cause him to be
condemned to death, but by his answer they had none occasion, but were all
ashamed. And he showed them well, yt against the Lord God there is no counsel
that can serve. Wherefore this Gospel does teach us that they that teach the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, I mean, the true Gospel, shall have other whiles
the Pharisees and their discyples lyenge in wait against them (which shall
accompany themselves with infidels beleuynge nothing of God, such as were
these Herodians) for to attrappe them subtylly in their interrogations, in any
thing that they say whether it be so or not so, searchyng apparent occasions
for to deliver them unto death. And so they shall not be able to eschew it, if
the spirit of God do not deliver them. Wherefore my brethren let us all take
good courage, for to announce and preach the word of Jesus Christ, the holy
Gospel. Let us leave unto the men, that yt is of men. And let us yield unto God
that that is Gods, that is faith, all hope and charytie, unto him dew by his
holy word. And our king which is Jesus Christ shall rejoice in his heavenly
father, the which with him shall give us his graces, and our praises shall be of
God, yt which also shall shut up the mouth of ye sklaunderers and evil
speakers of his holy word, as it is also written: But the king shall rejoice
him in God. All those with true hearts shall be praised, for the mouth of them
which speak iniquity is close, unto the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Qui viuit et regnat in seculorum secula Amen.

The Epistle on the.xxiiij. sunday after Trinite sunday. The. first chapter to
the Colossians.
Thargument. Paul desiereth and prays for the collossia^s that they might be
fruetfull in all good works and increasing in the knowledge of god.
BRethren, we have not ceased to pray for you and to desire that ye might be
fulfilled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, that ye might walk worthy of the lord that in all things ye
may please, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the
knowledge of god, strengthed with all might thoroughe his glorious power, unto
all patience and long sufferinge with ioyfulnes.

THe epistle of this day, my well-beloved frnedes does teach us how all
christen men ought continually to desire and syghe (which is to pray and to
demand) unto god that all the contreyes and nations may be replenyshed with
the holy ghost, the which follow the faith of the word of god, that they may
be replenyshed with the knowledge of the will of god which is all wisdom from
above, and understanding from above of the holy ghost. Which thing we ought
to pray to thentent yt in all places we may walk worthyly according unto
God, and that in all good works we may please God, that al may fructifye and
take increase in the knowledge of God, which is the understanding of his word.
Furthermore we must pray that al may be comforted in all strength, virtue and
might of god not according unto our might or the might of men, but according
unto the puissau^ce and incomparable might of his glory, in the which all they
that knowledge to have it of him, do praise him and gloryfie him in all
meekness and patience of his abydyng in spiritual joy in our Lord Jesus
Christ. The desires of al christen men.
Truly my brethren these be the desires, sighs prayers and peticyons of all
christen men, the which be understood by ye desires prayers and peticio^s of.
S. Paul for the Collosie^s for in ye scriptures the things spoken
particularly, ought to be taken universally, that is, that they be said unto
all men, as our Lord does witness it spekyng unto his disciples, this yt I
say unto you, I speak it unto all. Let us then pray contynually by these
noble desires and sighs, which the holy ghost makes in us, and we shall be
spiritual, we shall be a temple of ye holy ghost, and such as we desire the
other to be. We shall have knowledge of ye good will of God, which is the
salvation of every body by the faith in Jesus Christ and in his word. These
desires and prayers be works of charytye, works of sapience, and such as
teach the wysdom of God, and not of men, they be works pleasant unto God,
fruitful and increasynge from day to day in the knowledge of god, they be the
works of patience, abiding (in joy of spirit) what soever thing it shall
please god for to send, whether it be prosperytye or aduersytye, whether it be
syckenes or health, for the strength from above given by Jesus Christ and his
spirit does comfort and gives liefe to al. To whom be immortal glory and
praise without end. Amen.

The Gospel on the.xxiiij. sunday after Trinity sunday. The.ix. chapter of
Mathewe.
Thargument. The woman which had the issue of blood is healed.
While Jesus yet spoke unto the people, behold there came a certain ruler and
worshipped him saying, my daughter is even now disceased, but come and lay
thy hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose, and followed him and so
did his disciples. And behold a woman which was diseased with an issue of blod
twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his vesture. For she said
within her self, if I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be safe.
But Jesus turned him about and when he saw her he said. Daughter be of good
comfort, thy faith has made the safe.

And the woman was made hole, even that same time.

This Gospel (good christen audience) does put before our eyes how much that
our faith and hope in god our savior does please him, and is to him grateful
and acceptable, and which thing our lord does show us here by the faith of a
prince of the Sinagoge which (as says saint Mark) was named Iayrus. And
albeit that his faith and confidence in god was imperfect, yet nevertheless
our lord did apply and grant to his prayer, yea and went also with him
for to raise his daughter which was nere dead, and in deed she dyed. In which
thing the holy doctor Remigius says that the humilite and mildnes of our
lord is much to be wondered at, and also to be followed of us by exemple,
Remigius
For forthwith as soon as he was desired he began to follow him that desired
him. Wherein he instructs (says this doctor) both subjects and also
prelates. To subjects he has left an exemple of obedience. To prelates he did
demo^strate and show how they ought to be instaunte and paynfull in the
office of teaching, that as often as they here tell of any parson to be dead
in soul, they should study forthwyth to be at hand and present with him to
reuiele and raise him up again, even as our savior Christ of his most tender
pity and mercy was ready forthwith at the humble suit of this ruler to go with
him to raise up his daughter. And if that he had had as perfect faith as he
which said, lord I am not worthy that thou should enter in to my house, but
only say the word, and my child shall be hole, he might have healed her with a
word and say, be it done to the according unto thy faith, and it should have
been so, but he did to him according unto his faith, and so he does to us. He
had thus much faith that if he touched her she should live, and so was it
therefore done to him according unto his faith. He showed it us also by the
woman which had the blody flyxe by the space of.xij. years, the which had this
faith in him, that if she touched alonly his garment she should be healed. She
did touch it, and she had according unto her faith, not that she had her
faith in the garmente or that the garmente should heal her, but her faith and
her hope was in Jesus Christ. For assuredly the virtue of her healinge did not
come from the garment, but from our lord Jesus Christ as he said, I have known
that power is issued out from me. For certes she touched our lord inuisibly
by faith, and the garment visibly by sign of faith. And therefore our Lord
said unto her. Daughter have full hope and be of good chere, thy faith has
made yt to be saved, for he did unto her according unto her faith Then the
gospel does show us here, that if we have right perfyte faith, there shall be
done unto us according to our faith.
O that mortal men and women would have this perfect faith working by charytie
and confidence, and this trust in our lord Jesus Christ? Our lord did never
deny any which has had steadfast faith and hope in him. If we be in never so
great sickness of sin, yea if we be dead by sin, yet if we pray unto him,
and desire him of pardon having full hope and faith in him, that in asking it
of him we shall be healyd and justified, that is for to say that our sins
shall be pardomd, and that we shall be revived from ye death of sin, assuredlye
it shall be so done unto us, and we shall hear this sweet answer. Thy faith has
saved the. And ye gospel is full of the same that he will do to us according to
our faith. Wherefore let us have steadfast faith in all the promysses of the
words of God: and then shall be accomplished in all his promysses. Faith
without charity is nothing worth.
But this faith is a lively faith which works by charity. The son which
shyneth and gives no heat, does not give life to any thing, no more does
faiyh without charity. If you have this faith that Jesus Christ is dead for the,
and for to put away thy sins, it is so, and thy sins be put away, and
his death is thine: and the merit of his death thine. If thou believe also not
faynedly but truly that he is risen again for thy justification, it is so,
and his resurrection is thine and thy justification and thou art truly
justified if you so persevere and continue in godly living as becomes a
christen man. And thus of all the other words of God and of the holy
scripture, the which is clean hid from us and made dark and unprofitable
without this working faith and again all open and shyninge by this faith. It
is it that is always seen of God, and is never denied in all signs and
meruels and in all holy reuiuinges of God. For to be healed of all syckenesses
and death we need principally this lively and workyng faith which is the most
beloved grace of God. The woman had none other thing to be healed of her
bloody flixe. The prince of the synagoge had none other thing for to have
his daughter raised from death to lyffe. For to be inheritour unto the kingdom
of heaven is required this faith that I now speak of, as first and chife
fou^datio^ of all together. What would you that I should say unto you? There
is nothing impossible unto faith. Wherefore then let us pray unto our Lord
Jesus Christ which is auctour of faith that he may give us this fayeth: to
the intent yt we may pray laud and glorify him so as he would be prayed, and
that he wol not deny or hyde any thing unto them which so do pray him in
fayeth but that he woll enflambe them from day to day, for to luoe fear
honor and serve him more and more, and to pray him the more feruentlye unto
the glory of the celestial father which gives us all in him and by him in
this world and in the other by glory eternally. Amen.

The epistle on the.xxv. sunday after Trinity sunday which is the next
sondaie before Aduent sunday. Ieremias.xxxiij.
Thargument. The prophecye of Hieremye concerning the raygne of Christ.
Brethren, behold the time comes says the lord, that I will raise up the
ryghteous branch of David, which shall bear rule, and discuss matters with
wisdom, and shall set up equity and righteousness again in the earth. In his
time shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell without fear. And this is the
name that they shall call him, even the lord our rightousnesse. And therefore
behold, the time comes says the lord, that it shall no more be said, the
Lord lyuethe, which brought the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt. But the lord lives, which brought forth, and led the sede of the
house of Israel, out of the northlande, and from all countries where I had
scatered them, and they shall dwell in their own land again.

THis prophecy of Hieremie (good people) which we read for our epistle in the
church this day does show us that the days of ye coming of messiah our
Savior Jesus Christ be at hand and acco^plyshed. This is ye true branch
which God shall rcyse up unto David. And when shall this branch be taken? Of a
vyrgyn descendyd from David, He shall be trewly just, for he shall be the justice
of all just: and he alonly ought of his own pureness to be conceived and borne
among men without syn. But who shall reyse him up unto David? God alone, and no
tany man. And therefore he shall be God, and son of God. And wherefore unto
David? Forbicause yt god shall reyse him up and make him to be borne of a
virgyn desce^dyd of David. He shall reygne king. For he shall be king of kings.
It is he which says in ye person of king David in the second psalm. Psalm.
ij.
But I am constituted king by him over Sion his holy mountain preaching his
commandment. And he shall be wise: not without cause, for he is the wisdom of
god. He shall do justice and judgment in earth, for he shall condemn sin
and the prince of sin, and shall justify by him self which is the
sacrifice, the rede^pcion and justice of pore sinners. And by this father: he
shall justify the sinners. In those days, Judah, yt is to say, those that
shall confess in faith, shall be saved: and Israel that is for to say those
that shall knowledge there strength to come from God, shall live in great
suertie and trust. Judas signifies co^fessyng, laudinge and thankyng, and
Israel strong in God. And the name of messiah shall be this, The Lord God
which is the great name of God. Whereby Hieremie in spirit gives to
understand that he shall be the great God, his name also shall be our just.
Ours: forbycause that he shall be made man for us: and in such wise just, that
he shall justify us all that shall believe in him, as in God and man and therefore
he shall be ours, and his justice ours, and for this he should come. For (as Esaie
says) the little is borne unto us, and the son is given unto us, and for
this cause in the time of Messiah one shall not affirm any more in saying. The
lord lives which has with drawn the children of Israel out from the land of
Egypt. But it shall be affyrmed in one hole witness. The lord god lives that
has drawn out the sede of the children of Israel from ye land of the North,
and from all other places where they were cast. The lord god is the Messiah:
of whom Heremie said, the days of his coming is at hand. The which when he
should be comen should renew al things, al shadows and all figures should
cease, and then should truth reygne, none should affirm more according to the
old law in figure but according to the new in truth. The children of Israel
were delivered from the land of Egypt and Pharon in figure: But in the time
of Messiah the sede and children of true Israel which shall be sede and children
of faith, shall be delivered in all places where they were cast before by god
as enemies of the land, from the region and puissaunce of the great Aquilon,
from whence depends all evil, which is the crooked serpent the devil of hell
the prince of darkness. And they that shall inhabit in their land of lyuinge
people by the Messiah which is our lord Jesus Christ. Strive we then my
brethren, with all our strength, to be of the sede of faith of the true Israel
which is the only strong, in our lord Jesus Christ, that has vainquished
the great Aquilon: which has drawn us out from the puissance and tyra^nye of
the same, from all places, from all nations. And then he shall lead us with
him into the land of the living men eternally And we must be all well assured
of this: for this says the lord god almighty. Unto whom be glory honor and
might eternally. AMEN.

The Gospel on the.xxv. sunday after Trinity sunday which is the next
sunday before Aduent sunday. the.vi. cha. of Ihon.
The argument. Our lord feadeth five thousand men with v. barley loves and
two fyshes.
WHen Jesus then lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he
says unto Philip: whence shall we bye bread, that these may eat? This he said
to prove him: for he him self knew what he would do. Philip answered him, two
hundred penny worth of bread are not sufficient for them, that every man may
take a little. One of his disciples (Andrew, Simon Peter's brother) says unto
him: There is a lad here which has five barlye loves and two fyshes: but what
are they among so many? And Jesus said. Make the people sit down There was
much grass in the place. So the men sat down in nombre, about five thousand.
And Jesus took the bread: And when he had given thanks, he gave to the
disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down: And likewise of the
fyshes as much as they would. When they had eaten enough, he says unto his
disciples: gather up the broken meat which remains: that nothing be lost.
And they gathered it together, and filled twelve baskettes with the broken
meat of the five barley loves: which broken meat remained to them that had
eaten. Then those men (when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did) said,
this is of a truth the same Prophet that should come into the world.

THe royal prophet David (well-beloved audience) knowing that the fedyng and
meat as well of the body as of the soul is given and distributed unto men by
the only goodness and grace of god, howbeit more diligently nevertheless that
of the soul, then that of the body: he makes this request unto god. Lord I
have had my refuge to the, teach me to do thy will. And in another place he
faith. The lord god does noryshe me, and I shall lack nothing, he has set me
in the place of the fedyng, which is the place of the fedyng of god, my
friends? Trewly it is the holy scripture, in which is declared unto ss the
will of this great lord, and with the which every christen soul is
spiritually and ghostely fed reveled and nouryshed. And this is it which at
this day is represented unto us, by saint John in his.vj. chap. where as he
says, that when Jesus had lift up his eyes, and saw that so great a
multitude was come unto him, he said unto his disciple saint Philippe,
wherewith shall we bye bread, that these folks here may eat? He spoke not
this that he knew not perfetly, what he would do: but he proved his faith (for
it is he as says David that gives meat to beasts, and unto small ravens
that call to him) and for to confyrme it, and to give knowledge unto him and
unto the other that he was god. Take we then doctrine of this place my frendys
that our Lord Jesus Christ is only governor of al things what so ever they
be, not only as towchinge the body, but principally as towching ye sowl. And
let us not be as Philip and Andrew, which not having yet steadfast faith believed
not yt he which by his only word had made and created all the world, might
likewise by his word create and give noryshynge by five loves and two fyshes
unto so great a multitude. But what signifies unto us the five loves and the
two fyshes? Suerly my friends the five loves the which as S. John says were
of barley, represent unto us (as S. Austine and other holy expositours think)
the five books of Moses. Austine
For as barley outward has a husk very prickyng: even so have ye books of
Moses, for as touching the law which they conteyne, they be merueilous rough
and rygorous, but if they be spiritually vnderstandyd (which can not be without
faith) they give norishyng unto the soul. For as says the prophet Abacuc.
Abac. ij.
The rightwyse man shall live by faith. And the two fyshes may sygnify the old
and new testament. The new testament as touching the evangelical and
apostolical wrytinges wherein the christen man's faith is lively described. The
old as touching the other books and prophecies.
For eue^ as the fyshes can not live without water, so likewise without faith,
none has been, is, nor shall be saved. These five loves therefore and two fyshes
spiritually understood have been distributed unto al christen people. And if
ye ask by whom? Surely it is to be answered by the apostles and they which be
sent from god. For this cause (my friends) take ye the refection and fode of
the soul in the five loves, and two fyshes spiritually understood: that is
to say in the holy scriptures, and in faith. And understand that ye worldly
doctrines can not nourishe your souls, but rather slay the^, for our lord
says, that for naught we honor him in keeping the doctrine of men namely if
it be not grounded of gods word but rather made to ouerwhelme subuerte and
darken the same. Let us then desire with instant and fervent peticions this
heavenly fode of almighty God and he will without doubt give it us abundantly.
To whom be all honor glory praise and thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by Richard Banks, and sold in Fletestrete at the sing
of the white Heart by Anthony Clerk.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


