OUR LORDS FAMILE AND MANY OTHER POINCTES DEPENDING UPON IT: opened against a
Jew, Rabbi David Farar: who disputed many hours, with hope to overthrow the
Gospel, opened in Ebrew explication of Christianity; That instructed, Rabbi
Abraham Ruben.

With a Greek Epistle to the Geneveans.

By H. Broughton.

Printed at Amsterdam in the year 1608.

A Table of the chief points handled in this book.
Of our Lords family Of Iudahs Kindomes persons. Of a wicked Table. Of
Machmads Keys of Paradise: Of D. Bilsons proof, that our L. went hence to
paradise. Of Athanasius mistaken by the B. Of his three Syllogismes. Of
Catachthonia: that it means not Hell. Of Hades, that it never signifies Hell
in the N. Testament. Of Gregory Nazianzen for Tartaros. Of a Jews disputation
against the gospel. For Scripture text. Daniels ending Moses. Of the Iudaisme
of M. Livelie. Of vvarrant to translate Ebrevv: Of the fourth Kingdom in
Daniel: that the Romans are not meant in it.
TOT THE KINGS MAJESTY. Cum tot sustineas, and tanta negotiasolus in publica
commoda peccem, Silongo sermon morer tua tempora Caesar.
I Ma^e speak to the King, as Horace to Augustus: and affect brevitie, which he
shows mete for spech to a King. A Thracian Jew wrote from the City of our
Constant in unto the Land of his Mother, to have from that soil, his City
spirituallie builded; I printed his Epistle, and sent answer, that when the
King of Scotland should rule all the Ila^d, I should convenientlie perfome
Ebrew building, having most sad promess for means, to fill the world with
books of our faith, in the Chananean tongue, when the King came to the other
Scepter. And though the Noble Gentleman, of whom M. James Melvin from him wrote
assurance, delayed: I made all Ebrew instruments, and uttered books upon my
charges, in Ebrew, Greek, and other tongues, unto 36000: to fill the world
quick he with clear opening of matter mistake^: whereby we gave Jews occasion
to reject the Gospel; and whereby they much disgraced us unto Machmad They were
grieved to see their hope of victory gone. And one lew of Amsterdam made
request, that I would in an open solemn audience, answer him one after none,
to such arguments, as by which Jews gathered, that our Gospel, could not be
of God. Disputation was granted: and he disputed an afternone: vainlie hoping
to prove, that Luke told not our Lords kindred, that Salathiel could not be
son to Iechonias, and to Neri. That Romans were the jmage legs, that Daniels
Seavens did not plainly end Circumcision; that our Creed and Gospel, could not
be reconciled: that our Greek Testament was not pure in text. If he had proved
any of these, wherein our side assented much unto him: he had foiled the
aunswearer. To all these I aunsweared: and now print the tenor, for the use of
the Kings natio^es. And j would go foreward with Ebrew and Grek writings, to
be turned by others into all Europe tongues, for the light of Christendom, If
the King do think good to perform, that whereof M James* Melvin vvrote extreme
asseveration. And j heartily wish, and humbly desire, so much to be performed:
as the judge Eternal knows due in faith, and a means to lighten the ^ast
from the West. Liberality of a Prince sone great without band in smaller
occasiones, would find in this kind from God and man, greater approbation. The
King may appoint pay of promess, from Ecclesiastical revenues: and if any
Bishop can open the Bible in Ebrew and Greek; and heal the Bishops erroures
better then my slendernes, j would gladly give him place: and j am sure he will be
an honor to the Bishops and nation, over the world. But if neither the Bishops
can deal with the East in Ebrew and Greek: and in story and Thalmudiques,
cannot contrive both Testamentes into sure nerves: the King will take order,
that others do it.

Your Majesty's most humble, H. Broughton.

TO THE MOST NOBLE PRINCE, MAVRICE Land-Grave of Hassia.
WHEN I came to Marpurg (Most noble Prince) your Doctor promotor laid among
positiones of al faculties, this one against me: quidam autumat Descendere ad
inferos in sacro Symbolo, esse idem quod ascendere ad coelos, quod nos non
credimus. And they requested me to dispute: vvher I shevved that, all dead, be
inferi, all whose souls be in Heaven: and every taking of a lourney is
descendere by scripture speech. And if an horse die: antiquity held it enough
to say, he was dead: but for men, they took more in their mouth: as,

(...); is he dead and gone to the dwellinges of Hades.

And all Heathen would expound our Symbolu^ of faith to mean as the Gospel*
that our Lord vve^t from hence to the most happy lodge of the happy. Many

milliones in England think so: your tendered the truly learned D. Fortius
thinks so: and since I opened the cause, the flour of Christendom thinks
so: though the Cyclopes of Aetna would have svvalovved me up in their Gehennean
torment. The Senators yielded, and swore a great oath, that they would teach
the teachers, to use strangers better. Now a Jew has dealt openly against
me: vvher in your Doctors take with him, against my Ebrevv books to your
Highness and to your Brother the Grave of Hanavv. You have seen both translated.
I defend the Gospel: If Papist or Caluinistes do cross, I vvil combat. Your
Highness may tell your Doctors of flight or fight. It is not well, that men
teach, what they have not learned themselves.

Your Highness most humble Hugh Broughton.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privey
Counsel.
THE Kings Majesty (right honorable) minded a favor to my poor studies,
which M. lames Melvin vvrote I should look for. If it please any of your
Lordships, to putt his highness in mind, I hope it vvillbe sone performed. And I
would gladly take one years pay, of that which was purposed yerelie.
Besides, I am to request your Lordships to consider a Genevean injury done to
me for the Kings sake: That, I have expressed in an Epistle unto themselves.
If the King knevv the whole matter, his Majesty would be readier to weigh my
danger for his affairs: and to further my pains, for the common good of
Christendom.

Your Lordships most humble: H. Broughton.

The family of Jesus Christ after the flesh: who is God blessed for ever.
After that Koheleth or Ecclesiastes had showed all things under the sun to be
vain, that men might look how the soul immortal might stand in judgment, and
find the joy of the Kingdom promised to David, I opened Ieremies
Lamentationes, how therein the Jews hope of happiness in this world was buried
with the destruction of temple, city, Kindome. And the same year that Jeremy
first wrote his Lamentationes, the noble Daniel so beloved of God was captiued,
to Babylon, to rule his captiuers, as Joseph to rule Egypt; who thence deriueth
the Kingdoms that vexed the holy Jews religion: how Christ had all their
actiones as opened in a book before his judgment throne, and made a riddance
of them by the day that he was to com into the world. And joyneth unto their
utter consumption, his coming in the clouds of heaven: and ascension unto the
Everlasting throne promised unto David. There the Romans begin their
dealinges; and will rule over the King of heaven, till they crucified the God
of glory: Wherefore they are pictured after the tenor of all Daniels four in
one; The Lion, the bear, the fourheaded Leopard, and the fourth the
ten-horned, give them arms, to make one of them four, a beast ten-horned,
colored like a Leopard, footed, as a bear, and mouthed like a Lion Their
tribute or tax over the world fell out even with the time that Christ the God
of heaven came from the father into this world. And Da^el taught upon Babels
fall when God would by his own blood open an Eternal Kingdom to them that
believed in him: and when God in Christ would enter into the work of the
tabernacle, even beginning 30 years in the flesh. So the faithful savv when
the son would dvvell in our taberna^le; of Abraham's sede; whose family, known
rightly of fevv, and perverted by ^evves, with many questiones depending
heron, I open to all Christianes; and first show at the Entrance the reason of
several beginnige^ in the holy men that spell or speak unto us of God come in
the flesh.

Of S. Mathews beginning from Abraham.
The full purpose of S. Matthew concerning the Kingdom of the Jews, I will
handle at large in due place: Now the reasons of Abraham made the beginnig may
be touched only; 1. Abraham was the first man to whom Christ was promised in
plain terms; that in his sede all the families of the earth should be blessed,
So a beginning from him is fit for Jews and heathen.

2. In that Eve had a promess that Christ should destroy the works of Satan,
who destroyed the vorld, and Killed Adam, to be dead in sin, and to leave this
world; our Lord his justice and death, and resurrection and ascension and
restoring Adams soul to justice, and the new world wherein justices dwells,
all these poinctes are closly taught; But contemned by the blinded of Satan,
who delight to be vnwittj, and will not so much strain their care, as to
understand what God speaks. Now to Abraham matters were shevved playner,
that the destroyer of Satan's works; should come of him; and after death should
be revived; and figured by Melchisedek; and as Abraham and Sara dead from
strength of generation yet by faith were quickened: and justified by faith; So
they should be, who believed in God that raises Christ from the dead. For
these causes the beginng of the New T. is fitly taken from Abraham.

Of S. Marc.
S. Marc draws his entrance from the last prophet vv^^^ John Babtist is
foreshevved: and from Esays comfort upon spech of the fall of Babel. which
matter was plainly expounded for time, when Cyrus destroyed Babel. and Marc
his Gospel is of half a seven; to show Christ his teaching of the covenant
for many. And as God would have S. Mark to fortify the Angels Chronicle for the
time: So he would have the other three Evangelists to hasten to the same. As
S. Matthew does, when he told that our Lord dwelled in Narazet; as in the
volume of the prophets Es. xj he is called Nazer; and in the Babylon Thalmud
in Chelek; Nazor is the name of the son of David; Presently after Thalmadique
handling of that his name, he comes to the Angel Gabrieis half seven; and so
does S. Luke, and S. John hasten to the preaching of Malachj the son of
Zacharj. Whereby any might marveile how the Jews could miss to receive the
King of glory coming to his own hovvs. And thus all the four evangelistes
shevved care to fottifie that part. And God would have it famous, turning it
into a proverb; for afflictiones conformable to the afflictiones of Christ; by
all^sio^ to that time; That the afflictiones for Christ should be called the
afflictiones of days 1260. or, of a time two times and half a time; and
months forty two. So by allusiones our Gracious Lord teaches us to mark the
four evangelistes, for the half seven of our Lords preaching; and specially
S. Mark; and to go back with him to Daniel. And our Lords own tongue does
call us to mark the time: in the Parable of the fig tree fruteles, hindering
the Earth. Which spech may be gathered to be six months, before the cursed fig
tree withered. As Bucholkerus makes a goodly comparison, of that Parable, and
of our Lords half seven. So our Lord calls us from Elias Baptist unto Elias
the Thisbite: how in his time heaven was shut three years and six months;
warning that since the heavens were opened at his baptism, until his soul
should return from the cross to heaven, years should be three and six
months. Now the gathering of Elias times in the first of the Kings would
require long labor; But we may be sure it was well known among the
Thalmudignes; as S. James speaking to the Thalmudique manner, says, that Elias
pray^^ stayed rain three years and six months. Thus the time of our Lords
preaching is svvetely compared with other Scriptures. and we may be sure that
our Lord spoke the truth; and seeing ou^ Lord told, in Daniel chapter 7. and 12.
That Antiochus should cro^^ the laws and offering* a time two ^imes and an
half; He would have his time for sanctifying the temple to be as well Known;
and as well measured; seeing the allusion Ap. 12. of a time, two times, and
half a time, is taken from his preaching.

In what month S. Mark begins his story: and the rest, the opening of the
heavens by the second Elias.
Because our Lord was baptized, even beginnig thirty, and to open the Kingdom,
by teaching the covenant to many, three years and six month: Seeing his souls
passage from the cross to the fathes is certain in the fiftenth of Nisan; So
his birth and Baptism should be in the seventh month, Aethanim. Which was
the first month, after the creation of the world.

Of the month Ethanim or September.
It may somewhat help to mark old story of Aethanim from 1. Kings. ^. 2. All
Israel assembled to the King Solomon, in the month Aethanim, in the feast,
that is the seventh month; And the sacrificers brought the Ark of the
covenant of the Eternal, unto his place; unto the Dabyr; unto the holy of holy;
and the Cherubim spread their wings over the place o^ the ark. This so Solemn
should have antitypon awnswearable in high matter. And what thing else can be,
but that the most holy was manifest in his temple; and the army of Angels
spred^ their wings; to have him honored at his coming then into the world.

The explication and story, of the month Aethanim.
The most Learned Chaldy paraphast Ionatha^ speaks thus: of Aethanim. It is
the month of the ancient, and they called it the first month, of festiuity.
But now it is the seven month. Thus David Kimchj does expound him. Aethanim
or strength is the month wherein they gathered the fructs and increase of the
earth, to their houses. For that cause it is called the feast of gathering
fruits. So Aethanim means strength: and fructes and entrease of the earth be
the life of a man. And some of our doctoures expound Aethanim, the month in
which the fathers were borne. The stay (Aethanim) of the world; as the spech,
Mich. 7. 2. Hear ye mounta^ies; and ye strong foundationes of the earth.
Others call it Aetha^im from the strength of the laws that are given for this
month ^^th feasts, and laws. So Ralbag says. I think it called the month
Athanim, for the feasts: the strong, and teaching justice: which ^re in this
month. This for Ralbag. The first day had the trumpets; the tenth, expiation;
the fiftenth the feast of tabernacles for eight days. And Ionathans words
cited of me before, be thus expounded of Camchj. Before the time that Israel
came from Egypt, Tisri or Aethanim was the first month. For in Tisri the
world was made. And by reason that the Children of Israel came from Egypt in
Nisan, it became the head of months, and Tisri became the seventh. For so
the blessed God said unto them. This month shall be unto you the first of
months. To you, by reason that to the rest of the world it is not first: For
Tisri is the first. And this much for the month. So John Baptist well might
begin the first day; and assemble unto him much People fourtene days: And our
I ord come to him the fiftenth day; when they had learned of the stronger then
the Baptist, who would baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire. So the four
Evangelist^s Celebrating the Baptism celebrat the birth which was the same day
29. full years. So as the first Adam and the other to Noah came to the world
that month, Christ should come; and that time was fittest for Caesar to bid
men resort to their cities; and most likely that shepheardes would yet be abroad
with their ship; and fittest for men to go into a river naked to be Baptized.
And by Daniels half seven John brought in Baptism; for heathen; as David and
Solomon only Baptized proselytes; Maimony in Asure Bia, tract. 12 and 13. And
if his warrant had not been sure, and plain, from Daniel, none might have com
to him for Baptism. So our Lord beginning a new year of his age then, showed
the same time of month to have geven us his coming into the world. And the
Rabbines in Middras Rabba conclude that Messiah shall be borne in Aethanim or
Tisrj; full of feasts to teach of him. And God appointed no feasts for the
winter; because of the vnseasonablenes of the weather. Chrysostom mistaking
John's fathers story, thinking that he ministered not in june but in September,
began to disgrace the state of the Gospel. Hence Turk and Jew scoph: that we
place the birth where the conception should be; and can yield no reason of our
Gospels narrationes which we make most unlikely to be true. And Arias Montanus
helps Chrysostom; that Zachary should be high sacrificer, Whereas all Jews
know that the Candelstick, Table and altar of incense were without and daily
gone to by the ordinary sacrificers. Elias, four times made the beginning of
Daniels half seven, might have taught the Jews a sure note, what Elias
Malachj spoke off. Now the end of all the Evangelistes is in the first month,
toward leaving the Egypt of this world at the Pascha. And at Pentecost,
after, the law was given to Moses; when the fyerj law of the spirit was by
Jesus given. So the conception of John, vvher men placed his birth; falls to
Midsomer; and birth to the spring Aequinoctial, and likewise the conception of
Mary fell most fitly to mydvvinter, and our Lords coming into the world, to
the first month after the creation, and his redemption, to the first month
for redemption from Egypt; These matters agree with Scripture and plain
reason. But now the altering of the date would to much troble the world. It
may pass amongst us; as fit for considering a time when vvinter feasts, and
leisure to hear the law read hinders none works; and according to the
conception; very many Learned men have cleared the truth, of late; and all are
to blame that will follow an old error here, that disturbeth law and Gospel.
Jews and Turks look on: and the just judge, who has eyes pure, that they
cannot behold evil, will keep from his heavenly city all that practice lying.

Of S. Lukes beginning.
S. Luke joyneth the end of the old testament to the beginning of the New. A
most heavenly work. And here note the very names. Zacharj and Malachj end the
spech of God in the old Testament; and Zacharj and Malachj are in the first
spech of the Angel Gabriel in the New. The Angel Gabriel; who did tell of
Antiochus Epiphanes, for days 2300. and Generally of Gods hand upon the
Graecianes: he, tells of the second Elias; or Malachj, unto Zacharj; an holy
man: and of the birth of Christ, whom he him self named Christ; Daniel 9. and
here the time must be considered. Even when the Grecianes were rooted out from
under the cope of heaven: and had not the government of one city in the world;
but at Romans tax, in Daniel were utterly consumed; as the former all, the
Graecianes before they were parted: and the Medes with Persianes, and the
Chaldeanes; when the last of all these were consumed, then the Angel Gabriel
comes twice to tell the joy of the Kingdom of heaven; for John Elias: and for
Christ the most holy. Thus so heavenly a joining of the old Testament to the New
should be celebrated of all that will keep the commandment of praising God
with understanding. And all teachers be wicked that will be spending time to
their hearers, and them selves, in matters of this world, where the hearers be
so wise as they, and not study first the truth of these matters, so gracious
and full of salvation, and after, teach them unto the world. Bishops that would
teach with dexterity to make all in the the Kingdoms able if they would to
teach all the world, should never be envyed for their 200000 lib. per annum;
But they should be counted most reverend and right reverend fathers; and such
Papae as Athanasuis, and the like in Grecia. But ours must alter much before
all the learned nobility will think them so referend and so learned, as some
nobles be, and lower gentry, that never came in Pulpit.

Of S. John beginning the Gospel.
S. John the last begins from before the beginning: from the Eternal, called
the word of Thalmudiques infinitely through Moses, as Onkelos nere S. John
follows them: sayng for, Iehova said, the word of Iehova said. S. Paul says
they tempted Christ; vvher they tempted Jehovah. This was the main combat
with the Thalmudiques: and Cerinthianes, and other heretics. And matter
required that minds long occupied in easier matter, should at the last be
called to consider the Eternity, of the heir of all, which made the world.
And S. Luke sone after mention of Elias John baptist, handles the humanity of
Jesus Corist, up to Adam: whom Satan overraught to bring darkness upon him
self, before the sun ever left him in darkness; and then joins a new combat
to the old serpent; thence will I show the family of our Lord: and cmment
upon it; and S. Matthew shall follow, touching succession to the Kingdom, and
other dependantes, all for instruction of Jews, and such as would not lay a
trap to Jews, and their own destruction.

THVS THE TEXT SPEAKS Luke. 3. from. v. 23
ANd Jesus himself even began to be of The noblest story of all that are: for
years 3927 The pillar of all the Bible: to which Heathen be servantes.
thirty years: being, Son, of Joseph, (as me^ thought) of Eli, of Matthat, of
Leui, of Melchi, of Ianna, of Joseph, of Mattathias, of Amos, of Naum, of Esli,
of Nagge, of Maath, of Matathias, of Semei, of Joseph, of Judah, of Ioanna, of
Rhesa, of Zorobabel, of Salathiel, of Neri, of Melchi, of Abdi, of Cosam, of
Elmodam, of Er, of Iose, of Eliezer of Iorim, of Matthat, of Leui, of Symeon,
of Judah, of Joseph, of Ionan, of Eliacim, of Melea, of Mainan, of Mattatha, of
Nathan, of David, of Iesse, of Obed, of Booz, of Salmon, of Naasson, of
Aminadab, of Aram, of Esrom, of Phares, of Judah, of Jacob, of Isaac, of
Abraham, of Thara, of Nachor, of Saruch, of Ragau, of Phalec, of Eber, of Sala,
of Cainan, of Arphaxad, of Sem, of Noe, of Lamech, of Mathusala, of Enoch, of
Iared, of Malaleel, of Caina^, of Enos, of Seth, of Ada^, of God.

1 Here Children should begin first to read: and to compare the sorrowful
combat of Adam killed on his first day from life of soul made dead in sin,
with the glorious combat of our Lord resisting the old serpent; and driving him
to flight. Luke. chapter 4.

2 Mary the mother of our Lord is in name left out: but in matter contained.
For the term Son through all these has relation to Jesus, as in the Last:
Son of God. They use small judgment that hold Adam called the S. of God S.
Luke in Satan's spech chapter 4. says that Jesus was meant by him, Son of God.

3. Joseph's father who begat him was named Jacob Math. 1. But as all married
men have two fathers, so Joseph: David had Iessai and Saul; Joseph had Jacob
natural, and Ely in Law. yet by argument only, Joseph is Elyes S. not expressly.

4. Jews and Gentiles, that came not to the story of the resurrection,
shevving Christ to be the son of God, by the might that raised him, would have
made a scoff, to see the mother laid down in the Genealogy. And so the holy
Gh. pi^ying ma^^ weakness leaves Mary for name, out: but in, by argument and
sure collection; as thus: Jesus, Mary Ely. etc.

5. The whole number is disposed in order fit for memori^ Ten to the flod;
ending the old world; ten to Abraham heyr^ of the new world* repeating him,
twice seven of most Godly fathers are to David; Then his S. NATHAN, 1. Chr.

6. Begins a twenty; who Lived private obscure men under the Kings of
Salomons house: until the captivity of Babylon. Two Lived in the captivity.
Salathiel and Zorobobel. He was governor when the Jews were sent home by
Cyrus; upon the Angel Gabriel his Message for redemption, and ending of Moses
at 490 years. Rhesa begins, and out Lord ends a new twenty. Heathen in
Eusebius making a Chronicle by ages would make but 400 years of 20. The Olympiq
folovvers that would make 590 years; to disturb Daniels* light to all the
Bible, and our Lords house, shevved small judgment; The twenty from Rhesa to
our L. will be heavenly Championes for salvation joining with Daniel in their
number; to keep men from feining moo years then God reckoned.

7. When Jews refuse the auctority of S. Luke; and all the Nevve Testament,
they should be told that for civil records all nations would blame them. So
for the 15 of Tiberius, when Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod
Tetrarch of Galily, and Philip his brother Tetrarch of ^turea, and Trachonis,
and Lysanias Tetrarch of Abylene, when Annas and Caiphas were high
Sacrificers, for all those, civil records stand, known to many nationes; and
one man's auctority is not considered in them. So for the family of a King.
Nationes nere Knevv it; and Theophilus would examine the matter if doubt had
been: and Scribes S. Lukes foes had confuted him if fault had been; But none
did; as none could. So when S. Matthew makes Rachab wife to Salmon he
speaks according to Jews civil records well known. And so when S. Paul
Says he was an Ebrevv continually by fathers and mothers, he knevv that other
of Gamaliels scholars could examine that. So when he calls Andronicus and
Iunias, and Herodion his consins, his Kinsemen, that were yet Pharisces, had
reproved him if he had lied. So when S. Luke Suddenly calls Saul Paul, he had
felt reprofe if the matter had not been well Known. As when he tells King
Agrippa and Festus, how he was spoken to by Jesus our Lord: Saul, Saul, why
do thou persecute me; Festus would not have said, to him; thou are mad Paul;
too much lerning makes thee mad: if he had not known that he had two names.
So when Iohaiada, the father of Zachary the martyr is called B^rachias, by
the like notation, S. Matthew knevv him self warranted I^^ and Zach: one man
in 2. names Math. 27.
by many like examples; and when Zachary the auctour of the prophecy of
Christ his exaltation; and of the King ^iding upon an ass, and sold for 30
sicles, is called of him Jeremy the exalter of God, he had vvarrantes enough
from old ages so to do. And for Genealogies known to heathen: Moses in Edoms
story for the Kings of Seir that reigned sucessours before he was King in
Israel, was an ancient vvarrant to S. Luke. So when S. Matthew makes King
Iechonias that died without issue, father in place of Kingdom to one of
Salomons brother Nathan in very far descent, he knew that other Jews foes to
the Gospel who knevv the Kings family would herein maintain him. So
Hercules family and Sparta^e Kings; and Macedonian; and Cyrus the Persian,
and his cosyns Kings of Pontus, and Seleucidae and Lagidae, are famous in
sundry Graecians; and none will deny any without bringing better record: So
Jews should be required to bring other families of Zorobabel, if they despise
our Evangelists: and we should not suffer them to deny that, which a Turk or
any heathen would be ashamed to deny.

8. The names of our Lords Line are evident to be sagely given; and in more
wise sort, then ever any feigner could think upon. Many are from the
Patriarchs; Joseph comes oftnest to show how Judah honored the old Joseph,
who bare in his Beryll all tribes names: next Levi and Symeon and Judah but
once: But no name of inferior Patriark; no Ruben, no Isachar, no Zabulon, no
Benjamin: the house would keep the dignity.

9. Some in notation have singular great use, to show the end of Salomons
house; and the hope of Nathan, to come i^ lieu of it, as Melch-j the King is
mine; Ner-j The light, Candle or King is mine. So they swore; (2. sam. 21.
17.) to David; Thou shall go no more to war: for thou shall not put out the
Ner, light, or Candel of Israel. The holy and humble David geveth God that name
in his psalm, 2. Sam. 22. 29. For thou Eternal art my candle; and the Eternal
will lighten my darkness. So Ner-j bears a name for the throne of David;
that shall continue for ever.

10. Melch-j the King is mine, this name tends to the same mark plainly and
properly shevving the belefe to Sophony. David knevv from Moses, and by Spirit
of prophecy, no less then Moses, that his house would not be upright with God.
But one should rule man, perfectly just: ruling in the fear of God. 2 Sa. 23.
There, the learned chaldy Jonathan, thus expounds David's words. The mighty
of Israel promised to place me a King which is Christ, who shall rule in the
fear of God. But Salomons house would be in many very bad; and as thorns to
be thrust away; and to be brent in their place. Salomons brother Natha^,
marked and would not neglect the spech of David, against Salomons house: and
the old Nathans prophecy concerning the young Nathans Son; And the Ebrevv
tongue shows in the names of Nathans posterity, their hope and expectation
of great glory. Here Academiq studies come far short: bestovving many years in
humane works; and taking no time to the holy tongue; which in the very
names of stately personages conteyneth all the marrow of the holy story. An
for so much to know the simple words, for terms touching man, in Adams
tongue, one vveke with good direction would furnish any sage mind
sufficiently. And all should give so much honor to our redemer, as to search to
the bottom, all that could be serched for his fathers after the flesh. We may
be sure that all the sage vvisdome that could be in names should appear in his
family: to ordein strength out of the mouths of Babes and sucklinges aginst
the enemy; that would deny our Lords genelogie. The Jews all, but the hand
laborers, brought up their Maim^ny in Thalmud Thorah.
children from seven to fourtene, in lerning the plain tongue; and all their
time, for some fevv hovvres vvekely; not minding gains thereby; but the delight
to know God. And such have been to heathen the Salvation of our state. And
assemblies of such sagely opening scripture would much edify. And vvher the
King is learned, fevv years would frame universities to that course; to make
thousands of sound skill in the Bibles tongues and matter. So we should mark
weighty matters closly contrined in fevv words; and Sophonyes castinge off
Salomons saing: This shall come to pass: In that day I will make a riddance
of the Princes; and of the Kings Sons. In the days of Josias Sophonie spoke
this chapter 1. 8. Now the Sons of Josias were John, the first begoten in Kings
phrase: otherwise younger then ^oakim two years; but reigning first, he is
first son of the Kindome. Next is Ioakim properly the Eldest: next Sedekias,
who reigning after his brothers son, is called in Kings phrase, Iechonias
son. Now of these John or Ioachas was sone carried to Egypt, and died in
prison: unlamented Ier 22. Ioakim was carried for Babel. 2. k. 25. and died by
the way: and was cast away unburied; to the burial of an ass, as he brent
Ieremies Lamentationes. Sedekias had in the end his eyes pulled out; for
rebellion against the King of Babel; and his children were Killed before his
face: 2. k. 25. when the high sacrificer Saraias father to Ezra was killed.
That story of Saraias death-time will serve anon to great use, for Dan. 9.

10 Of Iechonias God swore that he should die, leaving no child alive behind
him; wherefore, it were flat Atheism, to prate that he naturally became
Father to Salathiel. Though S. Luke had never left us Salathiels family Up to
Natha^ whole brother to Solomon; to show that Salatiel was of another
family; Gods oath should make us believe that, without any further record,
Ier. 22. So God made a riddance of the Ammonean race of Iorams. And we are
closly warned of that in the names Ner-i and Melch-i, comparing them with
Sophonies Prophecy, and the Kings story; shevving the truth of the Prophecy,
That Nathan his house looked for the Eternal kingdoms prerogative. They who
will nor build such Gold from the most kingly family, had great need of
Colyrion to annointe their eyes.

11 Of Salathiel we must consider many poincts, beginning in, Name. Samuel
and Salathiel are both one; Anna the mother called his name Samuel, because of
God Saalti, I have prayed to have him. Now Samuel was borne at the removing
of the glory from Sylo and Ephraim of Joseph's house unto Judah our Lord his
Tribe. So was Salathiel borne at the fall and end of Salomons race; and at the
removing of the glory unto Nathan, that Nathan the Prophet might be called into
mind for old Samuel, who taught of Christ his true kingdom.

12 Compare the contrary Prophecies of Iechonias and Sal.

Prophecy of Iechonias.
As I live* says the Eternal, if Chonias the son of Ioakim King of Judah,
were a signet upon my right hand, I would pluck thee thence. O earth. earth,
earth, hear the word of the Lord: write ye this man Conias childles, a man
that shall not prosper in all his days, for none shall grow from his sede, to
sit upon the throne of David; or to bear rule any more in Judah. Thus all may
see a plain end of Salomons house; and how dangerously those Doctors be
deceaved, who bring Christ from Iechonias. They are little better who take in
hand to teach, and make not this plain to the simplest. The Bishop of our
souls vvil hate such blind contemners.

Of Zorobabel, Agg. 2.
Thus Aggai seals his Prophecy; In that day, says the Eternal of hosts, I
will take thee Zorobabel son of Salathiel, and I will make thee as a signe^;
for thee have I chosen, says the An heavenly translation of the title Ps. 22.
Eternal of hosts. This conclusion of Aggai, compared with Gods oath against
Iechonias, should have stayed us from conspiring with the dogs that despised
Aieleth ha Sachar Ps. 22 The morning star, as our Lord Ap. 3. and 22. and
kimchi there, translate the Ebr. He has not yet davvned to such Doctors.

Of zachary teaching how zorobabel comes of Nathan, chap. 10. 12.
Thus zachary joineth to Aggei; In that day the Land shall lament each family
apart; the family of David apart, and their vviues apart; the family of the
house of Nathan apart, and their vviues apart; the family of the house of Levi
apart, and their wives apart; the family of Semei apart, and their wives
apart.

The notation of Zorobabel.
Zorobabel his name contains the stately prophecy of Babels fall; vvher with
Jeremy comfort Judah. chapter 51. 2. I will send against Babel, Zor-im; fanners,
which Zor o Babel. Mark here vvith-all how the golden head is fanned to
chaff. And this much does (...) Zorobabel contain in name. And when Babel the
house of Nemrod and Cham were fanned by Sem and Iapheth, then comes an Angel
to tell when Christ the signet of God from Zorobabel should be sealed: that
all men might reckon from year to year, how nere they came to the Kingdom.

of there names notation.
As Zorobabel was also called Sa^betzar, glad in affliction; so his eldest son
was called Mosollam: that is: he shall be settled in Salem; as Naasson called
Salmon in that sense, so he is called 1. chr. 3. and by an other notation,
Abihu; Math. 1. The second son is called Ananias; in remembrance of Ananias
the noble martyr, the glory of men; that quenched the fire. He was fitly
termed so; a father to Christ; that quenches Hell fire from burning his
servantes; The same man is called by an other name Rhesa, principal; being the
second brother; Because he that is principal over all, shall come from him;
and make the second brother principal to the first.

Names from famous ancient men.
The name of Nathan David's son might not be given to moo; as no^e but one
was called David, nor any in the right Li^e to Adam: to keep the story from
confusion. But the Like in notation are full many. Nathan is, HE (God) geveth
and Mattatha, Matthat, Mattathias twice coming, and Matthew* n Mat. 1. be all
reme^brances of Nathan David's son; named after the prophet, which promised
Christ to David. So they still knevv that Christ should come of them. So Ianna,
short, or Ioanna long, Iona^ as the lxx express Ebrevv, all be John: by
which name Iohaiada the good high sacrificer was called. So the second
Melchi, Amos and Nachum revive stories, and look for Kingdom, strenght and
comfort; So Elmodam reuiueth the story of Iockta^s Elmodad vvher to avoid loath
some doubling of D. the one is changed. Iocktans house highly angered God;
falling to Babels Idols after many from, Sem Arphaxad, Sela, and Eber, followed
the godly fathers. Therefore God scattered them further to fill east and west
India. Yet Christ would once call all; and one of his fathers shevved that, in
his name, from Iocktanes Eldest son Elmodad. Others have religions foundation,
as lose, all one to Jesus, a Savior; Eliezer, God has strengh, Iorim, and
^liakim God sets up. Her, the vigilant. These contain the ground of
religion; Others touched the lot of the particular family; As Malea fulness,
Majnan, waters of increase; when Roboams house was decaying quickly. Some
express the fathers confort in a son, as Chesly, my glory, Addy an ornament
(...)
and one remembrance of hard lot; Mahath, vexation. All be vvittely named; and
our Lord Er the Aey vigilant, says; ye shall not seek me in vain. An idle
syllable shall not be found in the names of Jesus his fathers. By these
arguments the wicked Jews that reject the Kings record known over
nationes might be avvnsvveared and musselled.

Of Cainan, joined to Arphaxad; which Cainan never was in the world.
S. Luke shows to all learned in tongues that he followed the very syllables
of publiq records: otherwise moo names from one Hebrew as Ianna, Ioanna, and
Ionan, he had expressed in one tenor. So he follows the lxx for Cainan, son,
as it was supposed, to Aaphaxad. the lxx knevv that he never was in the
world; as nether Cainan the sixth son to Sem; Genesis 10. in the lxx; as they
knevv that; Joseph was father but to Manasses and Ephraim: when Jacob came to
Egypt; and not yet to the five added by them genesis 46 chapter which make for Ebrevv
lxx souls; in the lxx. they make 75. which thing also S. Luke follows act.
7. I have in my Consent shevved the reason. But here also it may fiitly be
handled: yet a long discourse must come to open the whole nature of the matter.

Why the lxx hid their mind.
The lxx ij Jews, six for every tribe are named, in shortness lxx. when
Ptolemy Philadelphus ambitious of a great library sent to Judah, to have them
books in Greek; so many transla^ters were sent to Egypt with the holy
volume; which they turned into Greek; but with exceeding departing from the
Ebrevv. And they carried not with them the pomcted Bible, that they might more
freely dally with the profane heathen. One example may be in the years a
thousand and many hundre the^ which they feigned. Of that I have written at
large to Melchisedeck. An other strange departing from Ebrevv appears in Genesis
4 to this Ebrevv vnpoincted:

Halo im tetib sheeth, ve im lo tetib le petach chatathrobets. or thus le
patteach, chatatha; Rebatz.

Is there not upon well doing, recompense? and if thou do not wells syns pay
is nere at the door. Because heathen should not plead hense in heathen manner;
Do well, and have well, they add vovvls thus; if thou offer well, and devide
not well, thou have sinned; be quiet. And this mockage they thought fittest
for heathen scorners of truth. This was the well doing, spoken by God; That
Cain, if he would come to God, must believe that God is; and is a revvarder of
them that seek him. But Lagidae and Chemmis land, would not sone conceive this
sense. Therefore he that sits in heaven would scorn them: and the Eternal
would make a mock of them. For this rule was from the beginnig; Cast not
pearls to hogs; nor holy things to dogs.

An other daliance was this: Deuteronomy. 32. when the only High scattered the sons
of Adam, he settled the borders of nationes according to the number of the
Angels of God. The Ebrew has: According to the number of the sons of Israel.
They savv weighty cause of this dalliance; which I have printed in a
dedication to my Grek translation of the prophets dedicated to the B. of Mentz.

The 2. Psalm speaks in this sort. Kiss the son lest he be angry; vvher
is anger sone Kindled. Happy are all that trust in him. Flesh and blood could
not open this unto the world, only the father which is in heaven should
reveal it. How God so loved the world that he gave his only begoten son, to
the end that vvhsoeuer believe on him should not perish but have lift
everlastinge. At this they would have skoffed; as how often skoffed they the
King of glory in the days of his flesh. Therefore the holy words which
proprely say Kiss the Son, they turn craftily thus; Lay hold vpod dostrine
lest. wicked men should say: David makes him self the Son of God.

So they were in danger of more then skoffing, in a common brag. Thus they
triumphed: as yet records show in Zohar upon exodus; Col. 27. JACOB OUR father
went to Egypt with LXX Souls: to recover the LXX families which cursed Cham
bred by parted tongues for Babels Idolous tower. And the seauenty souls of
Jacob match in value all the families of the world; and he that will rule over
them is as great a tyrant as an usurper to reine over all the world. This
brag all Barbers and blear-eyed knevv; and if they had not hid the truth of
lxx families Genesis 10. and somvvhat in Genesis xj. by two feined Cainans, and by
five Genesis 46. five then not borne, they had been more in danger the^ under
Aman; differing from all nationes in the feast of tabernacles; For that was
their greatest open difference, as the Chaldy Esther touches. The lxx having
thus dealed, and the Sanedrin or Synedrion having enacted a law that none
should alter the lxx. Eusebius praep. 8. S. Luke was to follow the Greek; as a
recorder; and not as a judge both in Cainan; and in souls 75. act. 7. And he
vvrote not to Siculis and Consentinis; but to wise men that had their eyes in
theri head. He who upon act. 7. feigneth that some late man added five act. 7.
and to the lxxij genesis 46. would make all the Christianes in the world very
simple; that could not epsy that; but mar all copies; and Arabiq
translationes. Moreover what will he say to the old Greek Philo; Equallaged
to S. Luke; handling Abraham's 75. years and Jacob 75. souls Genesis 46. and exodus
1. and again but 70 in Deuteronomy. 10. 22. He discanting after his manner tells how
in dalliance souls were 75. in truth but lxx. That number of five then
unborn to Joseph, I vvil not here declare why to him more then to other
enlargement was; and why the number of five: my consent and advertisement
conferred may give advertisement. Further for Cainan one says he had a copy
which had not Caynan. I can well believe it. For vvher the Apostles excede in
vvisdome: as S. Matthew in omitting hateful Ioakim, some wicked praesumptuous
copier would needs amend the text; to say for; Josias begat Iechonias and his
brethren; that is, Sedekias the uncle that reigned after him: Josias begat
Iakim: Iakim begat Iechonias and his brethren. Geneva printed this about 60
years; and with their folollovvers filled Europe with corrupt copies. Yet
Beza revoked the wicked copy; But who can revoke the milliones of the
corrupted. The old consent of the Church having truth, should have stood as
well at the first as at the last: and a town that feared God, should not
brag how they give the best Bible vvher they miss most deadly. And so when
they leave out Cainan here Luc. 3. when God set him in the text: pretending a
vvarrant as praesumptuous that they savv a copy void of that Cainan* they
should not be followed in England. Morouver mark this; that Greeks in Eusebius
make Abraham the tenth after Noe in story: though the 70 would make him the
eleventh: and so Epiphanius makes Jacob not the twenty three, but after the
Ebrevv the twenty two. And I had an Arabiq commen^arie upon Genesis which in
deed followed the lxx but with a note of misli king: But now I have not that.
For one Mattathias Holmes carried my Arabiq books and Bibles Massorite, and
great Plantine and others the best in the world all mine, to Ierne-land; and
at his death told as M. Trauerse will testify and others that they were
mine, yet one that married his sister, dealt worse then any Turk; he sold them
as his books of 100 lib sterling, lent of courtesy; without any penny l^nt for
pavvne: as, Middleburge knovveth. I humbly request the King to call him to
accounts and all others to hold him as he deserves for ever. If my own book
had been left me, Canian from Arabia might be handled. And this much for S.
Luke. Only one bad note of a Genevean calling the Gospel into doubt, I must
touch. He vvriteth how he has a copy venerandae vetustatis, vvher not S.
Lukes men, but S. Matthew's be up unto Adam. He should have brent, not sent to
posterity that wicked work. Some wicked copier, that dreamed Joseph his
family, to be handled in S. Luke, and knovving that Joseph could not have
natural fathers in several families, thought good to frame a Gospel of his
own head: and to leave out the most glorious family in the world. This rule
the reader may take at my hand: That commonly the places in which the holy
Apostles excel in Thalmudique or Attique Lerning, some rude copiers alter
after their own brain. But as any ears can discern Cyclops Polyphemus
Music to come short of Aristoxenus: so any one Thalmudique and Attique what
the holy Apostles left, Rude copiers can never bring that which has rare
vvisdome. So the copy of rare vvisdome must needs be holden the copy of God:
when there is difference betwixt the barbarous and them. And the church in
most Greek copies and old Arabiq, follow the best. And none but void of
judgment and wicked vvranglers, will deny that both testamentes stand in the
original sure enough for copy.

What use the forged Canian has.
The foolish of God is vviser then Men. The lxx departing from Ebrevv truth,
because heathen would not suffer it, show for all Divinity, how the natural
man cannot abide it. Specially they shevved, that in the 75 souls and in
Cainan. And that would our Lord teach Children in his own family; Bringing
irony or mockage for a Cainan that never was in the world. And by a man, that
never was a man, teach wicked men, how they will become worse then nothing:
eternally miserable. So the forged Cainan has great use; and corrupt
translations after corrupt copies should not be sold vnamended, after
vvarninge: such as leave out Cainan whom God left us. And specially because
Jews in every corner be thorns in our sides, and pricks in our eyes, we
should loath help to them; as in wicked blaming the most heavenly pureness of
the Greek testament. And this much for our Lords fathers set in S. Luke unto
David. The notationes of all from Adam to David conteyne the Abridgement of
their story. But the vnebrevved would not sone conceive them. All wise
students that take to Divinity will learn the holy tongue: and such, of them
selves may sone see what the names import. Now Let us look how S. Matthew
shows Messiah to be man, Emmanuel, (as S. Luke) from Abraham to David: and
to be God in man: and King of the Jews. These be the grounds of our faith:
and our darkness will be exceeding great, if we miss in these poinctes. S.
Matthew's text shall be first laid down, with so much of the persons story as
principally argues doctrine for the Kingdom of the world to come: and of
right faith in them, as in us now. The fathers of our Lord the first fourtene
should have their story known among their spiritual sons, to beimitated of
us; and the Kings should be known: to consider imperfectiones, arguing that
Christ his Kingdom should not be as an earthly one. Now the third row, will
force us to examine stately stories of their enemies destruction: and how they
by Daniel seauens, did know when. Christ would come into the world; and
there I must defend our church: and many others against betrayers of the truth
unto Jews: upon that occasion in sundry sorts. They notorioushy vex us for
our Doctors Babyshnes for confunding our Lords holy fathers, with Acabean
Kings of Roboams Ammonean ^ace; and for disagreing for redemption time; and
for Daniels fourth Kingdom.

OF THE FATHERS CITED IN S. Matthew his holy text.
A book of the Kindred of JESUS Christ: the son of David: the son of
Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac. Isaac begat Jacob. Jacob begat Judas, and his
brethren. Judas begat Phares, and Zara, of Thamar. Phares begat Esrom. Esrom
begat Aram. Aram begat Aminadab. Aminadab begat Naasson. Naasson begat
Salmon. Salmon begat Booz of Rachab. Booz begat Obed of Ruth. Obed begat
Iessaj. Iessaj begat David the King. David the King begat Solomon, of her
which vvs Vriaes. Solomon begat Roboam. Roboam begat Abia. Abia begat Asa.
Asa begat Iosaphat. Iosaphat begat Ioram. Ioram begat Ozias Ozias begat
Ioatham. Ioatham begat Achaz. Achaz begat Ezechias. Ezechias begat Ma^nsses.
Manasses begat Amon. Amon begat Josias. Josias begat Iechonias, and his
brethren nere the captivity of Babylon. After the captivity of Babylon
Iechonias begat Salathiel. Salathiel begat as a King for a successor: as
Baasa for Achab. 1. King 20.
Zorobabel. Zorobabel begat Abihud. Abihud begat Eliakim. Eliakim begat
Azor. Azor begat Sadok. Sadok begat Achim. Achim begat Elihud. Elihud begat
Eleazar. Eleazar begat Matthan. Matthan begat Jacob. Jacob begat Joseph the
husband of Mary, of which was begotten JESUS, which is called Christ. So all
the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen generations: And from
David until the captivity of Babylon, fourteen generations: and after the
captivity of Babylon until Christ, fourteenegenerations. Now the berth of
Jesus Christ was thus. When his mother Marj was betrothed to Joseph, before
they came together, she was found with child of the holy Ghost. Now Joseph
her husband being agratious man: and unwilling to make her cause seen, would
have put her away secretly. And as he was thus minded, Behold, the angel of
the Lord appeared to him in a dream sayng: Joseph son of David fear not to
take Mary, thy wife. For that which is begoten in her is of the holy Ghost.
For, she shall bear a son: and thou shall call his name Jesus: because he
shall save his people from their sins. And all this came to pass to fulfill
that which was spoken of the Lord by Esaj the prophet, sayng. Behold a
virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a son, and his name shall be called,
Emmanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us. Then Joseph avvaked out of
sleep: and did as the Angel of the Lord commanded him, and took his wife: but
knevv her not, until she bare her son, the firstborn and called his name,
JESUS.

Observationes.
This narration depends upon the demand of the Persian Philosophers, who by
Daniels prophecy, chapter 9. came to Jerusalem, to seek the late borne King of the
Jews the most holy. Daniel the wise, full of grace, would not miss to take
order that his nation and Susan vvher is rombe was yet honored of Elam, should
reckon most exactly year by year, when the King of glory would make his
covenant, with all nationes. And the half seven, of teaching the Gospel,
was made known; and thirty years for to be a father in nature, Solon the old
and Hesiod noted in poetry; and Sala, Paleg, Saruch, our Lords fathers show it
in practice, fathers at thirty. And for government; Joseph as King in Egypt at
thirty; and David King in deed at Hebron: and the law for the Levites to begin
their office of sad or heay charge at thirty. So all the world as the
Philosophers of Susan might know in what year since Judah came from Babel,
Christ was to come into the world.

And a comfortable light in the air appearing at Susan strange above the
course of nature, could not but move the Persian learned men, to know Gods
counsel, to look for the King, told off by holy Daniel, so long before. For
this cause the Persians Sages come to Jerusalem. But Herod better knevv the
time, as the Sacrificers and the whole nation; of whom none brought exception
that way; none of any striving against the truth, for other poinctes. But
Herod mistoke the nature of the King; and knevv not that God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto him self. To teach Herod, and the Thalmudique and
all the world, what kind of King Messiah should be, S. Matthew vvriteth this
chapter; shevving fourtene, fathers after the flesh to the son Eternal; who
savv his days before and rejoiced; and although they were nor perfitect in
doctrine severally from us; yet heaven, the perfect blessing for the soul,
they had when they left this world. All good men in private life; But the
first King hardly saved him self; after he came to rest. Fourtene be of them:
After them come fourtene Kings: fathers for the Kingdom: but not natural
fathers, to Christ all faulty, for government, and many, greatly sinful; and
not in Gods favor. So, S. Matthew does teach such as knew the law, that Christ
his Kingdom was not of this world. And he leaves Salomons house: whose
natural succession did end with Iechonias: and thence he comes to Salathiel,
of Nathan: and to zorob. who ar (...). And then he turns aside to the Kings
line: vvher be ten. Mary and Jesus make up the third fovvertene: and all be
called in Daniel heirs of the Eternal Kingdom. Great matters depend upon
their story: vvherby allshould be considered severally; as they are severally
set down for that purpose. And the principal matters that touched their
story, shall be handled with them.

Of the first fovvertene; and of Abraham severally.
David the King is once named first, because Herod demanded of the King; and
to David first, the Eternal Kingdom was promised. After a touch that way,
Abraham is set first and the rest in order to make fourtene; vvher the last is
King.

Why Abraham gives the beginning of the story.
The Land of Chanaan vvher the Kingdom should arise, was first promised to
Abraham: and Christ was promised to him first of any man in open distinct
plain words. And he is made father of the heathen; which would follow his
belief; and the heathen might offer first fruits at Jerusalem; as Maimony
notes Bechor. Per. 4. So for Jews and gentiles the beginning from him is
very fit.

Of Abraham's glory.
Abraham is often commended unto us; whose commendation all his children by
faith should gladly know and publish. He left the field of the Chaldeans being
nere Babel, in the most propre Mesopotamia nere the meting of the two rivers
Tigris and Euphrates; and stayed at Charan till he make many Souls; and his
father died there, aged 205. years. heavy by years, who took his journey for
Chanaan, and had not broken off, but by heavy years, and death: then was
Abraham 75. by Moses text: by S. stephans note upon it; by the Greek Philo;
whose (words I have cited in the Concent in Latin:) and by sundry Ebrewes in
Midras Rabba. And reason would tell us that Thara was dead before God promised
Abraham that Christ should come of him: Otherwise as he took journey tovvard
Chanaan; he had not stayed in Charan but by weakness.

An aunsvvear to M. Scaliger.
Because it is written Thara lived seauenty years, and begat Abraham, Charan
and Nachor, M. scaliger fights vehemently against Beroaldus and all that
were before of his mind. And vvher he says, still brethren be named in
seniority; and for the objection in Sem, Cham, and Iapheth; vvher Iapheth is
eldest in the lxx he would have Sem eldest, Cham next and Iapheth youngest, I
aunsvvear; if any vvil be contentions the church of God has no such custom to
S. stephen act. 7. he said: None yet understood S. Luke. Then vvher is the
fault in our wit, or i^ his pen? And in Bathshebaes sons 1. Chr. 3. Solomon
the Eldest is named last; and Nathan the second is named third. And Ioachaz the
second son of Josias both is named first, and called the first borne. And
seeing Ischa or Sara was Harans daughter and but ten years younger then Abraham,
the Babylonian Thalmud gathers sensibly that Abraham was not the Eldest. So
all the Eldest Jews fight for S. stephen; and for S. Luke. And for S. Matthew
that Thara was dead before Abraham received the promise. That still Abraham
might be alone in the dignity of the promise. So M. scaliger might have spared
disturbance of S. Matthew's begininge.

Of Abraham's Idolatry.
S. Paul calls Abraham (...) as he was once Idolatrous; and such an one
Philo and Rambam make him to have been; but by faith he was justified. So S.
Paul disputes upon him; against the Jews thus; what shall we say then that
Abraham our father found by the flesh? if Abraham were iustefied by works he
has vvherin to rejoice. But he has no works to rejoice in before God For
his request unto Sara to hazard her Chastity was a fault; as Rabby Bechaia
upon genesis 15 does make it, an egregious trespass, a gross fault, an exceeding
sin; bred from great mistrust in God; and the cause of Isreal's sorrow and fall
in Egypt. So he has not to rejoice before God: Therefore he was not justified
by works before God. S. James dealing with Jews who then, as now, think
their reverence to the law, and belief in the truth of the story, iustifyes
them, shows that they are deceived. For Abraham and all Godly show good
works, to tell others that they honor God; as Abraham did: in not sparing
his Son. Now, vvher as God said to Abraham; Because thou have not spared thy
only son; I swear, I will multiply thy sede; The very Jews in Midras
Rabba show the meaning thus; by the similitude of a physician, who promises
to heal a great man of a dangerous sickness; and after his promess gives a
most bitter potion; which the patient takes boldly; and then the physician
says; Because you have so taken the drench; I will svvear I will heal you.
Thus the party is confirmed; and not called to a new beginnig. So Abraham's
manifestation of regeneration is re^ompensed, in a confirmation: not with the
fountain of his justification. And still the Prophets require open justice;
and God punishes every sin; but less, upon charity; and in that sense charity
covers many sins. But the fountain was Abraham believed in God: and that
was recokned to him for justice; as David says that they are happy whose
sins are forgiven. So Abraham was justified by faith; beleving that Christ
sbould come of him; and should be raised from the dead, as he knevv that if he
had killed Isaac God would have raised him again. So faith shall be reckoned unto
us for justice; which believe that God raised Jesus our Lord from the dead: who
was killed for our sins: and raised for our justification. These poinctes
the Greek Creed handles plainly; and the Greek fathers* and Porphyry and the
oracles, that our Lords soul went hence to heaven. And Ben Arama, who
says; Christianes believe our Lords soul went to Hell, does the Gospel
great injury. Fot through infinite mention of death and resurrection, there is
never one syllable of going to Hell but in one oration in John six times
express mentio of going to the father. A wise writer never repeates, but
with some addition if any can be. And seeing the going of a just soul to Hell,
is more strange, then (...), the dwelling of God in man; or resurrection; it
had been oftener handled in plain terms, if it had been true. One R. Man a
Jew objected unto me our Creed of going to Hell. I told him it was an heathen
phrase; but meaned, as their Thalmudique to go to Parad^se; and So descending
in Moses Iosue, Judges, Ruth, and Kings, is for (...) and so translated; and
more then once translated (...) ascended. And (...) to go is translated Ascend
and Descend and So (...) is used of passage; as from Nazareth to Capernaum ^aum
in our Lord: and exceeding often in the acts of the Apostles: and Hades, for
Abraham, is heaven or Paradise. For as Britanie conteyneth two parts, England
and Scotland; So Haides conteyneth Heaven and Hell; and in Abraham set in the
beginnig of the New Testament, God would use Haides Luc. 16 and tell expressly
that God praepared Heaven to receive Abraham the pilgrom and stranger, loking
for the heavenly city. and hence the Jews might have learned the meaning of
our Creed: and for Paradise Luc. 23. the matter was plain; that our L. went
thence thither. And no Jews of Modesty would have slaundered our Gospel to
Match mad: to forge beter Keys of Paradise. A pha^tastical Black smith, not a
B^ssaleel he proved. Although this article should here be handled largely in
Abraham the Patron of faith; yet I may be short: because L. Th. winton proves
against Geueveans by Josephus, Ignatius, Justin martyr, Eusebius, Athanasius,
(in his sermon) Cyrillus, Epiphanius, Nazianzen, That Haides or Ca^achthonia to
Godly, is heaven; and he fortifieth Geneveans faith; that by Grek our Lord
went hence to Paradise; and justly rejects Hell grefe from (...), as hated
of Bible, Rabbines upon Ebrevv, and Attiques upon the Gospel. I shevved in six
Greek works left in Germany how lernedly the R. R. F. healed the Geneveans
disease; who denied a going to Haides vvher Abraham is; Luc. 16. and all
faithful souls, to cross their own faith: and deny souls immortality: and
would have all heathean, enemies for f^endes; and all Greek fathers, enemies,
for friends offering help. In that learned pains, fortifying Geneva, L. W.
does confute DD. B. and B. Purgatory and Limbum. And with Abraham's story
Children learn Abraham's religion; for the trinity, Incarnation, and
resurrection; and Paradise hence receiving the faithful, as hot fire, the
wicked; and not to be vvaving with every vvind of Hellish Divinity. The
notation of Abraham is an high father of many nationes handled Romans 4. from
Genesis Chapter 17.

Of Isaac.
Abraham after the flesh begat Ismael: whence came the unclean spirit of
Machmad, and that nation the poison of the world. Yet Isaac, though conceived
in sin, as others, was quickened with Christ: and raised, and placed in
heaven with him; who being vvilling to die, knevv that he should be raised up
again; Faith was in him the stay of things hoped for; and tryer out of
things not seen. In Isaac shall Abraham's sede be called. But Esavv of Isaac
cast off God; a profane man: who sold his birthright for a mess of Pottage.
Isaaks name is laughter; or gladness; the Joy of the world. Jacob in name is a
supplanter; as Esavv complains, he twice supplanted him Genesis 28. He shevved
most plainly his hope for riches, in Christ his Kingdom; when he requested no
more but diet and clothing genesis 28. Job and Paul teach all to follow him Job.
3. 1. Tim. 6. Yea and this Epigramme divine from one profane.

(...).
(...).
Naked came I unto the world, and naked go I into the earth; and what labor
I in vain; seeing a naked and.
Jacob savv a lather, reaching from the earth to heaven; and God was in the
top of it; and Angels ascended and descended by it. He knevv that Christ was
the Son of God; and that Angels should ascend and descend upon the son of
man; if Herod had known so much, he had not sought to kill the lateborne King
of the Jews. The Trinity Jacob knevv; and names one and the same Angel that
vvrestled with him, the Angel that would bless Joseph; and the God of Bethel.
And he taught his twelve Sons not to say: who can go up to heaven to bring
Christ down? or who can go down into the deep of the earth, to bring
Christ from the dead; but to believe that the God of Bethel would come man of
him, and of Judah: and that (...) as S. Paul Romans 4. translateth Es. 53 after
the 70 would pour his soul to death; and be recovered from death; as Isaac in
type; and go from the cross to the father; and that all the faithful should so
do; as the new Testament teaches continually; That Isaac Ben Arama after old
Siphri might be ashamed to say our Gospel believed that either the Prophets or
old just, or our Lord ever went to Hell. The Church never believed that; But
the Deuels here triumph over such teachers. God left his word sure: and
teaches nothing in corners. And they are gods hated for Lerning that dream of
proving rules of faith from corners. The Patriarchs rested in the incarnation
and resurrection. And our Creed Goes no further for (...) is any passage, up,
down; Either term is common for journeys in all autours and all Kind of vvriters
speak so; and Haides most be told incessantly to Babes that it is heaven in the
light part for the Godly; as in the dark part hell for the wicked. The dull
and unthankful vvightes that rave against this, shall see Isaak and Jacob in
Abraham's bosom in Haides; but in their course they have up to Gehennia.

Of Judah and his brethren.
The twelve Patriarchs might have taught Herod of what nature the Kingdom of
Christ was. Ruben savv nothing here but Sorrow. Yet he lives Eternally and
passed from death to life; Symeon and Levy heard of a curse upon their trespass;
Iudahs confession of fault by sham^ found glory: that none but such a Judah
shall have praise of God; and as John the fourth was dearest to Christ, so he
to Jacob most glorious. All the rest had their sorrows for Joseph; when some
said, come let us kill him; as the Scribes, of Christ; and Benjamin became
Ben-ony a son of Sorrow: For loss of his brother; and printed his sorrow in
his sons name: in Ros and Bicrj, Gall and biternes have I for my Elder
brother and Iosep was among his brethren sold for Sicles by Judas advise to
save his life: bus Christ by Judas to loss of life: Joseph in durance betwixt
two, told the one of salvation, the other of death: so Christ told the one in
durance with him, that on the right hand, of joy: and left the railer to perish
with the scribes: and the other rauers: that set their mouth against heaven.
Briefly all the Patriarchs were bishops for their families: (...) using all
care to teach theyrs from their fathers spech what Sem or Melchi-sedek learned
of Mathusala taught of Adam, of the holy trinity: and how Christ by death
should vanquish him that had the power of death. They would not miss to
Catechize their sons in these poinctes: and how our Lord should come of Judah:
the king of glory, the eternal, the framer of the world, of that poor
shepherd, to be a man: to have his tabernakel in us; to look throvv the
vvindowes within our wall. They did feed upon his flesh and blood, comforted in
sorrow by this hope. As Joseph gave (...) to feed his brethren. So all good
Math. 25. give (...) to feed their families souls. In one word (...) never
used before but in Joseph with the 70. our Lord his gracious tongue calls us
to the Patriarchs story: to look to heaven, not unto Thalmudiques Kingdom in
the earth that God cursed. S. Matthew requires so much to be considered in
these Patriarchs; to mark by induction through them all, the nature of the
Kingdom of heaven. And for that use they are so particularly set down.
Otherwise their pedigree was well known from other places. But Christ would
have us to mark that these were the sons of Adam in whom the Eternal
vvisdome delited.

Of Phares
Midras Rabba noteh upon Genesis, how God played delitefully with these sons
of Adam. Jacob was busied in mourning for Joseph, as being dead; Joseph was
busied in his afflictiones, the other Patriarchs were busied in their
marriages, and the blessed God was in disposing counsel how Messiah should
come of Thamar; of Thamar, a Chananean: of Thamar, Judas daughter in law: of
Thamar, by Judah. Again Phares striving to be borne before Zara, (who first
stredched out his hand) has his name of violence, shevving at his birth that
he would lay strong hand upon the Kindome of heaven; and is a patren for all,
as Jacob, to strive for the Kingdom from young years.

Of Ezron.
Fzron is by interpretation the midde of Joy; as Eron was borne at Jacobs
going to Egypt; 215 after the promess and 215. before the Pascha. Jacob knevv
that years 400 from Isaacs affliction which was thirty after the promise,
Abraham's sede should come from Egypt; and the promise was 30 before the
affliction, when Isaac entered six years and 55 after, Jacob is borne; when
Isaac is 60. and at 130 he goes into Egypt so 215 were spent in Chanaa^; and
Ezron was borne at the middle of their hope The notation of his name would
have lightened their darkness who thought that the dwelling of Israel while
they dwelled in Fgypt, was 430. years. The meaning of the Ebrevv text is open
in my concent and aduertisemen to; they that will, may fetch it thence. Where I
brought demonstration that Mose^ should be dead forty before the law, by
Genebrard: who would have Israel 430 years in Egypt. And I cited old Rabbines
moo^ then one, for 215 and 215. as in my Ebrevv work dedicated to Prince
Maurice. That also I turned into Latin.

Of Aram And Aminadab.
The immortality of the soul was taught by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by
spech of their peregrination; shevving how they were strangers in Chanaan;
and looked for an heavenly country. So Joseph, swearing his brethren to bring
his bones from Egypt, shevved that he followed Abraham's hope. And Genesis
ending in Joseph's bones calls all minds to Ezekiels valley of bones, and to
the general resurrection. So Aram and Aminadab in their notation, teach the
souls eternal happiness; Aram is high, as Israel base in Egypt, was high in
hope of heaven. So Ammi My People Nadab is noble, looks to the nobility of
the fathers from Adam to Noe; vvherin all faithful are twice noble. Diodorus
Siculus commends Egyptianes for their resolute opinion that Souls in (...)
had flourishing soiles for the Godly; and a prison for the God less. And Homer
the Eldest, and Plato, and troops, Elder and later Greeks, are truly
reported; to have learned that, from Egypt. Now from Israel did the Egyptianes
learn the same. As our Learned, Clemens, Eusebuis, Theodoret, and who not, a^^
taught. And from the days of Aram and Aminadab, the high and noble in Christ
did the Egyptianes learn, that, (...) as Plato says. The soul aeides unseen,
goes to the Aides, a place noble and pure and unseen, with good journey, to
the good and wise God. Now the proud heathen trimmed them selfs with the
ostriches of Israel, all in mind as Aram and Aminadab in name. So when the
Romans flourished in lerning their best from Tully down 300 years shevved
small resolution for Souls immortality: until Christianes in our Symbolon or
note of faith taught the true foundation of a sound common vveael; That the
just crucified to death went to the father, by the holy phrase: to Haides by
the heathen; vvher Abraham's bosom received the faithful. Abraham's bosom in
Haides, as Josephus or Ireneus, or Iustine Martyr, or Learned Caius teach. For
the work is fathered upon all these. John of Zorobabel and other poor taught
Luke of Anti^ch and Theophilus the Souls immortallitye. And the Deuels at the
last could not retain their auctority for vvisdome but by the same
philosophy. Porphyry a friend of the Jews, and joining with Josephus for
Haides to be the heaven for the godly: and not ignorant what our Creed spoke,
and as good a Grecian as ever could be, and with the Deuels an enemy to the
resurrection of Christ, yet recorded from oracles that Christ went hence to
heaven. His words are vvorthey to be cited Thus the oracle speaks of
Christ: Eusebius. Ap. 3.

(...)
(...)
(...).
That man's soul in Godliness passes all souls; and the soul of the Godly
goes to the rest of Heaven.

In that place of Porphyrie Christ is called of the enemy Porphyrie, (...),
Godly and a dvveller in the arches of Heaven. But he said Christianes were mad
that held him a God: for he knevv not that God was in Christ.

And if he had not known full well, that Plato would have made him ashamed,
if he had denied, (...) in the Godly, and (...) to be a most happy passage to
Heaven, he would not spared wrangling with Christianes, if they had taken
that article in any other sense, then this absolute meaning, that all just go
hence to Heaven. In Cant. 6. 12, My soul has set me in the chariotes of Ammi
Nadib, my people the noble; So all Godly be Aminadab, as the laten translation
speaks; because they teach Egyptianes, that the faithful in Haides, be in
Abraham's bosom.

Of Naasson.
Naasson has a badge of faith in his name; that he should have EXPERIENCE how
Israel should come from Egypt. So they looked to the very year when their
deliverance should be. As since Babel fell, they reckoned year by year, how
nere they came to the kingdom of Christ. And we should not be as Parrets, to
regard the bare sond of name, but to know what the notation told.

Of Salmon.
Salmon shows in his name that he should come into the rest of Chanaan.
Naasson died in the wilderness. But had great glory in the offringes: appointed
first, as father of Christ. To Salmon Rachab was married; who had greater
faith then sixhundred thousand of Israel; for she believed that God would give
Israel the La^d of Chanaan. S. Matthew cites for Rachab private records; as
S. Paul had for him self up to Benjamin.

Of Booz.
Booz comes next; having a name fit for one that would be a pillar in the
house of God. By it Salomo^ terms one of the two pillars; Boos, with
strength, Iachin, he will settle. Ruth was married to him, aged as an Abraham:
and in Ruth leaving country, Kinsfolk and fathers house, lot is revived, who
following Abraham out of country, Kinsfolk, and fathers house was fellow in
the blessinge: by Ruth that did the like.

Of Obed.
Of Booz and Ruth comes Obed, (...) a stay in old years, to Boos.

Of Iessaj.
Of Obed comes Iessaj. His name is substanciall; and is honerably mentioned a
father of Christ; the root of Iessaj. He had many valiant sons; and again
Seruiah his daughter had valiant sons; as Ioab and Asael.

Of David.
Now David is one most glorious. The letters of his make, Christ his name;
BELOVED through Salomons songs. To him Christ is promised with an Eternal
throne. That is; in the world to come. 1. Chr. 17. He, while he was
afflicted, was godly; at rest, he fell; in Vriah, and Bathseba; To be an
example for all that shall believe. And this much for the natural fathers of
Christ; al, teachers in their carriage, of the Kingdom of heaven. And Bathseba
the adulteress* rarely Godly in the end, is a grandmother of Christ; celebrated
in the psalm of repertance. 51. and pro. 31 and all prophets are in the
King^^me of heaven. Lu. 13.

Of the Kings that were not fathers to Christ.
Solomon and his brother Nathan were sons of David, by Bathsheba; But
knowledge of the holy trinity, and of Christ his incarnation and resurrection
made them the best souls. And all who blame them for sudden in^^mities, and
commend the^ not for their heavenly virtues, shall not be of Christ his
brethren. Salomo^ glorified God in his infirnite vvisdome; compa^ing things
visible to show the vnvisible of God; his eternal power and God head; and
speaks of the Eternal son Prove* ^. how his delight is in the holy sons of
Adam: as he governs his peoples state in a most pleasant frame: that the
blindest may see a clear provocation of all to salvation. His great power, and
building of towns* suffered not his heart to rest i^ the night; and his women
only overravvght him: to suffer, and by his charges to build, Idol places;
vvher upon he savv that Gods threat would overthrow his Kingdom; and before,
he knevv from Moses, Deuteronomy. 28. that the Kingdom should be overthrovven; and
that in a strange country Judah would pray looking tovvard the temple Leu. 16.
1 k. 8. and God would hea^^ them. And when by his practice suffering Idolatry,
he occasioned the renting of his Kingdom; and foresavv destruction ^f temple,
city, common weal he vvriteth his Gospel, That al^ under the son is vain,
and the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world; but the promise of the
Eternal throne to David, was for the world to come, that we, should look
for the la^^ judgment. Herod should most carefully have learned this much;
when he first learned the story of Solomon. who was the first and last that
had all this world at will; to show that Christ his Kingdom is not of this
world. And yet this day the Jews look for a pompous Kingdom; as I have laid
down their words, in Ebrevv and English, to Ecclesiastes* And Salomons case
alone might have taught Herod, Pilate, Cesars and concision that the Pomp of
this world is not fit to bread poverty in spirit; to bread morning, to bread
mekenes, to bread hunger and thirst for justice, to find the Kingdom of heaven
when the whole fovvertene pilgromes in this world following heaven in a
quiet private hope could not move Herod, all being our Lords fathers, and all
best* in pri^a^e state, the first turning aside from his live noble in the
vanity of this world, and leaving no hope for others to com nere, should have
warned that 'the King eternal vnvisible blesses men only to his vnvisible
Kingdom that is not of this worlds. So Herod had not Killed the young
children; nor had come to such an horrible death as Josephus recorded, to have
shevved an entrance to his Eternal flames: because he would know what the
Angel and Daniel taught the Persian sages for the Kindome of Christ.

Of Roboam.
Roboam being forty when his father was fifty two; as Jews universally and
old Greeks from them do gather his whole life, might well be known of
Solomon, and touched in Kohe^^th or ecclesiastes whether he would be a
wise man or a fool. A fool he sone proved: and could not rule that which his
fathers gate and mainteyned by great care. And his mother Namah the Ammonite
was not like Ruth the Moabite. And we should not hope for both Lots daughters
to be rare; without special warning from God. Now Roboam was vexed by war
from Jeroboam all his time; and left for Herod a warning that Christ his
Kingdom should not be like his; and that the sages of Persia came not by
Daniels Chronicle to look for such ^ King. Abia his son is well coupled
with him, to give warning of the same.

Of Abia
Abia vvalked in all the vvayes of Roboam: a second warning to Herod that
Salomons house would not be upright with God.

Of Asa Iosaphat and the rest
Asa good, yet imprisoned the Prophet, a Pope father or Bishop from God; as if
he had imprisoned Christ him self. Iosaphat a good King made bad affinity with
Achabs house that Ioram should mary Achabs Daughter. Iezabels also she might
well be. Athalia is the woman. Another Iezabel. Hence Ioram kills his
brethren his own bovvelles: and his Moth^^ Iezabel, as well she might be,
killed the prophets; and the lo^^ some muckhil, that her name sounds,
dreamed to kill the ho^ses and chariot of Israel: Elias the new Enoch. Then
follow exemples for Herod; to know matters to come, by former notoriours.
Two and forty years Omries house was a plage to Israel; and ochozias King of
Judah aged 22. when his father died at forty, in the first year of his regne,
fell by partaking with Omries house against Iehu, fell to be Ben, in the
giltines of the forty and two years. Esra cunning in Ebrevv, when he penned
the Chronicles, littel thought that men would be so barbarous as to make him
aged 42. and two years Elder then his father, whom the propre story of the
Kings written by Jeremy, made aged 22. for the same year. Ezra a repeaters,
pennyng the story eloque^tly, of one caught in the giltines of the family so
long wicked and caught in their sin; in the two and fortieth year. The
spirit which beautified the heavens, would have the story beautified with
Eloquent Ebrevv, that they should be Barbarous that would not mark this to the
bottom. Now Herod might see in Athalia fit Motherhood for Antipaters son.
Such a wife was fit to be Herodes mother. and Herod might know by her end
what his own would be. And any might see that a Kingdom given over by God to
the svvord of Athalia, was not of that throne which God promised to David to
stand for ever. Athalia Destroyed all the sede of Roboams mother the
ammonitilh, that might be Kinge^ for her children by a former Husband; except
Ioas whom his aunt saved, being an year old Who is called of God six time^ at
the lest for propriety son to ochozias; a miserable so^ to a miserable
father. Ioas the Cain killed the Prophet zachary that prophesied of Christ his
Kingdom: killed him, betvvi^^ the alter and the temple; vvher none but
sacrificers might come; The vvight most unthankful, and Gods hated killed him
who s^ father by his wife saved his life. Herod might see and the Pharisees
might see them selves the sons of this Cain Ioas; when they would shed blood
speaking more forcible then Abels.

Touching a forged Table, pretending to reconcile S. Mat. and S. Luke, bringing
Ioas and all after him to be holy-Fathers and our Lords (...); attributing
folly unto the Eternal wisdom of God, to bring the most holy, of the most
wicked: I gave advertisement, and as I here, through Britany, it is well taken.
Other countries also have it: I would wish them also to mark these short
speeches.

They, who vuold make the Apostles to teach all Thalmudistes, that they
sinned, holding Ioas and all after him, to be of Solomon; and not to be holy
men in S. Luke, termed by other names; pass Machmad infinitely in all
extremity of impudenty: and Lucian the Dog would say, the vvheston was vvonne
from his true story; by them who vuold feign twelve men together, to be
Kings of two names; and the one kind never ^eard by the learned of that
nation. I hope D. B. vvil hold this true at the last: and who could ever have
thought, that reasonnable vvightes would ever print or buy such a Table. And
the misery of the family, might teach Herod, that Christ's his Kingdom vuas
not like theyrs. Where Ochosias, Ioas, Amasi as, were all three sent up to
Haides by bloody death, to give acompt before Cods Throne, of their Scepter;
and the pleading there at judgment vuold be as tolerable for the Kings of Acab
by father, as for them, thence by mother; and S. Mat. leaves them out, as a
shame to be named in Salomons house; and unvvorthy of reckoning in the New
Testament. And here he teaches Herod and all, by silence, more then any by
any cries, that none heavenly minded, vuold bring Christ the King ^ro^ such,
or from such a Kingdom, since David vvrote; Thy Throne, o God, is for ever and
ever: the Scepter of thy Kingdom, is a Scepter of righteousness: thou love
justice, and hate sin. Therefore it is most evident, that God thy God has
anointed thee with ^yle of gladness above thy fellows. Yet in the sixth
generation from Acab the wicked, King Azarias found mercy; aged 4 years when
his Father was killed; and was ruled by the Council, about 12 years; and so
somvvhat better brought up, then if he had been ruled by his Father. Yet he
dyed in a Leprosy, for offering in the Sacrificers office, in Christ his
Kingdom; in which office Sem the great by the name of Melchisedek, was
described a Sacrificer in phrase still abiding, as still alive. Azarias should
have learned that of his Father David; and that none of Judah vverto come nere
the altar. By Law death was the payment for the action: for endeavor a
Leprosy brake out in his forehead: unto his death shut up from common company.
And by this punishment of Salomons house, Thalmudiques should have learned,
that Christ should be a King in an higher person and office; as the Eternal,
the brightness of glory; having all the nature of God in him; who carries
about all things by his mighty word* and by himself performing a clensing
ransom of our sins, should sit on the right hand of God. Unto such a King
Herod and the Scribes might have looked, and to an Eternal thro^ for themselves.
And in this age God shevved a shaking of Salomo^s house. In the year that Vzias
died, the glory of Christ filled the temple, with a smoke of anger; and the
posts of it trembled by the terrible earthquake, mentioned by Zachary; at
which the people fled. Then Esaias sees Seraphin in the temple; Angels
representing the Chaldeans vvhic shall burn the temple; and i^ taught of ten
calamities to come afor the last destruction; which I have ordered in tables
in my Concent. These terrors made Ioatham a good King: but Achaz would not
believe, as did Eve, that the Son of God would be a man of a virgin. He had
be^ well plagued by Pekath; and his children were kiled by the Arabianes.
Ezchias was a good King; but after deliverance from Sanacherib famous in
Herodotus, he shevved the Chaldean his wealth; as having some trust in it; and
is told that his posterity (by daughters) shall serve in Babels court. Manasses
that savved Esaias, savv all sin and slavery; Amon was sone killed; holy
Josias, for wicked subjectes was killed: Ioachas died in prison: Ioakim was
captiued* and cast away unburied; Iechonias was kept. years 37 in closse
prison. Sedekias eyes were polled out. And his children were killed; and the
state felt Ieremies Lame^^ations. And now let us come to the third fovvertene.

Who made the third fowrtene;
These be the third 14; Salathiel; Zorobabel, Abihud, Eliakim, Azor, Sadok,
Achim, Elihud, Eleazar, Matthan, Jacob, Joseph, Mary, JESUS* These be called
the holy of the most high Trinity. Dan. 7 The Chaldean golden head was beaten
to dust, the tree had the axe set to the root, the Lion was cast into fire,
for afflicting these. So were used the arms and breast of silver, the Bear in
the trobled sea, the Ram, of Madai and Pares; for not tendering this family;
so the Grecianes whole in Alexander and his sons; sone rooted out* came to
nothing, for Tyranny over the nation vvher these should have been honored. So
the P^olemies in Egypt, the south to Judea, and Seleucidae of Assyria north,
both chalenging Judah, and fighting still with duble camps in Judah, so wasting
it, perished for injuries unto these. These Greeks whole and parted wereall the
Image after the breast and arms. The Leopard and the fourth beast, and the
whole Buck. And seven times be every one of these set forth in the Prophecy of
Daniel. The gracious Prophet so describing the afflictions of the third
fourtene. And Jesus in Daniel cha. 2. is the stone which beats the great
image into dust, one like the Son of God. Chap. 3 one like the Son of man
coming in the clouds: chap. 7. Messiah, or Christ, the holiness of all
holiness. Chap. 9 Michael chap. 10 and 12. And the holy Prophet D. should be
compared with this last 14: touching, Herod Jews and Cesars, that the Kingd.
of Chr. is not of this world. And the whole book which I Ebrevved for Jews,
goes upon the house of David, and chiefly touches these last fourtene; and
may profitably be joined to the Commentary upon the Parcels of these tvuo
Evangelists. And this much for them; profitable, as I deem, for all study
touching our Lords Family. Certain further helps shall be added as time serves.
But thus ends the explicationes of both Evangelists, for our Lords Fathers
and Predecessors in right of Kingdom.

(...)

Positiones explicative of matter tow ched briefly, and first against the
slander of Isaak Ben Arama; sayng untrulie, That our Gospel teaches that the
Patriarchs had no^ the perfection of joy; but were in Hell, and that Christ
went thither to redeem them. Thus he writes upon Levit. 26. fol. 205 of the
Venice Edition.
The first occasion of the Jews fall; and the harm that comes by it;

SAINT Paul speaking of the old faithful, has been mistake^ of Christianes,
some, for these words; chapter XI. V. last. All these, glorious by faith,
received not the promess: God providing somewhat better for us: that they should
not have the f^lnes without us. It is evident through the whole Epistle, that
the Apostle disputes on this; That the Fathers were taught in the old time,
of Christ by the Prophets; in sundry manners; but at the fulness of time, he
spoke by the Son, that God made him Heir of all; by whom he made the
v^orldes. But some Christianes thought he spoke not of doctrine; but of joy to
the Faithful souls gone hence; that the old Faithful had not the joys of
Heaven at the first. Upon that, the Jews infer that we taught the
Patriarchs went to Hell* If they went not to Heaven. And that could not be
true, that Abraham and Moses, so familier with God in houses of klay, should
not have grerter familiarity after their souls were freed from the corrupt
body. This error of Chrysostomes upon* Heb. XI. the Jews uexed.

Ever since Chrysostom uexed them for Dan. 12; and limited times for
affliction under Antiochus; and limited for years 400. Genesis 15; and years 70
under Babel; and so 490; Dan. 9. under Heathen. So that God had limited time of
hope. Ben Arama cited an old work named Siphry; who uexeth us now a thousand
years; whence Machmad might feyn righter keys of Paradise; and strenghten
Arrianisme: as Arius, in Athanasius; that if Christ went to Haides, He had not
the highest joy. And thus Jews help Machmad, by mistakers of S. Paul*

the 2* occasion:
To this day the Jews continue the slander by the Creed; ill translated
through all nationes; and badly expounded to disturbance of all Faith. To
answer them we must show that by the New Testament, our Lord and all just
went hence to Paradise; as the Church did alvvayes expound the scripture; and
the Creed.

the Church of Englands faith:
First England shall be cleared, which allows and comma^deth the R. R. F. Th.
Bilsom Bishop for his sermon: where he handles scripture and Fathers: and
proves by both, that our L. went hence to the high joy.

D. Bilsons proof by scripture from his sermon fol: 219
We have no warrant in the word of God to fasten Christ's soul to Hell, for the
time of his death, that he went not hence to Paradise to the unspeakeable joy
of the Faithful: Thus the R. R. F. commended for one of the best of England;
shows that all authority vvil, that all faithful vve^t hence to Paradise*
And if any Jew say, England holds faith without scripture* Nabal is his
name, and Nab^la his fame for folly haunts him* and for a fool we will taunt
him:

An other invincible proof brought on from Luc 16, for the term Haides, which
in Abraham's and Eleazars joy, is a feasting
Thus from D. Bilsons words a full syllogism may be framed: of truth
unvincible;

If our Gospel place Abraham in Haides in joy, as the wicked in torment,
Haides must contain Paradise for Abraham, as Gehenna for the wicked. Now, as
Josephus, so S. Luke, makes Abraham boso^ in Haides: and the place of torment:
on high both; a^ all Jews confession in Cether Malcuth fol. XI Therefore D.
Bilson proves Ben Arama to be a sla^derer; and himself a R, R, F.
A second syllogism often printed, breaking all Europe. a work of John Cant.
and Th. Winton.

The place which received our L: soul was Haides of the Creed, Ioh; Cant;
and all Greeks:

Paradise received our L; soul, Th; winton, Law, and Gospel, and the old
Greeks and late reformed Churches.

Therefore blasphemous Jews may see they slander us; and we conclude
plainly, the sound in Divinity and tongues as the BB. and Nobles of England,
BB. in their place by the scripture tongue, we conclude, that Paradise is the
Haides of the creed; and Ben Arama slaundereth, teaching that the Christian
church ever beleved our Lord went to Gehe^na. Never went he says the Church,
so beleved we, that he never went; but went to Paradise. And thus our R. R.
FF hau made a syllogism of high esteem: that moved all Christendom to yield
unto them The rarest in France, now ten full years since L; W: made Paul's
tremble at his syllogism, honor and celebrate this conclusion; That the
barbarous translation, to descend to Hell means in learned spech, fitted unto
the most eloquent Greek of the Creed, plain to all Grek countries, a going up
to heaven. The rarest in Holland, the flower of Leyden, follow our
Ecclesiastical Bishops, Other in policy, Bishops of good calling; The best of
Frisia, Westphalia, Steinford, and flower of strangers in Marpurge, and the
whole Churches in Francfurd, and the learned of Hanavv, and the rarest in
Eidelberg, whose letters be at Hanavv, yield unto our Ecclesiastical and
Political Bishops: teaching or allowing this conclusion; And the Senators in
Geneva spoke to the penner of this syllogism; upon demand what our Bishops
thought of their; D: Beza and such, upon avvsvver said, Deus benedicat tuis
studiis; Damus tibi licentiam imprimendi quicquid voles: Also Nicol; Serarius a
principal Jesuit, being thrice demanded, what should be answered for Pope
to Jew: thrice vvrote: the Pope never believed that our Lord ever went to
worse lodging then the Patriarchs had; vvher Athan. Basil, Cyrillus, Theod;
place them* who in all their wise thoughts place them in the highest joy for
men: upon David's Psalms: Basil upon Psalm. 15 in his ^olume. The other in
fragmentes printed by Commelin; and so say the best Divines in Theophyl. upon
Luc 23.

of Athanasius seming to differ;
Because Athanasius says of our Lords Resurrection (...), some thought, that
Porters of Hell were here meant, but they are deceaved. For the words being
of the lxx. Job 38. can mean no more then does the Ebrevv there mean. And
thus goes the Ebrevv in the words of God to Job. cha. 38, 16; Have the gates
of death been revealed unto thee? Or have thou seen the gates of the shadovv
of death? The te^ has no more nor less then this. And this later is Greked as
I cited. The levv which translated Job, was excelent in Poetry; and by veres
might be Prophets scholar: to Aggay and Zachary, and know that Christ might
tell Job thus; Thou have not seen the state of the dead; but in manhood I
will break these bars; by a resurrection that shall never again see death:
as shaking the posts of that house. So Athanas. amazeth none learned. And thus
Athanasius strives not with the syllogism of the R. R. F. when judgment in
Ebrevv and Greek is used; Otherwise a Jew, or one bent to help Machmad for
new keie^ of Paradise, might find a trap to himself, and to as wise as him
self* But none, that can call the Greek Father to the lxx, and the lxx unto the
Ebrevv, will be any whit moved. And if any Alexandrean Jew or Machmadist
took offense at Athanasius to bread new keys of Paradise in despit of our
Gospel, he has felt judgment. Athanasius saing, that our Lord went to
Haides, never means that part of Haides which is Hell, but that part which
the faithful held; whom he placed in high joy. Whither if he had not gone,
our souls should never come to their bodies. And so all the Greek Fathers
answer Arrianes, objecting as a baseness the going to Haides; vvher yet the
faithful souls be, as the most learned Photius speaks in Oecumenius, upon 1
Cor. 15. One D. ignorant of that, spared a truth to the K. of three Kingdoms;
for want of surveyng Hell as aright. But yet he joined to the making of a good
syllogism, the best work that ever was made by our Bishops, the best to stop
wicked slanders of Jews for Machmad, against the Gospel. And all
expositiones of the Creed out of this sense betray not only the Greek Fathers;
whom if Jew and Turk foil, all is gone, but betray also the Gospel; which
will not be defended by Hell-forget torments, rooting out all auctority of
Divinity, of Ebrevv, of Greek, of conscience in speech.

of a third syllogism; which the surveyer in an Enthymeme made unto the King.
The usual Greek must be holden the Credes meaning (...): to Catelthein ^is
Haidou in the Godly, is a passage to heaven by usual Greek. Therefore a passage
to Heaven is meant by the Creed. Ih. Whitg. rightly held Rhodaneanes senseles,
that embraced not the Proposition.

And B. Winton in second thought surveyd that by the Greeks the phrase meant
the souls common lot: to have distinction by the quality of the person;
Parad^se Haides light for the good; Tartarus darkness for the other. For the
assumption, I commended to the K. 145 Greek Epigrammes from all sorts of
Greeks in An^hologie: vvher all countries and ages show uniformity. And so
three syllogismes, the R. R. F. has made against Ben Aramas slander;
Syllogismes all vnvincible, ye though, he himself would go about to
overthrow them, he never could; they be so fortified; for Geneveans good; if
they had one drop of thankfulness to accept it.

I mentioned Scripture, to prove going hence to heaven; and that Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob and all faithful be there; but I hold all Britanes rude, that know
not so much; yet the simple may take these; Mat. 8, Luc 13, John 5, Luc 23, 2
Cor 5. 1, compared with Lev. 26 10, Heb. 11, vvher Abraham desired the
heavenly city; and God had prepared it for him, and Eb. 9 and 10. I cited in
my reply against a Patroclean dream, and worse then Patroclean, for he feared
not, but desired Hades. And now I need not cite mo places. Reason would tell,
that all use little reason, that reason not thus; seeing the Apostles infinitely
cite of our Lords death and resurrection, and never have one syllable of going
to Hell; they be of infinite impiety and contempt of God, that dare write of a
going to Hell; seeing no Prophet repeateth a former matter; but with some
change, if the matter suffered any more to be spoken. So all these repetitions
be stained, by the unlearned vightes, that honor Hell against all Gods
vvisdome; and against Christ his words, that six times in one sermon says, I
go unto the Father; Who would ever think that Christianes should so contemn
God; or Scholars be so barbarous, or men so senseles. Now because the se^seles
barbarousnes pretends English custom from Davus in the marked take
Positiones for the term descending; and the term Hell; then I will return
to the Greek Fathers.

Of two words, Descending and Hell, how the unlearned and unstayd do turn
aside.
The terms Descending and Ascending are usually taken for passages: vvher the
ungrounded barbarous ignorant of usual speech, make ship vvrach of faith. By
these particularitez they may be instructed.

Descending to Egypt, Gen; 262; and Joseph Hurad was caused to descend to
Egypt, that is in our Church Bible: Joseph was brouhht to Egypt; Gen: 37; So
Judah went from his brethren; Ebrevv Iarad: Descended; And so infinitely in
Genesis for passage to Egypt

And usuallie in Iosuae borders of land reching or going from town to town,
are said to descend:

And it would vvearie one to reckon the Judges or defenders phrase of
Descending, for going to an exploit;

In Samuel* Kings and all the stories, Descend is the usual passage; and so
Ascend; as Anabasis expeditio Cyri.

Some time it is translated (...) to go, by the lxx, Genesis 43 5, or (...) 1 Samuel 294. To go, and (...) to pass through. And in double active; to cause to
descend up the Arc; that is, to carry it. And the lxx translate it; to ascend
Ruth 3 3 Io. 13. So Jews and Jew like may be answered: that the term
Descending is plain for any passage; and al passage of souls hence is
ascending Koheleth, or Eccles. 3. for they return to God, Eccl. 12.

(...) is used in the same sense, for passage from Nazareth to Capernaum;
passage to Samaria, Cyprus, Seleucia Cesaria Antioch, from Macedonia: likewise
(...) in Suidas; for passage away. So scripture should muse* sl^underous
Jews and Ievv-like barbarous. For the other word Haides is known to
milliones in Britanie; and both together heard for 3000 years use to mean a
passage of soul to God: and in our Soil they are holden barbarous unlerned,
that daregape against this. Shortly Germany will so stop Jews railinges,
the wicked helpers of Machmad. Let us mark Hades in the New Test.

Now of the word Haides or Hades, Hell in common sense, but never for to
particular, Gehenna.
The R. R F. cited thrice vvher God vvrote Gehenna, Mat. 5, twice, and ^oonce;
in all these places, he cited Hades, as though it had been there* not regarding
the Test. which God gave us: but making a new from his own wise head.

Yet all humane records, all together, all laid in a balance^ are to S.
Matthew's thrice Gehenna, less then the dust of a balance. The true term
Gehenna, being a Thalmudique term for souls place, confirms the Jews
common place, who most learnedly teach, that the Ebrevv never names place of
joy properly; or of torment. Thus both are taught, Lev. 26. If you keep my
commandments, I will dvvell amongst you. In Paradise, says the Rabbin; by a
borovved spech from Ada^s garden. If ye keep not my Laws, my angry face
shall be upon you, Where? before the throne of God, and the Lamb, Apoc. ^4. on
high. Cether Malcuth; as the Jews in propriety of spech express their mind.
For their Midras or fabling comme^taries, they have a rule; that none may stay
upon them. And he that cited them shevved in fevv words, that he was a babe
in judgment. When the Zohar agrees with the New Test: then it is certain old
sage, not late discanters bred the spech. Aben Ezra checketh mightily the common
Midras; and commonly and notably Pref: to Moses; The valley of Hernnon nere
Jerusalem was a place vvher children were offered to Deuels; bre^t to death;
And the old holy Rabbines borovved that term, to express Eternal torment; and
our Lord confirms that, and their judgment therein, for all their vein in the
Law; and layng that down once, twice, thrice, he teach^^h all learned, to
kep that term in all translationes. All bodies shall be cast to Haides; for it
is the grave to the body; the miserable bodies only shall be cast into Gehenna
so the R. R. F. would by Greek of his own making have marred all faith.

To forged textes I need not to answer. The Pentheus in Euripid., that sees a
double Thebes and a double Sun, savv one; but this Pentheus sees none. But
where Haides is in deed, he shall be answered. The builders on the rock were
not hindered by the gates of Haides. They feared not (...), the pass to the
grave, death, and region of souls, as A thanasius speaks. Capernau^i Hades
is in Ebrevv Abne Bor; the stones or clods of the pit; vvher bodies without
life lie, a child might sone see so much Ebrevv and Greek; and Scheol for
building tents cattels and men's bodies number. 16 had no worse. A sound Divine
will not say, that all men dead there, died the second death. Abraham's Hades,
I often handled. That in 1 Cor 15 nothing helps the wicked; there for bodies
it is the poison of Rottednes; Keteb a plagy air; Ps. 91, and Rekabon.
Rottednes ar centron sting in the lxx, the common sting of the body: and Hades
to the body is but grave and death. And there Hades to the soul, as the most
learned Photius in Oecumenius teaches, conteyneth all faithful souls until
the resurrection. wicked and barbarous wrangling with Scripture bredeth
fevvell for Hell. Death and Hades vvherof Christ has the keys, as the Rabines
speak, should not take John before the time, as Arethas says Ap. 1. Hades that
received Cesares and their troops, had been no nevves to the serpents sede to
be souls Hell; a gulf of burial was there meant. When the sea and Hades
gives up the dead, the grave, and air as Origin and Methodius think, yield
the bodies. Andreas says truly, though less fitly for a vision; (...). The
place which receaveth our souls is Hades, there the wicked are Death and
Hades, Apoc. 20, as Arethas lernedly expounds the place; and they are cast
into the Sea of fire and Brimston and second death. Elihu was not bolder to
say: Men of heart would speak as he; then the penner here; that Grecianes and
Ebricianes, sound from childhood, will speak as he; that Haides is never hell
in the New Testament. But their tongues are set on fire from Gehenna, that so
teach; Haden properly to mean Gehenna Hell, either there or in the Creed. None
can deliver his soul from hell, Ps. 89. all faithful shall deliver their
souls from Gehenna. So our Bibles never mean hell of torment: but when
Gehenna is in the Greek. Never in all the old testament; but by consequent;
that death to all the wicked, commonly an hasted Scheol, or hades, has
Gods-hated in Hades the place of torment. An this much against the spech of
Dauis in the market for the true meaning of Descending and Hell. Now let us go
to learned Eusebius. where Haides is most nobly handled and by B. Winton for
Geneva: where they could not help them selves. And now the R. R. F. his
auctoures will confirm for poor Geneva all that their hearts can desire: and
more then wicked Jews vvish to stop their unclean mouths foming out their
own shame, as raging waves of the sea. Liars and railers against all honesty.

Of Eusebius how B. winton cites him: so that he might stop Jews unclean
mouth.
Eusebius is cired by L. winton, speaking thus Eccl. hist. lib. 1. Cap. 13. He
raised the long laid in sleep; and brake the wall, that never was broken
before. Here the raised be the just: and from Haides: and the difference is;
that their bodies never more returned to Haides. That is meant by breaking the
wall unbroken till then. Here Ben Arama might be said to have a brazen hard
face, if he would gather a going to Hell, or the long dead to have been raised
thence: they gather well and truly, that the souls were raised to their
bodies from that part of Haides unto which our Lord went. But because all
heathen should tell what Eusebius should mean: and they would say he m^ant
heaven by Haides: and Eusebius does so expound him self; B* winton might tell
Ben Arama, that Euscbius would tell Siph^i and the Alcoran, that they greatly
iniuried the Gospel; to gather Hell vvher heaven is plainly meant. And herein
B. winton fights for England and Geneveans, and their partakers, that the
old just, and our Lord, went to Hades where Paradise Lies. Genevea^s vvish
Greeks for that; and the BB. of England cite auctoures that will suffer no
other meaning for their words, And the right referend fathers should be the
skumme and scomme of the world, if any Jew Learned in Ebrevv and Greek, as all
ought to be checkers of Bishops, if he could prove they meant hell, vvher the
Auctours meant heaven. perverting so grossly, and so crosly for to make their
Hell from Eusebius Ecc. Hist 1. 13. who means heaven Apod. 3. in handling
the same matter by other terms. So Eusebius does expound him self; that all
might be Hesiodean old sucklinges that should mistake him. Also B. winton
might prove that Eusebius meaned as Jews for souls place by Citing the Jew
Aristobulus, The Peripatetique as agreing with Christianes, and citing heathen
poets of our mind: in praepar. Euangel. li. 13. fol. 401. in these words.

(...) (...). The sum is; from Empedocles in Aristob. The Jew allowed by
Eusebius. says; the Godly going hence are happy with divine vvightes in the
same dwelling. Thus the Athean Jew was a liar and a railer against all duty
by B. W. that blaphemeth us, in teaching that the holy went to hell.

So Eusebius, B. vvintons auctour being soundly expounded stops Jews
mouths; and teaches, that Christanes have Jews and Greeks for them; that
the good departing hence are with the happiest. And Eusebius was to make good
to heathen, the judgment of Christianes in common plain agreement; and not to be
a wicked sophister speaking as to the heathen capacity; and yet having on
thing ready in his tongue: and an other thing hid in his heart. A Jew, or
worse then a Jew should he be that would then pervert Eusebius seeing he
teaches so plainly, that the godlies going to Hades means in Jews phrase;
an adioining unto the Fathers; vvher they are equales to Angels, as Philo
speaks of Abraham; how (...). No Christian checketh Philo for this. But some
had, if they were of an other mind and durst combat. Therefore Ievvee should
hold the best

of Gregory Nazianzen for tartaros and Catachthonia: wherein Epiphanius and
Cyrillus, and S. Paul Phil. 2 be expounded.
If any Buzantian and Jew, angry that Chrysostom drove them there to shame,
vvol be revenged also of Gregory Nazianzene, wished to be Bishop of
Constantines City* and in great election, would quarrel with him for
Tartarus, or Catachtonia, in which word Cyrill of Jerusalem follows him,
with Epiphanius, or upon S. Paul's word (...), answer is ready. These
auctours, which meant that our Lord went hence unto the happy, are cited by
B. Winton, for the right meaning of the creed; who expreslie tells, that no
scripture denies the going hence to Paradise, in ser. fol. 219, often cited,
and in many works, which may stop the unclean mouths of Jews. Now they
shallbe expounded, how they nothing help Machmades friends for better keys of
Paradise S. Paul says, that in the name of Christ all knee shall bovv, of them
in Heaven, or Angels, of them on earth, or the living here, or the lodged in
the earth, of the dvvellers in heaven, or men living, no doubt can arise. The
Thalmudiques celebrate infinitely, the high family and the Law family; and
to their manner S Paul speaks. So because the Psalm 22 entitled the morning
star, as D. Kimchi most lernedl^e expounds the Hebrew title in Ail, does
speak of the morning star, the auctour of resurrection, S. Paul in the ^ame
argument would heavenly touch the phrase. The phrase went thus. Before him
all that descend into the dust shall bovv the knee. And none (other) can
quicken his soul. Before he had said, all the ends of the earth shall
worship him; And the Angels are known for their worship Ps; 97, and Eb; 1;
So S; Paul speak^th no new matter; but speaks of the dead, as the Psalm:
and Esa 26 19 of them that dvvell in the dust: who (...), or by a short spech,
from the body are wholy called, (...), the dvv^llers in the earth; as in the
heat, in Homer cited by B. winton. Esays spech for this place must be
remembered. Thy dead shall be made alive; my carcases shall arise. Avvak and
reioiee yea that sleep in the dust. Now as the Angels are called (...). So
(...) be the men dead; or in heathen Phrase the common Haides as Nazian.
speake^h upon Coheleth. 3. whose words I cited; hov^ there the faithful rest
in joy: as heathen would speak. And therein he expounds the other two
fathers saing that our Lord went (...). And Cyril of Alexandria is evident
upon the psalms, to mean that all the holy went hence to Kingly tabernacles.
And Nazianzen being as one soul with Basil, would mean in this common place,
as Basil meant who teaches upon ps. 15. that David and the old just went
hence to Gods holy hill as Mamony tract Poenit in the end brings the Jews
common opinion; and he was ^he conningest in the Jews affairs of all that
ever they had, Moses Mamonides: that Been Arama vvriteth of him the common saing;
From Moses to Moses, no^e like to Moses. And this great Egle as they term
him, serching all the terms that in the Hebrew touched Gehe^na, yet durst not
bring scheol for any. The citers o of Midrash^th, speaking to memory of phrases
as one c^te^s Midras Tillin for le Sheola ad Scheol vsque, that Scheol is there
Gehenna, such in fevv words may show great unskillfulness in Rabbique studies.
And this much for Greeks against Ben Arama; from those Greeks by which the
learned father. B. Th. winton proves most soundly for Geneva, that which he
affirmed, soundly: That our Lord went hence to Paradise. And no Jew ever
d^rst say, that any old Christian thought of a ^ourney from Paradise to
Gehenna; or of going to Haides after the body was buried. Less thought of
triumphing there over Devels; or that Deuels are yet tormented ^here.

Of an other Iudaique poinct.
A Jew of Amsteldam named Rabbi David Farar, a revolted Christian, as of late
I have been informed, and as it seems, for he is ready in our I a^in scholmen,
and a great sercher of advantages, by our ouersightes, was savvvd in heart,
when he savv my Ebrevv Catechism for R. Abr. Ruben: wherein Nathans Prophecy
to David, was derived from David, not by Solomon, whose house, Ammonean, and
Achabeam came to r^ine; but by Nathan Salomons brother, 1 Chronicles. 3. 5, vvo,
was (...) Father in the flesh, to the Son Eternal: who then was in his
loins. This ouerthrevv all Jews hope: which upon Ecclesiastes I shevved to
be a spiders vvebd. He was further greueth, when I gave him my Latin Concent:
vvherin he savv S. Matthew, not a Publican, but a most eloquent Lavvier; who
in Kings spech, makes the successor, Son; though the predecessor died
without children: as Achab is Son to Baasa; no kind to him, 1 K. 20; and
Sedekias Son to his brothers son, younger three years then himselfes. So
Salathiel the heir, exceeding far off, was son, in Lavviers phrase, as
Julian, to Romulus, in Caesarib. This grieved the scholeman Jew. For he thought
a long time to have vvon the spurs here; to prove that our Gospel could not
be of God: vvher Salathiel and Zorobabel should have Fathers up to Solomon by
Iechonias, and up to Nathan by Ne^i and Melchi: and he was sure to oue^throvv
the Gospel, against all, that grant, that Iechonias had naturally children.
For they who here fail, bring ruin to the narration. In the which, if any
lie or falsehood be found; all the hope of life is gone. Our traitors, vvil not
mark that; but the enemies do observe it: and dravv revolters. The heaven
might be astonished, how the Doctors of the Law could be blind: on Jeremy
22, all savv, that Gods decree passes absolutely upon Iechonias, that he
should die childlesse. Maimonie saw that, tom. 1. tract. Poenit. as in a common
place to all consent: Ialcut notes Gods oths passed; which Moses repentance
could not call back being passed: all note this* Yet the Jew seeing my
resistance, and the Dutch of his mind, desired that I would give him leave to
reply on me an whole after none in open audience; I was content; the place
was appointed; a Great college hall was appointed; and many willingly met:
I gave him the upper end of a long table, and I took the nether; and vvrote all
his reply; that non should give fal^e report: experience taught me that. For
vvher, I once defended the Greek, Act. 13, (...), after a sort 450 years; to be
pure in letter, against Rhemists rejecting the Greek, and following the Latin,
vvherby Pope or we, lost the ground; and were wicked in our foundations; an
ungrateful Libeller, brutish for want of lerning, cauterized for conscience,
would be winning the whetston, writting that I defended the lxx; whom all
learned, these 1300 years, knevv to have i^finite milliones of faults; and I,
who made a new Greek translation, should be thought to know so much, so well
as another; and no wit could tell to what conclusion Papists and I should
theri^ strive. But where our side granted the Pope, that either, the N.
Testament was corrupt, or David never borne, wherbie Pope and Jew fell the
Gospel; I de^ended, that we had a pure N. Testament, and the Remistes
modestly told, that none of their, spoke ill of me, but (...) Lucianes or
Iulianes.

In memory of this I wrote the ^ewes arguments, and still made him weary by
plain aunsweares, and to flee t^still; and then he touched other poinctes, a^
Daniels Image in E^sebius meaning, worse then Iudaique; and Daniels seauens, in
the Thalmudique meaning; and privately since, the text of the N. Testament.
Wherein if I have no more thanks then of the libeller for the years of the
Judges, my labor will bring labor upon labor. This much I wish all to weigh,
that we must defend not only the Hebrew text to be pure, but also the Ne^u
T. and our hearts might blede to see our p^uishnes to help ^euues to hold the
ceremonies never ended; and to place East matters in the West, and precedent
tokens going before the incarnation, to folouu (...), or the days of Christ
his flesh. Of these I will write alitle for Amsteldam and the portugalles,
and our Iscariotes, who for 30 sicles would sell Machmadean notes with the
Bible.

Of the fourth Monarchy.
He at the first would have Syrianes, Persians, Greeks, and Romans. But being
warned how so he left out the Chaldeanes, denyng all the Prophets, left
Eusebius in that poinct: vvher in all Jews held the truth: and comes to the
fourth Kingdom: vvherin since, he has written in Latin a treatise to me and
against me.

Thus reasoned D. Farar.
If the fourth Kingdom, which must be dust in the image before God of heaven
his Kingdom is set up, if this Kingdom be the Romans, ye mistake the true
Christ

But the fourth Kingdom is the Romans.

Therefore the true Christ is not yet come

Br.
I deny the assumption; The fourth Kingdom is not the Romans; But the parted
Macedonianes; a parted Kingdom from the third; and called one in respect of
clayming Judah, to both sides; and by joining marriages still, Syria with Egypt;
and the Romans had been unfitly figured by two legs being one Kingdom.
Besides the marriages together had been no distinctiones. For all nationes mary
within them selves. But the marriages of Seleucidae and Lagidae pass al in all
stories; continued nere 300 years handled in many vvriters, Strabo, Appiane,
Pausanias, Livi Trogus, and moo full many. Besides the Romans had made the
inages legs longer then the giant Typhoeas whom Iuppiter buried in Tinacria
whose head was vnter one mout; and his two feet reached unto the other. But
Gods providence contrived all to a fit proportion of a man's body. The Chaldean
of short time to have a short part; 70 years. the Persianes in breast and
shoulders to let down the arms 130. nere double to the other Alexander and
his captains sone destroyng one another 23 beside Seleucidae and Lagidas, to
belly and as so many ribs: and all sone cut off to have the shortness of a
belly: and the reason is plain, that Alexander was to be sone cut off; because
he would be a God, proud by success; And a Poet would say, he should be cut
off least he would make vvarres for heaven. Now the two legs which
continued double the Persian time; and in marriage; that Cybiosactes a supposed
Seleucides married the late Gleopatra these have a fit proportion; and, strong a
while, are thick thyghes: weaker are the slenderer legs; And when
Antiochus Epiphanes ruled Egypt and Syria, Gyges Asia, and Egypt, and Phayt or
Phaytons Lybia, as Ezekiel told. Chapter 38 and 39. and Polychronius the Greek
whom I gave you with porphyrie and other Grecianes, does him and these
matters rightly handle: when Epiphanes ruled both; then the two were one
Kingdom; and for warning touching his altering of the law, the visiones
were chiefly shevved; and Chapter 7. 8. 11, and 12. agree to the parted
Macedonians to every word of Daniel; and your expounders confess that the
Grecian Epiphanes whole rage is of days 2300* and Rabbag says that the
legs contain the same matter; and that the Kings of the north and south Chapter
XI are the two legs; and for Chapter 12. Josephus says as Daniel, that he held
Jerusalem three years and an half; and your Machabees note that sone after (at
a month) his army smarted; and sone he (after days 45) fell by Gods hand. And
heathen stories agree to Every svl^able; which by chaunse could not fall out
one word by chaunse may fall fit to a matter not purposed; But as an hog may
dig the letter A, with the nose, yet cannot dig Andromachaes work of Ennius;
so heathen could never fit Seleucidas and lagidas to every whit of Daniel
whom they never savv, but that God closly ruled the Balamites to teach Israel.
Moreover it is most senseles to think that the Macedonians vexing your nation,
with double camps in your nation; eating as with teeth of iron; for five
Kings of one side and five of an other, and treading all down by camps
which they coul not eat; it is most senseless in you to think^ that no
prophecy should tell you of these poinctes, but 300 years should be passed
over; and Turk, and Caesar, and south Kings late in Aben ezra upon Dan.
should be meaned. Gehenna i^stly devoureth your nation, as fevvell ready for
it, that despise Gods goodness, leading you so clearly by Daniel unto Christ his
birth, by the Image; and unto his death by Aben ezraes words Dan. 9. That
seauenty seauens of years are from Daniels prayer to Seal the Messiah the
holiness of all holiness. And does not this speak as we, that God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto him self; who in death overcame him which
had the power of death; and the world was subject to the son of Enos, a
little inferior to Angels by suffering death, but Crowned with glory, by
resurrection and ascension. To what son of Enos could the world be subject
being a bare man? what bare man durst the Angels worship at his coming into
the world: by ps. 97. and Kimchi confesses that to be spoken of Messiah
coming into the world. And Sadaias upon Dan. 7. confesses Messiah the son
of man coming into the world; and sitting upon the right hand of God by ps.
110 And vvher your Thalmud denies that upon ps. 110 Iarky and Aben ezra cannot
agree. But Iarki with Sadaias upon Dan. 7. say Messiah is there meant; and the
person there sone returns to the Everlasting: and thence rules all Kingdoms:
coming into the world as soon as the Romans tribute shevved that the
Macedonianes the fourth Kingdom had not one town of government under the
cope of heaven. And how can you be saved despising so great salvation; which
tells by so many stories in Daniel; if this and this for 500 years fall out
as was foretold lok for the redemer in the year that Aben ezra told; and to be
Mes^^as and the most holy by Aben ezra: and to sit on Gods right hand by Rabbi
Sadaias. Thus ye may se that not the Romans but the Macedonianes were to be
the destroyed, before Christ came into the world. And you might read what a
gracious commentary the N. Testament makes upon this poinct; if you have any
word to gainsay speak on.

Farar the Jew.
None but you and D. Iunius make the parted Macedonianes the fourth Kingdom M.
Plancius and the Preachers of this town are against you for Salomo^s house,
for Daniels Chronicle, for the Creed, and for the fourth Kingdom; and hold not
the new T. to be pure in text. And the BB. of England be against you in their
notes upon the Bible for the five poinctes; and specially that ye have no New
Testament from God. For they write plainly upon many places, that your
testament is most corrupt; Jews of us understand English; and Beza far
passes in that: him in latin I can read.

Broughton.
Of all I have vvrirten younger then now by 20 years; and combaters yield;
therefore, do not oppress me by them who reject them. But for the present
Question of Kingdom, you injury many. Not Iunius only but also Tremelius, and
all Geneva in there last Bible, and D. Piscator a very learned man, and D.
Polanus, after that I came to Basil, as once he yielded for Dan. 9. but revolted
again to the groser Olympiades, all these stand to me for the legs; and many
in dutch Homilies, and Romistes after Bodinus full many* and two very learned
of Bretany; and no B. of England that the Prince of the nation made B ever
despised my book of Conce^t; and many Britanes and others think that none
would; but some one counted the skum and scomme of the world.

The Jesuits of Mentz humanelie confessed, that they would grant all that
book; and long ago by two Cardinales advise, would have moved me to have
taken a principal Cardinalship; sayng, that I might do much good to the Church,
if I had a Prince that favored my studies; and I told them, I hoped I had: all
these I must defend against you. A Bishop in syrname, bre^t certain books of
mine, hindering his gains for notes upon the Bible, damned of old. But of him I
complained to the Lords; so B; Cot; exc. brent books comme^nded by the K* and
Arch. Wh.; most highly a little before his death; and others against you;
which none but a Jew in heart or error, would hav^bre^t: and complaint was
made to the Lords against him; and some promised to move the K. for a very
great stipend to teach you Jews in Ebrevv. And for the Bishops of England,
none of the Princes making, or vnlothed deadly as enemy to the Bretish nation
will thank you, forsayng only D. Iunius is with me. Milliones of milliones
through ^urop would show, they agree with me. As you may think Polychronius
and enemy Porphyrie have bred milliones now many ye^es. Thus your citation
of testimony is answered, as untrue: and here your Iev^es whom you lead ^o
Gehenna, should know by one crime, all your treachery; and what a Sinon you
are. You know Virgil, and as Sinon, Incendia mis^es, ridentem dicere veru^,
Quid vetat?

DAVID THE JEW. I will write a book in Latin; that answer you in print. BR.
As the Thracian modestly provoked me in Ebrevv, so therein will I answer,
from Rabbines own syllables. To turn your nation, and you seem little
modest to call me to combat with you in Latin; with you, whom milliones of
our young men could break. I told you sadly that you spoke many words, for
fevv. But never one wise to my hearing. But your work shall be printed, send it
me. And this much for our disputation, which occasioned all the former book.
A book he sent which Hidelberge has to avvnsvvear, or to shrink.

Of the Angels determining Clearly when Moses laws should be buried, by the
burial of Christ.
I translated the Angel Gabriels spech into English, as circumspectly, if
many be not deceived, as any has done into any tongue; omitting no letter
of advantage, for the clearnes of Chrsstianitie; nor wresting any whit; that
a Jew might say I was partial in a Grammar cause; and some thankful DD. of
Oxford thought it duty, to tell others: that I translated the Angel spech,
better then any before me. Yet, some R. R. F. allowed M. Livelie to translate
ridiculouslie, Ievvishslie, and dead lie; and to rave against me, being at the
Alps far off, in Zuit zerland; who to my face, never durst hold himself my
equal: but has been often blamed of me, for extreme want of judgment, in
Ebrevv; Arch. Wh. cannot be blamed: for, M. Live lie told a Bohemian, fellow in
vvagin for Cambridg, that he vvrote against Beroaldus and me. But the Arch.
shevved no countenance to him; but all of high discontent. For heathenisme in
the Persian Kings he shevved him senseles, to astonisment against the last
prophetical books; Daniel, Ezra, Nehenias, Esther, Agges, Zachary. And his
commender shevved him self most wicked, and unlearned extremely to
astonishment: and impudent extremely to athean madness; that would foil the
bishops rightly following the Ebrevv text; For, To Seal sin: though the
margent have; To Finish. Readinges are 848 in the Ebrevv; vvher the text, and
the margent are both pure: and the margent checketh not the text, as corrupted
in Babylon; but both text and margent are from God. Arias Montanus has made an
whole work of textes, as corrupted; and so Plantines great Bible is printed in
deed corrupted. For this I have blamed Arias of extreme oversight: otherwise
the man was of rare learning; but for scripture tongues; I fear not to censure
him. And I have showed in Helue^ia, Marpurg, and Mentz, the reason of the
double reading, and none ever before me, from Jews testimonies, or plain
reason. The commender of a foiler of our BB. so referend, and so learned as the
libeller him self commends them to be, should be counted a brainsick fool:
and receave into his own bosom, all the vilenie of his libel. who the party
may be, that determine I not. But all will determine, that he was a shameless
ass: that whereas the Bishops held the right: the Line word, allways the safe,
and not chect, but expounded by the margent: and so protest in word, that our
nation holds not the text corrupt, in none of the 848 margent readinges (for
they are all of one authority;) he would stain the sagenes of our BB. and
commend a blasphemer eight hundredth forty eight fold, of the pure text: which,
if we betray, the scripture may not judge controversies; as a corrupt judge,
but Rome, clayming to be the Church, must judge, as not erring. This Lonchios
the blind Knight, that can perce the scripture to the heart, with his profane
spear, shall see what he has perced: and the disgracer of the BB. where they
better deserved, then in all their deserts, this Lonchios should be esteemed,
as a blind Bayard; and no^e should for this, gev him honor.

Of Farar the Jew.
Farar the Jew, that openly in a Colldge Hall at Amsterdam, as I told,
disputed upon Daniel to disgrace Christianes: yet never durst blame our BB. for
translating the text. But the libeller is more Jewish then any Jew, to
disgrace the BB. and steals their authority, to prove, that they missed of
the Bibles words; If a stranger had so condemned them; namely that they knew
not what the Bible was: their pleading had been easier. But now a creper into
their bosom, damneth them by their own authority; to make them befoole
themselves, when they deserved rarely well, 848 times well: by honoring one
place, that draws al of the kind 847 with it. So the heart of the fool was on
the left hand. And herein he is Jew is her in rancour against Christian good,
then any rancourous Jew. In these other poinctes, the Jew is equal and a
fellow And the Jews damn him in the former; but in the following, he joineth
with the Athean dogs.

1 In denial, that our Lords supper ended the lawfulnes of sacrificing. M.
Livelies words I cited in my advertisement; how he held sacrifice lawful in
Vespasianes times; So the Jews hold, and none moo; but M. Livelies commender.
So Farrar the Jew, and they, be equally enemies to Christian faith.
Christianes think, that our Lords death ended sacrifice and offering; and we
celebrate our Lords supper, as a seal, that our Lord ended Moses sacrifice;
when he went through the veil of his flesh into the holy, to find eternal
redemption. Both these the libeller denies; he denies that he went hence from
the cross into heaven; and holds sacrifice lawfully continued; as did M.
Lively; the first he did, commending Patrocles.

2 Farar the Jew denies, that 490 years just, were from Daniels prayer, unto
the sealing of Christ. So does M. Livelie: and his commender. More Jewish then
Aben Ezra; who being an enemy, as well learned as ever was enemy unto
Christianes; yet protests this to be most certain (as I touched before, and
often may profitablie;) that the seaventie seavens are, from Daniels prayer,
unto the sealing of Christ the holy of holy. His syllables I have expressed
in copies Ebrew, Greek, Latin, English; in copies, above ten thousand and the
best learned in Christen dome have in print showed thanks; But M. Livelie and
his libeller would be more Jewish then Aben Ezra: and not cite Jews for Christ;
but follow Jews against Christ: and likewise also against all Christianes.

Of the name Messiah twice in Daniel Chapter 9. meaning Christ properly, and
undeniably.
Vhersoeuer the name Christ is in all the New Testament, it calls the reder
to return unto Daniel, specially the two places, vvher Messiah, the Fbrevv
word, is in Greek letters; and that in the mouth of simple folk; as Andrew
the fisher; and the Samaritane vvomans, shevving that the Samaritanes then as
all he Jews, knevv when Christ should come into the world. M. lively
denies Messiah in the Angels tongue, to sound the redemer. Thirty years ago I
checked him, speaking so, sayng that he should be forced to alter his mind. And
then he said: he v^old not stand in his opinion. Yet finding a commender, he
returns to agree with the basest of the faithles Jews, to grieve all
Christian minds, for every place of the new Testament which still calls us
unto the holy name Messiah, or Christ: and unto the holy ministering spirit the
Angel Gabriel: from whose doctrine, we are called Christianes. So the
comme^der of M. lively (...) returned to God, should plead of force, why he
commands a joyner with the grossest athean Jews; vvher their better learned
would be ashamed to Cross Gods word: but in one place or other, would show
that Daniel spoke of Messiah; which word was never simply propre before the
Angel spak it. So his commender commends layng an axe in a lunatique
phantasy, to the rote of the tree of life (...) Deutero. 32. 2 and Pet. 2. And
this much for the Jew Farar; to whose hate of Christ, Iscariot Liuelisequa
joins, who the party is, I will not resolutely affirm. The Bishops, whose
authority he drevv, to countenance Iudaisme, should find him out; as their
deadliest fo: and a blasphemer with the Jew Farar. God Killed the printer of
the libell: against the scottish mist; and if milliones have not paid for it,
the plague and deluge paid. And God called, before Lively, the stationer, charge
man of printing liuelea. Let all mark how God will deal with the vvounder
of all the Bible; vvounder of the holy name of Christ; and stayner of the
authority of Christianity: a vvonder to be extolled in a common weal of
Christianity. And this much for Farar, and Liueli sequa yoked together for
infidelity of Heathenisme in Liueleis and his commender, and worse then
Heathenisme, in madness, putting two Kings betwixt good Artax; and him self,
and cutting of him into Kings two; and of being in Cimmerian darkness for Ezra
with Nehemias; of these I have given aduertiseme^t elsvvher. And because the
defender has no lerning to defend him; and Athean railing framed from his
own carriage, will not now serve, when the mist is turned into a sun: and
he can never avvnsvver to one poinct of a thousand of his errors: and madness,
it is better to leave him to the judgment of God and the King; while the
party may be mistaken, then to press him further. But some think the levvish
well knovve^ For one and the same work, tells that one and the same man
four times skophed the scottish mist; when the Nero hoped to see his own
country on a flame; and joined with Ben Aram for Hell; vvher D. Bilson proved
most substantially that as (...) in African us and Eusebius. Apod. 8 fol. 242 is
the Jews going up, as the scripture speaks, from Babel to Jerusalem. So it
is, for our Lord to go up from the Cross to Abraham's Haides; whence me^ should
think of revenge and the same man is auctour of both equaly bad doctrines A
noble of Scotland noted four times with vermilio^ his scoph; and milliones
now note the poison of his heresy; though D. By. write to the King only of
two, having forgotten him self in his vnvincible syllogism to be a third. But
vvisdome will make all yield unto obedience tovvard King and Gospel; and cover
much mischieff. If God mean not to pluck away all Bishops lands; which if
it be vvithdravven, both universities will be cold. Bishops in learning so far
passing twenty vicares in learning, as in revenues, would make our nation the
glory of all Kingdoms.

Of M. liuelies skill in Iudaisme to translate against Christianity; and what
learning a translatour should have.
I request the gentle reader to mark M. Livelies skill in Ebt. and mine; by
both our translationes of Gabriels words Dan. 9. If God sent me and lent me
any judgment, M. Livelie used little; and his commender as much. In the
advertisement, both our skill may be tried, of him and his learned defendour, I
will dispute no more. His translation will show agreement with Iudaisme; and
fight against all Christianes; and here for all, I will lay down a fevv
rules; to show what learning a tra^slator should have, for Ebrevv and Greek:
and for all arts, to judge of Equiuocationes.

Of Ebrew.
1 He must know that the letres Ebrevv, the 22 which we have, were not
invented by Ezra; as many fabled, but given in the Tables to Moses, and
known of old.

2 The Greek Alphabet, which divided Homers Iliad and Odyssea, is elder much
then that age; of Babels captivity; and it is named from the Ebrevv; and the
Ebrevv much elder then it; and the Characters that gave the name, yet much
elder; and ordered in the Alphabet, for like form; and so ordered in the
Psalms Prove. 31; and six times Lam. in all, 21 times; therefore an Ebrician
would not be found Analphabetus, to learn his, A, B, C.

3 In Noas time Podamim and Dodamim; Piphath and Diphath. Thubal and Chalyb by
transposition, noted the letters to be of old as this day; and many countries
in Heathen named from Noes family; differing by mistaking letters. David
Kimchi notes many such 1 Chr.

4 The lxxii, had old dim copies; as 1000 years old, or more; where their eyes
often missed, by letters like; as yet they be. D. Drus. noted that well in
Ciun and Rempham; a translator of courage would put Ciun Act. 7. from Amos 5.

5. Vovvels had Gods auctority in the tables; as Tiphereth Israel teaches.
Their infinite variety could not be from man; and no man's auctority could
prevail to force a nation to ^ake them; if the prophets in all ages had not
settled them, as their age spoke.

6. Accentes have use to stay spech by the argument; as Demosthenes excelled by
pronuntiation. I brevv accentes teach that to Ebrevves: and that, not Music,
is their use.

7. Elias Leuita doted when he denied that any old grammarianes before him of
renown: said, that vovvels were of old. kimchi upon Hoseas expressly ^elleth,
that Jonathan Coaeual to S. Paul's Rabbi, the sage Gamaliel, had Hoseas poincted.

8. Azarias blames Elias; by that all nationes have vovvels; then specially
Israel; more curious in style, then all Greek poets.

6. Tiphereth Israel says sagely, that all the law is now at this day with
us, in the 22. Letters in vovvels and in accentes, as in Moses time. The Pope,
who believed Elias, warring against them who say the poinctes, and so the
accentes are from God, the Pope beleving Elias, and vvekeninge the authority
of Gods word, herin deals not well: nor any of ours that follow him. No
man's wit could invent 14 vovvels; unless at the first they had them; nor
nedeless variety of poinctes, to great difficulties of grammar, unless autours
had written so at the first. So Benj, my son, hoseas 11 and Math. 2. might as
well be Banaj, my sons. So Gnasaj, God, my makers, for mystical trinity in
Elihu, might as vvelbe Gnosi, my maker. And seeing Jews (...) from Babel, as
Julius Africanus in Eusebius. Greketh, ascending to Jerusalem, followed Arabians
to have vovvels, common, as Mariam and Miriam, Solomon, and Solomon, Abel, and
Ebel, Gog, and Gyg, Cores, and Cyros, it was not possible for late Jews to
persuade one man to rest in many late-in vented vovvels.

10 Two kinds of Chananean Bibles we have now; vowelled, and vnvowelled; so
they had at the first. The one for certentie, if doubt came; the other for
expedition. As we write vnvowelled. So R. Ruben to me; and I to him, in my late
printed works. The lxx used only the vnvowelled; to hide with more facility,
holy things from dogs; when danger was.

What Auctours we have to help translation in Hebrew.
The Apostles translate exceeding much of the old testament, even as the lxx
have done before them. So much must be followed: and the harmony deliteth: and
the Apostles Greek words, in notable places, migh be set profitably in the
margent. Also the Apostles translate much of themselves. Therein they will be
dull contemners of God, that follow not him. Where Apostles translate not,
Arabiq Moses, the Chaldy Paraphrastes, and Thalmudiques in Moses Chair, are
good warrantes. Super intendans are slender in learning that are Babes in this
kind. And knowledge (...) haumeth me^, which spent short life in long
discourses, for matter wherein, all minds know more then any tongue can tell.
The incarnation and resurrection, how it has been followed or contemned from the
beginning: with civil plain carriage in Gods; and Satanean in the contrary,
this contains the sum: and they will lie against this infinitely* or spend
their life in idle Ceremonies and heavy laws, whose souls are not seasonned,
with the exact style of Gods word; Burst with envy toward painfuller student;
and as sure to have pay, returned upon their heads. More Academies of Alamanie
then one would sone see these words just.

Of the New Testament.
All the New Testament is penned from God in Greek. The Reporters that S. Math.
vvrote in Ebrevv, or S. Paul to the Ebrevve; never marked the Greek styles of
both in Attiq forms of spech, that Salem has not. And the holy Ghost never
translated book; but kept still the original, of all that he would have
translated. Here be four Dialectes, the Attiq, Iudean. Thalmudiq, and
Apostoliq. By ignorance of which, much darkness covers dealers with the N.
Testament: as I have co^victed one Doctor, to have shevved ignorance of all
these in one question, so gross, that a man would marveile with what face he
durst challenge any disputation.

Being cumbated,

Projicit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba.
The wise man casts off Attique and when Homers commenter was cited for
hard words; he could not think of Aristarchus in old Didymos; but of late
Eustathius, as whom S. Peter could not read; shevving yet therein all his
learning; as though Eustathius cited his own; and not Heathen, elder the^ the
Machabees. (...) are the plague of quiet opening holy truth. Ignorance of
Iudean Septuagint has apeared strange; when he said; Aey Sheol is Hades; and
the Greek Fathers understood not the lxx. But S. Augustine had great skill.
Forsooth (...) for erroneous Latin; Quinta generatione exiverunt ex Aegypto,
drove him to a tedious disputation. It is strange, that a sage man should
speak, so void from the who le tenor of learning. And vvher S. Augustine
knevv not why the lxx added so many hundred years, and why Mathusala by them
lived beyond the flood; the blind unthankful vvight well might have seen
that, handled first in England. And without observing what Ebrevv the
Apostles translate a new, he cannot hear the dum stones Apoc. 21, tell all the
old story of both Testamentes; a matter precious, and better then all the
Iev^els of the world. Lastly, for ignorance of Thalmudiq: world to come, or
Haides, the world of souls: he places hell in this world; and would rob
Greeks for the one part of Hades. Thalmudiques, compared with Attiques, had
here helped him. The New Testamentes translater should profitablie join to
the Greek, the Ebrevv, set to the lxx, or to their own new translation: and
the Thalmudique to their phrases; and note the Attiq by their auctours; and
Thalmudiq: and join an absolute Table of all these; and regard all in English.

Of the Text pureness. Rabbi Farar.
Your New Testament is corrupted in text. And that your Preachers grant; and
some Amsteldamean Jews have dwelled in London: and read English condemnation
of the text; and Beza in Latin, often amendeth the text. Now you will grant,
it is not of God, if it be corrupted.

Br.
Much rancour is uttered in your fevv words. Matters to have made you a
Christian, plain, is there; which your vveak head might learn; and not put
quarrels as (...), to prove your self full of poison, and void of lerning. I
will for disputation sake, make my self an enemy to the Law, and thus reason
with you. Rabbi Farar will grant, that if the old Testament be corrupted,
God gave it not, and I am sure it is true. For Gods Providence would keep pure,
all books that he would have continued; as when Jeremy and Ezra abridged
many books nedles for all aages; those God would not have more copied; but
left at the Ark, which when the Temple was brent, could not escape: or
otherwise, God would have to decay. But Ieremies Kings, and Esraes
Chronicles, to be kept to every letter. Yet I, as an enemy will thus dispute.

If in Carui Ps. 22, for Caru, all ye Jews, have corrupted all copies this
600 years against the Massoreth, and have in Dan. 8 Chaldean Kings name
profane with shin before Aleph in this notation; Bell enricheth, and not as chapter
7 with Aleph before Shin; Bell gives a fire of vvoe: a^ the Massoreth vvarneth;
if all you herefolovv corruption, God gave not the Law; or you are wicked;

But all eyes may see what you do:

Therefore by you God gave not the Law.
Now Rabby Farrar, what if a Turk thus disputed with you: would you not be
turned into a stone as (...), or, in words unvvise, of Hecate God would stir
diligence: and I dare defend the copies pure Psalm. 22 and Dan. 8. But I cannot
defend your troops. So you should not object unto me our troops. You have my
Latin Concent; there you see my judgment; that the Bible is settled all as one
body; pure, clear, and perfect; Trinity, Sons Incarnation, and Assumption
to Heavens, is the Divinity; Life by the light uniforme in all souls for
carriage, is the humanity; as perfect as Moses in the 613 Laws; No good thing
can be taught; but that is required in the New Testament; No ill thing can be
thought, but that is reproved in the New Testament; Ben Arama might have seen
this, and all Thalmudiques from S. Paul 1 Timothy 1. But Esaias sixth, makes you as
I doles, that have eyes, but will not see. But you vvil be carpinge, as seeing
to much. You could not see Gods vvisdome in geving Zachary the name of Jeremy.
And know you not that, to be most usual in Ezra and Nehemia specially, and
in Jeremy specially; in Nechlemite, and Magor-Missabil. And why could not
you carp at Barachias Mat. 23. for Iohajada. He is never called so in the old
Testament: but you know the notation to be all one. Now Zachary vvrote
Christ's his exaltation, a King riding upon an ass, sold, for 30 Sicles, as a
servant killed by an ox, but destroier of Jerusalem: after waters of life made
to spring from his heavenly Jerusalem: vvher all things shall be used to Gods
glory; horse bridles, as Temples vessels. So Zachary has the name Jeremy,
abridging all his work. And Christianes had never taken the strange word,
but for the glorious exalting of Christ; who did give the ox that killed the
servant to the Roman butchers.

But Envy bursted your panches, when you see all Scripture, and all learning,
contrived unto Christ. And thus I have answered for S. Luke; that Jesus, Fill.
Joseph opinione, est vere filius Eli, etc. filius Dei; and for S. Matthew, that
Iechonias, the man childles, a King, never childless, begat his successor:
and (...)ee (...) or bipotentes Macedonas; parted Grecianes in the Image
legs; and Moses clearlie ended by a set time for our Lords death. And that
which Ben Arama moved, was handled by collateral occasion, that our symbolum,
or mark of faith speaks in Greek, as the Gospel in holy spech: to go to the
Father. I have proved that by a B. D. Bilson, from Greeks abondant, that our
(...) tells so much. And for Scriptures old, I have shevved, that we
Christianes, know your Hebrew, better then your selves, for Massoritiq
exquisi^enes, for preservation of every letter. Massoreth is a rule; and
Massoritique: one cunning in rules that way. And your Jews confess to the
Princes of Germany, that from us ye read the purest Hebrew, that was written
since the Prophets wrote. That confession should make you know, that Chist is
God, who makes Iaphets sons his servants so speak with lip of Chanaan. If
you be of God, you will teach your contreyme^ what is answered to al your
objectiones: at which you stumbled to Gehenna hitherto; Now walk in the light
of Christ: whom God made Heyr of all; Psalm. 2, by whom he made the world, Prove.
8: who being the brightness of glory, Esa. 4. having the name of the Father in
him, Exodus 23. by himself has paid a clensing of our sins, Esa. 4; and
sits on the right hand of God in the highest; Ps. 110. Therefore while it is
said, to day, give glory to our God, the rock Deuteronomy 32.

To the learned Nobility, and all other Chrestianes.
As Jews exceeding busied in the Prophets, serched all means to disgrace the
Gospel, by errors of teachers unskilful; true defenders should raquite them
with grounds of Faith* that would make them in their own harms Gods hated:
and force them, if they have any drop of grace, to bow their knee at the name
of Jesus. For this, I will hear lay down a few rules; with this humility,
that if any can lay down better, he yield, upon occasion, the better.

1
The means to know God, is the Word of the old Testament and of the New.

2
The Jews and we, hold the old Testament, to contain as great wisdom, as
God showed in the frame of the world.

3
There is nothing there, which allureth not, unto the knowledge of God, for
salvation; and all of ability, should spend daielie a parcel of time that
way.

4
As the Prophecies of the old Testament, contain the vvisdome of God; so the
Jews should think, that the unchangeable God being the first, and manifest in
Prophicie, would be the last, and show performance.

5
The New Testament is in every respect, equal in vvisdome, to the old;
although the Greek tongue does not express natural Philosophy in terms
fittet to matter as the Ebrevv; yet the wisdom of God is equal in both. The
old Testament was to show, what wisdom Adam once had. The New Testament is
fittet in spech to the Heathen weakness.

6
In the little book of the New testament, God has sent so great a variety of
pure wise words fittet from the dept of wisdom, to the present matter, that
the language might tell God to be the auctour of the work; and all are worthy
of eternal flames which may spend their life in it; and delight more in wordlie
pleasures, then honoring God for his wisdom to life in it.

7
The small N. Testament from fishers of Galilie, and the tet maker of Tarsus,
and the Physician of Antiochus Magog, will call a learned reader, to the best
Greeks through their troops; from their first to the last; from Homer to
Philemon, and Menander. He that knows Grecianes, from Homer to Menander,
should find, that the little New Testament, will call his memory through all.
One fit for an Archbishopric in England, would be commended with such
knowledge; and the LL. of a Kings counsel; who, by Attiq Greek, are all,
Episcopi, and Kings, as Antigonus for all Asia.

8
The Greek translation of the old Testament, made by Ptolemie Philadelphus
request, by 72 of Judah, and used of Jews, where the Macedonians scatered them,
to South, East, North, and in part to west, this translation, is so skilfullie
cited of Galilean fishers and the rest, that all the wits in the world to
this day, cannot follow their steps, to apply their Greek unto Ebrew. Disdain
not, dulnes is the cause of the blindness. Bishops of Kingdoms should all be
Papae, Popes of their own soil; all (...), Overseers; as in the lxx; All of
any charge be (...). Babes be deceaved in terms. But God deliteth not in
fools. That Episcopus, that knows not what God speaks in the old Testament
in Ebrew, nor what in the New in Greek is too too learned; when he dares teach
others, that which he never learned himself.

9
The Apostles had disputationes with the Thalmudiques; who speak after the
manner of the whole nation upon the 613 Laws of Moses: because the letters
graven by Gods writing, were 613; and the Law and Gospel, has no more matter,
they divided all Moses Laws into 613. A few moo or less they might have made
them; but they saw, they fell out very fitly to that number. To these Laws
all the Apostles write; and most upon these two; Jehovah, thy God, Jehovah is
one: and, thou shall make thee a King of thy brethren. Because the Eternal
Son, who made the world, said, he was the Son of God* the Atheist high
Bishop, in Bishop Eleazars room, rent his clothes; as he, and all after him,
deserve to be rent with wild horses, that after will take his place; or nevve
Jews Policy. So, because he said, he was King of the Jews; they made this
a mean to have him King of the Heathen, and themselves slaves to Caesar. And,
upon this Law, Thou shall reverence my sanctuary; when the word Eternal,
who had his tabernacle in us, expounded most graciously how the Tabernacle
and Temple called unto him; they would make this, death, to say: Destroy this
Tabernacle, and in three days I will raise it up again* And they as he bade,
destroyed the Tabernacle, to their eternal fall, and he raised it up again the
third day. They who know not to what Laws of Moses these things are
penned, can never take delight in Moses: vvherin Kings specially, as David and
Solomon, should spend their time, to be Papes and Bishops of their people; the
King able to confer Moses with Jesus, would be the glory of the world. Now
the holy Apostles following the Thalmudiq plain common places, force all men,
either to despise God in them: or to be cunning in them. And all who protest
learning should be ashamed to have them in their library, and not in their
head. As Bodinus, vvriting of English Laws, was found unskillful, so all that
speak of Sale^ Laws, not brought up in the^, will trip in speaking of the^

10
A fourth kind of Greek the holy most wife Apostles have. Terms of Athenes,
applied unto voices of Salem in most heavenly brightness. (...) the brightness of
glory Ebr. 1. 3. from Esaias 4. is used to break the revolting Rabbines. That is
spoken of the eternal son our Savior; and Esaias al goes upon that term; and
Jeremy and Zachary, alias Jeremy, Mat. ^7, termed by notation, the exalter
of Christ, and Zachariefather to the second Elias.

Very many such pearls, the Apostles have, which I would handle, if the King
give that, which now elv year, upon word, I looked for.

11
Many before me, and I after others, have shevved, that the Thalmudiques have
speches, that prove the Trinity, upon Ecclesiastes, and in my two books in
Ebrew, that, to the Grave* of Hanaw, and the other to the Landgraue, I have
showed that* and Jews without envy speak the best to all the Princes of
Germany. S. Paul says for further matter, that he differs not from the
Scribes, for the incarnation and resurrection.

Touching all that the Apostles have written, this must b^ understood; that
they wrote to the simple of Judah; speaking most plainly to their capacity.
And all their speches differing from Heathen manner, are plain to all
Thalmudiques; and the Apostles tendered the weak of the world; speaking to the
capacity of the plainest: that no City but the dullard, that crucified the God
of glory, would say, the scriptures are hard; and religion is reduced to these
principles.

Conclusion.
Thus I have shevved our Lords family; and questiones depending thereupon; and
I wish all that hope for life, to know first the family of life. No family in
the world, nor all together match it. Geve glory to our God.

(...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

(...)
Faults Escaped.
(*) 3. fol. lin. 7. read seventh month. and line 14. Mich. 6. 3. (*) 3. b. l.
7. sheep (*) 4. b. lin. 30. read, comment. A. 1 a. lin. 11. Addi. B. 1. b. line
20. vowels. B. 4. a. lin. 14. which was. C. 1. a. lin. 16. his tomb. And lin.
25. heavy. C. 1. b. lin. 14 perfited. and l. 25. (...). C. 4. a lin. 21.
ladder. C. 4. b. lin. 13. so. must. D. ^. a. for Math. 25. read Luke 12. 42. D.
1. b. lin. 5. Ezron. D. 3 a. lin. 19. of his name.

D. 3. b. lin. 1. infirmityes. And l. 4. infinite. And l. 15. Lev. 26. And l.
30. mourning. E. 1. a. lin. 14. whetstone. And l. 23. Gods. E. 4. b. lin. 7.
(...). And l. 11 cha. 38. 17. F. 1. a. lin. 12. forged. And b. lin. 22. market.
And l. 32. brought. F. 4. b. lin. 5. would be. And l. 17. knees. G. 1. a. lin.
3. ye that And l. 18. the common. And l. 22. cites. G. 1. b. lin. 7. who was.
And l. 10. webb. And l. 11 grieved.

And l. 15. no kin to him. G. 2. b. l. 28. images. And l. 29. Trinacria. And l.
30. under one mount. H. 2. b. lin. 20. commends. And l. 27. 2. Pet. 2. H. 3.
b. lin. 26. Rodanim. Riphath. I. 1. b. lin. 29. Caari. And 2. a. lin. 22,
Magor-missabib. And, b, lin, 19, is God. And l, 33, requite. I, 3. a, lin, 24,
27, 30. fitted, And l, 30, depth.

In the Greek.
K, fol, 4. lin, 18, read (...)


