AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF PRINCE HENRY.

By Sr William Alexander of MENSTRIE, Gentleman of his Privy Chamber.

EDINBVRGH.

Printed by Andro Heart, and are to be sold at his shop, on the North-side of
the high street, a little beneath the Cross. [1613] With License

AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF PRINCE HENRY.
IF grief would give me leave, to let the world have part
Of that which it [though surfetting] engrosses in my heart:
Then I would sow some tears, that so they mo might breed,
Not such as eyes use to distill, but which the heart does bleed.
As from a troubled spring like offspring must abound,
So let my lines far from delight, hoarse [as their Authour] sound
I care not at what rate that others pryse their worth,
So I disburthen may my mind, and power my passions forth.
Though general be the loss, one shelfe confounding quyte
The Kings chief joy, the kingdoms hope, and all the worlds deligh
And that each one of those, a diverse wound gives me,
Whilst all concurring would increase, what not increased can be:
Yet mine own part when weighed, so deep impression leaves,
That my souls powers all so possessed, no others it conceaues.
How can my heart but burst, while as my thoughts would trace.
The great Prince Henry's gallant parts, and not-affected grace^
Ah that I chanced so long [O wordly pleasure frail!]
To be a witness of that worth, which I but live to wail!
How often have I beheld [a world admiring it]
His Martial sports even men amaze, his words bewitch their wit;
Whose worth did in all minds just admiration breed:
When but a child, more then a man [ah too soon ripe indeed]
Still temperat, active, wise, as borne to do great things;
He reallie show what he was, a quint-essence of Kings.
With stately looks yet mylde, a Majesty human
Both love and reverence bred at once, entys'd, yet did restrain.
What acting any where, he still did grace his part,
A courtly Gallant with the King, a stately Prince a part:
When both together were, O how all hearts were won!
A Sire so loving to behold, so duetifull a Son.
He more then all his state his fathers favor weighed,
And gloried more him to attend, then when elsewhere obeyed.
But heaven envied the earth, that one it so should grace,
Who was not due unto the world, though lent to it a space:
And straight they took their own, who now no more appears,
Even when the Spheres and muses joined, did serve to count his years.
What wit could not persuade, authority. not force,
An union now at last is made [ah made by a divorce!]
Both once did one thing wish, and both one want do wail,
Thus misery has matched us now, when all things else did fail.
We might as all the rest, so this exception miss,
I rather we had jarr'd in all, or we had joined in this.
This the first tempest is, which all this I Will did toss,
His cradle Scotland, England tomb, both shared his life and loss.
O how the traitrous world, by flattring hopes betrays
And scorns the confidence of man, who still through danger strayes!
But most of all the great, when at their fortunes hight
Often huge disasters do confound, not looked for till they light.
That states which seemed most calm, straight storms in waves involue
Who gathered were for greatest joy, with greatest grief dissolve.
That Macedonian Sire, whose victories were ryfe,
The day which did his daughter wed, did part him self from life.
French second Henry to, slain in like sort was seen,
As to triumph there with the rest, death had invited been:
For whilst he tilting was, when all his troops among,
A broken trees flow'n spark did prove more then his scepter strong
That Goth who vanquished Rome, and thousands did destroy,
Even when his bryde bent to embrace, died in his greatest joy.
The last yet first French King for courage, valor, wit,
Who by the sword acquyr'd the Crown, framed for a scepter fit:
Whilst mustring all his might, [being far from fear or doubt]
He fraughted France with armed troops, as bragging all about.
Then whilst his hopes most high, even kingdoms did appall,
Hein that greatest pomp surprys'd, a villains prey did fall.
Thus has it fatal been, confirmed in every age,
That who did meet to act great parts, went weeping from the stage.
Is it that God even then, would hautie thoughts disbend?
Or that such times as eminent, vile traitors most attend?
So when suspected least [O Ocean of annoy!]
Lo, mourning mirth prevented has, and grief encroach'd on joy.
Yet not in such a sort, as with some in times past,
Whose life being often inuolu'd in blood, blood did dispatch at last:
But he (still sacred) went not violated hence,
The glory of a Gallant youth, a pattern for a Prince.
What breast so barbarous is, which virtue can not charm?
No hand, no, nor no heart in ought, could do or dream his harm.
Since by his sight not blessed, all count themselves accursed,
By whom the world was big with hopes, which did not die but burst.
Time did contract it seemed (his course so short foreseen)
That worth in youth, which all his age should have extended been
For O, to what strange hight had his perfections flowne,
Had they as first, still by degrees proportionablie grown!
But superstition then, had statues made of gold,
And some might have Idolatriz'd, as many did of old.
The fates (it may be) stayed what after might him trap,
As in Campania Pompeyes death prevented had mishap:
He happy was in this, which few have been before,
When all opinions purchased were, to venture them no more.
For all persuaded are, as acted in effect,
That he might have performed as much as mortals could exspect.
Thus went he from the world, when with the best thought even,
Whilst though but flourishing on earth, yet a ripe fruit for heaven.
The Lord often twixt the King and dangers huge did stand,
And many so to save, him saved, as life of all the Land:
For scorning all their crafts who ugly evils did found,
What private plots did God disclose, what open force confound.
Yet when he was to part, [O what a wondrous odds!]
Who was by nature the Kings Son, but by adoption Gods:
Naught urging else his end, save nature that declyn'd,
Bright Angels did bear hence that flower, as other flowers the wind,
Both Devils and men when joined to kill for whom God cares,
May draw a star as soon from heaven, as hurt one of their hairs:
And whom he will remove when as their time once comes,
No guards can guarde, no Physic help, one fit force o'recomes.
But ah that treasures loss, which I can not digest
Is still the center of my mind, the point where it must rest:
And each great part of his, which I did erst perceive,
My fancies representing new do thoughts attendance crave.
What wonder though my plaints be thus for him employed
Who my affections free till then, when Virgins, first enjoyed?
And hear me [happie Ghost] that fame may spread them forth,
I vow to reverence and enroule the wonders of thy worth:
That even though chyldlesse dead, thou shall not barren be,
If Phoebus help to procreat posterity for thee.
Thus where that others did abandon thee with breath,
As still alive I travel yet, to serve thee after death.
FINIS.
To his Majesty.
THE worlds affection now this tragic trial proves,
Heaven heap mishaps upon his head, who^ it not highly moves.
But though the weight be great, which makes each heart to bow,
That men when mad, rage not so much as reason does allow:
And that [thryse Royal Syre] since that it first was known,
All by imagining your grief have doubled so their own.
Yet since to many due, waste not on one your cares,
As all your subjects wail your state, have pity Sir on theires.
Least that this grief though great, a greater do out-go,
If from your son turned to your self, you eeke, not end our woe.
A SHORT VIEW of the state of man.
MVST wretched man, when com'd where woes abound,
Ere to the Sun, unclose his eyes to tears?
Whom when scarce borne, one straight to prison bears,
Loosed from the belly, in the Cradle bound.
Then rising by the rod, he does attend
The mysteries of misery at length,
And still his burdens growing with his strength,
Huge toils and cares his youths perfection spends.
Last, helping Natures wants, O dear bought breath!
He must have eyes of glass, and feet of tree,
Till like a bow his body turns to be,
Which age has bended to be shot by death.
O, o I see that from the mothers womb,
There Is but a little step unto the tomb.
S.W.M.

FINIS.

