News come latle from Pera, of two most mighti Armies as well of Foteme^ as of
Horsemen, translated out of Italien, to French and so into Engleshe. And first
of the great Duke of Moscouia and of the Soffy, And ye othere of an Hebrewe
people never spoken of before, found not long ago coming from ye Mountains
called Caspii, with a new inuencio^ of Weapons, with ye number of ye
Squadrons, and with the names of two Earls and Capitayns. And the cause whi ye
great Turk has forbydde^ wine, with mani other news never hard of.

depiction of two groups of knights in armor on horseback charging each other,
with weapons and bodies on the ground

AFter ye particular things alleged in mi writynge, to your lordship, I
thought it good and convenient by this my letter to advertise you singularelie
of certain great, horrible, and fearful things that are reported in this
quarter. In the other letter that I wrote unto your lordship I showed you the
pomp and great triumph at the presentinge of the captain of the sea, unto
the great Turk, The miserye and unhappiness of the poor prisoners. The
dyscords and contention that came by the son of ye Vice Roy of Naples, being
prisoner.

The threatninges made to the Christians. The receiuinge of ye ambassadors of
the Soffy. The pompes, tryumphes, and intertaynementes made unto the^, and yet
dissembled enough with mocking one the other, at their departing.

The presents given. The going of ye great Turk a Huntinge, and al ^^^^r
things written at large, (...) ^^derstod of your lordship. But i^ another
letter of mine I told you of the preparation of ^^ army: of ye brave and proud
Triumph of this Turk and how ye changed suddenly even in a moment (...) a
murning ^or heaven took these things i^ disdain by a great mortalite and
death, which was so much the worse because ye begane in the beginning of Somer.
There happened also afterward i^ the same town (paradue^ture never the like) to
wete, a great and continual derth of al things. A horible and fearful
chance which was upon the Sea called Mare Maius, the loss of the great
multitud of ships the sorrow of the great Turk for the prohibjcio^ of wine to
his loss and hedrance more tha^ a hundredth and fifty thousand Ducates. The
cruelty used toward a Turk that had dronk wine putting him to death by
powringe molten Lead into his throat. The driving out of whores of this town
The prohibicio^ and forbydding that no Christian being married, may dwell there,
the defense that no Turk shall were any Beard. Al ye which things either
causes a great wondering, fere, (...) sorrow, so that me^ say that the great
^^^ke raueth, or yt he do the yt for ye nons, to the intent that his son
Selim^^ returning these forsaid things unto him (might get the favor of the
Genissaries. I have dyscoursed this, and can yet make rehearsal of many things
upon these matters (...) thing of greater importance did pluck me away from it,
and so I leave it of.

But now men shall understand at this time the greatest, the most wonderful and
most horrible thing that ever was herd of. The which partli has so trobled
ye great Turk. and all the rest, that the have left of al other affairs, to
provide for the peril and danger that at this time hangs over their head and
carries them. News are come that the king of Spain waketh a great army,
which shall have for his eide ye Galeys of Gene of Malte, of Florence of Naple,
and of mani other Princes of christendom. And they sai more over that the king
of France will help therein, and that the most part of Christian Princes will
come and aid him in this enterprice, except the most noble state and Sinorie
of venyce which meddeleth nothing at all it. These reporters of news affirm
that there shall more the^ a hundredth galeys, beside other Barks Ships and
Hulkes with out number, which is occasion that they have the army the more. The
which thing not withstandyng men esteem not so much as the ware that is made
beyond the Mountains, as you shall understand not without great wondering at it.
The Tartares make friends upon the greter sea and have made a leage and
frendshippe with ye great Turk, requiringe aid, for they are molested with
war by ye great duke of Moscouia, and prince of Sagodie, of Pogore, of
Smo^egye, of Drossye, of Gazam, of Virg^los^m, of Cerearie, of cham, of
Bieracham, lateli gotten of the Cirenssiens, and of diverse other people and
regions lyenge toward the South. They say that this emperor or duke has two
armies, and is called Iho^ Dw^tillo, a young man of the age of.xxiiii. years,
noble and valiant, and a christian after the institucion of the Greeks, and
presumes that by reason of his blood the empire of Constantinople does belong
to him. And these two armies are about a two hundred thousand horse. They were
not wont in time past to be so strong, nor so feared of ye Turks, for they
had not the use of artillarie in the war. But now they have maruaylous great
preparacio^ their war. He has in wages certain Duch capitaynes. And about
a ten thousand master gonners, and is marvelous well furneshed with harkebuses
and artillery. And because me^ understand that he has so dressed ye Tartarie^s
and brought them to such a state that the ca^ not much more resist him. And
that if yt said Moscouites should be masters over ye Tartares the should
consequentli be rulers of the greater sea, and the way should be open and easy
for them to come, not only to Constantinople, but also to drive ye turk out of
Europe. And because that the said great Turk is assured of this enterprise and
commocio^ of the Greeks, he has concluded and deteermined, to se^d to they
said Tartares a good assystaunce of fiftene thousand fightinge men and also for
this purpose he has sent to the sea, te^ galeyes to pass the^ over. Men make
mencio^ and dought of Mo^datcio, which is a great prince and rular, and able to
make fourscore or a hundred thousand horse. And yet me^ are uncertain whose
part he will take, because he is tributar: unto the great Turk. There is news
also from Africa, that the king of Bugien, the king of Tramece, the king of
Tunts the children of Serit. The lord of Murocho and of Gran with the
Arrabians and other have taken in hand to drive and expulse the turk holly out
of Africa, and to endomage the said turk as much as the may. Me^ know not
well yet in what place they will war. But we shall know it shortly The newys
also is that ye Soffy is in Camp with a great army, and has the Medes to
help him which border upon the Caspian Sea, and of on side neighbor to ye
Hyrea^s, called at this day Correxans and Necotans, with who^ he has made a
League and peace. And there are on his side also the Ibeians, and Albanians, and
also the people of Melibax which border upon the Yndians, and likewise with the
king of Bosphorus, all being people marvelous swift and nymble. In this so
mighty an host and army is also Baicey ye son of the great Turk, By means
whereof, all in those parts is in grate trouble, as well as here, It seems yt
the Genyssaryes bring him the lot of Turki, as Baduget, Nermonia, Alepo, and all the Region lyeng nere to ye Soffe is revolted, All the which particularites
shall be understood moore at large. This news is great, and has made ye great
Turk to muse enough upon it. But above all these maruelus and dreadful news
which are happened there is yet chanced another which has sered and a bashed
generally all me^ which nevertheless seems to be incredible. And yet it is
most certain and that is, that a people here to fore unknown, mighty, swifte,
and marvelous nymble, has taken weapon i^ hand to the dysaduantage and loss
of ye house of Ottoman. They say that Alexander the great did i^ time past
drive beyond the Mountain Caspe nine trybes and a half of the Hebrews which
worshipped the Calfe and Serpent of gold, and drove them a way, yt never sins
there was no news of them, nether knew any man if they were in the world or
not. But because the sea of Sand or ye sandy sea, By a certain inco^uenie^ce
of sa^d Gravel or Beche, swelled and rose so high yt it utterly took from the^
the wai into this our regio^. But now by the mean of the new Nauigacio^ that
the Spaneardes have made, they ar arrived in their country, and have espied out
al their doings. And after that the said Spaniardes had instructed and taught
them they science and knowledge of artyllerye, and gone poulder for Harkebuses
and Dagges whereunto there horses ar marvelous apt and ready, the are beco^ in all things very parfyt. After this, the egged them for ward to take weapon in
hand and to pass ye said Mountain by land. And because the sea of sand o^ the
sandy se did hinder th^^r passage, it appears yt some Spaniard or Italien,
which yet men know not, but not withstanding, some great Astrologian or
Cosmographer taught the^ ye way maki^g some hill plain with her, so that the
made the^ selves a wai veriely, which is a thing of great wonder. Now these
people have two mighty great armies and infinite victuals, they country being
very fertyle and fruitful, and also almaner of preporacio^ for war, and there
are Spaniardes among them so well exercised in the feate of Artillerye, as hand
go^nes and dagges. that is a wonder. And they say, that they will come and
recover ye land of promise, toward the which the first armi is already very
nere, not without great terror and dread of every man, which has been seen of
diverse and nombred, and finally report to the great turk, both the number and
qua^titee as you shall understand here following.

The spies say, not only one, but many, that would see and understand al
things, that the Saugiatari which border upon them and are their neighbors
write and testify, that beside a hundred and ^^o armies there follow other
infinit^ people, as well fotemen, as horsemen, and yt first army is already
arrived upon the limytes and borders of the Turks, and put al to fire and
sword. And their langage is bastard Ebrew. And because me^ speak of it much
hear: I will not forget to speak also some thing thereof worthi to be noted,
and well understood. The Hebreues of Consta^tinoble say that the^ ^^atie
certain prophesies among the which the one makes mention that from the four
part of ye world shall rise a people and come i^to Gog and Magog, and then
shall appear (as they persuade them selves there Messiah in might and power,
and then they shall have domynyon and rule in the world, whereof they secretly
rejoice and are wondrous glad. They say more over that there is a Prophecy
graue^ i^ a pillar set at Podromo, which says thus. A mighty prince shall
rise, whose beginning shall be of small reputacion, but he shall ware of such
force and strength (with the help of god (that he shall bring to nothing the
empire and rule of Ottoman, and shall be the right possessour and inherytour
of ye empire of Constantinoble. And the valeur (...) ^^^^be this Emperor and
d^^e^ (...), which is all ready in great estymacion among the Greckes. The
Turks have a propheci which they sing al ways in weepping bytterly, which
berokeneth and denounces unto the their utter ruin and destruccio^. And
although it sems strau^g to say yt the Turks have prophesies, it is no
meruele: For Balam was a false Prophet. The Sybilles prophesied and were
Paganes. For all these causes the great Turk has forbidden wine, and will that
alme^ go true times in a day to the Moschea, and pray to god for their health
and saftie. And so he prepares.3. great Armies on a gaynst the Moscouites,
another again the Soffy, and the third for to go against the Hebrews of ye
Mountains of Caspii. Within these few dais you shall have other news, wherefore
this making an end I commend me unto your good grace

from Pera the first day of of March. 1561. your faithful and trusty
servant, Andrew Ben accorso,

The descripcion of the first Army of the Ebrewes.
First of all of ye trybe of Ruben a king of very great stature of a fleshi
color, more red the^ otherwise, with broad eyes, called Loroam, is captain
general of all the Armies which ledeth under his Ensaigne twelve thousand Horse
and xx thousand footmen. The horsemen are Armed after a light sort but very
good Harnese almost after our facio^. The crri long lances of long redes very
hard and light, so sharp pointed that the pass through a thing so lightely
that it is incredable. The carry shyld or Targetes of bone, and in stead of
swords certain Courtylasses.

They are aparayled with the color of there ensaigne, and al clothed with
Sylke. The footmen carry Pykes of the same sort with Helmet and Habergyn.
Their Ensaigne is of black silk and blewe, with a Dog folowinge a Heart or
Bucke and a saying written in it which is in our tongue either quyke or dead.

ii. Of the Trybe of Gad.
THere is one called Fares which is an Earl, young and valyan^ not regardyng
this present life. This man has fiftene hundred horsemen armed lightly only
on the fore part and head piece: but this armure is so well tempered and wrought
that it keeps out alance and harquebuse-shotte.

This manner of arminge them self the prince, to the intent the may never
turn there back to run away. The bane also fires and light horses. There are
eyghtene thousand footmen appareled with a kind of sodod leather, of the skyn
of a certane beast, so that no pike nor hargebushe can perle it. These me^
are beastly people which will never fly for any thing, and are very obedyet and
subject unto there prince, they are apparelled in silk. And the eseigne is a
falcon pecking or byllynge with another bird with a sentence that says.
Either thine or mine shall break,

iii. Of the tribe of Asser.
THere is a Marquise of galair called Gooes. This man leads fyftene hundred
me^ at arms, which be all excedynglye well armed, and it out, strong, and
rebust men Their horses be moryskes, the greatest the strongest, the fayreste,
and the best that be in the world. There are also seue^tene thousand souldyars
very well ordered and appointed with lance and Harquebuse. Their Ensine or arms
is a red field with a maid clothed in green, holding a lion in her hand,
and has these words I hope to subdue a greater thing.

iiii. Of the tribe of Neptalym.
There is a duke of Falach, called Obeth, who has under his conduct.xx.
thousand footmen armed with a certain metal like iron but it is light and
hard. They have ma^i good swords, lances and other force Harquebuses and witie
lars. Their Enseigne or arms is a Mermayd in a black fyeld, and they devise
thus. My singing shall not cease until death.

V. Manasses.
OF ye Trybe of Monasses there is a Captayn called Natison which has under
him.xx. thousand me^ appointed and armed with ye skine of a serpent most hard
and stiff The have axes or Pollaxes, Pikes, Harquebushes, and other kinds of
weapons showing a great bravery. And there Ensene or arms is a whit^ snale in a
black fyelde, with a deuyle a boute it. By little and little me^ go very
far.

vi. Of the tribe of Symeon the^ (...) prince of Arsai whose name is not yet
known. But they say he is a devil, great, gross, and thycke beyond
measure, with a statte nose, and both he and his men are so of the stature of
gyantes. And leads with him twety thousand fotemen almost al Alfiers. Which
are also swifte and nymbell, that they will take horses runnynge, they make a
marvelous noise such as no people use. There Enseigne is an Cute in a black
field, and have for there posy. Such is my government.


