A Necessary Admonition out of the Prophet Joel, concerning that hand of God
that of late was upon us, and is not clean taken of as yet: and otherwise also
very fitly agreeing (in diverse good points) unto these days wherein we live.

By Edm. Bunny.

PROVERB. 15.32. He that refuses to be reformed, despises his own soul: but
he that submits himself to correction, is wise.

JACOB. 4:8, 10. Draw near to God; and he will draw near to you: Cast down
your selves before the Lord; and he will lift you up.

Imprinted at London by Robert Robinson, for Thomas Man, and Thomas Gubbins.
1588.

TO THE MOST Reverend father in God, his very good Lord, JOHN, by the
providence of God, Archbishop of Canterbury, one of her Majesty's most
honorable Privy Counsel, Primate of all England and Metropolitan.
IN what sort this land of ours was lately visited by the hand of the Lord for
two years together with unseasonable weather, and so consequently with some
scarcity then, although to say the truth it was nothing so grievous as
heretofore our elders have had, and others then felt, as it was reported: yet
was it so evident and plain in it self, that I shall not need to stand to
show what it was, or how far we were all generally touched therewith: but
especially those that were the poorer sort among us. Our own experience for
that matter was such, that whosoever would go about to make any farther
demonstration of it, might very well spare his labor therein. But whereas in
such case some other way there is, wherein we might be fruitfully occupied,
and to very good purpose, and so as the nature of the thing it self does
require: therein whosoever could rightly and orderly employ his labor, he
might be able thereby to discharge some part of his duty, and do a piece of
good service to God, and his country.

That other way I take to be especially this: that we acknowledge the same to
be sent of God; and therewithal, that so we be touched therewith, as in such
case does appertain. In which because. I did not then know (nor yet do) that
others did labor, therefore the last year, I did endeavor me self to set
down somewhat thereof: which also I finished as is pleased the Lord to bless
me therein. And to the end that I might safelier do it, without offending on
either side, either on the right hand, or on the left, I saw no better way
then to take some text of Scripture, such as belonged to this kind of
argument, and out of it to derive some such instruction as the text it self
should naturally yield. So did I take the Prophet Joel, and out of him framed
this Admonition, that then I praesented your Grace withal. But seeing that
since it has been stayed (I wot not by what sinister means) by one that
undertook the printing of it, and now of late it is come to my hands again,
although that in some respect it may seem to come out of season now: yet
because that in others it does not (nor but little in that) I thought it my
duty again to praesent your Grace therewith.

Which thing the less that it is in it self (in respect of any thing therein
that is mine) the less bold I ought to have been, both at the first and now
also to have offered the same, unto so grave and learned a censure. But seeing
that it pleased your Grace to accept of it then; I might not turn it an other
way now; especially, when as the nature of it in my judgment is such, as that
before I thought me self bound, and yet do, in order and duty to make it
yours. And so beseeching your Grace to pardon, both my former bouldnes therein,
and the renewing of it now again, I humbly pray that Almighty God the father
of lights and only fountain of all good graces, of his great and infinite
mercy, for the glory of his holy name, and in the face of his Anointed,
would vouchsafe so to visit us from above by his Holy Spirit, that we may be
in such sort touched, with this his gentle and gracious warning, and so seek
unto him while it is time, that we provoke no heavier displeasure, but may
attain to his further mercies, and ever stand in his gracious favor. From
Bolton-Percy, April. 6. 1588.

Your Grace most humble in the Lord, Edm. Bunny.

The Praeface to the Reader.
Whereas (gentle Reader) this admonition of mine out of the Prophet Joel was to
have come forth the last summer, That this Prophecy fitteth us also, and
these our days marvelous well.
though (I know not how) it has been stayed till this praesent: by this
means it cummeth to pass, that now I am justly occasioned to say sumwhat unto
thee, not only of the Treatise it self, but also of this late publishing of
it. Concerning the Treatise it self, although it be out of the Prophet Joel,
who was sent of God to his people of old, and about such things as concerned a
special estate of theirs then: yet does it so fitly agree with us also now,
and with the ways that are most common and rife among us that the self same
Prophet may seem as much to have been preserved for us against this time that
now we are in, as he was before sent unto others to speak unto them. For we
also are found in the self same ways, that they were in at that praesent: and
therefore has the Lord for these few of the last years in much like sort
laid his hand upon us, as he did upon them, and yet also does, in very plain
and sensible manner. But as they were senseles, and could not see it, and
therefore turned nor unto the Lord that so had laid his hand upon them: so we
likewise at this praesent have notably been provoked diverse ways to
acknowledge the hand of God upon us, and to turn unto him, and yet
notwithstanding, we have not done it, but either shame with it, or think it
needeles to take such a course. And yet, as at that time God did but with one
hand shake the rod at them, and with the other held forth special mercies unto
them, a further advancement of religion among them, and a special deliverance
from al their enemies: so at this time also we may see the Lord to observe that
course toward us, not only laying his hand upon us, but also tendering and
offering unto us, by many good and comfortable tokens, both a further
manifestation of the gospel, and a better riddance of our enemies, if so be
that we can truly turn unto him. As therefore this call of the Prophet was to
special good use unto them to quicken them up, both to a sensible feeling of
that hand of God upon them; and to cast themselves to be in a redines to
receave those greater mercies at his hands likewise: even so may it be as much
to our purpose, that he should now stir us up unto a feeling of such hands of
God as are upon us; and with all diligence to sort our selves to such a course,
as best may serve to take unto us those other mercies, that now of long he has
offered unto us, (and yet does) in so gracious manner.

But it may be, In what manner it is delivered.
that thou will think, that I have over lightly passed over the Text of this
Prophecy: yielding, as it does, so many good lessons; so meet for our
selves, and for the days wherein we live. But my desire was, but only to open
the Prophet unto thee; and that so briefly as I could: that so being otherwise
less encumbered, thou might the better attend unto him. For which cause
also, after every chief and principal division of the Text, and the opening
of the Method or order of it, I have briefly showed, how we may apply the
same to our selves. Then also, to the end that every one may better perceive,
how far forth he may account, either of the sense that out of any part of the
Text is gathered, or of the Method whereinto it is digested, I have here set
down the Text it self in such sort distributed, or divided into such several
portions as it is aportioned and handled in the Treatise it self: noting also,
in the end of every portion, in what Sections of the Treatise that portion is
handled. A matter that many do little need (such as have the text already, and
can redily turn unto it:) and yet may it be to good use to some others, and
(for that matter) ease them of some part of their labor. And the brieflier and
plainlier that it is delivered unto thee, the better shall thou be able to see,
what it is that the Prophet does call thee unto. Which when thou perceavest,
then it remains, that thou cast thee self to be in a redines to answer his
call.

Concerning this late publishing of it; first, Of the late publishing of it:
nevertheless, that yet also it comes in seasen.
what was the cause of the stay with him to who^ the prin ting thereof was
committed, and who then did undertake the praesent dispatch of it, I me self am
not able to say: and it was much against my will, considering that, as at that
praesent occasion had set me about that kind of labor for the good of others
so did it likewise not well accord with that needles delay that thereof was
made, when the time it self did so justly require it. Insomuch that to that
very end, that is, to give it so ready a course, as to that season did
appertain, both my self of set purpose repaired to London, and there took
special order for the praesent imprinting of it. Then that it is set forth
now, although it may seem to be sumwhat our of season, in some respect,
because it relieth so much on the scarcity that then was, which is in good part
eased now, yet the truth is, that the matter being better considered, there is
no cause why any man need to think, but that yet (in that respect also) it
may well come not far out of season. For though the year that now is praesent,
has brought with it (God be thanked) good store of come, which the other
wanted before: yet did that other so far sink the most men's substance at that
praesent, to get them grain to their needefulnesse, that now they hardlier
have wherewithal to get it, than they had then, though it be cheaper. And so
consequently that scarcity does as yet remain with very many. But howsoe^er
that it is eased: yet is there among us such a kind of sickness at this
praesent, spread over all generally, as that therein (both by the sharpenes,
and strangenes of it, we may plainly perceave that it is the hand of God, and
calls us no doubt unto repentance. Again, as this our Prophet, by occasion of
a famine then, called on the people to be effectually touched therewith, and with
true repentance to turn to the Lord: so, because that this Admonition of mine
has likewise held the self same course, the less that we have yet
acknowledged that hand of God, and the less that we thereupon did turn unto
him by repentance as yet, the more i^stly may it be demanded of us, and the
more (...) occasion has this Admonition still to proceed, and to hold on his
former course. Besides this, whereas the prophet Joel, upon their repentance
did assure them of greater mercies, both a further propagation of the Gospe^^,
and a notable deliverance from their enemies: who sees not, but that to this
end also this Admonition may now very fitly come forth, when as all sorts have
so much business about the advancement of Religion, and when as there is a
general doubt of enemies also, and sufficiently known, that (for the gospel)
they are not a little incensed against us? These reasons therefore moving, I
have thought good, now to take some further order for the publishing of this
Admonition: and therewithal to show thee, what reasons moved me thereunto.

And now what remains, but that, What benefit to take by the reading of it
as the Prophet does call upon us, God himself has notably provoked, and our
own estate does much require: even so we address our selves to answer this
gracious calling of his, in stirring up our selves to a sensible feeling of
that hand of God upon us, and, in turning our selves unto him in true
repentance? Of these things I thought good a little to forewarne thee (gentle
Reader): leaving thee now at thy good pleasure, to the Treatise it self, and
wishing thee to use it to the glory of him who so lovingly calls, and to the
benefit of thy self whom he would in no wise have to miscary: which that thou
may the better do, I humbly beseech God to vouchsafe thee his blessing, and
the direction of his holy spirit: and so I bid thee well to fare in Jesus
Christ.

The text of the Prophet Joel, in such sort distributed, as it is handled in
the Admonition following.
Sect. 1, 2.
1 THE word of the Lord that came to Joel, the son of Pethuel.
Sect. 3, 8.
2 Hark ye this, o Elders, and hearken ye all inhabitants of the land,
whether such a thing has been in your days, or yet in the days of your
fathers. 3 Tell you your children of it, and let your children, show to their
children, and their children to another generation. 4 That which is left of the
Palmerwoorm, has the Grasshopper eaten; and the residue of the grasshopper has
the canker-woorm eaten; and the residue of the canker-woorme has the
caterpiller eaten. 5 Awake ye drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of
wine, because of the new wine: for it shall be pullea from your mouth. 6 Yea,
a nation comes upon my land, mighty and without number, whose teeth are like
the teeth of a Lion, and he has the jaws of a great Lion. 7 He makes my vine
wast, and pilleth of the bark of my fig tree: he makes it bare and casts
it down: the branches thereof are made white. 8 Moorne like a vir-gin girded
with sackcloth for the husband of her youth. 9 The meat-offring and the
drink-offring is cut of from the house of the Lord: the Priests, the Lords
ministers mourn. 10 The field is wasted; the land moorneth: for the corn is
destroyed: the new wine is dried up, and the oil is decayed. 11 Be ye
ashamed, o husbandmen: howl o ye vine-dressers for the wheat, and for the
barley, because the harvest of the field is perished: 12 The vine is dried up,
and the fig tree is decayed: the Pomegranate-tree, and the Palm Tree, and the
Aple-tree, even all the trees of the field are withered: surely the joy is
withered away from the sons of men. 13 Gird your selves and lament, ye
Priests: howl ye ministers of the alter: come, and lie all night in sak-cloth,
ye ministers of my God: for the meat-offring, and the drink-offring, is taken
away from the house of our God. 14 Sanctify you a fast: call a solemn
assembly: gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants of the land into the house
of the Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord.
Sect. 9, 10.
15 Alas: for the day, for the day of the Lord is at hand, and it comes as a
destruction from the Almighty. 16 Is not the meat cut of before our eyes; and
joy, and gladness from the house of our God? 17 The seed is rotten under their
clods: the Garners are destroyed: the barnes are broken down, for the corn is
whithered. 18 How did the beasts moorn? the herdes of cattle pine away,
because they have no pasture, and the flocks of sheep are destroyed. 19 O
Lord, to thee will I cry: for the fire has devoured the pastures of the
wilderness, and the flame has burnt up all the trees of the field. 20 The
beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of the waters are
dried up, and the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.
Sect. 11, 12.
1 Blow the trumpet in Zion, and shout in mine holy mountain: let all the
inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord is come: for it is at
hand. 2 A day of darkness, and of blackenes, a day of clouds, and obscurity,
as the morning cloud spread upon the mountains, so is there a great people,
and a mighty: there was none like it from the beginning, neither shall be any
more after it, unto the years of many generations. 3 A fire deuoureth before
him, and behind him a flame burns up: the land is as the garden of Eden
before him, and behind him a desolate wilderness, so that nothing shall escape
him. 4 The beholding of him is like the sight of horses, and like the horsemen,
so shall they run. 5 Like the noise of charets in the tops of the mountains
shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble,
and as a mighty people prepared to battle. 6 Before his face shall the people
tremble: all faces shall gather blacknes. 7 They shall run like strong men, and
go up to the wall like men of war, and every man shall go forward in his
ways, and they shall not stay in their paths. 8 Neither shall one trust
another, but every one shall walk in his path: and when they fall upon the
sword they shall not be wounded. 9 They shall run to and fro in the citie^
they shall run upon the wall: they shall clime up upon the houses, and enter in
at the windows like a thief. 10 The earth shall tremble before him, the
heavens shall shake, the sun and the Moon shall be dark, and the stars
shall withdraw their shining. 11 And the Lord shall utter his voice before his
host: for his host is very great: for he is strong that does his word: for the
day of the Lord is great and very terrible, and who can abide it? 12 Therefore
also now the Lord says, Turn you unto me withal your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. 13 And rent your heart, and not
your clothes: and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.
14 Who knows if he will return and repent and leave a blessing behind him,
eve^ a meat-offring, and a drink-offring unto the Lord your God. 15 Blow the
trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly. 16 Gather the
people: sanctify the congregation, gather the Elders: assemble the children,
and those that sucked the breasts: let the bride-grome go forth of his
chamber, and the bride out of her bride-chamber. 17 Let the Priests, the
ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say,
Spare thy people, O Lord and give not thine heritage into reproach, that the
heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should they say among the people,
where is their God? 18 Then will the Lord be ielous over his land and spare his
people. 19 Yea, the Lord will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I will
send you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be satisfied therewith: and I
will no more make you a reproach among the heathen. 20 But I will remove far of
from you the Northren army, and I will drive him into a land, baren, and
desolate with his face toward the East sea, and his end to the uttermost sea,
and his stincke shall come up, and his corruption shall ascend, Or, although he
has exalted himself to do this.
because he exalted himself.
Sect. 16, 17.
21 Fear not, O land, but be glad, and rejoice: for the Lord will do great
things. 22 Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field for the pastures of the
wilderness are grene; for the tree bears her fruit: the fig tree and the vine
do give the^r force. 23 Be glad then ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the
Lord your God: for he has given you the rain of righteousness, and he will
cause to come down for you the rain even the first rain, and the latter rain
in the first month. 24 And the barns shall be full of wheat, and the presses
shall abound with wine and oil. 25 And I will render you the years that the
grasshopper has eaten, the canker-woorm, and the caterpiller, and the
palmerwoorm, my great host which I sent among you. 26 So you shall eat and be
satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God, that has dealt marvelous
with you: and my people shall never be ashamed. 27 Ye shall also know that I
am in the mid of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God and none other, and my
people shall never be ashamed.
Sect. 18, 19.
28 And afterward will I power out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons
and daughters shall prophecy: your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions, 29 And also upon the servants, and upon the maids
in those days will I power my Spirit. 30 And I will show wonders in the
heavens and in the earth: blood and fire, and pillars of smoke. 31 The sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the great and
terrible day of the Lord come. 32 But whosoever shall call on the name of the
Lord, shall be saved: for in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance,
as the Lord has said, and in the remnant, whom the Lord shall call.
Sect. 20, 21.
1 For behold in those days and in that time, when I shall bring again the
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, 2 I will also gather all nations, and will
bring them down into the valley of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with the^ there
for my people, and for mine heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the
nations, and parted my land. 3 And they have cast lots for my people, and have
given the child for the harlot, and sold the girl for wine, that they might
drink. 4 Yea and what have ye to do with me, O Tyrus and Zidon and all the
coasts of Palestina? will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me,
swiftly and speedily I will render your recompense upon your head. 5 For ye
have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your Temples my goodly
and pleasant things. 6 The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem
have you sold unto the Graecians, that ye might send them far from their
border. 7 Behold, I will raise them out of the place where ye have sold them,
and will render your reward upon your own head. 8 And I will sell your sons
and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell
them to the Sabaeans, to a people far of: for the Lord has spoken it.
Sect. 22, 23.
9 Publish this among the Gentiles: praepare war, wake up the mighty men:
let all the men of war draw near and come up. 10 Break your plowshares into
swords, and your Siethes into spears: let the weak say I am strong. 11
Assemble your selves, and come all ye heathen, and gather your selves together
round about: or, Bring to pas, o Lord, that thy mighty ones (or men of war)
come down thither also. Tremel.
there shall the Lord cast down thy mighty men. 12 Or, The heathen shall be
wakned. etc. Ib.
Let the heathen be wakned, and come up to the vallie of Iehoshaphat: for there
will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. 13 Put in your Siethes: for
the harvest is ripe: come get you down, for the winepresse is full: yea the
wine-presses run over, for their wickedness is great. 14 O multitude, O
multitude, come into the valley of threshing: for the day of the Lord is
near in the valley of threshing. 16 The Sun and Moon shall be darkened, and
the stars shall withdraw their light. 16 The Lord also shall roar out of
Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shall
shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the
children of Israel. 17 So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God dwelling
in Zion mine holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no
strangers go through her any more.
Sect. 24, 25.
18 And in that day, shall the mountains drop down new wine, and the hills shall
flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall run with water, and a
fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley
of Shittim. 19 Egypt shall be waste, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness,
for the injuries of the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent
blood in their land. 20 But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from
generation to generation. 21 For I will cleanse their blood, that I have not
cleansed, and the Lord will dwell in Zion.
FINIS.
A Table declaring the effect of all the Treatise following: and namely, how the
text of the Prophet is here divided; and where the divisions thereof are
handled. The first members do note the Chapter, and verse of the Text: the
others, the Sections of the Treatise it self.
Joel. As touching the Title, see 1:1. 1, 2.

In the Prophecy of Joel we have first set down the Title of it: then the
matter that is therein contained. The matter that is therein contained, does
partly respect their praese^t calami tie: and partly, a better estate of
theirs, that by the goodness of God was towardsthe^. Their praesent calamity
was a famine. Concerning which, we are most of al to deal with that, which we
have in this our prophet: but somewhat also, with that which we have out of
others. That which we have in this our Prophet, is that he does earnestly
labor, to stir up the people unto a sensible feeling of this hand of God
upon the^: as appears in the manner of speech that first he uses: and for
that he repeateth the same again. In the speech that first he uses unto them,
first he laboreth to prepare them unto it: and then he commends the same unto
them. He prepared them unto it. 1:2-12. 3-8.
He commended it unto the^. 1:13-20. 9, 10.

The repetitio^ that he adds thereunto, is double, for that he repeateth the
same twice. 2:1-17. 11, 12.

That which we have out of others, is to show more specially, what those
sins were which the Prophet would have them to leave (though himself do not
name them) when he exhorts the^ to turn unto god. 13-15.

That better estate of theirs co^sisted, partly in their deliverance from that
famine: and partly in certain other blessings besides. How they were delivered
from that famine, is declared. 2:18-27. 16, 17.
The other blessings are two: a further manifestation of the gospel: and a
notable security from their enemies. That further manifestation of the Gospel
is set down. 2:28-32. 18, 19.
The better to set forth that security of theirs against their enemies, he
sets down both the wretched estate of the one: and the blessed estate of the
other. That wretched estate of the enemy is, first set down in plain speech
then more fully by a figure. It is plainly set down. 3:1-8. 20, 21.
It is more fully expressed. 3:9-17. 22, 23.

That blessed estate of the people of God is set down. 3: 18-21. 24, 25.






An Admonition, out of the Prophet Joel.
The word of the Lord that came to Joel the son of Pethuel. Joel. 1.1. IN
this Prophecy of Joel we have first set down the Title of it: The title of
it.
then the matter that is therein delivered. The Title of it is set down in the
first verse, and therein we are to consider, not only of such things as are
plainly set down therein: but of somewhat also, that is not expressed there,
and yet notwithstanding needful to be thought on and to be gathered so well
as we may. That which is plainly set down therein, rests in two principal
points: that the matter following (in all this Prophecy) came from the Lord:
and was delivered unto the people by the ministry of Joel. In that it came
from the Lord, we are to esteem of it accordingly: and in that it pleases
God to vouchsafe us such treasure in earthly vessels, those whom he uses to
such a purpose, though they be but seely things in them selves, yet ought they
to be for this cause, and in this respect, so much the more welcome and deater
unto us. That which is not expressed there, is concerning the time wherein he
prophesied: which notwithstanding is to be gathered of us so well as we may,
because that otherwise the sense of the Prophet must needs be harder unto us:
as also it is sufficiently known, that that has given a great part of the
occasion, that the Interpreters have varied so much in their judgments thereon.

First therefore to examine, The time when he prophesied. Which is gathered.
what the time was wherein he prophesied, it seems to me, that the iudgent
of those is clearly the best, that are of opinion, that he prophesied in the
days of Uzziah (otherwise called 2. king 14:21.
Azariah) the king of Judah: or, at least, of Iotham his soon: and so
consequently apperteineth to that compass of time, when Hos. 1:1.
Hoseah prophesied unto the Israelites, and Isa. 1:2^. and 2:1.
Isaiah began first among the Jews, Amos, 2:1, 3.
Amos, and Mic. 1:1.
Micah likewise, unto the Israelites, and Jews together. And the warrant that
we have for this opinion rests on two principal grounds: the placing of it:
First by the placing of it.
and the matter therein contained. As touching the placing of it, it is no more
but this, that seeing that of old it is placed among those, that, by good
testimony of the text it self belong to that time, (as Hoseah, Amos, and
Micah do) therefore is it the most likeliest that it appertains to that time
also: partly, for that the scriptures are ever lightly in that manner digested:
and partly for that Hier. in Joel. 1.
Ierom himself, by this argument also, was so persuaded. The Septuagint I
grant did Idem in Proemio in Joel.
Otherwise place it: but it seems they used the rule of Lesbos: placing it
so, as they thought the interpretation thereof would require: and not easily
yielding that the sense should be such, as the place, that long before them
it had, should seem to import. Otherwise it is somewhat strange, that they
should so alter the placing of it: considering that it is taken for Idem in
Praef. in 12. Prophetas.
a rule among the learned, that when there is no time noted of any of the
Prophets, then does that Prophet belong to the time of the Prophet that goes
before. Then by the matter therein contained.
As touching the matter therein contained, it does so fitly accord unto that
compass of time, that in my judgment, we may rather marvel, that diverse
there be of very good account in the Church of God (and worthily too) that did
not see it: then that our selves need to stand in doubt thereof. For not only
the whole matter does fitly agree, to that which was propounded by others, that
do undoubtedly belong to that very time: but diverse special things there are
besides, that do sufficiently warrant that so it did. Concerning the whole,
because that there can be no judgment thereof, til the matter it self be
unfolded, therefore the credit of it is to await the end of the treatise: and
then, either to stand, or to fall, in the judgment of the indifferent Reader,
By comparing this our Prophet, and Isaiah together.
without any further urging of it. Those special things that are besides, I
chiefly gather, out of the comparing of this Prophet of ours, and Isaiah
together: and that in the first five Chapters only which are most likely, by
1:1. and 6.1.
Isaiah himself, to appertain to the time that we speak of. For seeing that
the second time of his prophesying begins in the year that Vzziah died (as
in the beginning of the sixth Chapter it is recorded) and yet in the beginning
of the first Chapter it is plainly set down, that some part of his prophecy
was uttered in the days of Vzziah while yet he lived: therefore may those
first Chapters of that his prophecy be safely taken of us, if not as
undoubtedly appertaining to that time (for Calu. in Isa. 6.1.
some have been of their mind, not thinking that the first five Chapters did
appertain to a former time, in respect of that which in the beginning of the
sixth Chapter is noted: but that in those five Chapters going before is set
down how he began to prophecy, and then the time more specially noted in
the beginning of the sixth) yet as the most likely, because it is the judgment
of most of the learned: and the opinion of those others has no such warrant by
the text it self, but rather is thereby reproved. And that which we find in
these five first Chapters of Isaiah, so fitly agreeing to this Prophet of ours,
does partly he in those things that they utter of the judgments of God: and
partly in that which they do both set down as touching his mercy or favor
toward them. First in those things that they utter of the judgments of God.
Those things that they utter out of the judgments of God against them, are
two: first, a famine; then also, an army. Concerning the famine, they do not
only both speak of it: but also do it in much like manner. For where as this
Prophet does altogether beat upon it, and more specially tells them that the
famine should be so great, that 1:4.
what the Palmer woorme had left the Grasshopper had eaten, what the Grasshopper
had left the Canker worm had eaten, and what the Cankerworme had left the
Catterpiller had eaten (...) that 1:10.
the field is wasted, the Land moorneth, the Corn is destroyed, the vine is
dried up, and the oil is decayed: that 1:17.
the seed is rotten under their clots: that 2:3.
whereas the Land was, as the garden of Eden before, it was after this, as a
desolate wildernes^ and that 1:19, 20. 2:3.
the fire devoured the pastures of the wilderness, the flamb brunt up the
trees of the field, and the Rivers them selves were dried up: Isaiah likewise
in much like manner tells them, that 3:1.
the stay and the strength of bread and water should be taken from them: that
the chief and principal sort of them should be as 5:13.
famished, and plainly confess, 3:7.
that they had neither bread, nor clothing: that 5:10.
ten akers of vines should yield but five gallons, and the seed that was sown
should yield but the 10. part of it again: that 5:24.
their root should be as rotte^nes, and their bud rise up like dust: and that
1:30; 31. 5:24.
they should be as a garden that had no water, burnt and consumed with fire, as
tow, stuble, or chafe. So that both do speak of a famine, and both do
signify both that it shall be very great, and that it should, for a great part,
come by immoderate drought or heat (as also appeared by those worms that Joel
does speak of:) and yet it appears by Joel also, that otherwise it came by
overmuch wet for a time, when their corn was first sown, because he says,
as we heard before, that their corn was foysty and rotten under the clots.
Concerning the army, although it may very well be, that the one do mean a
further matter then the other: yet they both set forth their meaning, in much
like manner and form of speech for whereas this our Prophet says 2:3.
that it is a great and mighty people 2:5.
prepared to the battle 2:4.
like unto horsemen 2:7, 8.
marching in good array 2:9.
busily rif^ing for their pray, that all 2:6, 10.
should be afraid of them (and many other things to such like purpose) and
2:10.
that the Sun and the Moon should be dark, and the Stars with draw their
light: Isaiah says likewise 5:26, 30.
that the Lord will lift up a sign unto the Nations a far of, and will
hiss unto them from the end of the earth, and that they should come hastily
with speed; that none should faint or fall among them; that none should
slumber nor sleep, neither should the girdle be losed from his loins, nor
the lachet of his shoes be broken; that his arrows should be sharp, and all
his bows bent; that his horse hoofes should be thought like flint and his
wheels like a whirle wind; that his roaring should be like a Lion, and he
should roar like a Lions whelp; that they should roar and lay hold on the
pray, and so take it away that none should deliver it; that in that day they
should roar upon them as the roaring of the Sea; and that, if they looked
unto the earth, they should find nothing but darkness and sorrow, and that
the light it self should be darkened in their sky. Those things that they
utter of the mercy and favor of God toward them, Then in those things that
they utter of his mercy and favor.
are more amply set down in this our Prophet: but yet effectually, and to
like purpose in the other also. In this our Prophet it is declared (among many
other things more fully set down) that the Lord 3:2.12.13.
would mightily destroy their enemies, that though they 3:9.11.
gathered themselves together 3:9.
assembled the best warriors 3:9.
cheared up one an other 3:10.
brake their plowshares into swords, and their sithes into spears to furnish
themselves with weapons to the uttermost, though the success should be so
likely, that 3:10.
even the weak also should pluck up their hearts, and 3:11.
gather themselves round about: yet that they should be destroyed, as 3:2.^^.
others of old in the valley of Iehosophat, that they 3:11.
should be cast down, that they should be ^:13, 14.
a an harvest or vintage to the people of God: and that his people should be
2:28, 29.
endued with his holy spirit, that 2:^2.
there should be for the remnant deliverance there, that 3:16.
the Lord would be the hope of his people, and the strength of Israel, that
they should abound with 3:18.
wine, mylk, and water, and that he would 3:21.
cleanse the blood of those whom he had not cleansed. In Isaiah likewise we have
it set down, first as touching the enemies of the people of God, that 2:4.
the Lord should in such sort judge the nations, and rebuke the people, that in
the Church there should be such peace, that they should break their swoords
into mattocks, and their spears into sithes, and no more lift up sword
against another, nor learn to fight any more: then, as touching the peace and
glory of the Church, that 2:2.
the mountain of the house of the Lord should be prepared, and exalted above
the hills, and all nations flow unto it: that the ^:2.
bud of the Lord should be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth
excellent and pleasant to them that escaped, that he that was 4:3.
least in Zion should be holy, and every one written in the book of the
living, that 4:4.
the Lord would wash away the filthiness of Zion, and purge the blood of
Jerusalem by the spirit of judgment and burning; that 4:5.
the Lord would create upon every place of mount Zion, and upon the assemblies
there, of a clould and smoke by day, and the shinning of flaming fire by night,
and a defense upon all the glory; and that there should be among them 4:6.
a covering for a shadow in the day for the heat, and a place of refuge, and a
covert for the storm and the rain. Many more things might easily be to this
purpose alleged: but these I trust will be sufficient; and whosoever will, may
further induce him self to this persuasion, but more diligent comparing of
these together, and others withal, that do appertain to the time we speak
of.

3 But now to come to the Prophet himself, and to see what it is, Of the
prophecy it self.
that in him we have delivered, we may plainly see at the first, that it is of
that nature, that it did not only concern them of old; but also concerns us
now and therefore are we ever to apply the same from point to point, unto our
selves, as our own case requires, and the sense of the text it self will
bear. The order ensuing.
So are we first from time to time to consider, what it is that the Prophet
delivers to them: and then how we may best apply the same to our selves.
That which the Prophet delivers to them, rests on two principal parts:
the former concerning 1:1. 2:17.
the present calamity that then they were in; the other concerning 2:18. 3:21.
a better estate that afterward (upon their repentance) by the goodness of God
they were to enjoy. As touching the present calamity that then they were in,
whereas it is certain, that it was sent in the way of chastisement to them for
their sins, and that the Prophet now would have them, to leave these sins
of theirs and turn to the Lord, and (to that end especially does labor to
have them so sensibly touched with their present distress, and yet himself
does not recite any of those sins of theirs particularly (belike for that he
spoke but of such, as in those days were common among them, and well enough
known, and such as the Prophets of that age had already sufficiently laid to
their charge) that we therefore may better be able to apply this instruction to
our use, we are not only to consider of those things that we have in this our
Prophet, concerning that calamity of theirs, but also to enter into some
farther knowledge of those sins of the people, that we may find them to be
at that time infected withal. Of their present calamity: whereof he would not
have them careless.
That which we have in this our Prophet concerning that calamity of theirs,
does lead us no farther but only to consider, what it is whereunto he
labors to bring them: and then how earnestly he labors the same. That
whereunto he labors to bring them, is, that they would in no wise be careless
concerning that hand of God upon them: but that they would stir up themselves
unto so sensible a feeling thereof, as that thereby they might grow to
repentance, and turn to the Lord. As touching which, it shall be good more
specially to consider, how it may appear, that the Prophet had that purpose wih
him: and then what it may seem to be, that did move him unto it. That the
Prophet had that purpose with him, it is most evident, throughout the whole
(...) 2:^^.
first part of this his prophecy: and almost in every member, of whatsoever
sentence or verse therein is contained. A thing so evident (even at the first
sight) in the text it self, that we shall not need to bestow any further
labor about it. That which may seem to have moved him unto it, I take to be,
partly that great security, As by nature we al are.
that in all such cases by corruption of nature does hang upon all: and partly
the carelessness, that, in this case of theirs, he found in them at that
present. The security that in such cases by common corruption of nature does
hang upon all, is so passing great, and so many ways shows it self, that it
cannot be unknown unto us. Whereupon Solomon truly says, Pro. 27:22
that the folly of the foolish is such, as that although he were so beaten,
that he might seem to be brayed in a mortar, or beaten in pieces: yet would
his folly still remain, and he never grow to understanding there by. A
special example of David.
And David his father, a rare man for faith and godliness, and many good
graces that are of God, yet notwithstanding, in this point, was far
ouerseene. For 2. Sam. 21:1, 14.
when on a time the Lord had sent a special famine upon that Land, it had
lain three years thereon, before that we read, that ever he was so sensibly
touched therewith, as that he sought to the Lord about it. But at length he
sought him, and thereby finding at the mouth of the Lord, that it was for
Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites, although he
could not be ignorant, but that this would be ill interpreted of diverse
(especially of those that were toward the house of Saul) as though it were no
more in him but a worldly policy, by such a device to take away those that
remained of Saul's family, to establish the Crown so much the better to him
self for the time, and after him, to his line likewise: yet finding the same
to proceed of God, and the execution in it self to be just, he caused it to be
done accordingly, And they, in this case of theirs were.
and so found the Lord to be appeased toward the^ again The other cause that
might seem to move this Prophet to call upon the^ for this matter, was as I
said, the carelesnes of them, that, in this case of theirs, he found in them
at that praesent. For seeing that the other Prophets, that do apappertain to
this compass of time (as afterward we are more fully to see) did plainly
lay their sins before them in particular, and denounced many grievous
judgments of God against them, if they would not repent, but still go on in
their wonted ways: and this Prophet of ours enters not into any recital of
their sins, as the others do, nor of the judgments that others denounce:
hence is it, that it may probably seem, that God stirred up this our Prophet,
but only to this end especially (I mean for the matter that now we are in)
that whereas the others, and whosoever they were besides whom God had then
stirred up to speak unto them, were so little or nothing regarded, therefore
should he so call upon them to be better advised of those matters, and of the
hand of God upon them; being belike in the time of that famine, and having
himself experience of it, that was somewhat before denounced by others. The
application of it


4 To come to our selves, we also are in great security, in all such cases, and
at all times, generally: and, besides that, very sensles and careless at this
present also, We have much forgotten our selves here to fore.
when as notwithstanding it is most certain, that the like hand of God has
been of late, and (in some measure) upon us likewise. We have been long since
reasonably well pounded in the mortar: and yet our folly, I fear, remains.
It need not be yet out of our remembrance, how the enemy raged with fire and
sword, when he had the law in his hands: we cannot be ignorant of our daily
peril, by diverse abroad, and some at home. As David in like case for a time
did not seek unto the Lord: and yet notwithstanding, had the rod so laid upon
the whole Land, that he might easily have espied him self to be very justly
provoked unto it: so it is to be doubted (or out of doubt rather) that as yet
we have not truly sought unto him; how much soever we have been so deeply
provoked unto it, as that in no wise we can be ignorant, but that
effectually he has called us thereunto. At the length he sought the Lord, and
so escaped much of the famine that otherwise had tarried on them: and the sooner
that we also shall seek the Lord, the better will it be for our selves, and the
sooner shall he withdraw his hand from us. He, being admonished what the cause
was, addressed himself to take away the cause of that hand of God upon them;
although that he could not so do, but that he should run into suspicion
thereby, that he had some courser meaning: neither is any, whom it concerns,
to forsake the course of just execution, in any respect of credit or honor,
that privately might come thereby: God also himself, though he had taken away
^. Sam. 31:2, 3, 4, 6.
Saul before, and his three sons (whereof notwithstanding even Jonathan
Ibidem, 2.
was one, a very 1. Sam. 18:8.19:1.3. 20:9, 12, 13, 16.
unfeined friend unto David: the judgments of God are very deep and himself
is a ielous God on behalf of his people): yet would he not so content him
self, but now required a further execution to be done on those that yet
remained of his line. God be thanked for that, which (of this kind) is done
alredie, to very good purpose, and in comfortable measure likewise: and I
trust, that God will so much the sooner turn his hand from us. Now, some what
well done: but we ought to proceed.
But God give us grace to know withal (especially to those, to whom it does
chiefly belong) that if there be any of that sort left, guilty of the
innocent blood of the servant of God alredie spilt, and of a continual
thirst of more, they ought not to be spared, but to have the reward of their
iniquity laid upon them: that so the hand of Gods wrath be sooner removed
from the lot of his own inheritance. Though Jonathan (it may be) did not
descent from that slaughter of the Gibeonites, yet was he ever faithful to
David: and yet the Lord did not spare him neither. The more careful we are,
that such as be faithful be ever praeserved, and untouched by us: the less
need we care, to put all others to their lawful trial, and to see that they
have their just deserts. And all this so much the rather, as we know that it
is the more heinous, to determine such practices against those that are true
Israelites in deed; and, among them, against the chief and principal of
them; and that, in a bitter, and spiteful malice to the people of God: then as
Saul did it, but against the Gibeonites, 2. Samu. 21:2.
none of the people of Israel themselves, though dwelling among them; and
those but of the common sort, and meanest of all that dwelt in the Land; and
that, Ibidem.
on a zeal on behalf of the people of God. He calls on all to be advised
hereof: the Elders, and all generally.


5 How earnestly this Prophet Joel does labor to stir up the people unto
this sensible feeling of the hand of God upon them, may easily be seen, both
out of the manner of speech, that 1:2. 20.
at the first he uses unto them: and out of the repetition thereof again,
that 2:1.17.
afterward he adds thereunto. In that which at the first he uses unto them,
by the course of his speech it seems, that first he labored 1:2.12.
to pre pare them unto a public Fasting or mourning, for that hand of God
upon them: and then, after that, to 1:13.20.
call them unto it. He seems first to prepare them to that kind of exercise,
because he does so earnestly call on all sorts, to stir up them selves to an
hearty sorrow: and because that afterwrad, in that which does immediately
follow, he does commend that exercise unto them: so expounding in that which
follows, what his mind was in that, which goes before. And the better to
prepare them to this public fasting, first he calls upon all to give ear
unto him: then he sets in hand with the matter, that he has to deliver unto
them. He calls on all to give ear unto him, in these words, 1:20.
Hear this, o ye Elders: and give ear unto it, all ye inhabitants of the
Land. Wherein we are to consider, on whom he calls: and what he does require
of them. He calls on the Elders, or the chief or better sort, more
specially: then also generally on all, even on all the inhabitants of the Land
generally. For the Elders or chief of the people are those, whom this matter
chiefly concerns: and who are able, best to help, to gather the people to
public repentance. And yet notwithstanding, all the residue must needs
account it to belong unto them likewise: both that they all have justly
deserved it: and therefore, that they all in like sort, are now to humble
themselves to the Lord, whom they have offended, and who likewise hereby did
call them unto repentance. That which he does require of them, is no more yet,
but only to hearken or give ear to this matter: but that he does require, both
of the Elders, and of all the inhabitants besides. For neither are Elders, nor
the highest of all exempted from this kind of duty, toward God, and his
word; besides that, it concerns likewise their peace and welfare so much,
that it is best for them to give care: neither may any of all the inhabitants
exempt them selves from this; both because it is their duty, and concerns
their peace besides.

6 As touching our selves, So we like wise ^ven from the highest, unto the
lowest are to gather our selves to like advisement.
the matter is of that nature, as that chiefly it concerns our Elders also:
but yet notwithstanding, all the inhabitants of this Land likewise. Our Elders
it does chiefly concern, not only because our sins, for which this hand of
God was upon us, are of that nature, that may seem most of all to descend from
them; and for that their estate likewise (if they do not repent) is like to be
nearest to the greater fall: but also, because that they can best both call in
the people unto repentance; and amend these faults that do provoke the wrath
of God against us, Generally it concerns all the inhabitants of this Land
likewise, because that all (one way or other) have in such sort offended, as
that we all, and every one of us, have justly deserved this kind of
chastisement: and if we do not, by this gentle warning, gather our selves to
repentance now, then may we pull down an heavier judgment upon us; and
that, not only when none of us all do grow to repentance, but also because
that by the impenitencie of some few, the goodness of God is sometime
restrained to all generally. And unless we be disposed to hearken (both the
higher, and lower together) we may not only hinder our selves of that relief
of our praesent necessity, that otherwise we might obtain at the hands of God:
but besides that, we further provoke him, by so great contempt of his merciful
calling, to cast forth some heavier judgment against us.

7 Concerning the matter that he has to deliver: The matter that he has to
deliver: first, to prepare them to a public fast.
first he does but note it generally: and afterward treats more specially of
it. Generally he notes it to be such, as is strange and rare, and not lightly
to be esteemed, which he does two ways: first, sending them over to the time
past to enquire 1:2.
whether such a thing has been in their days, or in the days of their
fathers: then by commanding them to 1:3.
tell their children of it, and that so it pass unto the next, and third
generation. What the famine was
Coming to treat of it more specially: first he teaches them to consider in
how strange and pitiful manner, the fruits of the earth were destroyed: then
he calls on certain of the^ thereupon to sorrow. How pitifully the fruits of
the earth were destroyed, he plainly declares: that is, that 1:4.
that which was left of the palmer worm, the grasshopper had eaten: and the
residue of the grasshopper, the canker-worm had eaten: and the residue of the
canker-worm, the catterpiller had eaten. Wherein they might very plainly
behold, both that now they must needs be very sore distressed for want of
victualles, when as the fruits of the earth were so much destroyed: and that
the same came of the hand of God, because that so many noisome creatures in
such sort succeeded one another, and because they came in such abundance,
that being so seely a vermin as they are in their own nature, Who they are, on
whom he calls more specially.
yet as now they were strengthened in the multitude of them, they were able to
waste the whole land. In his calling on certain of them we are to consider, who
they are on whom he calls: and in what manner he calls on them. Those of
whom he calls 1:5.
are drunkards: and all drinkers of wine: meaning, as it seems, by drunkards,
such as were most in ordinately given to that kind of excess: and by drinkers
of wine, such as lived voluptuously in the wealth and abou^da^ce that God had
given the^. On both which, he might so specially call, not only in respect of
the^ selves, but also, in respect of others. In respect of themselves he might
do it, both because that they should soonest be distressed: and because it was
meet they should, for that, the one sort of them had made so great wast: and
the other had given them selves to their pleasure. In respect of others he
might do it, that so it might the better appear, that all sorts and estates
whatsoever, had occasion to moorne and sorrow, when he called on these to do
it: the one sort of them being a secure and sensles people, and therefore least
able so to consider of the matter, as might stir them up to some special
sorrow: the other being of the greater and the wealthier sort, and therefore by
likelihoode, farthest of from all such sorrow. In the manner of his calling upon
them we have to consider, what it is whereunto he does call them: and what
reasons he uses, the better to stir them up unto it. That whereunto the
Prophet does call them, is to ^:5.
awake: and to lament. In that he wills them to awake, it plainly imploieth,
How they are to awake and lament.
both in what case at that time they were, that is, a sleep (and yet had God
given them good occasion before, to have left of sleeping, and to look up:)
and that such sleepines and drowsines of theirs, was nothing meet for the
business that now they had in hand. In that he wills them to lament, we may
therein perceave, not only that he does require it generally: but also, that he
does (after a sort) praescribe unto the^ the manner of it: that he does require
it generally at large, that only may teach us, both how little yet they were
touched with that hand of God upon them: and that now the Prophet would needs
have the^ take an other course. That he does after a sort praescribe unto the^
the manner of it we are there to note, both how we may find, that so he does:
and to what use it, might be, that such a manner was praescribed unto them. It
is evident that so he does, because he requires such a lame^tation,
sorrowing, or moorning, as not only may cause 1:5.
both weeping, and houling: but also may be so earnest and vehement, as when
1:8.
a virgin lately married has lost the husband of her youth, and girding
hirselfe with sakcloth, does moorn for him: for weeping is an undoubted toke^
(if it be unfeigned) that the mind is wounded, when the sorrow is such, as
presses out tears: and houling goes somewhat further, proceeding of a great,
and vehement sorrow, and so yielding, in such proportion, a crying out
corresponde^t unto it. But because the affections of a young couple lately
married (if they meet together in mutual love) are very strong, especially in
the woman (that is more subject unto her affections) therefore the sorrow of
such a virgin, in such a case as there is described, must needs be great, and
so is affoorded the highest place. The use whereunto it might very well serve, to
have such a form of this their sorrowing prescribed unto them, seems to be,
the more effectually to frame them unto it: such as sorrowed nothing at all, to
be provoked hereby to sorrow somewhat: and such as sorrowed but in slender
manner, to fall better unto it, and to endeavor to get so near unto this as they
could. The reasons that the Prophet uses, The reasons why.
the better to stir them up unto it, are of two sorts: some of them taken of
the consideration of the thing it self: and some, of certain other persons
touched therewith, The thing it self, out of which the Prophet does reason, is
the famine that he spoke of before: which now he tells them, is very great:
and shows how it comes upon them. It is so great, that the 1:5.
new wine is on the soden pulled away or cut of from the mouth of those
drunkards, and drinkers of wine: who, if it might be had, would otherwise have
it, the one sort, for their unsatiable thirst they had unto it: the other,
because they have wherewith all to get it, were it otherwise never so scant. In
what manner it comes upon them, is here set down, first by declaring the power
and strength of it: then what effect ensues thereon. The power and strength of
it is such, that these weak vermins (being so strengthened by God as they are,
to this purpose) are compared to a 1:6.
nation, mighty, and innumerable: and that their teeth be like unto the teeth
of a Lion: and their axelteeth, as the axel-teeth of a great and fierce Lion.
The effect that ensues on their coming upon the land, is, that 1:7.
the vines are made baren, and the fig trees unfruitful: that their bark is
pilled of, the leaves and tender branches eaten up, and the clusters pale for
lack of moisture. Those other persons that are touched herewith whereby the
Prophet would better set forth the greatness of this famine, are Priests and
Husbandmen. Concerning whom we are to consider, first how much it strengthens
the matter, if they be found to be strengthened with it: then, how far it may
appear, that they were strengthened therewithal. It does strengthen the matter,
and shows the famine to be great, because that thereby it came to pass, both
that the Priests had not 1:9.
where with to do sacrifice unto the Lord: nor Husbandmen 1:12.
wherewithal to relieve themselves. That both these kind of people were much
strengthened with this famine, it appears likewise, in that which is (to that
purpose) set down in either of them. As touching the Priests, how much they
were touched with it, is set down by 1:9.
these two things: that the meate-offring and drink-offring was cut of from the
house of the Lord; and that the Priests themselves, the ministers of the Lord,
moorned, to see the service of the Lord intermitted, and them selves without
relief. As touching the Husbandmen, (both tillers of the ground, and such as
dressed vines) how much likewise they are stre^gthned with it, is also set down,
both in the want that they have of those things that should yield the^ relief:
and in showing, how they are affected therewith. The want that they had in those
things that should have yielded the^ relief, is set down, first as touching
their fields: then as touching their fruit trees. As touching 1:10.^^
their fields they are said to be wasted and to moorn: and that corn, wine, and
oil, wheat, and barley; and the whole harvest is perished. As touching their
fruit trees, it is said that the 1:12.
vine, the fig tree, the pomgranate, the date, the aple-tree, and all the trees
of the field are withered. How they were affected herewith is also declared,
because it is said, first that they 1:11.
are confounded, and moorn: then, that all 1:12.
joy (such men as are wont to have at getting in their harvest or other fruits
of the earth) is withered away from the sons of men.

8 And now to take, out of this also, How far we are to^ched with the like hand
of God.
some part of the instruction unto our selves, although first it cannot be
denied, but that the scarcity that of late we had, and is not clean finished
yet, is nothing like unto this other that the prophet here speaks of, neither
for the straungnes, nor especially for the grievousnes of it: yet
notwithstanding, was it not in either of those respects, of so small
importance, but that we had, and yet have good cause to enter into special
consideration of it. For although it came not in so strange manner, as the
other, nor as some others that heretofore this land has seen; yet may we
find it to be such, as shows it self to have come of God: proceeding, as
it did, of so unseasonable weather, and especially the season being so very
wet, both in seed time and harvest, two years together. And although it did
not strengthen us, so much as the other did them: yet must it needs touch us
near also, when as not only our corn failed so much as it did, but our cattle
also, great, and small: and that in a manner, generally throughout the whole,
and in all parts of the Land whatsoever. The like sort of people among us also
are to be quick ned up unto the consideration of it.
The same sort of people likewise, whom the Prophet called on then, might well
be called on at this present: those that have lived in some special excess;
and others likewise that have lived in pleasure, in that abundance that God
has given them. For if they have lived in some special excess, then have they
good cause to sorrow, not only on behalf of them selves that now were
strengthened so much the more; and, for that they did so grievously offend
thereby: but also, because that excess of theirs was so great a cause of that
scarcity since. So likewise, if they did no more, but only enjoy their own
abundance, yet therein also they have good cause to lament: partly for that
many of them at the least were since much straightened of that liberal
allowaunce, that before they took to them selves; but especially, for that
hereby they may find, that seeing they would never take up of them selves, but
still take their pleasure so much as they did, they have so brought to pass,
that, to their further reproach since, God himself was fain, in this sort to
teach them, to gather the^ selves unto some better course of sobriety. That
both these sorts also are to take one, and the selse same lesson (together with
those others) out of the Prophet, it needs so much the less to be doubted,
as we may very plainly see, that all such disposition of theirs is ever void of
all such affections, and yet notwithstanding much does need them. For first as
touching those that give them selves to so great excess, as they do never
acquaint them selves with any kind of godly sorrow; so, by the reason of the
excess that they do use, they are not so much as able, in any good measure,
to hold up their eyes or to awake: and yet were it good, and needful for them,
not only to stir up themselves, and to awake, that so they might the better see
what case they are in, before it be too late to amend it; but also to give them
selves to earnest sorrow, both in respect of the waste they have made, and for
the vengeance that is due to the same. Then also as touching those that have
not made so great excess; but, because they had wherewithal, have always
framed their portion accordingly, and taken their pleasure of the abundance
that God has given them, because that use of abundance and wealth does easily
make men to forget them selves, and unable to bear in good and orderly manner,
a straighter allowance: therefore are they also so much the rather to stir up
them selves from that their drowsy forgetfulness; and to be sorry, that they
have so far disabled them selves, to take in good part, and quietly to bear an
harder estate. Our sorrow also ought to be sound.
And because that so many ways, we have so far provoked the wrath of God
against us, and especially both these sorts aforesaid, therefore it is meet
likewise, that we never content ourselves with a slender sorrowing, but that
ever we seek to bring it to the measure that of them is required, as before
we have heard: especially, when the reasons that the Prophet there does use,
do come (in a manner) as near unto us, as they did to them. For first as
touching the thing it self, although the good blessings of the earth were not
altogether so much cut of from us (especially from those that now we speak of,
because that they will lightly have them, when others do need them) as they were
from them: yet were they so far cut of from us also, that very many were much
distressed, and some among us utterly lost; and those also that among us had
before so exceeded, or else had but lived in that abundance, could since in no
wise hold on that course, nor come any thing near it, but that needs they
must streighten the meaner sort so far, that they should make them selves
answerable for the distress of those that were straightened, or did miscarie.
Which our necessity was in such sort also sent unto us from the hand of God,
as that it could not have been avoided of us, but was unto us as a mighty
people, ouer-strong for us to deal withal: and has in a manner laid much of
our land waste likewise, not only for that our cattle died, and our corn
failed, so much as they did; but also, for that by reason thereof, even yet
also many of our pastures are empty, and no small part of our land for a time
unsowen for want of seed. The like reasons with us, as with the^.
Then as touching those others that in such sort were touched therewith, as
that the same ought to be a reason to us, rather to sorrow for that hand of God
upon us, we may easily see, that the same kind of people also with us, were in
like sort touched as were those others. For first to come to the Priests, it is
most evident, that the service of the Lord not only was, but yet also is so
very much failed, in many of our churches likewise, that our ministry or
ecclesiastical estate has good cause to moorn: all the whole multitude of us
for the want of Gods service in such measure as were to be wished; and many of
us also, for want of things needful to this praesent life, which
not-withstanding comes not so much of the scarcity that now we speak of, (for
then it might be more easily born, and were likely to be much sooner amended)
as it does out of two other causes that are much stronger, and make the sore
almost incurable. Whereof the one is that sort of Impropriations, that has
altogether taken away many of our church livings, not only from the ministry,
but also from al other ecclesiastical use: the other, that insatiable greedines
of most of our Patrons, that daily more and more convert to their own proper
use, either the whole, or else some part of those that remain, and were
committed, of special trust, unto their defense and custody. Our busbandmen
likewise were so much distressed, that they had not wherewithal to relieve
their most just and urgent necessities; and their woonted joy (in those matters
also) was parted from them: and yet, not only by the late scarcity that then
they were in; but by the hard dealing of their hard and unmercifull Landlords,
that now of long (since the days of our peace, by the uniting of the two
houses together in most places of this land have prayed upon the^, and daily do
more and more.

9 But now to return to our Prophet again, Having so far forth praepared them
unto it, now he commends that Fast unto them.
when he has so prepared all generally unto the exercise that he was desirous
to commend unto them, then does he gather himself to that matter, and 1.13.20.
commends a publik fast unto them, And we therein are to consider, first how
he does call upon these, to whom it belonged, for that matter: then how
himself does further urge it. In his calling on those to whom it belonged, we
are likewise to note, who they are on whom he calls: and what it is that for
this matter he requires of them. Those on whom he calls are ^ ^.23. Calling
on the Priests especially.
the Priests: whom there also he calls the Ministers of the altar; and the
Ministers of his God. Whereby it appears that it was their parts, to have an
eye to such matters: and when need was, to call on the Magistrates, and on the
people, to join together in a public fast. That which for this matter he
requires of them, does partly concern them selves: and partly others. That
which does concern themselves, Showing the^ what they shall do.
is first to show them what they are to do: and then for what cause they have
to do it. That which they are to do concerning themselves, is to quicken up
themselves to earnest sorrowing: that so the better they they call upon others;
and themselves be leaders unto the^. To this end it is required of the^, not
only that they do the thing that is required, that is, that they 1:13.
gird themselves unto it, and lament: but also that they do it in earnest
manner, and therefore that they howl; enter in, and lie all night in sakcloth,
which in those countries was their manner in special moorning. The reason why
they were to do it, was, because the 1:13.
meatoffring and drink-offring was taken away from the house of their God. That
which they were to do concerning others, was most of al to get the church
together unto this exercise: and then how to hold the^ occupied when they came
there. To get the church together, they were willed, first to 1:14.
sanctify a fast, and to proclaim or publish a day of ceasing from usual
labors, otherwise called a solemn assembly: and so gather thereunto, both the
Elders: and all the inhabitants of the Land, unto the house of the Lord their
God. When thus they had gathered all together, then, to hold them occupied
there, in such sort as was most convenient, 1:14.
they are willed in the name of them all, to cry unto the Lord. Concerning the
Prophets further urging them hereunto, Strongly urging the^ unto it.
I am to acknowledge herewithal, that the same which I do take in that sense,
some others do take rather as the form of complaint, that they were to make
unto the Lord: which also is a good sense, and may well agree with the text it
self. But in my judgment it lies more likely, to be the speech of the Prophet
himself; then to be appointed to them, for the form of their complaint: and
therefore have I so applied it here, not praejudicing the judgment of any other.
Wherein first the Prophet laboreth those Priests and Ministers of the Lord to
take that course that he has called them unto: then, though they will not, yet
he professes, that he for his part will surely do it. In this his laboring of
others, we are to note, first, that by likelihood he espied them to be over
heavy in this matter: then, in what manner thereupon he does labor them. If
they were so heavy hereunto, that the Prophet needed so to labor them, then
did the Prophet very well, so much the more to put to the spur, as he did see
that the heavines of those did need it. In the manner of his laboring of them
we are to note, first, that the Prophet him self does lament that their
distress: then how he shows very good reason, that so he may. He lamenteth
it 1:15.
in crying out, Alas for this day. Then coming to show, that he does it not
lightly, but has good reason so to do, first he sets down the reason it
self: and then he does confirm the same. By very good reason.
The reason it self that here he gives, is no more in effect, but to show how
sorrowful a day it is: and that does he two ways; first, as touching the
substance of it; and then, by the manner of proceeding. For the substance of it,
he says, that 1:15.
it is a day of destruction, or that does make them utterly waste. In the manner
of proceeding, or in what sort it comes upon the^, he notes two things: one,
that it comes mightily on them, or in very strong manner, calling it the day of
the Lord, and saying that it comes from the almighty; the other, that it is
even at hand, or that now they are very near to utter destruction. In his
confirmation of it, first he sets down the matter, out of which he will
confirm it: and then confirms or further strengthens that same likewise. The
1:16.
matter that he sets down for the confirmation of it, rests in two
points: the one, that their meat is cut of before their eyes; or that they
may plainly and evidently see, that now they have nothing whereon to live: the
other, that joy and gladness is also cut of from the house of their God, as
evident a token of prsent destruction, as the other is. That which he brings
for the confirmation and further strengthening of this also, is by showing that
those things are utterly failed, which should minister, both to them all
necessary food: and joy and gladness to those that served in the house of
the Lord. To this end he adds, first as touching their 1:17.
corn, that they had so little hope or comfort thereof (partly for so much as
was sown, was most of it rotten under the clods, by immoderate wet; and partly
for that such as was left, was also withered) that now men did commonly let
even their barnes, and garners go down: then, as touching their 1:18.
cattle, not only that they all moorn, but also that both their herds of
greater cattle pine away for lack of pasture (that was destroyed by immoderate
1:19, 20.
heat that afterward followed) but also that even their flocks of sheep, who
are wont to make good shift, in very bare pastures, were lost notwithstanding,
even the whole flocks for lack of pasture. In his profession or protestation
that he will do it, although they will not, we are to note, first, what it is
that he will do, and then, wherefore he will do the same. That which he will
do, is, that he will 1:19.
cry unto the Lord. The reason is, for that the fire has devoured the lodges
or pastures of the wilderness, and flamb has burnt up the trees of the fiedes:
and for the beasts of the field did also (after their manner) cry unto him,
for want of water, because the rivers were dried up; and for want of meat,
because their pastures were devoured or burnt with heat.

Which that we may in like manner apply to our selves; It appertains to those
that are of the ministry with us likewise, to have an eye to this matrer: and
sometimes they need to be stirred up by some other.
first, whereas he calls on the Priests for this matter, who were the
ordinary teachers of the people, we may note, that among us likewise, such as
are our ordinary teachers, should have an eye to these matters: and when need
is, admonish the magistrates and people also, to join together in such good
exercise. And whereas those ordinary teachers, which no doubt were many, were
now so earnestly called upon by this our Prophet, who was sent in
extraordinarily, and was but one: it also may teach us, that though our
ordinary teachers, be many, yet may they forget them selves so much (even
all, sometimes) that God may find it needful, to send in some other
extraordinarily, to put them in mind of such matters, and to quicken them up
thereunto; and though they be many, and the other but one, yet may they not
therefore despise him. For it falls out very often, that though they live of
the Altar, yet do they not so much oft-times regard these things that belong
to the Altar; I mean the true service of God, and the advancement of his
glory: and though they be the Ministers, or servants of God: yet are they not
always so careful of the service of him, whose servants they are. And as at
this time one other was found, that had no part of his living of the Altar, nor
was any of the number of those, that were the ordinary servants of God; and
yet was very careful for the Altar, and to promote his masters business: so in
these days also it pleases God sometimes to stir up some one or other among
us, that being nothing maintained by the altar, nor any of our ordinary
teachers neither, nevertheless does that kind of business much more sometimes
then those that are; and when it pleases God to send any such, they are not
lightly to be regarded. In that they are admonished, first to stir up them
selves to sorrow, before that they should call upon others, that so they might
the better do it; therein likewise may we very well note, what cause it is
that they have to follow, that in this case would do any good: that is, first
of all to begin with them selves, from whom others are to take their light and
direction. For unless they sorrow them selves, and be effectually touched with
their miseries, it is not to be looked for, In what manner they ought to sorrow.
that they should stir up others unto it. And whereas it is of them required,
not only to sorrow, but also to do it in very earnest and hearty manner, (and
therefore it is required of them, that they houl, and lie all night in
sakcloth, although that we are not to account our selves necessarily tied to
their manner of moorning, and so consequently to their manner of sakcloth
neither: yet are we to do it in very earnest and ferve^t manner, and to know
withal, that as we are not necessarily tied to their sakcloth, so neither do
our ca^briks, and lawns, our shak-haire, undecent loks of uncleannes or pride,
and other excess (or whatsoever other badges of our wo^ted delicacie, or
tender nicenes) any thing becum those, that profess that godly sorrow that now
we speak of. Insomuch that as God himself (...). 33:5.
on a time admonished the children of Israel, (when they had offended, and the
Lord being angry with the^, they had now to seek his favor again) to lay
aside their costly apparel, that thereby he might the better see, how far they
repented, and then how to deal accordingly with them: so we likewise have need
to account it as needful for us, especially for those that ought to be leaders
unto others, to lay aside the great excess that now is used, before that
either themselves shall see, that there is any true repentance in them; or
before that others, by their example, or cold exhortation, whilbe gathered to
any such sorrow, as now in this case we have in hand: for certainly excess in
apparel does never agree with sound repentance, because it argues not only
over good a liking of our selves; but also a very small care of our neighbor:
both which are contrary to sound repentance, and that as directly as can be
devised: The like reason with us, that was with the^.
and to the end that these leaders of others may the better stir up them selves
to an earnest sorrow, that so they may the better induce those unto it, that
they are to call thereunto, they may do well likewise to consider, how
effectually the reason that was alleged to the^, is now accomplished with us
likewise: for howsoever that in many places, there is co^venient entertainme^t
left, to mantain instruction, and the service of God; and so consequently,
those places have accordingly (for certain of them) the Gospel truly and
ple^tifully preached, to the glory of God, and to the edifying of the people
there: yet others there be, both more in number, and (for the most part) the
greater congregations also, that are so utterly destitute of this so just and
needful help, that in those places they may plainly see, that the
meat-offring, and drink-offring are clean cut of from the house of the Lord
their God; insomuch, that there the people of God have neither meat nor drink
(such as is co^venient, and needful for them) and God himself is also
defrauded, almost of all the honor and service that there among them is due
unto him. In that they were willed to publish a fast, to gather the people unto
it, and when they were com together, then to pour forth their complaints unto
God, out of it may we learn to do the like: that is, that though our selves
cannot appoint it, but must await the appointment of those that are in foreign
authority (so far as we look that others should be tied unto it) yet both
that we do admonish others, both the Magistrates them selves, and the people
also, how meet and seemly it were for this case of ours, a little to withdraw
their cogitations from their other affairs and to gather them selves to a
public fast; and, when they are come, that then we do direct them aright, in
their supplications and prayers to God. But where as this our Prophet does so
earnestly call on those Priests so to do (which belike was, because that
otherwise they were so heavy of them selves) that also may teach us, that our
ordinary leaders may in like sort be so dull generally, that they need some
such extraordinary quickening up, unto such considerations as these. And yet
notwithstanding, it cannot be hid, but is I am sure over plain to be seen,
both that our late scarcity was such, as that diverse of the poorer sort were
famished by it, and many more do still drop away by the distemperature and
weakness, that thereby they fell into: and that not only now, but long since
also, in diverse places, joy and gladness is clean cut of from the house of the
Lord. And as in the one part of this our necessity we may plainly see, that by
immoderate wet, much of our seed did then perish under the clods: so in the
other might we as quickly find, that not only barns, and garners, but all other
necessary buildings besides, in the houses of God are clean let down, or much
decayed.

11 In his repetition we are to note, The Prophet repeateth the same again and
twice for fa^ling.
that he does not content him self to repeat it once: but very plainly
repeateth the same 2:1.14. ^:15.17.
two several times. Which (belike) was, because he perceaved, that
notwithstanding this havie hand of God upon them, yet were they very deaf in
this matter and would not be induced to enter into any such consideration of
it. In the former of which his repititions he does very earnestly labor to
bring them to the exercise that he has already propounded unto them: in the
other he does briefly knit it up, as needing no more now (after so much calling
on them before) but only to put them in mind again of it, and therewithal
holding himself contented. But in the former of them we are more specially to
consider, His former repetition.
first, how he sets forth that hand of God against them: then, how he does
likewise exhort the^, unto a public and hearty repentance. He sets forth
the heavines of this hand of God upon them, first, A description of their
misery.
by showing how it is to be taken of others, or how others are to be affected
at it: and then, by showing what it is in it self. How it is to be taken of
others, he shows, when as in the very beginning he sets down, that the
Priests and Levites 2:1^
must blow the trumpet in Zion, and shout in his holy mountain: and that all the
inhabitants of the land must tremble. What it is in it self he declares
likewise by two similitudes: the one of a special great darkness; the other,
of a fearful army. Concerning the former, there by he does but generally
declare, what it shall be; that is, a sore or greevous time, and very
discomfortable. To which end 2:2.
he does both call it a day of darkness, and blacknes; a day of clouds and
obscurity: and compares it to a cloud of the moorning, spread on the
mountains; that does for a time darken the parts beneath, and bondeth foul
weather besides. But coming to the other, on that does the Prophet more fully
follow; first describing it 2:1.3.
generally, and 3:4.11.
then Propounding certain principal things that more specially are to be
considered therein. In his general description of it, we are to note both what
kind of army it is in it self: and what is the effect thereof toward others.
In it self it is said 2:2.
to be great and strong: and such, as neither has been from the beginning;
neither shall be from any generation after. The effect that comes thereby
toward others, is 2:3.
that it is as a fire and flamb, before, and behind: insomuch that although the
country were before as Eden, yet is it afterward made by it, as a desolate
wilderness; and that nothing at all does escape it. Those principal things that
in this army are propounded, to be considered, are two: first how 2:4.6.
fearful it is to see to, in the show, or out ward appearance of it, then
2:7.11.
how readily they put in execution whatsoever they have to do. Both which he
describes, first, as they do arise, only out of the consideration of the thing
it self: and then of the effect that it works with others. And first for the
fearfulnes of it, as we are taught to gather it out of the consideration of it
self alone, it is said to be 2:4, 5.
not only as horses, horsemen, and chariots running too and fro on the
mountains; but also as a mighty people and those prepared to battle: of the
effect that it works, that it is as fire consuming stuble; and such as 2:6.
makes that the people tremble before it, and that all faces are blancke and
pale to behold it. Then for the other, that is, how readily they put in
execution whatsoever, they have to do, and first, as it is set forth unto us
out of the consideration of it self alone, we have there set down, how they
buckle themselves toward their business before they come at it: and then how
they do the thing it self when once they come to it. In the former of which
we have delivered unto us, not only such things, as do appertain unto the
discipline of good soldiers: but somewhat also, how prosperous they are
therein.

Those things that concern the discipline of good soldiers, are two: one,
that they are industrious; the other, that they are orderly in all their ways.
Their industry is declared in that they are said 2:7.
to run like strong men, and to clime up to the walls like warriors, and
not to stay or turn back in the way they have to walk: their orderlines
also, in that they are said 2:3.
not to thrust one an other; but to walk every one in his array. That which is
said of their prosperousnes therein, is no more but this, (and yet a matter of
great importance) that though they 2:3.
fail on the sword, yet are they not wounded therewith. In what sort they do
the thing it self, when once they come to it, is set down by the example of
rifling a city; how 2:9.
they run up and down therein a long by the wales, and into the houses, to
destroy and to spoil. As it is set forth unto us, out of the effect that it
works: the Prophet does not only note what effect it is that it works: but
also the reason, why it comes to pass that it has so strong an effect. The
effect that it works, is, that me^ shall be at their wits end 2:10.
as if the heavens and the earth were astonished at it, and clean confounded
and as if the Sun and the Moon were darkened, and the Stars took in their
light a gain. In giving of the reason here of the Prophet does not only show
what the reason is: but also how mightily the same does work. The reason it
self that caused this effect to ensue, is that 2:11.
the Lord himself did by his word authorize, and by his power enable
hereunto: and it is said to work so mightily, that the same day should be
great and very terrible, and that none should be able to abide it. An
exhortation to public fast.
In the exhortation that now does next ensue whereby he labors to bring them
to a public hearty repentance, we are to consider, first how to that end he
does set before them the word of the Lord: then, how himself does further
deal with them thereupon. In the word of the Lord that he sets before them
2:12.
he does not only show what it is that the Lord would have them to do, that
is, to turn unto him with all the heart, and with fasting and weeping, and with
moorning: but also, that even yet, he would have the^ to take that course,
though they have driven of very long already. That surther dealing that
hereupon the Prophet himself uses toward them, rests in two points: first
that he does in like sort call them unto the self same course, then that he
uses some strength of reason to persuade them unto it. He does in like sort
call them to the same course, by willing them 2:11.
to rent their hearts, and not their garments, and to turn unto the Lord their
God.

The strength of reason that there he uses to persuade them herein, is upon
the likely-hoode they have to obtain favor: which he does, first by setting
down very plainly, how merciful the Lord is: then by insinuating how
themselves may become partakers of it. As touching the mercifulnes of God 2:13.
he plainly says, that he is gracious and merciful, Slow to anger, of great
kindness, and one that will readily turn from the evil that he purposed. How
themselves may be partakers of it, though he do not plainly tell them: yet
both he does insinuate the same; and puts them in good hope of a special
blessing. That which he does insinuate to them, is that they seek it in most
carnest manner, as a thing that otherwise is hard to be attained: and thereupon
demands 2:14.
who does know, whether he will not be entreated to leave a blessing behind
him? The special blessing that he puts them in hope to obtein, is that
after that great famine, it might be, that the Lord would yet give such great
plenty, that they should content themselves to part with, a 2:14.
meat-offring and drink-offring unto the Lord their God. His latter repetition.


In his latter repetition wherein he seems to have it is purpose now, but
only to knit up the matter briefly having already called on them sufficiently
for it, first the Prophet does will them to bid or publish this fast: then does
he direct them in a few principal things that do concern the manner of it.
In that he does will them to publish this fast, it appears withal, both that
he would have the exercise held: and that he would have the congregation
gathered together to solemnize the same. As touching the former, he wills
them again 2:15.
to blow the trumpet in Zion, and to sanctify or publish a fast: as touching
the other, he wills likewise, that they 2:16.
gather the people together and assemble the congregation. Those few
principal things that do concern the manner of it are but two, one, how
thoroughly he would have the people to be gathered together in this exercise;
the other, how they should be exercised there. He would have them so thoroughly
gathered together, that he would have none wanting 2:16.
neither the old, nor the young: no, not the very sucking children; nor so
much as the bridgrome nor bride. Concerning their exercise there, he ^:17.
gives them direction, both who should be the chief^ leaders therein: and what
it is that they should do. The chief^ leaders therein should be the Priests
the Ministers of the Lord. Concerning that which they have to do he does not
only praescribe the thing it self unto them, but also the place where it
should be done. The thing it self rests in two points: to weep; and to
pray. Concerning Weeping, he does no more but only require it. But coming to
their Prayer, he praescribeth unto them the manner of it: both what to crave;
and how to plead for it. He would have them to crave, that the Lord would Spare
his people: and not to give his heritage over in reproach unto the heathen. In
reproach to the heathen they might easily be given, even by their famine only,
both because that in this case, they might easily be over run of their
enemies: and because it was reproachful to them, being by profession the
people of God, to be notwithstanding in such distress, when the heathen had
all things needful in plentiful manner. Their pleading he would have to rely
on the honor of God, teaching them to say, Wherefore should they say among the
people, where is their God. Concerning the place where it should be done, he
would have it, not at home, or wheresoever else; but only in the Temple (where
1. king 8.37. and 9:3.
God in this kind of distress also promised to hear) even Between the Porch
and the Temple.

12 Out of which likewise we may take to our selves many good lessons to our
instruction. If they were so heavy, much to be doubted, that wear not alwais
so very ready.
And first if they were so heavy that the Prophet needed to call on them so often
for this matter; and the Prophet thereupon stook not to bestow all this labor
upon them: neither may we think, that we are easily won to a godly sorrow,
especially, when we are to testify the same in public manner; neither may
any, to whom it belongs, think much to call on those that should do it,
again, and again. We also have cause to sorrow.
If that also were a just cause for them, to blow the trumpet in Zion, and to
shout in his holy mountain; and for all the inhabitants of the land to tremble:
truly this also was as just occasion to us, to do the like in ratable manner,
or in such measure, as the^ the hand of God was on us or yet is in much like
manner, as it was on them. For this also was a discomfortable darkness, when as
the poorer sort were so very much straightened, as then they were, and yet are,
and when their eye waxed dim for want of needful susteina^ce: when as this
cloud of darkness was spread so generally over the poorer sort, and over many of
the mountains themselves, that it darkened much the light of our wonted comfort
and joy; and ha^ging on us still so much as it does, bodeth I know not what
further distress to be toward us also. Or if we cast our eyes to that army,
that was so fierce and sore upon them, we have no great cause to co^ceave our
selves to be freed from it, when we may see, that our land also, being in a
manner as the garden of Eden before, has since been so far wasted by this, that
in many parts of it, it has been (in the yield of things needful) not far
unlike to a wilderness also: and that the same that hitherto was wont to help
many others with all manner of grain, was since fame to seek far of, that
which we wanted to our needful relief, and yet could not get it with all we
could do. But howsoever it has pleased God to take away the force of that
army from us: yet still does he threaten us with certain others; and such as
would gladly pray upon us, and kindly do it, if once they might attain unto
it. If we do not, it is our fault: it boadeth not that we have no such reason.
Insomuch that if our faces also be not abashed thereat, it is but our fault:
it is no argument that we were not then streightened so far as we speak of, or
that yet it is not evident that God does shake his rod against us. But when as
so many faces were pale for want of needful relief, and yet are, partly by it,
and partly by the sickness that is among us, and when as we may plainly
perceive that it is the hand of God yt is on us: it is a foul shame for us, if
our countna^ce be not something appauled thereat; and a very ill token besides,
if neither that distres of so many, nor our own sins that have brought such a
wrath upon us, can so far work with us, as to be in some good measure abashed
thereat. For surely that necessity of ours did also ru^ very strongly against
us, prpared to the battle with great speed, and in good array; and so
strengthened besides by the hand of God; that in no wise we could avoyde it: and
so did it break into our cities; it climed up into our howses; it both spoiled
and rifled all. I can not say, that the Heavens and the Earth were astonished
at it; that the Sun and the Moon were darkened; nor that the stars took
their light. God be thanked we were not there yet: our distres or scarcity
was not so great, that in these creatures it might be said to appear so much
as that other, in that sense that the Prophet does mean it. Nevertheless it
can not be denied, but that by that praesent scarcity we were so straightened,
that the ^eave^s by unseasonable wether for those two years, and the earth by
the small increase of corn that it has yielded, and both together by the loss
of our cattle withal, did pregnantly witness the hand of God to have been upon
us: and our scarcity being such as it was, those that were distressed thereby,
could have so little comfort by those other creatures, that to them the Sun and
Moon and Stars (after a sort, and in some measure) were darkened also, in that
sense that the Prophet means. Our spiritual famine.
And if we go further, to yt spiritual famine that not only was, but yet also is
among us, in all those places where the meat offering and drink-offring is taken
from the house of the Lord, therein may we see, (though in another sense, but
yet very pregnant, and of great importance) that the heavens no doubt are
astonished, and that the earth might very well tremble to see the Sun, the
Moon and the Stars, the Truth it self, the Church among us (in all such
places) and our very leaders themselves to be so darkened as they are, partly
by their own former ignorance, and error, and partly by the negligence and
carelesnes of those, that now should either amend themselves, That we also
should give our selves to our most sorrow.
or at least make sure that others did it. And now that we are in this case
that we are, what is there more seemly or convenient for us, then to turn to
the Lord: and to do that in so hearty manner, that neither such fasting, nor
weeping, nor moorning, as the Prophet requires be wanting from us? For what
else do these things teach us, but to turn unto him? and seeing that this hand
of God that was on us, did in some measure lie upon all (though some were much
more sharply touched therewith, then were some others) how could we do better,
then to have the profession of our repentance, public also? and whereas we do
plainly and daily see; that many were sore distressed herewith; and cannot be
ignorant but that our sins, that had provoked his wrath against us, are many
and great: how may we account it any other then our bounden duty, and plain
debt, that this our fasting be very thoroughly, and kindly steeped in weeping
and mourning; and that we stir up our selves unto so unfeined and earnest
sorrow in both these respects aforesaid, that even our hearts might (in
some measure) be ready to rent or cleave in sunder, for the sorrow that they
conceave, as not able to contein the same? And this so much the rather, as that
we now know much better then the Israelites could then, both what wrath is due
unto sin in the justice of God: and especially the great mercies of God; and
how ready he is to receave all such as do come unto him. For we now see both
those so plainly (besides all other means, which are infinite) only in the
death and passion of Christ, that as in respect of our offenses, and the
judgments of God that are due unto them (which in the death of Christ, the
only begotten Son of God we may see to be great) we are strongly urged, in
most humble wise to seek to him: so in respect of his great mercies, and his
most prompt readiness to be entreated of us (which also we may see in the death
of Christ, a great deal more clearly, then the light of the Sun, when it
shines the clearest of all) we may come with good hearts unto him, and in full
assurance, for to obtain his gracious favor. How beit we must know therewith
all that the matter is very hard: hard I say, but yet not doubtful. So that
although we may not doubt it: yet must we make sure, that we labor it
earnestly, with all our power, and all our strength, even to the uttermost that
we are able. And so doing, we also may hope, that, notwithstanding this, the
Lord will much rather leave us such meat-offring, and drinke-offring, as shall
be needful: as also our selves should take good heed, that we never
withdraw that from those to whom it is due; no, not in our own distress, as
Deuteronomy. 2^.14.
we may find our selves directed in the law of the Lord. And whereas the
Prophet requires that both old and young, sucklings also and those that are but
new-married, should come forth to this exercise, we also might learn that it
were needful for us likewise, to withdraw our selves for a time from our
wonted delights, and worldly affairs, and with one heart to assemble our
selves together to seek the Lord. Wherein, as al are to stir up themselves to
a godly and an hearty sorrow, of what estate, sex, or age soever they be: so
are the Ministers of the Lord especially to take so good a course therein, as
best may serve to stir up themselves, and others also, soundly, and thoroughly
to do what they have in hand; and well to remember, that, being, as they are,
the salt of the earth, they make the same now to appear, especially in this.
But whereas that late scarcity of ours, the sickness that now is, and the
troubles that are doubted by diverse might well be greevous unto us, not only
in respect of our selves, but much more for that the glory of God might be
touched thereby, and our holy profession ill spoken of likewise; although we may
very well be touched with the sense of our own necessities, yet are we in any
wise chiefly to respect the glory of God: and for that cause especially, to
desire the Lord to be favorable therein unto us, that whereas he has
vouchsafed us to be his people, and himself to be our God, we may in such sort
have his gracious help in all these matters, that it may be seen, that we have
a good and a gracious God; and that he accounts no otherwise of us (though in
our selves we can nothing deserve it) but as of his peculiar, and entirely
beloved people. He that Mat. 22:32.
said that God is not a God of the dead, but of the living, upon our hearty
repentance would soon procure, that though our estate were so hard, yet should
it be so altered, from worse, to better, from want to plenty, from sickness, to
health: from troubles, to godly peace, yt in our own experience soon we
should find, that the father him self would account it dishonorable to him that
we his people should still be miserable, How to find out what those sins were,
of which they had to repent them now.
and as it were swallowed up with distress.

13 Those sins in particular that the people the^ were infected withal, although
this our Prophet does not name the^ (as it seems, upon such reason as before
is declaerd: yet both they may be easily gathred out of the history of that
time; and it is good that we herein have some eye unto them, that so we may the
more to our aedifying, apply this call of the Prophet unto our selves. And the
history of this praesent time is set forth unto us sufficiently, at least, to
this purpose) both in the history of the kings of Judah: and in certain of
the Prophets besides: Out of the story of the Kings.
But in the story of the kings of Judah there are but two of those their
kings, on whom we may rely for this matter: which are Vzziah, and Iotham his
son. To the time of Vzziah we have recourse, because it is found to be the
time whereunto his prophecy does chiefly belong, as before is declared: Sect.
2.
to Iotham likewise, not only because he succeeded next (and so belongs very
much to that time likewise) but because that he 2. Chho. 26:19.
bare the sway in his fathers days, after that once his father was stricken
with leprosy. In both which that we may the better find out the estate of
the people in their days, and so consequently what it was wherein they chiefly
offended, we are to consider of what disposition they were themselves: and so
shall we find in some reasonable manner; the ways of the people that were
governed by them. For, besides that the Scripture does not otherwise set down
unto us, what their ways were (but very little) in this story, we see that
experience does commonly teach, that such as the Prince is, such also are the
people generally. Insomuch that if the Prince be religious, the people do so
much the more embrace religion; if otherwise himself regard not religion, the
people also make light of it: and so do we ever for the most part see it, not
only in religion, but also in all other things besides. Vzziah.
First therefore to begin with Vzziah (who also 2. Kings 14:21.
is called Aziriah) we are to see in what sort he is described unto us: first
as touching his inclination to Religion; and then as touching his disposition
in such things as belonged to his civil estate. In his inclination to religion
likewise we are to consider what was commendable in him: and what was
reprovable. Commendable it is, that he is 2. Chro. 26:4, 5.
said to have done uprightly in the sight of the Lord, and that in the days of
Zachariah, who understoode the visions of God, he did more specially seek the
Lord; and in such sort sometimes, that the Lord did prosper him for it. It is
likewise reprovable Ibid. verse. 4.
that he followed not the Lord with all his heart, but only as his father
Amaziah did (of whom it is said Ibid. 25:5.
that he did uprightly in the sight of the Lord but not with a perfect heart;
as also 2. King. 14:4.
that he took not away the high places, but that the people did sacrifice and
burn incense thereon: and that 2. Chro. 26:16:19.
himself did praesume to intermeddle with the Priests Office, and therein
would not be admonished by the Priests that forbad it unto him. As touching
his disposition in these matters that concern his civil estate, some there
were that were honorable unto him; others again, that did not so well become
the person and state that he sustained. Honorable it was, that he 2. Chro.
26:6, 7, 8.
did so valiantly against the enemies, the Philistines, Arabians, and
Ammonites: and that 2. Chro. 26:9, 11-15.
both the fortified Jerusalem; and, not only had in a readiness so strong an
army for the number of men (being two thousand and six hundredth Captains, of
special account, and three hundred and seven thousand and five hundred others
besides, but also had in a readiness for them all manner of furniture, even to
the very stones that were for their slings. That which did not so well become
the person and state that he sustained, was that he had such a fancy to
husbandry and employed himself so very much about his own private gain. For
Ib. verse. 10.
it is said not only that he loved husbandry (which if he had done like a
Prince, careful to cherish it in his kingdom, it had been very commendable
likewise:) but also that himself had much cattle in the valleys and plains,
plowmen also and dressers of vines, in the mountains and in Carmel; and that,
for that purpose, he builded towers or lodges in the wilderness, ^otham.
and dug Cisterns for them also, Concerning Iotham his son, it appears
also, that 2. King. 15:34, 35. and 2. Chro. 27:2.6.
he was much like to his father: and so consequently that his manner of
government, was like unto his, not only when he ruled for his father, but
when he reigned for him self likewise.

But as touching 2. King. 15:34, 35 and 2. Chho. 27:2, 3, 6.
his inclination to Religion, we are more specially to note, that though it
be said of him, that he did uprightly in the sight of the Lord; and builded
the high gate in the house of the Lord: yet is it witnessed also, that he
sought the Lord, but as his father did; that the high places remained, and the
people corrupted their ways; and that himself did not enter into the Temple.
Out of certain of the Prophets.
The Prophets that do apperteine, both to this people that we have in hand,
and to the time that now we speak of, are only Isaiah, Amos, and Micah: of
which, Isaiah only kept himself to the Jews alone (I mean in the first part
of his prophecy, which is all, as I noted before, that we may seek to for
this matter) whereas both the others spoke to the Isaralites, and Jews
together. But they all easily may be found in a people that have such Princes
as we see that Vzziah and Iotham were. Isaiah.
For Isaiah first rebukes them, not only in matters that concern Religion:
but also for such other vices, as may very well seem to come from such
disposition as their Princes had. Concerning Religion, he plainly charge
them that 5:24.
they had cast of the law of the Lord, and contemned the word of the holy one
of Israel: and that they 1:19.
had groves and high places, and delighted therein: and therefore 1:11-15.
did the Lord earnestly protest, that he misliked al their offerings and holy
assemblies. As touching other vices among them, some he lays to the charge of
all generally: others again more specially to the charge of some. Generally to
all, that whereas now, they should have 5.4.
brought forth the right or natural grape, they 5:19.
made light of the threatening of God; and 3:9.
were of such countenances, that, that thereby they made their sin manifest
even as Sodom. More specially he notes the greater sort of them with two
special faults: both with hard dealing toward others; and, when so they are
come to immoderate wealth, that then they wax insolent and excessive therewith.
As touching their hard dealing, some part of it he seems to allot to those
that deal in administration of justice: and some part of it to others again
indifferently. Those that deal in administration of justice he charged that
1:23.
they loved gifts and followed rewards: and that 5:7.
in steed of Judgment: there was oppression, and in steed of righteousness,
crying: That which he laid to the charge of others of them indifferently, was,
that they 5:8.
joined house to house and land to land, that they might dwell alone that their
1:15.
hands were full of blood; that they 3:14, 15.
did eat up the vineyard: having the spoil of the poor in their houses,
beating the people in pieces and grinding the very faces of the pore. As
touching their own insolency, and excess he charge them also, that they
2:11.27.
had high looks, and were hauty and lofty: and that not only all that sort of
the^ generally 5:11, 12.
gave themselves to immoderate drinking and feasting, and music joined
withal, no man regarding the work of the Lord, but also that 3:16-24.
the women were proud, nice, and vain in their behavior, and excessive and
costly in their attire. Amos.
Amos deals not very much with the Jews (to speak of) yet he also charge
them both with great default toward religion; and with those other vices
besides. In their default of religion he charge the^ thus far, 3:4.
that they had cast away the law of the Lord, and not to have kept his
Commandments: and that their lies, after which their fathers walked, caused
them to err. As touching those other vices 6:3.
he also do charge the^ that they deal violently with others, or approach to
the seat of iniquity: and that they 6:1.
take their ease on their beds of yvorie 6:4.6.
live in abundance and plenty, nothing sorrowing for the affliction of Joseph;
and that they 6:3.
regard not Gods threatenings. Micah.
Micah likewise does charge them partly with co^tumacie to wards God: but
especially with hard dealing toward their neighbor. As for the former he
plainly says, that 2:6.
they forbad the true Prophets to prophecy unto them, and chose rather to hear
men pleasers. As touching their hard dealing toward others, first he lays
that sin to their charge: then he denounces certain judgments of God against
them. Concerning that their sin, he does plainly tell the^, that 6:12.
they are full of cruelty: that they 7:2.
lie in wait for blood, and that every man hu^teth his neighbor with a net,
that in the nighttime 2:1, 2.
devising what means to work by on their beds, in the morning they set in hand
with it, taking away fields and houses by violence, oppressing a man and his
heritage together: that 2:8.
themselves being clothed do spoil others of their garments, and that when
there is no war but peace, yt 2:9.
they spare neither women nor children: that they 3:2, 3.
pluck of the skin from the pore, and their flesh from ye bones, and chop them
in pieces as flesh to the pot, and then pray upon them: and that 7:4.
the best of them all is as a brier; and the most righteous of them as a
thorn-hedge. The judgementes of God that for these things, he denounces
against them, are first as touching them selves, that 2:4.
they shall be utterly wasted, and 3:4.
in their necessity not be heard when they cry unto the Lord: then as touching
the whole state, that 3:12.
for their sakes Zion should be plowed, Jerusalem should be made an heap of
ruble, and that the mountain of the house should be as the high places of the
forest.

14 Having so found out what those sins were, What those sins of theirs were.
that story of that praesent time does lay to their charge, now may we with
one labor behold, both what those sins were, with which the people were
infected then, and which the Prophet would have them to leave, and turn to the
Lord: and what those sins were, which we also may think of on behalf of our
selves, if so it be, that by this occasion we think good now, in some special
manner to turn to the Lord. Concerning them, in Religion first we see, that
their Princes them selves were far to seek of that sincerity and zeal, In
Religion: which was professed by them, but much neglected.
that was to be looked for of them. For though they did not give themselves to
Idolatry as diverse others of their ancestors had done, nor yet inhibit the
service of God by the law appointed: yet were they but weak professors of
Religion them selves, and tolerated much corruption besides among their people.
Vzziah, though he sought the Lord, and did uprightly, in comparison of many
others: yet notwithstanding had not his heart perfect, and plainly declared
himself to be very ignorant, or at least very careless of a known, and a
principal point of the law of God. He was such an husband, that it is less
marvel though he were but a mean Divine. Iotham his son built a fair gate
unto the Temple, but himself did not enter into it. Though he laid open a way
unto others and that in fair, and honorable manner: yet himself did take no
benefit of it. It was well, that he made a way to others: but it had been
much better, if he had taken the use thereof to him self likewise. And as for
the people, it is plainly set down, that in the days of both these, they had
the high places, and worshipped there: which was clean contrary unto the rule
that the Law praescribed. But seeing that we have so evident testimony of the
ignorance of the one, and coldenes of the other, it is no great marvel, if
neither of them both did much regard it: the one, because it may well be that
the law of God, or at least that it was not of so great importance; the other,
for that himself caring so little as he did to frequent the Temple, he could
less mislike of others that came there as little as he, but elsewhere
bestowed the devotion they had. It may be also that first he himself, and
then the people together with him, refused the Temple and worshipped
elsewhere, because that Vzziah his father was in such sort stricken there for
going to far. For such is the untowardnes (or frowardnes rather) of the heart
of man, that if they may not do as they would, neither will they in any wise
be brought to do as they should. In civil matters they provided well against
the enemy but were grievous to their own people at home.
In matters that concern their civil estate, first that they both were so
well given (but especially the father) to fortify Jerusalem, and before hand
to provide, and to have in a readiness such forces and furniture, as were meet
for the needful defense of the State, it was not only very commendable and
honorable to themselves: but also to great use to the Church of God. For
Jerusalem had then enemies inow, and the people of God had otherwise been in
danger of them. And yet because that otherwise Religion was no better regarded,
thereby it appears, that this tended not so much to the praeseruation of the
Church of God: as, either to their own honor, or to the maintenance of their
earthly estate. Inordinate care of private wealth not meet for the higher sort.
But that they were so very much given (especially the father) to increase
their private wealth, that was not only evil in it self: but, no doubt, the
occasion of much evil besides. It was ill in it self, first because the law
of God Deuteronomy. 17:17.
did plainly set down, that such as should be Kings over his people,
should not multiply their treasure, or endeavor themselves to increase their
riches; and, besides that Number. 26:52 56. Ios. 11:25.
praescribed unto them such a distribution of the land among them, as would
not affoorde the Prince to have any such part to his own proper use: then
also, because that it was not seemly, but very dishonorable, that such as
should make others rich, and attend the wealth of all, should so much be
given unto the love of money themselves, as such kind of exercise does import
that they were. For otherwise, to what end should the King of Judah have so
much cattle, in the valleys, and in the plain; yea even in the wast or desert
places? To what other end should he dig those wels and set up those new
buildings of his for his heardes and flocks, and for such as he had to attend
upon them? To what other end should he have such fields and vineyards,
plough-men likewise, and dressers of vines. Much evil comes thereby.
The evil that by occasion hereof might otherwise come, may be so much, and so
very great, that hardly may any man think to find out or to reckon the same:
insomuch that the Apostle himself does account it the root of all ill. But if
we may find that such things as the Prophets (as before was alleged) did lay
to the charge of that people, and of that time may justly be imputed to this:
then shall that course be sufficient for us; and we shall not need to force
any more upon it. For if the defect of religion that those Prophets do charge
them withal, and those other vices, may be found to be of that nature, that
they might proceed of this, then is it no wrong so to conceave of such
inclination of theirs, and the matter that now we have in hand will be
sufficiently cleared likewise. Coldness in religion.
First therefore as touching that defect of theirs in religion, without al
quaestion it might easily come of this. For wheresoever there is such a love of
private wealth, and a nature disposed, so busily to employ it self, about
those inferior and earthly matters, there is religion soon let down, or
thriueth but ill, though after a sort as yet it stand. Hard dealing with others.
But then if we come to those other vices (hard dealing with others, and
excess in them selves) those are of such nature, as that every one may
plainly see, how they may very kindly proceed of such disposition of those
as before is described. For as for their hard dealing with others, when the
Princes themselves get into their hands those fields and vineyeards, and had
such pastures, and were such husbands for corn, cattle, and wines, what others
were there in all that country (that had ability) that would not soon attempt
the like: when as the Princes example had first set them on, and gave them
besides so good hope of protection for the time to come? And surely it is not
unlikely, but that al generally (especially the greater sort of them) did so
follow on this naughty course so ill begun, that it is no marvel, though Isaiah
complain so earnestly both of joining house to house, and land to land, and
besides that, that when such things come in quaestion, and the weaker sort were
feign to seek to the Magistrate for help, their oppression notwithstanding
was little eased, and still they had just cause to complain. Mo marvel neither,
though Micah do so grievously charge them, to be full of cruelty; to lie in
wait for blood, to hunt their neighbors; to take away from them their grounds,
and houses; to oppress a man, and his heritage; to spoil the^ of their
garments, in time of peace; to spare neither sex nor age; to pull of their
skins; and to chop them in pieces unto the pot: and that the best of them all
are so infected with his corruption, that although they deal much more
moderately in respect of the others, yet they also are in truth no better, in
this kind of dealing, then briurs and thorns. So likewise, Excess in
themselves
for their excess in themselves, it is, as we know, most commonly seen, that
when men are come to immoderate wealth, then do they soon wax wantons
withal. And then no marvel, that Isaiah does so complain of the high looks
of that people, and that they were so haughty and lofty; that they were so
give^ to feasting, drinking, and music to make themselves merry: and yet that
in all this, they nothing regarded the work of the Lord. No marvel neither,
that the women of that time were grown now to such a fashion, as that he is
forced so to complain both of their attire, and of their behavior. And these
things considered it is no marvel that Amos is so bold, as to look into the
bed-chambers also of the wealthier sort, and thence to bring us word, that
even in Zion they live at ease, and take their pleasure: and that none of them
all, either is sorry for the affliction of Joseph, or else regards the
threatenings of God.

15 But to leave them, and to come to our selves, first as touching Religion,
there is no quaestion, That we also may find the self same faults among us
likewise. In Religion, a godly and a commendable care to be found in us.
but that we are deeply and much beholding to God, for that which we have
already among us: as any such people in these our days is, or heretofore to
our knowledge has been, since the world began. For of our Superiors likewise,
it may I trust, as truly be said, that they have done uprightly, and directed
their ways aright in the sight of the Lord: and both with Vzziah do more
specially seek the Lord sometimes; and with Iotham likewise have repaired
that high gate to the house of the Lord, and made a ready way for all to come
unto it that will. For whereas religion was corrupted before, and both
superstition and idolatry also were commonly taken for the true worship of
God, they have laid the word of God before them, and made reformation
according to the level thereof: and besides this general reformation for all,
sometimes besides they have more specially sought the Lord, when some special
cause has so required; and when they have had concurring withal the direction
of such, as have dealt sincerely with them in the name of the Lord. Likewise it
is very clear, that they have repaired again that high, and chief, and
principal gate of the Temple, even Jesus Christ (who said himself, that he
was the gate or door to the house of the Lord) and have not only made a ready
way for all to enter into the house of the Lord; but also have been at
special charges in repairing the ruins of the buildings themselves that are
to that use. But the like corruption to be found likewise.
But then it is to be doubted withal, that the infirmity and corruption that
was in them, does cleave over fast to us likewise: and so consequently, that it
is not done with a perfect heart; but rather as some Amaziah has done, that is
gone before us. High places remaining with us also.
For first as touching that fault that was common to them both, that is, that
the high places did still remain; and that the people did sacrifice and burn
incense there: that same fault may certainly be found overmuch with us to this
praesent day that now we are in, if we can rightly distinguish of those high
places, that are most likely here to be meant. For whereas they were all places
of worship, but some of them tended to the worship of the ttue God, though not
in such sort as his word required (in which sense Gibeon also, where the
Tabernacle was for a time, 2. Chro. 1:3.
is termed an high place) others again to the worship of jdols (as 1. King.
11:7, 8.
those places are termed that Salomo^ builded to certain idols after that once
he fell to idolatry; and many others) it is not likely that the high places
which among them were said to remain, were any of those that belonged to idols:
but only of those where the people were wont of old to worship the Lord;
which notwithstanding ought not to have bin, after that once God himself had
appointed the place where he would be woorshipped. For if these had bin of
that other sort of high places, that is, of those that were ordained to the use
of idolatry, then could not these Kings that let them remain, in any sense
have had that commendation, that they did uprightly in the sight of the Lord,
etc. Taking it therefore in the other sense, their oversight or fault was this,
that they did not make the people to come to Jerusalem (as the Lord had
appointed) to worship there: but suffered the^ to worship in diverse other
places, that they had before inured themselves unto. In which sense it does
challenge us also herein to be offenders with them: that is that we also have
high places remaining, wheresoever God is not worshipped as he has appointed,
but only after our own custom. For where so ever the maintenance of
instruction is taken away to profane uses, and no other provision made for the
needful relief of the people there (of which sort there be very many with us,
and those, for the most part, of the greatest congregations also) there may we
be sure is an high place remaining: there do the people worship, as they were
wont; but not in such sort as the Lord has appointed. And hove offensive they
are unto God.
Which also may be a very good cause, why, although the history do give them
so good commendation, because they did (in their weak manner) keep to the
Lord, and turned not aside unto idols as others did: yet the Prophets do so
roundly charge the people of that time, as before we have heard, and namely
that the Lord was now grown to a great hatred of their assemblies, and
utterly rejected, both their oblations, and them selves withal. And it is very
much to be doubted of us likewise, that God already has, or else some may
conceave such an hatred, not only of those assemblies that yet d^ worship in
these high places of ours (because that they obtrude unto him, that which in no
wise he can accept of) but also of all our other chief and highest assemblies
likewise, even the best that we have, though there we worship him never so
rightly, only because we do but suffer those others to have naught else in
effect but high places as yet, ^ome of us also somevvhat to far, and others to
short.
for lukers sake. Those that were proper to either of them, were but a couple:
for each of them, one. Vzziah meddled somewhat too far in the Priests office:
and Iotham came as far behind when as he entered not into the Temple. And how
soever it be that I do not see, how we are in danger of that fault of Vzziah,
unless that for matters of religion we take our direction otherwise, then from
the learneder and godlier sort of the Ministry (which, as I take it, in some
respects is much to be doubted) yet in the other we may plainly see, that we
also are very great offenders, diverse of us absenting our selves from the
Church of an inward hatred unto it; and many more for filthy luker, pastime, or
ease; nicenes, or pride. And diligent searchers (I am persuaded) might likewise
find that whether it were the fault of Iotham or not, that he would not enter
into the Temple, because his father might not there do what he would; yet
that it might plainly be found in diverse of us, that there is no greater cause
of the absence of many of us: and that as Iotham that entered not into the
Temple, nevertheless bestowed cost on it; so it might be found among us, that
diverse of those that in outward show bear a good countenance toward the
Gospel, and do somewhat for it, yet nevertheless when need requires are
but dissembling and loose friends unto it. In those things that are civil.
In matters that concern our civil estate likewise, it is very commendable
that her Majesty has in so good readiness such provision of men, money, and
furniture, as (God be thanked) she has on behalf of the state against the
enemy; especially, seeing that their quarrel is against the Gospel, and to
set up Popery again: yet by the covetousnes of some few, and to maintain
their excess and riot, the common soldier is often times so much defrauded of
his pay, that himself is distressed, others discouraged, and her Majesty's
service not a little defeated thereby. But if we come to those other vices,
therein may we find our selves so plainly described, Certain special vices.
and as it were so truly set out in our lively colors, that the Prophets
therein may seem, as much to have spoken before of us, as to have applied their
speech unto the^ Not so much here tofore.
For howsoever that the time heretofore has been, when those vices were not to
be found so rife among us, as they are now: yet in these days of ours they are
grown to such head, and every where are so commonly found, that now the
Prophets may have those saynges of theirs as fully verified in us, as at that
time it may seem that they were in the^. When we were not only at variance
among ourselves (about the title of the Crown, betwixt the two houses of York
and Lancaster, until that it pleased God of his goodness to unite the^ together
in one) but also in so miserable bondage to the Bishop of Rome, that no body
could have any comfortable fruitio^ of lands or goods, the^ was there made
less reckoning of them: then might the meaner sort more quietly have the^; and
the^ were not our courts so pestred with daily complaints of oppression and
fraud, nor the judges themselves to be so easily charged with delays,
excessive charges, respect of persons, and others such like. But now very
plainly.
But since the time that God has vouchsafed us greater mercies, that we may
not only have, but also enjoy in peaceable manner, both lands and goods,
without the fear of any contrary parts at home, or of those Romish publicans
from abroad, that so insatiably exacted of us what so ever we had: now are we
all generally so ready to take the advantage of this opportunity, that though
all do sca^ble, and help them selves so well as they can; yet do the mightier
sort overlay the weaker, and daily do praevail against them more and more. And
so pruailing, what is it they do, with that great and immoderate wealth that
they have? What is it else but either that they make it a way, or readier mean
to attain unto more: or else to abound in such excess, as no words that these
Prophets have used, are sufficient to express the same; nor former examples,
in this country of ours, for many ages able to match it? In so much that
excess is much greater with us, then it was with them: and as for oppression,
both it is very rife among us (even the most greevous, that the Prophets have
named) and when our Courts are sought unto for help, what by the excessive
chargeablenes they are come unto, and what by delays; and, when matters come
toward ending, what by corruption or respect of persons then, we also may see,
that our justice is very much turned to worme-wood and gall, and that
oppression may sometimes be found in place of judgment, and crying out for
lack of help, where there ought to have been aequity done. The nature of this
hand of God considered may indifferent plainly teach us our offenses herein.
And seeing that these things are so rife among us, we are less to marvel,
and withal to acknowledge his righteous judgments, that God has so touched
us with this late scarcity: both for the abuse of his plenty before, and for
our hard dealing with our neighbors also. Whereby we also may the better be
able to see, what these sins are, whereof more specially we are to repent, if
so be that we are disposed, by occasion of this hand of God upon us, truly to
turn our selves unto him.

16 Now to return to our Prophet again, Of those better things that upon
their repentance were toward the^.
that better estate, that afterward (upon their repentance) by the goodness of
God they were to enjoy, is of so great and special importance, that it ought
to weigh very far with them toward the working forth of their repentance,
when as they were to enjoy such blessings thereby. And if we likewise may
assure our selves of the like mercies, when so ever we shall turn unto him,
although I know that our hearts be very heavy to such a purpose: yet dare I
before hand set down this for most certain, both that the benefits them
selves which are promised here, are of such importance, and that we are (in
these days of the Gospel) in so likely a way to obtain them, that even this
consideration only ought to be of that account with us, as that we should
need nothing else to moove us to such a public repentance, as in this place
the Prophet does call them unto. Therefore concerning that better estate of
theirs, first 2:18.
the Prophet himself does promise it unto them generally: then, for the better
assurance thereof, and the better to strengthen them therein, he medleth no
further him self in that matter, but only 2:18-31 21.
all ageth how the Lord has answered already concerning the same. In that the
Prophet him self does assure them of it generally we are to note, both what
affection the Prophet declares the Lord to bear toward his people: and how
favorably he is determined to deal with the^. First of what affection God was
toward the^.
His affection he notes to be as jelousie, that so they may the better see how
unfeinedly he loves the^, and how hardly he ca^ abide that any hurt should lie
upon the^: and that, according to this his inward affection; he means to deal
favorably, he shows likewise, that notwithstanding they have otherwise
deserved; yet will he spare them, or be gracious unto the^. Then coming to
show the^ what the Lord has answered for that matter 2:19-27.
first he shows what the Lord has answered concerning the removing or
taking away of their praesent calamity: 2:28-3:21.
then concerning certain other blessings besides of greater importance, which
the Lord, the better to strengthen them in the assurance of this his promise,
declares himself to be fully minded (in time to come) to bestow upon them.
Concerning the remooving of their praesent calamity, 2:19, 20.
first he tells them what he will do: 2:22-27:
then he raises up the hearts of them all to the assurance of it. That which
he will do, Then what proceeded out of the same: first how that praesent
calamity of theirs should be taken away.
tends to their help as touching the calamity that then they were in: and
first as touching the needful relief of their bodies; then as touching the
reproach that therewithal they sustained (of which also 2:17:
themselves had complained before) by having such a plague cast upon them.
Concerning the needful relief of their bodies 2:19. Both that they should have
convenient relief: and be rid of the reproach also.
he does not only promise to send them corn, wine, and oil: but also in so
plentiful manner, that notwithstanding this their famine now, yet then that
they be fully satisfied. Concerning the reproach that thereby they sustained,
first he speaks thereof unto them for the time to come generally: then more
specially of their deliverie from that reproach that then they were in.
Generally he tells them 2:19.
that he will no more make them a reproach among the heathen. More specially
concerning this reproach that now they were in, first he tells them how they
shall be delivered from it: then he remooveth out of the way a doubt that
otherwise might trouble them, or shows a reason why he will so do. In
telling them how they shall be delivered 2:20.
he gives them to understand, that he will make such a dispatch of that army
of noisome creatures, as that both themselves shall be delivered from their
annoyance: and that, the better to abolish this reproach from them, it shall be
done in such sort, as that it may plainly appear, that the Lord has done it
on behalf of his people, both by scattering them away into the North, South,
East, and West; and for that their stinch or corruption shall be great. That
the sense of the other is diverse, it hangs upon the diverse reading. For if
we read, 1:20:
although it has exalted it self (that is, the army aforesaid) to do this,
then does he remove out of the way a doubt that otherwise might trouble them.
But if we read, because it has exalted it self, etc. then is it a reason, why
the Lord would so destroy them. Either of which may stand very well, and to
the comfort of those that were distressed thereby. The better to raise up the
hearts of them all to the assurance of it, he altogether directs his speech
to that end: and first to the creatures from whom a good part of this their
relief should come; and then unto the people themselves. Those creatures that
he speaks unto, are first the earth: then, next thereunto, the beast of the
field. Speaking to the earth 2:22.
both he forbids it to Fear, and also wills it to be glad and rejoice:
and adds a (general) reason why, that this, because the Lord will do most
woonderfully. Speaking to the beasts of the field likewise, 2:22.
both he forbids them to fear: and adds a reason that is more special,
but one part of it very near, that is, because the pastures, even of the
wilderness, should be green; the other somewhat farther of, that is to say,
because the tree should bear her fruit, the fig tree and vine should give
their force. Then coming to speak to the people themselves, therein have we
to consider, who they are to whom he now speaks so comfortably: then what it
is he says unto the^. Those to whom he speaks so comfortably, are 2:23.
the children of Zion, or the repentant and faithful people. That which he
speaks unto them, does most of all concern his mercies toward them for
this praesent time: but some part of it is, of the extending forth of the same
to the time to come. That which concerns the praesent time rests in two
principal points: first exhorting them to rejoice; then showing forth diverse
good reasons why they should so do. In that he exhorts them to rejoice, we
are to note, that he does 2:23.
not only will them to rejoice and be glad: but also that he praescribeth
unto them the manner of it; that is, that it must be in the Lord.

The reasons he adds to tend to this end, to show how notably he means
to refresh them: first showing that he will give them victuals again; then
also declaring, in how plentiful manner he will do it. The better to confirm
them in the former, first he assures them of seasonable weather: then he
tells them how fruitful those years shall be thereby. Concerning the
weather, he says, that he will give unto them 2:23.
rain and showers just in their season, and so soon as ever need requires.
Concerning the other, he shows that those years should be so fruitful, 2:24.
that their barnes should be full of wheat; and their presses run over with
wine and oil. The better to show forth in how plentiful manner he will do
it, he tells them, that he will do it so plentifully, that them selves
shall 2:25.
both be recompensed for the loss that they had by that great host of his of
those noisome creatures: and 2:26.
eating continually shall be satisfied; and that in such sort, that they shall
praise the name of the Lord their God that dealt so marvelously with them. In
that which tends to show how this his mercy is extended forth to the time
to come, we are to consider, first what it is that he says of that matter:
then how he repeateth some part of it again. That which he says of that
matter, is 2:26.
first that his people shall never be ashamed: then, on the other side, that
2:27.
they shall know, that he is in the midst of Israel; that he is the Lord
their God, and that there is none other. That which he repeateth again, is,
that 2:27.
his people shall never after be confounded again.

17 Herein also to remember our selves, The like affection of God toward us.
first as touching that affection of God toward them, it was in deed very
great, that he could put on the whole power of Jealousy on their behalf, and
that in such sort as it does apperteine unto his nature, that is, very fully,
or in the highest degree that can be. Yet notwithstanding, if we consider the
great and singular blessings that he has already in these days of the
Gospel bestowed upon us, and how many wais he has already often times declared
his favor toward us, both at home among ourselves, and a broad aagainst our
enemies by sea, and by land; in peace, and in war; in Religion, and matters
of State; and how so ever else: it ought (no doubt) to be so far of, for any
man to think it over bold a part, for us to account of the like favor of his
toward us also, (if we truly turn unto him) that rather we offend if we
do it not, and do over much call into quaestion his goodness toward us, when
he has already so many ways so much declared the same. And if he be so well
inclined toward us; we need not doubt, but that in these, and al things else,
he will be ready to deal with us accordingly. The^ as touching the remooving
of those evils, that of late were, or yet are hanging upon us, as he did assure
them, How likely it is that God will now deliver us also, from this hand of his
upon us.
that so far as it concerned the releef of their bodies, he would not only ease
them of that extreme famine, but also bless them with great plenty: so
likewise we may co^ceave, that he may be induced in such sort to deal with us
also upon our repentance, not only because that he ever is very gracious to all
that turn unto him; but also because he has already eased us of a good part
of our scarcity, and for this year that now comes in, he has hitherto given
(his name be ever blessed therefore) as great tokens of special plenty, as at
any time heretofore for these many years we have lightly had. In like manner,
whereas he promised, to deliver them of that reproach, for that matter he is
beforehand with us; partly for that he has helped us so far already, and our
scarcity when it was at the worst, yet was it not so extreme (by any want that
God has sent us, but only by the hardness of greedy men) as that any way it
might turn us, or our profession unto reproach; and partly for that others of
our neighbors that are about us, and subject unto Popery yet (from whom our
reproach does ever arise, whe^soever they have any advantage against us, were
then, and yet are, as it is said, much more straightened by it, the^ we. And as,
to the end that he might better lift up the hearts of that people to the
assurance of these his promises, he turns his talk unto the earth, and to the
creatures that are therein, willing them no more to fear, but to rejoice in
respect of that plenty that now was toward them: so may we see, that already
he has in such sort spoken unto the earth on our behalf, that well it may
rejoice our hearts now to behold it; and thereby also does so comfort and cheer
those creatures that are therein, that they also must needs be joiful to see the
earth in that likelihood, to be so well replenished with alsuch things as they
do need. But where as he promised them, that he would make so clean a riddance
of those noisome creatures that they should be scattred into all quarters far
from them, and that their stinch should arise up unto heaven; although we
cannot see the same in this case of ours, be cause our scarcity did not come
by such noisome creatures, but only by that immoderate moisture in seed time
and harvest: yet may we see, that in effect he has done it in easing us thereof
so much as we see already he has done, and the performance thereof we may hope,
both in this, and in the residue of those evils that now are on us, or
otherwise may seem to hang over our heads, and to be in a redines to fall upon
us. Then if we come to the people the^ selves to whom he does so comfortably
speak, we also must note, that where as they are none others but the children
of Zion; neither may we look to find that favor with him, unles we sort our
selves to that company. The mercies of God toward his are great: but ever
(lightly) restrained withal to those that are his. Though the tree be never so
full of sap: yet no part of it is lightly imparted, but only unto such boughs
and branches as belong thereunto. As for the residue, wherein he promises to
relieve their necessity, and to do it in so plentiful manner, we may very well,
upon our repentance, assure our selves of that point of favor also, both
because he is a God of so great favor toward those that seek him, and because
that in helping us so far already, he has put us in hope, that he means the
full performance of it: and if we continue in his fear, that he will never
give us up unto the reproach of any of our enemies whatsoever.

18 Concerning those other greater blessings, which the Lord for their better
strengthening in this, Of those other blessings besides.
did, now de clare himself to be fully purposed (in time to come) to bestow
upon them, the Prophet names a couple: ^:28-32.
a further manifestation of the truth; and therewith all 3:1-21.
a notable protection from their enemies. As touching that further
manifestation of the Truth because that whenever it comes abroad into the
world, A further manifestation of the Truth.
it does come, not only in mercy to them that believe, but also in judgment to
those that are incredulous and disobedient (and that on behalf of his people
also) therefore does the Prophet in this place declare, in what sort it shall
be given to both those sorts: 2:28, 29.
how mercifully and graciously toward those that believe; and 2:30-32.
in how strange, and fearful manner to those that believe not. How mercifully
toward the^ that believe.
How mercifully and graciously it does proceed toward those that believe, we
may gather, both in respect of the thing it self: and in respect of the effect
that in them it should work. The thing it self does notably witness the mercy
of God; both in respect of the nature of it; and because it is so abundantly
given. In respect of the nature of it, it is said to be the 1:28.
gift of the Spirit: and the same the Spirit of God. It is also abundantly
given, for that it is said to be 2:2^.
poured forth: and upon al flesh. The effect that in them it works, is first
set down generally: then more specially. Generally it is said, that 2:28.
their sons and their daughters should prophecy: that is, that the
generation that was to come should be al generally endewed with that light of
the truth, that they should be able to prophecy, both in respect of the truth
of the thing it self; and especially, in respect of that measure of knowledge,
that in those days of former time God vouchsafed for to bestow on the children
of men. More specially it is described, both in respect of the excellency of
the knowledge it self that is give^ unto them: and in respect of the persons to
whom it is given. The excellency of the knowledge it self is noted to be
great, in that it is 2:28.
compared to those dreams and visions Number. ^^:^^.
whereby it pleased God of old, to make himself, and his will and pleasure known
to his people. In respect of the persons to whom it is given, it is also
commended, when as it is said to be so generally given forth unto al, as that
al estates shall be very fully possessed of it. To that end he names not only
12:^^.
the old and young, which are, for the most part, most estra^ged from such
matters: but also even their very ^ 2:29.
bondmen, and bond-women, who are yet further of then the others, both because
their Masters make no such account of them; and because that them selves, being
in that misery that commonly they are in, have no joy in any such matter to
attain unto it. In setting forth how strangely and fearfully this
manifestation of the truth shall appear unto others (which also he does to
their comfort, as before is noted) 2:30, 31.
first he sets down how sorrowful a portion they shall have therein: and
2:32.
then how the faithful, in this execution of heavy judgments on those,
shall notwithstanding them selves escape or be in safety. In how strange, and
fearful manner to those that believe not.
The portion that those others, that is, the incredulous and disobedient, shall
have therein, is set forth by the nature of the things them selves: and by the
limitation of time that is put unto them. The things them selves are of that
nature, as that they boade unto them great confusion: which is set down first
generally; then more specially. Generally it is said, that there shall be 2:30.
wonders or signs in the heavens, and in the earth, that is, that on every
side, or which way so ever they shall turn them selves, whether they cast
their eyes but about them on the earth, or whether they turn them up unto
heaven, they shall see that they are compassed about with confusion: with
evident testimonies, both that such manifestation is of God; and that them
selves are compassed in with the judgments of God, because they do not obey
the truth. More specially certain are reckoned up, first in the earth: then in
the heavens. In the earth first he reckons a couple: then he prosecuteth the
one of them a little further. Those that he does first reckon, are 2:30.
blood and fire: by which some special destruction is commonly signified, as
we also in our tongue do mean the like by fire and sword, speeches not much
unlike unto them. He does prosecute the one a little further, by adding to the
fire that which he speaks of 2:30.
pillars of smoke, or the breaking out and rising up of smoke: by which it
seems that he does mean, both that the fire shall have plenty of matter to
consume, whereupon that smoke shall come; and that them selves, that is, the
incredulous shall have no part of the Truth light unto them, but al to be as
dark as smoke. In the heavens likewise are other two: that even the 2:31.
Sun it self should be turned into darkness; and the Moon into blood. By which
darkness of the Sun he may signify to the^, that they shall see no light at al
in the light it self: and by which bloodines of the Moon, it may be likewise
that he does signify, that whereas the Moon is ordained of God to be the
instrument, to send over to us some part of the light of the Sun in the night
season, now because they refused the light of the Sun it self, and winked at
it, it should signisie nothing but blood or destruction to them, for their
unbelief. The limitation of time that is put hereunto, is, ^ ^.^1.
before the great and terrible day of the Lord do come. Whereby it seems the
Prophet does mean, both that by these things the Lord will make a way to those
his judgments in that great and terrible day, when he shall judge the quick
and the dead, and the world by fire: and that the Lord will not keep in all his
vengeance till then. but will be doing in the mean while, to the confusion of
his enemies; and to the comfort of his servants. Concerning the safety of the
faithful, in those heavy judgments against unbeleevers, first the Prophet does
set it down: then he confirms or proves the same. He sets it down when
as he says, that 2:32.
whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be safe. Whereby he
teaches, not only that all such shall be safe: but also that to call on the
name of the Lord, is the note or mark of the people of God, and which should in
those days be safe. His proof or confirmation there of he builds on the
privilege of the place: and on the special calling of God. Concerning the
place, both he names 2:32.
mount Zion, and the whole city Jerusalem: and assures them of that
deliverance, that the Lord before had promised. As touching the other, 2:32.
both he notes, that it shall be those whom the Lord shall call: and, that
those shall be but a remnant neither.

19 As touching our selves, We also ought to account this a special blessing.
as the Prophet does here make mention hereof unto them, in the way of a
special blessing; so are we to take it likewise (as very well we may
throughout the whole if we enter into any special consideration of it:) both
in respect that it is a further manifestation of the Truth; and for that it
proceeds or comes in such manner as it does. Both in respect of the thing it
self.
For considering no more, but only that it is a further manifestation of the
Truth, yet herein only we may perceave it, because that flesh and blood, and
the whole power of man may labor long to attain unto it; and yet never obtein
it: as we in these days may plainly behold; first in our selves, then also in
others. For how gladly would our godly forefathers have seen these days, that
we now see, and yet they could not: and how earnestly do many in these days
wish, some of us any kind of reformation what so ever, others again a much
better then yet we have, and such as is here described unto us; and yet who
knows not how short we are yet from either of both? If therefore our true and
hearty repentance now (upon this occasion) might procure us so great a blessing
besides, there is no man but sees, how earnestly it were to be labored of us
all: both to obtein the thing it self; and to save much of that unprofitable
labor, that otherwise we have bestowed about it to little purpose, and yet may,
we know not how long, nor how unprofitably, unless we take that course, that
the Prophet here praescribeth unto us. And in respect of that moner, whereby it
proceeds.
But if we consider in what manner this reformation proceeds, that in this
place the Prophet does speak of, or what kind of manifestation it is there may
we much more plainly see, how much this blessing is to be wished: not only
because that it does proceed in so gracious manner toward those that receave
it; but also in respect of those things likewise, that do appertein to those
that refuse it. For as touching those that receve it, Toward those that
receave it.
we see it is in such sort bestowed on them, as they are made able thereby to
prophecy and not only all the sort of them generally, but especially also, such
as no body would look for, the old and the yo^g, and, that which is most, eve^
the very bond-slaues the^ selves. With us yet, the elder sort are too old to
learn; and the younger are over wanton, and care not for it: but the poorer sort
especially (such as lived before like men, and now by their unmerciful Lords
are brought so low, that they may rather be accounted bond; then free) are in
so great and urgent distress, in respect of their bodily necessities, that as
they have no hearts unto it, being so much overwhelmed with their miserable
estate as they are; so have they not so much as any convenient laisure, nor
comfort neither, to go about it, would they never so fain. It is long
therefore, in the course that we are, before that the elder and younger sort
with us, and especially those that are so fleesed or spoiled by others, will
be able to attain to the light that now is spoken of, in such measure as
here is described. It were well if they understoode (in some reasonable manner)
such things as were good and needful for them to know: but to be able to
teach others likewise, that is a point so far beyond al likelihood for them to
attain unto, that we may rather wish it with great doubt never to see it; then
with hope expect it, as though we might to the full obtain it, But if we could
truly repent us of our former ill ways and turn to the Lord, as by this
aforesaid occasion we may justly find our selves provoked to do, then would
the Lord, we need not to doubt afford us the same measure of goodness that is
promised here: then should we all be able to prophecy; our old men then would
dream such dreams, our young folk likewise would see visions, and the Spirit
of God should rest even on bonds or villains. And seeing that already we have,
in diverse particulars, experience of it (and that in so comfortable measure, as
many have) even that only ought to be sufficient to teach us, that the good
work that is already begun, should soon be perfited, if our selves were no
hinderance unto it. And those that refuse it.
In those things that do appertain to them that refuse it, we may see that it
would be a special blessing likewise, partly in respect of the judgments
that belong to the wicked: and partly in respect of the safety of the
faithful, in the midst of all those dangers. In respect of the judgments
that belong to the wicked we may perceave it, if not for that it is so noted by
the Prophet here: yet because that our selves already have some experience of
it. For now also may we in some measure see, that such as are disobedient unto
this merciful calling of God, are altogether in darkness, and stand amassed:
and many ways pull down upon them the fearful, but just judgments of God.
And because that, by their incredulity and hardness of heart, the Sun it self
is darkness with them: why should not the Moon be turned into blood likewise?
It is not meet, that such as so wilfully resist the known and manifest truth,
should have any light to them derived, by such means as God has provided to
that purpose: but much rather in steed thereof, should have naught else, but
manifest tokens of fearful judgments. To whom therefore by their own
infidelity, the Sun is darkened: to those is it meet, in the justice of God,
that the Moon should be turned into blood likewise.

And because that already we see, in some measure this is done, as it is to
the glory of God, that the contempt of his Truth is so avenged, before that
great and fearful day; so is it to the strengthening of the weak likewise,
that thereby perceave, that there is a God whose throne is in heaven, and whose
eyes consider the children of men: and that he with cheerful countenance
beholds the just, and raineth on others snares and tempests, and many other
tokens of his displeasure, to be unto them a portion to drink. But that the
faithful in all these dangers are still praeserved, that must needs very
soon appear to be a great and a special blessing, both in respect of that
safety that them selves enjoy: and in respect of the danger that others are
in, For it is no small thing, to be exempted from such perils, and to be
withdrawn from so heavy a wrath of God: but when we consider how those
others are overtaken therein, and how fast they are (as it were) chained up
unto perdition, then is the safety of the faithful so much the more an evident
testimony of the goodness of GOD toward them, and so much more comfortable
unto them selves, that see what a difference GOD has put put betwixt them and
others. In which place also it is good to take it unto our selves, that to call
on the name of the Lord, is by the Prophet here set down, as a mark of those
that shall be safe: and that otherwise the privileges of the place, and
outward calling, are to little purpose, because the Prophet does join or
couple them so near together. In so much that we also may see, who they are
unto whom this safety is due: and that neither our Zion, nor Jerusalem
neither, nor yet our outward or common calling as we are Christians (or
Catholics rather, as some have better delight to speak) are to any purpose to
procure us this kind of safety, but so far as we find that inward truth
concurring with all, that we are of the number of those, that put by all
others, and in all our necessities ever call on the name of the Lord. The
privileges of Zion and of Jerusalem were very great, and it was no small
matter, to have been an Israelite, or a Jew, by lineal descent: but yet
notwithstanding they came to no proof without that other; and without which
they deceaved them selves, and ever had their greatest glory redounding back
upon them with double shame.

20 As touching the other blessing, A notable protection against their enemies.
that is, that protection of theirs against their enemies, he follows on that
in all the third Chapter: and to the end he may better declare it, he sets
down (as it were, in their right, and proper colors) both the 3:1-17.
wretched estate of the one; and the 3:18-21. The wretched estate of the enemy.
blessed estate of the other. Concerning the wretched estate of the enemy,
3:1.8.
first he sets it down plain in speech: 3:9^17.
afterward he does more fully express and illustrate the same; by a figure of
great dignity. In that which he speaks plainly of them, first he speaks
3:1-3.
of all generally: then he directs his talk to 3:4-8.
certain of them more specially. In that which he speaks of all generally,
What he says of all their enemies (for this matter) generally.
first he sets down what he will do: then he shows what is the cause why
he will so do. That which he will do he describes unto us, both by the nature
or substance of the thing it self: and by certain circumstances thereunto
appertaining. The thing it self that he will do, as touching the substance or
nature of it, rests in two points: that 3:2.
he will gather all nations together; and plead with them for his people, and
for his heritage the children of Israel. The circumstances hereunto
apperteining, are two: the one, of the time; the other, of the place. The time.
In the circumstance of the time he shows, that it must be 3:1.
in those days (when he would pour forth his Spirit, as before he declared:)
and in that time, when he would bring again the captivity of Judah and
Jerusalem. For first there was to come on that people a time of wrath because
of their sins, in which they were to be possessed by the hand of their
enemies: but afterward by the goodness of God, they were to be brought home
again; which is the time that now he does speak of. Concerning the
circumstance of the place, The place.
it is set down that this shall be done in 3:2.
the vale of Iehoshaphat: whereby may be noted, that the Lord would so deal
with the enemies of his people, both before the faces of the^, to their greater
comfort; and in wonderful triumpha^t manner. It may note that he would execute
his judgments on the^, even before the face of his people, because that this
vale of Iehoshaphat was before the city Jerusalem and the mount of Zion that
before he spoke of. It may likewise note, that he would do it in wonderful
triu^phant manner; be cause that the story, whence that vallie took his name,
imports such a matter very plainly, as the a. Chro. 20: ^-28.
text it self records. For there Iehoshaphat triumphed over the Ammonites,
Moabites, and Idumaea^s without any conflict; but only in praising the name of
the Lord: and the spoil besides was so great, that it held them occupied three
days to gather it. The cause why.
The cause why he would so do, is because they have done such wrong to the
people of God: and made so light account of them. Wrong they had done them,
because they 3:2.
had both scattered his people among the nations: and besides, had parted their
land among them. They made light of them likewise, 3:3.
both because they cast lots for them: and gave them for naught a boy for an
harlot; and a girl for a cup of wine. In that wherein he directs his talk
to certain of them more specially, What he says unto some more specially.
we are to consider, to whom he speaks: and what it is that he says unto
them. Those to whom he speaks are 3:4.
certain enemies bordering on them: two principal cities; and an whole
country besides. Those principal cities were Tyrus, and Zidon, great Towns of
Mart especially the former: the Country was the Land of Palestine, bordering
upon them. That which he says unto them is 3:4 6.
first concerning their fault wherewith he does charge them: and, 3:7, 8.
then concerning the punishment of it. The better to show forth what their
fault was, First, as touching their fault.
wherewith now he does charge the^, first he shows, that they had no cause so
to do: then, what it is that they have done. He shows that they had no cause
so to do, because he will not allow them any such speeches, as whereby they
may seem to impart, that they were first provoked by him: and further tells
them, that if they should say so, then would he take further order with them.
In that he will not allow them such speeches, we are to note, first, what those
speeches were, which for that cause he so rebukes: then of their uttering of
such like speeches. What those speeches were we may best gather in that 3:4.
the Lord does ask the^, what they had to do with him: and whether they would
be avenged on him, or, as it were, recompense him, for some hurt that he before
had done them. If they uttered such speeches as these (as hereby it seems
they did) then did they declare themselves thereby, both to take in ill part
his former chastisement: and now also to forget themselves very far. His former
chastisement they did take in ill part, because they accounted it an hurt unto
them, and such as whereon they might justly look to be avenged. Now also they
forget themselves very far, both because they are so saw cie, as in such sort
to deal with the Lord: and so foolish, as to overmatch themselves so far. In
that he would take further order with them we may likewise note, both how
offensive such speeches (or thoughts) are unto him: and what is the order that
thereupon he takes. That such specahes are offensive unto him, he plainly
declares, for that he shows that he will provide further punishment for
them. The order that hereupon he takes, is 3:4.
that he then will be further avenged on them: and that, both very swiftly; and
upon their heads. That which they have done, does partly concern the substance
or wealth of the la^d: and partly the people that dwelt therein. Concerning the
substance and wealth of the land, he charge them both with a wrongful taking
away at the first: and with a foul abuse of it after. That which they
wrongfully took away, 3:5.
was first, by name, silver and gold: and then generally, all precious, or
pleasant things besides. The abuse of them after, was that they 3:5.
carried them into their Temples: as though they had got them by the power of
their idols; and offending in this also, that they sought to advaunce the
dignity of their idols thereby. Concerning the people that dwelt in the land,
he charge them likewise with 3:6.
double injury against them: one, that they did set them away, and that to the
Graecians, an heathen people, and far of; the other, that to this end they
sold them, to send them far from their own border. Then, as touching the
punishment of it.
Concerning their punishment for this fault, we are to consider, first what is
the punishment that is denounced: then, how the certainty thereof is confirmed.
The punishment that is denounced, consists in two points: first that that
which they had done, should be undone again; then, how their former doings to
others, should now be requited in them selves. As touching the undoing of that
which they had done 3:7.
he plainly says, that he will raise the^ out of the place, where they had
sold them. As touching the other, that is, how their former doings to others,
should now be requited in them selves, first he sets it down generally: and
then more specially. Generally he says that 3:7.
he will render their reward upon their own head More specially 3:8.
he tells them, both that he would sell their sons and their daughters into
the hands of the children of Judah: and that they should sell them over again
unto the Sabaeans a far of. The certainty of this their punishment is, for
that 3:8.
the Lord himself has spoken it.

21 And now to come to our selves again, How we also may hope for the like
against our enemies.
and to search out what instruction or comfort may out of this arise unto us,
whereas in these days we are not a little molested by many on behalf of the
Gospel, or for our professions sake, if the security and mighty protection
that here is promised unto them, may also be derived to us, in such sort that
we likewise may be assured, upon our repentance, to have that safety from all
our enemies, that is a matter of such importance, as that we must needs
account it a special good blessing and aesteeme accordingly of it. Whereas
therefore God is ever one, and continually has that care of his people, that
before he was wont to have, and can as easily be kindled now against their
enemies, as heretofore at any time he has been; there is no cause for us to
doubt, neither yet can there be any, but that if truly, either by this
occasion, or howsoever else, we seek unto him, he also will be as readily
found ofus, and as easily entreated, as he was wont to be of others:
especially now, this age being part of the time, that himself did promise to
crown with this kind of blessing; and whereunto he did with so undoubted
certainty assure the same. So that, whatsoever he is said against the
enemies of his people then, that also may be (as touching the sense and meaning
thereof) as fitly translated to our enemies now, so far as they are in
enmity with us for the Gospel of Christ. The vale of Ieho^haphat.
First therefore where as he says, that he will gather them all together, into
the vallie of Iehoshaphat, and plead with them there, for his people: and that
especially, when he brings again the Captivity of Judah and Jerusalem: we
also may hope, that, seeing that now he has begun to bring back again our
late captivity, he will in like manner vouchsafe us that mercy, that he will
also gather our enemies together, and into some vallie of Iehoshaphat also, and
plead with them there on behalf of his people now, as he did with those others
of old, on behalf of his then. But there at that time he so ordered the
matter, that falling at variance among themselves, two parts of them fell on
the third, and when they had utterly destroyed them, then fell they each one on
the other also, and so made a clean riddance of all: and left the victory
(and spoil together) to the people of God, without any stroke, as they were
but coming toward them, and with instruments and voice praising the Lord.
And seeing the Lord calls this but pleadings, and yet appoints the place of
hearing to be in the vallie of so famous an execution, as hereby he gave them
to understand that their cause was so naught, that it should no sooner come to
hearing, but that a sharp execution thereupon should be done: so we also,
finding the cause of these so bad as it is, may very well hope, that it shall
no sooner come to the hearing before the Lord, but that they also shall be
cast, and have execution accordingly done; as also in these days, if we look
about us, we may easily find many things, that are of that nature, and do
plainly witness the same. For the reason that held with them, does in like manner
hold with these likewise. How injurious they have been to us likewise
For who sees not, that they also have scattered the people of God among the
nations, and have parted their land among them selves. Scattering us abroad.
They have scattered the people among the nations, partly by the broiles that
they have made whereby they have so afflicted Christendom, and tossed it up and
down like a foot-bale at their pleasure: but especially, because that by the
corruption of doctrine that they have brought into the Church, they have
dispersed the people of God, almost into all the errors of the heathen that
have been about us. And that they have parted the land of the people of God
among them, it appears also very plainly, in that they had so much consumed
them from the face of the earth, and placed them selves in their rooms:
insomuch that, of a worthy and honorable assembly of many good and godly
people in the Church of God, they had now of late brought it to a disordered
multitude of such a people, as most notoriously of all others did utterly
abandon in Religion and life, what so ever is good, and in them both betook
them selves most impotently to that which is ill. Having us in vile contempt.
But as for that vile contempt that those enemies had of the people of GOD,
when as they gave the boy of an harlot, and the girl for a cup of wine, that
may we find to be very far out matched by these. For it is no strange, nor
great matter (to speak of) among soldiers, when they have conquered others,
and taken the spoil of them at their pleasure, and come laden home with the
pray, to give such captives as they taken for very trifles, if they have many:
when they come so easily by them, they can be content often times to affoorde a
good peniwoorth of them: especially those that are the looser, and the more
prodigal sort that are among them. But these were the pillars and stays of
the people; they were their leaders and guides in their pilgrimage: they were
their spiritual Pastors and Fathers; and had them of trust, and with special
charge, committed unto them. And yet have these also made so light of the
people of God, The boy, for an harlot: the girl, for a cup of wine.
of whom they had this special charge, and whom they took unto their
government, that for the accomplishment of their foul and shameful lust, and
for their bellies, they have freely parted, not only with the boys and
girls, the smallest and meanest of the people of God; but with men and women
also, the aged and honorable, and greatest of all: nor that only at some
special time, or done but of some few of them; but it was the general course
of them all, and such as stands with the substance of their profession, and
is commonly found with them all, even from the highest unto the lowest. Taking
from us all ^ich and pleasant things
Out of that likewise wherein he directs his speech more specially to certain
of them, we also may note, that these our Tyrians, Sidomians, and Philistines
have done as fondly as did those others, and daily yet do: and yet have no
better cause of this their doing then had those others. For these also have
taken away out of the Church, the city of the great king, and from among the
people of God, their silver and gold, and all precious things: and that not
only in the literal or nearest sense; but much more, if we go to a further
meaning. Both the maintenance of the ministry.
For even in the literal or nearest sense, they had spoiled all Christendom
(and yet do, where they may be allowed) of a great part of their treasure,
silver, and gold, and of all such things as were most precious, or of greatest
aestimation among them. Insomuch that they have not spared the Church Livings
them selves: which were all that the people had, and were like to have, to
maintain instruction among them, to the glory of God, and their own salvation.
And, that worse is, these things have they not only taken away from the people
of God; but have employed them to the use of jdolatry: and that so gross, as
seldom at any time could be overmatched among the gentiles. And all our
treasures in Christ himself.
If we go to a further sense, the^ must we charge them, that they have not
only spoiled us of our earthly treasures (which notwithstanding is no small
injury, besides the grief that does justly arise to them abused so far as they
are) but that they have spoiled us also, almost of al those our spiritual
treasures or graces that we had in Christ: of his Word, and Sacraments, that
should have directed and comforted us here; and of the force of the merits and
passion of Christ, that were to bring us to the kingdom of God. And whatsoever
there was, that apperteined to true holiness, or to our redemption in Christ
(the greatest riches that ever were, and the inaestimable treasure of the
church of God) that have they either altogether taken away from the Church, or
in such sort corrupted and defiled the same one way or other, that they have
bereaved the people of God, of the comfort, and use thereof. And as those
others sold away the children of Judah unto the Graecians, Selling u^ far away
for bondslaves.
to send them far from their own country: so have those also sold away the
people of God to palpable darkness; and all to get them far from the Truth,
that they might never be able to epsy the same, and so to return to their
country again. Neither have they only so done heretofore; but to this day also
they labor it still, and ever hold on the self same course, wheresoever they
may: laboring also, to bring back again the people of God to their former
captivity, and seeking daily to be avenged on those, that have delivered any
part of the^ out of their hands. So that herein also they match those others,
Bristling against the Lord,
in assembling their forces together against the Lord; and accounting it a
sufficient provocation, for them to bristle so as they do, for that the Lord
has already foiled them in diverse of their ways, and begun to deliver his
peculiar people out of their hands: having refused the merciful visitation of
God so long, that now they have not the grace to consider, that such hands of
God are laid upon them for their former just deserts; but wickedly account
that they are a just quarrel to them, to rage and scorn so much as they do.
How justly these doings of theirs may pull down the like judgeme^ts against
them.
When these things therefore are so plainly and fully found in them, may we
yet doubt, that they are so far from those heavy judgments that here are
denounced? may we think, that when they have done all this wickedness
against the aeternall Majesty of GOD, and against those anointed of his, for
whose sakes he was wont to rebuke even the mightiest Princes that were; and
when as it is evident that they have not only done those things, but still
persist and continue therein: that yet notwithstanding, the Lord will spare
them, and let them go clearly away with this, and never call them to account
for the same? Or at least may we think so now, when we see that the Lord has
already entered into the like judgments with them, Especially when we see
the same to be begun already.
that he promised here unto these? For now may we plainly see, that he has
undone much of that which they had done: and himself has sold diners of their
children unto his people, to be sent away unto the Sabaeans where they can
never get them again. For he has so opened the eyes of many thousands of
them, that now they have left the ways of their fathers, and are joined unto
the people of God. They have so truly with the Queen of Saba, and with the
Sabaeans that came with her, given ear to the wisdom of our Solomon Jesus
Christ, that now they mean still to make their abode there: and cannot
sufficiently wonder, that their fathers, and they them selves, have been so
long, so far deceaved. And if it were enough to stand for sufficient
confirmation here of unto them, only for that the Lord had spoken it: how much
rather ought we to be raised unto an undoubted expectation of it, when as we
see, not only that the Lord of ours he has already begun with the work it
self, and has done great and wonderful things therein already?

29 In the figure that he uses, the more fully to express, and to illustrate
that, This wretched estate of the enemy more fully expressed by a notable
figure.
which he had in plain speech set down before (which also he does with great
dignity, and to the special beautifying of the thing that he has in hand)
whereas yet he holds on his talk with his enemies, and wills that
proclamation be made among them concerning that matter, we are first to
consider, that he will have proclamation made: then what it is, that he will
have proclaimed unto them. That he would have proclamation made, it appears
most plainly, for that himself 3:9.
wills, Proclamation, to gather the^ all together.
that the thing that he has in hand be proclaimed among the Gentiles. Whereby
it seems that he would give them to understand, both that it is a matter
fully determined with him: and, that he would have them all to know it. That
which he would have proclaimed unto them, rests in two principal points: one,
that he 3:9.11.
stirs them up unto battle; the other, that yet notwithstanding himself
does withal 3:12-17.
denounce their overthrow. And in stirring of them up unto battle, first he
does it generally: and then he follows upon the same more specially. That
which he does generally, is no more, but that 3:9.
he wills that war be proclaimed, or that they do praepare themselves unto
war. In that which is more specially set down of that matter, we are to note,
not only how the Lord does more fully follow upon it: but also how the
Prophet, that hither has stood by himself, and has but recited what the Lord
has said, does now (according to the interpretation of the best) put in a
short prayer of his, such as he thought the matter it self did now require.
The Lord, in following more fully upon it, How they should get themselves in a
readiness at home, and so come against his people.
calls upon them 3:9.10.
first to get them in a readiness at home: 3:11.
then to come forth, and to settle them selves unto their business. To the end
that they may be in a readiness, first he calls on those, that in common sense
are meetest to such a purpose, that is, to the battle: then he calls on
others also that are unmeete. Strong.
Calling on those that are meet to such a purpose, 3:9.
first he wills the mighty to awake, or to stir up themselves; and all the
men of war to draw near, and to come up to the muster: then, to the end they
may all have weapons inow, or that there may be weapons inow for all, 3:10.
he wills them to turn their instruments of husbandry into weapons, their
plow-shares into swoordes, and their siethes into spears. And weak
Coming to those that are unmeete for the wars, that is, the weak or
feeble, to the end that he may better show forth, how fair a day the
Heathen or enemies to the people of God, shall seem to themselves to have
against them, and how sure account they shall before hand make of the victory,
he would have them also to chiere up themselves to this business, and 3:10.
wills them to say, that they are strong, or, at least, to wish that they
were. When thus they are gotten into a readiness, he 3:11.
wills them all, of what Country or Nation so ever they be, to leave their
own Country now, and to come and join their forces to gether against the
Jews, and to compass them round about. The prayer that hereupon the Prophet
does make, is l that the Lords mighty hosts, or men of war, The Prophet
prays.
should come down thither also, on behalf of his people: so opposing strength,
3:11.
against strength; the hosts of the Lord, against all the forces of all the
heathen. In denouncing their overthrow, he frames his speech in that sort,
that he may seem to have had in some respect unto that prayer of the Prophet:
and then to proceed in, or to hold on that course, that before he had
intended. He may seem to have respect unto the Prophet in that he says, 3:12.
Let them be wakened, The Lord hears.
and let all these nations come up into the vallie of Iehoshaphat: for there
will I sit to judge all these nations round about. or, They shall be wakened,
and all these nations shall come up, etc: but there will I sit, etc. For whereas
the Prophet immediately before declared himself by that prayer of his, to be
very careful on behalf of the people of God (especially when as he heard,
that the Lord stirred up so many against the^, and of the mightiest, and willed
them to be furnished also) these words of the Lord are of that nature, and do
so fitly answer the quaestion, as that it may seem that the Lord thereby did
quiet and comfort the heart of the Prophet in that his carefulnes over the
people: letting him understand, that he need not to fear that they should so
be gathered together, for that it should be in the vallie of Iehoshaphat; and
himself would there judge them. In the residue of his speech, wherein he
seems for to hold on his former course, His judgments against the^.
3:13-16.
head o^th not only denounce his judgments against them: but also 3:17.
foresheweth certain special effects that should come thereby. In
denouncing his judgments against the^, first 3:13.
he does direct his speech to those that shall be the executioners of this his
vengeance: 3:14, 16.
then he discourses further thereof at large, not directing his speech unto
these specially, but indifferently unto all. In directing his speech unto
those, that were to execute his judgments, first he wills them so to do:
then he gives the reason why. He wills them to set in hand with the
execution of those his judgments, by a figurative speech, compating the
enemies, first unto corn in the field: the^ unto grapes that are in the press.
In respect that they are corn (though many in number, yet such as may be easily
cut down) he wills these his executioners 3:13.
to thrust in their sickles: and gives a reason, because that now the corn
was ripe, or the time of harvest was come. In respect that they were as
clusters of grapes in the press, 3:13.
he wills those his executioners to come to their business, that is, to tred
these grapes: and the reason is, because grapes did not only run now of the^
selves (being so fully ripe) but also ran forth in plentiful measure into the
streets. The reason that he gives, why he would have such execution done upon
them, is because 3:13.
their wickedness was great. In that part of his speech wherein he discourses
further of this matter, not specially unto these, but indifferently unto all,
3:14.
first he speaks of their slaughter in particular: then 3:15, 16.
of their great distress, generally. Concerning their slaughter, he shows
that it shall be very great: and then does note certain circumstances of it. He
shows that it shall be very great, both for that he shows that there shall
be 3:14.
great multitudes of those that are slain: and for that he thereupon calls
it the 3:14.
vallie of threshing, or of chopping them in pieces. The circumstances are two:
one, of the time; the other, of the place. For the time it is said, that then
it should be, when 3:14.
the day of the Lord (which himself had appointed for this matter) should be
come. For the place, it is said likewise, that it should be, in the 3:14.
vallie of threshing, or of chopping them in pieces. Concerning their great
distress generally, both the thing it self is described: and a reason thereof
is given. In the description of it we have set down unto us, what it shall be:
and when it should come. It should be such, as that unto them 3:15.
the Sun and the Moon should be darkened: and the Stars should withdraw their
light. In the description of the time it is not only declared 3:16.
that it should be when the Lord should roar out of Zion, etc. but also
they are taught, whence that same distress of theirs does come, that is, from
the roaring or displeasure of the Lord, because that it is said withal, that
3:16.
the heavens and the earth are moved by it. The reason is, because that 3:16.
the Lord is ever a refuge unto his people: and the strength of the children of
Israel. The special effects that should come hereby, are two: 3:17.
one, that they should know, that he is the Lord their God, dwelling in Zion
his holy mountain: the other, that Jerusalem should be holy, and that
strangers should pass through her no more.

23 Out of which that our selves may take such instruction as to us
apperteineth, How little we need to fear them all, if we can repent and turn
to the Lord.
whereas first the Lord wills that proclamation be made among the Gentiles,
to praepare them selves to the battle, and then to come and set in hand with
their enterprise, seeing that he does so openly put them in mind of it, and
besides that does so eg them unto it, we need not to doubt it to be so
perilous and dangerous a matter, if our enemies take up such a purpose among
themselves, nor though they be so bold, as to attempt to bring to pass their
wicked endevors. On the other side rather, if once they be known to bear an
hostile mind against us for the Gospels sake, and thereupon to lie in wait for
some opportunity to break in upon us to their best advantage, out of this we
may gather, that we might well be so void of all fear of them, as that our
selves might bid the^ make have and soon come forth with the woorst that they
could. We ought to take heed, that we never give to the least of them al any
just occasion of variance with us: but if they malign us for the Gospels sake
(which is all the quarrel that now they have with us) and for that only cause
do cast to annoy us, we need not doubt to care a fig for them all, our selves
may put the^ in mind to be doing and tell them we long sore to see the woorst
they can do. In which respect it is not lightly to be passed over, that the
Lord so earnestly calls on the best soldiers, and the most valiant warriors
that were in the world: and would have no fewer, then all of the^ neither.
These would he have to incampe them selves about his people, and to compass
them in on every side: these would he have to be a document unto themselves and
to al others that either then lived, or where to come, how little able any power
of man should be to praevaile against the aeternall, and the invincible Truth
of God. If they were but of the common sort of soldiers, or if there were but
few of them, that they could not (to their own desire) compass in the other
on every side, the matter were less, if they could not attain to that they
desiered: and though they were foiled or clean overthrowen, yet that also were
short of that portion of honor and comfort, that God in such case would have
bestowed on so good cause, and on those that sincerely stand in the same. Nay,
unless he have them all, in so much that none be wanting, even that also is
more, then he, in such case, can afford unto them. What cause is there then,
why we in these days (when God is disposed, as before we have heard, to bring
again our captivity) should be so afraid when we hear of any, that in this
cause profess enmity toward us: being, as they are, far short of all;
and, such as they are, neither the best Warriors themselves, nor yet so
strong, though all their forces were united together? But he does not only
call in their persons, but puts them in mind of their furniturealso: and
because their provision of weapons might be over scant, when now they came all
generally, to the end that therein also they have no want, he wills them to
frame their instruments of husbandry into weapons also; that so all may be
provided thereof, to the uttermost of their own desire. And yet, when they come
with all this furniture, that also shall be but a seely poor help unto the^.
Goliath was a mighty man; very well furnished for armor and weapon; and an
expert soldier besides: and David, on the other side, but a simple thing to be
in the field; nothing at all furnished to such a purpose; and never trained up
thereunto. But so soon as they met, that great beast was laid flat on the
ground: and David went away with his head, for all he could do. Neither is it
to be omitted, that the Lord assures of his success, though the odswere so
great on our enemies part, and the likelihood so fair, that even the weaker
sort among them, in hope of the spoil, would stir up themselves to go to the
field with the rest: or at least wish, that any way they might be able so to
do. For whatsoever likelihood there is, that flesh and blood may think to have
found: yet can there be no sooner a trial made, but that it will most plainly
appear, that flesh and blood was far deceaved. Yet nevertheless it is to good
purpose, a seemly and a needful exercise to us, that with the Prophet we also
should in all such gatherings of earthly forces, lift up our eyes and hearts
unto heaven: and there desire our most mighty and merciful Father, to send
down those greater forces of his, to encounter with them. Which if we shall do,
we may likewise hope, to have that gracious and comfortable answer, that all
the sorts of our enemies also should be gathered together to that
discomfortable and irckesome vallie of Iehoshaphat to their utter destruction:
discomfortable and irckesome, I say, to all the enemies of the people of God;
but unto those that profess the Truth, and sincerely hold it, a place of great
honor and joy, a crown of glory, a mountain of inaestimable high renown,
and no vallie at all of grief or reproach. As stalks of corn and ripe grapes.
But when the Lord compares them further to the corn of the field, and the
clusters of grapes in the press (whereof the one is so easily cut down with a
sieth, or may well be gotten by whole handes-full at once with no more but a
sickle: the others, being once come to that ripenes, that they are meet to
come to the press, break in sunder and bleed of themselves without any
treading) who is there may doubt, but that, in such case, even the best
strength that they have, is nothing else but miserable weakness: and their
greatest glory not one jote better, then their open and aeternall shame?
especially, when as their wickedness now is so very great, and in open sight
much greater by far, then can be matched in any other sort of people; and
when as the Lord already has begun so to roar out of Zion, and in such sort
to give forth his voice in Jerusalem, that the heavens and earth are therewith
moved already. And what reason is there, why it should not be as seemly for
his honor now, to be in these days, both a refuge, and a strength to his
people, as heretofore it has been on behalf of others? We our selves, I
grant, do in no wise deserve it (and no more did others that have been
before us, if God should have entered into judgment with them) but it is
meet, and very much to the honor of God, that in these days also he should
be known to be a refuge and strength to his people, as at any time heretofore
it has been, without exception. If we therefore shall seek unto him, in such
sort as we before directed, there need to be no quaestion made nor doubt
conceaved, but that in these days also the Lord will so bring down our
enemies, that now also it shall be made known unto all, that the Lord is our
God likewise: and that Jerusalem shall henceforward be kept undefiled from such
corruption, as heretofore was brought into it; and that her enemies shall never
hereafter so praevaile against it as they have done, nor make it a
thorough-fare for them to pass and repasse at their pleasure, as heretofore
overlong they have done.

24 Concerning the blessed estate of the other, The blessed estate of the godly.
that is, of the Church or people of God 3:18.
first it is set down simply, or in respect of it self alone: 3:19.21. In
respect of it self.
then by comparison, or in respect of certain others. In that which is but
simply set down, or in respect of it self alone, we are to consider, first of
the time, wherein that blessed estate is promised: then what is that blessed
estate, that then is promised. For the time, there is relation had to that
which 3:^.
before was named, when God would bring again the captivity of Judah, and of
Jerusalem: and therefore 3:18.
it is said; in that day. The blessed estate that then was promised, was
concerning the land wherein they dwelt: and first as touching the abundance
of fruits that it should then yield; and then as touching the good watering
of it. As touching the fruits, that then it should so abundantly yield, we
have set down, both what parts of the Country they were that should be so
fruitful: and then what should be the fruitfulnes of them. Those parts of the
Country that should be so fruitful, are the very 3:18.
mountains, and hills: which for the most part, are nothing so fruitful, as
the valleys and plains; and often times the most barren of all. What should be
the fruitfulness of them is likewise declared, both by the nature of the fruit
they should yield: and by their manner of yielding the same. The fruits that
they should yield, are 3:18.
wine, and milk: and so consequently of that nature or kind, that is to
special use unto men. The manner of their yielding these fruits, is in such
sort set down, as that we are assured thereby, that it should be done in
most plentiful measure: in so much that 3:18.
those mountains are said to drop wine, and to flow with milk. As
touching the good watering of that land, first he speaks of all the rivers of
Judah generally: then of one special fountain. Concerning all the rivers of
Judah generally, we are to note, that as he promises 3:18.
that all those shall run abundantly with waters: so he does in large that
promise no further, but only to the rivers of Judah. Concerning that one
special fountain, it is to be noted, 3:18.
that he does not only compare that grace that he means, unto a fountain:
but also (the better to declare the excellency of it) does show, whence it
shall come; and what it shall do. In that he compares it unto a fountain, he
notes that it shall be continual: as also in declaring that it shall come
forth of the house of the Lord, and that it shall water that special vallie
of Cedars, he declares both the dignity, and utility of it. In comparison of
others.
In that part of his speech wherein he advaunceth the estate of the people by
comparison, or in respect of diverse others, we are to note, how either part of
this comparison is described unto us: and 3:19.
first as touching those others, with whom they are compared; 3:20, 21
and then as touching themselves, to whose comfort this comparison is made. As
touching those others, we are to see who they are: and what it is, that is
said of them. Concerning the former, it is plainly said, 3:19.
that they are Egypt, and Edom: both of them flourishing kingdoms, (especially
Egypt) and such as had sometimes the people of God in subjection unto them.
Concerning the latter, that is, what it is that is said of the^, we are
likewise to note, 3:19.
both what judgment is denounced against them: and what reason thereof is
given. The judgment that is denounced against them) is that Egypt should be a
wast: and Edom a most desolate wilderness. The reason that is given, is,
generally, for the injuries or violence that they had done to the children of
Judah: more specially, for that in their land they had shed innocent blood. As
touching the^ selves, to whose comfort this comparison is made, we are in like
sort to consider, who they are: and what it is that is said of them. Concerning
the former of these two, 3:20.
they are, the whole Country of Judah: and, the chief or principal city
thereof, Jerusalem. Concerning the other, we are here also to note, both what
blessing is to them ascribed: and what reasons are given, to induce the
doubtful hearts of the people to be so persuaded. The blessing that is to them
ascribed, is (...).
that Judah should stand fast for ever; and Jerusalem from generation to
generation. The reasons are two: one, to take away out of their hearts, that
which most commonly does make men to doubt; the other, to confirm or settle
them better, in the certainty of this promise made unto them. That which does
most commonly make men to doubt, is the guiltines of their own sin, or the
knowledge of their own corruption of nature. Which that he may the better take
away out of their hearts, that they need not to think that it should be any
bar unto them to lay fast hold on that good hope, he gives them to understand
3:21.
that he will there cleanse those, whose blood before he had not cleansed: that
so they might know, that although they had cast themselves out of the favor of
God before, while their corruption of nature did overruled them; yet it should
not be so now, when that corruption of nature was in a manner abolished unto
them, and so the cause of offense remooved. To confirm and settle them so much
the better in the certainty of that promise, he 3:21.
gives them to understand, that he the Lord will dwell in Zion: that so they
may the rather assure themselves not only that their blood is cleansed, when he
vouchsafes to dwell among them; but also, seeing that he has chose^ it to be
his mansion, or dwelling house, that he will also up-holde it, and not suffer
it to come to the ground, or, as we say, to fall on our heads.

25 Which also that we may the better apply to our own proper use, That we also
upon our repentance may look for this blessing likewise.
first whereas the time that here was appointed, is the self same that now we
are in (being under the kingdom and manifestation of Jesus Christ) whatsoever
blessing is promised here, or what so ever good estate of the people is here
set down, all that may we assure our selves to be our own, in that course
that before is praescribed. For the more stricktly that any thing is restrained
unto a special time, the more may those that are of that time, assure
themselves in their time to see the performance of it. Whereas those blessings
therefore concerned the land wherein they dwelt, as, if we go but only to
the outward letter, yet in this, or any such like time of scarcity, upon our
repentance and turning to God, we may hope to obtain our needful relief in
plentiful manner: so if we pass on to the inward sense, that this place, and
many others such like do yield, then may we further gather, that whereas that
land was a figure of the Church of Christ, we need not to doubt, but that
being under the Gospel now, we also are near unto all those blessings, that by
this or such like are promised unto it. And seeing that the fruitfulnes of that
land is so described, that it plainly does appear thereby, tha^ it should
yield great plenty of food, and not only the best parts of it, but the most
barren also, out of it may we likewise take double comfort unto our selves:
first as touching our bodily sustenance; and then much more in spiritual
graces. In bodily sustenance
For as touching our bodily sustenance, we also may hope (and all others
besides that do apperteine to the kingdom of Christ) that he of his goodness
and woonted mercies will rather bring to pass, that even the most barren places
we have, shall bring forth fruit in plentiful manner, then that we shall want
things needful to pass through this our pilgrimage here, in the fear and
service of him. Much rather if we come to those spiritual graces, that are
promised here, In spiritual graces.
we may then assure our selves, that in the Church or kingdom of Christ, they
are in so great and plentiful manner, that every where they do abound: and
that the meanest Churches or persons therein, do more abound in these matters;
then elsewhere any others, of what estate, experience or learning so ever they
be. As also when he comes to show, how this land that he does speak of, is
watered, as he tells us, that the rivers shall be full of water, and of a
fountain that should water the vallie of Cedars: so he adds withal, that
they are but the rivers of Judah that he does speak of; and that the fountain
did likewise proceed from the House of the Lord, and in truth, the faithful
have such sufficiency, and fulness, and most plentiful abundance in Jesus
Christ, and in his holy word, and continually are so refreshed and so
replenished with that fountain proceeding from the house of the Lord, that not
only all the rivers of Judah are ever full of water, even to the brinkes: but
even those great and mighty Cedars also, of that rich and fruitful vallie, are
all watered even to the full. Otherwise with our enemies.
But on the other side, if we cast our eyes to any of our unneighbourly Aegypts
or Edoms, such countries or states, as take part with Egypt in their
idolatries and superstitions, or with Edom in continual hostility to the
people of God, though we may find them for a time to flourish, and sometimes
to getunder the people of God for a season: yet is it sure, and sealed up in
the irrevocable judgments of God, that they shall be made wast, and become
inhabitable, or as a wilderness without any to dwell therein, in comparison of
that which otherwise they might attain unto, with the residue of those that in
spirit and truth do call upon God. And howsoever they may seem to flourish for
the time, and thereby to hinder the course of the Gospel: yet may they be
sure, that it shall not be so with the^ still; but that needs they must come
to judgment, for withholding the Truth ^n unrighteousnes so long as already
they have done. For all flesh, is grass; and the glory thereof, but even as
the flower of the field: and though now they flourish as green as the
bay tree, yet he that now passing by the^ in that case does leave the^, may at
his return not be able to find the place where they were, though he make good
have, and do not tarry, For in them is found innocent blood, and injury done
to the people of GOD beyond all measure. Wherein though others also have their
parts: yet, of all others, that Whore of Babylon, that long since has been
drunken with the blood of Saints, must needs bear the bell, wheresoever she
comes. When they are wasted. Jerusalem stands in good case.
And as these must be laid wast, so Jerusalem and all Judah must stand for
ever: that when the enemies have done what they can to overlay them, to put
all to the swoorde, and to abolish the very name or memorial of them from the
face of the earth; yet must they find in the end, that they were in no wise
able to perform their desire, and that the more they have sought to bring them
down, the more has God opposed himself against their attempts and set the^
up. Of which his goodness because we have had so large and ple^tiful experience
in these days of ours, so many ways, and in so great matters as we have had,
so much the more may we assure our selves, that these are the days, wherein we
shall see (by the goodness of God) the full performance of these his mercies unto
his people. We are our selves, I grant, unworthy; and that may be denied by
none: but he tells us also, that he will cleanse the blood of those that are
his. By which his clensing it may well come to pass, that we may be so highly
in the favor of God (by him that cleanses us, Jesus Christ) that he may well
(even in his justice, after that once he has affoorded us that way to his
mercy) vouchsafe to establish, and to uphold us, as here is promised:
especially, when as he tells us further, that himself will dwell among us.
Exodus 32-34.
For as on a time when the children of Israel had greevously sinned against
the Lord, he withdrewe himself from their company, till upon their repentance
their sin was done away, but when they repented, and the Lord, by the
intercession of Moses, had forgiven their sin, he then adjoined himself unto
their tents again, and was content to keep company with them in all their
journeies, until they came to the land of promise: so in this case likewise,
how so ever the Lord has heretofore estraunged himself from us, because of our
sin, yet if it so be, that now we repent us of those our sins, we may be
sure, that by the intercession of our Moses Jesus Christ the only Mediator of
the New and last covenant, he also will so for give us our sins, and so
circumcise our hearts withal, or cleanse our blood, that the lover of men will
not account it unseemely his honor to dwell among us. And because that his
dwelling or continual aboade requires likewise a dwelling house, and that the
same be ever maintained, therefore so soon as it does appear, that the holy
Ghost has built is upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets Jesus
Christ being the Headcorner-stone, and so has made us Temples to him, we also
may assure our selves, that he will not suffer us to miscarry. Houses are
sometimes overthrown by outward force; sometimes again they decay of
themselves: but this House or Temple of his will he both defend against the
force of all his enemies; and uphold likewise against such decays, An
exhortation unto such repentance as herein is required.
as otherwise of it self would grow upon it.

26 Now therefore to draw to an end, whereas it is clear, that we also may
find our selves to be touched with the self same hand of God that was cast
upon them (though not in so large and plentiful measure) what were more
seemly or meeter for us, then sensibly to be touched therewith, and to
acknowledge it (as in deed it is, and can be none other) the special hand of
God upon us? Let the Heathen think (that know not God) that such things come
by chance or fortune: Because we may see this to be the hand of God.
let us acknowledge, and undoubtedly persuade our selves, that it is of the
Lord; and that he, for some special cause, has sent it unto us. And if it be
his doing, or come from him, may we make so light of it, as not to suffer the
same to take any hold of us? Or may we so easily pass it over, as not so much
as in serious and earnest manner to bethink our selves, for what cause he
should send it unto us? Is there no remedy, but that needs we must be like
unto them, that being provoked, in very strong and forcible manner, to mourn:
yet notwithstanding will in no wise lament, nor suffer such calling to work
upon them? Are such things daily before our eyes, and have we hearts to behold
the same: and yet is our countnance nothing at all abashed thereat? Need we
some Joel, again to teach us, what this gear means? We also have in like
sort sinned.
Belike because we have among us no such sins, as for the which that hand of
God was cast upon them. But Lord God, what thing was there ever more certain
then this? Who ever did more certainly know the day to be day, and the night
to be night; the fire to be hot, and the water moist: then any man that has
any sight at all may plainly perceave, that those sins are rife among us;
and grown also to a marvelous head? Or did ever the Sun in his brightness show
it self more clearly to the children of men, then those things have made
themselves to be known to the children of God? Which way are we able to turn
our eyes, where we shall not see oppression, and sacrilege uncondemned, and
uncontrouled? where we shall not see the oppressed crying out for lack of
help, or comfort either; and the glory of God clean ^odden down, for filthy
luker? And do not these more justly deserve a greater and a sharper scourge,
then so easy, and so gentle a warning, as now the Lord has cast upon us? Is
it not meet that when we have so unmercifully taken from others that which is
theirs, we should be so met-with in that which is ours? Or when we have taken,
and still withholde from the Lord himself his own proper part, may we not
think, that he is justly provoked, so far to accurse it, and our own that we
mingle together? Or may we look to deal so uncharitably with our neighbor,
and so dishonorably with God: and yet that he must ever let pass, and quietly
put up both the one, and the other? Public offenses require public repentance
Now if it so be, that we know well enough that we have so offended, and daily
yet do (as in deed it cannot in any wise be denied) is it then so small a
matter with us, that we cannot think it so needful a course to repent us
thereof, and to assemble or gather our selves into some public profession of
it? If those sins of ours be public, and offensive to all: should not our
repentance be public also, and such as were meet to take away the offense so
far, as before by them it was given. May we take to our selves the liberty to
offend so openly: and yet must we count it so strange a matter, if it be
required, that the profession of our repentance be open also? Or is it
wisdom, so far to withdraw our impenitent and proud hearts from taking away
the offense our selves, by some open acknowledging of it: that thereby we give
some just occasion to God, to take it away by casting some public vengeance
upon us? Or, if in no wise our selves will do it, may we after mislike, if, to
our further dishonor and grief, the Lord him self set in hand to amend it?
Or, At least, to obtain these mercies offered.
if nothing else could moove us unto it, can we have so little consideration of
the mercies of God now offered unto us, that when as upon our repentance he is
so ready to make them ours: yet we for want of this repentance, will leese
them, and so foully miss so fair opportunity as this? To obtain that further
manifestatio^ of the Truth.
Is it a matter of so small importance, to have the good Spirit of God in such
sort poured forth among us, that old and young, even servaunts and al, should be
so plentifully endued with the word of Truth? Have we so long labored it our
selves, to so little purpose: and yet can we now make so light of it, when the
Lord himself does offer it unto us; and that for no greater a price then this?
Or have we so little care of the glory of God that would come thereby, that when
we have so compendious a way to attain unto that whereby it might be notably
advaunced: yet notwithstanding we rather will suffer all to fall to the ground,
then cast our selves to be in a readiness, to accept and to use the means that
are offered? To get such protection from our enemies.
If we come unto those that are our enemies for the Gospels sake, it is
sufficiently known unto all, that, for certain ages late overpassed, we have
been in miserable bondage unto them, and have suffered at their hands
whatsoever miserable captives are wont; or the pride, ravin, riot, or cruelty
of the conqueror is bold for to offer: and that they have labored, by many
strange and dangerous means, and yet do, and daily will do, to bring us
back to their hands again, that so they might lead us that dance a fresh
and once again claspe that yoke of their bondage about our necks, and then
make it so sure withal, that we might never be able to get out of their
talents, or to recover the comfortable freedom that now we enjoy. And have we
yet so little remembrance of our former miseries, and so little care still to
uphold this our lawful and needful liberty, that when so easily we might
get so fair an hand against all our enemies, yet notwithstanding we will not
take the opportunity that leads unto it? Is their tyranny become so easy,
that now we do so little fear it? Is Religion with us of no greater
importance, but that we could again be under so gross idolatry? Have we so
little care of our posterity, that it is no matter to us, whether they be bond,
or free, whether the Lord be glorified by them, or not? Can we be so senseless
or so little touched with the consideration of these calamities, and many others
depending thereon, that we will not redeem our security from them: when as
now the opportunity serves so well; the Lord himself so graciously offers
that favor unto us; and we may purchase the same to our selves for little or
nothing? Then must we pronounce against our selves, that we are right worthy to
fall to the depth of all distress, that so little regard, when so easily we
may, in time to praeve^t it. And how may we look that God should pity us, when
in the same we should cry unto to him, Though we can hardly grow unto it: yet
are we not therefore to shrink away from it.
when as now we have so little regard thereof our selves? Our hearts, I grant,
by the common corruption of nature, are very hard, and strongly possessed by
the sin of impenitencie; and, besides this, we are so dissolved into all
excess, lightness, and vanity, by the peace and wealth that God has given us,
and for that we have tasted so little of the rod, as now for a good time we have
done: that it is less marvel, if hardly we can grow to any such earnest and
public sorrowing; or, so much as like of the motion when it is made. But in
this case also it is good to remember, that the wisdom of a Christian ought
to be such, as that whatsoever is an offense or hinderance unto us in the way
of godliness, though it be as dear, as is our hand, or our foot: yet ought we
rather to cut it of, and cast it away (though we should be much mained thereby)
then that we should suffer our selves to be let or hindered by them. If
therefore we have any sense or feeling, of our great and manifold sins, or of
this gentle hand of God that for the same is cast upon us; if we have any hearty
desire to be partakers of those great and inaestimable mercies of God, a more
general, and a further fruition of his aeternall Truth, and so comfortable
security from all our enemies: what is there then, that, with any color, may
stay us, from that which the Prophet does here require; or, if in heart we
consent unto it, why should not our deed also bear witness, or rather
express our meaning therein? Well may our dalliance deceave our selves: but
others it cannot; especially, God. The fruits that we bear, will plainly
witness what we are. If they be ill, or if they be none, either of those do
plainly cast us: if they be good (and such as argue a sound reverence, and a
ready obedience to the Word of God) then do we find, to our singular
comfort, that now in deed we are the children of God; and that our reward,
without all quaestion, must needs be great. Long enough have we wallowed in
careless security; it is time now to look about us, and to accept of those more
special favors of God, that he, in this acceptable time of his, does offer
unto us. God give us grace ever to be easy to be admonished, that he need
not to use any rougher means to quicken us up: and to take such hold of those
good opportunities, that in these our days he offers unto us, that we may
in like sort enjoy such blessings as are tendered withal. God grant the same,
through Jesus Christ his Son our Lord, to the advauncement of his Kingdom
among us, and to our own unspeakable comfort.

FINIS.
A prayer of the same argument: and meet for the time that now we are in.
WE acknowledge (O Lord) before thy most glorious and aeternall majesty, That
we have deserved this and much more.
that we most justly have deserved, not only the hardest estate that thy
people have at any time had, but utterlie to be cast of likewise from being
thy people: much more this gentle and fatherly chastisment, which at this
praesent thou have cast upon us. Nevertheless, because we know by thy holy
word, that thou delightest not in the death of a sinner, but would rather
have him to live, and it is not thy pleasure, that the rod of thy
chasticement should ever lie upon thine inhaeritance, but covetest rather, that
they should soon remember them selves, and turn unto thee: we are bold even
now (and thou have enboldned us) to seek unto thee, and to entreat thee, now
to take from us this hand of thine, before that thou thereby have chasticed our
former sins any thing near to that measure (no, not by the thousand part)
that we have deserved. For thy mercy o Father (in thy Son our Lord) is
very great toward all that are his, and so spread forth over all thy works
in so plentiful measure, that we make no doubt, but that at any time we may
be bold to seek thy favor, and to entreat thee to stay thy hand, when yet
thou have scant begun to strike, notwithstanding that we have justly
deserved, that thou should turn away from us thy face for ever. That he
would grant us true repentance.
Howbeit, that no way it tend to the impechment of thy glory, in the order and
course that thou have ordained in all thy works (laying out the means
whereby thou do work it, as well as the effect that is to ensue) we humbly
beseech thee (and much more earnestly, for this, then the other) that by this
small portion of this thy chasticement that now we have felt, our former
security may be so quickened unto a diligent and sound advicement of the
corruption of our nature, and of the foul and loathsome fruits that out of the
same have already proceeded, and so truly and earnestly repent our selves
thereof: that thou, having obtained that which thou soughtest at our hands,
may the more easily be induced to spare us, and to withdraw thy hand from
us. And, both deliver us from this our praesent distress.
To this end o Lord we most humbly beseech thee, to give us a sound, an
hearty, and a sensible feeling of our former and woonted coldness in the
advauncement of thy glory, and of that whole course of our life, wherein by
the immesurable thirst that we have to the things of this world, we have
been, and yet are, so injurious and hard unto many: and even to thee also
among the rest: and not only to give us such a feeling of those things our
selves, but also to vouchsafe us such an inward detestatation thereof withal,
and so resolute a purpose to betake our selves to a better course in all such
matters, that, as now we make bold with thee to seek thy favor, before that
ever we have been chasticed any thing near as we have deserved; so we may
hereafter likewise throughout our whole life, be so careful in all things to
advaunce thy glory, and in nothing to anoy our neighbor for the bettering of
our selves in worldly matters, but in all things to uphold his good estate the
best that we may, that neither we provoke thee again to strike us for these
offenses, neither yet occasion it to appear, that now thou have withdrawn
this thine hand from us over soon. And because it pleases thee to put us in
hope of much greater mercies, And vouchsafe us those other mercies also.
then only such relief of these our bodily necessities; and these are the
days whereunto those mercies of ^^ine are promised: we likewise beseech thee
in most humble manner, to vouchsafe us that further manifestation of thy Truth,
and that notable protection from our enemies also, that not only the likelier
sort of thy people, but the meaner likewise, may both know and glorify thee;
and that we all being ever preserved from those that hate us for thy names
sake, in that our safety may employ our selves the best that we can to the
service of thee, and ever praise thy holy name for these thy mercies. Our
enemies o Lord have ruled over us very long already: and they of long have
done unto us, even as those others did unto them. They have taken away our
silver and gold, and whatsoever Jewels we had besides of spiritual graces in
Jesus Christ: and those have they carried into the Temples of their own proper
idols, and wickedness ascribed all unto them. Our selves also they have not
spared, but have done with us whatsoever they would. Not only the boy, but the
honorable also, and ancient of years have they given for an harlot: and not
only the girl, but godly matrons, and the chaste souls of thy faithful
people have they given for a cup of wine, and for their bellies. And, not so
content, they have likewise in such sort sold us, as most might avail them to
send us away far from our country, that afterward we should never be able for
to return thither again. But thou, o Lord thee self have seen it, and know
well enough, that they have been so greevous unto us, not so much for any
thing that we had done (though in truth we be most wretched sinners, and have
deserved much more then it) as in despite of thy holy Truth, and of an inward
hatred to thee. Be it therefore thy gracious pleasure, to undo whatsoever they
have done: and to gather us together again from all those places, whereinto we
were dispersed by them. And as they had sold us a far of, never to see our
Country again: so we beseech thee, that so many of them, as (in thy secret
election) belong unto thee, thou also would in like manner sell over, not unto
us, but to thy holy Truth, ever to have them in full possession, and never to
suffer them for to return unto their woonted wanderings again. And where as
heretofore they have already so much praevailed against thy people: now be it
thy pleasure, to bring them under, and daily more and more to enlarge the
safety of thy peculiar people against them all. We grant, o Lord, the things
we desire are very great: but it hehooveth thy people should know thy abundant
mercy; and thine enemies also the invincible power of thy mighty hand. Grant
us therefore these things we beseech thee, through Jesus Christ thy Son our
Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, as of right apperteineth, be
ascribed all thanks, honor, and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

