THE ENGLISH VSVRER; OR VSVRY CONDEMNED, BY The most learned and famous Divines
of the Church of England, and Dedicated to all his Majesty's Subjects, for the
stay of further increase of the same. Collected By JOHN BLAXTON, Preacher of
Gods Word at Osmington, in Dorcet-shire.

Calvin, Epist. de Vsura. Adeo plus quam rarum est eundem esse hominem probum
et faeneratorem. It is more then rare, (or it is very seldom seen,) that one
and the same person, should be both an honest man, and an usurer.

LONDON. Printed by JOHN NORTON, and are to be sold by JOHN LONG, in
Dorchester. 1634.

The Illustration.
THe Covetous wretch, to what may we compare,
better then Swine: both of one nature are,
One grumbles, the other grunts: both gross and dull,
hungry, still feeding, and yet never full.
Resemblance from their habits may be had
the one in Furre, the other in Bristles clad.
Rich men by others sweat augment their pounds:
the Hog's still rooting in the neighbors grounds.
They neither of them upward cast an eye,
both downward look, and pray on what they spy,
Nor differ they in death, The Brawne naught yields
till cut tn Collers, into Cheeks and Shields,
Like him the Usurer howsoever fed,
Profits none living, till himself be dead.
Both with the Christmas-boxe may well comply
It not hing yields till broke, They till they dye.
depiction of a man or userer seated at a table on which is laid the
paraphernalia of his trade: coins, measures, books, etc.; beneath his seat is a
strongbox; on the back of his chair, at his shoulder, is a black demon or devil
The English Usurer.
I say I will have all
both Use and principal.


depiction of two pigs, one standing with its snout in the earth, the other
lying on its back Mine is the Usurers desire.
To root in earth, wallow in Mire.
Living spare me,
and Dead share me.


Calvin Epist. de Vsura. In repub. been constituta nemo foenerator tolerabilis
est, sed omnino debet e consortio hominum reijci: An Usurer is not tolerable in
a well established Commonweal, but utterly to be rejected out of the company
of men.

To the Reader.
THere are some commit usury, Why some are usurers.
not knowing it to be sin: either because they have not the Word, or they use
not the Word for the enlightening of their hearts. See Mr. Moss, Treatise of
usury Epistle to the Reader.
Those that be ignorant for want of the Word, are much to be pitied; and yet
is their want that way, the just punishment of sin. Those that are ignorant
for not using the Word, are sharply to be reproved, as those whose ignorance
accrewing from their own negligence, is mere sin unto them. August. ad
Sextum Romans presby Ep. 105.
In vtrisque non est iusta excusatio, sed iusta condemnatio, says Augustine,
Neither of both can justly be excused; nay either of both is justly to be
condemned. Others commit usury, and stand to excuse it, aleadging for
themselves the authority of men: to these I answer, as Lactantius did to the
Gentiles, who grounded their religion upon the authority of their Ancestors,
Id solum rectum est, quod ratio praescribit, Lact. de Origin erroris, l. 2. c.
7.
not that which men say, but that which reason warranteth, is right and to be
approved.

Exodus 23.2.
To them that allege examples, I answer with the ancient proverb, Viuitur
preceptis non exemplis: we must live by precepts, and not by examples. And with
that of Moses, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. To them which
justify usury to be lawful, I stand not here to make answer: for to that end
serves the treatise following. Only, Cyprian. De Simplicitate praelatorum.
I apply unto them, that which Cyprian spoke of some Teachers of his time,
Ambulantes in tenebris, habere se lucem existimant: walking in darkness, they
suppose they have the light.

Distrust in Gods providence the Usurers sin.
To them that pretend, they cannot otherwise live, I reply: that they may
accuse themselves of sloth and idleness, of infidelity and distrust in Gods
Providence: which is indeed the Usurers sin.

Others yet there are, who knowing the practice to be evil, and themselves
not being able to excuse it, they turn their nose upon the very wind, Simile.
like the weather Cock, and like mad men rage at those that would bind them
for their benefit: and are like the Swine of which Christ speaks in the
Gospel, Mat. 7.6.
who when they have Pearls thrown before them, turn again, and all to rent
those that cast them. God be merciful unto these kind of Usurers, and convert
them, Simile.
(if it be his will,) for their case is desperate. They are like unto a
foolish patient, who is ready to fly into the face of the Chirurgian, when he
searches his wound unto the bottom, for the curing of it. What will follow
hereupon? But the ruin of the Usurer?

Others, when the Minister preaches against Usury, encourage themselves in
their uncharitable course of life, by this conceit: that it is but his private
opinion. This treatise will make it evident, that, Usury to be unlawful, The
most judicious Divines condemn Usury.
proceeds not out of the mouths of some few Humorists in the Country, (for so
the Usurers account them:) but it is the judgment of those who sit at the
Helm, and deservedly are accounted pillars in the Church of God.

As for the Author of this Treatise: understand, that he neither lends, nor
takes upon Usury: for he follows his calling, Usurers vile persons Ps. 15.
and does not busy himself much with the affayers of the world. As for professed
Usurers, he esteems them as vile persons, in whose eyes they are most justly
contemned, but he honoreth those that fear the Lord. which the Usurers do
not. And therefore being free from the guiltiness of this sin, he may the
moore freely give sentence upon the ungodliness thereof Iudicet ille de
alterius errore (says S. Ambrose) qui non habet in seipso quod condemnet:
iudicet, Ambros. super, beati immaculati.
qui non agit eadem quae in alio putauerit punienda. Let him judge of another
man's default, who has not the same fault to condemn in himself: let him
judge of another who commits not the same thing which he deemeth worthy the
punishing in another.

Know moreover, that he is a thorough conformable Member and Minister of the
Church of England. And for the Scope of this Treatise, it is for the
information and salvation of thy soul, and his own soul. Take the Treatise,
and Si quid ex vsu tureperias, iuvame precibus tuis apud deum; aliam mercedem
non defidero. vale.
give prayers, for

Thy fellow member in Christ Jesus, John Blaxton.

A Table of the Contents.
CHAP. 1. Usury defined by Bishop Downam, and Mr. Fenton. CHAP. 2. The
distinction of usury into mental and actual. Where actual usury is
distinguished from other contracts: as 1 From liberal contracts. 2 From all
lawful buying. 3 From lawful Location or letting to hire. 4 From the contract
of Partnership. 5 From adventurers usury. 6 From liberal usury. 7 From
recompencing usury, which we call Interest. CHAP. 3. The testimony of six
learned Bishops proving it simply unlawful. CHAP. 4. The testimony of the
learned Divines of the Church of England condemning usury. CHAP. 5. Clear and
apt Similies to which usury and usurers are resembled. CHAP. 6. Answers the
objections which are commonly made in defense of usury. CHAP. 7. That usurers
are bound to repent, and to make restitution.
The Names of the most Reverend and learned Bishops, and of the most learned
and Judicial Divines used in this Treatise.
Bishop
1 Sands sometimes Archbishop of York. 2 Jewel sometimes Bishop of Salisbury.
3 King sometimes Bishop of London. 4 Babington sometimes Bishop of Worcester. 5
Downam, the hammer of usurers, Lord Bishop of Derry in Ireland. 6 Lake, late
Lord Bishop of Bath and Wels.
Doctor
Pic. Willet. Sclater. Tailor. Smith. Preston. Williams Web. Sutton. Wilson.
Mr.
Wilkinson. Smith. Wheatly. Dod. Bolton. Perkins. Adams. Powel. Wilson.
Scudder. Rogers of Wethersfield Rogers of Messing Rogers of Dedham. Northbrooke
Philips. Robrough. Moss. Fenton. Dyke. Bayne. Brinsley. Siluester. Withers.
Quarles.
The Charitable happy, the Usurers accursed.
O! thrice, thrice happy he, Blessed are the merciful. Math. 5.7. Psalm. 37.19.
whose free desires
To charity a holy feruor fires:
Who only minds Gods glory, by his gift,
And neighbors good, without sinister drift;
Famine (familiar unto rogues that range)
Shall not come near his garner, nor his grange:
His fields, with Corn, abundant crop shall cover,
His vines with Grapes, his hedge with Roses over;
His downs with sheep, his dayery grounds with Neat;
His mounts with Kids, his moors with Oxen great;
His groves with droues (increasing night and day;)
His hills with Herds, his smiling meads with Hay;
His fens with foul, his pills, and pooles with Fish;
His trees with fruits, with plenty every dish;
Content and health (the best of earthly bliss)
Shall evermore remain with him and his; Phil. 4.11.12. 1 Timothy 6.6.

Him, pride or envy never shall molest;
Or corsiue care, foe to repast and rest.
For, the all-see eye still carefully respects
The Almner's house, and ever it protects; Esaias 58 8.9, 10, 11, etc.

Till finally, when justice ends all,
Sweet mercies voice him to heavens Kingdom call.
But the Usurer (how-euer here he thrive
In herds and hoords) already dead alive
(No heat of love, no heart to give a mite, Cursed are the vsures. Psalm. 15.5.

Ezekiel. 18.13.
Except to gain and gather double by 't)
Him, in that day (to him a day of woe)
The Holy-one the all-knower, will not know.
Shame and confusion shall be-spread him over,
Wishing the holes to hide, and hills to cover.
James 2.13. Revel. 6.15.16
Eternal fire shall fry his thirsty veins;
Immortal dying in eternal pains.
His eyes, so nice to look on Lazarus sore
Shall swim in sulphury tears (tortured the more,
To see above, in bliss and glory rife,
Whom ruthlesse here, he would not see, in life)
His ears here deaf unto destressed ones;
Shall there hear horror of the damned groans;
Nor shall the voice of mercy him salute,
Who, in effect, to needy moan was mute:
Millions of masses cannot him redeem,
Nor all Church-treasure ever ransom him,
From all-thought-passing pangs of wretchedness;
As, endless, caselesse, and remedylesse.
IOSVA SYLVESTER.

On Usurers.
OF all men vs'rers are not least accursed;
They rob the Spittle, pinch the afflicted worst:
In others grief they are most delighted in;
Whilst Giuers suffer for the Takers sin:
O how unjust a trade of life is that,
Which makes the lab'rers, lean, and the idle, fat?
FRA. QVARLES.

FAEnere qui lucrum facit, est homicida Catoni,
Furti dupla, huius quadrupla mulcta fuit.
Non facit heredem, priuatur honor sepulchri
Qui tenues lucro faeneris auget opes.
Sermo sacer, patres, pius omnis damnat, at vna
(Quae docet errores) Consuetudo probat.
Johannes Garbraudus Oxoniensis.

To the Usurer.
Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi, gloria caeli,
Et dolor inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Thy death, the death of Christ, the worlds tentation.
Heavens joy, hells torment, be thy meditation.

Three profitable helps of a godly life. Psalm. 119.57 58, 59. See Bb. Cowper
in Romans 8.1.
THere be three most notable helps of a godly life, delivered to us by David,
in three verses of the 119 Psalm, 57. O Lord, I have determined to keep thy
Word. 58. I have made my supplication in thy presence with my whole heart. 59.
I have considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
Determination is the first: It is a good thing by settled resolution to conclude
with thy self that thou will live godly. Supplication is the second: except by
continual Prayer thy determination be confirmed, and strengthened by grace
from God, thy conclusions which thou take to day, shall vanish to morrow.
Consideration is the third, and it is profitable to reduce thee again into the
way of God, so often as of weakness thou thou wanders from it, contrary to
thy first determination. These are three helps to keep thy heart in the way of
God: so necessary, that if without them thou do any work, it is not possible
but thou shall be snared. First therefore determine to forsake thy Usury, and
to make restitution. Secondly, strengthen this determination by Prayer, say
with David, create in me a clean heart, O God: Psalm. 51.10. Psalm. 119.36
and renew a right spirit within me. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and
not to covetousness. Thirdly, consider thy former courses when thou wast a
theeuish Usurer, and say with our blessed Savior: What is a man profited, if
he shall gain the whole world, Math. 16.26
and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
Say with the holy Apostle S. Paul, they that will be rich, fall into temptation
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9.
which drown men in perdition and destruction. Finally, do good, v. 18, 19.
be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up
in store for thy self a good foundation against the time to come, that thou
may lay hold on eternal life. Consider what I say, 2 Timothy 2.7.
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things, Farewell.

Thy remembrancer, I. B.

THE ENGLISH VSVRER.
CHAP. I. Of the definition of Usury.
THe contract of Usury is nothing else but illiberall mutuation, Bb. Downam in
Ps. 15. p. 151. Usury defined.
and may thus briefly be defined: Usury is mutuation, or lending for gain.
This brief definition does fully set forth the true nature of Usury, and
sufficiently distinguishes it from all other contracts whatsoever.

FIrst I say it is mutuation or lending, Subiectum vsurae mutuum.
which is also presupposed in the Scripture, Exodus 22.25. and the same if need
were, might be proved by the other relative, which is borrowing: for lending
and borrowing are relatiues: And if he which takes up money upon usury, be a
borrower; then he that gives or puts it forth unto usury, is a lender.

The contract therefore of Usury is a contract of lending: now in the contract
of mutuation or lending, Idem p. 152.
diverse things concur, which also belong to the nature of Usury.

1. That it is of such things as are spent in the use, and consist in
quantity, that is to say in number, weight, or measure, as Money, and
Victuals, Corn, Wine, Oil, etc. which are particularly mentioned, Deuteronomy.
23.19. Leuit. 25.37. 2. And therefore is alienation not only of the use, but
also of the property, from which the use (of such things as are spent in the
use) cannot be severed. 3: As the property is transferred to the borrower, so
the borrower stands to the hazard of the thing borrowed. 4. That it is not a
perpetual alienation of that which is lent, but for a time, which time being
expired, the borrower is bound to restore the principal. 5. Because the thing
borrowed is to be spent in the use, therefore the borrower is bound, not to
restore the self same particular which he borrowed, but so much in the same
kind, or the same value. 6. It belongs to the nature of lending, that it be
free and liberal. And this is that which follows in the definition, as the
difference to distinguish it from free lending, that it is for gain.
Usury is for gain.
By gain is meant any addition, overplus, or increase, over and above the
Principal, whether it be money, or money worth, required not for the
indemnity of the Creditour, Idem p. 153. What is to be esteemed gain.
to save him harmless, but for his advantage, to make him a gainer by
lending; for that only is to be esteemed gain, which is an overplus, clearly
gotten above the Principal. And whereas I say it is either money, or money
worth: this money worth reaches far, not only to goods and wares, but also
to labors and services, and whatsoever else being valuable by money, may
lawfully be let or sold for money. And when I say that usury is lending for
gain, it is meant, that in the first act of lending upon usury, or afterward
in the forbearing, whereby that lending is continued, gain is, if not
couenanted for, yet at the least intended. So that where there is a covenant or
intent of gain by loan, whether it be in the first act of lending, or
afterward in the forbearing, it is usury: and contrariwise, where there is
neither a covenant nor intent of gain in lending or forbearing, there is not
usury, though there be an overplus, or increase received over and besides the
Principal.

The Hebrew word Nesheh, is the ordinary name to signify usury, as Foenus in
Latin, or (...) in Greek, Idem p. 154.
or Usury in English. For the money which is lent upon usury, is called Nesheh,
a biter, or which biteth: The names of usury.
and the Hebrew phrase, which signifies to be lent upon usury, is to bite, as
appears plainly, Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother
money or meat, or any thing else, Asher Ishak, which biteth, that is, which is
lent upon usury. For whatsoever the Usurer lends, it has teeth, and jaws to
eat and consume the substance of other men; his Corn or victuals which were
made to be eaten, do eat, and his money which was made to be spent, does wast
the substance of others, and therefore Hebrew writers do teach, that in the
name of Usury is encluded an admonition, not to borrow upon Usury: for he
which takes money upon Usury, takes as it were a serpent into his bosom.

This is confessed by Calvin himself, that whereas Usurers avoid the name
Nesheh, which signified biting, as they do the name Usury among us, as being
odious, and therefore alleged, that they took not Nesheh but Tarbith, as
amongst us they will not be thought to take Usury, but consideration, vsance,
or interest: therefore the Lord forbideth as well Tarbith as Nesheh, In Exodus
22.25 Levit. 25.36..
whereby he condemns generally Quamlibet sortis accessionem (says Calvin)
any addition or increase above the principal. And upon Ezekiel chap. 18. he
says the Prophet condemns not only Nesheh which signifies biting, God
forbids biting usury and increase.
but also Tarbith, which he translateth incrementum, increase: hoc est (says
he) quicquid lucri sibi avari homines conciliant ex mutuo; that is, whatsoever
gain covetous men do get to themselves by loan.

Actual Usury is described by Dr. FENTON, to be pactum ex mutuo lucrum. Lucre
for loan upon covenant; or The covenant of lucre for lending: or Lending upon
covenant for lucre. Dr. Fenton Treatise of usury, p. 15.

So that these three words, mutuum, pactum, lucrum, do define and circumscribe
the entire nature of that Usury whereof the maine question is made, whether it
be lawful or not.

And to these descriptions of Usury, agree those of our most reverend, and
judicious Divines: vide. Dr. Willet upon Exodus, p. 509. Dr. Smith in Willet
upon Leuiticus, p. 625. Perkins, Comt. 8. Mr. Smith, 18. Sermon upon Usury. Dr.
Pie, Vsuries Spright coniured, p. 4. Powels positions of Usury, p. 4. Bb.
Jewel, upon 1 These. p. 113. Amesius de conscientia, lib. 5. cap. 44. Dr.
Wilson, Discourse upon Usury, p. 85. Mr. Moss, Arraignement and conviction of
Usury, p. 31.

CHAP. 2. The distinction of Usury.
Usury is either Inward and Mental, or Outward and Actual.
Mental Usury is a lending for gain without covenant, that is, Mental usury.
Bb. Downam in Ps. 15. p. 168.
when the creditor only intends and looks for gain by lending and
forbearing his money, but does not indent or covenant with the borrower for
gain. And this may be called, the Usury of the heart: Romans 7.14.
for the law of God being spiritual, does not only restrain the hands, and
outward man; but also the intent and purpose of the heart: insomuch, that
moral actions though in show good, are to be judged evil, if they proceed
from an ill intent, and tend to an ill end: for he that intends evil, has
the like evil will with him that works evil: and he which by lending only
intends his own gain, he lends for gain, and therefore, if actual Usury
be evil, then the intent and purpose thereof is also evil.

Outward and actual Usury is, when the creditour does not only intend
certain gain by lending, but also couenanteth for a certain sum to be
allowed him at a certain time, or times. This in the Scriptures is called
imposing of Usury, Exodus 22.25. Idem p. 170.
Thou shall not impose Usury upon him: Wherefore in actual Usury, a covenant
is made for certain gain, and in that covenant the very form of actual
Usury consists: for which cause some do call such a contract, formal Usury.
And this covenant uses to be confirmed by obligation, either verbal, as bills
and bonds, or real, as pawnes, or mortgage; or personal, as suretiship;
whereby the creditor is secured for the receipt, and the debtor bound for the
payment, both of the principal and also of the Usury.

Let us now see how by this definition Usury is distinguished from other
contracts, and also other things which may seem to have some affinity
therewith: for of the rest it is needless to speak.

It is therefore distinguished

Usury distinguished. 1 From all liberal contracts. Idem p. 157.
1. From all liberal contracts, as that of donation or free gift, of mutuation,
or free lending to spend, of commodation, or free lending to use, because they
be free and liberal, but Usury is illiberall and for gain. 2 From all lawful
buying
2. From all lawful buying: because in buying there is a perpetual alienation
of money, in Usury but for a time. 3 For letting to hire.
3. From lawful Location or letting to hire: which is the rather to be
observed, because some imagine, that money and other things which are lent upon
Usury, Idem p. 158.
may as well be let as other things. But there is a great difference betwixt
Usury, and the lawful contract of Location or letting. And first they differ
in the subjects.
Usury is in those things which are spent in the use, and consist in quantity,
standing in number, weight and measure. Location, is of such things as are not
spent in the use, neither stand in number, weight and measure. The subject of
Usury, are such things as have no fruitful use in themselves, but the gain
which is to be raised by employment of them, is to be imputed to the industry
and skill of the imployer. The subject of Location have a fruitful use in
themselves naturally. The use of things lent upon Usury cannot be severed, or
reckoned apart from the property and dominion, because they are such things as
are spent in the use, and therefore if you use them, you spend them. The
fruitful use of things lent, may be severed and reckoned apart, and is
valuable by it self, as of Lands, Goods, Houses, etc. which remain in the use
unspent. In the contract of loan, whether free or upon Usury, the lender
grants to the borrower, not only the use, but also the property of the thing
lent, from which the use of that, which we lend to be spent in the use cannot
be severed: hence it is called mutuum, because by lending it is made ex meo
tuum. In the contract of Location, the letter grants to him that takes to
hire the use only of the things retaining the property to himself. Because
that which is the subject of loan, and Usury, is spent in the use, and is lent
to be spent; therefore the borrower is bound to restore, not the same
particular which he borrowed, but so much in quantity or full value in the same
kind, without any impairing, or diminution. Because, that which is the subject
of commodity and Location, is lent, and let, not to be spent, but only to be
used: therefore he that takes the same to use, is bound to restore the self
same particular, which for the most part is impaired and made worse in the use.
As in mutuation, and Usury, the property is translated to the borrower, so with
the property also the hazard wholly appertains to the borrower: for the very
contract of mutuation includes in it an obligation, binding the borrower, that
whatsoever becomes of this particular which he borrows, he shall restore
the full value thereof at the day appointed, in the same kind. And to this
purpose the borrower makes promise, either by word or writing, enters into
bonds, and statutes, laying his goods to pawn, or his lands to mortgage,
gives sureties, to assure and secure the creditor for the principal. As in
Location the use is communicated to the Hirer, but the Letter retains the
property: so the thing, if it shall miscarry without the default of the Hirer:
belongs to the Letter, and not to the Hirer, because it came for his hire,
Exodus 22.14. And it is a rule in law, to whom the hazard appertains, to him
the fruit and profit belongs.

Where there is a Covenant to bear part of the loss, as well as to reap part
of the gain, 4 From the contract of Partnership.
and this contract, is neither usury, nor loan: but a lawful contract.

Which in Latin is called Nauticum, 5 From adventurers usury.
or Maritimum Foenus, and is a gain or allowance made for money which is
transported beyond the Seas, at the peril and hazard of the Creditor. This is
not unlawful, provided, Idem p. 164. 165.
always, that there be an adventure or hazard in truth, and not in pretense
only; and also that the gain be proportionable to the hazard.

Which is a gratuitie or free gift, 6 From liberal usury
when the borrower finding himself much benefited by the lenders courtesy,
does of his own accord in testimony of his thankfulness, freely give to the
lender, who neither intended when he lent, nor expected whiles he forbore, any
gain; and much less couenanted for it.

From that which is called Vsura compeus satoria recompencing usury, which we
call intrest: 7 From recompencing usury. Bb. Downam in Ps. 15 p. 166. Dr. Smith
in Willet upon Leuit. p. 631. Powels Posit. of usury p. 14. Bb. Jewel. 1 Thessalonians.
p. 135.
which is nothing else but a just recompense which the Debtor, having through
his default been the effectual cause of the Creditours hinderance, does owe
unto him by the Law of nature, and that hinderance may be two fold, Damnum
emergens, loss arising, or Lucrum cessans, gain ceasing: but this ceasing
gain which must come into estimation, must not be uncertain and doubtful,
but certain: or at least very probable.

Here are certain cautions to be remembered.
First, that intrest be esteemed not according to the gain or benefit which
the borrower has had by the employment of the money, but according to the
hinderance or loss which the creditour sustained through the borrowers
default. Secondly, that Interest is not to he required nisi post moram, but
only after delay and default committed by the borrower. Thirdly, that not
always after delay it is to be required, but only then, when the creditour
has indeed sustained loss or hindrance by the borrowers delay. Fourthly, that
he do not voluntarily incur any loss, meaning to lay the burden thereof on
the borrower, but do his true endeavor to avoid it, either in whole or in
part. Fifthly, that when he suspecteth loss or hinderance by the debtors delay,
he descend not into extremities with those who have broken day, not through
negligence or unfaithfulness, but through want and necessity, which they did
not foresee: and let him remember, that where is no fault, there ought to be no
punishment. Sixthly, that the estimation of the interest be not referred to the
creditors own arbitrament, but committed to the judgment of some other honest
and discreet men: which conditions being observed, it is lawful for the
creditour to require an overplus besides his principal: which overplus
notwithstanding is not usury.
How usury discovers it self in selling, in buying, in letting, in partnership
and exchange, under pretense of the adventurers usury, under the color of
recompencing usury, vide. Bb. Downam, upon the 15 Psalm, p. 173, 175, 182,
183, 188, 191. Dr. Fentons Treatise of usury, p. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Powels
positions of usury, in his Epistle Dedicatory. Mr. Moss, in the Arraignement
and Conniction of usury, p. 62. to p. 68.

CHAP. 3. The Testimony of six learned Bishops of the Church of England
concerning usury.
The Testimony of Bishop Sands.
THis biting Worm of Usury, Sermon upon 1 Samuel 12.23, 24. Usury a biting
worm, a canker.
that deuowring wolf has consumed many, many it has pulled upon their knees,
and brought to beggary: many such as might have lived in great wealth, and
honor not a few. This canker has corrupted all England: we shall do God and
our country true service, by taking away this evil; repress it by Law, else
the heavy hand of God hangs over us, and will strike us.

God says, Lend freely, and look for no gain: Idem Sermon upon Luke 1.74.75.
but will the Usurer, whose money is his god, remit his Interest because of
this; because the Lord has so charged him? No, he will not let go his ten or
twenty, or thirty, in the hundred. To him the glory of God, Note. Nothing
precious to the Usurer but money.
yea and his own soul is vile, nothing is precious but only his money. What
the Prophet speaks of putting forth money to usury, he full little regards,
but seedeth still upon his mast, and blesses himself when he waxes fat, not
perceiving that God has already plagued him with a plague of all plagues, the
obduration of his heart. And although that God has given him over into a dull
and senseless mind, Usurers have hard hearts.
his ears being so damned up that nothing can have entrance to move, or touch
his hard heart, yet he still blesses himself, and his accursed soul. Thou
Usurer, thou idolater, that do glory in thy shame, in thy evil gotten gold:
Their wealth prospers not.
do thou not know, that thy wealth shall melt like snow before the Sun?
Think thou still to hold it? O fool, this night shall they take away thy
soul, perhaps this instant, and then whose is all this? After that Zacheus
fell to the service of Christ, and that Christ entered into his house, he
presently forsook the service of Mammon, made a large restitution of that
which he had gained by such unlawful means, and then began to be liberal:
and not only to lend freely, but to give for nothing. He gave the one half of
all his goods to the poor. If God would at this day work thus in the heart of
one Zacheus, a rich Usurer, how many poor might be relieved by such a
restitution? He might maintain many a needy man, and save his own soul.
Well, this one thing we know, the word that proceeds out of Gods mouth
against usury, Is. 55.11.
shall not return in vain, if it cannot work reformation, it will work
confusion.

Every man is to his neighbor a debtor, not only of that which himself
borrows, Idem Sermon upon Romans 13.8, 9, etc.
but of whatsoever his neighbor needs: a debtor, not only to pay that he
owes, but also to lend that he has and may conveniently spare; to lend I say
according to the rule of Christ, Luke. 6. Lend looking for nothing thereby. So
that these ouer-payments, the usury which has spoiled and eaten up many, Usury
the canker of the Commonwealth.
the canker of the Commonwealth, is utterly both forbidden to man, and abhorred
of God. To bargain for Lead, Grain, or Leases, with such as have neither
Lead, Grain, nor Leases to pay, neither any such matter meant, but only
unlawful gain of money, the party to forfeit his obligation, because he
neither can, nor means such payment, and the lender not content to receive
less advantage then thirty at the hundred, this is but a patched cloak to
cover this vild sin withal. Note.
Whatsoever thou receiuest upon condition, or by what means soever thou
receiuest more then was lent, thou art an usurer toward thy brother, and God,
will be a revenger against thee. He whom thou should obey if thou will be
saved, Ezod. 22 25. Levit. 25 27. Deuteronomy. 23.19.
does in express words command thee, not to lend thy money for usury. This
Word of God, man cannot dispense withal, and it shall not return in vain; if
it cannot be a converting commandeme it, it shall be a confounding judgment.
The reasons of men for usury must give place to the precepts of God against it.
The reasons of men for usury, must give place to the precept of God against it.
What man art thou that wilt be wiser then thy Maker? Has God condemned it,
and dare thou defend it? is it in his judgment injurious, and does thy
judgment think it equal? Has he seen reason to prohibit it, and do thou
see reason why thou may use it? such reasons with the makers and users of
them, the Lords justice shall destroy. And yet in truth all Nations, at all
times have condemned it, as the very bane and pestilence of a Commonwealth: The
old Romans condemned usury
whereof the old Roman both History and practice is an often witness. These
secret shifts are seen of God, and abhorred, and will be revenged: well may
thou escape the hands of man by thy colored delusions, yet can thou not
escape the sharp and swift judgment of God: Note.
who accordingly as he has threatened, will exclude thee out of his Kingdom,
interdict thee his Tabernacle, and hurl thee into Hell: Where thy evil gotten
money can neither redeem nor help thee, a just reward for thy unjust usury.
Our Apostle requires that we pay unto every man the thing that we owe, and we
are as much debttors to lend freely, as others faithfully to pay the thing
which was lent.

The bowels of compassion are in some men so marualously dried and closed up,
Idem Sermon upon Micah. 6 8 p. 100.
that they turn away their faces from all men, that desire any thing at their
hands, though they ask it not of gift, Usurers worse then Jews.
but of loan, unless they ask to buy the loan with Usury. The Jews even
till this day will not lend upon usury among themselves, but lend freely to
their brethren and without gain. Judas himself that sold his Master for
money, was not more cruel hearted I suppose then these men are, who for money
devour their brethren: their hearts are iron hearts, they have no spark of
pity or compassion left in them, let them not think but that one day their
gain shall be their exceeding loss. Note.
If Chrysostom thought that one evil gotten groat, laid up amongst a chest
full of money, would be a canker to fret out and eat up the rest, what shall
become then of so much gotten by so unmerciful and ungodly means? Where is
love, where is mercy, when lending of money is become merchandise? Enough has
been said in this place of this matter, which if it be not amended, be ye
assured that the Lord God in his just wrath will plague you both in your
selves, and in your posterity for it.

2 Testimony. Bb. Jewel.
MAny live in usury, a most filthy trade, a trade which God detesteth, Sermon
upon Romans 13.12.
a trade which is the very overthrow of all Christian love: But their gain
shall be to their loss, and their money to their destruction. He that gives
his money upon usury, shall not dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, nor rest
upon his holy Mountain.

Treatise upon the Sacraments.
Deceive no man by wrongful dealing, increase not thy goods by extortion nor by
usury. He that gives his money to usury, shall not enter into the Tabernacle
of the Lord. He that takes usury of his neighbor, kills him without a
sword, the Lord will avenge it. He will not bless ill gotten goods, they
cannot prosper: they will never continue, nor remain unto the third heir.

Usury is a kind of lending of money, or corn, or oil, upon 1 These. p. 113.
Usury defined.
or wine, or of any other thing, wherein, upon covenant and bargain, we
receive again the whole principal which we delivered, and somewhat more, for
the use and occupying of the same: as if I lend 100 pound, and for it covenant
to receive 105 pound, or any other sum, greater then was the sum which I
did lend: No good man an Usurer.
this is that which we call usury: such a kind of barganing as no good man, or
godly man ever used. Such a kind of barganing as all men that ever feared Gods
judgments have always abhorred and condemned. It is filthy gains, Note.
Usurers say, Lord increase our faith, and then make such a confession of it as
Bb. Jewel does in this place.
and a work of darkness, it is a monster in nature: the overthrow of mighty
kingdoms, the destruction of flourishing States, the decay of wealthy Cities,
the plagues of the world, and the misery of the people: it is theft, it is the
murdering of our brethren its the curse of God, and the curse of the people.
This is Usury. By these signs and tokens you may know it: For wheresoever it
reigns all those mischiefs ensue.

Whence springs Usury? Soon showed. Idem p. 115. The cause of usury.
Even thence whence theft, murder, adultery, the plagues, and destruction of
the people do spring. All these are the works of the devil, and the works
of the flesh. John 8. Usurers of their father the devil.
Christ tells the Pharisees, You are of your father the devil, and the lusts
of your father you will do. Even so may it truly be said to the Usurer, Thou
art of thy father the devil, and the lusts of thy father thou will do, and
therefore thou have pleasure in his works. The devil entered into the heart
of Judas, and put in him this greediness, and covetousness of gain, for
which he was content to sell his master. Judas heart was the shop, the devil
was the foreman to work in it. They that will be rich, fall into tentation and
snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9 10.
which drown men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money, is the
root of all evil. And S. John says, Whosoever commits sin is of the
Devil. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Thus we see that the devil is the planter, and the father
of usury.

Idem p. 116. The fruits of usury.
What are the fruits of usury? A. 1. It dissolueth the knot and fellowship of
mankind. 2. It hardneth man's heart. 3. It makes men unnatural, and bereaueth
them of charity, and love to their dearest friends. 4. It breeds misery and
provoke the wrath of God from heaven. 5. It consumes rich men, it eats up
the poor, it makes bankrupts, and undoes many householders, 6 The poor
occupiers are driven to flee, there wives are left alone, their children are
hopeless, and driven to beg their bread, through the unmerciful dealing of
the covetous usurer.

He that is an Usurer, wishes that all others may lack and come to him and
borrow of him: Idem p. 120. Our forefathers abhorred usury.
that all others may lose, so that he may have gain. Therefore our old
forefathers so much abhorred this trade, that they thought an Usurer unworthy
to live in the company of Christian men They suffered not an Usurer to be a
witness in matters of Law. They suffer him not to make a Testament, and to
bestow his goods by Will. When an Usurer dyed, they would not suffer him to be
buried in places appointed for the burial of Christians. So highly did they
mislike this unmerciful spoiling and deceiving our brethren.

Idem p. 121. All professions of men condemn Usury.
But what speak I of the ancient Fathers of the Church? there was never any
Religion, nor Sect, nor State, nor Degree, nor Profession of men, but they have
disliked it. Philosophers, Greeks, Latins, Lawyers, Divines, Catholics,
Heretics; all Tongues, and Nations, have ever thought an Usurer as dangerous
as a thief. The very sense of nature proves it to be so. If the stones could
speak, they would say as much. But some will say, Idem p. 124. The Usurers
objection.
all kinds of usury are not forbidden, there may be cases where usury may
stand with reason and equity, and herein they say so much as by wit may be
devised, to paint out a soul and ugly idol, and to shadow themselves in
manifest and open wickedness. Whatsoever God says, yet this or this kind of
usury, say they, which is done in this or this sort, is not forbidden. It
profits the Commonwealth, it relieueth great numbers, the poor should
otherwise perish, none would lend them.

By like good reason, Answer.
there are some that defend theft and murder, they say, there may be some case,
where it is lawful to kill or to steal: for God willed the Hebrews to rob the
Egyptians, and Abraham to kill his own son Isaac. In these cases the
robbery and the killing of his son were lawful. So say they. Some plead for
Usurers, as Papists for whores.
Even so by the like reason do some of our countrymen maintain concubines,
curtizans, and brothel-houses, and stand in defense of open stews. They are
(say they) for the benefit of the Country, they keep men from more dangerous
inconveniences, take them away, it will be worse. Although God say, There shall
be no whore of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a whore-keeper
of the sons of Israel. Yet these men say all manner of whoredom is not
forbidden. In these and these cases it is not amiss to allow it.

As Samuel said to Saul, so may we say to the Usurer? Idem p. 126. God cares
not for Usurers excuses.
thou have devised cases and colors to hide thy shame, but what regard has
God to thy cases? What cares he for thy reasons? the Lord would have more
pleasure, if when thou hear his voice thou would obey him. For what is
thy device against the counsel, and ordinance of God? What bold presumption is
it for a mortal man to control the Commandments of immortal God? And to
weigh his heavenly wisdom in the balance of humane foolishness? When God
says, thou shall not take usury, what creature of GOD art thou which can
take usury? When God makes it unlawful, They are of a desperate mind.
what art thou, oh man, that say, it is lawful? This is a token of a
desperate mind. It is found true in thee, that Paul said, the love of money is
the root of all ill. Thou art so given over unto the wicked Mammon, that thou
carest not to do the will of God.

Idem p. 144.
Thus much I thought expedient to speak of the loathsome and foul Trade of
usury, I know not what fruit will grow thereby, and what it will work in your
hearts. If it please God, it may do that good that I wish. I have done my
duty, I call God for a record unto my soul, I have not deceived you. I have
spoken unto you the truth. If I be deceived in this matter, O God thou have
deceived me. Thou say, Thou shall take no usury. Thou say, He that takes
increase, shall not live. What am I, that I should hide the words of my God, or
keep them back from the hearing of his people? The Learned old Fathers have
taught us, it is no more lawful to take usury of our brother, then it is to
kill our brother. They that be of God hear this, and consider it, and have a
care that they displease him not. But the wicked that are no whit moved, and
care not what God says, but cast his Word behind them: which have eyes and see
not, and ears yet hear not: because they are filthy, they shall be filthy
still: their greedy desire shall increase to their confusion, and as their
money increases, so shall they increase the heaps of their sins. Note.
Pardon me if I have been long or vehmeent, of those that are Usurers I ask
no pardon.

Idem p. 145.
I hear that there are certain in this City which wallow wretchedly in this
filthiness, without repentance, I give them warning in the hearing of you all,
Usury a cruel and detestable sin.
and in the presence of God, that they forsake this cruel and detestable sin.
If otherwise, they continue therein, I will open their shame, and denounce
Excommunication against them, Bb. Jewel threatens excomunication against
Usurers.
and publish there names in this place, before you all. That you may know them,
and abhor them, as the plagues and monsters of the world: that if they be
past all fear of God, they may yet repent and amend for worldly shame.

Tell me thou wretched wight of the World, thou unkind creature which art past
all sense and feeling of God, which knows the will of God, Usurers impudent.
1 Because they come to Church. 2 Because they read GODS Word. 3 Because they
come into the company of good men. They cause Gods wrath to fall upon their
children.
and do the contrary? How dare thou come into the Church? It is the Church
of that GOD, which has said, thou shall take no usury, and thou know he
has so said. How dare thou read or hear the Word of God? It is the Word of
that God, which condemns usury; and thou know he does condemn it. How
dare thou come into the company of thy brethren? usury is the plague and
destruction and undoing of thy brethren. And this thou know. How dare thou
look upon thy Children? Thou make the wrath of GOD fall down from Heaven
upon them. Thy iniquity shall be punished in them to the third and forth
Generation. This thou know. How dare thou look up into Heaven? Thou have
no dwelling there: thou shall have no place in the Tabernacle of the highest.
This thou know. Because thou robbest the poor, deceiuest the simple, and
eatest up the Widows Houses: therefore shall thy Children be naked, and beg
their bread: therefore shall thou and thy riches perish together.

The third Testimony, Bishop King.
HOw long will the Usurer and oppressor of others whose Laws are as knives,
Upon Jonas p. 90.
and whose teeth be of iron, sleep in his bed of mischief, as the Psalmist
calls it, and in the contemplation and solace of his ill gotten goods?

Idem p. 444. Lecture 32.
How long have we cried against oppressions, and smitten the oppressors with
the rod of Gods vengeance, as Moses smote the Rock? And yet what one drop of
remorse have we ever wrung from their stony hearts? How long have we clapped our
hands at the shameless usury of this place? Ministers must preach against
usury.
If usury be too stiff to be moved, yet we must free our souls, and if it
were possible, we would also free them that are wrapped in their snares. If they
little esteem the warning of the fifteenth Psalm, that give their money upon
usury, let them at least take heed that receive it. Let them not try to bear
an Ox upon their shoulders, when they are unable to bear a Goat. That is, if
poverty be burden enough unto them, let them not add the burden of usury.
They ask what they shall do? Do thou ask? Says Plutarke. Thou have a
tongue, beg. Thou have hands, work. Thou have feet, walk. Thou have an
heart, Plutarch de vsura. Nihil tam molestum quam reddere. Idem p. 504. Lecture
37.
think.

Nauiga, renauiga, sale forward and backward, take any pains, rather then to
fall into the mercy of an Usurer. There is nothing so bitter as to restore.

I would our Usurers would mark this, that of all those grievous offenses
whereof Nineueh had labourred a long time, the rest are held a sleep, and
their names spared, as not worthy in comparison to come in speech with their
far superior iniquity; only the wickedness of their hands, Namque meos nec
aequos mihi nec rapuere iuvencos Plutar. de uitando aere alieno.
which is not least in biting the poor, is remembered and reported in special
words. Spoke I of Usurers? There are none: neither is there a Sun in the
Sky. For mine own part, I know them not. For they have taken neither Horse
nor Bullock of me. But for my brethrens sake both in the City and Country, I
wish that their bills and bonds were all heaped together in the Market place,
and set on fire, as they were sometimes at Athens, that we might all joy and
say, as Alcibiades then did, we never saw a clearer fire. Nunquam vidi ignem
purionem.
But because we cannot ease our hearts so soon of them, nor by such means I
will tell them for their own comfort what they shall trust to amongst other
things that although they labor in the fire to get riches, yet the time shall
come, when there shall nothing remain unto them but this, that they shall be
able to know and recount with themselves, how many debtors they have quite
undone: As for their treasures of iniquity, let them plainly understand that
they put them into a bottomless bag which could hold nothing. De male
quaesitis, etc.
Ill gotten goods never descend to the third heir; perhaps, not to the second,
nor first, not to benefit himself, who thinks he has most handfast. She
gathered it of the hire of an harlot, Micah 1. Usurers goods shall not prosper.
and it shall return to the wages of an harlot. They gathered their wealth by
usury, and usury or somewhat else shall consume it. Gnipho the Usurer as Lucian
reports, lies in hell, bemoaning his hard estate, that R^docares an
incestuous spend thrift should waste his goods: so may these, but I leave their
judgment to God, to whom it belongs. For vengeance is his, and he will repay
it. Yet dare I give sentence against it, as far as the ancient Romans laws
did: wherein because a thief was bound to make restitution of double, the
Usurer of four fold. Their meaning is plain enough, Usury double theft.
that they esteemed usury a double theft, and that at the least is my
judgment. And therefore as Alexander Seuerus made an Act, that none should
salute the Emperor, Note.
who knew himself to be a thief, so let our Usurers, take themselves warned,
Usurers not to salute Christians.
and discharged (so long as their hearts accuse them of their double and treble
theft) from saluting Christians, and much more from eating, drinking,
conuersing, most of all from praying, fasting, communicating with Christians.

The 4. Testimony, Bishop Lakes.
In his works vol. p. 343.
THis is no small difference between God and the devil. The diueil in show,
bids us, love our selves, do all for our selves, and we are so simple as to
believe him, The devil the image of Usurers.
and think that we do so; whereas the event proves that we do all for him,
and to our own ruin: for he is the plain image of Usurers, who live by the
sweat of other men's brows, and cunningly grow rich by undoing others with a
seeming relief.

Idem upon Ps. 50.21. God will reprove Usurers.
God himself says it in the close of this Psalm, Hear this all ye that
forget God. Jews, Gentiles, whatsoever you be, if you be adulterers,
drunkards, Usurers, blasphemers, any way wicked livers, Consider this (says
God) lest I suddenly take you away, and there be none to help you. For if we
be guilty of such sins, and encourage our selves in them by base conceits of
God, God will not fail to reprove us, and marshall such wickedness before us,
to convict us thereof, and to confound us therewith.

Idem Sermon upon John 2.16. Usurers fill the land with poor.
While the Gentleman depopulates the Country, and the Usurer and Victuler are
become the chief Tradesmen of Incorporations, what wonder if contrary to Gods
Law, and the Kings, the whole Land be filled with miserable poor.

The fifth Testimony, Bishop Downam.
This most reverend and learned Bishop proves usury to be unlawful by diverse
arguments.

1 Argument.
Proposition. upon Ps. 13. p. 250.
Whatsoever peruerteth and ouerturneth an act of virtue, especially such a
necessary act to humane societies, that is to say, free lending: it is not
only a vice, but a detestable vice.

But usury peruerteth and depraueth this necessary act of liberality and
charity, (free lending: Assumpt.
) turning it into an act of self love, covetousness and cruelty.

Therefore usury is not only a vice, Concl.
but a detestable vice.

The proposition is proved, because nothing is opposite to virtue but vice. As
for free lending, it is a commendable act of liberality, and a necessary duty
of charity.

The assumption is clear and manifest. For whereas by the ordinance of God and
by the Law of nature, lending is free and charitable, intending the good of the
borrower, and not of the lender; usury has made it illiberall and
uncharitable, intending the lenders profit chiefly, if not only, and seeking,
yea couenanting for the lenders gain as well out of the loss of the borrower
as out of his gain. The property of charity is not to seek her own, but the
good of others, and whereas other virtues serve for the good of the subject
wherein they are, the acts of charity and liberality are referred to the good
of others: Note.
lending therefore being an act of liberality and charity, ought to respect the
good of the borrower, if not only, yet chiefly; but lending by usury is made
an act of selfeloue, wherein the good of the borrower is sought either not at
all, or but in a secondary respect, Usurers covenant absolutely for gain.
as it serves to further the lenders gain. For indeed the lender by usury
couenanteth absolutely for gain, which happens sometimes out of the borrowers
loss, and sometimes also out of his gain, which the Usurer will pretend to
seek and respect, but the truth is, he will never look after his neighbors
profit, unless therein he may be sure to find his own gain.

The usurers lending therefore is an act of selfeloue, Lending proceeds from
3 fountains.
and it is also an act of covetousness. For whereas lending proceeds from
one of these 3 fountains, either from Christian charity, or from civil love
and humanity, or from covetousness: he is said to lend in Christian charity,
who lends for the Lords sake to his needy neighbor, looking for nothing
again: in civil charity or courtesy, who lends to pleasure his friend,
looking for his own again: in covetousness who looks for more then his
own. For indeed what is (...), that is covetousness, but an unlawful desire
of having more.

2 Argument.
Idem p. 310.
Usury cannot be practiced with a good conscience, because it cannot be done in
faith, that is to say, in a sound persuasion out of the Word of God, that it is
lawful: and whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14.23.


3 Argument.
Phil. 4.8. Romans 12.17. 1 These. 5.22:
That which is not honest and of good report, is not to be practiced. For the
Scripture teaches us, that we should do such things as are honest, and of
good report, providing for honest things, not only before God, but also before
men, abstaining from all shows of evil.

Improbanturij quaestus qui in odia hominum incurrunt vt faeneratorum De Off.
lib. 1.
But usury is a very odious thing, and of ill report: the very heathen by the
light of nature detested it. Tully says, such things are to be misliked which
are odious, as namely that of Usurers. Columella says, that usury is odious
even to those whom it seems to help. Aristotle says it is hated most
worthily, etc. As for Christians, usury in ancient time was so odious among
them, that if any were but suspected to be an Usurer, his house was counted the
house of the devil, no neighbor would fetch fire at his house, or have any
thing to do with him, children would point at him in the streets: yea, by the
laws of Christistians they are diffamed persons. vid, Cent. 12. cap. 4. The
usurers house called the house of the devil.
The Scriptures censure usury as an abomination; that is, as a sin to be
abhorred. and Ps. 109.11. the holy Ghost uses this interpretation against the
wicked: Let the exactour (meaning thereby the usurer, as all Translations,
almost, besides some English do read) ensnare all that he has. Whereby it may
be gathered, both that to be an Usurer is an odious thing, and that it is a
curse to fall into his snare.

Seeing therefore usury is and always has been a thing so odious and of so
bad report, The Usurer denies the conclusion.
no Christian can practice it with a good conscience.

The Usurer sins against God, his neighbor, and himself.

First against God by impiety and ungodliness. Leuit 25.36. Neh. 5.9.
For the Usurer wants the fear of God.

2 He disobeyeth the Commandments of GOD, Idem p. 270.
straightly commanding free loan, and sharply forbidding usury, and
contemns the threatenings of God denounced against the same.

3 He sins by infidelity, Usurers infidels.
in not believing the gracious promises of God made to those who lend freely:
for as Chrysostom. has well said (...), usury is the offspring of infidelity.

4 By diffidence, ending commonly in profaneness. For the Lord would have our
faith concerning spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Page 271.
to be excercised and confirmed by our affiance reposed in his goodness for
temporal blessings in earthly things, as may be gathered by the order of the
fourth and fifth petitions of the Lords Prayer. The usurers dare not trust to
Gods providence.
-- But the Usurers whole endeavor is to settle himself and his estate as it
were out of the gunshot of Gods providence: he will not deal by husbandry, or
traffic because of the hazards whereunto either of both is subject: that is
to say, because of his diffidence in God, to whose providence he dare not trust
his goods: and therefore he will make sure work for himself, that he shall
not need to stand to Gods courtesy. The practice of usury shall be as a
Tower of Babel unto him, Note.
that whether GOD do bless the traffic of men, or not, or whether it go
well or ill with Husbandry, he will be sure both of his Principal and of
his gain. All is one to him, whether the Merchants gain or loose, sink or
swime, whether there be Fammine or plenty fair. weather or foul, he fears
no floods In a word, his chief endeavor is, that in respect of worldly things
he may have nothing to do with God; and so at length of a faithless man he
becomes also prophaine, Ezeh. 22.12.
having forgotten God, as for this sin the Lord charge Jerusalem, neither
is God, I mean the true God in all his thoughts; for his god Mammon does wholly
possess his heart.

Usurers idolaters.
The Usurer sins by Idolatry. For seeing the root of usury is covetousness
(which is the root of all evil) it cannot be denied; but that every Usurer
is covetous; and every covetous man is an idolater Ephesians. 5.5. And a Servant of
Mammon, Mat. 6.24. And therefore no true Servant of the Lord, now you must
remember, that for covetous persons and idolaters, there is no inheritance in
Heaven.

Idem p. 232. The Usurer is both unjust and uncharitable.
Secondly, the Usurer sins against his neighbor for whereas there are two
duties especially to be practiced toward our neighbor, that is to say,
Justice and Charity: Justice, to give every man his own, and Charity, not to
seek our own but other men's profit Justice: to do no wrong, Charity, to do
good to all; usury offends against both, as being both unjust and
uncharitable. Which copulation is duly to be marked. For whereas some allege,
Note.
that usury is not against Charity, when neither the lender nor borrower is
hurt thereby, it shall hereby appear, that if at any time it may seem not to
be opposed to Charity as an hurtful thing, yet it is always opposed as an
unjust and unequal thing. For first, the general Law both of Justice and
Charity is this, as you would that men should do to you, so do you to them
likewise. See the answer to object. 2.
But when you have need to borrow, you would that Men should lend you freely,
and not impose Usury upon you: therefore in like case, when others would borrow
of you in their necessity, you ought to lend them freely, and not impose usury
upon them.

Thirdly, the Usurer sins against himself by desperate folly. Idem p. 272.
The usurer sins against himself.
For as every notorious Malefactor may truly be said to cast away himself, and
is guilty of selfe-murder, as it is said of Korah and his accomplices, Number.
16.38. so the Usurer likewise pulls upon himself the fearful judgments.
of God, and is guilty of his own overthrow. For the Lord has threatened not
only the translation of their goods from them in this world, Pro, 28.8. but
also, as touching the world to come, that they shall not dwell in the Mountain
of Gods holiness (as may be gathered out of the 15 Psalm) but that they shall
die the death, meaning thereby the death of the soul. Ezeh 18.13.
) and that you may know to whom the cause of the Usurers damnation is to be
imputed, it is added, and his blood shall be upon him. And that is it which Leo
says, Poenus pecuniae, funus est animae, the gain of usury is the grave of
the soul.

The 6. Testimony, Bishop Babington.
THere be great slyes, and those be great men, Upon Exodus Chapter 8. p. 203.
that tyrannously rule, not shearing but shauing to the very skin, if they take
not skin and all. And there be lesser flies, and those be Vsures, and other
biting binders, who with their Nouerint vniuersi, make an universal ruin of
many a man's estate, and do fetch him in still with The conditition of this
obligation, that in the end his condition is woeful, and his heart breaks
with the bitter grief of Be it known to all men: Surely these are cursed
flies indeed, the suckers of our sap, the bibbers of our blood, Usurers be
cursed flies.
the pinchers of our hearts, and the stingers and wringers of our very souls.
The Egyptian flies was nothing like unto them, but yet you see was a great
plague of God, sent to punish the sins of men. But let them remember that
these flies of Egypt had but a time, God sent them in wrath, and took them
away in mercy, upon entreaty. Some Moses or other shall stand up, and the Lord
shall send a strong West wind, to take these canker worms away, and cast them
into the red Sea, that in our coast they may torment no longer. Amen.

Idem upon the Commandments p. 69. 70.
If a man (says the Law) borrow any thing of his neighbor, and it be hurt or
else die, the owner of it not being by, he shall surely make it good. If it be
an hired thing he shall not make it good, for it came for his hire. In which
Law, if we well weighe it we may first see, that if we have that thing which
our neighbor would borrow, and we be able, without our hurt, well to spare it
him, we are bound to do it, or else we sin against this Law of GOD, and we
even steal from our brother, that which in right is his. For God would not
ever have made a Law for recompense of the lender, It is a necessary duty of
love to lend when we may.
if his thing lent receive any harm, unless it had been a necessary duty of
love to lend when we may: therefore this narrowness of heart, and unkind
disposition, to grudge unto any that good which by lending we can possibly do
him, it is hateful in the eyes of God, and a plain breach of this
Commandment.

Secondly, in this Law, (as one has very well noted,) we may see a great
light given to that hard controversy concerning usury of money. For mark I
pray you, how he says in plain terms, that if the thing were hired, and
though it perished in the use, yet should it not be made good by him which
hired it, for it came for his hire. The money which Usurers give out, is hired
as you know. Therefore if it were a thing that might be hired, you see the
sentence of God, though it perished.

Secondly, mark again how the Lord says, though a man lend of mere love
freely without any hire, yet shall his recompense be nothing more, then good
will again, unless it die, or be hurt which he lends. Now money neither
dies, neither commonly is any whit hurt, but returns every way as good as it
came.

Thirdly, consider how the Law will have an apparent hurt of the thing lent, or
else it allows no recompense, Usurers have consideration for likely loss.
but Usurers will have consideration for likely loss: for, say they, If I had
had my money, possibly I could have gained thus much with it: yet are they not
sure they could have done it, for God could have crossed their expectation, and
being not sure that they could have gained, it is not apparent that they have
been hindered: but this Law of God provides in equity only for apparent
harm, and therefore nothing for them.

Fourthly, the equity of this Law is only this, that good will be no loser,
They will have certain gain.
and therefore provision is made for recompense, if the thing lent received
hurt. But Usurers will have their good will, as they call it, certain and an
excessive gainer.

Fifthly, in this law of God, the borrower is respected, that he should have
help of his neighbor, Usury regards wholly the lender, Usury plain injury
void of love.
and not pay for it, unless he hurt the thing which he borrowed, but usury
regards wholly the lender. Wherefore it seems that if this Law of God had
ever any equity, this Usury of money had ever plain injury, and that this kind
of lending is void of love, and therefore apparently a breach of this
Commandment.

CHAP. 4. The judgment of our most Learned and Orthodoxal Divines concerning
usury.
The first Testimony, Doctor Willet.
upon Exodus, p. 509. usury defined.
BEfore the several points belonging to this question can be discussed, first
we must see what usury is 1. Plus ex mutuo velle, quam mutuatum sit, iniquum
est, to desire more by lending, then was lent is wicked, Caietan. 2. Vsura est
lucrum quod accipitur, solius mutuationis causa. Usury is a gain, which is
taken only for lending. Vrsinus. Quicquid lucri praeter sortem dabatur, what
gain soever was given beside the principal: whereupon it is called in the
Hebrew Tarbith, that is, increase of the multiplying. Calvin. 3. After the same
manner was usury defined in former times; as Carthag. 3. c. 16. Nullus
clericorum amplius accipiat, quam cuiquam accomodavit, that none of the clergy
should receive more then he has lent. Augustine thus describes an usurer, Si
plus quam dedisti, expectas accipere, faeuerator es, if thou look to receive
more, then thou have given, thou art an Usurer.

That this kind of usury is utterly unlawful, and not to be practiced among
Christians, it shall appear by these reasons.

Usury condemned. unlawful to the Jews.
First, the Hebrews were forbidden to take any usury at all of their brethren;
of the Gentiles they might: but now diruta est maceries, the wall of partition
is taken away, there is neither Jew nor Gentile, but all are one in Christ.
Calvin.

Of it self hurtful.
Secondly, Vsura ex suo genere nociua est, Usury even of it self is hurtful,
because it is called Nesheh, biting, Caietan. And the law of nature teaches:
that we should not do that to another, which we would not have offered to our
selves.

Thirdly, usury was detestable among the Heathen, Detestable among the Heathen.
much more odious ought it to be among Christians: as Cato being asked what it
was to play the Usurer, answered, Idem quod occidere; all one, as to kill: and
further he said, that in former time, they used to punish a thief but in two
fold, an Usurer in four fold. Calvin.

Fourthly, usury is against the first institution of money, Against the first
institution of money.
Pecunia inuenta est, etc. Money was invented, and found out, that thereby
things necessary for the maintenance of this like might be provided: but now
it is perverted and abused to covetousness, that money may increase money.

Fifthly, Usury against Scripture.
the Scripture absolutely condemns usury Ps. 15.5. Ezeh. 18.17. And
Chrysostom says, Vsurarius super omnes mercatores maledictus, the Usurer is
accursed beyond all Merchants and trading men. Hom 38. sup. Math.
And he further uses this comparison, like as when one sifteth Wheat or any
other grain in a sieue, Usurers accursed.
all the grain by little and little slippeth through, and so, Solum stercus
remanet in cribro, only the soil and dirt remains in the sieue: An
excellent comparison.
so of all the substance and ill gotten goods of Usurers, Nihil remanet praeter
peccatum, nothing remains beside sin, etc.

If it be Objected, Object.
that God permitted the Hebrews to take usury of the Gentiles, therefore it
was not simply unlawful: to this it may be Answered, Answ.
that they were those seven Nations of the Canaanites, of whom they might take
usury, which Nations they were commanded to destroy: and so by this means they
might weaken their estate, and empouerish them: whereupon Ambrose infers, Ab
hoc vsuram exige, quem non sit crimen occidere. Exact usury of him, whom it is
not unlawful to kill.

Objection. p. 511, 112.
But Dr. Willet has certain considerations, which make the receiving of some
gain by the loan of money, not unlawful.

Answer.
Observe his considerations dilligently, and thou will utterly dislike thy
usurious practices.

First, if thou lend thy money upon usury, thou must not be such a one as
makes it thy trade to live by letting of money.

Secondly, thou must not lend money upon usury to those of the poorer sort: for
to such it is simply forbidden to lend upon usury, Exodus 22, 25, and that which
he allows, is properly no usury, (as he says:) but rather a gratuity, that he
which has gained by another money, should, to show his thankful mind, make
him, which was the occasion thereof, a reasonable partaker of his gain,
Gratitudo animi lege naturali mandatur: this gratitude and thankfulness of
mind is commanded even by the law of nature.

Thirdly, the interest which thou receiuest must be moderate not excessive.

Fourthly, this consideration which thou receiuest for the loan of money, must
not be ex pacto, it must not be agreed upon by any certain compact or
covenant: as the words here are, Note.
lo tesimun, non imponetis ei: you shall not impose or lay upon him usury. It
is not lawful to covenant with a man certainly to pay so much; he may loose
by using the money, he may be in hazard also of the principal; for the lender
then to receive a certain gain, where the borrower is a certain loser were
not just. What say you to these usurers.
Such indifferency must be used, as that the borrower be contented, as to be
made pertaker of the gain, that comes by his money, so also proportionably
to bear part of the loss.

The second Testimony, Dr. Smith.
In Willet upon Levit. p. 625.
THis is the full definition of usury: Quando aliquis accedit vsus rei gratia
interposita pactione: When as any things comes for the use of money above the
principal, usury defined.
by way of contract, or compact: for so it is said in the law lo tesimun, non
impones, Thou shall not put upon him usury.

That opinion which condemns all usury, usury condemned. 1 By Scripture.
is grounded upon evident testimonies of Scripture, Ps. 15.5. Pro. 28.8. Ezekiel.
18.13.17. and 22.12. and these places have somewhat in them more general, then
to be restrained to the poor: as that in Ezekiel. 22.12. In thee have they taken
gifts to shed blood, in thee have they taken usury and increase, and thou have
greedily gained of thy neighbor by extortion: these kinds of oppression may be
committed as well against the rich as poor, though more against these then the
other.

vide locum.

It is answered to these, and the like testimonies, Object. Idem p. 627.
that the Fathers speak against cruel and unconscionable usury: Quae omnibus
seculis plus satis obtinuit, which prevailed too much in every age.

But surely they condemn all usury whatsoever: Answ. in ps. 36. con. 3.
as Augustine says, Si plus quam dedisti expectus accipere, faeneratores: if
thou exspect to receive more then thou gave, thou art an usurer. And Bernard
says, quid est vsura? venenum patrimonij: quid est vsura legalis? latro
praedicens quid intendit, what is usury? the poison of ones patrimony: what is
legal usury? a thief foreshewing what he intends; inter praecept. familiar.

Aristotle thus reasons against it.

First, from the unprofitableness of it: (...) Polit. 1. c. 9.
for he that is rich in money, may oftentimes want necessary food.

(...) ibid.
Secondly, from the infiniteness of the desire of money: all men that are
desirous of money, do increase it infinitely, whereas every laudable act, has
a certain and determinate end.

Thirdly, they pervert the end for the which money was appointed, which was for
commutation, and to be a mean to the end: but they make money it self the end.

Fourthly, the manner of the gain shows it to be unnatural: for it is
according to nature to reap profit from the fruits of the earth, or from
Cattle: but it is against nature to reap gain from men, from one another:
and whenas money begets money; whereof usury has the name (...), of
begetting.

Object.
To these reasons some answer, That although money be barren of it self, yet by
money one may purchase grounds which will bring him fruit: Answ.
But still the argument is good for originally this increase comes out of
money by man's industry: and so by two things not apt to bring fruit, gain is
had: by men, and money: and besides this answer serves not, but only for
profitable usury: but where one takes up money to supply his want, and
necessity, there arises no such fruit.

The third Testimony, Dr. Williams.
The true Church. p. 438.
THat you may perceive and understand, how odious and how detestable this biting
theft is, I beseech you to consider. First, how unjust he is, especially in
these two things: Usurers unjust against all laws 1 Of nature:
1 In selling that which he owes unto the poor, for the law of nature tells
thee, that he which has, should lend and help him which has not, as we see
the flood, finding the emptiness of a poole, will not pass until it fills it;
2 Of Moses. Luke 6.35. 3. Of grace.
the Law of Moses bids the same thing; and the law of grace confirms it,
saying, Do good and lend hoping for nothing again: and yet the covetous man
sels that which God commands him to give: and he lets that for use which the
Lord inioyneth him to lend for love.

2 In eating that which he never labored for; Genesis 3.19.
for the Lord said, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy Bread: but the
Usurer eats the labor of other men, The usurer eats what he never
labored for.
and for the use of his money he uses to get vineyards which he planted not,
Houses that he builded not, and many other things that he never labored for.

Secondly, how cruel he is; He is most cruel.
because he eats and drinks that with joy and laughter, which the poor man
has gotten with grief and tears.

Thirdly, 3 He is the worst of all Thieves.
how for his theft he transcends all other kind of Thieves whatsoever: for as
there is not a more effectual plague to hurt a man then a familiar enemy: so
the Usurers, being domestical foes, they do impouerish and disinherit more
men then any other Thieves can do; because other Thieves steal secretly and
in the night time, but the Usurers follow their trade manifestly, though
cunningly, day and night: and therefore, when the Romans enjoined other
Thieves to make double restitution for their theft, they compelled the Usurers
to restore fourefold for their transgression.

Fourthly, The punishment of usurers.
how fearful is the punishment of such theft; because, as they have spoiled
others, so they shall be spoiled themseues; and their spoil will be the
greater: because that as the Dog, snatching the Bread out of the Childrens
hands, 1 In this world
snatcheth the hand withal; so Usurers, seeking the wealth of the poor, Idem
p. 439.
are thereby become the utter ruinne of the poor, and therefore their wealth
shall be soon taken from them.

2 As they have punished the poor on Earth more then many others, 2 In Hell.
so their punishment in Hell shall be greater then most sinners.

And in this there infernal punishment, How the usurers and their children do
curse one another everlastingly in hell
it is observed that the usurers and their children shall perpetually curse
each other, the father saying, cursed art thou, O son, because that for thy
sake I am tormented in this flame; for I became an usurer, lest I should leave
thee a beggar; I gathered wealth, that thou should not be poor, and I was
contented to be poor in grace, that thou might be rich in goods; and
therefore I am now poor in all things, but in torments. And the son, on the
other side, saying unto his father, nay, rather cursed art thou, O father, Quia
nisi male congregasses mihi diuitias, non male congregatas conseruassem;
because thou gatherest thy wealth with iniquity, and leftest them unto me with
a curse, which has consumed them and destroyed my soul.

That Seraphicall Doctor Antoninus, Archbishop of Florence, after he had heard
the confession of a wretched Usurer, The form of an absolution which Antoninus
used to an usurer.
gave him no other absolution than, Deus misereatur tui, si vult, et condonet
tibi peccata tua, quod non credo: et perducat te in vitam aeternam, quod est
impossible: God be merciful unto thee, if he please, and forgive thee thy
sins, which I do not believe, and bring thee to eternal life, which is
impossible: that is, Rebus sic stantibus, if God does not wonderfully work a
strange conversion in his heart, and the Lord himself threatens, that he
which robs or gives to usury, and receives the increase into his bags, he
shall dye the death, and his blood shall be upon him.

The fourth Testimony, Dr. Sutton.
THere is no sin, be it never so prodigious and foul but his master has
some plea for it, Lectures upon Romans 11. p. 296: usurers excuse their sins.
p. 476.
and some reason to uphold it. Some have Scripture, as covetousness has 1 Timothy 5.8. Usury has, Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto a stranger thou may lend thy money
upon usury, though not to thy brother.

Many persuade themselves that they have lawful callings when they have none;
such as live by usury, carding, dicing, playing, these have neither the Author,
God, nor the end, the common good.

No calling is lawful, Idem p. 477
when the action pleases not God, as 1 Cor. 10.31. Usurers have no lawful
calling.
By this I hope some will learn at last to give over their calling, whereby
they bring not honor, but dishonor unto God: those that live upon usury, by
dicing-Houses, by penning and acting of Plays, let them all remember this,
mine heart trembles to think, what calling these men have, my Soul wonders
how they glorify God in them, I marvel how these make for a public good:
How God is honored, a kingdom bettered, the common good promoted by them I
know not, I believe not.

The fifth Testimony Mr. Wilkinson.
LEt those who plead this cause consider, Debt book p. 61. 62. All usury
forbidden. Usurers do not as they would be don unto.
that God dispenceth with no usury, when Nesheh the bitting: and Tarbith, which
they call the toothlesse usury are both condemned. Ezekiel. 18.8.13. That the
lender, for eight or five in the hundred, deals not as he would be dealt
withal, for he himself would neither give eight, nor five, nor two, if he
could borrow freely; and the rule of love is, to do to all men as we would
they should do to us, Mat. 7.12. Let them consider how usury is cried down,
among other oppressions Neh. 5. and Ps. 15.5. How it is condemned by the
Council of Nice in Clergy men, as a matter of filthy lucre, (if filthy lucre
in Ministers, then no righteous dealing in others. Usury the ruin of thousands.
) how it has been the utter ruin of many thousands in our Nation; how in the
Church of Rome at this day), all Usurers are excommunicated monthly; how no man
of note in all antiquity Jews and Manichees excepted) none I say of honesty
and learning, No honest learned men defended usury for fifteen hundred years
after Christ.
for fifteen hundred years after Christ has ever undertaken the defense
thereof: wherefore as Ioash sometimes said to the men of Hophra, when they
stood for Baal against Gideon, Will you contend for Baal? let him plead his
own cause: so say I to the patrons of usury; will you contend for Mammon? let
him plead his own cause.

The sixth Testimony, Mr. Smith.
Usury is unlawful, for:

Usury is against charity. Sermon usury.
First, It is against the law of charity because charity, bids us to give
every man his own, and to equire no more then our own: but usury requires
more then her own, and gives not to other their own. Charity rejoices to
communicate her goods to other, and usury rejoices to gather other men's goods
to her self.

Against the law of nations.
Secondly, it is against the law of nations, for every nation has some law
against usury, and some restraint against usurers.

Against the law of nature, and of God.
Thirdly, it is against the law of nature, that is the natural compassion which
should be among men: the rich should distribute and do good.

Fourthly, it is against the Law of God. Exodus 22. Leu. 25.36. Gain makes
usury lawful.
Deuteronomy. 23.19.

Some think that usury is lawful, because it is gainefull as Saul thought
that the idolaters beasts should not be killed, Note.

because they were fat: But as he was commanded to kill the fat beasts, as well
as the lean, so we are commanded to kill fat sins, as well as lean sins:
gainefull sins as well as prodigal sins.

The 7. Testimony, Mr. Wheatly.
Caveat for the covetous. p. 71. Usury a notorious injustice. 3 sorts of
borrowers.
Usury is a notorious injustice: when a man makes a gain of lending, and binds
the party borrowing, without consideration of his gains or losses, to repay
the principal with advantage. For whereas there be three sorts of men that use
to borrow, either poor men, whom necessity drives to it, or unthrifts, whom
prodigality drives to it; or sufficient men, that hope to make a commodity of
it: it is apparent by the confession even of those that would seem to say
somewhat for this usury, (as if it were not a needy sin simply that it is
wicked to lend on Use to the poor needy borrower, for God has stately
commanded to lend unto him freely. And for the unthrift, it is also certain
that he should not be lent to at all; Usurers gain most by vnchrists.
for that is to feed his issue with ill humors, and to put a Sword into his
hand wherewith to destroy himself: and thus the Usurers most accustomed and
greatest gains are cut of. Now for the third kind of men, of them to exact
gain vnconditionally, not respecting their loosing or getting, is altogether
against the Law of Charity, and equity both for the light of nature will not
suffer any to deny this principle of Equity, that he which will have part in
wealth, must also have part in woes; and he that will divide the sweet, must
also divide the sower: he that will take of the good success, must also take
of the bad. And the light of Religion will not suffer him that has any of it,
to deny this principle of Charity; that Christians must serve one another in
love, and not themselves alone in self-love: both which principles are
directly contrary to the very trade of the Usurer; The Usurer serves himself
alone, not also his brother.
for he makes sure for himself to have a part only and infalliably in the
profit, and therefore serves himself alone, and not also his brother: and for
this cause the Usurer is set among those that cannot come to dwell in the
Mountain of God: which he should not be, were he not unjust. So then the
Usurer, whether he do it plainly, or underhand, as men have a thousand
policies to cover their sin in this respect, must undergo the imputation of
living by wrong and injury.

The eight Testimony Mr. Dod.
IN the same colorable theft is that common sin of Usury, which is of evil
report, and hurtful effect amongst men and is forbidden of God in the Law and
Prophets. It is evident in Leuit. 25.35.36. The causes of usury. 1 Want of Gods
fear.
That the fear of God, and a loving and merciful regard of our brothers life,
2 Love to our brethren.
be the preservatives to keep men from this Usury: therefore the practice
hereof does grow from the want of the fear of God, and of compassion to our
poor brother. Add hereunto, that usury is not a calling appointed of God, but
a humane invention, devised by worldly men to gain filthy lucre to themselves,
Usury not a calling appointed of God.
whereby they live of the sweat of other men's brows, and do many times add
affliction to the afflicted, and build up themselves in the ruins of their
poor neighbors, whom they ought freely to support.

The ninth Testimony, Mr. Bolton.
OVt of the widenes of the consciences of wicked men, proceed much mincing and
excusing, many interpretations, Discourse of true happiness. p. 55. All usury
condemned.
favorable constructions and distinctions of sin. As for example, that usury
is of two sorts, biting and toothlesse; when all kind of usury is pestilent,
and most certainly damned in the book of God.

Ministers may tell the merciless usurer that he is infamously guilty of that
sin, Usury condemned by the best Divines. Idem p. 183.
of which a converted lew, an honest Heathen, a tolerable Turk, would be
ashamed and remorsefull: stigmatized by ioynt-consent of charitable hearts, and
strongest current of best Divinity, with a brand of extraordinary hatefulness,
hard-heartednesse and cruelty: It is a fretting canker.
which at this day does shrewdly shake the strong sinews of this great
Kingdom, like a fretting canker, with a plausible invisible consumption, does
daily waste the states, Note.
suck the blood, and eat the lives of many poor distressed ones in this
Land, fills towns and Cities with unprofitable persons, and the country with
miseries and inhumanities. Nay, and let carnal reason, covetous humors,
supercilious, obstinate imperiousness fret, and contradict, rage, and reclaim
as long as they will; to set aside provocation of Gods plagues, and
consideration of piety; even in the sense of nature, and moral conscience, it
casts an aspertion of inexpiable shame and dishonor upon the ancient glory of
this incomparable City. usurers be Harpies and vultures.
It is very strange that such ravenous Harpies and usurious Vultures, (for so
even Paganism styled them by the light of reason,) should audaciously roust
especially on high, in the Eagles nest, this Imperial grove and Seat of
Maiesly.

The tenth Testimony, Mr. Adams.
THe Usurer is a private thief like Judas, Adams works p. 55. The usurer like
to Judas.
and for the bag like Judas, which he steals from Christ like Judas, or rather
from Christians, that have more need, and therefore worse then Judas. This is a
man made out of wax: His Pater noster is a pawn: his Creed, is the condition
of this obligation: his Religion is all religation: a binding of others to
himself: of himself to the Devil, -- infinite colors, mitigations, Note.
euasions, distinctions are invented, to countenance on earth, heauen-exploded
usury: God shall then frustrate all, when he powers his wrath on the naked
conscience. God says, Thou shall not take usury. Go now study paintings,
excuses apolegies, dispute the matter with God: hell fire shall decide the
question.

If Usurers will not restore by themselves, Idem p. 120. usurers shall restore
by their posterity
they shall by their posterity. For as Pliny writes of the Wolf, that it
brings forth blind Whelps: so the usurer lightly begets blind children, that
cannot see to keep what their fathers left. But when the father is gone to
hell for gathering, the son often follows for scattering. But God is just. A
good man leaves his inheritance to his childrens children: and the wealth of
the sinner is laid up for the just.

An usurer is known by his very looks often, Idem p. 454. The usurer known
by his looks.
by his speeches commonly, by his actions ever: he has a lean cheek, a
meager body, as if he were fed at the Devils allowance: his eyes are almost
sunk to the backside of his head with admiration of money. His ears are set
to tell the clock; his whole carcass a mere Anatomy. Some Usurers have
fatter carcasses, and can find in their hearts to lard their flesh: but a
common meagernesse is upon all their consciences. Foenus pecuniae, funus animae.

Nature has set a pitch or term in all inferior things, when they shall
cease to increase. Old Cattle breed no longer: doted trees deny fruit; the
tired earth becomes barren; only the Usurers money, the longer it breeds the
lustier; Note.
and a hundred pounds put out twenty years since, is a grandmother of two or
three hundred children; pretty striplings, able to beget their mother again in
a short time.

EAch man to heaven his hands for blessing reares;
Only the Usurer needs not say his prayers.
Blow the Wind East or West, plenty or dearth,
Sickness or health, sit on the face of Earth,
He cares not: Time will bring his money in:
Each day augments his treasure and his sin.
Be the day red or black in Calender,
Common, or holy, fits the Usurer.
He starues his Carcass, and true money slave,
Goes with full chests, and thin cheeks to his grave.
Idem p. 455.
The Usurer shrinkes up his guts with a staruing diet, as with knot-grasse: and
puts his stomach into his purse. He sels time to his customers, his food to
his cofers, his body to languishment, his soul to Satan.

The eleventh Testimony, Mr. Perkins.
Usury is a gain exacted by covenant, above the principal, upon Com. 8. usury
defined.
only in lieu, and recompense of the lending of it.

usury being considered as it is thus described, is quite contrary to Gods
Word, and may very fitly be termed biting lucre. Exodus 22, 14.15. Ezekiel. 18.8.
2. Cor. 8.13.

The twelfth Testimony Mr. Fenton.
LEt every one who desires to resolve his conscience for this matter by
Scripture (the only true ground of a Christian resolution I t him consider, I
say, Treatise of usury p. 48.
how neither usury nor interest, Usury condemned in Gods Book.
biting usury nor increase is ever once named in the Book of God, but it is
condemned; condemned amongst such abominations as bring a curse in stead of a
blessing: an eternal curse upon the Soul of the Usurer, and a temporal curse
upon his wealth and posterity.

Let some of these tender consciences, Is it not a shame for me^ to deny
kneeling at the Communion, and to be professed Usurers.
who are so urgent to call for warrant out of the book of God, for every
ceremony and matter of form in the Church, seek a warrant for this their
practice, which so nearly concerns them; and let them seek it at the Oracle
of God who has not left it, as he has many other things, either to the
discretion of the Church, or wisdom of commonwealths, but has vouchsafed to
determine it in his own book to our hands: to set down an express Law
against it in Exodus: to renew and revive that Law again and again in Leuit.
And Duter: to ratify and confirm it with no other words then himself used at
the publishing of the whole Morrall Law; to specify the only limitation which
he meant to tolerate for a time; to add the promise of blessing to the keepers
of this Law: and to denuonce such fearful judgments against the
transgressors of the same: upon their wealth and posterity in this world, upon
their own souls in the world to come.

The Usurer has great gain and certain: Idem p. 101. Usurers have certain
gain out of loss, etc.
sometimes out of little gain: sometimes out of no gain: sometimes out of
loss; always out of uncertainties; always out of labor and pains, out of
care and cost, out of hazard and peril to the borrower. Comes all this on
Gods Name?

Idem p 142, No writer defended usury for fifteen hundred years after Christ,
Note.
There was never any Church or Churchman, carrying the name of a Christian, who
has defended in writing any branch of usury, for the space of fifteen hundred
years after Christ. Neither was this for want of occasion given; for it has
been both practiced and written against in all ages. Neither can we with
modesty impute it to the ignorance of the Church: for as she is acknowledged
to be most Eagle-sighted in the time of her purity; so when she was
ouershadowed with superstition, her writers in cases of conscience, for matters
of morality were most exact: as by their school Divinity is evident to be
seen. Yet where shall we find any one, for so many ages of the Church, who
could ever devise a distinction to save an usurers soul.

Mr. Fentons Treatise of usury ii able, to satisfy those that be not
desperately minded.
He that desires to be fully satisfied concerning the unlawfulness of usury, by
Scriptures, Fathers, the latter times of ignorance: by the testimonies of the
Church assembled in Councels, by the testimony of Divines in reformed Churches,
by the testimonies of Philosophers, Historians, by the three Laws, 1 Canon, 2
Civil, 3 Common: by strong and conuincing arguments: finally, he that desires
to have those motives answered, which persuade some to the lawfulness of
usury, let him read with diligence the learned Treatise of usury, written by
Mr. Fenton, read his Treatise with a single eye, judge of what thou read
without affection: and conform thy affection to right judgment.

The thirteenth Testimony Mr. Rogers, of Weathersfield.
THese being the most usual kinds of contracts, do show the nature of the
rest, 7 Treatises upon 8 Commandment. usury unlawful
which are in use among men, and do leave no place to that oppression in the
world, called usury, or any other such seeking of men's private profit in their
dealings, without regard of the common benefit of both: that is, when both
parties are not provided for, to their contentation and satisfying according to
equity, and to the meaning and provision made by God in that behalf: which is,
that the one without the other should not be benifited or enriched; but the one
to have care and consideration of the other, Regard had of both parties is no
usury.
and the Commonwealth of both (as I have said) respected which if it were
regarded betwixt both parties, could in no wise be justly complained of:
neither is such dealing of the nature and kind of usury, whether it be in
hiring and letting, or in any other kind of contract whatsoever; but that
common dealing for 10 in the hundred, or 9, or 8, or any such like, which is
without due consideration of the Commonwealth, and upholding of both, is
utterly to be condemned.

Which if it be well and duly considered, will soon answer all conscionable
men, No use of usury in Church or Commonwealth.
about the question of usury and oppression, that there can be no use of them
in the Church of God, nor the Christian Commonwealth: the Lawmakers having
said of both, as of witchcraft and Idolatry, there shall be none such in
Israel, that is, among Gods people. And as for teaching others their duty,
(especially in money matters) who have not given themselves in full resolution
to be guided by Gods Word, Why Preachers prauaile not with usurers.
Preachers may sooner wear their tongues to the stumpes, then they may
prevail with them.

If thou desire the judgment of other divines, besides these before
mentioned; read, Mr. Bayne, his directions to a godly life, p. 172. Mr.
Philips, upon Math. 4. p. 198. Mr. Dyke, upon Repentance, p. 143, 144. Dr.
Sclater, upon the 2 These. p. 277. Mr. Robrough, Balm from Gilead, p. 35, 176,
225, 285, 320, 325. 432. Dr. Preston, Remedy against covetousness, p. 33. Mr.
Wilson, Theological rules for the understanding of holy Scriptures, p. 70. and
in his mystical cases and secrets of Divinity, p. 180. Mr. Brinsley, in the
third rule and watch of life, p. 97. Mr. Rogers of Dedham, Treatise of love, p.
235, 236. Dr. Web, on Agurs prayer, p. 323. 147. read also the 3d. part of the
Homily, against the peril of Idolatry, p. 70. where usury is ranked with
gross sins, and condemned for unjust gain. Read the 2d. part of the Sermon or
Homily for Rogation week, p. 225. where usurers are said to have their goods
of the devil, to be worshipers of the devil, to kneel down to the devil at
his bidding. See also Mr. Scudder upon the Lords Prayer, p, 276,

Mr. Fenton, of usury. p. 2. Usurers not easily persuaded to leave their sin.
It is now time to draw to the conclusion; it has been observed by wise men,
that usurers will not easily be persuaded to forsake their sin; their gain
of Usury is a sweet gain, without labor, without cost, without peril; let it
be granted that they will not forsake this so pleasant, and so profitable a
sin; yet by these Testimonys, they may be convinced in their judgments, of the
unlawfulness of usury; and so they shall be made without excuse at the last
day, when Christ shall come in flaming fire with his mighty Angels to render
vengeance to all disobedient persons.

As for you that make a trade of usury if you shall think your judgments to
be of such weight, Idem p. 77. The judgment of these reverend Divines should
make the usurers to question their trade.
that all these together be not able to cast the scale against you, yet I hope
they will so much move you, as to bring the balance to a suspense, that you
will think usury very questionable at the least; and if it be questionable,
then it is unlawful to be done. But if all these reverend Bishops and learned
Divines, will not so move your understanding, to make it questionable; then I
will say no more, and I can say no less, but that you Usurers think that you
know somewhat. 1 Cor. 8.2.
And then S. Paul makes up the rest, that you know nothing as ye ought to
know it.

To him who knows usury to be a sin, it is a sin, because he knows it.
To him that doubts, it is likewise a sin, because he doubts. And to the
rest it is a sin of ignorance, but of affected ignorance: whose eyes are
blinded either with pride, because they would be singular, or with lucre and
gain, Usury a sin of affected ignorance.
because they would not disturb their consciences by examining or discovering
that sin wherein they have so sweetly slept, and do still repose themselves.
But such ignorance does neither excuse nor extenuate the fault, but rather
agrauate the same, because it is wilful.

CHAP. 5. Similitudes to which usurers, and usury are resembled.
Usury is a thriuing occupation. Usury like the Persian tree. Adams works p.
503.
Usury is like that Persian tree, that at the same time buds, blossoms, and
bears fruit. The moneys of interest are evermore some ripe for the Trunk,
others drawing to maturity, the rest in the flower approaching, all in the bud
of hope. But the usurer is mad; for his sin at once buds, Usurers mad.
blossoms, and brings forth the fruit of vengeance. Every Bond he takes of
others, enters him into a new obligation to Satan: as he hopes his debtors will
keep day with him, the devil expects no less of himself. Every forfeit he
takes scores up a new debt to Lucifer; and every morgag'd land he seizes on,
enlarges his dominion in hell.

Money lent upon usury to a poor man to supply his need, Usury like new cloth
upon an old garment. Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 206.
may not unfitly be compared to a piece of new cloth sowed upon an old garment;
for that, although it cover the rent for a time, and seems to have mended the
garment, yet after a while, the new cloth fretteth the old, and brings away a
part of it, and so makes the rent much worse.

Though the usurers sometimes do vaunt, how kindly they deal with their
debtors, Idem p. 254. Note.
in forbearing them from year to year: yet the truth is, the longer they
forbear, the greater is their gain, and though they defer the borrowers
misery, The Usurer compared to the greedy Cat.
yet in deferring it, they do increase it: and therefore by some are not
unfitly compared to the greedy Cat, which though for a while she plaieth with
the silly Mouse, yet in the end she will be sure to devour it.

The Usurers money is like the biting of the Aspe, Usurers money like the
biting of the Aspe.
for even as he which is bitten of the Aspe, goes to sleep, as if he were
delighted, and through the pleasantness of his sleep dies; so he which
borrows upon usury is delighted for a time as one that had received a good
turn; and so through the pleasure of the imagined benefit he does not
perceive how he is taken captive. For even as the poison of the Aspe, Usury
disperceth it self through all the borrowers goods.

It is like leaven.

Apud Chrisost. 3. Homil 12. in fine.

Bb. Downam Ps 15. p. 258. Usurers drones Vsura est quaes: tuosa segniti: es.
Usury is gainefull idleness.


secrety conueying it self into all the members, corrupts the whole body: so
usury dispersing it self through all the borrowers goods, conuerteth them into
debt. And even as leaven which is put into meal, infecteth the whole lump,
and drawing it to it self, turns it into the nature of leaven: so when usury
enters into any man's House, it draws all his substance unto it, and turns
it into debt.

The Philosopher matcheth the Usurer with the baud: and to the same purpose
observe the coherence, Deuter. 23.18.19. It is a wonder therefore, that in the
hiue as it were of the Commonwealth, such drones are suffered, which live of
the sweat, yea blood of other men: who out of other men's labor attain ease,
out of other men's hazard gain security, out of other men's loss reap gain.

Similes.
LVther says, an Usurer is a blood-sucker of the people: In decalog.
and as a Worm in an Apple or Nut consumes all that is within: so an Usurer
deuoureth the substance of the City by wonderful and secret means.

The Usurer, Mr. Wilkinson Debt book p. 99.
whose traffic and trade it is to make men miserable, and to raise his gain
out of other men's adversity, he is says Chrysostom, Quasi manum suscipiens
et in naufragium impelleus. As a man taking one by the hand to pull out of the
water, but kicking him back again to the Shipwreck of his substance, and of
himself, which is a rude and a barbarous part in any, to hurt infallibly, The
Usurer hurts those whom he pretends to help.
whom he pretends to help. This is one of the bitter Potions which the world
reaches forth to over purchasers, and ouer-traders, which they are forced to
drink to the very dregs, when they cannot be content to walk within their
compass. Note.
As a man cannot touch Pitch but be defiled therewith: so he cannot deal
with usury without detriment, ipso facto, the first moment.

When the Usurer says that he lends for compassion, Mr. Smith. 1 Sermon upon
usury. The Usurer like the luye.
he means for compassion of himself, that he may gain by his pity. The
Usurer loves the borrower, as the Iuye loves the Oak; the luye loves the Oak
to grow by it, so the Usurer loves the borrower, to grow rich by him. The Iuye
claspeth to the Oak like a lover, but it claspeth out all the juice and sap,
that the Oak cannot thrive after: So the usurer lends like a friend, but he
couenanteth like an enemy, for he claspeth the borrower with such bands, that
ever after he diminishes, as fast as the usurer increases.

The Usurer is like a Butlers box: The Usurer like a Butlers. box.
for as all the counters at last come to the Butler: so all the money at last
comes to the usurer, ten after ten, and ten after ten, and ten to ten, till
at last he receive not only ten for an hundred, but an hundred for ten. This
is the only difference, Idem.
that the Butler can receive no more then he delivers: but the Usurer
receives more then he delivers.

He is like a Moath; Like a Moath.
even as a Moath eats a hole in Cloth, so Usury eats a hole in silver.

Adams works p. 1058. Usury a sharp thorn. Note.
The gentlest usury is a most sharp thorn, and pricks the sides of the Country
till the blood follows. An Usurer with his money, is like a man that has no
work of his own, yet keeps a servant to let out: and takes not only hire of
others for his daily labor, but chardgeth him to steal somewhat besides, and
never to return home empty.

An usurer worse then all sinners. Worse then a Thief. Then Hell.
An Usurer is worse then all sinners, he is worse then a Thief: a Thief
robs but in the night, but the Usurer robs day and night.

He is worse then Hell; for in Hell only the wicked shall be punished: but the
Usurer punishes; and spoileth both good and bad and spares neither holy nor
unholy.

He is worse then a Jew, Then a Jew.
for one Jew will not take usury of another: but the Usurer will take usury of
his Christian brethren.

He is worse then death, Then death.
for death kills but the body, but the Usurer kills body and Soul.

He is worse then Judas, Worse then Judas.
for Judas sold Christ but once for thirty pence, but they sell Christ
continually, as often as they take usury: Judas restored the money again, but
the Usurers never restore the money again, Norrbbooke poor man's gardan f 270.
Idem p. 2706. An Usurer like a Pigge.
that they unjustly have taken.

The Usurer is like a Pigge, for while he lives, he is good and profitable for
nothing, for he will be ever rooting up the Earth, running through, and tearing
of hedges: eating and devouring up good Corn, Beans and Peason, so likewise
does the wicked swinish Usurer whilst he lives: but when the Pigge is dead,
then there comes profit by him to many: so the Usurer, when death takes him,
then the poor may have some profit.

Usurers like the Worm in timber. Powels posits of usury p 48.
The Worm Teredo is soft to touch, but it has such hard teeth, as it deuoureth
and consumes the hard timber: So the Usurer is a soft beast at the first to
handle, but in continuance of time, the hardness of his teeth will eat a man
up, flesh and bone, if he have not an especial regard to shune him.

The Usurer is like the Beuer, The Usurer is like the Beuer.
which biteth so sore, as that he never loses his teeth, until he have
broken the bones. It may be truly said of these, Note.
desolation and destruction is in their path: wheresoever they set foot, they
make havoc of all.

The Prophet Ezekiel does hedge in this sin between Bribery and Extortion.
And in another place we shall find, Ezekiel. 22.12.
Exodus 22 25.
that it and oppression is made both one: thus by Gods own testimony these are
oppressors. The Usurer compared to the nether millstone. How he spends his
time. Note.
Not unaptly may we compare the usurer to the nether millstone, which is slow
and sturres not; he sits at home, and spends his time in a deuillish
Arithmeticke, in numeration of hours, days, and moneys, in Substraction from
other men's estates, and multiplication of his own, until he have made
division between his soul and Heaven, and divided the earth to himself, and
himself to hell. His Broker we may compare to the upper millstone (without
which the nether millstone may seem unprofitable) that is quick and stirring,
and runs round: the poor (like Corn) who between both these is grinded into
powder. Usurers suffered for our sins.
Surely it is for our sins that God suffers usurers amongst us: it may be he
suffers these a while; as he did the Canaanites in Israel, lest the wild beasts
should break in upon them; lest pride and a full estate should spill men's
souls. Yet we may safely say of these, as Joshua did of those, they are pricks
in our sides, and Thorns in our eyes. Now the mercy of God rid us of them: let
them bring what excuses, apologies, mitigations, euasions, or distinctions
they, possibly can invent: let them reply, usury is no sin, many learned men
are of this opinion: yet what are they the better if, Mr. Rogers Strange
vinecard p. 312. 313.
God himself be not of the same mind those learned men are of? and let them
tell me if their consciences can be so satisfied. Would not the greatest Usurer
willingly give an hundred pound bag to be secured in this point? It is not safe
wading far in a questionable water.

Mr. Perkins. vol. 3. p. 220.
The Usurer may pretend he pleasures the poor, but his help is no better then
his is, that gives a draught of cold water to him, that is in a burning fever,
which seems pleasant at the first, but after turns to his great annoyance.

Bb. Jewel. upon These. p. 116. Idem p. 117.
Usury in the midst of a City works such good, as fire does, when it is set
to the roof of a House: or as the Plague does when it is taken to the midest
of the body and touches the heart.

An Usurer worse then a Thief.
An Usurer is much worse then a Thief. For a Thief is driven by extremity and
need: The Usurer is rich and has no need. The Thief steals in corners,
and in places where he may be unknown: the Usurer openly and boldly, at all
times, and in any place. The Thief, to releeve his Wife and Children: the
Usurer to spoil his neighbor, The Usurer a Thief at all times.
and to undo his Wife and Children. The Thief steals from the rich, which
have enough: the Usurer from the poor that has nothing. The Thief sleeth,
and will be seen no more: the Usurer stands by it, continues, and steals
still: day and night, sleeping and waking, Note.
he always steals. The thief repents of his deed, he knows he has done
wrong and is sorry for it: the Usurer, thinks it is his own, that is well
gotten, and never repents, See Dr. Wilson. upon Usury p 95.
but defends, and maintains his sin impudently. The Thief, if he escape,
many times becomes profitable to his country, and bestows himself
painefully in some trade of life: the Usurer leaves his merchandise, forsakes
his husbandry, gives himself to nothing, whereby his country may have
benefit. The Thief is satisfied at length: The Usurer never satisfied.
the Usurer has never enough, the belly of the wicked will never be filled: as
the Sea is never filled with water, though all the streams of the world run
into it: So the greediness of an Usurer is never satisfied, though he gain
never so unreasonably. The Sea is profitable: the Usurer is hurtful and
dangerous. By the Sea we may pass and come safely to the Haven: but no man
passes by usury without loss or Shipwreck.

Usurers are in worse case, then common strumpets, Usurers in worse case then
harlots. Dr. Wilson, of usury, p. 138
or harlots be; for a drab is not bound to make restitution of that she has
gotten unlawfully, by abusing her body in filthynesse, but only to do
penance: and yet an usurer must restore his evil gotten goods, because he has
stolen them, or else, he cannot be received into the Church again.

Tully, in his first book of Offices, compares usurers to vile artificers,
that get their wealth by lying deadly, Idem p. 147.
and uttering falsehood to save themselves from famine. And with the usurers,
he reckons tole-takers, customers, and such money Officers, that pille and
polle both Prince and people. Aristotle says, that usurers and bauds may well
go together, for they gain by filthy means all that they get.

CHAP. 6. An answer to all such Arguments as persuade some to the lawfulness
of usury.
1 Argument,
from the Parable, Math. 25.27. Thou ought therefore to have put my money to
the Exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with
usury.


1 Answer. Dr. Sclater upon 1 These. 5 p. 392. 393.

IS it not a worthy argument for usurious contracts: drawn from the parable?
worldlings look for their own with usury; so the Lord for advantage of his
glory, by his gifts. Approues he their practice? or rather vpbrayds our
negligence, by comparison drawn from men's courses in evil? They were best
say, they may imbeazle their masters goods, because Christ, by that worldlings
wisdom, would teach us providence for our souls: or because he resembles his
coming to a Thief in the point of suddenness, thence infer the lawfulness
of theeuery. Comparisons are borrowed from things sinful, Comparisons why
borrowed from things sinful.
and unlawful, to teach truth, and admonish of duty: the use of them is, not
to justify their evil, but to remember us of duty, or to explain his truth.

2 Answer.
Similitudes and Parables used in Scripture do not hold in every thing but
wherein they are compared. Dr. Smith, in Wilet upon Leuit. p. 627. 1 These. 5.2.
Revel. 5.5. 1 Pet. 5.8.
As Christ, for his sudden coming, is likened to a thief in the night, yet
hereby is not theft justified: and as Christ is resembled to a Lion for
strength and courage, so the devil for cruelty; and so here, the spiritual
increase of Gods gifts is likened to usury, for the thing, that is, the
increasing, not to justify the manner. 2. And further, here the word usury,
Metaphorice accipitur pro super excrescentia bonorum spiritualium: is
metaphorically taken for the increase of spiritual graces, Aquin. And so
spiritually, the Lord receives usury from us in the increase of his gifts, in
Psalm. 36. Con. 3. Commendable usury.
and we usury from him, as Augustine says, Si vis foenerare, foenera deo,
foenerator minus vult dare, et plus accipere: hoc fac et tu, da modica, accipe
magna, da temporalia, accipe aeterna, if thou will be an usurer, put out to
usury to God: an usurer will give less, and take more, do thou so, give small
things, and take great, give temporal things, and receive eternal.

If these answers will not give thee satisfaction, as what will satisfy a
resolved usurer, whom the god of this world has blinded? then consult with
other Divines of sound learning and sincere judgment, as: with M. Fentons
Treatise upon usury, p. 14. p. 137. M. Dyke, of the deceitfulness of man's
heart, p. 209. Bb, Downam, upon Ps. 15. p. 285. Bb, Jewel, upon 1 These. p. 140.

2 Argument, for the lawfulness of usury.
I would willingly pay ten in the hundred, if I had need, and therefore I may
take so. I. M.

Answer.
1. THat royal rule, Do as thou would be done by, Mr. Boltons directions
for a comfortable walking with God. p. 208. 209. Fenton of usury. p. 137, 138.
Dr. Pie, of usury, p. 9. Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 233. 234. Powels positions of
usury p. 90.
must be understood and expounded, according to to the grounds of a good
conscience, dictates of right reason, and directions of a just and rectified
will: not out of the mists and miseries of a depraved and exorbitant judgment.
Otherwise Abimelech, Saul, and other of that desperate rank and resolution,
might conclude, that it were lawful for them to kill other men, because they
were willing to be killed themselves, See Judge, 9.54. 1 Samuel 31.4. for they
might say, they did but as as they would be done by. It would also follow very
absurdly: the Magistrate being in the malefactors case would gladly be
pardoned, therefore he must pardon the malefactor: some son of Belial would be
content villanously to prostitute his wife whom he cares not for himself, to
others; therefore he may abuse another man's wife whom he loves better: these,
and the like abominable and absurd consequents, demonstrate the vanity of the
usurers inference, and that Christ's rule is not so general, but restraineable
to that will, which is orderly, Note.
and honestly guided by the light of nature, and Gods Law.

2. We must then have recourse to this general fountain of the second table,
Dr. Tailors Circumspect walking, p. 163. 164.
and fetch light and direction thence: when we have no express and special
word in Gods Book; but the Scriptures have clearly and directly determined
and resolved the point of usury.

3 If the usurer were in the borrowers case, he would not willingly, as he
pretends, give ten in the hundred. I mean with an absolute and free will, but
of force and constraint, because without paying after that rate, Note.
he could not have it. If a man would borrow upon Usury, to buy land, ingrosse,
forestall, or compass some unlawful matter; that were a corrupt will, and no
rule: but if his desire so to borrow were just and lawful, as in some cases it
may be, then it is no entire will, but mixed and forced by some necessity, for
the avoiding of a greater evil: and therefore denied in the eye both of law
and reason, to be any will at all. Note:
He that would borrow, should have need to borrow, for a needless desire is
unlawful, and an ingenious man who has need to borrow, would not willingly
borrow but for need, much less would he pay usury. Therefore the will of the
borrower, in this case, is either corrupt, or no will at all, and so
consequently without the compass of Christ's rule.

The will of the borrower in this case, is like the will of an honest
traveler, Simile.
in giving his pur e to an arrand thief: for the fear he should loose both
purse and life. Is such a man willing, think you to loose his money? or like
the will of a man, whose house being on fire, pluckes down part thereof to
save the rest: willingly indeed as the case stands with him, Simile.
yet not simply, but upon necessity. So the borrowers will is not free, but
forced, and so a will against a will.

3 Argument.
Some Divines have undertaken the defense of some kind of usury, especially to
the rich, and so have animated some in that course.
1 Answer.
Dr. Taylers Progress of Saints p. 96.
This Doctrine brought to his trial will not hold, seeing it is such a consumer
of men's estates, and so uncharitable, as the Lord would not admit of it in
Israel, but among his enemies whom he would have quite consumed. Besides, men
deceive themselves in their distinction: for God in the case of usury
distinguishes not between the rich and poor of Israel, but between the
Israelites, and the Canaanites, between strangers and brethren. The poor
indeed are mentioned, The poor why mentioned in the prohibition of usury.
but only thus: 1. Because they have most need to borrow 2. Because they are
most liable to wrong and oppression. 3. The Commandment of loan is made
especially for their good. 4. Usury on them is a more grievous sin and crying,
Exodus 22.21.

Ob. But if it were unlawful, God would forbid it to the stranger. Sol. 1. The
Morrall Law forbids it to all. 2. It is by God dispensed with, by a judicial,
for the hardness of the hearts of the Jews, for the injustice of the
Gentiles, who exacted it on the Jews, and for the overthrow of the Canaanits.
The word is Deuteronomy. 23.20. Not Lemicro but Lamicro, Extraneo huic, that is, to
this stranger, meaning the Canaanite. 3. See Fenton. of usury p. 46.
It is no more lawful then Poligamy or a Bill of divorce, which was against
the Institutor. 4. When the Canaanites were destroyed, all usury was afterward
absolutely forbidden; Ps. 15. And Pro. 28.8. Hier on Leu. 18. In the Law Usury
is forbidden only to brethren, but in the Prophets to all absolutely: and in
the Gospel much, more, because all are now brethren.

2 Answer.
If any learned men do allow that usury, which is properly so called, and
practiced in the world, Bb. Downam on Ps. 15. p. 310.
I oppose to them the judgments of many more worthy and learned men in this
Age, the testimonies of all the learned in former ages, both Christians and
heathen, the censures of Councels, the authority of the Word of GOD.

3 Answer.
If those Divines that speak or write for usury properly so called, be Usurers
themselves; Dr. Sclater: upon Roman p 122.
may not this sin wind it self into their affections, and thence creep
into their judgments, and understandings, till it have eaten out all soundnes
of judging and discerning betwixt good and evil? Does not adultery creep from
the body to the affections bewitching them? Does it not blind the judgment: to
think and censure it but a trick of youth? Drunkenness what an inward thirst
of the desire works it? And how easily inclines it to judge it no worse then
good-fellowship, yea so good as a point of manhood.

This advantage has the devil gotten against us in the practice of this
sin, Dr. Fenton of usury p. 3. Usury why a bewitching sin.
that usury being a trade so gainefull in respect of others, so easy, so
cheap, so secure without all labor, cost, or peril, being also so common,
behouefull, and requisite in these times for all occasions; it has bewitched
even the consciences of those who are most tender in other matters. For if the
heart and affection be once won and possessed, it is an easy matter even by
slight proofs to turn the brain. Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facile
credunt, Seneca.
strong affection gives great credit to weak arguments: whereas indeed it
ought to be contrariwise; that our natural pronenesse, and the general
inclination of the world to this practice of usury, should move a well tempered
judgment the rather to suspect the lawfulness of it, and the soundness of
such reasons, as are brought for it. Perit omne iudicium, cum res transit ad
affectum. Men looking by affection look through a mist or a painted glass; to
whom nothing appears in his native color and due proportion.

3 Answer.
Powels posit. of usury, p. 52, 53.
Never any Divine, that ever I could see or hear of, ever allowed usury, but
with such caueats and lessons, as alter the quality of usury, and make it
indeed no usury at all.

Calvin in Ezekiel. 18. Wilet upon Exodus p. 511.
1 All Divines condemn it, as when men make a trade of it. Quisquis ex professo
foeneratur, ille omnino debet ab hominum consortio reijci. Thus also Dr.
Willet, he that lends his money upon usury (says he) must not be such a one
as makes it his trade to live by letting of money. And of all other trades to
be a professed usurer is most odious.

2 They absolutely condemn usury of usury. Iun. in Leuit
Vsura vsurarum, iudicio bonorum omnium etiam apud infideles damnata semper et
infamis fuit. Yet this in it self is no more unlawful then usury.

Cautions to be observed by Usurers, and that Exact, to be precisely kept, as
Mr. Calvin says.
1 Ne exigatur ab egente: See Fenton of usury p. 62. 63. Amesins de
conscientia. cap. 44. quae. 4, Perkins Condit. Commandment, 8: Tantundem aut
plus, Calvin. Bb. Downam in Ps. 15. p 274 275.
it must not be taken of the needy, or such as be urged to borrow upon
necessity. 2 The usurer must not be so addicted to gain, but that he must be
still ready furnished, and willing to furnish his poor neighbor in his need,
freely. 3 The rule of Christ must ever be his touchstone, to deal no otherwise
then he would be dealt, with in the like case. 4 The borrowers gain must be so
much more at the least as the usurers interest comes unto. 5 That not only a
respect be had to the borrower but to the good of the Commonwealth also, that,
that receive no prejudice: 6 That the usurer never exceed the stint set down
in the Country, or Commonwealth where he lives.
And because Zanchie, who is held another great patron of usurers, does
undertake to set down the true meaning of Calvin, Bucer, and others in favor
of usury, let us hear what usury that is, which they meant.

Lictat pacisci de lucro, sed adhibita semper condition vel expressa vel
tacita, atque in mente pij creditoris confirmata: nempe, vt si certo
compereris, cui tuam dedisti pecuniam, cum vel parum, vel nihil lucri fecisse,
idque non sua culpa aut negligentia, sed propter res aduersus, et quia dominus
noluit eius laboribus benedicere: tu quoque vel nihil, vel minus quam erat in
pactis accipias. Imo hoc animo esse debes, o creditor, vt si debtor, non solum
non fecit lucrum, sed etiam accepit damnum, tu quoque damni aliquid cum illo
patiaris: hoc enim postulat aequitas et charitas.

The Usury that Zanchie allows,
It is lawful to covenant for lucre, but under a condition either expressed in
the covenant, or kept in mind, that if it appear the borrower shall gain
little or nothing, (if without his own default he proves a looser:) thy usury
shall be little or nothing: and further if he lose of the principal, thou must
bear part of the loss. For equity and charity require this. This is the usury
which Zanchie defends, and this (says he) was the meaning of Bucer and the
rest. Zanchie in Epist. ad Ephesians. 4. quaest. 4 p. 173.
Yet this is nothing but mere partnership. If the lender take part of loss as
well as of gain, it is no usury.

4 Argument for usury.
The Law allows eight in the hundred, therefore it is lawful.
Answer.
Mr. Dyke, deceitfulness of the heart, p 205.
THus the common usurer deceives himself; why the Law allows eight in the
hundred: yea, but the law only stints, and limits it to eight in the hundred,
and so far gives way to it for the preventing of a greater mischief. And
this will not be enough to excuse the usurer in the Court of Conscience: thus
the Jews deceived themselves in the matter of their Poligamy, in having many
wives; and in their divorces for every trifle; Math. 19.8.
they thought Moses Law had allowed them in these sins: whereas our Savior
shows, Moses only gave a toleration for the hardness of their hearts.

Bb. Downam in Ps. 15. p. 265
The permitting of usury, argues that usury in it self is evil, and the rule
of conscience must be fetched, not from the civil laws of men, but from the
Word of God.

Mr. Smith.
The usurer herein is like the Jews, who said, We have a Law, and by our Law he
ought to die, John. 19.7. when they could not say, by Gods Law, he ought to
die: they said by our Law he ought to die: so when the Usurer cannot say, by
Gods Law I may take usury; he says, by man's Law I may take usury: this is the
poorest defense of all the rest: for if Gods Law forbid thee, can any Law of
man excuse thee?

In that act of Parliament wherein usury was stinted at eight in the hundred,
and at the latter end of that act, Anno Vicesimo primo Iacobi. regis.
it is provided: that no words in that Law contained, should be construed, or
expounded, to allow the practice of usury, in point of Religion or conscience.

5 Argument for usury.
Usury is not forbidden in the new Testament, therefore it is lawful.
Answer.
I Deny this consequence: Dr. Pie. Usurers Spright coniured p. 81 82, 83. Note.
Many gross sins not forbidden by name in the new Testament.
there is no special mention of the forbidding of it by name in the new
Testament: Ergo it is lawful. For there are many breaches of the Morrall Law,
yea many gross sins, which are not expressly mentioned, and forbidden by
name in the new Testament: as namely profaning of the Sabbath day: all the
degrees of incest save one; removing the neighbors mark: taking for pledge,
or upon execution a poor man's only weed; removing of Landmarks, Polygamy;
jealousy, etc.

2 An argument drawn from the testimony of some one part of the Scripture
negatiuely, does not hold, it is sufficient that it is forbidden in the old
Testament, and namely in the Mortal Law of God, which is common and
perpetual; and far be it from us to think that Christ in his Gospel
allows any sin which is fordidden in the Moral Law.

3 Neither is the taking of usury of a poor man, that is in never so great
distress, forbidden by name in the new Testament, and therefore by this
argument it should be also lawful.

4 By consequence usury is sufficiently forbidden in the new Testament, as
sometimes under the contrary affirmative: for where free lending is commanded,
as Mat. 5.42. Bb. Downam Ps. 15 p. 282. 283.
Not free lending (that is usury) is condemned: sometimes under the general,
as Ephesians. 4.28 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Sometimes abstinence from usury is commanded under
the arguments of the greater and less, as Luke. 6.35. Sometimes by an argument
drawn from the less, even sinners, says our Savior, are willing and ready
to lend one to another without usury, how much more does it become you that are
Christians; to lend one to another without usury?

6 Argument for Usury.
It was in the Apostles time, therefore had it been a sin they would have
condemned it
Answer.
Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 284.
I greatly doubt of this assertion, that usury was in the time of Christ and his
Apostles commonly practiced among the Romans: seeing Tiberius in the latter
part of his reign had used effectual means for the abolishing of usury, as
Alexander ab Alexandro reports: but much more in respect of the Jews, among
whom the practice of usury was forbidden by the Law of God, and to whom our
Savior gives this testimony, that the very sinners among them would lend one
to another to receive as much as they lent. Luke 6.34. James 5.3.
St. James also finds fault with the rich men of that time, See Dr. Pie. of
usury p. 84. 85.
that they suffered their gold and silver to rust, which they would not have
done if they had been addicted to usury: and therefore the less practice of
usury in those times, may be some reason why it is not expressly mentioned in
the writings of the Apostles.

7 Argument for usury.
The law which forbids usury, is not moral, but judicial, and therefore
not belonging to us: they prove it to be a law judicial, because usury is
permitted toward a stranger. Deuteronomy. 23.20.

1 Answer.
1 If it were a judicial law, yet the equity thereof, Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p.
207.
which is perpetual, would appertain to us, viz. that usury is not to be
imposed upon a brother: but behold we Christians are all brethren in Christ,
this difference of Jew and Gentile being taken away,

2 The law which commands free lending, is not judicial but moral, and is
therefore renewed by our Savior Christ, therefore the law which forbids
usury or lending for gain, is moral; for the same law which commands the
affirmative, condemns the negative.

3 Usury is reckoned in the Scripture among the transgressions of the moral
law. Fenton of usury, p. 45.
Look into the Prophets and they ever combine this sin of usury with the
transgressions of the moral law in the highest degree, with lying,
backbiting, deceit, wrong, bribery, Ps. 15. with idolatry, oppression,
adultery, cruelty, unmercifulness to the poor, bloodshed, and murder, Ezekiel.
18. with the profanation of holy things: with the abomination of uncleanness:
with the unnatural sins of incest, Ezekiel. 22. (...).
Usury (says S. Basil) is placed among the greatest abominations; all of them
transgressions of the moral law.

It is true indeed, there is a judicial and politic toleration annexed unto
this law, that the Jews might take usury of strangers: ^.20.
but that makes not the law it self judicial but rather moral. The Jews
had a divorce permitted unto them in the same book of Moses, the next chapter,
and yet the 7 Commandment, to which that belongs, is moral notwithstanding;
in like manner the Jews might take usury of strangers, chap. 24.1.
which was a peculiar toleration for that nation, yet the law against usury is
moral.

8 Argument for usury.
If usury be not lawful for any to practice alas what shall become of those
Orphans and widows in these unjust days, which have stocks of money left
unto them, and want skill to employ the same.
Answer.
Fenton of usury. p. 115,
What shall become of them? by the help of God they may do well. My greater
care is, what shall become of those Orphans and Widows in these uncharitable
days, which have no stocks at all left unto them. Though I confess both the
one and the other are alike in this, that they be not so able to help
themselves as others be. Therefore there be no two estates among men, over whom
God has a more provident and tender care, then over Deuteronomy. 10.18. and 14.29.
and 18.11, 14. and 24 17 20. Ps. 68.5. Ps. 146.9.
widows and fatherless children.

Exodus 22.22, 23, 24.
Has God then so many ways bound himself by promise to provide for Widows
and Orphans, and shall these by usury withdraw themselves out of his fatherly
protection? shall these be secured by usurious contracts against the act of God
himself? verily God will take it more unkindly at their hands, then at any
other.

If Almighty God in wisdom had thought it meet to have tolerated usury in
these persons, he might as easily have mentioned the same, as he does the
toleration of lending to strangers. But it was so far from Gods meaning, that
in the very same place, where he makes a law for the safeguard of Orphans and
Widows, Exodus 22.22.23 24.25.
presently and immediately upon it, is annexed the Law against usury. Shall then
these who are so well provided for, by a special Law of God, be transgressors
of the very next Law unto it? God forbid.

Let Widows and Orphans, etc. Bb. Downam. in Ps. 15. p. 268. Dod. in Com. 316.
Dr. Wilson discourse upon usury p. 70.
Either employ their goods in some honest trade, wherein they have as good
cause to expect a blessing from God, as any other: or let them deal by
partnership; or if other means fail, let annuities be bought for their lives,
or Lands, or Rents purchased for ever; or let some other honest course be
taken, which wise men can easily devise, if they list: how Orphans may be
maintained without impairing of their stock.

9 Argument for Usury.
The state of the City cannot stand: traffic cannot be maintained: tradesmen
cannot live without Usury: therefore usury is lawful.
Answer.
1. I demand first of these Tradesmen, Fenton of usury p. 121.
who cannot live in their trade without taking up at interest: is their meaning
that they cannot live in that fashion as they do, maintain their wives in
those fashons that they do: drive their trades to that height which they do?
If this be the case, the answer is easy: Prou. 5.15.
it may be God would not have them carry so great a sail as they do, but to
drink of the waters of their own well, Note.
and content themselves with such means as Gods fatherly providence does offer
them: Prou. 15.16.
there is no necessity for a man to enrich himself by such practices, as be
either forbidden or doubtful. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord,
then great treasure with trouble; trouble of conscience at the hour of death.
Thus far we do agree: whosouer lays this for his ground that he will be
rich, 1 Timothy 6.9.
must ensnare his conscience with many necessary evils, whereof usury is one:
necessary, I say, not to a religious honest man, who is content with his
estate; but to him who resolves he will be rich: for they that will be rich
(says the Apostle) fall into temptations and snares, 1 Timothy 6.9.
which drown men in perdition and destruction.

2 If it be propounded, that trade and commerce between man and man cannot be
maintained in this City without borrowing and lending: Luke 6.13. (...)
that is also granted. Gods Law did ever intend that men should lend one to
another; in charity to the poor: in friendship to their equals, to receive
the like courtesy again. Which duty if men would perform, three were no
necessity of usury.

3 The third point then follows. Presupposing the custom and corruption of
these times wherein men will not lend freely as they ought; is there not a
necessity of usury admit that be granted: who did impose this necessity? Note.
if God; then is this reason good, usury is necessary, therefore lawful. But
if men or estates have drawn a necessity of sinning upon themselves by the
custom of sin, does this extenuate or aggrauate the fault? Woe be unto them
(says the Prophet Esaias) who draw sin, Esaias 5.18.
as with cart-Ropes. Cities and Incorporations have drawn a necessity of this
sin upon themselves by three strong cart-Ropes of iniquity. 3 Cause of the
necessity of usury.


First the hardness of men's hearts, and want of charity in those who be well
able to lend and will not, have forced many to pay usury.

Secondly, the covetous desire and pride of borrowers, who out of an insatiable
appetite to compass great matters, do take up great sums of money, for
money: that no money is to be spared for such as be true borrowers indeed. Is.
5.8.
Woe unto them that join, Land to Land till there be no place for the poor to
dwell in. That is the Country woe. But upon the same ground, it is inferred:
Woe unto them who join money to money, till there be none left for the poor
to borrow. This is the City woe: which brings a necessity of borrowing upon
intrest.

Thirdly, falsehood and deceit in defrauding one another of their moneys at the
times appointed, so as being disapointed of their own, they are compelled to
take up of others, or to shut up their doors. These three fold cart-Ropes, not
easily broken, have drawn a necessity of usury upon Cities. And shall it
therefore be reputed no sin? God forbid: it is no good consequence neither in
persons nor estates.

Not in persons. S. Paul tells us of an heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.5.
which heapeth unto it self wrath against the day of wrath. Is impenitency in
that heart no sin, because custom has made it necessary?

A drunkard has brought his body into such an habit, that unless he drink
bountifully, even to the turning of his brain, he is sick again. Is not
drunkenesse in that person sinful, because so necessary?

But for the lender, which is the Usurer, there is no color or pretense of any
such necessity which can befall him: seeing he has authority from God as
steward of his blessings: and power amongst men as owner of his money: for
variety of lawful and undoubted employments.

2 Answer.
The Commonwealth of the Jews did stand without usury, therefore why may not
ours?

2 You may find a discovery of the infinite injuries this kingdom endures by
the unlawful trade of usury. In a tract against usury presented to our high
Court of Parliament. 1621. Item in usury arraigned and condemned. 1625.
Where the allegations commonly made in defense of usury, are sufficiently
answered.

3 Usury is the cheifest cause of the greatest misery in this Land, as well to
give occasion of great waste as also to make much want, and will be in the end,
the undoing of all, if it be not looked to in time. The Romans never began to
decay, till usury Lorded amongst them, Dr. Wilson. of usury. Epist. dedicat.
for then private gain thrust out common profit, lust was holden for law,
idleness more used then labor, riot instead of diet, vice better regarded
then virtue, no charity at all, no love betwixt man and man, but eueryman for
himself, and the whirle-poole of pride and riot ouerfloweth in all things, and
in all places.

10 Argument for usury.
Proposition.
No usury is forbidden by the law of God, and by the law of nature, but that
which is hurtful, and joined with the hurt and loss of the neighbor.

Assumption.
But some usury is not hurtful, but rather helpful to the neighbor.

Conclusion.
Therefore some usury is not forbidden.


Answer.
First the proposition is untrue, and of dangerous consequence: for the law of
God forbids all usury in general, Bb. Downam p 293.
as a thing in it own nature and in his whole kind simply unlawful, without
any restraint or limitation, even as it condemns adultery, lying, theft, or
any other notorious sin. Thus a man might argue for an officious lie.

Reply.
But they prove their proposition thus.

Proposition.
Usury is not forbidden, but as it is against charity, for charity is the sum
of the law, and he which observes the rules of charity, keeps the law.

Assumption.
But that which is not hurtful to the neighbor, is not against charity.

Conclusion,
Therefore that usury which is not hurtful to the neighbor is not forbidden.

Answer.
1 To the Proposition: Charity which is the sum of the law, has reference
toward God; toward our neighbor, not only in private, but also in public:
and toward a man's self. And in this sense I acknowledge the proposition of
his syllogism to be true, viz. That usury is not forbidden, but as it is
repugnant to charity. But hereby the assumption of this syllogism is proved to
be false, for there be many things which are not perhaps hurtful to our
neigbhour in particular, with whom we deal, Note.
which are notwithstanding repugnant to charity. The officious lie helps the
particular neighbor, in whose favor it is told, yet because it is repugnant
to verity, it is repugnant to charity. God who is truth has forbidden all
untruth, and he will destroy every one that speaks lies: the lying mouth
destroys the soul: therefore no lying can stand with that charity and
obedience which we owe to God, nor with that love which we owe to our own
souls. So in like sort suppose that the borrower sometimes is not hurt by
usury, but rather helped: yet notwithstanding all usury is against charity, for
the practice of it cannot stand with charity and our allegance to God; who has
forbidden it, denounced his judgments against it, made gracious promises to
them that will do the contrary: nor with our charity and duty to our Country,
unto which usury is in many respects noisome, as has been showed: nor with
that love which we owe to our own souls; for whosoever puts forth to
usury, or takes increase, he shall not live, but dye the death.

Reply.
Yea but say they again, to prove the former proposition, That usury which is
joined with the hurt of the neighbor is condemned: therefore that which is not
joined with the hurt of the neighbor is not condemned.

Answer.
I deny the consequence: for there are other respects which make usury
unlawful, Idem p. 297.
besides the hurt of our neighbor, as even now I showed; by the same reason
the patrons of officious lies might argue thus; God forbids us to tell a lie
against our neighbor, therefore the lie which is not against the neighbor,
but for him, is not forbidden. But you will say, all lying is forbidden: so is
all usury, as I have already proved.

And thus I have showed against the proposition that all usury is unlawful,
though all were not hurtful. Now I add against the assumption of the first
Syllogysme, that all usury is hurtful: hurtful I say, either to the borrower
as commonly it is, or else to the Commonwealth, as before has been proved.

11 Argument for usury.
To lend upon usury and to borrow upon usury are relatiues, therefore if to
lend upon usury be a sin, it is a sin to borrow upon usury, and if to
borrow upon usury be lawful, then is it lawful to lend upon usury.
Answer.
I Deny the consequence which is grounded upon a false supposition. Bb. Downam
Ps. 15. p. 305.
That there is always the like reason of relatiues. The oppressor, and he
that is oppressed: the robber, and he that is robbed, are relatiues: but shall
we hence conclude, He which borrowes upon usury, necessity compelling sins
not, Idem p. 338.
that if to be robbed, or oppressed is not a sin, therefore it is not a sin
to rob or to oppress?

He which upon necessity, yields to pay usury, does suffer wrong and is
oppressed: therefore such a one sins not. Which may be thus proved.

To suffer wrong is not sin.

The borrower which upon necessity yields to pay usury, does suffer wrong.
Therefore he does not sin therein.

Reply.
He which borrows upon usury is not oppressed, because he is willing to
borrow upon usury: yea, and so willing, that he seeks to the usurer, and
entreats him to lend, offering to give him consideration according to the
Statute, that is to say, Usury.

Answer.
He that borrows upon usury in case of urgent necessity does yield to usury
against his will, yea although he both offer and promise it: for in cases of
urgent necessity, men seem many times willing to that which is indeed against
their will. When a man is in danger of shipwreck, how will he bestirre
himself to unlade and lighten the ship, and with such earnestness cast his
goods into the sea, that he may seem to be very willing to be rid of them: and
yet the thing which he wills, See the answer to the 2 argument for usury,
is not the casting away of his goods, but the safety of his life. This is a
conditional necessity. Thus the borrower is no more willing to pay usury, then
that man was to cast away his goods: but his necessity for avoiding a greater
inconvenience, makes him seem willing to that whereunto simply he is unwilling.

2 Reply.
The usurer cannot accomplish his sin without the borrower, therefore the
borrower is partner of the usurers sin.

Answer.
The consequent is not good. Idem p 344,
The sin of rape cannot be without the innocent party that is ravished, yet
she that is ravished, is not partner of his sin that commits the rape. So
likewise one man cannot oppress, unless there be another to be oppressed, nor
impose usury, unless there be another on whom it is to be imposed: and yet he
that is oppressed is not partner of the oppressors sin, nor the borrower who
upon necessity borrows upon usury, of the usurers sin.

3 Reply.
It may be doubted of, whether one may take money for his use of an usurer: 1
Because it is not lawful to consent to him, that does evil. 2 Nor to give
occasion to one of evil, as he seems to do, that takes money upon usury.
3. And Jeremy professes, Ier, 15:10, Bb. Babington, upon the Commandments, p
70.
that he neither gave nor took to usury, where the Prophet plainly
insinuates, that if he had done either, he could have found just cause in
himself why he should be evil thought of.

1 Answer.
Dr. Smith, in Willet, upon Leuit. p. 336.
1 He consents not to the sin of the usurer, that takes up money of him, he
consents to the lending, which is good, but the hard condition in lending,
the usurer imposes, and the other is forced to accept, because of his
necessity.

2 Neither does he give him occasion of sinning, but of lending, the usurer
himself Sumit occasionem peccandi, takes occasion of sinning.

3 The word there used by the Prophet, is Nashah, which signifies mutuo dare,
to lend, as Iun. well translateth, as it is taken in other places, Deuteronomy. 15, 2.
c, 24.10. where the Septuagint interpret it by the word (...), or (...) debt
not usury, and so Theodotion here reads, I did owe nothing to any man: the
Hebrew word Nashah, with He, signifies simply to lend, but with Aleph, to lend
upon usury, as Esaias 24.2. and though the usual reading be received, it
signifies no more then this, that the Prophet had no trading at all with them,
Cautions in borrowing upon usury.
(as we say) he neither bought nor sold with them and yet they hated him.
Wherefore the resolution here is, that a man for his necessary occasions may
make use of an usurers money, but (not to make gain of it by letting it out
again. 2 or to maintain his pride, gaming, drunkenness. 3 Or to compass
great matters in the world, Bb. Downam in Ps. 15 p 318, 319, 320, etc.
or to purchase Lands, or Houses. 4 Or to seem poor, that he may give nothing
to the use of the Church, or to the Commonweal in subsidies and taxes. 5 Or
when he may borrow freely, at the first motion offering usury to the lender)
but driven to it of necessity: for, non qui patitur, sed qui facit iniuriam
peccat, not he that suffers, but he that does wrong, sins: and it is a
very like case, as when a man uses the oath of one that swears by false
gods: as Jacob did of Labans oath, that swear by the god of Nahor, Genesis 31.53.
who served other gods, Josh. 24.2. to confirm the league between them, as
Augustine says, Non peccato illius, sed pacto bono, quo fidem seruavit, vtitur
in bonum, he does not use his sin in swearing by false Gods, but his
covenant, whereby he kept his faith to a good end: Epist. 154. Note.
And like as a man falling into the hands of Thieves does reveal unto them his
treasure to save his life, which otherwise he ought not to do: as the ten
men did to Ismael, Ier. 41.8. So it is when one urged by his necessary
occasions falls into the Usurers hands. But better were it to prevent such
occasions, if it may be: and being once enwrapped, to follow the wisemans
counsel: Give not rest unto thine eyes; till thou have delivered thy soul,
Not to continue in debt to Usurers.
as a Do from the hand of the hunter, and as a Bird from the hand of the
fouler, Prou. 6.5. For as a Bird taken in a lime-bush, so one by dealing with
the Usurer, the more besnareth and entangleth himself.

12 Argument for usury.
Neshech, which signifies biting usury is unlawful. But toothlesse usury is
not so.
Answer.
IT is the nature of all usury to bite, Mr. Fenton of Usury p. 9. All Usury
bites
though with great difference: some like the English Mastiue, some like the
dogge-slie some scarce sensibly, and therefore not perceived to be a sin.

First, Why Usury seems not to bite.
because many are content to moderate themselves in this gain, and then, if it
be a sin, it is but a little one, as Lot said of Zoar, Genesis 19.20. Modica
sunt quae perdunt nos; they be those little ones that undo us. A Moate in the
Eye if it be not got out in time, may grow to a pin and web; and a man's
conscience may suffer Shipwreck as well upon a Sand as upon a Rock.

Secondly, it is not ever so sensible, because as the Usurer moderating
himself does not seem to bite the borrower: so the borrower releiuing
himself by others, has no cause to complain. Yea, many borrowers concurring
in this practice, by their multitudes, are able to sway and inhance the market,
in such manner, that they may live themselves and pay the usurer besides. So
that in conclusion those do all set upon the Commonwealth: which being a great
body, is able to bear many dogs, before she need to complain: and feeling the
wound (as in time she must) she knows not well of whom to complain. Multorum
manibus grande leuatur onus.
Burdensome therefore it is to the Commonwealth, yet so dispersed amongst
many, that it is the less sensible, but never a whit the more allowable.

For these and the like causes the biting of usury being sometimes not so
sensible to particular persons, almighty God in his wisdom foreseeing how
ready men would be to cavil at the Word Neshech, has of purpose expressed his
meaning more fully by the exegeticall addition of another term, which simply
signifies any increase at all. And this has he done, not only in the
comments of the Prophets. Ezekiel. 18.17. Pro. 28.8.
But in the very text of the law it self, Leuit. 25.36, vetarbith, and the 37.
Vbemarbith: which word, Solomon forgets not to add: for Salomons days
being both peaceable and rich in silver and gold, men would be then more ready
in all likelihood to devise any cavil, or color to maintain that sin.

Neither are these my private conjectures, against the groundless distinction
of biting and toothlesse usury; but Mr. Calvin himself (upon whom they seem
to rely as a chief patron of usury) does not only condemn it as frivolous;
The distinction of biting and toothlesse usury groundless.
but adds further, that it was the purpose of the holy Ghost, by adding that
other word to prevent such cauils. Quia homines hac in part nimium sunt accuti
et versuti, et excogitant subterfugia, quibus crudelitatem suam tegant; ideo
addit: et incrumentum non acceperit: because, says Calvin, men in this kind be
over accute and subtle, and devise euasions how they may cunningly cover their
cruelty, therefore he adds in the text, Usury or increase. And for the
distinction it self, Calvin his censure is, Ludunt homines suis cauillis, sed
deus non admittit tales versutias: men cavil and play with words, but God
admits no such sleights. His meaning is simple and plain, that all increase
above the principal is forbidden.

13 Argument for usury.
Usury is forbidden to the poor, therefore lawful toward the rich.
Answer.
THis evasion is very frivolous: for Deuteronomy. 23.19. Bb. Downam Ps. 15. p. 202.
there is no mention of the poor, but all usury is forbidden toward a
brother, whether he be rich or poor.

2 By the same reason we may conclude, wrong is not to be done to the poor,
the widow, the fatherless; or stranger; therefore wrong may be done to the
rich, Pro. 22.22.
to the married wife, to the children that have their parents living, etc.

3 Or when Solomon says, Rob not the poor, because he is poor, we might
infer; therefore thou may rob the rich, because he is rich. Powels
positions of usury. p. 45. See the answer to the 3 argument.


God in the laws of usury, did specially, and by name forbid lending in that
manner to the poor, for two respects.

1 To show what care he himself has over them, who are commonly and usually
neglected of men.

2 Because the poor are soonest and easiest oppressed of the rich, as the
lowest hedge is soonest stepped over.

3 If the law of lending to the poor without usury, should infer the
lawfulness of lending to the rich upon usury; then it is evident that Gods
intendment in those laws for the benefit of the poor should rather prove a
hurt and hinderance unto them, because by this means it would come to pass
that the poor should not borrow at all. Dr. Moss, of usury: p 131.
For, who will lend to the poor for nothing, that might lawfully lend to the
rich for usury? of which point we have so lamentable and evident experience in
these our days, as no man, no not the usurer himself is able to gainesay it.
Yet of the two it were better for the poor man, that he should borrow upon
usury, then that he should not be able to borrow at all: now borrow at all he
shall not, if it be lawful to lend to the rich for usury, and not unto him.
And therefore as one said, Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum: accursed be
that gloss or commentary that destroys the text: so may I say in this case,
evil fare that interpretation which overthrows the intent and purpose of the
Commandment.

14 Argument for usury.
Many by employment of money borrowed upon usury have grown rich.
Answer.
Bb. Downam. in Ps. 15. p. 257.
I Will not answer with Basil, (...), that is, but I think more (says he) have
come to the halter: but I think more have proved banckrupts. Dr. Wilson of
usury. p 189.
Dr Wilson has a pretty story to this purpose, not unworthy the remembering. A
man coming into a certain Church, and seeing it fraught full of Images made
of wax, Note.
demanded, what might be the cause of such an unwonted sight? answer was made,
that those whom these images did represent were certain persons which on a
time were saved from drowning by calling upon our Lady. Nay then (quoth he
again) where be the Images of those (I pray you) that called upon our Lady,
and were drowned notwithstanding? So say I in this case. If any man will set
before me the instances, and as were the images of those, who took up money on
usury, and grew rich thereby: I would demand on the other side, that he show
forth the hundreds, and thousands of those, who by that means have utterly
impouerished, and overthrown their own estate, they will be found to be
without all comparison.

2 Though some for a time may seem to be rich by that which they have borrowed
upon usury, yet usury at the length consumes them, and eats them up.

3 Neither does this prosperous event of the borrower justify the contract of
usury, Note.
which couenanteth for gain not in euentum lucri, but absolutely, and
therefore out of his loss as well as out of his gain.

4 And lastly I add, that the more the borrower is enriched by this means,
the more the Commonwealth is damnified. For whosoever thriueth by occupying
money borrowed upon usury, he has so pitched the prices of his commodity, Dr.
Wilson, of usury. p 174.
as that besides a competent gain raised for the maintenance of himself and
his charge, he also has gathered up an overplus of a tenth part for the
usurer. And thus by usury the prices of all commodities are enhaunced, whiles
the sellers, who borrow upon usury, if they will thrive, must needs make the
buyers to pay two shilling in the pound more then otherwise were sufficient.
Answer to an Objection.
And because they which do borrow upon usury, must needs sell for so much as
they may gain both for themselves and the usurers. Therefore the rest do
pitch the prices of their commodities accordingly. Otherwise they which trade
with money borrowed upon usury could never thrive: Bb. Downam in Ps. 15 p. 255,
256.
but because sometimes they do thrive, it is evident, that all of the same
trades do so pitch their prices, as if all did borrow upon usury.

CHAP. 7. Usurers must repent of their sin, and make restitution.
Usurers must repent of their sins.
AS for those who have practiced this sin, their duty is to repent thereof,
because they that put forth their money to usury shall not dwell in the
Mountain of Gods holiness, namely, unless they repent. And again Ezekiel. 18.
He that puts forth to usury and takes increase he shall not live, but die
the death, viz: unless he repent and turn from his wickedness; for that
condition is to be understood by warrant of the Lords own exposition, Ezekiel.
18.14, 15, 21.

Bb. Downam in Ps 15. p. 312 313.
Now unto Repentance, besides the inward loathing of the sin and sorrow
conceived for it, is required (as that testimony; of Ezekiel 33.14.15. Plainly
shows) both a desisting from the practice of usury, and a restitution of that
which has been gotten by usury, with the harm of of others. For the first:
it is the express Commandment of God by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that
stole, steal no more: and by Nehemiah more particularly in this case of usury
Chap. 5.10. Let us cease from this burden; meaning usury: forsaking of sin
accompanies forgiving of sin: Prou. 28 13. Neither may we think that God
remitteth those sins, which we our selves retain.

Now upon this forsaking of sin, will follow the second duty of repentance,
Usurers must make restitution else. 1 No repentance.
namely restitution, as a necessary consequent thereof, which restitution
whosoever makes not, being able to restore, he neither has unfeigned
repentance of his sin, nor any sound assurance of the forgiveness thereof.
He has not repentance: for he does not forsake the sin of theft and usury,
that continues in it, and he continues therein that does not make
restitution. For so often as a man remembers, that whatsoever he has unjustly
gotten by usury, or any other kind of theft, to the damnifying of others, is
not his own, but theirs whom he has wronged, and yet refuses (being able) to
restore the same, Si res aliena propter quam peccatum est, cum reddi possit non
redditur, non agitur panitentia, sed fingitur.

2 No sound assurance of remission. Epist. 54. ad Maced:


so often he commits theft. Therefore Augustine says, that men do not
repent indeed, but counterfeit repentance, if when they are able to restore
other men's goods, wherein they have offended, they do not restore them

As he has not repentance which makes not restitution, if he be able, so
neither has he any sound assurance of remission. It is a true saying of
Augustine, Non remitti peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum, that the sin is
not remitted, unless that which has been unjustly taken, be restored,
namely, if the party be able to restore: for whiles a man continues in his
sin, he cannot believe the forgiveness thereof, and he continues therein,
until he make restitution. To restore is to cease from doing wrong, therefore
he that shall not restore, does not cease from the wrong.

But it is further to be considered, to whom and when this restitution is to be
made, and how far forth.

1 To whom? To whom usurers must restore.
Surely to him that has sustained loss or harm thereby, Leuit. 6.5. Numb.
5.7.8. That is, either to the use of the Debtour if he has been bitten or to
public and godly uses, if the Commonwealth has been endamaged.

2 When? 2 When.
So soon as thou desire remission of thy sin, and reconciliation with God
for so the Lord has expressly commanded. Numb. 5.6.7.8. Leuit. 6.2.3.4.5.6.7.
viz. That the sin first must be confessed to God: Secondly, restitution is to
be made to the party offended, the same day that thou seek reconciliation
with God, if not before: and Thirdly a sacrifice was to be offered, etc. The
equity whereof remains unto us, that in the third place we should call upon
God for the forgiveness of our sin, desiring him for and by the sufficient
sacrifice of Christ (which was prefigured by the sacrifices of the Law) to
forgive our sin Many will seem to seek reconciliation with God; but never
think of making amends to their brother offended. But our Savior Christ
teaches us another lesson, Mat. 5.23.24.

How far forth this restitution is to be made.
How far forth is this restitution to be made, that is, of what usury, and of
how much?

Ans. Not of meutall usury, where gain for loan is intended only and
expected: for howsoever that intent corrupts the act of lending, yet it
polluteth not the free gift of the borrower, which is voluntarily given in
testimony of thankfulness. And therefore it binds not the lender for
restitution to be made to the neighbor whom he has not wronged, but to
repentance toward God.

And of how much?
For the quantity; so much at the least is to be restored as has been gotten
by usury with the harm of others: or if the offender be not able to restore
so much, yet he must restore so much as he is able. The Lord in his Law
commands, that the offender should restore the whole sum, and also add a
fifth part unto it, Leuit. 6.5. Numb. 5.7. and Zacheus, to testify his
repentance, promises four fold: that those men may know how far they be
from true repentance who will restore nothing at all.

If any shall think or say, Durus est hic Sermo, this is a hard or harsh
Doctrine, which is not so esteemed in respect of other kinds of theft: I
Answer, the harder this Doctrine seems to Usurers then to other Thieves and
robbers, Note. Usurers worse then other Thieves.
the more desperate is their estate then of others. And this may be another
argument to aggrauate the grieuousnesse of this sin, that whereas other
Thieves and robbers, if once they be discovered, acknowledge their fault, and
are willing to make restitution, Usurers though convinced of this sin, yet
stand in defense thereof and think not themselves bound to make restitution.

I could with much facility, confirm the judgment of this reverend Father, by
the concurrence of a world of testimonies; but because the point is already
discovered to be a manifest truth, I will but Dyke of repentance p. 143 Mr.
Smith 2. Sermon upon usury and in his Sermon of Zacheus conversion. Bb. King on
Jonah. Chapter 3. 8.
name some of them that require Usurers to make restitution, and prefer to
the Usurers consideration, the judgment of a most learned and judicious Doctor.

Powels positions of usury p. 68. 69. Mr. Philips Sermons p. 95. Bb. Sands in
Sermon upon, Luke 1.74.75. Mr. Rogers strange vineyard p. 313. Bb. Jewel, upon
1 Thessalonians. p. 147. Perkins vol. 2. p. 197.

If usury be an unlawful trade, Dr. Smith in Willet on Leuiticus p. 632.
as has been sufficiently proved before; then it will follow, that what is
wrongfully gotten must be restored home, and restitution be made of the wrong
done. Usurers to restore.
So Zacheus professes to recompense four fold what he deceitfully had gotten;
the word is [(...)] taken from such as among the Athenians discovered those
which carried out figs, which was forbidden, (they being had their in great
price,) and so the word is generally applied to those, that accuse others
wrongfully, and forge any cauillation against them, in like manner Usurers have
tricks, and devices to enwrap and entangle their poor debtors. Usurers have
tricks to entangle their debtors.


And if they will with Zacheus become the children of Abraham, they must make
restitution of their unconscionable usury: so was it decreed in a general
counsel, Counsels decreed restitution.
Possessiones quae de Vsuris comparata sunt, vendi debent, et pretia his, ex
quibus vsurae extortae sunt, rescitui; possessions gotten by usury, must be
sold, and the price given to them, of whom the usury was extorted; Lateran.
Part. 16. c. 5. and Augustine also would have usury restored: Quia omne, quod
male possidetur, alienum est, because every thing, which is ill possessed,
belongs to another; Epist. 54.

But here in this case of usury, Cautions to be observed.
these cautions must be observed.

1 That every thing gotten by money cannot be restored, but only those things:
Quorum vsus non est consumptio, which are not consumed in the use, as House,
Lands, but meat apparel, which consume in the use, cannot be restored, but the
value of them.

2. Besides the usury money, something may be gotten humana, industria, by
humane industry and for that restitution is not to be made.

3. And if the lender be damnified, Per dilationem, by the detayning of his
money; of that also a consideration must be had.

4. And all the price of the House and ground is not to be restored, but
Secundum quantitatem vsurae; according to the quantity of the usury received.
To this purpose, Aquin. 2. 29. 18. art. 3.

5. Add hereunto, if the parties be not living of whom the usury was taken:
then restitution must be made to his heirs, and next of his kindred, and for
want of them to be given to pious uses according to the Law, Numb. 5.8. And so
the Canon is: Qui vsuras receperint, cogendi sunt, sub paena Excommunicationis,
ijs aquibus extorserunt, velhaeredibus restituere, they which have received
usury, are to be compelled under pain of excommunication to restore them to
such, from whom they extorted it, or to their heirs, Lateranens. ibid. vbi
supr.

Conclusion.
2 Chro. 30.18 19.
Now the good Lord pardon every Usurer, that prepares his heart to seek God,
the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary. Acts 26 18.
The good Lord open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God: that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Christ.

Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
Heb. 13.20.21.
make them perfect in every good work to do his will, working in them that
which is well pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
ever and ever, Amen.

Barnard. Sermon. 61. in Cant. Meritum meum miseratio Domini.

Mr. George Withers.
TO make of griping usury their Trade
among the rich. No scruple now is made
In any place. For every Country-village
has now some usury, as well as tillage,
Yea they that lending most of all detest
though but for tolerated interest:
Do nathlesse take those annuities
which often proves the bitingst vsuries;
By nature money no increase does bring,
most, therefore think it a prodigious thing
That money put to loan, should bring in gain.
yet some of these by practice do maintain
As monstrous vsuries: and naught at all
are touched in their conscience therewithal.
In usury of Cattle or of Leases
we may disburse our money for increases
More biting far then those who dare to take
who by mere lending do advantage make
As money naturally produces naught,
so, by the earth small profit forth is brought:
Until both cost and labor we bestow,
for little else, but thorns and weeds will grow.
The Landlord, therefore, here I dare aver,
to be no less a griping Usurer,
Then is the money master: if he break
the rule of Christian charity, and take
More profit then his Tenant can afford,
and such as these, are hated of the Lord.
Of Usurers there are some other sorts
who keep no certain place, but both in Courts,
In Cities, and in Country-townes they dwell,
and in the trick of griping they excel;
There be of these, that Use for silence take
some others, an Usurious profit make.
Of their authorities, and do advance
their wealth by giving others countenance:
Their carriages their neighbors fetch and bring
they have their seed time, and their haruesting
Dispatched almost for nothing: such as these
are many of our Country Justices.
Some by another engine profit catch,
they must be prayed and paid for dispatch
Yea Clerks; and many of other officers
are greater and more hateful Usurers,
Then they that most are hated for that crime
since these do often for a little time
Which they delay unjustly take what may
of no mean sum, the annual interest pay,
These men are cruel: and yet worse by far.
most Treasurers, and their pay-masters are
For, that which due unto us does remain
they do not only ouerlong detain,
But, often, of every hundred, twenty take,
ere payment of our, own, to us, they make
They must have bribes, their wives must have Caroches.
or horse, or Jewels, after which encroches
Their servants also, for some other dues
(as they pretend) which if we do refuse
To pay unto them, twice as much we leese,
this trick enricheth also. Referres
In Chancery, and in some other Courts
and this or makes, or marreth most reports:
This is that common cheat, and means by which
mean officers so speedily grow rich,
Although they give large Incomes, by this way
their wives so on a sudden grow so gay,
That were but Kitchin-mayds few years before
yea many in the blood of Orphans poor
Have did their gowns in Scarlet by such courses
and clothd and fed themselves with widows curses.
George Withers.

FINIS.

