A DISCOVRSE of the SIN against the Holy Ghost.

Grounded upon Matt. Chap. 12. verse. 22.-23.

Tending to the comfort of such Persons as, being afflicted in conscience for
their sins, are, by the delusions of Satan, brought to the brinke of Despair,
through fear that they have fallen into that unpardonable Sin.

Written some space of time since, by that godly and judicious Divine M.
William Bradshaw, sometime Fellow of Sydny College in Cambridge; and published
by his son John Bradshaw.

1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. LONDON, Printed
by R. H. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at the sign of the Sun in
Paul: Church yard. 1649.

The Preface to the READER.
AS the Portall is to the house in Architecture, so should the Preface to a
Treatise be an^erable and suitable. The Dis^urse, here set forth, is neither
^rge, nor yet quaint, or floscula ^, no more is this Introduction. and indeed
when should plain^sse of speech, and expression be ^ed, but then when dark
things ^e to be made plain? The end (...) Rhetoric is to cloth; of Lo^icke,
to make bare or naked; therefore in matters of difficult^ we are to make use of
the latte^ and lay by the former. Thebe^ Rhetoric in discourses polem^ call
is to use expression most liv^ly and naturally setting forth o^ notion, with a
clear kind of br^vity. Not so long as to tire, (...) so short as to unsettle
the Reade^ neither to starve his expectati^ with brevity, nor to surfeit it wi^
a confused prolixity.

Hor. l. 1. Ser. Sat. 1. est modus in rebus, etc. Senec. Oedip. Act. 4. sata si
liceat mihi singere arbitrio meo, temperem zep ^yro levi vela etc.
The ancient Schoolmen avoiding of Elegancy in dispu^ have observed the rule
afo^ said thoroughly, and a little t^ much, for they have run a^ so far from
unseasonable ^gancy, that in many words the have fallen into flat Barbaris^ And
I believe (reserving all (...) praise and respect to their cle^ and strong
abilities joined wi^ indefatigable study) that if t^ Latin and Greek tongues
(...) been better known to some of them, they might there have found variety
of fit words by which to express their notions, without adding to the Latin a
Dialect of their own. It is pity, I confess, any notion, especially in
divine things should be lost for want of an expression, and yet withal it is
pity to shape words of our own, when languages may afford them. For it is an
undoubted rule in humanity, that seeing things Nam cu^ ^mn^ ex e and verbis
conste^ ^ratio neque ^erba se^em habere oossint, si ^em subraxeris, atque res
lumen, si verba Ci^le oraor. lib. 3.
are made known by words, the words them selves ought to be well known; which
they cannot be, if they be out of use, and they must needs be out of use, if
they be new coined.

I desire also to be short and succinct as this Treatise is, and I could wish
it were more in use then it is in things published: when the world had nothing
but a few manuscripts, Books were scarce; and the^ the more large wr^tings
were, the more they were acceptable. But since, by that happ^ Art of Printing,
Books have multiplied, swarming continua^ly out of the Press, tanqua^ ex equo
Trojano, conciseness^ is more approveable, which me^ might better effect, if
they would with judgment cull out the choycest of their readings an^ other
their labors, and so tender them to the world.

In this subject of the sinn^ against the Holy Ghost, there ar^ four maine
difficulties, i^ which satisfaction is desired.

1 What kind of sin this is, and how it differs from other sins. Now
because the difference is grounded much upon the unpardonablenesse of it;

2 The second difficulty is, how this sin is unpardonable, and in what sense.
And because the unpardonablenesse seems grounded on, 1 John 5.16. Heb. 6.4, 5,
6. and Heb. 10.26-29.

3 The third is whether this sin in Matthew. 12. Mark. 3. and Luke 12. be of
the same nature with those in 1 John 5. Hebr. 6. and Hebrews 10. Moreover,
because those places speak not directly, or expressly of any sin against the
Holy Ghost.

4 The fourth inquiry shall be, why, and in what sense it is called the Sin
against the Holy Ghost. Of these four, as briefly and clearly as God shall
enable me, and that without any coincidence with, or contradiction of what is
contained in the ensuing Treatise.

What kind of sin this is, and how it differs from other great sins, Pet.
Lomb. lib. 2. distinct. 43. Aquinas 2. 2. qu. 14. artic. 2. Antonin. sum part.
2 ^it. 8. cap. 8. and others.
that seem like to i^ or the same with it. The Schoolmen have made six
species or kinds of it: first, desperation; secondly, presumption; thirdly
impenitency; fourthly, obstinacy fifthly, Veritatis agnitae impugnatio, fighting
against truth that we acknowledge sixthly, envy at our brother graces and
sanctification. Which as it appears are all or most grounded upon several
places in Saint Augustine. If therefore they mean that these are, or may be
consequences and properties of that sin, we yield to them, but not that they
are kinds of that sin.

1 For desperation, a man may despair, and yet not commit this sin, although
he that commits this sin must needs despair, if before death his conscience
be awaked.

Many have despaired for a time, and after believed, and so obtained pardon.
Yea, a man may possibly despair finally, and yet not sin this sin: because
despair does not necessarily imply any scorn, hatred, or malice, against the
mercy and favor of God, which is the maine in the sin against the Holy
Ghost, Therefore despair in this life, is so far from being a kind of this
sin, as indeed it is but a separable adjunct of it.

2 For presumption; Antonin. sum. part. 2 Tit. 8. cap. 8. ut supra.
they thus describe it: it is that whereby a man, that he may commit sin,
refuses the thoughts of Gods Justice in punishing sin, and strives to
smother, and stifle any such thoughts. This indeed is an evil very dangerous
to the soul, but yet not that great Sin against the Holy Ghost, which thus I
prove: It may be forgiven; therefore it is not that sin: it may be repented
of, therefore it may be forgiven; it shall be repented of, therefore it may be
repented of: Deuteronomy. 17.13. And all the people shall hear and fear, and do no
more presumptuously, that is, shall repent of their former presumptions. The
Hebrew word is (...) Iezidun, which properly signifies, to wax hot, and boil
over, and by a Metaphor, to swell against another; and here, to stop the c^res
proudly and stubbornely against the sentence of the Priest whose sentence was
Gods: Even this may be repented of, as those words show, they shall hear and
fear, and by the words (...) lo gnod, not again; Presumption may be the way
to it, but is not the same with it.

3 Concerning impenitency, either it must be for small impenitency, or that
which is final also; if formal impenitency, as it is such, then all
impenitency is irremissible, for a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia; and
then who could be saved? if final impenitency, it is granted indeed, that is a
property of him that sins that great sin, but yet it is proprium
imperfectum, because it does agree, omni and temper peccanti in Spiritum
Sanctum, but not soli.

4 Concerning Obstinacy, it is all one with hardness of heart, and is a cause
of impenitency, and is a property; as is aforesaid: of that great evil, but
not that sin, and so I conceive, Epist. 50. circ. finem -- hoc est autem
daritia cordis usque ad finem hujus vitae; qua homo recusat in unitate corporis
Christi, quod vivi ficat Sp. Sanctus, remissionem accippere peccatorum.
Augustine is to be understood.

5 The resisting of a truth known and acknowledged by the person resisting,
may easily lead him to this sin, Acts 26.11 ^xceeding mad against them.
but is not the same. For Peter in denying Christ, resisted a truth
acknowledged, yet was not guilty with these Pharisees.

6 To envy at the Graces of another, to fret that the Gospel is preached, that
believers increase, that souls are converted, when men's spirits boil up
against Gods Ordinances, and the good success of them in the world, it is a
near degree to this fearful sin, but not necessarily that since all this
may be out of ignorance, as in Saint Paul before his conversion, or out of
other aims, and not out of any rancour or despite to the grace it self.

To the consideration of these six vices how far they d^ff^r from that sin
aforesaid. I think it not amiss to add somewhat that I meet within a Raphael
Eglino de peccato in Sp. S. Removetur primum ab hoc peccati genere quicquid
legi contrarium proprie and per ^e est, cuj^s modi est primo^. par^n^.
origi^ale, etc. ^hesi bus 21 22, 23, 24.
German First, (saye^ he) we must remove and ex^mp^ from th^^ sin whatsoever is
properly and in ^t self contrary to the l^w, as the original si^ne of our
first parents, and of our selves, also all actual sins of omission and
commission against the first and second T^ble, so that they be not joined with
this. And after shows that there is a broad difference between the sins
committed against the Law directly, and against the Spirit of Grace, and the
distinction is cle^rely la^d dow^ in the ^o of the Hebrews 28.29 The said
Writer add, moreover, that sin committed against Christ the Son of man,
e^ther o^ ignorance (...) in Paul, or out of sudden fear, as (...) Peter can^o^
be s^^d to be this sin.
Writer:

The second Difficulty.
FOr the not pardoning it must be understood in one of these three senses.

1 That though happily it may be, yet it never was, nor shall be pardoned in
event. Those that so understand it, give this reason. Our Savior (say they)
says not, it is impardonable, but shall not be pardoned: Those that go to
hell for other sins, their sins were unpardoned, but not unpardonable. So
that their meaning is, that there shall never be any instance, example, or
experience of any in whom this foul act is pardoned. But to this I answer,
that this very thing, that there never shall be any instance or example, makes
it unposs^ble, in some sense, to be forgiven. For frustra est potentia quae
nunquam producitur in actum. It is a vain possibility that is never brought to
effect: and a vain possibility is as good as no possibility, and therefore no
better then an impossibility. Besides, Saint John, 1 ep. cap. 5. v. 16. says
it shall not be prayed for; which yet it might, if there were any possibility
of forgiveness; and Heb. 6.4. says it is impossible to renew them again to
repentance, speaking of the same sin, or one not so bad.

Iansenius in conc. Evang. c. 49
Iansenius and Estius, who, Estius in. sentent l 2. distinct, 43.. 3.
as in many other things, here jumpe together in this interpretation, The
ground they build on, they thus level: In that sense (say they) that our
Savior says that all other sins, except this, shall be forgiven, in the same
sense he says that this shall not be forgiven; but he means not that all
those sins are forgiven to every one, therefore he means not that this sin
is not forgiven to every one. Consequently (say they) he must needs speak of
facility of pardon in the former, and of difficulty in the latter. But (under
correction) I think any indifferent man may see our Savior speaks of
possibility and impossibility. For, says Christ, all manner or kind of sin
and blasphemy, else, shall be forgiven to men: not every particular sin to
every particular man; for then who shall be damned? But all sins in some men
or other, and by consequence, this kind of sin in no man. As if I should say
all diseases in men shall be cured, but the Pestilence taking the vitals shall
not be cured, it is manifest I speak of possibilities and impossibilities; for
else it were as much as to mean that some diseases are easy to be healed,
which are not easy, as desperate Fevers, desperate consumptions and many
others, which were a flat contradiction to the truth.

whereof seems grounded on 1 John 5. Hebr. 6.4. Hebr. 10.26. and so I proceed
to the third Difficulty.

The third Difficulty.
WHether this Sin, 1 Samuel 2.25.
Matt. 12. Mark. 3. Luke 12 be the same with 1 John 5. Hebr. 6. Hebr. 10. That
it coincides with 1 John 5.16. the current of Interpreters will tell you. Aug.
lib. 1. de Ser. Domin. in monte. Peccatum fratris ad mortem puto, cum post
agnitionem Dei per gratiam Domini nostri Jesu Christi, quisquam oppugnat
frat^rnitatem and adversus ipsam gratiam qua reconciliatus est Deo, invidentiae
facibus agitatu^. So Beda.
Austin: I think a brother then sins to death, when after acknowledgement of
God by the grace of Christ, he sets himself against the brethren, and burns
in envy against that very grace by which he was reconciled to God. See
Gualter. Also Perkins his Dialogue on 1 John.

But to come to Argument* In that Saint John says it shall not be prayed for,
it shows it must needs be some extraordinary heinous crime. The Sin of
Simon Magus was very great, Act. 8.23.
which made Peter say, he was in the gall of bitterness, etc. Yet the Apostle
there wishes him to pray for forgiveness: pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of
thy heart may be forgiven.

The Sin of them that stoned Stephen was great and fearful, it was peccatum
aggregatum, there was Envy, Pride, Murder, and persecution, all conjoined, yet
Stephen prays for them. Therefore this sin to death must exceed Pride,
Malice, Envy, Persecution, and then what can it be less then the sin
against the Holy Ghost.

Concerning Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. who doubts but this sin is also there understood.

Yet with these two differences. First, our Savior, in the Evangelists,
speaks most especially of sin in speech that is blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, not excluding other kinds of Sin; for, as he says all sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven, that is, blasphemy, or any other sin in thought
or deed; so here again, this blasphemy shall not be forgiven, nor any other
sin against the Holy Ghost, in thought or deed. It is sottish to think that
this great sin is only confined to speeches, since a man may be as bad or
worse in deeds, as he can be in words. But here in the Hebrews, the Apostle
speaks more generally, as well of other sins against the Holy Ghost, as of
blasphemy.

Secondly, Musc. comment, in Mat. 12. Istisunt duplicis generu, etc.
Musculus shows a second difference: Those (says he) that sin against the
Holy Ghost, are of two sorts. First, such as do oppose and blaspeme that truth
which they cannot but inwardly acknowledge, but have not at all given up their
names to the profession of that Truth, so these Pharisees, here in the
Evangelists.

Secondly, such as do the like, but have also given up their names to it, and
made profession of it, and of these this Epistle to the Hebrews chiefly makes
mention.

But notwithstanding this difference, yet it is still the sin against the
Holy Ghost that is here spoken of: which thus I prove.

The Sin against the Holy Ghost, is a malicious denial of, and rage against
a fundamental, Evangelicall truth inwardly acknowledged, therefore it is
contained, in Hebr. 6. Heb, 6, 4, 5, 6.
For the fourth verse contains in it an inward acknowledgement of such a truth
aforesaid, to which add the fifth verse: and for the malicious denial of it,
and rage and envy against it, it is clearly contained in vers^ 6 they fall a
way and crucify etc. that is they so fall away as to crucify Christ, and do
what they can to cast all the disgrace and scorn they can upon Jesus Christ
and the Christian Religion: Not that every falling away is a crucifying, for
then had Peter been thus far guilty; but sensu diviso, they so far fall, as
to commit this horrible indignity. Therefore I conclude, it is clearly spoken
of in this sixth Chapter.

And as clearly is it expressed in the tenth Chapter. The 26 verse contains in
it this inward acknowledgement of such a truth above mentioned: after ye have
received (says he) the knowledge of the Truth: The 29 verse. containing a
malicious rage against it. Who has (says the Apostle) trodden under foot the
Son of God, -- and done despite to the Spirit of Grace, not only spoken;
but done, not only to Jesus Christ, but to the Spirit of Grace, that is, the
Holy Ghost, which leads us forward to the fourth and last Difficulty; Why,
seeing it is against the whole Trinity (as all sins are) and especially
against Jesus Christ the maine of the Gospel, it is called a Sin against the
Holy Ghost?

4. Difficulty.
Why it is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost? which admits of two senses.
For first, either Holy Ghost stands in opposition to man and unclean spirits,
to man, as it is a Spirit, to unclean spirits; as it is the Spirit of
holiness, the Holy Ghost; and so it must signify the Holy God. Or secondly,
it is taken for the third Person in Trinity, in relative opposition to the
first and second Persons, the Father and Son.

The ground of the first sense and interpretation lies thus: Our Savior says
that all blasphemy against the Son of man shall be forgiven, but not against
the Holy Ghost; as if he had said, so far forth as you sin against me,
appearing but as a man, I will forgive you; but so far forth as you sin
against me, appearing to be God as well as man, I will not forgive you. And
whereas the word Holy is added to the word Ghost, or Spirit, that (say they) is
in direct opposition to that unholy and unclean spirit of Beelzebub, to whose
power these blasphemers did impute Christ's great and gracious work of casting
out devils. Hieronymus ep. 149. ut cum videas in virtutib^^, Beelzebub
calumniera infactis -- and post ea -- aliud est se Christ^anum nega^e allud
Christum diabolum dicere. Isidor. Pelus. epist 39. G^rgon^o circ. fi^em. (...).
And certainly what greater blasphemy can be framed by the wit and invention
of the most malign wretch in the world, then to say that that is done by
Beelzebub, which a man's conscience tells him is done by God? If nothing be so
hateful^ to God, and distant from God as sin, and if nothing be so polluted
with sin as the Devil, an^ if amongst all the Devils, non^ so much as
Beelzebub, the prince of Devils, what a monstrous, prodigious, transcenden^
blasphemy was this, to impute, and that wilfully, the work of the most Holy
pure God, to so for and impure a spirit! a greater then which a man's thoughts
cannot project. This sense cannot well stand, at least alone. For if God in
opposition to man b^ here understood by Holy Ghost, then all sins against the
first Table are committed against the Holy Ghost.

The second Interpretation is, that it stands in opposition to the Father and
the Son; and is taken properly for the third Person in Trinity. Of which the
Schools give this as the reason: because this foul sin is properly against
the goodness of God. For (say they) power is properly attributed to God the
Father, wisdom to God the Son, goodness to God the Holy Ghost.
Consequently, sins of infirmity are against God the Father, sins of
Ignorance against God the Son, sins of malice and wickedness, against God
the Holy Ghost. upon which notion of theirs, they infer a reason why the
sin against the Ghost is only unpardonable, because sins (...) Infirmity
and ignorance have some pretext, but the last ha^^ none. In which positions
(...) theirs, there is more subtilt^ then sound verity. It Is grant^ that Christ
is called the Wisdom of God, but he is also call^^ the power of God in the
sa^^ place, 1 Corinthians. 1.24. Y^^ the Holy Ghost is called the po^er of God,
Luke 1.35. the po^er of the Almighty shall ov^^ shadow thee. Neither is it
clea^ how the Holy Ghost is prope^ the goodness of the Godhe^ since the
goodness of God is m^nifest to the world-ward, also Christ the Son of God,
tak^ our Nature, and laying down life for us, out of whose fuln^^ we all
receive, and grace (...) grace.

Secondly, were it so, that the attributes were proper to (...) three Persons,
as is mentioned; and that in matter of expression toward the world, for so
they understand it, acknowledging all the persons to be in themselves qually
powerful wise and good, I say, admit this to be true, yet how are sins of
Infirmity against the power of God, or sins of Ignorance against the wisdom
of God? What can we make of this? If sins of Infirmity be sins against the
power of God, then it must either respect the Infirmity as Infirmity, or the
sin as sin if the Infirmity, as infirmity or weakness, it is no more against
the power of God, then all natural infirmities and weaknesses are in any
creature whatsoever; but if sin as sin, then it is more properly against the
Holiness of God then his power.

Besides, when we say such a sin is against such an attribute we mean it does
especially di^honour that attribute, and ta^^ it in vain; as desperation is
sin against the mercy of God, because it dishonours his mercy (...) limiting
it; presumption is a s^^ against the justice of God, because it is abused by
it. But si^ of Infirmity do not abuse or l^sen the power of God, but rathe^
illustrate it. But if they say the they mean a bare passive de^ contrariety,
such as is betwe^^ black and white, light and dar^nesse, or the like, then it
is granted: but in the mean time the^ give us a very lame and unev^^
trichotomy of three sorts of sin^ For they cannot deny but the si^ against the
Holy Ghost is mo^^ then a bare passive contraries to the holiness and
goodness^ thereof, for it comprehends in (...) an active opposition, resistance
repugnancy, abuse, dishonor, despite against the Holy Ghost.

Therefore to conclude this fourth thing: It is called the sin against the Holy
Ghost, because although it be equally a transgression against the whole
Trinity, who as they are equal, so in every sin are equally offended; yet it
seems most to reflect upon the Holy Ghost, by which Christ, as man, did all
his great works, Matthew. 12.28. If I by the Spirit of God cast out Devils, etc.
by which to this day things are wrought that tend to the reparation and
sanctification of man fallen, by which Christ is made ours, and we Christ's,
therefore it is called the Spirit of Grace, and despite is said to be done to
the Spirit of Grace.

Neither does this thwart what is specified in the ensuing Discourse, where it
is said t^ have this name, because it i^ committed against the grace and gifts
of the Holy Ghost, for I grant that too; but as it is a^ offense, it is
properly against (...) person. They sin indeed against those gifts and graces
by repe^ling them, and making themselves for ever incapable of the^ but yet
herein they offend properly the Spirit of God, Chrysos^. in Mat. Spiritus antem
sancti gratia multis, and magnis and parvulis signis se ipsam manifestaverat:
^am prophetae per spiritum omnia locuti sunt and omnes illi vatere^ multa de
ipso acceperant documenta.
by wh^^ properly and immed ately tho^^ graces are to be wrought in them

And though the Pharise^ knew not distinctly whethe^ there was an Holy Ghost or
(...) as a third person in Trinity proceeding from the Father and the Son,
yet notwithstanding the could not but acknowledge a divine holy spiritual
power proce^ding from God, and closing wit^ men, by which the Prophets
formerly, and Christ now among^^ them, did and spoke so many holy and great
things. See 1 Kin. 22.24.

Thus have I (good Reader) as briefly as well I could, laid open those four
things, which seem hard in this matter, and that I hope without any
intrenching upon the ensuing Treatise. My aim herein is, thy satisfaction; if
I miss of it, it may be, it is either thy prejudicate thoughts, or slight
perusal of what is written. But if thou have duly weighed all things in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and found any thing too light, tell me of it, and I
will either satisfy thee, if I can, or crave pardon of God and thee, if I
cannot. However cover the failings of me thy brother from others, so long as
they do not endammage others, and Jesus Christ for ever cover thine. For my
part I could do no less then I have done in publishing this small Work
following. I was told by a late friend, a little before his decease, that some
Divines of his acquaintance, in the West of this Kingdom, had Copies of the
same, a^ intending, if I had none, to publish theirs. I thought it therefore
very convenient to precede them in that Work. First, that none might be more
forward to continue the memory of my deceased Father in any thing that might be
useful to the Church then I my self; and next to prevent other Copies, that
happily written at the second and third hand or more might be much different
from the original. In inditing whereof I know the, Authors aim was at these
things mainely. First, to comfort such afflicted minds as think they have
committed this sin, but have not. Secondly, Quod non probatur ab aliquo esse
commissum; nisi cum de corpore exlerit. Au^ust. Epist. 50.
To prevent all rash judgment of the persons of others, whom we are apt to
judge guilty of this sin, but are not. Thirdly, to admonish men of it, and to
teach them to avoid the way that leads to it. Fourthly, to instruct all
concerning the true guise and nature of it. What acceptance other Treatises of
his, those especially of Justification and preparation, have found in the
world, is known to the world; this also may find some, offense I know it can
give none. The Author desires not thy prayers, who has been dissolved, and
been with Christ now full twenty two years: those that he cannot enjoy, for
his sake bestow on me, how short soever I fall of him, how unworthy soever I be
of them.

I have been somewhat too large, and perhaps the Reader seeing the Treatise
little, and the Preface long, will be ready to say as he, that seeing a little
City and a great pair of Gates, said, the City perhaps will run out of the
Gates. The Apophthegme is common. But to prevent such a thing, I will shut up
the Gates, closing up all with my prayers that this fearful sin may a
seldom be committed (if it b^ Gods will) as it is pardoned To which end, the
Lord of hi^ mercy give us all right understandings, humble hearts, tender
consciences, the fear of h^^ Name, the love of his truth sincerity of faith,
and truth obedience; that our faylings m^ neither become fallings, nor o^
fallings irrecoverable; that (...) we sin, we may repent; if (...) repent,
we may be forgiven; we be forgiven, we may be a^cepted; and if accepted, we
m^ for ever be glorified, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.

Thine, an unworthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN BRADSHAW.
April 1. 1640.
Martii. 30 1640.
Imprimatur,

THO: WYKES.

MATH. CHAP. 12.
VERSE 22. THen was brought to him one posses^ed with a Devil, blind and dumb;
and he healed him, so that he that ^as blind and dumb, both spoke and ^aw.

3. And all the people were amassed and said, Is not this the Son of David.

4 But when the Pharisees heard it, they said; This fellow does not east out
the Devils, but through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

5. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them: Every Kingdom divided
against it self, is brought to desolation; and every City or House divided
against it self, shall not stand.

6. But if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how shall
then his k^ngdome st^nd?

27. And if I by Beelzebub cast o^ Devils, by whom do your childr^^ cast them
out? they therefore sh^^ be your Judges.

28. But if I cast out Devils by (...) Spirit of God, then is the Ki^^dome of
God come unto you.

29. Or else how can one enter in^ strong man's house, and spoile^ goods, except
he first bind strong man, and then spoil may his house.

30. He that is not with me, is aga^^ me: and he that gathers (...) with me,
scatters.

31. Wherefore I say unto you, Or, All manner of Sin.
(...) Sin or Blasphemy shall be (...) given unto men: but the Bla^^^my
against the Holy Ghost (...) not be forgiven unto men.

32. And whosoever shall spe^^ word against the Son of (...) it shall be
forgiven him: but (...) soever shall speak against (...) Holy Ghost, it shall
not be f^^^^ven him, neither in this W^^^^ nor in the World to come.

OF THE SIN AGAINST THE Holy Ghost. MATH. CAP. 12. VER. 22, 23.
THough there be no one thing wherein God has decreed to glorify himself
more than in his ^^rcy, in forgiving man's sins; ^d though the greater the
sins (...) the more his mercy shall shine ^he pardoning and remitting of ^^m;
yet is there one kind of sin ^^ainous and horrible, so vile and ^^minable,
that being once com^^ted, it shall never be pardoned, it being of that nature
that it wo^^ stain the mercy of God in (...) pardoning and remitting of it:
(...) this is the sin that is called (...) Blasphemy against the H^^^ Ghost.

The nature and quality of (...) Sin is set forth in this part of (...) word;
as also Mark 3.28. 1. Io^ 16. Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. and 10.26, 27 Of the Doctrine
whereof a (...) may say, as the Philosopher (...) sometime of the Edition of
(...) Physics: The Nature of this S^ is set down in the word of (...) and it
is not set down in the (...) of God. For it is so darkl^ down, that those
that are not ^^cised in the word, cannot at (...) to the understanding of it;
an^^ it is so set down and laid fo^^ the same word, that those that (...) the
Scripture worthy their st^^ may (if they will bestow (...) pains) come to the
understan^ of it.

In this History, the Evange^^ enjoined and directed by the (...) ^host (whose
public Notary and ^^cribe he was) to register unto the church one Example of
the same; (...) which one may receive much ^^ght concerning the Qualiry and
nature of that Sin.

In handling whereof, I will ^mit all other points, but those that ^ay tend to
the illustration of this ^^nne; which I trust will not be (...) profitable
unto any in this place: ^ough I must confess, in setting on the same, I more
respected my ^e than any of you, in that the ^nt of the distinct knowledge
^^reof has driven me to bestow ^^ne meditations upon it. So much ^^t
therefore of it, as this portion Scripture has given unto me, ^n content to
impart unto you: ^^ugh, if you will have an exact ^^full knowledge of it, you
must ^row further light from those ^^er places of Scripture, that pur^ly also
entreat of the same.

The Drift and Scope then of ^everses is to show us in a parti^r Example, what
is the Nature and Quality of that unpardon^^ Sin.

The parts whereof we will ^^sider, not as they are in themsel^ but as they
have reference to (...) Sin, that so by that means may the better cut off all
man that shall not tend to the illustra^ of it, though in themselves ne^^ good
and profitable.

There are therefore six things pressed in this History, conce^^ that
particular Sin that is specified, which may give (...) light to all other of
the same k^

1. The Conception of this S^

2. The Birth of it.

3. The Name of it.

4. The Nature of it.

5. The Conviction of it.

6. The Condition of it.

The first part. Of the Co^tion of this Sin.

The Conception of it (...) means of a wonderful miracle our Savior Christ
wrought (...) one that was possessed bodily an unclean spirit. That d^ beam
of light that streamed from this miracle, shining upon their Consciences, did
animate and quicken this hellish Monster in the Scribes and Pharisees, as it
appears afterward. For it is with the light of Gods Spirit, as it is with the
rays of the Sun, shining upon diverse Objects, it produces diverse Effects;
it brings forth through the variety of the soil; not the Rose only, but the
Nettle; not the Fig Tree only, but the Thistle; not the Vine only, but the
Brier: it animateth and quickneth not clean alone; but unclean Creatures
also, as Toads, Adders, Hornets, and such like. So the divine Truth of Jesus
shining upon diverse persons, it brings forth diverse effects, and those clean
contrary; in some by the blessing of God it produces many excellent Graces; in
other some, many foul and hideous Sins through the Corruption of the soil.

Hence may we draw these Conclusions concerning this Sin.

The first Conclusion.
The Sin against the Holy Ghost is quickened as it were by the light and heat
of some special divine Truth: for so is this particular Sin in this place.
That light of the divine Truth shining about them, was i^ that first stirred
and tempered their Corruption, and wrought and framed that monstrous Sin,
that had never been begotten, if it had never shined on them.

So that the very cause why thi^ Sin is committed, is by reason that such or
such a divine Truth does present it self to the Eye o^ their Conscience, which
if it di^ not, they would not commit such a Sin. For Example: These wicked
Scribes and Pharisees, if neither this nor any such like mean^ had been used,
whereby they might have perceived this Truth, they had never committed this
Sin; but as it is apparent, they committed it because of that Truth.

The Use whereof may be,

1 For information of ou^ Judgment concerning this Sin. We see many commit many
strange and desperate Sins against the light of Gods Word, of Conscience, yea
of Nature it self; and that also most wilfully, and stubbornly, and
obstinately; yea, with this height of desperate resolution, that though they
were sure they should go to hell for it, yet they would do it. Though such
Sins be a fighting against the Truth, yet are they not this unpardonable
Sin, except the first and principal motion of it do arise from that divine
Truth, in such a manner, that he would not commit that Sin, but for that
divine Truths sake. For this is a Sin, the very first motions whereof, are
conceived by the sight of a divine Truth; so that it is a Sin not only
committed in the light, and against the light; but by means of it, and even for
the Truths sake.

2 Since by reason of the Corruption of Man's mind, the divine Truth of God, the
principal Organ or Instrument of all grace and goodness in the Soul of Man,
especially the Doctrine of the Gospel, may work and breed such monsters in the
Soul; it behooves us to do our uttermost endeavor to purge and sweep our
Soul, as much as we can, especially when we are in such places, where these
divine Truths shine and appear most. For else, a thousand to one, but some
Monster will arise in the Soul. Neither is there any divine Truth that
present^ it self to the eye of the Conscience, but does breed some Monster or
other in a corrupt Soul; though not so huge a one as this, yet that which may
be a spawne, a fry, and seed to this. As therefore in the mud of Egypt cast up
by the overflowing of Nilus, are engendered many vile and filthy creatures by
the beams of the Sun: so by the overflowing of Sin, there being as strange
mud cast over the Soul, strange Monsters will arise out of the same, by
occasion of the divine light of Truth shining thereupon.

3 Hence observe the persons that are most capable of this Sin; they are such
as are most capable of divine Illumination, and most apprehensive of all Truth.
A dullard, a blind person that has no eyes to look above that which is
humane, cannot commit this Sin, but those that are able to see and behold the
divine Truth. So that in this respect, Ignorance is an advantage to a man: For
a narrow brain will not suffice to conceive this Sin. The Scribes and
Pharisees, Julian the Apostata, and those that come nearest to this Sin, the
grand and Archpersecutors of any divine Truth, they are men admirable for
gifts. There are indeed many insolent Dunses and Sots that are malirious; but
they receive this malice from the spirits of great wits; themselves are but
axes and beetles in their hands. So that it is not a Mouse that can bring forth
this Elephant; nor a Wren that can lay and hatch this Eagle.

4 Learn hence how to prevent this Sin. Many there be indeed that take a
most vile course to prevent it; they will not know the divine Truth, because
they will not wilfully resist it, and so desperately perish through their
wilful want of it. But let our course be for the preventing of it, to adore
every divine Truth that we receive, and not to admit of the least thought
against the same. Of all Sins this should be killed in the womb. For other
Sins may be cast out of possession and Kingdom; this never.

The second Conclusion.
The Sin against the Holy Ghost is not conceived by means o^ every divine
Truth, but of a supernatural divine Truth; that is to say, an Evangelicall
Truth. So that a^ every light is not a means to produce and quick^n things, but
the light of the Sun only: so every Truth is not a means to breed and
animate this Sin, but some Evangelicall Truth only. The Truth hereof
appears in this Example That divine Truth that here stirred up this Sin was
this, that Christ Jesus the Son of Mary was the true Messiah. This it was
that stirred up their minds to this Sin. So that a natural Truth cannot
stir up such a Sin as this unpardonable one; but as it is plain, Hebr.
6.5. it must be a Truth concerning the Life to come.



2 In Temptation the Child of God may make use of this Conclusion. For let the
Sin, that he is troubled in Conscience for, be never so heinous and desperate
against Conscience; yet, if by the light of the Gospel they have not been
stirred up unto it, it is not this unpardonable Sin.

The third Conclusion.
This Sin is not engendered and stirred up by every Evangelicall Doctrine and
Truth, but by the maine and fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel. For this was
it that begat this Sin in them, that this Christ whom they so horribly
revile, is that Messiah and Savior of the World. This was it that made them
spit out this blasphemy; because they saw he was so. Though therefore there is
no Legal, nor Evangelicall Truth, but it has this property through the
Corruption of man's nature, to stir up the mind to Sin; yet no Truth, but a
maine and Fundamental Truth, the excellentest Truth, and that which being
presented to the Soul of an elect Child of God, does stir up in him the
most principal Graces of God, and beget in him an unspeakable Love of God: the
same Truth it is that begets in the reprobate (if God leave them so far unto
themselves) the highest and most horrible Sin. For that which is an
Instrument of holiness to the good, is an Instrument of impiety to the wicked:
and so by degrees, that Illumination which is the means of the greatest Grace
in Gods Children, is the means of the greatest Sins in the Reprobrate. The
Doctrine of the Law begets many Graces in the heart of Gods Child; the
Doctrine of the Gospel more. Every Evangelicall Truth is a means of much
Grace; the Fundamental and high points thereof much more: So on the contrary.
It is therefore an high Evangelicall Truth, that is, the stirrer up of this
high Diabolical Sin.

how we abuse the Gospel of Jesus Christ unto sin against God, especially
the highest Mysteries of it. Its a Corruption that we are too much subject
unto. It is a fearful thing, that our nature should be stirred up to sin
the more by the Law, as it is; that Sin should take occasion by the
Commandment, Romans 7.8, 11. verse. 9.
to work all kind of Concupiscence in us, that it should revive Sin it us.
But much more fearful is it when by the Gospel we shall there unto be
stirred up, yea by the principal parts of it.

2 This may be a relief to a distressed Conscience that shall be tempted and
persuaded by Satan that he has committed this Sin Satan sets before thine
eyes, t^^ the end that thou might despai^ of mercy, and so grow profane, an^
an enemy to God, some feareful^ Sin that thou have committed, ar^ he tells
thee its the Sin again^ the Holy Ghost. This should mak^ thee to try and
examine what mov^ and stirred thee principally to tha^ Sin. And if it shall
appear to the Eye of thy Conscience, that the light of the Gospel, and the
chief Ordinances thereof, did not irritate or provoke thee thereunto; that Sin
of thine cannot be this Sin against the Holy Ghost. For he that commits this,
must be an enemy to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And as the presence of those
whom a man does hate, uses to stir up in a man blasphemous and outrageous
speeches of him, by making his stomach and choler to rise against him: so the
like effects does the presence of Christ in the ordinances of the Gospel,
produce in those that be enemies and haters of him.

3 Hence we may have some sight, why this Sin is unpardonable, because it is
a Sin stirred up, and provoked directly by the pardon. For what is the maine
matter and principal Doctrine of the Gospel, but an offer of pardon of Sin
^o all those that will receive Jesus Christ. And why should they be vouchsafed
pardon, that do not only contemn the same, but so hate it, that they are by
the offer thereof worse than before. The Kingdom of God was come to these
hellish Imps. God brought Jesus the Messiah unto them. Their own Consciences
acknowledge^ it: the light of Gods Spirit seale^ and confirmed it. What was all
thi^ but an offer of pardon? which the^ despise so far forth, that they as
for the very offer of it the worse.

The fourth Conclusion.
It is not the light of the Gospe^ in general, and in a confused manner
shining, or set forth in types, an^ shadows, and figures that did beg^^ this
blasphemy; but some specia^ and particular beam of Light bei^^ palpably and
evidently presented (...) the Eye of their Conscience: Its a experimental
knowledge that b^gat in them this Sin. The Doctrine of the Messiah they knew
w^ enough, and approved it: as a^^ they affected with great devoti^^ those
Mystical Rites and Cerem^nies of the Jewish Gospel, that s^dowed out the
same: this only was it which they could not endurre, the direct light and truth
of it in particular, presenting it self to the Eye of their Conscience. For
example: In Tapestry and Imagery we can with delight behold the portraicture
of Serpents, Toads, Foxes, Wolves, and other filthy Beasts, that we cannnot,
when themselves in themselves shall be presented unto us, but fly from them, or
pursue them to death. Even so is it with many professors of Christ; that though
they seem much affected to Christ in general, and much devoted to every
shadow and semblance of him; yet do they notwithstanding indeed hate and
malice him, and would, were he present in person with them, pursue him even
unto death.

profess Christ, yea, and persecute Christ in the name of Christ.

2 If in the hour of Temptation thou can in thy Conscience assure thy self
that thou wast never thus affected, when the Gospel and Christ Jesus was
presented unto thee, that thy mind did never rise nor lift up it self against
it, but ever liked and loved it; yea if thy Conscience tell thee that thou art
so far from this affection, that the more knowledge thou have had of Christ,
the more thou love him; thou may assure thy self that this Sin is not so
much as breeding in thee.

The second part. The Birth of this Sin.
YOu have heard before how this Blasphemy was conceived by the beams of a
Divine Truth that shined to the Eye of their Conscience, whereby these Scribes
and Pharisees discerned indeed that Christ was the Son of God. This first
quickened this Monster, and made it to swell and grow in the womb of their
hearts. Now we are to consider the Birth of this Sin, by what means it was
brought forth of them.

This is set down verse 23. For when the Scribes and Pharisees did not only
see the wonderful works that our Savior Christ wrought, but did also perceive
that the people came thereby to the light of that Truth, which they labored to
the uttermost to smother and extinguish: as soon as ever they began to descry,
that that the people were astonished at the wonderful works of Christ; and
that in this their astonishment they began to conclude, that he was surely the
Christ: they could not then contain any longer, but presently breathe out this
fearful Blasphemy. So that the sight of the peoples astonishment, and the
hearing of their words, whereby they began to give glory to Christ, as the
Messiah and Savior of the World, was the Midwife that brough forth this Sin.

Whence observe we these Conclusions concerning this Sin.

The first Conclusion.
The cause that irritateth and provokes men unto this Blasphemy, is not within
themselves, but out of themselves. The matter of this Sin was within
themselves; but the irritating cause was out of themselves For if this divine
Light had shined never so brightly upon their own Souls, howsoever they might
have maliced the same, yet they would never in that manner have spit out
Blasphemies into the cares of men against it. For they knew well enough that it
was not so as they said; and therefore had it not been more in regard of others
than themselves, they would never have said so. And thus it is in the extreme
malicious speeches of many concerning man: men are wont by seeing other men's
respect unto him, to be provoked and stirred up thereto.

words concerning God, concerning Christ, concerning the Scripture, etc. But
for their heart-bloud, they cannot tell either how they come, or how they were
moved unto them. Now, howsoever we have just cause to humble our selves for
such Sins as rise out of our minds thus we know not how; yet have we n^ just
cause therefore in regard of them to condemn our selves as guilty o^ this
horrible Sin.

The second Conclusion.
Those that commit this Sin, it the committing of it have a respec^ to
others. For others sakes doing that they do, and are in that regar^ stirred up
unto it. As in this Example, the Scribes and Pharisees i^ blaspheming Christ,
had a respec^ to the people, and in this regar^ were they stirred up indeed, so
t^^ blaspheme. For their intent was to make Christ odious and vile in the eyes
of them that began to admin^ and adore him. And this among me^ is the height of
malice and despite to revile men, and odiously to abu^^ them, not to themselves
only, but to others. This Sin therefore is such a malice and despite, as is
in a man stirred up by others.

Paul, to the end they might be humbled, and not puffed up with the graces of
God ^n them. For we carry about with us (...) strange nature, that will make us
proud that we are not proud, and that is the most dangerous pride of ^ll. And
therefore when God has given a Christian grace to go before others in many
holy exercises, to ^ake more conscience of the Word, ^abbath, Sacraments, and
Prayer, ^han others ordinarily do, and ^ouchsafed in more than ordinary manner
to reveal himself unto ^im; he leaves commonly a sting (...) the flesh to
humble them, 2. Cor. 12.7.
he suf^eth such sometime to fall into ^any strange Sins; yea, such as may
have some resemblance un^ the highest and extremest Sin^ against the Holy
Ghost. But t^^ Children of God, in such spirit^^ desertions, are to take heed
h^^ they boult out of their hearts (...) hope of mercy. For although (...)
Sin they have committed (...) have a show of malice and ha^^ to God and his
Truth, which i^ every man in some degree so f^^ forth as he is flesh; yet so
long^ is not a malice and despite (...) regarding others, but certain ^shings
only, it cannot be (...) Sin.

The third Conclusion.
This Sin is no Closet. Si^^ nor Chamber-Sinne, or House. S^ but a public
Sin, a prof^ malice and hatred against C^^ and his Truth; a Sin procla^^
with the sound of Trumpet, c^mitted in the market place.

That Blasphemy therefore (...) is ashamed to show the head, (...) blusheth to
look a Christian in the ^oe, is not this Sin. This is an im^^dent and a
shameless Sin.

The fourth Conclusion.
The very end of this Sin is a ^^litious purpose and resolution to ^^tinguish
the divine truth and love (...) Christ in others; and therefore it ^^sireth to
imprint that malice upon ^^hers, as these here do; yea this is (...) very
reason why it is commit^^.

The fifth Conclusion.
This Sin is a Sin of Oppo^^^on and Contradiction, when ^n maliciously and
spightfully op^^e themselves unto, and contra^^ the Truth of God professed by
^^^ers, and that to the face of the ^^fessors of it; yea, and therefore, be^^e
it is professed by others.

The sixth Conclusion.
They that commit this Sin, of all other things can least endure (...)
contrary practice and profession others; but according to the deg^^ thereof are
the degrees of this (...) and by that very practice and p^fession of others are
men thrust were into it.

A man through the mali^ Satan may have many strange^ blasphemous thoughts
runni^ his mind; yea, sometime brea^ forth even in tongue against (...) against
Christ, against the Wo^ God, against this or that Arti^^ Religion; yet so long
as ma^^ with any patience endure to (...) the contrary professed, and (...) the
contrary practiced, and i^ thereby provoked and stirred (...) more to that Sin,
and to the (...) of those persons that profe^ practice the contrary, so long i^
far from this Sin. For the a Sin that breaks forth by contrary
profession and pra^ They therefore that are so far (...) being stirred up by
the co^^ practice and profession of o^^ ^^at they love the contrary practice
and profession in others, are very far ^^om this Sin.

The seventh Conclusion.
This Sin is a Sin that will ^^dure no reasoning, no disputing, ^o
conference, no contradiction, no ^erswasion, no authority, and by ^onsequent,
no remedy.

They therefore that hold and ^aintaine, though affectedly, any ^^asphemous
Errors, and yet can ^^tiently endure contradiction and ^position, or
disputation and con^^ence; yea, that delight therein, and affect it, and take
it in good ^rt, especially if thereby they be ^^itigated and allaied, are
far also ^^om this Sin.

The eighth Conclusion.
This Sin is a Sin committed (...) knowledge, in advisement, in de^eration,
in judgment; and not ^ly in violence of rage and passion. Men commit it not in
their b^ blood, incensed by some person disgrace, nor in any distracted f^^ or
temporary madness; but they (...) it advisedly, deliberately, witting^ freely.
Thus was it here with the^ There was nothing at all in (...) voice of the
multitude that mi^^ provoke them to wrath. If the p^^ple had taken occasion
hereby cry out upon the Scribes and Ph^sees, that gave Christ no better
e^tertainment: if they had deno^ced curses and woes against the^ Christ
himself sometime did, (...) by this means had first inra^ them, and they then
in their (...) and fury against them had bro^^ out into these blasphemies aga^^
Christ, it had changed the nature their Sin. For a man in his f^^ and rage,
provoked by another, (...) sometime speak very spight^^ words against them
whom he bears no malice unto in his he^^ especially in his cold blood. So the
this was no sudden, rash, hea^ unadvised, distempered Sin ^ut a deliberate,
stayed, settled, firm ^inne.

The ninth Conclusion.
This Sin against the Holy Ghost is not a secondary malice, ^^sing orginally
from the hatred of some other; but it is a direct and immediate malice against
Christ and the Gospel. They did not thus spightfully speak against Christ,
because they maliced these people that began to love Christ; but because they
maliced Christ, therefore they spoke thus maliciously of him (...) the people,
whom they had no ^ause to malice but for Christ's sake. This is not therefore a
refracted, or a reflected malice. For what was there in these Jews, or in
their speech, that should make them in this manner to break forth into
blasphemy?

The tenth Conclusion.
Every Blasphemy is said in the word to be a kind of piercing o^ God: (...)
Lev. 24.11, 26. See Iun. notes.
For that is one Hebrew nam^ that is given unto it. So that thi^ Blasphemy is
as it were a kind o^ discharge of a great Cannon-sh^^ against the Lord. Now
what is the March that gives fire to this Cannon? you may see it here; the
zealous profession of others. So that as the Light of the Gospel turne^ their
thoughts as it were into a po^der; so the same light affecting others, is as it
were a match to set these their thoughts all on fire.

And hence it may appear, that even the Children of God, albe^^ they be so
upheld, that they comm^ not this Sin; yet may feel i^ themselves a great
inclination un^^ it, insomuch as naught but the hand of God keeps them from
it. For how do our minds naturally rise and swell at those that we see more
forward in Religion than our selves? but in other matters if we see men go
further than our selves, we cannot endure it.

The third part. Of the Name of this Sin.
HItherto of the Conception and Birth of this Sin. We are now to entreat of the
kind and quality of it, which we are to gather partly out of the answer that
the Scribes and Pharisees make to this people, and partly out of the Titles
that Christ himself gives unto it.

Where first of the Name, and then of the Nature.

You have here then this Monster brought forth; you have it na^^ (...) it is
said to be a Sin of Blas^^ (...) against the Holy Ghost.

Where, by Sin against (...) ^ly Ghost, you must not (...) a Sin directly
and pecu^ (...) ^mitted against the p^ (...) Holy Ghost, being the third in
Trinity: For,

1 In that sense every Sin, whatsoever is committed, is committed against the
Holy Ghost; it being impossible for a man to sin against any one person, but
he must sin against all; or to sin against God, but he must sin against
the Trinity, and by consequent against the Holy Ghost.

2 This were to lift up the Holy Ghost above the two other persons, that a
Sin committed against him only were unpardonable.

3 The Example that we have here makes it plain: For the Sin was directly
committed against the person of Christ. So was Julian the Apostates.

4 It Is a question whether these persons did so much as know that there is an
Holy Ghost; and this (as shall appear afterward) is not a Sin of Ignorance: as
if a man should be so mad as to smite at the King, imagining him to be some
beggar.

By the Holy Ghost then, when we call this Sin the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, by a Rhetorical grace and ornament of speech you are to understand the
Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost: as we say, a man sits or walks in the
Sun, when he sits or walks only in the light of the Sun. Luke 2.25.
In this sense is the Holy Ghost said to be upon Simeon, though essentially and
really he were no more upon him, than upon any other ordinary man in Jerusalem,
but in respect of his gifts and graces only: And thus the Apostles are said by
imposition of hands to give the Holy Ghost. What? Acts 8.17, 18.
the person himself? no; but his gifts. So that by Sin against the Holy
Ghost we are to understand a Sin against the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; as a
man may be said to sin against the King, not only when he smites or reviles his
person; but when he offers despite and disgrace unto any of his royal gifts
and so in like manner against (...) other.

Hence arise these Concl^^^ons concerning this Sin.

The first Conclusion.
This Sin is not ones rising against God or Christ, in regard of some
judgment or punishment present upon him. For judgments and punishments are
not called the Holy Ghost in the word; though they come from God, and by
consequent from the Holy Ghost. Besides, this Sin is a sin against the
Grace of God; which punishments cannot be but by accident. And therefore all
such Sins as arise from a deep sense and apprehension of them, howsoever they
may be great and grievous Sins, fearful and horrible; yet this Sin may
be of an higher nature than so, as shall appear afterward, and of another
kind.

of passion in word or deed against God, or against any part of Gods Truth: as
we see it usual with many so to do in extreme losses, hurts, agonies, pangs
of sickness, and such like.

Julian the Apostata committed not this Sin, when being deadly wounded, he
took of his blood, and flung it up into the air, crying withal, vicisti
Galilaec, Thou have overcome yet, O Galilean, at last.

Julian had not committed this Sin before in many vile and spightfull
speeches against Christ and Christians, it could not so clearly be argued from
that. And yet was that speech so horribly spightfull, that the smiting of him
may seem rather a bare occasion than a cause of it; and he rather shows in it
an obsti^^venesse in the Sin, as if he should said, Now thou have done thy
worst, ^et are thou still but a Galilean.

But herein especially wariness ^f Censure is to be used concerning ^uch as
blaspheme in time of affliction, wound and torment of Conscience, when God, by
reason of some sin, pincheth, and racketh, and tortureth the Conscience in
that manner, that the party breaks forth into strange, and direful, and
outrageous blasphemies: that which God suffers many to fall into, partly by
hiding the merit and desert of Sin, and partly by denying strength to bear
the punishment inflicted. Job 9.17. and 10.16, 18. and 16, 14, 17 and 24.12.
and 30.20, 26.
Job himself was often breaking forth into such passions against God.

And yet this, though it be not that unpardonable Sin, it is notwithstanding
a most fearful Sin, and a kind of renouncing of God, and an holding of him
to be unjust, which he cannot be, but he must be no God. It were an horrible
Sin in a Child to revile and reproach his natural Father for some
over-extreme correction, though natural parents may therein overreach
themselves. But for a Child^ of God to revile and blaspheme, when God shall lay
any Iudgemen^ upon him, and thereby to profess him an unjust God, who can no
more be unjust than not be, when one should the rather study to please God the
more, and argue the horriblenesse of Sin by the horriblenes of punishment, is
much more fearful.

The second Conclusion.
This Sin is committed against the love and favor of God, yea against the
real Love of God in the collation of a benefit and favor. And who cannot see
that this is a Sin of a far higher nature, than to sin against the wrath
and justice of God? When a Child shall rebel against his Father, or a Subject
against his Prince for extremity and rigor, it is a Sin; much more for
justice and equity: but for love and favor and grace to revile them, is most
odious and vile. So to revile and blaspheme God for his judgments and
punishments, which are always just and righteous, is horrible; but to revile
him for his grace and favors is hideous and ghastly.



2 To admonish us to take heed how we abuse any gift or grace of God to the
dishonor of God. For whenever we so do, we are in the highway to this
Sin, and we have our footsteps printed in the path that leads thereunto.

The third Conclusion.
The Sin against the Holy Ghost is not only a Sin against the Love and
favor of God, or against God for his gifts and graces; but even a Sin
against the very gifts and graces themselves: and not a Sin whereby we abuse
those graces and gifts to other ends and purposes; but a Sin whereby we
oppugn, and resist, and disgrace, and wilfully deface the said graces directly
and immediately. For Example; the Father gives his eldest Son money, the Prince
his Subject a Iew^l this Son or this Subject spends this money or Jewel in
gaming, gl^ttony, venery and riot: this is an ^buse both of Father and King;
and of the gifts themselves also, to employ them to such base uses. But this is
a disgrace in a far higher degree, that touches both more directly and
immediately, when they shall offer disgrace to the gift it self, fling it
away, deface it, trample it under their feet, or the like. All of us, when we
turn the graces of God into wantonness and va^ity, into pride and vainglory,
do sin both against God and his graces: But when we offer despite and
indignity unto them of purpose and directly, this is a fearful and horrible
Sin.

1 Note hence the vileness of our natures, and the rebelliousness^ of them,
that do not only h^^^ God, but hate the very gifts and gr^ces also that come
from God. M^^ many times may give a gift that i^ not worthy of any account, ye^
that deserves disgrace: as if a Kin^ should give one of his Nobles i^ way of
reward for some piece o^ service, a piece of bread, or some suc^ trifle. But
there is not the base^ gift that God bestows, but it (...) worthy honor and
esteem, and i^ such as should make us love God the more.

2 When we feel our minds rise and lift up themselves against any ordinance
of God, which he has appointed for our good, it should humble us, and we
should fear the falling into this Sin. And how apt our natures are hereunto,
may appear by our often moiling and repining at the sacred ordinances of God,
as the preaching of the Word, etc. Which are grudgings and spices of this
disease.

Secondly, out of this Name is to be enquired, whether the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, be a Sin against those gifts that are in the person himself that
commits the Sin, or in the person of some other.

The answer is, that it is a Sin partly against the gifts in themselves, and
partly against the same in others: it is committed against both. A man would
never in such a manner despite the Holy Ghost in himself, if he perceived it
not in another; neither would he ever have despighted it in another, except it
had been in himself. For there being in such wicked persons as these are, an
inbred hatred unto all things that do but savor of the Spirit of God; when
being after some sort possessed with it themselves, they see others also to be
made partakers of it, this is it that makes their hearts to boil and broile
within, and causes them to break forth into this blasphemy. And this is
confirmed by our Example in this place. These Scribes and Pharisees had
received the Holy Ghost, that is, the divine Illumination of the Holy Ghost:
they saw with the very Eye of their Conscience, that Jesus the Son of the
Virgin Mary was that Messiah, that Christ, that son of David; they saw it by
that divine beam of light that streamed from his divine works: this light was
odious and loathsome unto them; they hated and detested it above all things:
But when they perceived it to spread it self unto others, and to be
entertained and embraced of others, that made them in this manner to blaspheme
the same.

Hence arise these Conclusions concerning this Sin.

The first Conclusion.
That man commits not the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that hates,
revileth, and persecuteth, though with the highest malice, any gift or grace of
God in another, if that gift or grace be not in some measure in himself. For
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, is a Sin against a gift received by the
person that commits the Sin, and not only against one received by another;
but both do necessarily concur, the one is not without the other.

Paul himself before his conversion, though he was a might persecuter of all
Christians, and went from place to place, panting and breathing after Christian
blood, and blaspheming Christ; yet forasmuch as he was not illuminated by the
Holy Ghost, but did it in mere and gross ignorance, he committed not this
Sin. Hencee also it follows, that all the blasphemies and revilings of
those that are not contrarily persuaded in their Consciences, are not this
Sin. Neither had this Blasphemy of the Scribes and Pharisees, how vile and
odious soever, been that unpardonable Sin, if they had not been illuminated,
and had spoken as they thought. Neither is it any question, but that Paul, that
had so deep an hand in persecuting Christians, had as deep a tongue in
blaspheming Christ, 1. Tim. 1. 1, 16.
for they eve^ use to go together: and yet obtaining pardon, it is thereby
apparen^ that he sinned not this unpardonable Sin.

2 Further this shows the difficulty of judging this Sin. Those that do
commit it, of all other least judge themselves for it. And it is a wonderful
hard thing to judge of it in another. There must be a concurrence of many
circumstances to it, as shall after appear. I may easily judge when a man is a
blasphemer and a persecutor; but to judge whether he blasphemeth and
persecuteth as Saul did, or as these Pharisees, is hard. And we must take
heed, not only how we do headily sh^t Heaven-gates against our selves, but
against others. It is a fleshly and a carnal delight, not a spiritual, that
is taken at the consideration of persecutors their future destruction.

The second conclusion.
Those that love, nourish, cherish, admire, extol, or reward any Grace in
another, that in respect of themselves they hate, scorn and deride, do not
commit this Sin. For this is a Sin (as appears, not by our former grounds
only, but by our Example) that they which commit, commit not against the Holy
Ghost in themselves alone, but in others, and more against that in others than
in themselves. For their gall bursteth not indeed, until they see that in
another which they have in themselves.

graces: whereas he that committe^ this blasphemy, would never endu^ his Child
to bless that which h^ does so di^c^ully curse. Would the Scribes and
P^arisees have endur^ their C^ildren to have professed (...) blessed Christ,
whom themselv^ thus blasphemed?

The third Conclusion.
He that in word or deed sinne^ against that gift and grace of t^ Holy Ghost
in another, which (...) also in himself, and yet hates n^ the gift in
himself, commits not the unpardonable Sin.

because he would have the ^lory of such a grace in himself ^one, does not
commit this Sin; ^cause in this Sin, a man hates (...) Grace, as in others,
so in him^^fe.

The fourth Conclusion.
If a man do therefore spite and ^aspheme a gift and grace of the spirit in
another, because it is not in ^mselfe (as many do) it is not this ^inne. For
this is a Sign that he ^oth not malice the gift, but the ^erson.

A third point to be enquired into ^oncerning this Name, is against that kind
of gifts the Sin against ^e Holy Ghost is committed. For ^ery good thing may
be called a ^ift of the Holy Ghost, because very good thing is a gift of God,
^ho is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; our health, our strength, our ^ctivity,
beauty, etc. But yet these ^e not those gifts that are called the Holy Ghost in
Gods Word. But the Word of God endited by the Ho^^ Ghost, has appropriated
this na^^ unto certain special gifts, not (...) the Body, but of the Mind. A
m^^ that having bin sick, has recove^^ his health, is not said to have recei^^
the Holy Ghost; though the he^^ he has received be a gift of (...) Holy
Ghost. A man that has (...) an hand or an ear, cannot in Di^^nity be said to
have lost the H^^^ Ghost, though both of them be (...) gifts. So of Beauty;
and of (...) Actions proceeding from these ^^dily gifts. He that has the gift
running, of wrestling, of any ot^^ like exercise, should abuse the H^ Ghost: if
he should say that ^ overranne such a man by the gift the Holy Ghost, where
the Scri^ture has curiously affected, appr^priated and enclosed a Name, (...)
must not make it common. (...) Name Church is general, (...). Act. 19.32, 39,
40.
sign^ing any company gathered to ^ther. But the Word of God havi^ appropriated
it to a company such persons, as are assembled for (...) ^erformance of holy
duties, it were ^rosse prophanensse to call a com^ny of Artificers or Tradesmen
^^eting to consult of common bu^nesses, or to make merry together, Church. The
gifts of the Holy ^^ost therefore are to be understood ^f the mind of man. And
surely (...) the good gifts of man's mind, as (...), reason, justice, mercy,
know^dge, etc. are the gifts of the Ho^^ Ghost; but yet all of them are ^^t
these gifts that are called the ^oly Ghost. For Example; He that ^^ch learned
Arithmeticke, Astro^^my, the Tongues; he that is a ^eat Statesman, and knows
all the ^olicies of all Commonwealths ^^nnot in these be said to have the ^oly
Ghost.

But to come to the point, the gift ^^t is here meant, is that supernatu^^^
Illumination of the Holy ^^ost, wherewith he illightneth (...) mind with the
knowledge of ^^e Gospel, or any point or parcel ^ereof: And the Sin against
it, ^hen men are so mad and furious against the light that shines (...) bring
Salvation, that they do w^lies in them to darken and ext^guish it, and to put
out both the own eyes, and the eyes of oth^^ that they might not see it. The
^^cellency of the Gift argues the ^nesse of the Sin. The bo^ light, and
bodily eyesight is ^^cellent gift, to travellours espec^ that go dangerous
ways for (...) and pits, etc. How much more ^cellent is that spiritual Light,
(...) directs men here traveling (...) infinite dangers without it
una^dable, to the place of their ere^^^ abode? It were an horrible vill^ for a
man to put out both his o^^ and other men's bodily eyes; b^ put out their
spiritual eyes, where of necessity they must needs ^^nally miscarry, is even a
villainy villainies, of all villainies the (...) villainous.

The Conclusion then hence ^sing is this, That they that sco^^deride, contemn,
blaspheme (...) bodily or natural gift and grace God in man, though never so
spight^^lly and maliciously, commit not ^herein this Sin. This Sin is a
^^ntempt of higher graces and ^^fts.

Lastly, our Savior calls it a ^^asphemy: Which appellation will ^o give
some further light and in^ght into this Sin. To blaspheme, ^^nerally,
signifies to hurt one in lord or Speech. But specially it is ^^en for a
spightfull and malicious ^^ling upon, reviling and disgra^^g one. To blaspheme
the Holy ^^ost, then, is openly to rail upon, ^d revile and give foul words
of (...) Holy Ghost; that is, of the Truth (...) God reviled by the Holy Ghost.

Hence gather we these Conclusi^s concerning this Sin.

The first Conclusion.
This Sin is not committed in ^ought alone, but in word also, or that which
is proportionable un^^it; to wit, writing, or other such ^gnes as may testify
and bring ones mind to another. For words are nothing but notes and signs of
tho^ things that are in our minds, wherb^ we make known our notions, desir^^
and affections to others; writing, ^n other kind of Signs, are the signe^ of
words. Now there are two so^ of Signs, one ambiguous and co^jecturall, another
certain and evident. And there is some differen^ between ambiguous or
uncerta^^ signs, and words; for some will n^ speak in words that which they
(...) show by some signs and tokens no^withstanding. Many will she many signs
and tokens, and du^^ shows of discontent and of profaneness, which they will
not ye^ show in words. But there are some and certain signs and tokens, and
of such it is here meant.

Hence it appears that this is n^ smothered and dissembled Sin that lies
lurking in the secrets of the heart or soul, or that dares not (...) show his
head. There are many gross and wicked imaginations i^ man's mind, as also
affections and desires, which himself also nouri^heth and feeds within
himself, but he will not suffer to go abroad; yea for the further hiding of
them, many will in words deny, renounce, swear, forswear and abjure them. But
this is none of those modest and shame faced Sins, that blush to look a man in
the face; but an impudent, ^hamelesse, brazen faced Sin, who ^^then in her
pride, when most gaze upon her. This Sin makes no dumb shows, clips not the
Kings language, but speaks plainly and ^^eadly.

The second Conclusion.
To call in question the blessed Truth (though against Conscience) to wrangle
and dispute against it with some kind of heat, is not to commit this Sin,
though it be a Sin. For this is not properly to blaspheme; which is more than
simply to reason against, dispute and oppose.

Yet such as pride themselves, and whose wits glory to maintain e^rour, and to
sophisticate the holy and divine Truth of God, had nee^ to beware lest they
pass from the one to the other.

The third Conclusion.
A simple denial of any divi^^ Truth, even of the highest, ev^^ of the
Trinity, of Christ, of God of the Gospel, of Salvation by Christ, of the
Resurrection, of H^^ven, of Hell, is not this Sin. For though these in a
general sense be^ Blasphemies and horrible Sins; yet take Blasphemy in the
proper sense, which is here meant, for a railing and reviling speech, and it
will not hold in a simple denial; it being one thing to deny and reject, and
another to revile and rail.

This is clearly set before our eyes in this Example. They do not barely and
simply deny Christ to be the Messiah; but adjoyne unto the same odious, vile
and contumelious Speeches. So that the Sin against the Holy Ghost is a
greater Sin than the bare denial ^f God. If this had been the que^tion
between the Jews and the Pharisees, whether Jesus were the Messiah, and the
Pharisees had either denied their Conclusion or Argument, and gone no further,
they ^^d not had this Sin. For thus ^^e in some cases of trial, and fur^her
than this may even the children (...) God go. Peter denied Christ, ^^d against
his Conscience he deni^d him; yet sinned he not this Sin, out received mercy.
Much less do Pagans and Infidels, Turks and Barbarians, that ignorantly do
the ^ame.

The fourth Conclusion.
A denial of any, even the grea^st divine Truth, that is, though ^ith
protestation, swearing, for^earing, cursing and abjuration, is ^ot this Sin.
For though every ^aine Oath, even for the Truth, be ^ome kind of Blasphemy;
yet to ratify and confirm error, yea the grossest errors, with oaths and
a^jurations, are not Blasphemies (...) strict and proper sense.

Mat. 26.74.
Hence Peter, who did not onel^ deny, but forswear Christ, yea anathematised
himself if he knew Christ, was notwithstanding free from this Sin, though
he sinne^ against both knowledge and Co^s^ience. So that he that commi^^
blasphemy against the Holy Gho^^ commits a greater Sin than (...) does, that
denies and renounce^ and forsweares Christ.

By this also it appears, that the simple Sin of Apostasy is not the Sin
against the Holy Ghost. For he is an Apostata, that having professed Christ and
the Gospel, does after deny and renounce the same; but that a man may do, and
yet not commit this Sin.

The third part. Of the Nature of this Sin.
HItherto of the Name of this Sin. Now follows the Sin it self, which,
duly weighed and scanned, will direct us ^ndeed to the true knowledge of the
Sin against the Holy Ghost. For the Sin here committed being that Sin;
the true description of the Sin here committed, will describe the Sin
against the Holy Ghost.

The Sin then here committed (as appears by all the Circumstan^es of this
History) is an open, con^^dent, and desperate opposition un^o the public
profession of the ^ospell; wherein contrary to know^^dge and conscience, they
freely, wilfully, spightfully, and maliciously rail against and revile the
same.

1 That this their Sin was a sin of Opposition, appears plainly. For in the
committing of it, they directly opposed themselves to these Jews that
professed Christ, being touched with his miracles.

2 That it was an opposition to the Gospel, it is apparent. For they opposed
to this Article of the Gospel, that Jesus was the Messiah.

3 That it was an opposition to the profession of the Gospel, appears; in
that it did arise upon the peoples profession.

4 That it was an open opposition, appears. For it was in the face, presence,
and hearing of the multitude.

5 That it was confident and desperate, appears by the tenor of all the words.

6 That it was contrary to conscience and knowledge, appears both by our
Savior Christ's conviction, and the monstrous absurdities that they were driven
unto therein.

7 That they did it freely and wilfully, appears by the tenor of the Text.

8 That spightfully and maliciously, is apparent: For they spit out their gall
against Christ in the most odious manner that may be.

And this may serve to show the detestablenesse of this Sin, and the ^orrible
impiety of them that commit the same.

Now it remains that from hence we gather the description in general of the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, which must needs be the same with ^his.

The Sin against the Holy Ghost then is an open and malicious opposition made
unto the professors of the Gospel for the Gospels sake, wherein, contrary to
knowledge and conscience, a man does freely, wil^ly, desperately, spightfully
re^^le the Author and Professors ^hereof.

This according to the judgment ^f most Divines, is the nature and quality of
this Sin: For the better understanding whereof; we will,

1 Explain the words;

2 Prove the Truth; and

3 Show the horriblenesse of the Sin.

1 It is an Opposition: which is not a bare conceit, imagination, affirmation
or assertion. For though these be where there is an opposition; yet these may
be without opposition. But opposition is when a man of purpose sets himself
against another. For Example; a man in arms on horseback with spear in hand,
though he ride and run, and shake his spear never so much, yet except there
be a person, to whom he opposes himself, he cannot in so doing be said to
make opposition; and yet he that makes opposition, uses no other kinds of
motion. So that admit a man were so wicked as to revile and blaspheme alone by
himself; yet such a reviling and blaspheming is no opposition. Again,
Opposition is a mutual confronting of two Opposites, when the one sets it
self against the other. For he cannot be said to make opposition, that go^^th
or holds with another, or that pursues one that flies away. This Sin
therefore, being a sin of Opposition, is not committed with those that are of
the same wicked mind, or that do not hold any contrary part.

2 An open or public Opposition, is that which is not only proclaimed, but
acted before the faces of men. It is a solemn opposition in the presence of
others. So that it is as a solemn combat.

3 It is also confident, not a fearful and timorous opposition, but with all
resolution and boldness. Not such an Opposition; as when a ^an is afraid of
himself, or runs ^way from his own shadow. So that the Fool that says in
his heart, ^here is no God, Psalm. 14.1.
but dares not say it (...) words, and that boldly too, even ^o the faces of
them that hold the contrary, is not guilty of this ^inne.

4 It Is against the professors of the Gospel, the holy and religious men of
God, who in a special manner represent God: these are the persons that in this
Sin they oppose themselves against.

5 For the Gospels sake: this is the very cause of their Opposition, not for
any other by respect.

6 Wherein they revile, not the persons so much as the Gospel, especially
professed and embraced.

7 Freely; without force or constraint.

8 Against knowledge and conscience; not in simplicity and Ignorance.

9 Wilfully; against all good means to the contrary.

10 Desperately; contemning all the mischiefs that may follow.

11 Maliciously; from an heart in a special manner set on fire by Satan
against God and all goodness

Now that this Sin is such as i^ here described.

1 This description is agreeable to our precedent, and to other precedents; to
wit, that of Julian the Apostata, etc.

2 This is such a Sin, as is no^ possible for any that has the least degree
of grace and sanctification in him to commit.

3 They that commit the Sin here described, are as far from all grace and
goodness, as a man can imagine; neither can the wit of man imagine an higher
wickedness.

The greatness of it may thus appear.

1 Not to love or respect the professors of the Gospel is a great Sin, and
an injury unto Christ, yea, a kind of enmity unto him.

For. 1 They that so do break the special commandment of the Gospel, John
13.34, 35.
a new Commandment that Christ gave unto his Disciples, and in them to all
that look to be saved by him, that they love one another, as Christ has
loved them.

2 There are no persons more lovely than they if men had eyes to see the same.
For they are not only sacramentally, but really washed from the guilt of all
their S^^nes; they are new Creatures, born ag^^ne of the Spirit of God; they
are the living members of Jesus Christ; they are quickened by the Spirit of God;
they are heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, Temples of the Holy Ghost; the
Sons and Children of God. What greater or more admirable matters can there be
deserving love and admiration than these? So that not to love the true
professors of the Gospel, is to profess a contempt, and a light regard of
Regeneration, of the Spirit of God, of the blood of Christ, of Christ, of
Heaven.

3 No persons deserve more love than they, if men were not wonderfully
besotted. The Husband of the Wife, Semen sanctum statumen terrae. Isa. 6.13.
the Father of the Child cannot deserve so much.

For 1 Under God they are the very pillars and foundations of the Earth. It Is
for their sake that the Earth endures; when their number is fulfilled, the
World shall have an end.

2 They are the causes of all the blessings that are in the places where they
live: They are men that love all, hurt none, are ready to do good unto all.
Their prayers pull down from God many special blessings upon the very wicked.
They desire earnestly, and seek after the conversion and salvation of all men.
They rejoice in the good of all, they sorrow for the hurt of any; wherein can
there be greater desert?

But they that commit this Sin, do not only not affect them, but set
themselves against them; are opposites and adversaries unto them. And this is a
greater degree, to be professed enemies unto professors of the Gospel, than
to be bare contemners of them; yea, this must needs argue much wickedness in
the heart.

For 1 All true professors of the Gospel are honest men, and good men. And for
men to be professed enemies and opposites to honest and good men must needs
argue a wicked heart.

2 A man cannot oppose himself, and be an enemy unto a true pro^essor of the
Gospel, but he must needs be an enemy, and oppose himself some way or other
to the Gospel it self, and to Christ. For these are so near united the one
to the other, that one cannot touch the one, but he must withal touch the
other.

3 He that stands in opposition to the professors of the Gospel, cannot but be
in league and amity with the enemies thereof.

2 For a man to hate the Children of God in regard of their personal
infirmities, or in regard of some injuries received at their hands were a sin
grievous and inexcusable. For besides that it is evil and unwarrantable upon
such grounds, to hate any whomsoever; there are those lovely parts and graces
in all good Christians that may well more than countervaile and weigh down any
such wants and imperfections, as may be in any of them, and such wrongs and
injuries as by occasion thereof they may offer unto any.

But to hate them (as in this case) not in regard of any such special quarrel
against them, or in respect of any private injury and wrong received from them,
but to dislike (yea to spite and malign) them for their very profession; it is
not so much to hate Christ for them, as to hate Christ himself, and
Christianity in them, and to hate them for Christ.

3 For a Turk or a Pagan that never knew better (out of a love unto, and zeal
of that way and worship that he has ever been trained up in) to oppose himself
in such sort to the professors of true piety, were a fearful course, and
likely to bring upon the head of such a one, a far greater than ordinary
^easure of Gods wrath; the certainty whereof, by many dreadful judgments
inflicted upon heathen persecutors of his people, God has sealed up in sundry
ages at several times.

But for one that himself has acknowledged Christ, been enlightened by the
Spirit of Christ, convinced in Conscience of the truth of the Gospel, yea, and
outwardly made prof^ssion of obedience thereunto; for such a one, I say,
spightfully to oppose himself against the professors of that which he has
formerly been instructed in, possessed with, convinced of, and professed to
embrace; what is it but wittingly, and wilfully contrary to knowledge and
conscience to go out of Christ's camp, to turn head against him, and to wage
war against those that adhere still unto him? which is yet far more fearful
than the former.

4 For a traitorous wretch, having so gone out from his Sovereign, to go on
obstinately in his rebellious courses, without any thought of repenting or
returning again to him, neglecting all such courses whereby pardon might be
procured and favor regained; and that when opportunity of atchieving it, were
often offered unto him, were a very damnable and desperate course.

But in this kind the case is yet far worse than so: For those that commit
this Sin, not only refuse to use any means of recovery, but even
contumeliously reject Gods mercy tendered unto them in the Gospel; tread the
pardon it self as it were under their sect; trample upon Christ the person
that purchased it for them; despite the Spirit of God, that revea^ed, and that
should seal it up to them, and maliciously impugn and oppose those that
either have accepted, or make show to accept of it. And what can there be
imagined more hideous, or more hellish than this is?

The fifth part. Of the Conviction of this Sin.
HItherto of the Conception and the Birth, of the Name and the Nature of this
Sin. Now the fifth point follows, which is the Conviction of it; wherein our
Savior labors to show, that the Blasphemy they utte^ed in this open and
shameful manner was against Conscience, and of malice and despite; and that
therein they did openly rebel against God, and set themselves against the
^ingdome of God.

They laid to our Savior Christ's charge, that (as if he were an Arch-Magitian,
or Conjurer, or a Practi^ioner of the black Art) he wrought ^^ose great and
mavelous works, which he did, by the power and help of Beelzebub the prince
of devils.

Our Savior on the other side:

1 By reasons disproves their blasphemous assertion.

2 By other reasons proves the contrary truth; to wit, that what he did, he did
not by the power of Satan, but by the power of Gods Spirit.

Where before we descend to particulars, let us make some general use of this
practice of our Savior. He pronounces not the sentence of condemnation for
this Sin, before he have by evident reason convinced them to be guilty of it.
It is against the Law of Love and Charity to judge and condemne^ person of any
crime, without j^^ reason and good cause. And the greater the crime is, the
greater mo^^ our presumptions be, before we must condemn. Before therefo^^ we
lay to the charge of any the high and horrible Sin, it behov^ us to be able
by sound and sufficie^^ reason to convince them first of i^ Accusers have ever
been esteemed odious, except there have bin some just cause; much more false
Accusers: and the greater the crimes are, the more odious they are, that accuse
any falsely of them. It must therefore needs be most odious, to accuse one
falsely of such a crime without evident Conviction, as is of so high and heinous
quality as this is.

And as this is a great Sin against others, so is it no less Sin against our
selves; especially in laying to our own charge this Sin above all other. For
howsoever in other sins, I may do another more hurt than my self; yet if I
could lay this Sin to the charge, though of the greatest innocent in the
World, I should not do him so much hurt, as in laying it upon false surmises
and grounds upon my self. For another Soul is never the worse for my false
judgment. But in this case especially, if we feed and nourish such conceits,
many direful and dreadful Effects will follow in our own Souls. For,

1 He that accuses and condemns himself of this Sin, he thrusts God out
of his room, and sits himself therein, when without warrant from the Word,
and direction from those that have better insight in the same, he takes
authority to arraigne, judge, and condemn himself, when he is not his own,
but Gods, to judge and condemn. Men must assent to Gods judgment and sentence
revealed in his Word, and measure their judgments and condemnations by it; not
judge or condemn of themselves. As a man, except he have commission from God,
may not judge or condemn another to a bodily death; so much less may he
judge or condemn himsele to eternal death. We have power to deserve Hell; but
we have no power to condemn our selves to Hell.

2 He that yields to this Temptation, what does he in effect but give
himself to the Devil, acknowledging himself of right to belong to him, and
not to God, and to be actually a subject of his Kingdom. For he that shall
pass such a condemnation as this against himself, knows that there are but
two spiritual Kingdoms, he knows that the Kingdom of God does not belong
to such a Sinner; and that therefore he must needs belong to the other. Now
were it not a great presumption to give away a Soul, which Christ has
reckoned at so high a price, that he has purchased it with his own precious
blood, without a commission from God.

3 He does what he can immediately to plunge his Soul into Hellfire. For how
can he choose ^ut be possessed with hellish ago^ies and torments, when he
shall ^^dge himself past all hope of mer^^? And if it be a sin for a ^an,
be he never so vile a wretch, ^^ cast his body into the fire or ^^ter, or to
set but his Neigh^ours or his own house on fire; ^^w much more then to fling
his Soul into such spiritual torments?

4 He strikes dead, or casts into a swound all the graces of God in him;
takes away their spirit, their life, their motion. For this course it quenches
the light of Faith, cools the heat of Love, kills the heart of Hope, and
makes a man wholly unapt to do God any good service. For how can he that
despaires of mercy, pray unto God? What good will it do a man with tears to
confess his sins to God, when he knows and assures himself he shall be
damned for them? What heart can he have to think on God, when he shall judge
that all those blessings, that God has bestowed upon him, shall but work to
his further condemnation?

5 Though it be most certain that they that are afraid that they have
committed this Sin, neither ever have, nor ever shall commit this Sin, so
long as they continue so affected; yet to admit of such conceits, is the next
way in the world to bring a man to the next door in committing it. For as
nothing is more powerful to beget love and obedience, than a persuasion of our
Salvation: so on the contrary, nothing is more effectual to beget in us a
spite and ^alice to Christ and the Gospel, than a persuasion of our dam^ation.

Now before that the Evangelist ^^teth down the Arguments of Christ's
Conviction, he premiseth ^^is, that Christ knowing their Thoughts, said unto
them. And by says he so, when in all like^^hood he heard their words, and his
answer confuted them? By is it should seem that the Sin ^^ainst the Holy
Ghost, is commit^^ in Thought rather than in lord.

Nay: by this it appears that it not committed in word only, in thought also.
But that they (...) thoughts breaking forth in ^^rds also, appears, not only
by the Name Blasphemy; but by the words of our Savior, Whosoever shall speak
against, etc. verse 32. Neither (reserving due reverence unto them that may
have better reason to judge otherwise) do I take this to be meant of those
thoughts by which together with their words they committed this Sin, which
were rather of affection; but of some other thoughts of judgment. They made no
doubt of this in their minds, that the Devils that were cast out by Christ,
suffered manifest violence; and that they were not cast out by any voluntary
compact or colorable force, but by a violent power and strength: upon which
our Savior works. For else his discourse and reasoning that he here uses
wit^ them, had been vain. For he take it as granted, that Satan had violence
offered; that his expulsion was by force, etc. This then is the meaning, that
Christ not only hearing their blasphemous word^ but knowing also the very
secre^ Imaginations of their hearts, goes about to confound them, and by
evidence of Reason grounded upon their own Thoughts and Imagi^ations to
convince them of a spiteful and malicious blasphemy.

The Use hereof.

1 This Sin shows how hard (...) is to convince a man of this Sin. ^ee their
words and deeds never so ^pightfull and malicious, yet you ^^all never make
them acknowledge (...), except you deal with their ^houghts, and wrestle and
strive ^ith them. Else what need Christ ^ave meddled here with their ^houghts?
If he had gone no ^^rther than their words, one would ^^ink he should have
matter enough against them; but he is feign to go ^^ther. And therefore though
a ^an could dive into the deepest ^^crets of ones Soul that has com^itted
this Sin, though he could ^ll as it were his heart out of his ^^dy; though
he could show him (...) the secrets of it as it were in a ^asse, how his words
and affections are set against his knowledge and conscience; yet it will not
serve the turn. Christ had more advantage of these wretches than we have, and
could have gathered more out of their wicked words than we can; and yet
notwithstanding he deals not with words only, but with thoughts, and yet
cannot bring them to acknowledge this Sin; though it is likely he pricked
their Conscience with it, and in it convinced them of it.

2 In that our Savior deals thus with their Thoughts and the secrets of their
Soul, and withal is feign to beat upon them with so many reasons to prove
them guilty of such a Sin: this shows the property of those that have
committed this Sin, not to acknowledge it when it is committed, much less to
be grieved and troubled that they have committed it, So that so far are they
from acknowledging it themselves, th^^ though Christ Jesus himself should lay
it to their charge, yet they would not yield to it. And therefore this is an
undoubted sign of one that has not committed this Sin, to fear, and accuse
himself of the committing of it. For,

1 This is the property of Sinners to hide and conceal, and not to acknowledge
a Sin. And the greater men's Sins are, the loather are they to acknowledge
them. But this is the greatest, Sin that is.

2 The greater Sinner, the harder Heart, and the more senseless of Sin: the
harder heart, the further from remorse.

3 This is a Sin of malice and spite; and we know a man will rather break his
heart than acknowledge such a Sin.

4 They that commit this Sin ^re most graceless: But there is ^uch grace in
this, to fear and sus^ect our selves in this Sin.

Now I come to the particulars ^herein Christ opposes unto their ^lasphemy;
not so much laboring therein their conversion as their conviction, that from
it he might pass to their sentence of condemnation.

The question that Christ disputes, is, whether he did cast out Devils through
Beelzebub.

The first Argument whereby he confutes it, and by consequent convinces them of
furious spite and malice, is this:

If I through the power of Beelzebub have cast out these Devils, then is the
kingdom of Satan divided, and at war in it self.

But the kingdom of Satan is not divided, and at war in it self.

Therefore I cast them not our through the power of Beelzebub.

The first part is true, except they should imagine that herein the Devils
played one with another, and in mockery or some policy made opposition one unto
another. Which howsoever in words they had been likely to have done, if they
had had so much cunning then, as some in our times now have; yet in their
Conscience, which our Savior smites at, they could ^^t, because it could not
possibly suggest unto them the least color of a reason, why the Devils should,
as it were upon a Stage play their parts in that manner: but they discerned a
manifest enmity between that Spirit by which Christ did this work, and those
that were cast out; and therefore Christ proves it not, but lets it pass.

Whence learn we this practical method of Christ, in dealing with desperate
Sinners, not so much to strive to stop their mouths, as to touch their
conscience, and therefore not to weary our selves with endless wranglings and
brawles, as if it were possible to stay their thoughts: It Is enough if we can
convince their conscience; which when we have done, let us leave them and their
Conscience together to decide the controversy. If men could observe but in
some measure this Rule, the World had not bin so full of endless controversies
as it is. Christ in this controversies go's no further then so: as if he had
said; you see and hear, you Scribes and Phari^^^, and your consciences tell
you; and though you be impudent enough to deny a manifest truth, yet you
cannot gainsay this; that there is between that Spirit which I use, and those
that are cast out, a perfect hatred and jarre, and a most fiery dissension. And
therefore if my Spirit (as you spightfully and blasphemously affirm against
knowledge and Conscience) be Beelzebub; then is there hatred, division, war,
tumult, and civil dissension amongst the Devils, one seeking the ruin and
overthrow of another, and laboring to cut the throat of another. This
proposition Christ leaves, though it might be cavilled at; and a man may dwell
all the days of his life in clearing of such a proposition as this, if he
would go about to clear all oppositions and cavils.

He passes to the second part, which is this; But the Kingdom of Hell is not
divided against it self: as if he should say; But it is too gross and absurd
for any, that are masters of common wit and reason, to imagine, that Hell is up
in arms against it self, and that there is deadly feud amongst the Devils of
Hell, that they war and fight in this manner, as you are eyewitnesses of, one
against another among themselves.

This our Savior Christ proves by a short reason. For then Satan's Kingdom
could not stand and remain, but should be near unto an end. For that is the
state of all Kingdoms rent with civil dissensions. So that by this reason,
either they must herein speak maliciously and against Conscience, or else they
must of necessity maintain the former absurdities. And they were no doubt
special positions of the Pharisees, which Christ here frames his Argument of.

The second Argument is thus conceived.

By that Spirit, which your Children cast out Devils by, do I cast out Devils.

But your Children cast not out Devils through Beelzebub.

Therefore neither do I cast them out by him.

In this Argument there is some doubt what is meant by their Children. The best
of our Interpreters hold it to be meant flatly of our Savior Christ's
Disciples. But I must crave leave to dissent with reverence from them: For, 1
there is no more reason to call his Disciples their Children, than himself.

2 In holding that Christ cast out Devils through Beelzebub, they must needs
hold that his Disciples must do it by the same Spirit. For it were senseless
to imagine, that the Disciple should do it by the Spirit of God, and the
Master by the Devil.

3 By Children are not unusually meant Scholars and Disciples. Hence by the
Children or Sons of the Prophets, are meant those that sat at their feet to
learn: as Paul might be called one of Gamaliels Children or Sons. And
therefore I take it, that Christ means it of some of the Pharisees own
disciples and scholars, that were no professed Disciples of Christ: which, as
it seems, in those times had special Gifts to cast out Devils, for the grace
and countenance and confirmation of the true Religion, which the Pharisees
sitting in Moses chair, professed and taught: And of these, I Am persuaded,
Christ speaks in this place.

4 He speaks of some near unto them, when he says, They shall be your
Judges: meaning such as they could not with any honesty appeal from; whereas
they might from Christ's Disciples.

5 Some such are mentioned, Mar. 9.38. Luke 9.49.
whom the Disciples found casting out Devils.

6 Except this be the meaning, I am not able to discern what force in the world
there should be in this argument. For any man may see that our Savior takes it
as granted, that the Pharisees did hold and maintain, that the dispossession
that their Children used was the act of God, and done by the finger of God. And
if it be so understood, there is great force in the Reason, and it is a
stronger than the former. And this is the sense of it.

If I cast out Devils to no other end and purpose in substance, than many of
your honored and renowned Scholars do, then I do it not by Beelzebub.

But I do it to no other end than they, but to confirm the same doctrine and
faith.

Therefore I do it not by Beelzebub.

The proposition is evident: for else their ends would have been as contrary as
their Spirits.

The assumption no doubt was as evident. For Christ wrought these Miracles, to
confirm no other Religion or Doctrine, than what in substance the Exorcists
did, set down in Moses and the Prophets, howsoever there were some difference
in the manner. So that if the Miracles of Christ were as effectual against the
kingdom of Satan, as their Exorcists were, and as power^ull to confirm the
Kingdom of God, and had no other apparent ^se; this Argument must needs be
very good: (howsoever in their ^ormes there were some diffe^^ces:) ^or is it
not absurd to imagine that Christ should use the very same^hing against Satan
that the Jews ^id; and to the very same end, to ^onfirme the Kingdom of God,
and yet do it by a contrary Spirit, though it were done after a diverse
^anner?) Suppose two persons set upon some notorious Thief, the ^ne smites him
with a Sword, the ^ther with a Pistol, and both have ^o other end but to save
men from ^bbing: now were it not absurd, that for the very act doing, the one
^f them should be justified, and the ^her condemned as a friend and ^elwiller
to Thieves and Rob^rs?

The third Argument is this:

If I in your Conscience cast out Devils by the power only of Gods Spirit; then
have you spightfully blasphemed the Holy Ghost in avowing this publicly, that
I did it by Beelzebub.

But I, in your own Conscience, have ^^st out Devils only by the power of
Gods Spirit.

You have therefore in so saying spightfully blasphemed the Holy Ghost.

The proposition is clear, and cannot be denied.

The Assumption he thus proves.

That Spirit that offers violence unto the Devil, and by strong hand casts
him against his will out of his strong holds and possessions, is only the
Spirit of God.

But you in your Conscience know that that Spirit whereby I cast out Devils, is
no other than the Spirit of God.

And by consequent you herein wilfully fight against God and his Kingdom,
which in my works have shined before you, and have offered themselves unto you.

The Assumption he sets forth by a plain and familiar comparison; ^^sembling
that Spirit to a strong and mighty man, that goes into another man's house, and
by force in ^espight of him binds him and robs ^im.

The fourth Argument is contai^ed in this Sentence, He that is not ^ith me, is
against me, etc. and is ^^us framed:

If the Spirit of God were not ^ith me, and did not build with ^e in the work
that I labor in, then ^ould the Holy Ghost set himself against me, and
destroy whatsoever do:

But the Holy Ghost is not a^^inst me, nor destroys what build.

The Spirit of God therefore is ^^th me, and builds with me in ^y work.

And this Argument must needs unanswerable, if it be considered, that if Christ
had been an Imposto^ indeed, and a deceiver, he had bee^ the most abominable
Blaspheme^ upon Earth: and exercising these tricks only in the Church, to pu^
men from Religion; the Spirit o^ God would never endure it.

All these Considerations the^ laid together, it is too too apparen^ that these
Scribes and Pharisees di^ most spightfully, and malitiousl^ revile and
blaspheme the Hol^ Ghost. And thus you see how palpably our Savior Christ, by
stron^ and evident Arguments, convince^ them thereof.

Now this is the general an^ main use of this point; To imita^^ our Savior
Christ.

1 In judging of the true nature of this Sin in general.

2 In being able to detect it i^ special, in those persons that sha^ commit
it. Without the former man cannot do the latter: and wit^out the latter a man
has no use (...) the former.

Now the knowledge of the Nature of this Sin has these uses.

1 It serves to show us the horrible corruption of our Nature, what a monstrous
Rebellion lies and lurks in us; if we should be left to our selves, like
enough to break forth from us. Who would ^hinke it possible, that there should
be so much corruption in man, as to all into such a Sin against the Savior of
the World?

2 It serves to teach us, that Gods mercy is mingled with wisdom; that it is
not a mad or a foolish ^ercy; that he is not one that will ^^st his mercy away
hand over ^^ad; that he cannot endure to have ^is grace and mercy wilfully and
^alitiously abused.

3 It serves especially to comfort those who are afflicted in Consci^nce for
their Sin, and are by Sa^^n persuaded that they have com^^tted this Sin;
who in this case ^n have no comfort but by the ^nowledge of the Nature of it.

4 It serves to stir us up to thankfulness, that God has so stinted us, and
kept in the Corruption of our Nature so far forth, that we have not fallen
into it.

The knowledge how to detect it, serves for these uses:

1 That we may not labor in vain, in endeavoring to cure that which is
remediless, by casting of holy things to Dogs, Mat. 7.6. 1 John 5.16.
and praying for such.

2 That both we may our selves, and be a means that others also may fly from
them, and avoid them.

3 That the certain consideration of their end and confusion may lift up our
heads above those evils that they are wont to inflict upon the Church and
Children o^ God, and the professors of the Truth and Gospel of Christ.

Now for the detection of th^^ Sin in those that have committe^ it, it is
thought to be hard, yea impossible. But indeed the hardnes^ grows more from
our Ignoran^^ of the Sin, than from the diff^culty of it otherwise. For it
should ^eeme that God writes no Sin so ^vidently upon the foreheads of those
that commit it as this. For,

1. It Is committed in word as ^ell as in thought.

2. It Is committed publicly, ^ot privately.

3. It Is desperately and directly ^mmitted, not by sleight only, or ^der-hand.

4. It Is an act of open spite and ^alice.

Thus far it cannot but be evi^nt. The greatest difficulty lies in (...), to
judge of these three things.

1. Whether it be done freely, (...) in special Temptation.

2. Whether it be done delibe^tly.

3. Whether against Knowledge (...) Conscience.

These Considerations must be ^ghed.

For the first, whether freely and upon some special Temptation; Consideration
is very needful. ^w I do not mean by Temptation, a moving or stirring up to
do the Sin, but a special co-working in the Sin. For Satan's work in a
Sinner commonly called Temptation, is double Motion by Persuasion, Terrifying.
Commotion.


Motion is then when by secret ^^stinct, by reason, persuasion, al^ ring,
enticing, terrifying, etc, (...) moves one to the Sin; and the he does in
any Sin.

Commotion is when over a^ besides his Motion he helps to a^^ the very Sin.
And this is doubl^ either with, or besides
will.

This may better be understood (...) similitude: as when a man shall (...)
persuasion only stir up one (...) do a mischief, as to kill a man, l^ving
him alone to do the act; shall assist him also in the doing it.

So that what a man does in (...) kind, either of Fear, or by Co^motion
besides will, cannot be t^ Sin, which is the greatest of Sins, ^^d therefore
must needs have full ^onsent of will. So that,

1. Manifest Fear, either of Life, (...) of that which is as dear as Life,
(...) public shame, and extreme mi^y, or bondage.

2. Some great hope of receiving ^^me special good, that a man a^we all
earthly things desires; or of ^oving some grievous evil pre^^t upon him.

3. Special Temptation, as Fren^, or Satanicall Illusion by dream ^sleep,
discharge of this guilt.

For the second Consideration; ^tes of Deliberation are,

1. Constancy in the continu^e of it.

2. Confidence in the mainte^ce and defense of it.

3. No appearance of any distur^ce or passion, but a freedom of ^^d in the
committing of it.

4. A shameless and bold beha^ur after the committing of it.

5. A seeking and taking hold of opportunities of committing it.

For the third against knowledge and Conscience, this is known;

1 When men go against the^ own grounds and principles (i^ their blasphemy)
which they ho^^ and maintain with zeal and affection.

2. When they are feign to fly i^ the defense of their blasphemy to shameful
lies and slanders.

3. When being evidently so f^ convinced of the Sin in general to wit, that
it is a blasphemy and slander of the Spirit, yet they cease not still to
maintain it.

4. When the more they see it detected, the more still they commit it.

By this that has been spoken may appear, that very many, if no^ the most of
the Jesuits and learne^ Papists in these days have and do^ commit this Sin;
sithence al^ these points may be determined i^ them.

The sixth part. Of the Condition of this Sin.
FRom the Conviction of this Sin pass we to the Condition of it. And here
^riefly to recapitulate the sum of ^ll that is past. The more that our
^aviour Christ by the works of the spirit did manifest himself to be ^^e
Messiah and Savior of the world, ^e more did the Jewish Rulers and ^overnours
malice and despite ^im, and that Holy Spirit of God ^y which he wrought them.

And here, whereas our Savior and miraculously healed a man posssed with a
Devil that was both ^ind and dumb, which so deeply ^ffected the people, that
they be^n thereupon to be persuaded ^at he was indeed that Messiah which was
to come: This effect of Christ's Miracles so enraged the Scribes and Pharisees,
and mad^ their malice and spite so to boil an^ sees over, that, though in
their consciences they were convicted eve^ by the same works that he was the
Messiah; yet the more they were convicted the more they were enraged breathing
out of their hellish throa^ direful and damned blasphemi^ against Christ, and
against that Spirit by which he wrought; affirmin^ in the extremest
bitterness, tha^ Christ in casting out of Devil^ wrought by the Devil; and
that the devil whereby he wrought, was Bee^zebub himself the prince of Devils

Our Savior thereupon having first evidently proved that they were in their
own Consciences convicted, that that which they said was most false slander,
proceeds afte^ to show further the fearfulness o^ this Sin above all other
kinds o^ Sin whatsoever: that, whereas a^ other Sins may be forgiven an^
pardoned, and are all forgiven an^ pardoned to some person or other; this kind
of Sin alone shall never be forgiven to any, either in this life, or in the
life to come, but that those who shall be so graceless to break out into the
same, shall as certainly go to Hell as there is an Hell.

So that our Savior here makes a distinction of Sins, that some Sins are
pardonable; that other some are unpardonable.

For the first he says, that all Sins, one only excepted, may be pardoned,
yea though a man should revile and blaspheme even the Son of God himself.

For the second, he affirms that one Sin only is utterly impardonable, and
that Sin is the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

In the former part, when our Savior says, that every Sin and Blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto men; His meaning is not that they shall certainly and
absolutely be forgiven to all men, so that no man for any Sin whatsoever shall
go to Hell, if he can keep himself from that one sin that comes after.

For then there should go but a few, to speak of, to Hell: whereas it is
clear by Gods Word, that the number of those that shall be saved is but a
small number in comparison of those that shall be damned.

Furthermore, the Scripture is as clear that men are and shall be damned for
other Sins besides this. The rich glutton in the Gospel was not damned for
this Sin, Luke 16.
but for his unmercifulness to Lazarus, that miserable spectacle at his door.
And our Saviors Sentence of condemnation that he shall pronounce at the
latter day against those on his left hand, M^t. 25.41, 42, 43.
shows the contrary.

Yea this Doctrine so taken, should be a Doctrine of the greatest liberty that
ever was taught, and a very dissolving of the Law. For then might men murder,
and whore, and steal, and lie, and swear, and forswear, and do any thing
without danger of Hell, so that they kept themselves from this Sin.

But his meaning is, that this one Sin excepted, there is no other particular
Sin, how high or heinous soever, but it is pardoned in some or other, may be
pardoned in any, and shall be pardonable in all, if the fault be not in
themselves.

1 That they have been pardoned in some, the Scripture does amply testify.
That Mother Sin of all in eating the forbidden Fruit was forgiven in Adam and
Eve, and in all the Elect, though eternally punished in the Reprobate. So the
Sin of Drunkenness in Noah: the Sin of lying and consening in Rebeckah and
Iac^b; the Sin of Incest in Lot; the Sin of Murder and Adultery in David;
the Sin of Apostasy and Idolatry in Solomon; the Sin of Oppression in
Zachee; the Sin of robbing and stealing in the Thief on the Cross; the Sin
of bloody and spightfull persecuting of the Saints of God (which comes
nearest the Sin impardonable) in the Apostle Paul.

2 That they may be forgiven, and are pardonable in any, appears by this, that
they have been pardoned in some. For if a Sinner can say that such or such a
Sin, which he is guilty of, has been pardoned in such or such a person; why
should he despair, as if God would not or could not pardon it in him? That
which God has done in any, he can do in thee.

3 That all other Sins are pardoned in all, except the fault be in
themselves, is evident also. For as God forces none to sin; so he forces
none to continue in Sin: And it is not for Sin so much that he damneth any,
as for the continuance therein without Repentance. And there are none that live
in the Church, and have the use of their understanding, but he vouchsafes
them sufficient means to bring them to Repentance, if they would use them, and
seek after them. He vouchsafes indeed to some greater and more effectual
means than to other some, and does work more powerfully in the means. But
there can none complain and say, that they wanted means, and that the fault
was not in themselves that they repented not.



2 This serves not to encourage and hearten any to go on in their wonted
course of sinning; but rather the contrary. It is the unspeakable goodness of
God to be ready to pardon all manner of Sins. But it is gross folly and impiety
in Sinners to think and conceit that he will pardon any but such as use means
for the getting of a pardon. The Prince is a gracious Prince in pardoning
Traitors or Murderers. But this consideration, that the King may do it, or
has done it, is no motive to make those that are Traitors or Murderers
secure, much less to go in their Treasons and Murders: But they must be
content to sue out, yea to pay dear often for their pardons, or else their hope
will lie in the dust. So is it with God. It Is true, he is merciful, and ready
to pardon any Sin; yet he has and will condemn the greatest part of the
World: and he will pardon none but such as use the means to sue out and
purchase their pardon, by forsaking their Sins by true Repentance, and
humbling themselves before the Throne of Gods mercy for them, with a full
resolution never to return again to them.

3 The consideration of this may serve for a special stay to them, who by the
subtle Temptations of Satan are made to believe that they have committed the
impardonable Sin here spoken of. And commonly Satan, abusing their Ignorance,
puts these conceits into the minds of those which are the farthest from that
Sin, to wit, humbled and afflicted Sinners. Whereas those are least troubled
with the fear thereof, that either have committed it, or are nearest to the
committing of it. This therefore may help them somewhat, who know not so well
what the Nature of that Sin is, to consider what particular Sins God is
reported in the Word to have forgiven to his Servants, and to consider whether
their own Sin be not one of the same kind; which if it be, they may thence
then infallibly conclude that it is not that impardonable Sin.

All other Sins then are at the least pardonable; yea they have been pardoned
in some or other, and may be pardoned in any: But in whomsoever this Sin is
found, which we principally entreat of, to wit, of Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost; he is certainly without all redemption a firebrand of Hell. We cannot
of any other Sinner pronounce an absolute and definitive Sentence of damnation;
no, though he should breathe out his last gasp in filthiness and blasphemies:
of this we may. He that has committed this Sin, is branded for Hell, and is
more than bored or burnt in the Ear for Satan.



Judas his betraying, and not Peter's forswearing.

Mercy? For what? may some say: Can man then in sinning go beyond the Lord in
mercy? Can a man by any Sin drown the mercifulness of God toward him?

perjury, Apostasy, etc. But this we must know, that God, as he is infinite in
mercy, so he is infinite in his justice: And in his holy wisdom and
providence he so mingleth and conjoyneth these twain, that the one limiteth the
other. So that God is so far forth merciful as will stand with his infinite
justice; and so far forth just, as will stand with his infinite Mercy. His
Mercy does not drown his Justice, nor his Justice his Mercy.

2 Goh shows Mercy to Sinners, that he might glorify himself in his mercy.
But in showing mercy to such a Sin, he might rather seem both to stain his
Mercy, and to disgrace his Justice.

3 There is no Sin whatsoever that makes God merciless, but in respect only
of the person. In this regard therefore is this Sin unpardonable, because the
Lord has decreed that none shall commit it but Reprobrates, in whom every Sin
is unpardonable.

4 This very Sin potentially is forgiven in all the Elect. For it is not of
themselves that they do not commit it, but of God, who bridles their wills. For
even they also have the seeds of all Sins in themselves; as the Cubs of
Woolves and Foxes, of all mischief and ravening, though they either cannot yet
do, or dye ere they do hurt ought.

content our selves with this, that we have a place in Gods Church. For we may
have the highest rooms, and yet stand guilty of grievous Sins* yea, the
higher rooms we are in many times, the higher Sins are committed of us. Who
in higher place then Judas? and who committed a greater Sin?

2 Here is matter of Consolation for the Godly, who desir^ above all things to
be freed from Sin, and to whom nothing i^ more combersome then the burden
of Sin; that though they cannon be wholly rid of it while they liv^ here; yet
the Lord has prescribe^ bounds unto their Sins; so tha^ they cannot go so
far in Sin again^ God as a Reprobate may. For no godly man can commit thi^
Sin.

3 For as much as it is bootles^ for them that have committed the Sin to
crave mercy of God, ort^ hope for grace with God; and tha^ Satan therefore has
no more forc^ble Engine to work despair, tha^ by persuading humbled Souls,
that they have fallen into it. It behooveth all such, before they open the
Gates of their Soul to despair, to try whether they have committed it or no.

1 If thou do or have felt any mark of the Child of God in thee, yea or no.
For he that has any inward mark of Gods Child, is still Gods Child, and
cannot commit it.

2 Fear of committing it, is a sign of not committing it. For it is a
desperate Sin. And such persons as commit it, use not to be so much troubled
that they have committed it, as that they have not opportunity to commit it
again and again. Experience it self teaches this in your grand malicious
persecutors of Religion: they use not so much to be troubled for that evil and
mischief that they have done, as that they cannot do more. And thus it was
with these Scribes and Pharisees.

3 An unfeigned dislike and hatred of all the malicious enemies of Religion, and
a special affection (caeteris paribus) to all the lovers of the Gospel.

4 An abhorring and loathing of our selves for it, and an acknowledgment of it,
with a desire of pardon, when we suspect our selves to have committed it, are
undoubted arguments of a soul that never committed this sin.

4 The more fearful and desperate the state and condition is, of those that
commit this sin, the more it stands all men in hand to take heed of it, to
keep as far as may be from it, and to use all preservatives that may be
against it. And to this end,

1 To know it, and conceive aright of it, that they may the more detest and
abhor it.

2 To take notice of those means by which men have fallen into it, that they
may more carefully shun and avoid all such courses.

3 To take especial heed of those sins that border nearest upon it, and have
most affinity with it.

4 To be thoroughly persuaded of the curse of God due to sin; and of the
blessings of God promised to all obedience.

5 To be fully assured, that even the least sin that is deserves everlasting
damnation.

6 To beware of all presumptuous sins, lest else by little and little they come
to make the greatest sin no sin.

7 To set the mercy of God in the pardon of sin, at a high price.

8 To be often meditating of the joys of heaven, and the torments of hell; the
former whereof, this sin once committed, does irrecoverably deprive men of,
and in bonds indissoluble oblige the committer of it to the later.

FINIS.

