(...)
Pilates Jest Turned to Earnest.
JOHN (...) And it was (...)
[IESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS.]
WHen Satan's malice had produced mischief in our first r^ (...) ^am (...) Re^
(...) ^ows, en^ (...) only in the (...), whom their souls desired in the
substance.

At length, when the fullness of Grace was come, he that was velatus in Lege,
covered in the Law, became Revelatus in Evangelio Discovered in the Gospel:
For when the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son of a Woman made under
the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Gal. 4. verse. 4.5. The
son of man had sinned against God, the Son of God satisfies for the sin
of man. Let admiration produce amazement. But seeing man had sinned for a
season, and must dye unto eternity, unless the Son of eternity did suffer
for a season: therefore Christ the Messiah was slain. Dan. 9.26. but not for
himself: Traditus est in mortem propter offensas nostras. Romans 4.25. Romans 4.25
He was delivered to death for our offenses. He was delivered by his Father
in mercy; by himself in compassion; by Judas for covetousness, and by the
Jews in malice: And all this to the end, that God might effect, wh^t the Jews
could not conjecture, the Redemp^^^^ of his people Israel.

In the precedent Chapter you have Christ apprehended, in this Crucified. He
that was typified by the Brazen Serpent, is exalted on the Cross between two
Thieves, with this Title superscribed, [Iesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.]
As the manner of Christ's Death, so the manner of this Superscription was
according to the custom of the Romans, who were wont either by written Titles,
or by the voice of the Crier, to notify to the people the cause of the
suffering of such as were condemned: According to which custom, Pilate
commanded this Title to be written, and fastened to the Cross of our Savior,
manifesting hereby unto the people the cause of his Condemnation. And as the
Jews were offended at Christ, so were they likewise at this Title. They sue
therefore unto Pilate, that it might be written: He called himself the King of
the Jews. But because they against Pilates will had desired Jesus to be
crucified, he against their wills sets this Title on the Cross: and rather
like Gods Officer, than Caesar's Friend, dashes their petition, returning that
answer wherewith he was inspired, Quod scripsi, scripsi, What I have written,
I have written, as though by divine infusion he had prophesied unto the Jews,
that he, whom they out of malicious cruelty had caused to be Crucified, was,
is, and ever shall be [Iesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.] Pilate herein
seeks not so much our Saviors glory, as his own excuse: For now when his
conscience did accuse him of this impious fact, and fearing a complaint might
come against him unto Caesar, for condemning such, and so great a man with whom
God was, without a legal Trial, he fixes upon the Cross this Title, hoping
to clear himself, that he crucified Christ not as the Son of God, or a
Prophet of the Jews, but for that he was a seditious person, an enemy unto
Caesar, one that affected both his Crown and Kingdom. With this pretense he
thinks to cloak his Injustice, because he knew Caesar's Throne would admit no
Rival.

Whatsoever was Pilates Intendment, surely, it was the drift of the Holy Ghost,
by this unjust Judge to vindicate the Just one, and to give him a Name above
all Names, and a Title above all Titles, which though Heaven and Earth pass
away, yet shall remain for ever: For though the sons of men are subject to
mortality, yet the Son of God shall endure unchangeably [Iesus of Nazareth,
King of the Jews.]

In this Title we are to consider two things: The Manner, and the Matter. The
manner how it was published: It was written: The matter, [Iesus of Nazareth,
King of the Jews.] First of the manner: The ensuing Verse tells us, that it
was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, the three most general and famous
Tongues in the world. The Reasons whereof (and that not without reason) are
alleged to be four: that understood any of these Languages, might know and
conceive the cause of Christ's suffering.





[Iesus of Nazareth is King of the Jews.]

[And it was written.]
Whatsoever is written, is written for our Instruction: whatsoever is true in
the general, is not false in the particular. This Title of Christ affords us
Instruction, yea, consolation. Sampson found Honey in the dead Lion. Judge.
14.8. Judge. 14.8
The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, yielding up his Ghost with a graceful,
disgraceful Title over his Head, affoords each Christian soul sweetness,
surpassing the honey, or the Honey-combe. Observe here how God disposes the
malice of wicked men to the future benefit of his Church: their cruelty is our
advantage. The Jews out of malice against Christ, Pilate out of malice against
the Jews, deliver Christ with this Title, [Jesus of Nazareth King of the
Jews.] What have the Jews gained? what has Pilate got hereby? The Jews
desolation, Pilate Damnation: Only the Church hereby reapes consolation.
Bless we with wonder the All-directing providence of God, who of an enemy can
make Pilate a benefit unto his people: He that can bring light out of
darkness, and good out of evil, can employ the malice of his Adversaries to
the perpetual consolation of his holy ones.

[And it was written.]
LIttle did the Jews; nay, little did Pilate think, that this act of his
should parralell Eternity: But now it is written: It is his own hand that has
delivered it to Time, which shall preserve it, so long as time shall be.
Observe here the just sentence that Christ shall pronounce against Pilate at
the Day of Judgment, who pronounced an unjust sentence against him, in the day
of his Humiliation: For as Balshazzar beheld the Handwriting against him, upon
the Walls of his Palace, Dan. 5.5. So shall Christ show the handwriting of
Pilate against him fastened on his Cross; unto the Jews he shall say, as to
the wicked servant, Luke 19.22. Ex Ore tuo, Out of your own mouths will I
condemn you, ye wicked Jews; for ye cried Crucify him, Crucify him: But
unto Pilate he shall say; Thine own hand is against thee, and shall condemn
thee, O thou unjust Judge, for thou have written, [Iesus of Nazareth, King of
the Jews.] Hae Tabulae te arguunt, quas tu scripsist, hae te vinciri jabent.
What needs any other Witness? Thine own hand is against thy self: Iam
pateris telis vulnera facta tuis.

[And it was written.]
SEe here, The Son of God: The Holy one of Israel: The Everlasting Father: The
Prince of Peace: The wonderful Councellor most shamefully exposed to Ignominy,
not with a paper on his back, but with a Title of dishonor over his head: For
it was written, [Iesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.] Had these words been
spoken by Pilate, It had been shame sufficient, but to enlarge his reproach
they are written; yea, and written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, that so they
might not be better known unto himself, than to all the World. O cursed
Pilate, that thus dishonourest the Lord of Glory; the time will come, that thou
shall wish the Rocks to fall upon thee, and the Mountains to cover thee from
that face, which thou did so (...) disgracefully vilify with a supposed
Reproachful Title: O ye blood-thirsty Jews, ye were of old termed a
Stiff-necked people: Has GOD sent his Son in mercy? and do you hasten him
to the Cross in malice? Have you honored in your Sacrifice, Christum
venturum? Christ which was to come? And do you now Sacrifice upon the Cross
Christum ventum Christ which is come? Oh hearts of Adamant, is this the
entertainment you give to the Messiah? The shame you do unto him, shall bind
shame to you, and your posterity for ever.

[And it was written.]
CHrist, whose hands and heart were free from injury, is content to be counted
a Seducer; to be judged a Traitor against Caesar; to have an Ignominous Title
over his head: Christ Jesus, I say, the Lamb Immaculate, refuses no shame,
that he might purchase Glory to his faithful ones: He that was the God of
Glory, becomes the son of shame: He that was the Righteous Redeemer, is
deemed an unjust Usurper: He that was the Lord of Life is condemned to Death:
He that was honored with the Acclamation of Angels, is now dishonored with
the exclamation of the Jews: He that was dignified with the Title, Holy, Holy,
Holy, is here disgraced with a supposed Title of discredit [Iesus of Nazaret,
King of the Jews.] Pilate shows him disgracefully to the people, with an Ecce
Homo, as you may see verse 5 of this Chap. Behold the Man, Behold the Man:
Pilate? yea, behold the Redeemer of Man, in the shape of a Servant: Behold the
Man? yea, behold him who was both God and Man: In comparison of whose
holiness: In comparison of whose Innocence: Both these in Angels are but
streams from his Fountain: Beams from his Brightness, parcels from his
Lump: Mutuations from his perfections.

Stand, O my Soul! and with admiration, bless the Author of all Blessedness,
Christ, who to prevent thy shame, sustained shame before men, before his
Father: Cum sceleratis numeratus est: He was numbered among the wicked, for thy
sake: He was accounted sinful, for thy salvation. Adam, by eating of the
forbidden Tree, deprived thee of Life: Christ, by suffering on the cursed Tree,
restores thee to Life.

Set to thy mouth then, O my soul, and drink heartily of this Life-giving
Water: For Invenisti in Cruce Gloriam: Christ's Cross is thy comfort: His
dishonor is thy honor. That which is Ludibrium Impijs, is Misterium Pijs: The
Cross of Chist is to the Jews a stumbling-blocke: To the Gentiles
foolishness: But to thee, O my soul, it is the power of God, and the wisdom
of God. 1. Cor. 23.24.

Here then, O my Soul, exhilerate thy self in contemplation of the infinite
goodness of thy Redeemer: Behold him environed round about with virtue On his
right hand, Obedience, on his left hand, Patience; below him, Humility, above
him, yea, above all, Charity, behold al these, and because thou can not
express, admire, with silence: And because thou can not merit this, bless
with thankfulness the bounty of him, whose Death is thy Life, whose shame is
thy glory; even the Lord Jesus Christ.

But has he done this for thee? Then walk forth, O my soul, with courage,
till thou meet the Cross: then take it up with patience, and bear it in
despite of thy Saviors enemies: Follow thy Redeemer, with a Cross at thy
back, and say with St. Paul Gal. 9.14. God forbid, that I should glory in
anything, but in the Cross of Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the World: For Crux Christi, is Lux Christiani: The Cross of
Christ, is the glory of a Christian, which Cross has freed thee from the
blindness of error; restored thee to rest, overcame Hell for thee: brought
thee near unto God, opened the gate of Heaven; wrought thy peace, and purchased
everlasting happiness unto thee.

Honor him, then O my soul, who for thee was dishonored: Suffer a little
misery for him, in this World, who suffered, and endured a World of Misery for
thee: Entitle him in thy heart; who bare this Title over his head [Iesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews.]

And so from the manner I pass to the matter of this Inscription.

[IESUS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE JEWS.]
IN which words, are contained the causes (as they would have it) of our
Saviors Condemnation: In the writing whereof, rather GODS Will, than Pilates,
did appear: For in this Title, are contained three Divine reasons, why Christ,
the only begotten Son of GOD, should yield up his life upon the Cross.

First, because he was Jesus.

Secondly, because he was Nazarenus.

Thirdly, because he was Rex Iudaeorum.

He was Jesus, that is, Salvator, A Savior: He was Nazarenus, that is,
Floridus, A Flower, or flourishing. He was Rex Iudaeorum, that is Rex
Confitentium, King of the Jews, not carnally, but spiritually, not by
Circumcision, but by Faith: King of those, who do believe with the heart, and
confess him with the mouth, to be the true Messiah. Pilate was blind, and
could not see this: The Jews were obstinate, and would not know this: But now
it is revealed to Babes and sucklings, by Regeneration; for all, that are borne
of God, know, that by nature, they were sins subjects, yet here they find
Him Iesum a Savior: By nature, they are stinking in the Nostrils of God, yet
here they find him Nazarenum, A sweet smelling Flower: By Nature, they are
Satan's Bondslaves; yet, for their Redemption, they find him here, Regem
Iudaeorum, King of all those that confess his name. This Title of Christ was
written (as I said before) in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: The Hebrews had the
true Priesthood: The Grecians abounded in Wisdom; And the Latins in
Dominion, and Government: The first, signified Christ to be the true Priest;
the second, to be the wisest Prophet; the third, to be the Potentst King. Here
then is Christ's Sacerdotall Office, in that he is Jesus. His Prophetical, in
that he is Nazarenus. His Regal, in that he is Rex Iudaeorum, Of these in Order.
First he is Jesus.


[Iesus.]
THis Name includes the first reason: Why our Savior dyed upon the Cross: Our
first Parents, by eating the forbidden fruit, offended chiefly in three things.
In Pride, in disobedience, and in Carnal delight. Pride, in aspiring to be
like their maker; Disobedience, in transgressing the Law of their maker.
Carnal delight, in preferring the pleasantness of the fruit, before the love
of their Maker. But seeing Christ came into the World to be a Savior, he must
satisfy for man, by contrary means: For Pride, by Humility; for Disobedience,
by Obedience, for carnal delight, by suffering of punishment; these three
Christ performed. Look into the 2. Phil. 8. and there St. Paul make it
plainly appear, that Christ was not behind hand in any of these: He humbled
himself (says the Apostle,) behold his true Humility: and became obedient,
behold his prompt Obedience; unto Death, even the death of the Cross; behold
the largeness of his punishment. So that if Christ will be a Savior, he
must, by the death of the Cross, open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

This was typified in the Old Testament, by the Sacrificing of Isaak: By the
lifting up of the Brazen Serpent: By the smiting of the Rock: By the
Leviticall Oblations, and Offerings: And yet, these hard-hearted Jews could not
understand it.

O foolish Pilate, think thou to dishonor the Son of the most High, by
writing Jesus? No, it was a name assigned unto him from Heaven for the Angel
said unto Joseph, Math. 1.29. Thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save
his people from their sins. It is that name, wherein Christ most glories, and
whereof, every Christian is least ashamed.

Seeing there is no name under heaven whereby we can be saved, but by the name
of Jesus. Acts 4.12. Act. 4.12.
A blessed name, a sweet name: Mel in ore, Melos in aure, Iubilus in Cord,
(as St. Bernard sweetly says) Honey in the mouth, Melody in the ear, But a
Iubile, a joy in the heart. This name, is light unto the soul. Ye were
Darkness, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.8. but now ye are light in the Lord.
This name gives health to the body. In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, rise up,
and walk, Acts 3.6. This Name is the Life, the comfort, the restoration of
the soul of a Christian. Aridus est omnis cibus, si non oleo isto infunditur,
insipidus, si non hoc sale conditur, St. Bern.
(says St. Bernard) All Spiritual food is dry, if this Oil be not powered
into it; unsavory, if it be not seasoned with this Salt.

Other names of Christ, are names of Majesty, only this is a name of mercy: To
be called the Word, the Son, the Anointed of God: These Titles proclaim
Christ's Glory: but the Name of Jesus imports our Redemption. By the former, we
know him to be God, by the latter, we know him to be our Mediator, and
Savior: To him then, and to him only, properly, and (...), belongs the Name
Jesus.

But it may be objected, that there are others, in the Scripture, called after
the same Name: As Jesus, or Iehoscua, the son of Nun: Jesus, or Iehoscua, the
High Priest of the Jews: And Jesus, the son of Sirach, the Author of the
Book called Ecclesiasticus. All this I confess, and I know, that the first
was famous for his valor, and government in Israel: the second, for his
Integrity in his Preisthood: the third, for his Wisdom and Understanding. But
alas, these three were but types of our Jesus. The first represented his
Kingly, the second his Preistly, the third his Prophetical Office: They were
so termed in regard of some temporal and particular Deliverances: Our Jesus
so styled, because of that general and Spiritual Redemption, which he has
wrought for all his Saints, Jews, and Gentiles. The former were sent before,
like Elishaes staff, 2 King. 4.29. 2 King. 4.29.
but could not raise Mankind from the dead. But the true and powerful Jesus,
was feign to descend from Heaven himself, as Elisha from Mount Carmel, to
apply his mouth, to our mouths, his eyes, to our eyes, his hands, to our
hands, becoming the same with us, in substance, in Nature, and infirmity,
(sin only excepted) before we could be raised. Magna miseria superbus
homo: Mayor misericordia humilis Deus, St. Aug.
(says St. August.) Great misery it was, to see man so proud, greater mercy,
to see God so humble. And therefore to him properly, and to none but him,
belongs that Name, which is above all Names, the Name of Jesus: For he alone
is the Savior of the World, to whom both the Name, and Office appertains. And
as he is by Name, Jesus, so is he by Nature, a Savior. For him alone does the
Gospel proclaim throughout all Ages to be a Savior: by whom Abraham was
accounted righteous. He was that Salvation which the Patriarchs desired; he
was that Salvation, which the Ceremonial Law prefigured; he was that
Salvation, which the Prophets foretold; he was that Salvation, which Jacob
waited for, when he said, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy Salvation O Lord.
He was that Salvation that David prayed for, he was that Salvation which old
Simeon rejoiced in, when he sung, Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. Luke
2.30. This was that Salvation, by which the Patriarchs entered into Heaven, the
Prophets attained blessedness, and the Saints enjoy true happiness. In him
alone were all the promises of the Messiah fully accomplished: He alone trod
the Wine Press of Gods wrath: He alone satisfied his Fathers Justice: He alone
became (...), the price of our Redemption. It was he, that was sent of the
Father, to save the World. John 3.17. And for this cause, he came himself into
the world, to save sinners. It was he that was smitten for us: Propter scelus
populi mei percussi eum: I have smitten him for the wickedness of my people:
Traditus est in mortem propter offensas nostras: He was delivered to death for
our offenses. Solus Christus sine peccato, peccati paenam subire dignatus est,
St. Aug.
(says St. Aug.) He alone, without sin, was pleased to undergo the
punishment for sin: His Death was not for himself, but for us. Quasi
peccator occisus est, ut peccatores justificarentur apud Deum, St. Ambr.
(says St. Ambrose) He was slain as a sinner, that sinners might be
justified before God. It was our sins, not his own deservings, that fastened
him upon the Cross. Pro me doluit, qui nihil habuit, quod pro se doleret
(says the same Father.) God was the Creditor, Man was the Debtor; but he that
was both God, and Man, the Play Master. Thus he, who enjoyed the Name of Jesus,
has performed the Office, and remains our alone Savior: Blessed in his
Name, and for ever blessed in his Person.

I have long insisted upon this sweet Name, for that it brings so much profit
unto us: yet can I not shake hands with our Romish Adversaries, who ascribe so
much unto the Name, and so little unto the person of Jesus. They affirm, that
the bare Name it self being used, has great power, and does drive away
Devi^s, though the person, that uses it, be void of good affection: whereas
indeed, the Devil is no more timorous of the Name of Jesus, than of any other
Title of God. The sons of Sceva, Act. 19.14 found this to be true, by their
own dear experience, for they could not adjure the evil spirit, though they
used the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached. And as they ascribe too much to the
Name: so they ascribe too little to the Person of Jesus: in that they make him
but a Demi-Saviour, joining others with him, as partners in the work of our
Redemption, coupling our works, with his Merits, our satisfaction, with his
satisfaction: The intercession of Saints, with his Intercession; especially,
the Intercession of the Virgin Mary, whom they call, the Queen^ of Heaven, the
Mother of Grace; requesting her, that by the authority of a Mother, she would
command her son. Oh take heed of sharing stakes between Christ, and any
creature in the act of our salvation. He will not be accounted joint purchaser
of our Redemption with any, no not with his own Mother, the Virgin Mary; for
he was her Savior, as well as ours: My Spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
(says she) Luke 1.47. Luke 1.47.
And Sanguinem, quem de Matre accepit, pro Matre obtulit, (says one of the
Fathers) The Blood, which he received from his Mother, he shed for his Mother.

Let us acknowledge our selves lost by Nature, but found only by Christ. He
only it was, that came to seek, and to save that which was lost: We were,
through Adams transgressions, bound by the Devil, we are losed only by
Christ's Passion, Alligavit fortem, vinculis Passionis. It is he, that bound
the strong man, and spoiled him of his weapons: It was he that set us at
liberty, when we were in bondage: That found us, when we were lost: That
called us home, when we were banished: That raised us, when we were dead;
that redeemed us, when we were miserable captives; he restored our lives, by
losing his own; he unbound us, by fastening himself; he overcame, by being
overcome; he redeemed us, by enthraling himself; he cured us, by his own
wounds; raised us to life, by his own Death; made us rich, by his own
poverty; robbed himself of his dignity, by becoming a creature; of his
Royalty, by paying of tribute; of his liberty, by becoming a servant; of his
credit, for he was blasphemed; of his joy, for he was heavy to the Death; of
his welfare, for he was wounded, scourged, nailed, crucified; and all this,
for our Salvation. What Saint, or Angel did? Nay, what Saint or Angel could do
the like for us? He only, and alone, Carnem suam, pro omnium Carne dependit,
and animam suam pro omnium anima constituit, (says Saint Cyril St. Cyril.
) He, (I say) payned his flesh, for the flesh of us all, his soul, for all our
souls. He was Moses Serpent to heal us, Gods Lamb, to feed us with his
flesh, and cloth us with his fleece: The true Pelican, nourishing us with his
blood. O profunditas Divitiarum! O the depth of the riches of the mercy of this
our Jesus! Let us draw waters of comfort out of this depth of Mercy: Let us not
rest contented with that general name of Christians; but labor for assurance
of salvation, that as Thomas called Christ his Lord, and his God: Ioh. 20 28.
so we may, by faith, every one particularly, call him, Our Jesus.

We are all naturally like the wounded man between Jerusalem and Jericho: Luke
10.30. Luke 10.30.
Let us seek out that good Samaritan, who has compassion on us, will bind up
our wounds, power Wine and Oil into them, and restore us to health.

Sin is an unsupportable load, with it we are all over-burthened; yet our
Jesus calls us, Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. Math. 11.28. He invites graciously, let us hasten speedily;
Non pedibus, sed affectibus; Not with our feet, but with our affections. Whilst
he stands at the door, and knocks, let us open unto him, lest by too long
delay we lose him: Then shall we open the door, but he has withdrawn
himself: then shall we seek him, but not find him; call him, but he will not
answer: wherefore while the time serves, let us say unto our Jesus, as David
to the Lord, Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation. If we ask in time, we
shall receive: If we seek in time, we shall find; if we knock in time, he
will open unto us; if we believe, we shall be saved. Away then with all
conceit of our own merit, or the Holiness of any Saint: Let Christ be the
sole Lord of our salvation, without any Copartner; for he alone has
possession of that threefold Treasury, which must make us rich unto salvation:
namely, the Treasure of Glory, the Treasure of Grace, and the Treasure of
Wisdom. Man was exiled from Celestial Glory, Christ alone enjoyed the
Treasury of Glory, that he might bring Mankind unto Glory. Man was an enemy
unto God; therefore Christ had the Treasury of Grace, to reconcile man unto
God. Man was blind, and wrapped in darkness; therefore Christ had the Treasury
of Wisdom, to teach men the way to eternal Life. Look in John 1.14. Joh.
1.14.
and you shall find all these three comprehended in one Verse: Spectavimus
glorian, plenam gratia and veritatis. We saw the glory of Christ, behold the
first: full of Grace, behold the second: and Truth, behold the third: Now
therefore let us say, Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da gloriam.
Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory. For thou O
Jesus, art made unto us of God, by thy pains sustained, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Wherefore, seeing that thou my blessed Savior, have borne my sorrows, shed my
tears, suffered my disgrace, sustained my punishment, and paid my Debt, let
Jews, Turks, and Heathen revile thee, I will honor thee: let them blaspheme
the Name of Jesus, I will adore it; let them persecute it, I will make it my
refuge: for the Name of the Lord, is a strong tower of Righteousness: They,
that fly unto it, are secured. Let them disdain it, I shall esteem it to be
a precious ointment powered out; let them vilify it, I will glory in it: For
with the Lord, there is Justice, but with our Jesus, there is plenteous
Redemption.

O Lord, what Pylate deemed to be thy shame, proves to be thy glory: He
writes thee disgracefully Jesus with his hand, whom he would not call
faithfully Jesus with his heart. Yet this is thy Name, this is thy function:
Jesus, by Title, a Savior by Office. With this name Jesus, thy Birth was
honored, and with this Name Jesus, thy Death is honored: What thou broughtest
into the world, by the Angels Direction, thou carryedst out of the world, by
Pilates Inscription, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. And so I pass from
his Name Jesus, unto his Title Nazarenus, of Nazareth.

[Nazareth.]
NAzareth was the name of that Town, which Joseph dwelt in, when he returned
out of Egypt, in the which Jesus continued, until he undertook the
Prophetical, and Sacerdotall functions: From which Town he received this
Title, to be called Nazarenus, Jesus of Nazareth. This then is a Title given
unto Jesus, taken from the Town, or Village, where the Angel Gabriel brought
the message unto Mary, and where Christ dwelt after his return from Egypt: and
not from the order, and Votary of Nazarites, as some do vainly imagine.
Neither is this Title without a Mystery: For this word Nazarenus signifies
three things: Sanctified, Separated, and a Flower. In all which senses, Jesus
may be truly termed Nazarenus.

First, he was sanctified, not imperfectly, and in part, but perfectly, and in
whole: And this was not, by any external means, after his Birth, but only by
the Holy Ghost, in his conception. And therefore he was sanctified in utero, in
the womb; and ex utero, Out of the womb. He was sanctified in the womb: the
which Sanctification has two parts.

First, the stoppage in the propagation of Original sin, and of the guilt of
Adams transgression: which, because Christ was from Adam, as from a Root; and
not by Adam, as by a Father, is not derived unto him: For man is originally
sinful, not because of his substance, but because of his Generation,
proceeding from a sinful man. For God, at the beginning, set down this Order,
that what evil Adam had brought upon himself, he should derive the same to
every one of his posterity, begotten by man. Therefore, when any Father begets
a Child, he conveyes into it, besides humane nature, the corruption of humane
Nature. Christ therefore, for the preventing of this, was not begotten by Man,
but conceived modo ineffabili, by the Holy Ghost: That so he might take the
substance of the Virgin, without the corruption of that substance.

The second part of this Sanctification, which is ex utero, Out of the womb,
is the perfect endowing of the Manhood of Christ, with all pureness, and
holiness, to make him a meet Mediator. He was sanctified out of the womb,
for his whole Humane Nature was full of Grace and Truth. Ioh. 1.14 Full of
Grace in his works, full of Truth in his words. Holy in his Birth, holy in his
Life, and holy in his Death.

Secondly, as he was Nazarenus sanctified: so is he Nazarenus separated. He was
that Scapegoat, separated from his fellows, to make an Atonement for the
sins of the World. Lev. 16.10
He was separated from his Fathers Court of Majesty, by taking upon him the
form of a Servant. Phil. 2.7. Phil. 2.7.
He was separated from his own Nation, when he fled into Egypt for fear of
Herod. He was separated from his Brethren, and Kinsfolk, to do his Fathers
Will: He was separated from his Disciples, when he was hanging upon the
Cross. He was separated from the Living, when he dyed for our Redemption. He
was separated from the World, when he ascended into Heaven. And thus was Jesus
termed Nazarenus, that is, Separated.

Thirdly, Jesus is Nazarenus: That is, Flos, or floridus, A Flower, or
flourishing: for so is is he called. Esaias 11. There shall come a Rod out of
the stem of Jesse, and a branch; or as the Vulgar Translation has it, Flos
de radice ejus ascendet. A Flower shall grow out of his root.

Christ is more specially called Nazarenus, a flower, because, as Protagoras
observes, Flowers Solemn habent in Coelo Patrem, Solum in terra Matrem: That is,
Flowers have the Sun in the Heavens for their Father, and the soil on the
earth for their Mother. So Jesus, the Flower out of Iesse, had in Heaven a
Father without a Mother, according to his Godhead: And in Earth, a Mother,
without a Father, according to his Manhood. As he was God, not differing from
the Father; but semper apud Patrem, semper cum Patre, temper de Patre, semper
in Patre. Always by the Father, always with the Father, always of the
Father, and always in the Father. Even so, as he was Man, he was Homo de
homine, propter hominem, secundum hominem, super hominem. He was Man of Mankind
according to his substance, Man for mankind in regard of our Redemptihis, Man,
according to mankind, in regard of his Nature; Man, above mankind, in regard of
his Holiness. Sine quo, Pater nunquam fuit, sine quo, Matter nunquam fuisset.
Without whom, the Father never was, and without whom, the Mother never had
been.

Jesus is called here Nazarenus, a Flower; First, because of the sweetness
that is in him. Secondly, because of the sweetness he is to us. That
sweetness, which is in him, is expressed two ways.

First, in the sweetness of his Virtues, manifested in his holy conversation,
wherein he was a sweete-smelling Flower for imitation.

Secondly, he was a sweet smelling Flower in his Passion, when he offered
himself to God, a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, for our
Reconciliation. Ephesians. 5.2. Ephesians. 5.2.
Lastly, he is the hope of that eternal sweetness, which we shall enjoy
hereafter, in the Kingdom of Heaven. For Dedit Humanitatem in terra, praetium
nostrae Redemptionis, sed servat Divinitatem in Coelo, praemium nostrae
glorificationis. He gave his Humanity upon the Earth, the price of our
Redemption, but does reserve his Deity in Heaven, the reward of our
glorification.

There are five principal Flowers in use with us, Our Savior is compared unto
five sorts of Flowers:
whereunto this our Nazarenus, this our Jesus, may be fitly compared: The
Violet, The Violet.
the Lilly, the Saffron. the Rose, and the Marygold. The Violet (you know) is
little in quantity, low in growth, not raised far from the earth: signifying
hereby, the Humility of our Nazarenus, the Lowliness of our Redeemer. The
which Humility of Christ, was manifested in three particulars. Nascendo, In his
Birth: Vivendo, In his life: Morien^o, In his death. In his Birth, he was
humble: For being the Creator of all things, be disdained not to become a
Creature. Factor terrae, factus in terra; Creator Coeli, creatus sub Coelo. St.
Aug.
(says St. August.) He, that made the Earth, was borne upon the Earth: He,
that created the Heavens, was made under the Heavens. He chose not to be the
Son of some Great Empress, but of Mary, a poor Virgin in Israel. He was not
borne in a Princely Palace, but in a Stable, not laid in a curious costly
Cradle, but in a silly Cratch. Not attended on by Knights, and Potentates, but
by Oxen, and Asses, and such like creatures. Such was our Saviors Humility in
his birth.

In his Life: He was content to work at the Trade of his supposed Father
Joseph, not affecting Lands, Houses, nor possessions: For the Foxes had holes,
and the Birds of the Air had nests, but the Son of Man had not where to lay
his Head. Not abounding in worldly Treasure; for the Fish of the Sea must pay
Tribute unto Caesar. Not ambitiously aspiring unto Rule, and Government; for
when the people would have made him King, he refused it, and conveyed himsel^e
from among them: such was our Saviors Humility in his Life.

In his Death, he suffered himself to be scourged, spit on, blasphemed,
crowned with Thorns, and condemned by an unjust Judge. Lastly, when he was
nailed most cruelly upon the Cross, and made a spectacle of disgrace unto all
beholders, and had sustained the utmost of the Jewish malice, yet he prayed
for his enemies, saying, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Luke 23.34. Such was our Saviors Humility in his Death.

This Humility of our Savior is recorded by Saint Paul, Phil. 2.6.7. where he
says of him, That being in the form of God, he thought it no robbery, to be
equal with God: And yet he made himself of no reputation, but took upon him
the shape of a servant: and humbled himself, and became obedient to Death,
even the death of the Cross. This Humility of our Savior is exposed by
himself to us, for our imitation: Learn of me, for I am meek, and humble in
heart. Math. 11.29. And thus is Christ compared to a Violet, and may be justly
called Nazarenus, The Flower of Humility.

The second Flower, Nazarenus is compared, is the Lilly: The Lilly.
a Flower growing upon a straight stalk, raised from the Earth; white of
color, and of a fragrant smell, signifying unto us the innocence of our
blessed Savior. Ego sum Lilium Convallium: You know whose speech it is. Cant.
2.1. I am the Lilly of the Valleys.

The Ancients were wont tom Emblematize Innocence, by Whiteness, which is the
most pure, and perfect color. And so the Ancient of Days, is said to have his
Garments white as snow. Rev. 11.14. And well may he be called a Lilly, for his
Whiteness; well may he be styled a Lamb, for his Innocence. Ecce Agnus Dei,
qui tollit peccata mundi. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the World. John 1.29. whole Hands, Heart, and Tongue, were free from injury.
O Mirror of Innocence! who offended neither in thought word, nor deed, being
neither disobedient to God, nor injurious to men; but full of Grace toward
God, and of Truth toward men. Moses led not the Israelites into Canaan, but
Iosuah, the son of Nun, because he offended not at the waters of strife:
Noting unto us, that he, who was to be the Savior of the World, and the
Leader of the spiritual Israel, into the Celestial Canaan, must be (...),
Without sin.

In Nature, our Jesus of Nazareth, was like other men: but in Holiness of
Nature, transcending all men. In all things like us, sin only excepted. He
was Nostri generis socius, sed nostrae contaminationis alienus. Like us in
Nature, but not like unto us in corruption of Nature. Great was the
commendation, which was due, by merit unto Cato, and Fabritius, two noble
Romans, famous for their Uprightness, and Integrity. Singular was the
Innocence of Samuel, Recorded 1 Samuel 13. ver. 3.
approved by the suffrages of all Israel; who defrauded, or oppressed no man:
who had neither taken away any man's Ox, or Ass, nor had blinded his eyes with
the bribes of a^y one. The Integrity of these Worthies, reaches but to men: but
the Innocence of our Savior, extends it self farther, even to the Law of God,
which he violated not in the smallest thing, in the least precept. This made
him bold to demand of the Jews, Ioh. 8.46. Qui^ ex vobis arguet me de peccato?
Which of you can convince me of sin? He was holy in his cogitations, upright in
his intentions, divine in his words, just in his works: Free from Original,
free from Actual sin; neither omitting good, nor committing evil;
sanctified in his Conception, holy in his Birth, innocent in his Life, and
righteous at his Death.

Adam was innocent at his Creation, but his Whiteness was soon sullyed, and
changed into Blackness. But in our Nazarenus, was no inclination, that Satan
could work upon: And therefore he says, The Prince of this World comes,
but he finds nothing in me. So immutable was his Purity, so unchangeable his
Innocence, as could neither, by the World, nor the Devil, nor by any other
means, become stained, or polluted. What was his whole Life? The Model of
Obedience, a Glass of Righteousness, yielding to his Parents, Duty, and
Reverence: Giving bread to the hungry, sight to the blind, hearing to the
deaf, feet to the lame, health to the sick, life to the dead, comfort to the
sorrowful, forgiveness to the sinner; rendering unto Caesar, that which was
Caesar's, and unto God, that which was Gods. Here was Innocence so spotless,
as that it was approved from Heaven, by the voice of God himself: This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Ma^h. 3. Math. 3.
the last Verse. It was cleared by Pilate too, though an unjust Judge; I find
no fault in this man. Luke 23.14. It was confessed by the repenting. Thief
upon the Cross, in the same Chapter, verse. 41. This man has done nothing
amiss: Thus is Christ compared to the Lilly, for his Whiteness, and may
justly be called Nazarenus, The Flower of Innocence.

The third Flower, whereunto Nazarenus may be compared, is the Saffron, The
Saffron.
which is a Flower, (as St. Bernard observes) used in making of Sauce for
Meat, St. Bern.
or in seasoning some kind of Dishes, and does represent Abstinence, or
Temperance, which may very fitly figure out unto us, the Temperance of our
Nazarenus.

When first he set foot into his Prophetical Office, and began to make
himself known to the World, he entered with admirable Abstinence, fasting
miraculously, Forty days, and Forty nights. Math. 4.2. Profane Esau sold his
Birthright for a mess of pottage, Genesis 25.32. and was the picture of a
Belly-god: But to show that the Kingdom of God did not consist in meats, and
drinks, as our Apost. says, Romans 14.17. Romans 14.17.
Christ begins with Fasting, and continues in Temperance, which is, a
moderate use of meat, and drink, unto the end. Not, like many Divestes, who
fare delicately every day, turning fasting, into feasting, making their guts, a
Gulf of pleasure, and their Belly, their God; drawing all their Happiness
down their throats. He who was God, of Heaven and Earth, and had all things at
command, who opens his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse,
was pleased to use sparingly, that which others spent prodigally; and to save
that by Abstinence, which others spoil by Luxury: And thus is Christ compared
to the Saffron, and may be fitly called Nazarenus, The Flower of Temperance.

Nazarenus may be compared, is the Rose, The Rose.
the most noble of all Flowers; dilating it self abroad, and of a ruddy
color, which properly represents Christ, our Nazarenus. Ego sum Rosa Sharonis.
Cant. 2.1. I am the Rose of Sharon. He is first, like the Rose in his
dilatation, and spreading himself abroad, seeking not only the lost sheep of
Israel, but every sheep that has strayed from his Fathers Fold. Number Iudaeorum
Deus solum? non and Gentium? is the Apostles Question: Romans 3.29. Romans 3.29.
Yea, of the Gentiles also. For us has he called, which were of the Gentiles,
who sometimes were a far off, are now made nigh, by the blood of Christ. Ephesians.
2.13. Secondly, he is like the Rose in color, Rubicundus, Red, with his own
blood. His color was foretold by the Prophet Esaias 63.2. Why is thy Apparel
red, and thy Garments like him that treads the Wine Press? The Redness of
this Rose presents to our sent, the Charity of our Nazarenus. Contendunt
Passio, and Charitas: illa, ut plus ardeat, ista, ut plu^ rubeat, St. Bern.
says Saint Bernard sweetly: There was a holy contention betwixt his Passion,
and his Charity, whether the one should excel in redness of blood, or the
other, in fervency of affection. His Charity enlarged his Passion; for if he
had not loved, he would not have suffered; and the Redness of his Passion,
discovered the fervor of his Charity.

We read in the Scripture, that our Savior was six times dyed in blood, that
thereby he might excel the Rose in Redness.

First, in his Circumcision: then was this Rose at his first budding, sprinkled
with Blood, whilst he was yet nourished with the milk of his Mothers paps.

Secondly, in the Garden, when in that great conflict, between the infirm
flesh, and the prompt Spirit, he sweat (...), Clods of water and blood, falling
down to the ground.

Thirdly, when he was fastened unto a Pillar, and his sacred body made all red
with scourgings.

Fourthly, when the Soldiers harrowed his holy Head, with a Crown of Thorns.

Fifthly, when they nailed his innocent Hands, and Feet unto the Cross.

Lastly, when his precious side was pierced with a Spear, there appeared a
Fountain, out of which flowed Water, and Blood. Thus was our white Lilly
changed into a red Rose, red in Blood, and red in Charity.

Thou, O Savior, once did affirm, that no man had greater Charity, than to
lay down his life for his friend. John 15. Verse 13.
How is this true? Had not thou greater Charity, when thou did lay down
thy Life for thine Enemies? yea surely; but thou, in thy Nature, were more than
Man, and in thy Charity, no less than God. Never any Charity like that of
thine, which being God, did dye for man; being just, did suffer for the
unjust; that thereby, thou might make us of sinners, righteous; of Servants,
Brethren; of Captives, Co-heires; of Exiles, Kings: Thy Charity was free,
unforced, unmerited: Thou lovedst not ours, but us, not our sins, but our
persons: Thou did inform us by thy Word, reform us by thy Example, confirm
us by thy Miracles, and all this, to express thy Charity. O quam stupenda
Dulcedo, quam invicta Mansuetudo, Regem gloria, pro despicatissimo vernaculo
imo vermiculo crucifigi! What an unspeakeable Love, and unparalled Charity
was it, for the King of glory, to dye for a worm: and that not for a loving
one neither, but for his enemies. Thou O Jesus, did lay down thy Life, thou
did offer up thy self, thou gave thy body, and blood for our food, thy
Soul, for our Ransom, thy Deity, a refuge against Satan; and all this, to
express thy Charity.

Here then is a Rose without parallel, Charity beyond compare. There are but
three degrees of Charity: The first is, to love them, that love us; this did
the Heathen, and the Publicans. The second is, to love them that do us neither
good, nor evil; many there are, that can reach to this degree too. The third
is, to love them that hate, and persecute us. This last degree is the chiefest,
and may be expressed four ways.

First, when we speak well of our Enemies: this is the service of the tongue.

Secondly, when we give alms to our enemies: this is the service of our store.

Thirdly, when we endure pain for our Enemies; this is the service of our
body.

Fourthly, and lastly, when we dye for our Enemies; and this is the service of
our life.

Many there are who will both speak well, and do well for their Friends, but
who will dye for his Friend? Many will speak well, and do well for their
Friends, but who will open his mouth for his Enemy? What, not a Tongue for an
Enemy? Then I am sure, no man will willingly offer himself to Death for his
Enemy.

Curtius, and the Decij dyed for their Country, and fellow-cittizens, but they
dyed honorably: Christ dyed for his Adversaries, and his persecutors, and that
ignobly. Hic labor, hoc opus est. This was a work indeed, achieved only by
him, who was above all the sons of men, even the Son of God. But what moved
him thus to do? It was Charity alone that constrained him: she was that happy
gale of wind, that drove him upon our Coasts, she alone was guilty of his
Death. Haec de Coelo Deum deposuit, haec in Cruce posuit. It was Charity, drew
him down from Heaven: It was Charity, that fastened him to the Cross. And
therefore, unto thee, O Charity, to thee, I mean, O God: for God is Love. To
thee, I say, we do sacrifice our praises: For thou have procured the
remission of our sins. God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. It was thou that did give that Vermilian Tincture, to our
Celestial Rose, and made our Nazarenus so red in his Passion. It was thou
that gave him to us, that gave him for us, and in him, have given us all
things. Thus is Christ compared to the Rose in Redness, and may justly be
termed Nazarenus, The Flower of Charity.

The last Flower, whereunto Nazarenus may be compared, is the Marygold, The
Marygold.
a Flower for this remarkable: That it opens with the Sun, and shuts with
the Sun: And as the Sun moves from East, to West; so the Marygold seems
still to incline, toward the Sun, and therefore is called (...), Ad Solemn
vertens, Ever turning to the Sun. Our Nazarenus may be called a Marygold, in
respect of his Obedience: He began his life in Obedience to the Ceremonial
Law, in his Circumcision, and ended his life in Obedience to the Moral Law, in
his Passion. The Sun, you know, is the eye of the World, and that bright
Light, which illuminates all Regions. To such a Light is Gods Law compared: Thy
Word is a Lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 119.105.
Psalm. 119.105.
Here is the Sun, Gods Law: Behold now the Marygold, Christ Jesus, opening with
this Sun. For the first words of Christ, which the Scripture particularly
sets down, that he spoke, were words of obedience to the Law: Know ye not
(says he) that I must be about my Fathers business? Luke 2.49. Setting with
the Sun: For at his Death, he cries Consummatum est, It is finished. John
19.30. In his whole life, his face inclined toward the Sun: For he might
truly say, in the words of the Prophet David, I have always set thy Law
before my face. Psalm. 119. And as the face of the Cherubine looked always,
toward the Mercy-seate: so the face of this Marygold, was always, toward the
Sun of Gods Law. He was so addicted thereunto, that it was his meat, to do
the Will of him that sent him, and to finish his Work. John 4.34. John 4.34
The Lord calls him, His righteous Servant, who shall justify many by his
Righteousness. Esaias 53.11. His righteous Servant: There is the exactness of
his Obedience. Who shall justify many by his Righteousness, there is the
Superrogation of his Merits. Thus is Christ compared to the Marygold, and may
be justly termed Nazarenus, The Flower of Obedience.

Here then have I let you see a Garden of fragrant Flowers, to the sight
beautiful, to the smell odoriferous. What remains, but that we enter into
this Garden, and gather of these Flowers, from the Cross of our Savior; and
making Garlands thereof, wear them upon our Heads, and Poses, to carry in the
bosom of our Hearts: O thou sweet Nazarenus, draw us by thy odoriferous sent
after thee, yea, unto thee: Lead us into thy Garden, and comfort us, with the
fragrancy of thy Celestial Flowers. Nay, make us, O blessed Nazarenus,
spiritual Gardens unto thy self: Set in our Hearts some slippes of these
Flowers, purge us from the weeds of vice, and instead thereof, make Humility to
flourish in our cogitations, Innocence, in our conversations, Temperance, in
our appetites, Charity, in our affections, and Obedience, in all our actions:
to the Salvation of our Souls, the good example of our Brethren: To the glory,
and praise of thee our blessed Savior, who were, art, and ever shall be, Jesus
of Nazareth. And so I come to the last word of Pilates Inscription, King of the
Jews.

[King of the Jews.]
THese were the last words of Pilates Inscription, fastened upon the Cross,
whereon our Savior Christ was crucified, which is the third pretended Cause of
his Crucifying. Little thought Pilate, that Christ was truly King of the
Jews, when he set up this Title: For he received this Name, not by Pilates
Inscription only, but by his Fathers Ordination. For he is our Great King,
who rules all things; who has subdued all our Enemies, tryumphing, on his
Cross, over the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

He is called The King of the Jews, not carnally, but spiritually; not of
those that were of the seed only, but of such as are of the Faith of Abraham:
that is, of such as believe with the heart, and confess with the mouth, that
he is their King, and Governor.

This Title was not first given him upon the Cross: for the Prophets did
prophecy of it before. I have set my King upon my Holy Hill of Syon, says
David. Psalm. 2.6. And so the Prophet Zachary, Chap. 9. ver. 9. Rejoice greatly,
thou Daughter of Syon, shout out, thou Daughter of Jerusalem: Behold, thy King
comes unto thee. He is just, and having Salvation, lowly, riding upon an
Ass. His Dominion and Government was foretold by Daniel, Chap. 7. verse. 14.
There was given him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all people,
Nations, and languages should serve him: His Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, which shall not pass away; and his Kingdom, which shall not be
destroyed. It is he that is Rex Regum, Dominus Dominantium: The King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. Rev. 19.16. Rev. 19.16
With this Title did the Wise men seek him: Math. 2.2. Where is he that is
borne, King of the Jews? With this Title did the Soldiers deride him. Math.
27.29. Hail King of the Jews. And with this Title, did Pilate think to
dishonor him, as it is in this Text, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. A
King indeed he was, though Pilate knew it not; whose Kingdom, though it be in
this World, yet is it not of this World; having nothing in it, that is
Temporal, or Terrestrial, but all Spiritual, and Celestial; depending not
upon Man; but upon God; consisting not in Riches, Pomp, Cities, Castles,
Forts, Armies; But in Righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans
14.17. He is universal Monarch, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, whose
Vicegerents only they are here upon Earth.

The Pope wears a Triple Crown, in token of his threefold Kingdom: In
Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell, or Purgatory. What he assumes usurpingly, Christ
Jesus enjoyes properly: For he is a King, Regens in Coelo per gloriam, in
Mundo, per gratiam, in Inferno, per justitiam. A King (I say) reigning in
Heaven, by his Glory, in Earth, by his Grace, in Hell, by his Justice. Unto
this Kingdom Christ has a Triple right.

The first, as he is God, coequall with the Father, by whom all things were
made: John 1.3. John 1.3.
and this he is, Iure Creationis, By right of Creation.

Secondly, he is King, as he is the Son of God, whom the Father has
appointed Heir of all things. Heb. 1.2. And this is Deno Patris, By the
donation of his Father: All power is given me both in Heaven, and Earth. Math.
28.18.

Thirdly, he is King, as he is Mediator between God and Man: And this is
Merito Redemptionis, By the merit of Redemption: and thus (...), he is here
styled, Rex Iudaeorum, King of the Jews. As he is then our Jesus, so is he
our King. The which Title King, presupposes a Kingdom: and a Kingdom,
presupposes Subjects, and Subjects presupposed Laws, and Government. In the
handling therefore, of this Kingly Office, I am constrained, (though but in a
word) to unfold unto you a whole Commonwealth: Christ's Office, his Kingdom,
his Subjects, and his Government. And first of his Office, he is Rex, A King.

The word King imports a Sovereign power over Subjects, whereof, the Scripture
records four sorts.

First, there is Rex infernalis, An infernal King, which is the Devil, called
by Job, Chap. 41. the last Verse, Rex super omnes filios superbiae, A King over
all the children of pride. And also termed by our Savior, John 12.31.
Princeps mundi, The Prince of this world. And by St. Paul, Ephesians. 2.2. Ephesians. 2.2.
Princeps Aeris, The Prince of the Air. And by St. John, Rev. 9.11. King of
Locusts, Abaddon by name, a destroyer by nature, whose Kingdom is of this
world, whose subjects are the slaves of sin, and children of Disobedience:
whose government is wickedness, and whose Law, is the transgression of all
Gods Commandments.

Secondly, there is Rex temporalis, A temporal King; such as Saul, David,
Solomon, Ezechias, and others were in Israel: Such as are now Kings of the
Nations. This Kingdom is both in this world, and of this world: Their
Subjects, men ordered by Reason, and governed by Laws Civil, and
Ecclesiastical.

Thirdly, there is Rex spiritualis, A spiritual King; such is every godly
Christian: A King, and a Priest to God, substituted under Christ. His Subjects
are his affections, which he commands, neither by the Law of Reason, nor by
the Law of Nature, but by the Law of Grace, which is the Word of God.

Fourthly, and lastly there is Rex aeternalis, An eternal, and an everlasting
King, and this is he, who is here entitled, Rex Iudaeorum, King of the Jews.
The Regality of our Savior was directly typified by the Crown, that was about
the Arc: Exodus 37.2. the which Arc represented Christ. His Princely function
was strangely prefigured in Melchisedecke, who was both King, and Priest: In
David, who was both King, and Prophet: In Solomon, who was a Type of our
Savior, in his Sovereignty, in his Riches, in his Wisdom, in his Peace,
excelling all the Kings of Israel, in wealth, in Judgment, and in tranquillity:
hereby resembling our Saviors Kingly Office, in his Riches, his Prophetical,
in his Wisdom; his Priestly, or Mediatorship, in his Peace. This is that
King, whom the Angel foretold to Mary, Luke 1.33. He shall reign over his
house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom, there shall be no end. This is
that King, of whom the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 8.6. Psalm 8.6.
Who was crowned with glory, and honor, and to whom, God gave Dominion over
the works of his hands, and put all things under his feet.

Lastly, This is that King, who is above all Kings; for other Kings Countries
are bounded, his without limits; their time of Reigning is designed, his
endures World without end; their power extends but unto the body, his both to
Soul, and body; he derives his Kingdom from none, they all from him; and
therefore is most fit to be honored with this Royal Title, King of the Jews.

There are six things requisite, to make a good King.

He must be 1 Wise, to govern. 2 Liberal, to reward. 3 Mighty, to defend. 4
Indifferent, to judge 5 Severe, to punish. 6 Peaceable, to reconcile.


^hese six properties met ^^^n Christ, which shows (...) he was a good King:
^ir^t, he is a wise King: For it pleased his Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell. 1 Colos. 1.19. 1 Colos. 1.19.
What fullness? Even the fullness of Wisdom; therefore is he called, The
Wisdom of the Father. Esaias 11.2. For in him did the Godhead dwell (...),
Bodily, instructing him perfectly, what he had to do. The Jews once said of
Christ, That he did all things well: We may say, he rules all things wisely,
diverting all to his own glory, and the good of the Church. He is wise, and
sees all things; he is Prudent, and considers all things: he is provident, and
prevents all things which may prejudise his Church, which is his Kingdom:
therefore he is called, Esaias 9.6. Admirabilis Concilarius, The wonderful
Counselor: For he is that Wisdom, which Solomon speaks of, Prove. 8.12.13.
That dwells with Prudence, that finds out witty inventions: Council is his,
and sound Wisdom: He is understanding, and strength: by him Kings reign,
and Princes decree Justice. Wherefore, albeit Christ, our King, suffer Schisms
in his Church, Dissentions in his Kingdom, and the Enemy to prevail against
his Subjects; yet this is not for want of wisdom to govern, but that thereby
Antichrist may be revealed, the Loyalty of his own Subjects proved, and tried,
and his enemies confounded with the greater confusion. Therefore, whatsoever
Turks, Jews, or Heathen judge of Jesus, we must confess that he is Rex
sapiens, A wise King.

Secondly, Christ is a liberal King: Heathen Histories have recorded the
Munificence of Alexander, the Liberality of Caesar, the Bounty of Titus
Vespasian, of Ptolomeus the Thebane, and of Pertinax the Emperor. And sacred
Scriptures acquaint us with the like, in David, Solomon, Ahasuerus, and others,
famous for their Liberality. But what is their bounty, if compared with the
Liberality of our Jesus, King of the Jews? He exceeds all others herein, as
the Sun does other Stars in Brightness. When he ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.8. behold his Bounty:
Behold, I come quickly, (says he) and my reward is with me, to give to every
one according to his works. Rev. 22.12. A Cup of cold water shall not be
unrewarded, if it be given to a Disciple, in the Name of a Disciple. Christ's
bounty far exceeds all worldly glories, be they never so great, be they never
so many. Ptolomee the Thebane Captain, had so accustomed himself unto
liberality, that, when a poor soldier craved his Alms, he having at that
time in present nothing to bestow upon him, gave him his shoes off his feet,
saying, My friend, make thy profit of these; for I had rather go bare-foote,
than thou should suffer so much. But what has Christ given to us? Not his
shoes, but the garments of his own Righteousness, to cover us, his flesh, to
feed us; his Blood, to refresh us, his Life, to revive us: He has made us his
friends, yea, Co-heires with himself; Romans 8.17. He has made us his sheep:
He is the good shepherd, that laid down his life for his sheep. John 10.11.
He has made us his Branches: I am the Vine, and ye are the branches, says
he, John 15.5. He has made us his Members: For he is the Head, and the whole
Church is Body. 1 Cor. 12.27. Nay, Christ being King, to express his bounty,
gives petty Crowns, or Coronets to all his Saints: Therefore it is said, Rev.
1.6. He has made us Kings, and Priests to God. If Kings, where are our
Crowns? Why, the whole Church has a Crown, figured by the Crown of
Jerusalem. Ezech. 16.12. I put a Jewel on thy forehead, and Earerings in thine
ears, and a beautiful Crown upon thy Head. Nay, more particularly, every
member of Christ has a Crown. There is a Crown for a faithful Husband: A
virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, says Solomon. Prove. 12.4. There is
a Crown for the wise. The foolish inherit folly, but the prudent are crowned
with knowledge. Prove. 14.18. There is a Crown for Children, and another for
Parents. Childrens Children are the Crown of the aged, Prove. 17.6
and the glory of children, are their Fathers. There is a Crown for the
faithful Pastor; thus Saint Paul calls the Philippians, Gaudium, and Corona,
His Joy, and his Crown. Phil. 4.1. Phil. 4.1.
And the Thessalonians, the like: 1 These. 2.19. where they are termed by the
Apostle, The Hope, the Joy, or the Crown of his rejoicing. These are Crowns
given here: but what Crowns may they expect hereafter? Christ has one Crown,
but distinguished in Scripture, by three denominations: the which Crown he
will bestow upon his Saints, and all those that fear him: The Crown of Life,
the Crown of Glory, and the Crown of Righteousness. The first is promised,
Iam. 1.12. Jam. 1.12
Blessed is the man, who endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of Life, the which the Lord has promised to them that love
him, This was likewise promised by Christ to the Angel of the Church of
Smyrna, Rev, 2.10. Rev. 2.10.
Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee the Crown of Life. The
second is promised to Christ's faithful Ministers: For St. Peter encourages
them, saying, When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
Crown of Glory, which fades not away. 1. Pet. 5.4. Of the third, St. Paul
assures himself, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. Thus,
as there is none crowned, except they strive: so there are none that strive
aright, and fight lawfully in Christ's warefare, but shall be crowned; none shall
be his Subjects, but shall be rewarded; Job shall not serve God for naught:
but if he serve him, he shall be recompensed. Wherefore we cannot, but truly
confess, that he, who is King of the Jews, is Rex liberalis, A bountiful
King.

Thirdly, Christ is not only a wise, and a liberal, but also a powerful, and
a mighty King, whose power is seen in two things especially, confounding his
enemies, and in defending his Subjects. The confusion of his Enemies, is an
essential part of his government: for he could never have been a sufficient
Savior, if he had not, and did not confound the enemies of his Kingdom. But
that he should so do, was prophesied by David, Psalm 2.9. Thou shall bruise
them with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel. And
Psalm. 72.9. which was purposely penned for Solomon, but typically describes
Christ: He says, ver. 4. He shall break in pieces the oppressor: and verse. 9.
And his enemies shall lick the dust: whereby the Prophet would insinuate
Christ's power, in the destruction of his Adversaries, and in the confusion of
his foes: What greater Enemy than the Devil? yet, the God of peace shall
shortly tread Satan under our feet, says the Apostle, Romans 16.20. How strong
an enemy is the World to Christ's Kingdom? yet be of good cheer, I have
overcome the World, says Christ to his Disciples, Ioh. 16. ver. the last. How
potent an enemy is Sin against Christ's Kingdom? yet Christ came in the
flesh, that he might condemn sin in the flesh, says the Apostle, Romans 8.3.
And so likewise, Romans 6.6. Our old man, which is sin, is crucified with
Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed; and therefore sin has no
more dominion over us. What is become of that Adversary, which cut off all
Christ's Subjects, namely, Death? St. Paul tells us plainly, That Death is
swallowed up in victory: 1 Cor. 15.54.
And Christ rides tryumphantly, saying, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave,
where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.55.

How has Christ Jesus brought to confusion the Jews, and their Adherents,
which would not have him reign over them? Behold the power of this King of the
Jews, in the subversion of Jerusalem, the destruction of Herod, the confusion
of Julian the Apostate, the ruin of many Heretics, and their Heresies, which
were the Devils soldiers, and foes unto Christ's Kingdom: Only, there
remains the fall of Babylon, that Scarlet-colored Whore, and the destruction
of Antichrist, that son of perdition, whom our Jesus shall destroy with the
breath of his mouth: so let all thine enemies perish O Lord.

Secondly, Christ's power is manifested in the protection of his Subjects: He is
not only Rex titularis, but also Rex tutelaris; Not only a Titular, but also
a Tutelar King. And as Joshua, not only destroyed the Canaanites, but protected
Israel all his days: So Christ, (a Type of whom Joshua was) does not only
confound his foes, but also confirm his friends; destroying his enemies, but
protecting his Subjects: For he is our Judge, he is our Lawgiver, he is our
King, and he will save us. It is he that has saved the children of the needy,
it is he that has, and will for ever deliver the poor, that has no helper:
It is he, that has promised to be with his Church, unto the end of the
World: As to direct it by his Spirit, so to protect it by his power. It is he
that keeps Israel, and neither slumbreth, nor sleeps. Hayle then, O hayle
thou victorious King both of Heaven, and Earth, that have overcome the flesh
within me, the world without me, Death for me, and the Devil against me: That
do correct me in thy mercy, direct me in thy truth, and protect me by thy
power, from all my Adversaries: Thou art the Lord, the Lord strong, and mighty,
thy Name is a strong Tower, to which I fly, and am secure: therefore I will
confess thy power, and acknowledge, that the King of the Jews, is Rex potens,
A powerful King.

Fourthly, a good King must be an indifferent, an impartial King; to judge the
cause of the poor, as well as of the rich; of the weak, as well as of the
mighty; respecting not the Condition of the person, but the Equity of the
cause; not countenancing the rich man, for his Wealth, nor contemning the poor
man, for his poverty: for it is an honor to a Prince, to be a poor man's King.

Such a one is our King of the Jews, who is not partial in his temporal
punishments, nor will be partial in his eternal Judgments. Therefore is he
styled by Saint Paul, The just Judge, that shall render unto every one
according to his works. 2. Tim. 4.8. For of a truth, God is no respecter of
persons, says the Apostle St. Peter, Acts 10.34. For where sin is committed,
there is punishment inflicted, be it King, or Beggar; rich, or poor; Jew, or
Gentile: Wherefore all the World may truly say, that our King of the Jews, is
Rex justus, A righteous King.

Again, fifthly, a good King must be severe against such as are incorrigible,
and will not amend. It is observed by Cicero, That it is the ruin of a
Commonwealth, when Judgment given, is revoked, and the execution of the Law
stopped against Malefactors. And the saying of Solomon is, Because Sentence
against evil doers is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the
sons of men are fully set to do evil. Eccles. 8.11. Eccles. 8.11.
But Christ, like a severe King, will at the length judge, and punish the
wicked. If Jerusalem will not be gathered together under his wings, she shall
be at the last left desolate. Luke 13. verse. the last: And if the Church of
Ephesus will not remember from whence she is fallen, and repent, and do her
first works, he will come against her shortly, and remove away her
Candlestick. Rev. 2.5. And at the last day, what a just Sentence shall he
pronounce, both to the godly, and against the wicked, seperating the Sheep on
the right hand, and the Goats on the left; when he shall say unto the one, Come
ye blessed of the Father receive the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world: but unto the other, Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. Thus is Christ Jesus an
impartial King, punishing all the wicked within his Dominions, and rewarding
the good: wherefore we may say, that our King of the Jews, is Rex severus, A
severe King.

The sixth, and last property of a good King, is, that he be Pacificus, A
peacemaker, and that, both in his own Kingdom, and abroad: This is the
commendation, that Plutarch gives to Numa Pompilius, in whose days, the Temple
of Ianus was kept shut, for the sp^ce of Forty years. And this praise in the
Scripture, is given to Solomon, that during his Reign, Israel was neither
molested with civil Wars at home, nor foreign, with other Nations; herein
being a Type of our King of the Jews, who was called, long before he was
borne, Princeps pacis, The Prince of peace. Esaias 9.6. He was borne in a time of
a general peace, when he wrought our peace on Earth; he is our Peace: He came,
and preached peace unto them, that were a far off, and to them that were
nigh. Ephesians. 2.17 Justly did Christ merit to be called The Prince of peace; for
before his coming, there were many Questions in the World, which at his
coming, he fully determined.

The first question was in the sacred Trinity, and that was this:

our Savior, Math. 26.41. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is
weak. Thirdly, because the whole Nature of Angels fell not, but only some,
that were Rebellious: whereas the whole Nature of Mankind fell, as having
sinned in the root; and pity it was, that so noble a Creature should wholly
perish. Fourthly, because the fall of an Angel, was the ruin of an Angel,
and made him past recovery: Whereas the fall of man, made him not past
recoverie.

should work this Redemption? whether the Father, or the Son, or to Holy
Ghost? And it was determined, that the Son should do it: Because unto the
Father is attributed Power, unto the Son, Wisdom; unto the Holy Ghost,
Goodness: Now Lucifer ambitiously desired Gods Power, and therefore sinned
against the Father: Man desired Gods Wisdom, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing
good, and evil: and therefore, sinned against the Son: Antichrist usurpes
the Goodness of the Holy Ghost, and therefore sins against the Holy Ghost,
and is the son of perdition, and cannot be saved. Now Ejus est liberare, etc.
It behooveth him, that receives the injury, to give the Indulgence; and Man,
that had offended against the Son, must be redeemed by the Son.

Christ, the Son of God, made satisfaction, by Humility, Obedience, and the
suffering of Death.

Christ took away this difference, by becoming a Mediator.

Now, a Mediator must have three properties: Community, Authority, and Power:
Community, he must be indifferent between both; so was Christ, having
Community with God, as God; and Community Authority with Man, as Man. He must
have Authority too, to argue the Cause on either side: So had Christ, pleading
for his Father, that Man had broken his Law: pleading for Man, in making
satisfaction. He must also have Power, upon the determination of the cause, to
make a Reconciliation; so had Christ, having made peace, through the blood of
that his Cross, to reconcile all things to himself, whether they be things in
Earth, or things in Heaven. Colos. 1.20.

between Man, and Satan: The Devil pleaded right unto Mankind, who had sold
himself to him, for an Apple: The difference is taken away by Christ, who
pleads, the Apple to be none of the Devils, and therefore, he bought him not
with his own: but Christ redeemed him, not with Silver, or Gold, but with his
own precious blood. 1 Pet. 1.18.19. And man's sin could not so much exceed
in Demerit, as Christ's sufferings did in Merit.

Man complained of the Woman, that she had allured him; and the Woman of the
Man, that he should have reprooved her; but because they were both Authors of
their own perdition, Christ has made them both partakers of his Redemption.
He took flesh of a Woman, that Women might not think themselves excluded:
but in the person of a Man, that Man thereby might be redeemed: Thus has
Christ, in the world, wrought a world of Peace for us, not peace with the
world: For, Non veni mittere pacem, (says he) but peace with God, peace with
the Angels, peace with Men, peace with the Creatures, and peace with our own
Consciences. Wherefore we may justly say, that our King of the Jews, is Rex
pacificus, A peaceable King.

And thus we have seen the Condition of our Sovereign, Jesus Christ, how he
has approved himself a good King: For he is wise, liberal, powerful,
indifferent, severe, and peaceable; answerable to which qualities, are all his
Actions. For every work of his, is either a work of Wisdom, or a work of
Mercy; or a work of power, or a work of providence; or a work of Justice, or
a work of Peace; as if he intended in all things, to show himself a King for
our commodity: But as the King of Israel changed his habit, and disguised
himself, when he went into the Battle at Ramoth-Gilead, 1 King. 22.30. 1
King. 22.30.
so Christ indeed disguised himself, who being in the form of God, and equal
with God, took upon him the shape of a Servant, continuing ever, though
unknown to the wicked Jews, [Iesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.]

Wherefore, seeing we have but one Sovereign Monarch, who is God, and Man,
and King of the Jews, that has the sole power to command our souls, let us
never deny our Allegiance to him: Let us never make any confederacy, or
enthrall our selves to the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, which would soon
get the Dominion over us, and make us their vassals. And although all
worldlings, drunkards, and unclean persons, and all that continue in
wickedness, without repentance, have made themselves bond-slaues unto these
Tyrants, yet let us, whom God has called to the inheritance of his Saints in
love, stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free: not
suffering our souls to be entangled again, with the yoke of bondage. Gal.
5.1. Their service is nothing but misery, and wretchedness: For Mundus
decipit, Caro inficit, Diabolus destruit: The World will deceive us, the Flesh
will infect us, and the Devil will destroy us: from such Kings, Good Lord
deliver us. Only, O blessed King of the Jews, be thou our spiritual
Sovereign; thou art wise, and wilt instruct us; thou art liberal, and wilt
reward us; thou art mighty, and wilt defend us; thou art just, and wilt not
forget us, thou art severe, and wilt not suffer the wicked to triumph over us;
thou art peaceable, yea, our peace, for thou have wrought Reconciliation with
God the Father; who with thee be glorified for ever-more. Fly then thou
sinner, from bondage, to liberty; from death, to life; from misery, to glory:
Behold, The King of the Jews calls thee, Come unto me all ye that are weary,
and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Math. 11.28. Here is a Proclamation of
pardon for thy revolt, if thou will seek it, if thou will embrace it. He that
is King of the Jews, waits when thou will become his Subject: Behold, (says
he) I stand at the door, and knock, if any man open unto me, I will come in,
and suppe with him, and he with me. Rev. 3.20. Set open the gate of thy heart,
and the King of glory will come in Psalm. 24.7. He will come tibi, si credis,
contra te, si non credis: If thou receive him with faith, and repentance, he
will come to comfort thee; if neither with faith, nor repentance, he will come
to confound thee. If thou become a Subject, he will defend thee; if thou
continue an enemy, he will destroy thee.

Now is Christ coming into thy Soul, as once he came to Jerusalem: Oh,
believe that he is thy King, entertain him joyfully; cut down the Branches of
old Adams corruption, put off the rags of sin, spread them in the way, and
let thy Savior trample on them: Receive him with hearty acclamations, and say,
Hosanna to the Son of David, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the
Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Thus much touching the Office of our Jesus, He is
a King.

Now, for that a King does necessarily presuppose a Kingdom, for they are
Relatives; the next thing we are to treat of, is his Kingdom.

There was never any earthly Empire, but had his limits, and was bounded with
some parts of the habitable World: The Assyrian, Grecian, Roman, and Turkish
Emperors, though they spread themselves far, and wide, yet was there always
some Lands, Nations, and Kingdoms exempt from their Dominion: There was never
any earthly Monarchy, that was perpetual, but, as it had a time of increase,
so has it a time of decrease; being, either by sedition, or foreign
invasion, or some vice, or other, brought to ruin: herein resembling the
natural body of man, which has a time to be conceived, a time to be
nourished, and a time to be brought unto perfection: But when it has attained
his (...), His full growth, it declines again, as the Sun, when he is come
to the Meridian; and in tract of time, either by its own imbecility, or (it
may be) sooner, by diseases, or soonest of all, by sudden Death, drops into
the Grave.

As it is with this Little world Man, so is it with that Great Man, the world;
subject it is to change, and alteration. Now herein, Christ's Kingdom exceeds
all Kingdoms, which, as it is boundless for place, so is it endless, for
time; infinite in extent, and eternal for continuance. He shall reign over
the House of Jacob for ever, there is his perpetuity; and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end, there is his infiniteness.

The Kingdom of Christ is twofold, Superius, and Inferius: His Kingdom which
is above, and his Kingdom which is below: Or rather they are one Kingdom,
differenced by two degrees: though usually we call one, The Kingdom of Grace,
and the other, The Kingdom of Glory: The Kingdom of Grace is that, which our
Savior says, is within us: Regnum Dei intra vos est, The Kingdom of God is
within you: Luke 17.21. Luke 17.21.
wherein CHRIST solely reigns, without substituting any Viceroyes, or
Depu^^^s: For the greatest Monarch, a^^ the most righteous Christian in the
World, is in this case, but a fellow subject, and therefore has no rule over
the Soul, or command over the Conscience, in matters divine, tending to Gods
worship; though otherwise, in matters Civil, and Pol^^icall. For as I have
distinguished Christ from a temporal King: so may his Kingdom be
distinguished from the other; the one being wholly spiritual, the other Per
se, and direct, wholly temporal. This Kingdom or Grace is nothing else, but
our spiritual incorporation into the mystical body of Christ, being made
lively branches of him, who is the true Vine, being established through faith,
in Christ. This Kingdom consists not in worldly dignities, terrestrial
Tryumphs, Cities, Soldiers, Councillors, but in Righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14.17. Romans 14.17.
All are not Subjects of this Kingdom, that are visibly in this Kingdom: For
some there are, that are dead Members, rotten Branches, having a show of
godliness, but denying the power thereof. Some, again, there are, which be
but Forraigners, and Aliens, though suffered to trade, and traffic in it; yet
many of these have gotten the outward habit, and have learned the Language of
this Kingdom, and do so cunningly counterfeit, that they cannot be discerned
from true subjects by any, but by the King himself. This Kingdom is but an
initiation of the other: Here have we the first fruits, there we shall have
the whole lamp; this is but an earnest penny, that other, the full payment; in
this, we labor, in that, we receive the reward: This is Christ's Vi^eyard,
that, his place of payment; this is his Worke-house, that, his Treasury; this
is the Field of War-fare, that, the place of Triumph: yet here we must reign
over our selves, before we can be crowned there: For Regnum Coelorum sperare
non potest, qui propria membra regere non potest: He can never hope to reign
in Heaven, who does not first reign over his own members here on Earth. This
Kingdom is not so secure, as the other; here many fall away, others are cut
off; some intrude without their Wedding-garments, and are therefore imprisoned,
as Spies. This Kingdom is often disturbed by sedition of Heresies, and
Schism; often shaken by the gusts of persecution, often shrewdly undermyned by
privy temptations, but never overwhelmed. For he, who is King thereof, is the
Rock, whereon this Kingdom is immoveably founded: Unto this Kingdom all
strangers are invited, the gates or Ports are shut to none: For Gremium
Ecclesiae nulli clauditur. But some are unwilling, others vilify it: the world
is a clog to some, Pride is a Remora to others: Some disdain the King, others
martyr his messengers; not one, of a Thousand, becomes a true Subject. This
Kingdom is the Church militant, which is nothing else, but Numerus credentium,
The number of true believers; which is Numerus exigu^s, A small number; like
Ieremye Berries, here, and there one, very thinnely strewen, and sparingly
sown: Yet, though they be but few, their confidence is strong for Fear not
little flock, it is your fathers pleasure, to give you a Kingdom. Luke.
12.32. And so I pass in my Sermon, (the which God grant we may all do in
practice,) from the Kingdom of Grace, unto the Kingdom of Glory; Into which
Kingdom, no false hearted Subjects are admitted: Nullus egreditur emicus,
nullus ingreditur inimicus: Out of this Kingdom shall no friend pass, into it
shall no enemy enter. There shall be no Schisms, nor seditions; but the God of
Peace, shall rule all their hearts peaceably: There, Jesus shall Reign over
all his Saints as King, and yet shall make them his Friends, nay, his Brethren:
O qualis ille Rex, qui omnes servos suos facit amicos, and, quod multo magis
est, fratres. Oh what a blessed King is he, who makes all his servants, his
friends; nay, which is more, his brethren! There shall be peace without war,
joy, without heaviness; holiness, without impurity; and happiness, without
intermission. This world is our way, that is our Country; this our War-fare,
that our Triumph; this our suffering, that our glory: Here, are we (as it
were) in the Wilderness, there, we shall possess the heavenly Canaan, the
Metrapolis whereof, is the New Jerusalem, whose glory is unexpresseable: If a
man had the tongue of men, and Angels, and should undertake a description of
it, he that enjoyes it, may very well say of it, as the Queen of Sheba did of
Solomon's Kingdom, that the one half of it was not revealed. In it, is no
Creature base, or thing contemptible, but all things are superabundantly
glorious: A glorious King, whose blessed vision will make us all happy, and in
whom, we shall enjoy all beatitude; glorious Subjects, even the blessed Saints
and Angels; a glorious place, far transcending any earthly Paradise, or
terrestrial place of pleasure: Were it possible to find on earth a City so
glorious, as Saint John describes, Rev. 20.10. yet were it not to be compared
to the glory of Christ's Heavenly Kingdom: There are Riches which cannot rot,
pleasures which cannot fade; Honor, that cannot be lost; Life, that cannot be
expired. O blessed King of the Jews, happy is that man, whom thou choosest,
and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts; he shall
be satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even of thy holy Temple: It is
the King that must choose him, he cannot deserve the dignity of a Subject; for
there is Gratia sine merito, Charitas sine modo: Favor without merit, and Love
without measure: Against this Kingdom can no Enemy resist, upon this Kingdom
can no Enemy make invasion: For this Kingdom was no price given, but the
precious blood of the King of the Jews, the which blood he shed, to purchase
this Kingdom not for himself, but for his Subjects: And so I pass from this
Kingdom, unto the Subjects of this Kingdom, Rex Iudaeorum, King of the Jews.

King of the Jews? what Jews is he King of? of those blasphemous, rebellious
Jews, which cried out, Crucify him, Crucify him? They were of the Synagogue
of Satan, Rev. 3.9. Rev. 3.9.
and said they were Jews, but were not: For all are not of Israel, that are
Israel: Romans 9.6. And some, that are not of Israel, are the Israel of God: For
more are the children of the desolate, than of the married wife. Esaias 54.1.

His Subjects then, are not only the Jews Natural, but the Jews Spiritual,
called by the Apostle, The Israel of God. Gal. 6.16 And these are such, as are
Nathanaels, true Israelites, in whom there is no guile: John 1.47. John 1.47.
being rather Heirs of Abraham's faith, than of his flesh.

It is not then the seed of Abraham, but the Faith of Abraham, that makes a man
an Israelite: and he is not a Jew, that is a Jew outwardly; but he is a Jew,
that is a Jew inwardly, namely, by believing in Christ, and doing his Will. As
the Kingdom of Christ is Diverse secundum, hic, and illic: so are his Subjects
diverse, either such as are here in the Church militant, whom I may call, his
Soldiers; or such as are in the Church Tryumphant, whom I may call his
Conquerors.

In the Kingdom of Grace, which is the Church Militant, they only are true
Subjects, who, besides the outward calling of the Gospel, are made partakers
of the inward calling of the Spirit; which is the Donation of saving Faith, and
Communication of heavenly Grace, whereby the heart is opened, as the heart of
Lydia was, Acts 16.14. when she attended unto the things which were spoken of
St. Paul: and when a man is made a lively member of Christ's mystical body,
being both in profession, and practice truly Christ's. And in this Kingdom,
though Subjects have diverse functions, some governing as Rulers, both to
defend, extend, and enlarge Christ's Kingdom: others being governed, as
Inferiors; yet they all jumpe in this, that they are fellow soldiers,
laboring in this war-fare: Neither Regality, nor dignity, neither Riches, nor
Poverty, exempting them from this spiritual function, and ghostly subjection
unto Christ their King.

From this Kingdom are excluded, first, all such as are without the Pale of
the Church, unto whom the Gospel of Christ has not been preached, as
Heathens and Pagans, or with whom the Name of Christ is vilified, as Jews, and
Turks. Secondly, they are excluded, who are Jews outwardly, but not inwardly;
that is, Christians by name, but not by practice. Hence then are excluded all
Heretics, and Schismatics, being public disturbers of the peace of Syon:
and all carnal Gospellers, and loose Libertines, which, by their wickedness,
wound the bowels of the Church: and all superficial Pharisees, and dissembling
Hypocrites, which privily yield themselves servants to sin, and slaves to the
Devil: These are in this Kingdom, but not of this Kingdom; professing Christ
their Sovereign, but vouchsafing him only a Reed for his Scepter; wearing his
colors, but forswearing his service; talking of his name, but not walking in
his ways: Not every one therefore, that receives his Badge of Baptism, or
makes an outward show of his Service, is truly his Subject: For this is but
to enter into the utter Court of the Temple; and of these may be affirmed that
of our Savior, Math. 22.14. Multi vocati, pauci electi: Many are called, but
few are chosen.

In the Kingdom of glory, they only are Subjects, whom Christ has redeemed
from the earth; for whom he shed his blood, and bare this Title over his Head:
As Christ is King of Heaven Iure Creationis, By right of Creation, so the
Angels are his Subjects: But as he is Rex Iudaeorum, Iure Redemptionis, King
of the Jews by right of Redemption: So, none are his Subjects, but such as are
saved by him. For this was the end, why he became The King of the Jews, That
we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us.
Luke 2.71.

For as St. August. St. Aug.
observes, Non Rex Israel Christus, ad exigendum tributum, vel exercitum ferro
armatum, hostesque visibiliter debellandum: sed Rex Israel, quod mentes regat,
quod in aeternum consulat, quod in Regnum Coelorum credentes, sperantes,
amantes perducat: Christ was not the King of the Jews, to exact Tribute, or to
raise an Army, or visibly to vanquish enemies: but he was the King of the
Jews, to rule men's hearts and minds, to counsel them eternally, and to bring
all those, that believe in him, hope in him, and truly love him, unto
everlasting life.

Happy then is that man, who is a Subject in the Kingdom of Grace: but thrice
happy is he, who is a Subject in the Kingdom of Glory: For he shall be
glorious in his body: This corruptible must put on incorruption: 1 Cor. 15.53.
1 Cor. 15.53.
but much more glorious in his soul: for Qualis tunc erit splendour animarum,
quando lux corporis, Solis habebit claritatem? says St. August. How great
shall the splendour of their souls be, when their bodies shall shine as the
Sun in the firmament? Their felicity shall be such, as that they shall desire
to dwell there for ever, as Peter did on Mount Thabor: And good Reason, seeing
they shall be possessed of such happiness, as neither eye has seen, nor ear
has heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. The which
happiness, seeing we cannot comprehend, Grant, o Lord, that we may be
comprehended of it; and so I pass from the Subjects, unto the government of
this Kingdom, which is the last thing considerable in the Text.

This Mighty Monarch, this King of the Jews, governes not his subjects by
humane Laws, and civil policies; but by his own Law, called by St. Paul,
Gal. 6.2. Gal. 6.2.
The Law of Christ: Now this Law is nothing else, but the Word of Christ, by
which Word we shall be judged at the latter day, says our Savior: His Word
must rule us outwardly, and his Spirit inwardly; the one as a Law, the other as
a Guide. We offend not, if we transgress not his Word; we obey not, if we err
from it. This Law of Christ, whereby he governes, is like the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, unalterable: It shall be an everlasting Law, especially
that new Commandment which he gave us, namely, That we should love one another.

Now, as this Kingdom, and the government thereof is spiritual, and stands
not in the glittering show of this world, nor in any thing desirable by flesh,
and blood, as the two sons of Zebedee vainly imagined; but rules in the
heart, and reins: Therefore the Laws of this Kingdom, and the government
thereof, requires the inward righteousness of the heart, binding not only the
outward act, but the Conscience: For the Authority, and Government of the King,
is that, whereby he, by his Word, and by his Spirit, (for the Word barely,
without the Spirit, pierces not into the heart:) effects, and works the
conversion of those that are to be converted, and glorifies himself in the
eversion, and confusion of the rest. For as the Kingdom of the Gospel, is the
means to bring us to the Kingdom of Grace: so the Kingdom of Grace, does
bring us to the Kingdom of Glory: And none shall enter into the Kingdom of
Glory, but such as, through the Kingdom of Grace, submit themselves, in the
Kingdom of the Gospel, to Christ the King, his his Laws, and Authority.

Now, in this inferior part of his Kingdom, which is the Kingdom of Grace,
there is not the best subject, but is subject to tansgresse, though through
infirmity, yet not through wilful Rebellion. But in the superior part, which
is the Kingdom of Glory, there shall not be the least omission of good, nor
the least commission of evil; but all our thoughts, words, and works, shall
wholly tend to the glory of our Celestial King, and Governor. For when sin,
and the old Serpent, shall be cast into the bottomless pit, we shall have no
temptations, but shall sing, Blessing, glory, honor, and power be unto him,
that sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb for ever-more. Rev. 5.13. Rev. 5.13


What remains now, but that with the Queen of Sheba, we set forward out of
our own Country, the World, to see, and admire the Wisdom, Justice, Peace,
Power, Mercy, and Magnificence of our Heavenly Solomon, here entitled, King of
the Jews. She was a Queen, we subjects; she came from far, we have our
Solomon amongst us; she sought a mere Man, we may find one who is both God,
and Man, she gave presents, we shall receive rewards: Let not the Queen of
Sheba then rise up in Judgment against us, for behold, a greater than Solomon
is here. Seek him then (O sanctified Soul) seek him with devotion, for he is
Jesus, A Savior: seek him by imitation, for he is Nazarenus, A sweet smelling
Flower: seek him by homage, and obedience, for he is Rex Iudaeorum, King of
the Jews: seek him for thy refection, seek him for thy protection, for he is
the Seed of the Woman, that breaks the Serpents Head: It is he that is the
keeper of Israel, and the Salvation of his people: It is he that will slay all
thine, and his enemies, that would not have him reign over them. Though that
great Dragon, old Serpent, and roaring Lion seek to devour thee, yet seek
thy King, and Savior, and he will defend thee: Of thy self, thou art Debilis
ad operandum, facilis ad seducendum, fragilis ad resistendum: Unable to do
well, easy to be seduced, and weak to resist: Yet the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews, is a strong Tower, to fly unto; for under that
thou shall be secure. Fear not therefore, for he is thy shield, and exceeding
great reward: He is that God of peace, that shall shortly tread down Satan
under thy feet. Romans 16.20. Romans 16.20.
Fear not the Law, for Christ has satisfied it; where Moses launceth, Jesus
cures; where the Law searches, the Gospel salveth. Fear not thy sins, if
thou do weep for them; for this King of the Jews, calls all that are
weary, and heavy laden, and he will refresh them. Fear not the world, for
Christ has overcome the world: It is he Qui pugnat pro te, it is he, qui
pugnat in te: It is he that fights for thee against the world, it is he that
fights in thee by his grace. Fear not the ungodly, for thy King is a
righteous, and severe King, who shall one day sit in Judgment, giving
Praemium, and Paenam, Punishment, and Reward; the recompense of Reward to a
faithful subject, and the pain of Damnation to traiterous rebels: For he is
a just Judge, whom neither bribes can allure, nor gifts entice, nor threats can
alter from doing right.

Oh then seek this Jesus, seek this Nazarenus, seek this King of Jews:
Seek him for thy Lord, and he will find thee for his inheritance; install
him for thy King, and he will enfranchise thee for his subject; admit him for
thy Governor, and he will admit thee to glory, and immortality. For his
Kingdom is not of this world below, but of the world above, as was typified by
placing this Title above his Head, not under his Feet.

Oh then, dear Christian, come out of the world, and out of this dangerous,
and dreadful security of the Flesh: Whatsoever seems glorious to the eye,
odoriferous to the smell, harmonious to the ear, delicate to the taste, and
soft to the touch, O forsake them all, to follow Christ.

Awake oh thou Soul that sleep, for the Lord is come: He is come with
Salvation, he is come with Virtue, he is come with Glory: For Jesus comes
not without Salvation, nor Nazarenus without Virtue; nor The King of the Jews
without Glory. Be of good comfort thou lost sheep, Jesus is come to seek,
and to save that which was lost: Be of good comfort, thou lamenting sinner,
Nazarenus is come to deck thee with ornaments of Grace: Be of good comfort,
thou that aspirest to true Honor, for The King of the Jews, will make thee
partaker of his Kingdom.

If thou seek this King of the Jews, thou must seek him with Humility; for
he was Humility it self: He, instead of a Crown of Gold, was content for
thy sake, with a Crown of Thorns; for Regal attire, with a Purple garment,
yea, goary wounds; for a Kingly Scepter, a Reed in his hand; for a Throne, the
Cross; for joyful Acclamations, blasphemous Exclamations; for delicate
dainties, Vinegar, and Gall: Oh seek him then in Humility, for pride ascends
not with the King of Humility, nor malice, with the God of Mercy; nor Lust with
a Virgin-sonne of a Virgin Mother; nor wickedness with the Just one. And if
thou be a subject of this Kingdom, be not like the Swine, Qui Rosas
projiciunt, ut lutum quaerant: Who reject the sweet Rose, to accept the
stinking mire. Oh never conform thy self to this world, be not of that durty
generation: but since thy King, and Savior is in Heaven, let thy conversation
be in Heaven also: let the World, and her brave vanities go which way they
will; be thou (as Anselme says sweetly) Corpore ambulans in Terra, sed cord
habitans in Coelo: One that walks on Earth with thy Body, but dwell in
Heaven with thy Heart. Get out from thine own Country, the World; from thine
own Kindred, the Flesh; and from thy Fathers House, the family of Satan, unto
the Land, which the Lord has shown thee, even that Kingdom, which the King
of the Jews has prepared for thee: where thou shall behold Pulchrum Senatum,
pulchrum Regnum, Regem pulcherrimum: A glorious Assembly of Saints, a glorious
Kingdom, but a King most glorious: where we shall shine in Glory, and
Brightness, with Albes of Innocence on our backs, Palms of Victory in our
Hands, Crowns of Glory on our Heads, and Songs of Triumph in our Mouths: then
shall we enter into Sanctum Sanctorum, Into the Holy of Holies; there shall
we celebrate Sabbatum Sabbatorum, The Sabbath of Sabbaths: Then shall we sing
Canticum Canticorum, The Song of Songs, which none can learn, but those that
are redeemed from the Earth: Then shall we give eternal Honor, Glory, and
Praise to him that was, is, and ever shall be, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the
Jews.

Laus Deo.
The Authors Prayer to Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, collected out of
the foregoing Discourse.
Jesus.
O Thou Son of God, and sweet Savior of the World; Bone Jesus, esto mihi
Jesus: Thou art made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption: Wisdom, by thy Word preached; Righteousness, by our sins
pardoned, Sanctification, by thy grace infused; and Redemption, by thy pains
sustained: Have mercy upon us miserable sinners: Oh, our blessed Savior, who
have borne our sorrows, shed our tears, suffered our disgrace, sustained our
punishment, and paid our debt, inspire us with thy Holy Spirit, that, though
the Jews, Turks, and Infidels revile thee, we may still honor thee; though
they blaspheme thy Name Jesus, we may adore it; though they persecute it, we
may make it our refuge: For thy Name (o Jesus) is a strong Tower, the righteous
fly unto it, and are secured. Though Jews, Turks, and Heathen disdain thy
Name, yet give us Grace, that we may estimate it, to be a precious Ointment
powered out; though they vilify it, let us (sweet Jesus) still glory in it; for
with the Lord there is Justice, but with thee, Oh Savior, there is plenteous
Redemption: Oh Lord, what Pilate deemed to be thy shame, prooves to be thy
glory; he writes thee disgracefully Jesus with his hand, whom he could not call
faithfully Jesus with his heart: Yet will we ever acknowledge Jesus, to be thy
Name, and Jesus is thy Nature; Jesus by Title, a Savior by Office. With this
Name Jesus, thy Birth was honored, and with this Name Jesus, thy Death was
honored: What thou brought into the world, by the Angels Direction, thou
carriedst out of the world, by Pilates Inscription: To thee therefore, (I say
once more) and will never cease saying, and praying, Bone Jesus, esto mihi
Jesus; O good Jesus, be thou to me a Savior.

Nazarenus, sanctified.
OH Holy Nazarenus, who wast sanctified in the womb, and out of the womb;
whose Humane Nature was full of Grace, and Truth; full of Grace, in thy Works;
full of Truth, in thy Words; holy, in thy Birth; holy, in thy Life; and holy,
in thy Death; vouchsafe to look upon us miserable sinners, who were conceived
in sin, and borne in iniquity: Sanctify us with thy holy Spirit, that from
thee, we may derive such holiness of life, and conversation, that all our
thoughts, words, and works, being through thy Grace, sanctified, may be
pleasing, and acceptable unto thee, who have commanded us to be holy, as thou
art holy.

Nazarenus, separated.
O Loving Nazarenus, thou, who were that Scape-goate, separated from thy
fellows, to make an atonement for the sins of the world; thou, that wast
separated from thy Fathers Court of Majesty, by taking upon thee the form of a
Servant; thou that wast separated from thine own Nation, when thou fleddest
into Egypt, for fear of Herod; thou, that wast separated from thy Brethren,
and Kinsfolk, to do thy Fathers Will; thou, that wast separated from thy
Disciples, when thou hungst upon the Cross; thou, that wast separated from the
living, when thou dyedst for our Redemption; thou, that wast separated from the
World, when thou ascendedst into Heaven; vouchsafe to look with the eyes of
pity, and compassion upon us, most wretched, and miserable Caitiffes; separate
our sins far from us, as far as is the East from the West, blot them all
out of thy Remembrance, cast them behind thy back, drown them in the bottom
of the Sea, that they may never rise up against us, to make a wall of
separation, between thee and our poor souls.

Nazarenus, Flos, or Floridus.
OH thou flourishing Nazarenus, thou sweet smelling Flower, sprung out of the
stem of Iesse: Thou fragrant Rose of Sharon, thou white Lilly of the
Valleys; thou, who containest all sweetness in thy self, in regard of the
sweetness of thy Virtues, manifested in thy holy conversation; wherein thou
art a sweet smelling Flower, for imitation: Thou, that do impart thy
sweetness to us, in regard of thy Passion; wherein thou did offer thy self
to God, a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, for our Reconciliation.

Oh thou eternal sweetness, which we shall enjoy hereafter, in the Kingdom
of Heaven, draw us, with thy delicious Odours, after thee, yea, unto thee: Lead
us into thy Garden, and comfort us with the fragrancy of thy Celestial
Flowers, the Violet, the Lilly, the Saffron, the Rose, and the Marygold; nay,
make us (O blessed Nazarenus) spiritual Gardens to thy self; set in our
Hearts, some slippes of those Flowers, purge us from the weeds of Vice, and
Wickedness; as Pride, Deceit, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Envy, Malice, and
Disobedience; and instead thereof, make Humility to flourish in our
cogitations, Innocence, in our conversations, Temperance, in our appetites,
Charity, in our affections, and Obedience, in all our actions, to the salvation
of our souls, the good example of others, and to the glory, and praise of
thee, our sweet Nazarenus.

King of the Jews.
OH Thou Sovereign Monarch of Heaven, and Earth, reigning in Heaven, by thy
Glory, in Earth, by thy Grace; and in Hell, by thy Justice: Oh thou King of the
Jews, who have sole power to command our Souls, take us into thy protection,
who fly under the shadow of thy wings: Oh suffer us not to deny our
Allegiance unto thee; let us never make any confederacy, or enthrall our
selves to the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, who are Enemies unto thee, and
would feign bring us into subjection unto them, get the Dominion over us, and
make us their vassals. And although all worldlings, gluttons, drunkards,
unclean persons, and all that do continue in wickedness without repentance,
have made themselves bondslaves unto these Tyrants; yet grant, o powerful
King, that we, whom thou have called to the inheritance of thy Saints, in love,
stand fast in the liberty, wherewith thou have made us free, not suffering our
souls to be entangled again, with the yoke of bondage: We know, that their
service is nothing but misery, and tyranny; the World will deceive us, the
Flesh will infect us, and the Devil will destroy us; from such Kings, good
Lord deliver us. Only thou, o blessed King of the Jews, be our spiritual
Sovereign; thou art wise, and wilt instruct us; thou art liberal, and wilt
reward us; thou art mighty, and wilt defend us; thou art just, and wilt not
forget us; thou art severe, and wilt not suffer the wicked to triumph over us;
thou art peaceable, and wilt give us peace with God, peace with our Neighbors,
and peace with our own Souls, which is the peace of a good Conscience: Yea,
thou art our peace, who have wrought our Reconciliation with God the Father; to
whom, with thee oh Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, and the Holy Ghost,
our everlasting Comforter, be all honor, and glory, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, in the behalf of the
Church, and all the Members thereof.
O Thou sweet Savior of the World, thou Lion of the Tribe of Judah; thou
fragrant Rose, sprung from the Root of Iesse, we humbly beseech thee, to
bless thy Universal Church dispersed, and despised over the face of the
Earth: and therein comfort all those that are comfortless, strengthen those
that are weak, uphold them that stand, raise up them that are fallen: Send
help, comfort, and consolation in thy good time, to all thy Children, that be
in sorrow, need, sickness, misery, or any other adversity.

More especially, we beseech thee, to bless this Church, and Commonweal
wherein we live, enter not into Judgment with the crying sins of the Land,
but first remove from us our sins, and then, in mercy, take away thy heavy
Judgments, which are already fallen upon us; and, which is greatly to be
feared, will every day, more, and more, befall us, unless with true, and
unfeigned Repentance we turn unto thee, O Jesus, who art both willing, and
able to save all those, that fly to thee for succor.

Continue, we humbly beseech thee, the rich treasure of thy Gospel amongst
us, give it a free passage daily, more, and more; convert, or else confound all
those, that are enemies unto the same, and which seek to overthrow that
Church, which thine own Right hand has planted, and whereof thou thy self
art the chief cornerstone, sometimes of the Builders refused: Reform those
things which are amiss in thy Church, and grant, that thy Glorious Majesty,
may be exalted in this Nation ever-more, in sincere, pure, and holy
worshipping of thee.

To this end, O good God, power down all thy blessings, both spiritual, and
temporal, upon thy dear Servant, and our most gracious Sovereign, whom thou
have appointed to rule over us, CHARLES, by thy gracious goodness, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Bless him
with thy saving Health, anoint thine Anointed, with the sweet senting Oil
of Joy, and Gladness, above all his fellows: Let the advancement of thy
Honor, and Glory, be the chiefest aim of his desires; give unto him a more
than ordinary strength, courage, and magnanimity, fit to sustain, and bear
the weight of so heavy a burden, as the weight of so many Kingdoms are: Grant
unto him the Spirit of Wisdom, discretion, and government, that with all
Equity, and Justice, he may these his Kingdoms peaceably, and quietly
govern: Defend him from all foreign invasions, and from the mischievous
practices of domestical Traitors; scatter all his Enemies abroad, make them
like water spilt upon the earth, never to be gathered up again: bless him in
life, with many happy days; in death, with the peace of Syon; and in Heaven,
with the joys of Paradise.

Bless together with him, with abundance of blessings, sp^^^^all, and (...)
Majesty's (...) Queen (...) Charles, (...) succee^^ (...) with all (...) ^^all
Pro(...) excellent (...) Elizabeth, the (...) Sister, with


