An exposicyon upon a piece of saint James epistle to the end of ye second
chapitre, beginning at D. in ye same chapitre: as hereafter follows.

I will power out of my spirit upon all flesh: Your sons and your daughters
shall prophesye: your young men shall se visyons, and your old men shall dream
dreams. Joel. ij. Act. ij. printer's or publisher's device

Iac. ii. what avails it my brethren though a man say that he has faith / if
he have no deeds / can faith save him?
HEre it is plain / that James speaks of such an historical faith, as is
now among christen people for the most part / which when they do believe
all things that be spoken of in scryptures, as they do a tale of Robyn hode,
or of Gesta Romanorum, think it is sufficient enough as concerning faith to be
saved by: moved only by auctorite of their elders: as ye Jews and Turks
believe their law. And that ye may ye better perceive that he speaks of such
a story, or deed faith: Note yt he says not, what avails it though a man
have faith / but what avails it says James, though a man say that he has
faith? And truth it is, that such a story or deed faith only: as to believe
that Christ was borne of the virgyn Marye / that he suffered death / rose again
and ascended in to heaven: can justify or save a man no more than that same
story faith does iustifye the deuylles, which (as saint James says (do
believe all these things as well as they. Moreover, if such an historycall
faith could iustifye, that is, obtain and purchase remyssyon of sins: than
should all such false preachers yt the scriptures threatens with such
dampnacion, be saved as well as they that preach in Christ's name. Also if such
a deed faith could iustifye or save, than should all that bear the name of
Christ be saved, which is contrary to the word of god, which says. Math.
vij. Enter in at the straight gate / for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
yt leads to destruction, and many there be yt enter in thereat. But straight
is the gate, and narowe is the way that leads unto life, and few there be
that find it. Now if there be any so folysshe (as I think there be none) as
to believe that Jews and Turks, with such other infidels, shall only enter in
to that wide gate of destruction, and that Christ calls it ye broad way,
because there be so many of them that shall be dampened / than I pray you harken
what Christ said afterward i^ the same chapitre. Not all they that say unto
me, master master shall enter in to ye kingdom of heaven, but he yt fulfilleth
my fathers will which is in heaven. Many will say unto me (says Christ Math.
vij.) in that day. Master master, have not we in thy name prohesyed, and in
thy name have not we cast out deuylles? And in thy name have not we done
miracles? And than will I knowledge unto them that I know them not / depart
from me al ye that work iniquite. Saint Paul also, showing that such a story
faith could not justify: says these words. Tit. j. All things are pure to
them that be pure / but unto ye defiled and vnbyleuers nothing is pure / but
the mind and conscience of them is polluted. They confess (says Paul) that
they know god, but with their deeds they deny him, and are abominable,
disobedient, and unto all good works discommendable. Many places of scripture
there be which might be brought in here for this purpose / notwithstanding
because I will not be tedious unto you, I will show you but this one text more
of saint Paul. Ephesians. v. Saying that no whoremonger, either unclean person, or
covetous person (which is the worshypper of ydols) has any in heritau^ce in
the kingdom of god. That is to say, if they continue still in these vices
unto their end. And how think ye? be none that be called christians
whoremongers? or else is chrystendome without unclean persons? Yea and how many
are couetyse even until the brethe go out of their bodies? And now to declare
more plainly that such a storyck or deed faith can not iustifye or save a man,
s. James brings forth an example, which is so plain, that it needs no
declaracyon: saying these words. If a brother or a sister be naked / or
destitute of daily fode / and one of you say unto him: depart in gods name /
god send you warmenes and fode / notwithstanding ye give him not those
things that are nedeful to the body / what helps it them? Eue^ so faith /
if it have no deeds is deed in it self.

Or ever I proceed any farther, I will show you what is the true faith, which
the chosen children of god must believe. He must believe steadfastly and surely
without wavering, not only god the father, sone, and holy ghost, but must put
all his trust, hope, and confydence to be saved only by him / and bileue that
he is our god, our father, to us an almighty helper and deliverer. Tit. iij.
And that he has chosen us of his mere mercy to be saved before ye beginning
of the world. Rom^. v. And that he loved us so well, that when we were yet his
enemies, he reconsiled us unto him, by the death and merytes of his sone, our
sauyoure Jesus Christ. Upon which believe and sure perswasyon, we love him so
ernestly again, that we cease not (time and occasyon offered) to fulfill his
commandments in doing the works of charity to our neighbor. Of this lively
faith speaks Paul always. Galath. v. which by charity or love is mighty in
operacyon. Also Paul says. Roma. viij. If any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of Christ's. Wherefore (says he) if the spirit of Christ
dwell in you, even he that raised up Christ from death, shall quycken your
mortal bodies because that his spirit dwells in you. And to the Galathians
he says. Gala. v. The fruit of the spirit, is joy / love / peace / long
sufferynge / gentylnes / goodness / mekenes / faythfulnes / temperancye. Whereby
ye may perceive that faith comes by the spirit of god, and that we can not
be idle when we have received it / but love which is the fruit of the spirit
of god, causes us to work.

I trust in god, that now a very blind man may perceive that this lively
faith, always styrred to good works by the holy gooste, is not that faith
which James speaks of here, but that faith whereby he shows his example,
which is rather to be called a vain opinion than faith. And look as it does
proceed out of the heart of a sinful man. ij. Corin. iij. which of him self
can not so much as ones think a good thought, so has it neither power ne
strength to work goodness / or any thing that is acceptable in the sight of
god. No nor that deed faith does save, iustifye, or bring a man in to gods
favor, no more than (as saint James says) the bare words spoken do relefe
and comfort a poor man in his necessite: Now goes he forth and says. But
one will say unto me: I have faith / and thou have deeds. Show me thy faith
by thy deeds / and I will show the my faith by my deeds.

Hear he means no more, but that the christen people should live so purely
in showing charity / and doing the works of mercy / that they which were not
true christen might se by their fruits that they had the right faith in
deed: as Christ says. Math. v. Se yt your light so shine before men, that they
may se your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. Byleuest
thou (says James) that there is one god / thou do well: the deuyls believe
it also / and tremble. will thou understand (o vayn man) that faith without
deeds is deed?

These words are so plain, that he speaks of such an hystoricall faith as
the deuyls have, that they do in manner make these iugglynge spirits mad /
yalpynge, roryng, cryenge out, and speaking evil: as Petre says. ij. Pet.
ij. of that which they know not. Of which mystical sort (I call them so,
because they walk in the mistes and darkness of men's tradicyons) Paul
gives us warning: saying. Coll.ij. Beware lest any man come and spoil you
through phylosophye and disceytfull vanitye, through tradicyons of men, and
worldly ordynaunces / and not according to Christ. And these false apostles,
with all that believe their preaching: have none other but this deed faith that
saint James here speaks of, which he also does testifye that the deuylles
do not want, which may stand with all myschiefe. And this is to believe only yt
there is a god / that Christ was borne of a maid / that he dyed, rose again /
and ascended in to heaven. etc. And therefore as James says, men are justified
no more thereby than are the deuyls, which are dampened. And as the deuylles have
no faith given them by the spirit that can repent of evil doing, or believe
in Christ to be saved through him / or that can love god, or do his will. So
have these false prophets, with all their sect no such faith to be saved
through Christ's merytes / though they babble in every sermon that Christ was
borne for our welthe, and suffered death for our redempcyon / and rose again for
our iustifycacyon: as it appears in that they go so much about to iuggle
with this epistle of James, and would thereby prove yt our salvation should come
in part or in hole by works, which is, as says Paul, the denyenge of
Christ's death and redempcyon. Gal. ij. For if ryghtwysnes (says he) came by ye
law, than is Christ deed in vain. j. Ioh. j. and Titu^. iij. And where as the
true church of Christ does believe al in one Christ, and to be saved only by
his blood and merytes. ij. Petri. ij. These wells without watre, to whom is
reserved the myste of darkness for ever: promising us lybertye, being them
selves the bond servants of corruption / do teach to believe in all things
saving Christ: as in soul masses / diriges / pardons / and purgatory:
whereby they plainly deny that Jesus has bought us. ij. Pet. ij. as is
prophesyed / and do say that we are purged from sin by such things. And
this am I certain, that through such things which purges from Christ, but
not from sin / and have left the common welthe full thynne and bare. For
because men put their faith in it that ought to be set and grounded alonely in
Christ / that they shall unless they do repent and turn their believe before
they dye, go to the devil for all their labor and cost / except the
infinyte mercy of god be the more merciful. For Christ says. Johan. iij. He
that byleueth not, shall be dampened / ye he is condemned already. j. Johan.
iiij. Saint John^ says also, that Antechryst should deny Christ to be come
in the flesh. And that is done already through such means as are before
showed. But I pray god of his mercy to give his chosen people better grace in
understanding this epistle: than that they should as far as in them lies,
make this worthy apostle James one of those false prophets, that for couetyse
would deny the redemption that is in the blood of Christ, appoyntynge it to
works, which salvation (as saint Paul says. Ephis. iiij.) is the gift of
god / and comes not of works, lest any man should booste him self. He
says also (Roma. vj.) that the reward of sin, is death / but eternal life
is the gift of god, through our lord Jesus Christ.

Now come we to that which our Baal gods do so much lean to. And for
because they reckon them selves so sure hereby: I trust through gods grace
easily to supplant them, and make their building all lightly to fall, and to
lie in the mire, seeing they took no fast hold but builded upon a wrong
ground as they wrongefully use to interpret all scripture. was not Abraham
our father iustyfyed by his deeds when he offered Isaac his sone upon the
altar? thou see than how that faith wroughte in his deeds / and through
the deeds was his faith made perfyte.

For the understanding of this, I exhort you to know that there be two manner
of iustifycacyons. The one is called the iustifycacyon of the law. Roma. iiij.
or our own ryghtwysnes. Roma. ix. and is no more, but to do the works of the
law, whereby the people may know that one is ryghtwyse. And this ryghtwysnes
may one have and yet be dampened: as had the phariseys, of whom Christ says.
Math. xxiij. Woe be unto you ypocrytes, which outwardly do appear ryghtwyse to
men, but within ye are full of dissymulacyon and iniquite. And Paul likewise
said of ye Jews (Roma. x) that he bare them record, that they had a fervent
mind to god ward, but not according to knowledge. For they being ignoraunte
of the ryghtwysenes of god, went about to stablysshe their own
ryghtwysenesse / so that yet they were disobedient to godly ryghtwysenes.

And of this ryghtwysnes speaks he more; putting him self for example:
saying thus. Philip. ij. As touching (quod he) the ryghtwysnes of the law, I
was faultles. In likewise speaks Moses of this iustyfycacyon in these
words: The lord (quod he) talked with Moses: saying. Deuter. xxx. Speak
unto the chyldre of Israel, and say to them. Wherefore after the doings of the
land of Egypt wherein ye dwelte, se that ye do not / neither after the doings
of the land of Canaan whyther I will bring you / neither walk ye in their
ordynaunces: but do ye after my judgments / and keep my ordinances to walk
in them. For I am the lord your god / keep therefore mine ordinances, and my
judgments / which if any man do, he shall live thereby. And Paul reciteh the
effect of the same text, saying. Roma. x. Moses descrybeth the ryghtwysnes
of the law, how that a man that does the things of the law shall live
therein. And in this manner means James (Gene. xv.) that Abraham was iustyfyed
by offering up his sone Isaac upon the altar. Notwithstanding yet this
rightwysnes of Abraham proceeded of faith: as James shows. For faith wroughte
in his deeds / and through his deeds did iustifye or declare him just before
men, which could not else se his true faith, whereby he was iustyfyed long
time before in the sight of god. But now for because our sophysters do say
that Paul and James do not agree in this point / and do think the cause to
be, that Paul speaks so little of this outward ryghtwysnes, and James so
little of the perfyte iustifycacyon coming by faith: I shall prove you that
they agree well in one.

I have showed you already how Paul agrees with James concerning the outward
ryghtwysnes in that he allegeth so plainly for him Moses. Roma. x. Whereunto
agrees full well that he speaks of him self. Philip. ij.

Yet peradventure ye will not be thus satisfied, except you knew that Paul
does write so well of the outward rightwysnes, whereby Abraham is justified
before the world, as of the inward ryghtwysnes that made him commendable
before god. But that may you lightly find and se, if ye mark well Paul's
words, where he says. Roma. iiij. What shall we than say, that Abraham our
father did find or get as concerning the flesh, that is to say / by his
works? That is to say. What profit had Abraham our father than, as
concerning ye outward ryghtwysnes of the law? If Abraham (says Paul) were
justified by his deeds, than has he wherein to rejoice: but not before god.

Mark I pray you yt Paul says, Abraham had wherein to rejoice / that is to
say, he had deeds which justified him outwardly before men with the ryghtwysnes
of the law for his obedyence in offering up his sone Isaac: So that you may
now se, that Paul and James do accord in one concerning the outward
ryghtwysnes that makes men commendable before the world. Now will I speak
of ryghtwysnes approved and commended of god / and prove you that therein they
do likewise agree.

Of this ryghtwysnes which avails and is commended of god / through which
we be absolved from sin / having the same forgyuen, and not imputed or laid
to our charge: speaks Christ in diverse places of the gospel, saying thus.
Be it to the according to thy faith. Math. ix. Thy faith has saved the. etc.
He says also in the third chapitre of John^, that who so ever hears the
word of god, and byleueth in him that he was sent of, shall not se dampnacyon,
but is escaped from death to life. Paul pryncypally intending to prove that,
writes to the Romans in the third chapter, saying: That the iustificacyon
allowed before god comes by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all
that believe. etc. Also we know (says Paul. Gala. ij.) that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ / and we
have byleued in Jesus Christ therefore, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the law / because no flesh shall
be justified by the deeds of the law. Moreover he proves by scripture that
Abraham was justified by faith before god, saying thus. What (quod he) says
the scripture? To which he makes answer thus. Gen^. xv. Abraham byleued god,
and it was imputed or reckened his iustifycacyon or ryghtwysnes.

Now according to my promise made before, I shall lightly prove you that
James agrees with Paul concerning the ryghtwysnes coming by faith.

Iaco. j. Saint James in the first chapitre of his epistle says, yt god
begat us of his own will by the word of life, that we should be the first of
his creatures.

Oh good James, how do our false apostles peruerte and mysconstre thy words?
For if thou do knowledge yt god begat us of his own will, than is it euydent
that thou thoughtest not that we might begete our selves by works / which is
to despise the blood of Christ. Therefore concludes James with Paul (Roma.
iiij.) saying. And the scripture was fulfilled which says: Abraham byleued
god, and it was imputed to him for ryghtwysnes, and he was called the friend of
god.

Now would I desire all christen people to pray to god to give us perfyte
faith to trust to the merytes and passion of Christ / leest while we having a
fervent mind to god ward, but not according to knowledge, be yet ignoraunte
of the ryghtwysnes allowed of god, (Rom^. x.) as the Jews were / and thereupon
to go about to advance or stablysshe our own ryghtwysnes as they did, which
is disobedience to the iustificacyon acceptable and allowed of god, which
disobedyence commytte all they that seek to be iustyfyed by their works. Now
proceeds forth saint James: saying. You se than how that of deeds a man is
iustyfyed: and not of faith only.

As though he would say, although it be so, that faith only iustifyeth in
the heart and before god without help of works / ye and ere that works come.
Heb. xj. For without faith it is impossible to please god / yet for because
men do not know thy heart, and so can not se thy faith: therefore do thy
works being good, make yt to be counted ryghtwyse before men. But faith
only iustifyeth before god, and in the heart / and the works do declare a man
justified to ye world, and causes the faith to be seen. Faith iustyfyeth
before god / and works before the world iustifye us / that is to say, declare
us just.

Another example saint James puts here: saying. Was not Rahab the harlot
justified: wha^ she received the messengers / and sent them on an other way?

I answer. Yes truly, outwardly and before the people she was by that good
work, in receiving peasybly the messengers to lodging, and sendyng them out
an other way, but inwardly in her heart she was justified before through faith:
as Paul says, speaking of her in this wise. Hebre. xj. By faith (says
he) Rahab the harlotte perysshed not with the other vnbyleuers, after that she
had received ye spies to harborowe peasibly.

Now concludes James: saying. For as ye body without the spirit is deed:
even so faith without deeds is deed.

Here to knytte up all the matter that he entreats of. Roma. viij. He means,
that if the faith that a man has, be not given him by the spirit of god, and
that ye same spirit quyckeneth not the mortal body to do good when time and
occasion comes, than it is but an historical and deed faith of man's
imaginacion / and that a man is no more justified thereby, than the deed carcas
is quyckened by the soul, when there is none in it.

FINIS.
The laud be to god.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete / at ye sign of the Son / by me Johan
Byddell. Anno dn^i. 1536

Cum priuilegio.

I B
printer's device of John Byddell

John^ Byddell.


