A Letter sent to Master A. B. from the most godly and learned Preacher I. B.
In which is set forth the authority of Parents upon their children, for
gyuing of correction unto them.

With an addition of a Sermon of Repentance annexed thereunto.

Anno Domini. 1548.

To his loving Friend and Cosyn, Master A. B.
GRace and peace in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, be with you and all
yours. I am very much grieved, to hear of those afflictions of mind, which
do so greatly trouble and appassionate you, and my dear Cousin your wife, for
the disobedience of your son toward you. And specially for that you stand
in some doubt with your self, in respect of his ryper years now, whether you
should give him such sharp correction, as without which, there is little hope
of his good reformation: he being now entered into the age of twenty and
above. Truly you must take this, to be a just punishment sent from God unto
you: in that you have heretofore, so careleslye let fall the reins of his
government out of your own hands, and laid the same so loosely in the neck of
your youthful son, permitting him without chastisment, to do what he would:
and to follow the lewd affections of his own rash will and pleasures. I did
always much fear and mistrust, that this your overmuch suffraunce, would
breed and bring forth at the length his great hinderance, much discomforte to
your self, and heaps of sorrow to al us your faithful friends and kinsfolks.
For who sees not, that in all things it is most plain and euydent, both to
men of judgment and learning, but chiefly to men of wisdom and experience,
that youth and young things, always have been, be, and ever will be such and the
like, as in and by their education they are taught and framed. Yea, it is most
commonly and in manner continually seen, that nature by the power and strength
of education, is often times utterly changed and altered to the contrary, the
history of Socrates does approve it: the memory of Balenus does throughlye
confyrme it: and even in our own time and age, it is so fully witnessed, as
it needs no great argument to set forth the same. I me self have seen a
very mungrell Curre, trained up and made to the hurt Dear, so excellent, so
perfect and so good, as that he was bought and soulde for xx. angels between
two brethren. This did education put into him against nature. Again I have
seen a most fair and bewtifull hounde, and even of the best kind, being
bred and brought up to sleep and lodge in a knights Chamber, and to wait
upon him there: has utterly refused to hunte, or to follow the chase
according to his kind, yea, though he was beaten unto it from his masters
heels right sharplye. It is beyond all belief, what a wonderful great force
and power in all things has education. So it is most certain, that if there
be due care and diligence had and used, that virtuous and good behauyour be
taught and lovingly cherished: and lewd and loose demeanor forbidden and
sharply punished: the child which is always sure, to taste and receive the
great pleasure of the first, and not to escape for no cause the bitter pains
of the second, will always no doubt gladly embrace the one, and wyllingly
fly the other. Wherefore I conclude, that if you had brought up your son with
care and diligence, to rejoice in the fear of God, to take pleasure in
meekness and humylity, to delight in obedience toward his Parents: and on the
other side to be afraid to do evil, to shun disobedience, and to fear the
smarte of correction: you should then have felt those comfortes, which happy
Parents receive from their good and honest children: and never have known
those sorrows, which now oppress your heart, for the grief of your unruly
son. But will you know the root and cause of all this? Alas even your self,
and my siely Cousin your wife, carried on with a fond love and a foolish
affection, which evermore falls out to be the childs utter destruction: you
both have suffered him, to pass on pleasauntly in his own delights: you have
permitted him, to run the course of his own will: you have foolishly
forborne, to spend the sharp rods of correction, upon the naked flesh of his
loins: you have fondly pyttied, to spylle some blood of his body, with the
sharp strypes of chastisment: and what have ye wrought thereby? you have
preserved his skyn from breaking, his blood from spylling, and his loins from
smarting. A three halfpeny matter, yea though his skin had been broken in
pieces, though his blood had run down in streams, and though his scourged
loins had smarted forty days after. For now by forberaunce of this which is
nothing, you have put your son in hazard of utter confusion: you have heaped
your own discomforte and lamentation: yea, you have endaungered your utter
deep damnation. For be you most assured, that before the Lord you shall give
acount of such careless and neglygente bringing up of your children, so much
to their own destruction, and when they perish for want of that rod of
correction, which is committed unto you, and put into your hands, only to the
end and intent, that you should use it for their chastismente and good,
assuredly their death and damnation will be required at your hands, and you
shall answer as well for their bodies, as for their souls, in that last day
of judgment, before the Tribunal seat of GOD. But I hear, that now you
weep and wayle bitterly for that which is past: you find your own follye
now: you repent you of your extreme fondness and foolish pity heretofore:
and if your son were in his tender years again: you say that then you
would chastise him with all severe scourges and castigation. Behold how one
great follye does acompany an other, and that greater then the first. Good
Lord, how wonderfully are you blinded in that, which is more clear than is
the light of the noone day. Your son is now of twenty years old and more: Is
he therefore free from the rod of correction? Is he therefore now not subject
to the stripes and scourges of his father? Is he therefore not to be stripped
naked, and to be beaten and whipped, until you have broken even all the skin
of his body, spilt the blood of his loins in abundaunce, and given him so
many thousand scourges, as that he may neither lie nor sit without pain in
forty days after? Nay he is nothing at all free from these things. For all
this is most fytte to be done, and he is to be haled home with violence, and
whether he will or not to be taught to obey, by the smarte of his loins, and
to be trained to his duty by the pains of his scourges. For when gentle
lenatiues will do no good, to an old sore over long neglected: you know that
Corosiues are to be applied, and though always they put the pacient to great
pains, yet are they most sure Salues, to heal and cure the wound. Be not
therefore abused, in believing that your child being above twenty years of age,
ought not therefore most sharply for his faults to be scourged and punished. In
former ages, the sons and daughters have been subject to the scourges of
their Parents, even all their lives long. And by the laws of God, and of
nations: it remains and ought to be so still. Does not the law at this day,
for diverse faults, judge both the man and woman, even naked to be most
grievously whipped, and that with the scourges of whipcordes knotted, some with
a thousand strypes, some with more, and some with less, according to the
quality of their offense? And is not think you, the authority of the parents
upon the child, far above and superior, beyond all the laws positive, that
man may stablishe and make? You shall hear, what God himself has set down
and enacted in his sacred book, which is above all earthly laws and
constitutions. And thereby shall you plainly perceive in how great and strayte
subjection, it is the express will of God, that children do stand and remain
toward their parents. The text is thus. If any man have a son that is
stubborn and disobedient, Deutr. 21.
which will not harken unto the voice of his father, nor the voice of his
mother, and they have chastened him, and he would not obey them: Then shall his
father and his mother take him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City,
and unto the gate of the place where he dwells: and shall say unto the
Elders of his City: This our son is stubborn and disobedient, and he will
not obey our admonition: Then all the men of the City shall stone him with
stones unto death. So thou shall take away evil from among you: that Israel may
hear it and fear. Here you see two things are to be noted. First that there
be no years excepted: but if he be a son, (that is to say a child of his
parent, for under that word son, both son and daughter are equallye
comprehended) he is fast bound to the duty of obedyence. Let him be of what
years so ever he may be, if he be at any time disobedient to the voice of his
father, or of his mother, he is subject to their chastismente. The second note
is, that this disobedience of the child to his Parente, is a thing so hateful
to almighty God, as that he has pronounced by his own mouth, that such a
child shall dye the death therefore. Let not parents then be doubtful or
scrupulous, by the sharp chastismente of whipping and scourges to correct
their children, to the uttermost: when by their power and authority over them,
they may for their disobedience deliver them unto death. For if death be
commanded to the disobedient child by God himself, O ye fond and foolish
parents, will ye make any scruple pity or compassion, to strip him naked, to
beat him, whippe him, and scourge him, yea not with a thousand strypes, but
even with many thousands and that most bitterly and sharply, when gentle
admonitions and warninges given, will not prevail? For you know what is
written in the book of God: Prouer. 13
He that spares his rod, hates his child, but he that loves him, chastises
him betime. And in an other place. Prouer. 19
Chastise thy son while there is hope: and let not thy soul spare for his
murmuring. This text does very well forewarne those fond and foolish
parents, that will be moved, to pity the cries or lamentations, of their
corrected children, for this is as much as if he had said: whether thy child
murmour, or mutine against his correction, whether he resist or set himself
against thee: whether he make moan or lamentation unto thee: yea, though he
speak never so fair to entreat thee: whether he weep or wail, cry or
exclayme: Finally, whatsoever mean or moan he make unto thee, to move thee to
that fond or foolish pity or compassion: let thine ears be still deaf unto
him: and let not thy soul spare, lustely to lay on the sharp strypes of
correction, even with all the might and power that thou can give them. For
again he says: Prouer. 20
The blewnesse of the wound does serve to purge the evil: and the strypes
within the bowels of the belly. This teaches us to whip and scourge, not only
till the blood run down, but even till we have left wounds in the flesh:
and this does plainly prove, that the scourgings of disobedient children, ought
to be with knotted whipcordes, and not with rods of byrche, which God knows
unto a shrewde boy, is but a simple chastisment: and in a few days after, is
soon recouerd and forgotten. But this text says, that the strypes should be
such and so severe, as they should pass and enter even into the very bowels
of the bellye: that is to say, even the very heart and soul of the disobedient
child, that lies within the bowels, should feel the sharpness of his
correction, it ought and should be so great unto him. And why? marie to save
himself from shame and confusion, and his soul from damnation. And therefore
in an other place it is said: Prouer. 23
Withholde not correction from thy child: for if thou smite him with the
rod, he shall not dye. Lo, here is a blessing promised to that child, whom
the parents do smite with the rod of correction: and that even the greatest
blessing of all blessings: which is eternal salvation. And is it not also
likewise emplyed think you by this text? that if this child be not smitten
with the rod of correction by his parents, that he is then in danger of
eternal damnation? Ye, no doubt it is. For in an other place, the same is
plainly confyrmed to be so, where he says thus: Thou shall smite him with the
rod, Prouer. 23
and shall deliver his soul from Hell. And after this he says: Correct thy
son, Prouer. 29
and he will give thee rest, and will give pleasures to thy soul. Lo how he
says, that it shall be rest and pleasure to the soul of the parents, to
correct their child. So as we ought to take pleasure in their sharp
correction: because it is so much for their sweet good and behoof: and ^o
greatly for their own comfort. And there is no doubt, but that if either we be
negligent, and reck not: or moved with fond pity, and will not give that
sharp and severe punishment that we ought: assuredly the fall and confusion of
that child, shall be required at our hands in the day of the Lord: and our
soul shall pay the price of his destruction. And therefore we ought, not
only to correct them, but also to instruct them, and teach them. For all
their whole life, rule, order, disposition, and government, depends upon us.
And therefore it is written in Ecclesiasticus: If thou have sons, instruct
them, Eccle. 7.
and hold their neck from their youth. The meaning is, keep their neck
always under the yoke of obedience and chastisment. And again it follows:
Eccle. 30.
Give him no liberty in his youth, and wink not at his folly. And after
again: Eccle. 30.
Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides, least he
wax stubborn and be disobedient to thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart.
And likewise again: He that loves his son, Eccle. 30.
causes him often to feel the rod: that he may joy of him in the end. And
after this again: Eccle. 30.
He that chastises his son, shall have joy in him, and shall rejoice of him
among his acquaintance. And in like sort again: Eccle. 30.
Chastise thy child and be diligent therein, least his shame grieve thee. And
after this again: Prouer. 29
The rod and correction give wisdom, but a child set at liberty makes his
mother ashamed. And last of all it is written thus. Eccle. 30.
He that flattereth his son, byndeth up his wounds, and his heart is grieved
at every cry. Whereby he does plainly teach us: That good and discreet
fathers and mothers, they should not flatter nor moan their sons and
daughters: for though their loins be never so much scourged, and though their
bodies be never so bloodye beaten: yea, though their sides be full of wounds,
yet says Ecclesiasticus: Flatter him not, bind not up his wounds, be not
moved with any cry or compassion that he can make unto thee: but let him
(...) child: you shall also deliver your own soul, from the heavy burden of
conscience, by which you are bound even upon pain of damnation, to see his
faults and offenses most severely chastised and corrected. The Lord power
upon him his grace, and send him to live in the love and fear of him: and
then shall all things prosper with him, even to your great comfort and
rejoicing, which GOD grant. Amen.

FINIS.

