A Jews Prophesy, OR, News from Rome.

Of two mighty Armies, as well footmen as horsemen: The first of the great
Sophy, the other of an Hebrew people, till this time not discovered, coming
from the Mountains of Caspij, who pretend their war is to recover the Land
of Promise, and expel the Turks out of Christendom. Translated out of Italian
into English, by W. W. 1607.

depiction of an army

Printed by W. I. for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in Pater noster row at
the sign of the Sun.

To the renowned Lord, Don Mathias de Rensie of Venice.
AFter the particular things alleged in my former writings unto your
Lordshippe, I thought it good and convenient by this my Letter, to advertise
your Lordship, of certain great, horrible, and fearful things that happened in
this quarter.

Purposing to certify your Lordship of the pomp and great triumph at the
presenting of the Captains of the Sea, unto the great Turk: the misery and
unhappiness of the poor prisoners: the discord and contention that came by the
son of the Vice Roy of Naples, being prisoner: the threatenings made to the
Christians: the receiving of the Ambassadors of the Soffy: the pompes,
tryumphes, and entertainments made unto them, and yet dissembled enough, with
mocking one the other at their departing: the presents given: the going of the
great Turk a hunting, and all other things written at large, as your Lordship
shall understand.

But now your Lordship shall understand at this time, the greatest, the most
wonderful, and most strange thing that ever was heard of. The which partly
has so troubled the great Turk, and all the rest, that they have left of all
other affairs, to provide for the perrill and danger that at this time hangs
over their heads.

Your Lordships to use, Signior Valesco.

The Jews Prophecy.
THe news are come that the king of Hungary makes a great Army, which shall
have for his aid the galleys of Buda, and of many other Princes of
Christendom. And they say moreover, that the King of Bohemia will help
therein, and that the most part of Christian Princes will come and aid him in
this enterprise against the Turk, except the Signorie of Venice, which
meddleth nothing at all in it. These reporters of news affirm, that there
shall come above a hundred galleys, besides other Barks, ships, and Hulkes
without number; which is occasion that they hasten the war the more.
Notwithstanding, men esteem not so much hereof, as of the war that is made
beyond the Mountains, as you shall understand not without wondering at it. The
Tartars make friends upon the greater Sea, and have made a league and
friendship with the great Turk, requiring aid, for they are molested with war
by the great Emperor of Moscouia, and Prince of Sagodie, of Pogore, of
Smelengie, of Drossy, of Gazam, of Virgolosam, of Tartarie, of Cham, and of
diverse other people and regions lying toward the South: they say that this
Emperor or Duke has two Armies, and is called John Dwatillo, a young man, of
the age of xxiiii. years, noble and valiant, and a Christian, after the
institution of the Greeks, and presumes that by reason of his blood the
Empire of Constantinople does belong to him. And these two Armies are about a
two hundred thousand horse.

They were not wont in time past to be so strong, nor so teared of the Turks,
for they had not the use of artillarie in the war: but now they have
marvelous great preparation in their war. He has in wages certain Dutch
Captains, and about ten thousand Master gunners, and is marvelous well
furnished with hat que bushes and artillery, and because men understand that
he has so vanquished the Tartarians, and brought the^ to such a state, that
they cannot much more resist him, and that if the said Musecuite should be
masters over the Tartars, they should consequently be Rulers of the great sea,
and the way should be open and easy for them to come, not only to
Constantinoble, but also to drive the Turk out of Europe: and because that the
said great Turk is assured of this enterprise and commotion of the Greeks:
he has concluded and determined, to send to the said Tartars a good assistance
of fifteen thousand fighting men, and also for this purpose, he has sent to
the sea ten Galleys to pass them over.

Men make mention and doubt of Mondaccio, which is a great Prince and Ruler,
and able to make fourscore, or a hundred thousand horse: and yet men are
uncertain whose part he will take, because he is atributarie unto the great
Turk.

There is news also from Africa, that the king of Bugien, the king Tramece,
the King of Tunis, the children of Serif, the Lord of Murocho, and of Gran,
with the Arabians and other, have taken in hand to drive and expulse the Turk
wholly out of Africa, and to endomage him as much as they may. Men know not yet
in what place they will war, but we shall know it shortly. The news also is,
that the Soffie is in Camp with a great Army, and has the Medes to help
hun, which borde^ upon the Ca^pian sea, and of one side neighbor to the
Hireans, called at this day Correxans and Zeeatans, with whom he has made a
league and peace. There are on his side also the Ibeans and Albians, and also
the people of Melibat, which harbor upon the Indians, and likewise with the
king of Bosphorus, all being people maruailous swift and nimble. In this so
mighty an host and army, is also Bascet the son of the great Turk, by
means whereof all in those parts is in great trouble, as well as here. It
seems that the Ianissaries bring him the lot of Turkey, as Baduget, Zermonia,
Alepo, and all the Regions lying near, to the Soffi is revolted, all the which
particularities shall be understood more at large.

This news is great, and has made the great turk to miss enough upon it,
but above all these marvelous and dreadful news which are happened, there is
yet chanced another, which has greatly feared and abashed all men, which
although it seems to be incredible, yet upon my credit it is most true, and
that is, that a people heretofore unknown, mighty, swift, and marvelous
nimble, has taken weapon in hand, to the disadvantage and loss of the house
of Ottoman. They say that Alexander the great did in times past drive beyond
the mountain Caspe nine tribes and a half of the Haebrewes which worshipped
the Calfe and Serpent of gold and drove them away, that never since there was
no news of them, neither knew any man if they were in the world or not:
because the Sea of sand, or the sandy sea, by a certain inconvenience of
sand Grauel or Beche, swelled and rose so high, that it utterly took from them
the way into this our Region. But now by the mean of the new Navigations that
ye Pollanders have made, they are arrived in their country, and have espied out
all their doings: and after yt the said Hollanders had instructed and taught
them in the science and knowledge to artillery, and gunpowder for Harquebushes
and dags, whereunto they are marvelous apt and ready, they are become in all
things very perfect. After this they egged them forward to take weapon in hand,
and pass the said mountain by Land. And because the sandy Sea did hinder
their passage, it appears yt some Dutchman or Italian, which yet men know
not, but notwithstanding some great Astrologian or Cosmoprapher taught them the
way, making some hill plain with fire, whereby they might easilye pass, which
is a thing of great wonder.

These people have two mighty great armies, and infinite store of vittualls, by
reason of the fruitfulness of their country, they are also well provided of
all manner of preparation for war, and cunning in ye practice of their weapons.
They say they will come and recover the land of Promise, toward the which the
first army is already very near, to the great terror and dread of every man
which has either seen or heard of them. The spies which have been sent out
by the great turk to discry them, do affirm, that beside a hundred and two
Armies, there follow an infinite number of people, as well footmen as
horsemen, and their first army is already arrived upon the limmits of Turkey,
putting all to fire and sword. Their language is bastard Hebrew: and because
men speak much of it here, I will not forgette to speak also something
thereof worthy to be noted, and well understood: The Hebrews of
Constantinople say, that they have certain prophesies, among the which one
makes mention, that from the four parts of the world, shall rise a people,
and come into Gog and Magog, and then shall appear (as they persuade
themselves) their Messiah in might and power, and then they shall have dominion
and rule in the world, whereof they secretly rejoice, and are wondrous glad.
They say moreover, that there is a prophecy graven in a pillar set at Podromo
which says thus: A mighty Prince shall rise, whose beginning shall be of small
reputation, who by his Issue shall wax of such force and strength (with the
help of God) that he shall bring to nothing, the empire and rule of Ottoman,
and shall be the right possessor and inheritor of the Empire of Constantinople,
and they believe all that ii shall be this Emperor and duke of Muscouia. which
is already in great estimation among the Greeks.

The Turks have a prophecy, which they sing often and weep bitterly the
while, for it betokens and denounces unto them, their utter ruin and
destruction. And although it seem strange, to say that the Turks have
prophecies, it is no marvel: for Balam was a false Prophet: the Sybilles also
prophesied and were Pagans. For all these causes the great Turk has forbidden
wine, and will that all men go five times in a day to the Moschea, and pray to
GOD for their health and safety. And so he prepares three great armies, one
against the Muscouites, another against the Soffie, and the third for to go
against the Hbrewes of the Mountains of Caspij. Within these few days you
shall have other news, wherefore thus making an end, I commend me unto your
good Lordship: From Rome, the first day of June, 1606. Your faithful and
trusty servant, Signior Valesco.

The description of the first Army, conducted by Zoroam a Jew, Captain
general of the Armies.
FIrst of all a Jew of very great stature, of a fleshly color, more red then
otherwise, with broad eyes, called Zoroam, is Captain general of all the
Armies, he leads under his Ensign twelve thousand horse, and twenty
thousand footmen. The horsemen are armed after a light sort, but very good
Harnes, almost aftet our fashion: they carry Lances of long Reeds, very
hard and light, yet so sharp pointed, that they pass through a thing with
incredible lightness: they carry also shields or targets of bone, and in
steed of swords, they use certain Courtilaxes.

They are apparrelled with the color of their Ensign, and all clothed with
silk: the foote-men carry Pikes of the same sort, with Helmet and Habergin:
their Ensign is of black silk and blewe, with a Dog following a Heart, or
Bucke, and a saying written in it, which is in our language thus: Either quick
or dead.

2. Of the Army of Don Phares.
THere is one called Phares, which is an Carle, young and valiant, not regarding
this present life: this man has under his command fifteen hundred Horsemen
armed lightly, only on the forepart and head-peece: yet this Armor is so
well tempered and wrought, that it keeps out a Lance and Harquebush shot.

This manner of arming themselves, is to the intent they may never turn their
back to run away: they have also fierce and light horses: they are eighteen
thousand footmen, apparrelled with a kind of sodden leather, made of the
skin of a certain Beast, so that no pike nor Harquebush can pearse it. These
men are beastly people, and will never fly for any thing, they are very
obedient and subject unto their Prince, and their ordinary apparel is Silk.
The Ensign that they bear, is a falcon pecking or billing with another Bird,
with a sentence that faith, Either thine or mine shall break.

3 Of the Marquess of Galair.
There is a Marquess of Galair called Goes, this man leads fifteen hundred
men of arms, which be all exceeding well armed and stout, strong, and rebust
men: their horses be moriskes, the greatest, the strongest, the fairest, and
the best that be in the world: there are also seventeen thousand soldiers,
very well appointed with Lance and harquebush: their Ensign or arms is a red field, with a maid clothed in green, holding a Lion in her hand, with
these words, I hope to subdue a greater thing.

4 Of the Duke of Falach.
THere is a Duke of Falach, called Obeth, who has under his conduct xx.
thousand footmen, armed with a certain metal like iron, but it is light and
hard, they have many good swords, lances, and other force, harquebushes, and
wiflers: their Ensign or arms, is a mermaid in a black field, and the devise
thus, My singing shall not cease until the end.

The description of the Army conducted by Captain Nauison:
THere is a captain called Nauison, which has under him xx. thousand men,
appointed and armed with the skin of a serpent, most hard and stiff, they have
Axes, pollaxes, pikes, harquebushes, and other kind of weapons: their Ensign
or arms, is a white snaile in a black sielde, with a devise about it, By
little and little men go very far.

Of the tribe of Simeon there is a Prince of Arsay, whose name is not yet
known, but they say he is a devil, great, gross, and thick beyond measure,
with a flat nose, and both he and his men are of the stature of Giants: he
leads with him xx. thousand footmen, almost all Alfiers, which are also so
swift and nimble, that they will take horses running: they make a marvelous
noise, such as no people use: their Ensign is, an Eute in a black field, and
have for their posye, Such is my government.

6 Of the Duke of Barsalda.
THere is a duke of Barsalda, and he is the conductes of xiii. thousand
footmen, which are all Harquebushers, and carry no fire matches, but strike it
with a stone: they are apparrelled and armed with such a hard kind of leather,
and so enchaunted, that no iron weapon in the world is able to perse it through.
They be also very swift and light: their Ensign or arms, is a dry tree in a
blew field, and their devise thus, I hope to spread, and be green again.

7 Of the Army of the Duke Pasill.
THere is a duke of Pasill called Abia, he has under his conduct a thousand
footmen, very cruel, having all kind of weapons to push or prick far off,
and to strike night, but far different from ours, they are very expert in
artificial fire, and make the greatest and most dreadful things with all yt
a man can imagine: they do it either by art or enchauntmen, so that it seems
that it reigns fire upon their enemies, and yet notwithstanding hurts not
themselves at all, by reason they are apparrelled with a certain Serpents skin
which preserves them. Their Ensign is a Lat holding a Rat in her paw in a
black field, and their posy thus, Even so happens it to him that is not
governed.

8 Of the Army conducted by the Earl of Albary.
THere is an Earl of Albary caled Orut, which has under his governance a
thousand Horsemen with Crosse-bowes, some of them wear certain light armor
of a kind of hard metal, with Rapyers and daggers after their manner, they
fight always running, and their horses are so swift that it is wonderful.
This man also has xx. thousand horses barbed with very fine leather. Some carry
pikes and Partisans, and such like weapons. Their Ensign or arms is a man in
chains, in a field parted half with green and Purple, and this devise
withal, My chains shall bind another man.

9 Of the Marquess of Vorio.
THere is a Marquis of Vorio called Manasses, who has under his conduct xvii.
thousand footmen, Armed with a very hard and strong leather, which men believe
to be enchaunted, because that no meapon nor harquebush is able to perse it
through, yet it is as light as Linneu cloth, and a thing very fair to see to.
These now have all sorts of weapons that an Army may have: and they are
divided and set in a very fair, comely, and decent order: their Ensign is an
old man in a chariot, in a black field, saying thus, After a long journey I
shall be happy.

Caleb Shilock his prophecy, for the year, 1607.
BE it known vnro all men, that in the year 1607. when as the Moon is in the
Watrye sign, the world is like to be in great danger: for a learned Jew,
named Caleb Shilock, does write that in the foresaid year, the Sun shall be
covered with the Dragon in the morning, from five of the clock until nine,
and will appear like fire: therefore it is not good that any man do behold the
same, for by beholding thereof, he may lose his sight.

Secondly, there shall come in the same year a marvelous great flood of
water, to the great terror and amazement uf many people.

Thirdly, there shall arise a marvelous great wind, and for fear thereof many
people shall be consumed or distraughted of their wits.

Fourthly the same year, about the month of May, will arise another wonderful
great flood, and so great as no man has seen since Noyes flood, which will
continue three days, and three nights, whereby many Litties and Towns which
stands upon Sandy ground will be in great danger.

Fifthly, Infidels and Heretics, through great fear and dread, will fly and
gather together, and as much as in them lies, make war against Christian princes.

Sixthly, in the same year after the great waters be past, about the end of the
year will be very great and fearful Sicknesses: so that many people are like
to die by the infection of strange diseases.

Seauenthly, there will be throughout the World great trouble and contention
about matters of Religion, and wonderful strange news unto all people, as
concerning the same.

Eighthly, the Turk with his God Mahomet shall be in danger to loose his
Septer, through the great change and alteration in his Regiment, by reason of
famine and wars, so that the most part of his people will rather seek
relief from the Christian, then from him.

Ninthlie, there will also arise great Earthquakes, whereby diverse goodly
buildings and high houses, are like to be overthrown and ruinated.

Lastly, there will be great remoouings of the earth in diverse places, so that
for fear thereof, many people will be in a strange amazement and terror.

These punishments are prognosticated by this learned Jew, to fall upon the
whole World by reason of sin, wherefore it behooves all Christians to amend
their evil lives, and to pray earnestly unto GOD to withold these calamities
from us, and to conuart our hearts wholly to him, whereby we may find favor in
our time of need, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

