Richard Bowdler, Plaintiff. George Morgan, Defendant.
This Bill is an humble Petition of Richard Bowdler and William Meggs, that a
Report and Decree, thereupon made in the high Court of Chancerie between
George Morgan and them, and others, and all Fines imposed upon them for not
performing of the same to be void, And that an Arbitrament made at the desire
of the Parties may be established and confirmed by Act of Parliament for these
Causes.
FIrst, That Morgan was called to account by Bowdler, by Bill in Chauncery, as
his Factor, for diverse years; That he might be relieved against certain false
Accounts exhibited by him; whereunto Morgan did answer, and preferred a cross
Bill against the Petitioners and others, charging them as Partners with matters
of Account.

The Court by consent of the parties and their learned Council, awarded a
Commission to Rowland Backhouse, Robert Ducy, Tho. Morley, Ralph Core, and To.
Palmer, Merchants of London, with authority to examine and determine these
Accounts and Differences, wherein for their satisfaction they perused and
considered of all Books of Account, Bills of Exchange, Letters and other
Writings produced concerning the same, but because the Commission was
returnable before they could conclude any thing, the parties importuned them to
end the said Accounts and Differences by Arbitrament, and submitted themselves
to their Award by several Obligations of great sums of money, bearing date
the 7. day of October 1018. And for the better strengthening of their
proceedings in the said Arbitrarie course. The Lord Chancellor was pleased to
grant a Commission bearing date the 19. day of the same month, with power to
take oath of the Parties and Witnesses; and to determine the Differences or to
certify their proceedings. And his Lordship did write his honorable Letters
to five other Merchants to give their assistance, as often as the said
Arbitrators should think sit.

And after 160. meetings and exact examination of all Differences and Accounts
aforesaid, the said Arbitrators being often aided by the said Assistants, they
did find Morgan indebted unto Bowdler in the sum of 579 l. 6 s. which they
did Award he should pay unto Bowdler the 6. of April following. And also by
their said Award did order and determine what each Party should perform to
other, as particularly at large thereby appears.

Secondly, For that the said Arbitrament being after called in question by the
said Morgan by false suggestion that it was partially made: the said
Arbitrators being required to certify their proceedings to the Court, did so
certify, Answering thereby all Objections, and declaring that William Meggs
was no wise chargeable unto Morgan, but that he was unjustly vexed by his said
suite: Nevertheless, by Orders in the said Court the said Award was suspended
which ought rather to have been put in execution. And the Bonds sealed to
perform the same were called into the Court, And all Bonds, Bills, etc. which
the Commissioners had received of Morgan were redeliuered to him, albeit they
appertayned to Bowdler as being accounted for before the Commissioners.

Thirdly, Because the truth of Bowdlers cause, being a discovery of falsities
and misprisions in a Factors Accounts, could not be so evident by examination
upon fixed Intergatories, as it was apparent to the Commissioners that had
therein proceeded as before; His Lordship caused them to certify particularly
the Reasons that moved them to make the said arbitrament, which they did
accordingly. Whereupon (for that the said Arbitrament was grounded as well upon
examination of Witnesses as upon Morgans confession and otherwise, And that
particular Relation thereof was made by the said (...) Witnesses but the Cause
coming to hearing the 18. day of December then following, by order of
Chancerit the said Award and Certificat were made void, and the Commissioners
branded with infamy and disgrace without being called to answer for
themselves. And without a Bill exhibited to show the defects of their Award,
And a new Reference to Sir Robert Rich and Sir William Bird, two Masters of the
Chancerie, and four other Merchants was made to examine the said Accounts and
Differences, but without power to examine upon oath.

Fourthly, For that the said Masters and Merchants were directed by the
Chancerie to proceed only upon proofs taken in Court, and upon Depositions
taken before the said Arbitrators and upon Accounts, Letters and Writings, such
as could be justified by two Witnesses, (neither Arbitrators nor Parties) to
have been produced and allowed before the Arbitrators, which kind of proof
was not possible to be made, for that there was none present at the debating of
the Cause, but the Arbitrator and Parties whereby Bowdler was bereaved of the
benefit of his proofs, and of Morgans confession, And deprived of the means
to manifest the truth. Also the Depositions taken on Bowdlers behalf before
the Arbitrators were rejected, but all Depositions on the said Morgans behalf
were allowed; whereupon the said Masters with their Assistants reported, that
the said Bowdler was indebted to Morgan in the sum 7486 l. 1 s. 10 d. And the
same report was decreed notwithstanding any thing that was offered against it.

Fifthly, Albeit Meggs were admitted to supplimentall proofs, and the two
Masters were to consider whether Meggs were partner with Bowdler, and whether
Meggs his lending Bowdler his credit did occasion Morgans engagements; and what
estate of Bowdler came to Meggs his hands, and when; yet after supplimentall
proof made by Meggs and Morgan; The two Masters did certify that Meggs was
Partner with Bowdler; and that Morgans engagements were occasioned by Meggs his
assisting Bowdler with his credit: And that there was of Bowdlers estate in the
hands of Meggs the sum of 10063 l. 11 s. 7 d. Whereas it is most apparent
that Meggs was not Partner with Bowdler in Morgans employments, Nor that
Morgans engagements were occasioned by his lending his credit to Bowdler, nor
that he had any estate of Bowdlers in his hands, but that Bowdler was justly
indebted to Meggs in 1500. And it is most clear that Meggs is not to be
charged unto Morgan by the custom of Merchants, nor by the Law for assisting
Bowdler with his credit; And there is nothing to lead the Masters to conceive
that the said Meggs should have of the said Bowdlers estate in his hands the
sum of 10063 l. 11 s. 7 d. But this report induced his Lordship to decree,
That Meggs should be as well charged as Bowdler with the payment of the said
7486 l. 1 s. 10 d. And the fifth of December last his Lordship imposed a Fine of
one Thousand pounds a piece upon the said Meggs and Bowdler for nonperformance
of the said Decree; And thereupon a Scire facias has been Awarded.

Forasmuch, As no redress of such Decrees is to be had but in Parliament: The
humble Petition of Bowdler and Meggs is, that all the proceedings in Chancerie
may be declared to be void, And the said Award established by Act of
Parliament, to be performed for the Causes and Reasons aforesaid.


