News from Argeir, Of the proceedings of our Royal Fleet since their
departure from England, and what happened between them, and the Turkish
Callies upon Christmas day last.
To the tune of, King Henry's going to Bolloigne.
depiction of a sea-battle between two ships or galleys, one flying the flag of
Saint George, the other flying flags with a crescent on each, and crewed by
'Turks' or Muslim men wearing turbans

GEntlemen, if you will hear
Noble tidings from Argeir,
our worthy and our famous English Fleet,
^^nd your ears a while to me,
And you shall hear how gallantly,
our royal Navy with the Turks did meet.
^^rst, you must understand,
^^ouided from fair England,
our well approved Men of War did go,
^^auely managed to the Sea,
(...) their lusty bold a^ray,
the valiant hearts of Englishmen to show.
^^ong the coasts of Germany,
^y Portugal and Barbary,
through the Straites, into the Turkish land,
^ur English Navy failed on,
^^t found no prize to work upon,
nor any Ships that durst against them stand,
^ntill that in November,
(...) we may well remember,
we did arrive and lie before Argeir;
^hilst we there at Anchor lay,
^^arefull visions on the Sea,
did from a black and bloody Moon appear.
^he Moon so wanne and dusky,
which is the arms of Turkey,
there suffered such a black eclipsed vale,
^ith which the face of all the Sky,
^as darkened over suddenly,
with pitchy clouds all bloody, black, and pale.
This, in the Town of Argeir,
Rumor'd out a sudden fear
amongst the Turks to see so strange a sign
As though this black Eclipse did show,
To that Town some following woe,
so fearful showed the darkened Moon yt night.
But when the Suns adorning
Gave light unto the Morning,
a Pinnesse came unto our English Fleet,
To know the cause and reason why
They did so near at Anchor lie,
whom they with courtesy did kindly greet
And said, they lay for shelter
There, under wind and weather,
and thereupon their Flags of truce hang forth
Which caused some Bashawes come aboard,
And to Lord General afford
such needful things as was to the^ much worth
And to prevent all dangers,
Thy proved friendly strangers,
and brought aboard some forty fatted sheep,
Lions, Leopards, and such things,
As are presents fit for Kings,
themselves in peace and safety to keep.
Young Apes, with Cat-a-mountaines,
Fresh water from their Fountains,
with Ruske in barrels, and such Turkish food,
As Hogsheds filled with wine and Beer
With such like things thy brought in there,
to save their Town, and do our Navy good,

