The Bloody Mother. OR The most inhumane murders, committed by Jane Hattersley
upon diverse Infants, the issue of her own body: and the private burying of
them in an Orchard with her Araignment and execution. As also, The most
loathsome and lamentable end of Adam Adamson her Master, the unlawful begetter
of those unfortunate Babes, being eaten and consumed alive with Worms and
Lice. At East Grinsted in Sussex near London, in July last. 1609.

depiction of the burial of an infant by the two accused depiction of the
wasting away in bed of one of the accused

Printed for John Busbie, and are to be sold by Arth^r Johnson in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the White Horse.

To the Reader.
YOu have here no translated wonder, no far fetched matter, no English lie, to
pass for an outlandish truth: but a true relation of that that many tongues
can witness to those that ambiguously shall stand to withstand it. If it brought
not with it that probability that it does, I could not blame any that should
have a ielosie or mistrust of the certainty of it; for we have had some pieces
that have had fair stampes, but the stuff has bin counterfeite. But this I
cannot suspect can be suspected by any (after they have read it:) For first,
the nearness of the place where these cruelties were executed: secondly the
time: thirdly the rumor has bin spread of it: and lastly the names of those
that at the bench gave evidence against them, persons (for the most part) of
good sufficiency, yet living, cannot but enforce a belief in any that have
sense to sensure upon such manifest marks of verity.

Such it is, as mothers with wet eyes, and Fathers with grieved hearts may
receive: for with the chief of many precedent soule-confounding mischeifes,
this may stand, to show (with terror) the bloody and most dangerous events of
lust, and such libidinous living.

Tho. Brew.

depiction of person standing over a pile of bodies

The bloody Mother. OR The most inhumaine murders of Jane Hattersley upon
diverse infants, being the issue of her own body.
Happy is that man whom other men's harms makes to be wise. I happy, and
thrice happy is he indeed: but such is the folly of men in this our unhappy
age, that though they see the most heavy and lamentable ends of thousands of
hell-charmd malefactors, yet they will not learn good from their ill, nor to
be wise by their folly.

Sin, like a subtle and most cunning adulator, comes upon us with a fair
look, and a tongue full of most fine words and phrases, promising all
happiness and sweet content at his entrance; and with that promise hastilye
gets to the heart of man; where having once got firm footing, he stays, till
the most bitter and formenting contraries of his promised, even kill the heart
he takes hold on.

O how happy is he, that seeing the foul ends of folly, and ungracious actions
a far off, fears least the temptation and thought, which was the Embryon of
that evil, insinuate, and creep into his heart: and fearing praise for
assistance to him that helps, whosoever calls upon him for help: one cole of
fire is easily quenched, when many are hardly, or never extinguished, till they
have confounded the matter they light on: So sin, while it is but a spark,
with easy opposition may be expeld the heart and mind of man: but suffered to
feed upon the fuel Satan casts in, and so to (...) spread it self in
furious ^ames, will be the dire fall an^ ^usion of his sufferer.

What heavy ends follow light beginnings, we may easily see, and not go far
to find them; for alas, the multiplicity of sin, shows it in every corner. As
for example: many there be that amongst their cannes, half cannes, and most
unhealthful healths, have fallen from ordinary and familiar conference to high
and opprobrious speeches: from such words, to blows: from blows to stabs: so
in blood, and hemp, have made an untimely and heavy division of their souls
and bodies.

Some entering into play, thinking at the entrance upon nothing but the
ordinary end; upon some petty, ridiculous, and most childish occasion, have
entertaind anger, and in that madness, (for indeed it is so) one has bin sent
to his grave, and the other to the gallows.

Some taken in the strong entangling net of a beauteous look, have so ^bord
for their maintenance, and security in that most dangerous pleasure, that they
have drawn upon themselves, an unexpected reward: for the reward of their
labor has bin the horror of their consciences, the grief of their friends, and
the shortning of their own days, with shame and bitterness.

Thus much have I said, to excite men at the very beginning, and entrance of
sin to behold it, with an eye of perfect judgment and thoughts of a heavenly
temper, that this Serpent, with an Angels forehead and a devils tail, may
not be suffered to creep in, to his confounding labor.

But now to my bloody and heavy subject: In Sussex in a town called East
Grinsteed, dwelt one Adam Adamsonne; a man that for his years, place, and
sufficiency in estate of living, was in good account and recconing amongst his
neighbors, But men can but see as men; the eye of man, cannot pierce or prye
into the thoughts and intent of man; neither can it give the heart intelligence,
but from outward behavior and working: And therefore right easily may the
judgments of men be deceived: for most common it is for man, to seem that he
should be, and be that he should not (...) so deceiving (as I said) the honest
conjectures and judgments of men, by a false and adulterate appearance; as in
this Adam Adamsonne is apparent: for with a show of honesty and good dealing,
he covered a mass of dishonest and putrified cogitations: amongst which, the
most rank and corrupted, were of lust.

He had a wife, but the vigor and strength of lust, carried his love from her
to a servant he kept; who was as fit for his thoughts (in affibilitie and
easy yielding) as if she had spent an apparentiship in a house of such
trading, as train^ such as she to such damnable service and employment.

So much he doted upon this strumpet, that all the love and kindness that was
fully due to his ligitimate bed-mate, she was mistress and commaundresse of:
what she commanded must be performed; what she requested, must be provided;
and what she was displeasd with, to please her must be removed: her will was
Adamant and his Iron, which followed the attraction of hers, to the very
vtt^ermost of her pleasure: and often to make her the more prone and apt to his
will, he would promise her when his wife dyed, to make her his wife: which
promise so wrought in her mind, that she thought every day a year till she
might see the last gasp of her Dame.

So long were these thoughts suffered, without a gracious resistance, that they
grew to that strength, that they stird her to show the fowlnes of them in
action: but the Lord so guarded the innocent wronged wife of Adamson, that she
could not have the power to perform her diuillish purpose.

Six weeks she bare poison in her pursse, to spice her dames drink withal,
in which time she made many fair (or rather most damnable foul) proffers; but
all were most strangely, and admirably frustrated by the will of the almighty
searcher of hearts and reins, who saw and prevented every wicked and ungodly
attempt of hers. When she saw that she was so often and so strangely prevented
she resolud to give over that purpose, and in that resolution, she threw her
poison into the fire and burnt it.

Many years did this old Lecher maintain this young Lena in this obscure and
most foul sin, in so thick a cloud of secrecy, as the devil makes fit, to
help those that labor in the business that is sweet and pleasing to him, for
ten or twelve haruests have they reapt the most wicked pleasures of their
ungodly lust. In which time, the full number of the babes they have had, cannot
be known, but three she confessed, besides one that is yet living.

Of the first of her loads of woe and shame, (being by Adamson turned off, for
that he suspected she made another partner with him in his loathsome libidinous
sin) she lay in the house of one goodman King, who with his wife ignorant of
her ignominous course of living, and present estate of body, had entertaind
her very kindly.

But as she deceived them, she deceived many, for she so cunningly blinded the
eyes of people, in the time that her sin must needs appear, with loose
lacing, tucking, and other odd tricks that she used, that to the very instant
minute of her delivery, none could perceive she was with child.

This Good Man King, and his wife (as thriftie persons use to do) left their
bed very early every morning, and Jane to lie by it at her pleasure.

It chanced so one morning, being thus left alone, that a neighbors wife,
coming to speak with goodwife King, found her in hard travail with child:
which (with an astonished mind) perceiving, she presently ran to Kings barn,
where she found him at his labor.

To him she very hastily, as half affrighted with that she had seen, told
all, desiring him to call his wife and go hen^e* he presently left his work
and went with her, and before they came to his door they met his wife, then
altogether going hastily home, they met this common and most impudent
bastardbearer, coming out of the doors with the pretty infant, that even that
minute was come from her poluted womb, into this world, and that then should
have bin tenderly laid and lovingly looked unto, most carlesly wrapped up in her
apron, intending (as we may bouldly imagine) in some impuous and execrable sort
to have made it away.

But that intent was by the blessed will and pleasure of God most happily
prevented, by these persons.

Very kindly at first, considering her case, they desired to see what she had
in her apron; but Jane knowing the peril of it, told them she had nothing
there but a few foul clothes she had looked up to have washed, and so would
have past by them.

But they by no means, would suffer her to pass; insomuch that she fell to
striving with them for passage.

In this strife, the poor infant, so unnaturally laid, by his most vnaturall
mother, (in a pitiful shreeke) did as it were, tell his preseruers, that she
told a wicked and villainous untruth.

They hearing the cry of the infant, violently took it from her, and after
they had it, with kind usage requested her to show the womanhood that in that
case was requisite; and not to shame her self, and bring a scandalous
imputation upon her sex, by her obstinacy, and stuborne wildnes.

After many honest and fair perswasiue speeches, they got her in a doors, and
laid her in her bed, good-wife King very carefully tended her, and mistrusting
she would do some mischeife to that unhappy issue, of her loins, she nightly
lay with her.

Five or six nights she was her bedfellow, in which time she perceiud in her no
intent of evil against the infant, so that then she made boulder to rise from
her, then at the first she vsd to do.

But (oh grief to relate it) she was no sooner out of the house, but this
shame of women took that from her sweet infant, that all honest mothers
strive, with all tender, loving, and diligent industry to preserve and
maintain.

With that hand that should have tenderly fed it, and given it that should have
maintaind the breath, she more then Tygerlike, stopped the breath. O cruel
mother, O grief to mothers, O wretch most wicked, unworthy the name of a
mother.

Mothers have hearts of war that melt and consume in the heat of sorrow, that
comes by the wrong of their children: and eyes (that like full fountains) in
abundance of tears, show the grief and anguish they suffer for the least
wrong their children suffer.

But this wretch had a heart of steel, and eyes of marble, so indurate, that no
motion of heaven, or spark of human pity, could be seen or perceived in
them.

Long this woman (though too long) staid not in the business she went to, but
returning she found a heavy object, the babe by his mother breathless, with
the mouth of it all ^oyld with foam, that rose by her violent wringing.

This sight struck her with such a strange and inexcogitable amazment, that she
could not perfectly tell, whether she saw that she saw or no, but stood as if
her senses had lost their power and operations: for she knew she left the child
perfectly well, and to see it so suddenly dead, (for she was not an hour
absent) she lamentably wondered.

This honest woman, maruelously incensed against her, by the death of the
infant, presently ran and fetched the constable, and other neighbors, to see
that eye-wounding spectacle, but before she (with them) could return, this
most wicked of all precedent wickedness, had so wrought upon the child, to
cleanse and trim it, that there was no sign of such a hand as is minister to a
hell-hardned heart, to be found upon it: so that the babe, (ignorantly) taken
to be ignorantly over laid (for so Jane bouldly and deeply swore it was) was
without any great ado, there buried. Goodwife King presently giving her such
things as were hers, except a gown she stopped for some arrerages, or money due
for some matter, turned her out of her doors.

Jane presently, notwithstanding the spleen of her master, in his iealious
humor went unto him, and after a few fair words and kind promises, was as
strongly possessed of his filth-affecting favor and friendship as ever she was
before: where with a face artificially set desembling, she made a very sore
complaint of very great and greiuous abuse offered her by goodman King and his
wife, and how they kept her gown from her.

These words of hers, stird the blood of Adamson so strongly, (in which he
showed the strength of the love he bar^ he) that presently he got them jointly
arested, and so wrapped them (as I may say) in the law, and wrought upon that
wrapping, that in revenge of his harlot, like a man utterly void of all sense
or feeling, either of the joys of heaven, or woes of hell, he did utterly
undo this poor couple.

As soon after this as nature will suffer, mistrusted to be with child, she
was searched by women, and found to be so: yet against them all, with bitter
and vehement oaths, she stood in it they wronged her, and were ignorant in that
knowledge, in giving that judgment upon her, swearing she was as clear from
that state or the cause of it, as she was in her cradle.

But within a while after, (as great breakers use to do) she played least in
sight, for the space of four or five days, no neighbor could have a sight of
her: all which time, she lay to be delivered of the load that made her load
her soul, with perjury, in Adamsons house.

This unfortunate fruit of lust, and unlawful pleasures, was no sooner borne,
but by the hand of the bloody mother it was murdered, and by the cunning of
the cruel father, most secretly buried in a grave of his own making, by the
side of a Box tree, in his orchard, which orchard not long after he sold to
one Edward Duffield: which done, she presently (to wipe of the stain of
susspition) stepped from her bed (the bed that honnest women cannot stepp from so
lightly, neither if they could would, in decency and woomanhood) to her
ordinary walkings.

She was (I say) presently seen abroad again well, and so lusty, as if she
had no such strength-abating pang, as was justly suspected, and she truly
suffered to have made her carry a contrary appearance.

But common it is that such common pieces, can bear it out better then true
and lawful bearers of children can.

Adamson upon this, cunning in their villainy emboldned, (to cast this and
other such like rubbes out of the way of their wickedness) impudently like a
true brazen faced founder, opposd himself against her searchers, and all such
as mutterd in suspicion against her, with peremptory speeches, oaths and
threanings, which carried such a show of innocence and clearness, that for
that time he carried himself clear from the danger due to so foul and most
vild a transgression.

The shame of her privy offending, a third time grown to ripeness, she was
laid in her old receptacle of sin, ( Adamsons house) very privately? to which
just upon the time of her pain in that business, came one Fraunces Foord, the
wife of one John Foord a neighbor to buy bread, who hearing some low deprest
cries and groans from Jane; thinking she had bin disseased by some ordinary
infirmity, went up: but she was no sooner entered into the room where Jane
lay, but Jane very suddenly (fearing she would bewray her) requested her to go
down into the parler to set her nekercher, which Foords wife did; and when she
had don, (mistrusting no such thing, as they feared she would find) went up
again to her chamber, but ere she could get to the top of the stairs, the
chamber door was shut against her by the wicked woman that was hired by her
and her master to keep her in that case, and to keep that wickedness for ever
concealed. This goodwife Foord, thus withstood in her kindness, marueiled, but
made no words about it, yet mistrusting she knew not what, she went not down,
but staid and peept through the keyhole of the door: through which she saw
Jane (very warm wrapped) set in a wicker chair by her beds side, with a look
bewraying very great debilitie and faintnes of body: and not far from, was a
good fire to comfort her and to make ready such things as might comfort her.

Yet, nothing mistrusted Foords wife, that she sat then groaning under the
Annual, or yearly woe of a woman.

But long she stood not thus, ere she heard the weak shrike of a newborn
infant, and saw in the hands of the keeper, a bole-dish, in which was the
after birth of a child, and other perspicuous and evident tokens of a child
borne at that instant.

Having seen this, to keep it from their knowledge, she very easily went
down the staiers, and after a little stay, hearing the chamber door open, up
again, and suddenly (to prevent auother prevention) into her chamber: And
there (without any show of any thing that might bewray her knowledge) she stood
talking with Jane half an hour: in the time of which confeence, her eye and
ear were busy, to find that she saw through the key hole; but she could
neither see what she had seen, nor heard what she had heard: for all was most
cunningly cleard by her conning keeper.

This child, as by manifest and probable circumstances appeard at her trial,
Adamson (after they had by most vile and inhumaine violence, taken the breath
from it, that but then it had received) in the dead of night (friend to rape
and murder) buried in an unknown grave as the former.

And this villainie, as the former, he with his countenance, as opposd against
the weak words of Foords wife by reason of want of greater proof then her
own speeches, he easily past over, and they slept as securely for all this
start, in their horrible uncleanness as before.

Still progrest this most graceless, audatious and impudent beast, (too bad to
bear the good name of woman) in this sin, with all impudency.

This Chimera, with a Lions vpper-part in boldness: a Goats middle part in
lust: and a Serpents lower part in sting and poison.

Not long after this (for there were no greater Interims, between their great
bellies then must needs be) the maturitie of her womb, showed it self again
in swelling, which with a greater circumspection, then before was looked into,
many eyes attended it to see the event, and find the events of former.

But she perceiving she was so narrowly pryed into, fearing they would find
that they sought for (her forepa^ villainy) she left her masters house; and
went to Darking, to one Crab a Tailor, who had married a sister of hers, and in
his house, she was delivered of a child, which was put to nurse to one Thomas
Ellis, who tenderly tended it.

There she was too far from the murdering hand, or cunning brain of her
master, to serve it as she had served his fellows: nay this babe had such
blessed fortune, that instead of the cruelltie, his poor brethren or sisters
had from his lawless begetter, he had kindness and comfort, for he allowed
the nurse a good cow to give her milk, that the allowance of the child might
be the better.

Many great bellies had she, besides these here spoken of, but the unhappy
loads of them could never be seen: by which we may justly think^, and
perfectly in reason, know, that there were many more murders, then are in
these leaves laid open: for (as I have before said) for the space of ten or
twelve years this wicked couple continued vndetected, in these abominable
sins of lust and murder.

Many times did Adamson, with his own tongue give cause of a suspicion for
three or four times, as Edward Duffell wrought in his Orhcard (which as I have
before said was Adamsons) he was earnestly requested and sometime straightly
charged, not to digg near the Box tree: he not mistrusting such a thought as
raisd that prohibition, maruailed; yet not knowing what to make of it, let it
pass without any further thinking upon it.

But see the goodness of the ^eare of every secret: within a small time after
this (upon what occasion I know not) Adamson and Jane were at high words, and
very bitter reuilings past from one to another. In which windy battails, Jane
called her master murderer, in the hearing of many neighbors, and that not once
or twice, but itterated and reitterated it, very freely and bouldly: and to
this added, that there was that yet hidden, that would hang him. And that there
was a tree in Duffels orchard, which if it could speak, would send him to the
gallows.

These words in the vehemency of anger she uttered, for thus it pleased him
that made Balaams Ass to speak, that beast, to make the beast speak to open
the way to their destruction: for hereupon Edward Duffel took diverse of his
neighbors, and (remembering that many times he had bin warned not to digg near
the Box tree) went then and diggd about it, to see if there were any such thing
as they suspected should be, by her speeches.

Small digging served to bewray their wickedness, for he had not digd a full
foot deep, ear he found many small bones, which bones, not long after, before
Justices and men of account, were prooud (to bar al opposite objections) by
the skill of a cunning and very expert Anothomist, to be the bones of a child.

Upon this (in a word) Adamson and his servant Jane were apprehended, and sent
to Horshan jail some ten or twelve miles from Greensteed: but Adamson upon
bands and good security to answers all that might be objected against him at
the Assizes, was in a little time from thence released, and had his liberty to
walk about his business.

Jane lay not long there neither; she was upon bonds from thence released ^oo:
but her bonds were the bonds she was bound in, and her release, but a remove
from thence to the Kings bench in southwarcke, where while she staid, she
wanted nothing, for he that had bin kind and liberal to her in the time of her
liberty, did not forget her in the time of her captivity.

But that he did at the first was in love, the last in policy: for all he
spent then upon her, was only to win her confidently to deny the words she
had spoken, and to clear him in her speeches: and as for herself, he had her
presume upon it, without fears or doubting, he would get her pardon.

But to prevent that, and all hope of it, she was removed from thence to
Kingston, from thence (to omit teadious recital) to Greensteed again. And
there again Adamson as before (For contrary to orders in that case instituted
(whether by purse or policy I know not) he had access unto her in the jail)
labord hard with her to unsay all her dangerous words against him; and to say
that she was to say at the Bench to the demands of the Judges, for his clearing
and acquiting: and withal, told her that in so speaking well in his behalf,
she should help her self in that danger.

And more over (for like waves our upon the ^ck of another came words of
inducement from him) if the worst should come that might, he would save her
with the Kings pardon.

And to make her belief and resolution the stranger, he told her, if she did
not do as he counseld her there was no less to be expected by her then death:
and backed it with this reason; that the least syllable vtterd in way of
confession, would frustrate the pardon he should purchas^e, and make it to be
of no force or virtue.

Thus, a^s since her execcution has bin ^ound, did he very cunningly, and as
closely work upon her simplicity, and effected his wishes, in her most wicked
and impious credulity; for she believing all he spoke, and making no doubt of
the performance, with a face set to the highest key of impudency, was at the
Bench very ready in the lesson he had taught her: so that he was by the Jury
acquitted, but she condemned and adiug'd to the gallows: which sentence
(presuming upon her masters promise) she heard with an undaunted heart.

To be short, she was according to her judgment, upon, or about the sixth of
July 1609. carried to the place of execution, where still expecting the pardon
Adamson told her should come to the gallows and save her, she was as stout
and fearelesse, as if she had bin but (like a stage player) to act the part in
least.

But when she had staid so long, she might stay no longer from the halter, her
heart began to fall, and fear to rise, yet remembering that he had said, a word
in confession should frustrate her pardon which (notwithstanding) in the last
minute of her breath she expected (and fearing so to prevent it) she would say
nothing but in that fear, and hope of life, even in the rope she gave the
hangman six pence to cut her down quickly: for she (simple wench) thought
verily though she were turned off, before she could be half dead, the pardon
would come, and save her in that heavy gasping: but her belief was vain, and
her vain hopes were deceived, for as she deserved she there died.

But now you have, with the eyes of your understanding, seen the most just and
deserved end of her, turn them again to Adamson, who presently after her
execution, fell into a most miserable, greeueous and lamentable consumption.

Worms meat we are al in death, but he in life, was (by the just judgment of
God (which God make us all have an eye to) a prey to these despicable and
devouring creatures, which had entrenched themselves in many parts of his body
to the bone, and minutely, and so mercilesly, with eager appetites fed upon his
afflicted flesh, as though he had bin laid only but but for one meal to be
devoured.

Lice in great multitudes tormented him: no shift in ^innen, nor other costly
shift in trimming, picking and anointing, could decrease ye innumerable number
of them: and so loathsome a savor came from his body, that those that went to
see him could not stand to give their eyes satisfaction, for the grievous and
odious strength of it: but turning as disdainfully in the offense, or greeuance
of that sense) as from the infecting stench of carrion they would leave him,
ere they could well look on him.

Thus for the space of half a year lay he most grievously tormented, in which
time, he spent much money, for a happy restoration or recovery, but all his
cost was lost, for alas Cum Deo pugnare, grave est: there is no striving
against the will of God.

All his means were wast and consumed: for he never left consuming till he was
consumed to skin and bone, and so lamentably ended his days about the
beginning of November last.

If we look well into this lamentable end of his, we shall find a lesson
worth the looking into, and that is this: that though he could, by money and
friends; or some false color and covering, (...) his desert from the hands of
men, yet the Lord would not let him pass this world without a punishment, that
like the (...) burst out through the Fogg^ and clouds of his dissembling and
privy contriuing, to show the world that he was not the innocent man that he
would have seemd to be.

Many that have wit to shift, and craft to cover, think themselves wise, but
the Lord knows they are fools, and so makes their end show them. But to that
we cast not an eye, but (alas) being set in the race of our own ruin we run
(like the Onagrie, or wild Ass, of Mauritaunia, with such dexterity and
strength that till we are breathless we stop not till we are breathless
indeed: for til our breath leaves us, we leave not sinning. O could we imitate
him as well in the path of piety, we should have heaven in our bosoms, I
mean such consciences as (after this life) would assure us of the everlasting
beatiatitude of Angels.

An exhortation.
IF the Apostle Peter illuminated by the spirit of God, in his time determined
the consumation of the world to draw nigh, and like the Lord of Hosts his
loyal Herault proclaimed thereupon to all the faithful: Now the end of all
things is at hand. If godly Cypryan many years after justly thought, and
taught, that the end of the world did hang over his head* sweet Laotantius
sighed in spirit, and said it could not lack above two hundred years: and holy
Jerome (that observed a iournall, and watched the hours of his life) had so
certain a persuasion of the suddennes, and nearenes thereof, that he ever
seemed, to hear the sound of the Troump of the latter day, sounding this heavy
note in his ears: Surgite mortui, venite ad iudicium: That is Arise ye dead
and come to judgment: all no doubt incited thereunto, and enlightened by the
holy Gohst: certes we (...) good cause, that live in these latter and dangerous
days, stedlastly to believe for many causes; and especially these three, that
the second coming of Christ cannot be far off.

First, for that all the prophesies of the Patriarchs, and Prophets, of all the
ancients, yea, and of the Jews themselves, who yet idly and ignorantly
expect another Meslias, so concordantly agree with this our after age, that the
Orthodoxes so long since deceased, may seem now to live and behold the state
of the days instant.

Secondly, for that all those prodegies, and tokens foretold by our Savior in
the Gospel, are now universally fulfilled in the world, and autentiquelly
importe an universal dissolution of the world.

Thirdly, for that in the same place our Savior promises to shorten those
days: and surely if (as there he promises) for his elects sake those days
were not shortened, scant any flesh should be saved; for if we narrowly look on
the course of time, the manners of men, the sta^ting up of false Christ's, the
vprise of counterfeyte Prophets, the contempt of Religeon, and untowardness of
all things, we shall assuredly find, that this our old writhen world, is
altogether like to unfruitful, and dry stubble or chafe, apt for nothing,
but to be consumed with fire, or as the Apostle Peter says, the heavens, and
earth that now are kept by the same word in store, and reserud unto fire,
against the day of judgment: Lord it is time, yea it is full and due time (fit
were thy blessed will and pleasure) that thou come to judgment: Come thou
Alpha and Omega, thou first and last, come Lord Jesus, come quickly: For sin
ouerfloweth, Iniquity abounds, Faith fails, Hope fades, Love freeseth; in
stead whereof Paganism, Despair, and Murder are founded, and generally
wickedness flourishes, and virtue falls.

But omitting all the rest, this wilful murderiug of Innocents is judged a
most heinous iniquity in the sight of God, and amongst all good men counted
principal of those sins, whose lamentable clamours ascend up before the
majesty of God, and incessantly yell out, greedily thirsting for revenge.

Let us therefore take warning by those Cruel, bloody, and libidinous bad
livers, whose horrid sins calls vengance from heaven: and let us desire
almighty God to hasten the latter day, to the comfort of his elect and glory of
his most holy name

Amen.
The names of the witnesses. Master Andrew Sackuill Edward Pain. George
Drury. Steeuen Price. And Edward Duffield in whose orchard the bones of the
murdered Infants were found. Goodwife King Goodwife Foord Goodwife Pain
Goodwife Pulman Goodwife Kent.


FINIS

