THE RECOVERIE of Paradise.

A Sermon, on the Incarnation and Birth of our Savior Christ.

By Michael Birkhed.

Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each
other. Psalm. lxxxv. verse x.

Printed for Nicholas Ling and Thomas Bushel, and are by them to be sold. 1602.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Tho. Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, and one of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
IT has bin (Right Honorable) well debated amongst the Learned, where Learning
was first professed, and it is as truly recorded of many worthy Writers, who
were the first that did teach for to Write, and surely as our forefathers did
reverence them as Gods, which spoke wisdom; so we may extol them as men
somewhat superior unto men which invented the art to Write what they spoke.
The first benefitted the persons that heard them; by the latter are instructed
al posterities that shall read them: the one instructed those only that were
present with them, the other gave lessons unto all nations whatsoever, though
never so much distant from them. And therefore very well says a certaint Poet,
now living:

O blessed letters that combine in one,
All ages past, and make one live with all:
By you we do confer with those are gone,
And the dead-liuing unto Counsel call,
By you the unborn shall have communion,
Of what we feel, and what does us befall.
The consideration of which premises, together with the respect of this
ouer-fruitfull age of the Children of the Prophets, the Land having more Church
men then Churches, and more Preachers then Parrishes to Preach in; has moved
me (though least of the Apostles yet unwilling to hide my talent with the
unprofitable servant) to write what I have heretofore spoken, and to publish
what I have Written, which I prostrate as my free will offering at the foot of
the Altar, as the poor Israelites did their Goats hair, when they had no
better to bring, and as the Widow did her mite, when she had nothing greater
to give. And forasmuch as Courtesy is the true note of Gentilitie, and Learning
is best favored of such as are best Learned, and matters of Religion of those
that are Religious; I have therefore made choice of your Honor for Patron of
these papers, not doubting, but that in regard of Gentilitie, you will
courteously receive it, in respect of your Learning, willingly pervse it, and
for the matter and subject of it, Patronize and protect it. Your Lordships
favorable entertainment of this, shall encourage me in greater matters
hereafter to employ my Labors unto the memorial of your worthiness: and move
others to peruse it the more diligently, being entertained of a Personage of
such Honor and Judgment. Thus, wishing unto your Lordship, the accomplishment
of your wishes, craving pardon for my (perhaps) overmuch boldness, I humbly
take my leave, this first of January.

Your Honors to command. Michaell Birkhed.

THE RECOVERY of Paradise.
Luke. 2. 10. Fear not: for behold I bring you tidings of great joy that shall
be unto all People. That is, unto you is borne this day in the City of David a
Savior which is Christ the Lord.
GReat is the Solemnity of this feast of Christ his Nativity, but the
shortness of the day, requires to read but a short discourse: and no marvel
if the words we write be short, seeing God the father made, as at this time his
word (the subject of this book) very short. If you would know the shortness
of Gods Word; behold that Word which said by his Prophet, I fill both Heaven
and Earth, which was neither Included in any thing, nor excluded out of any
thing, but was all in every thing, even that Word which the Heaven of heavens
could not co^taine, which was, from everlasting without beginning or ending.
Was now included in a place, swadled in cloutes, laid up in a cratch, and
become a child of a days age: a long word indeed, become very short; and yet
what length of time, or multiplication of words is able to descipher, the
incomprehensible length and breadth thereof? for even in his humility, his
glory is exalted, and in the shortness of his name, his name is enlarged.
Great are the works of the Lord, as himself is great, but greatest is that
which he did in his little one. Paruulus nobis venerit, sed non parum attulit,
no^ parum nobis contulit. He came as a little one, but he brought not a little
with him, it was no little benefit he did us. It is no unknown thing to him
that knows any thing: how glorious was the estate of Adam in paradise, being
created in the Image of the God of glory, living in a place of all kind of
pleasure, under the shade of the tree of life, with a companion that was meet
and fit for him, Inioying the sight of God himself, whose countenance is the
fulness of al joys and felicities, nothing being forbidden him, that might any
wise delight him, save only the fruit of one tree that was in the midst of
the garden: the penalty, if he tasted of it, was the expulsing out of paradise,
the deprivation of his pleasures, death and damnation to his body and soul,
and everlasting miseries to either amongst the devils in hellfire. But what
followed? Thy princes (says Esaias) were rebellious and became the companions of
thieves. Our parents disobeyed the charge of the Almighty, accompanied Lucifer
in his the every of Gods glory, and so became subject unto the forenamed
damnation. Great was their fault so obstinately to have sinned, and great was
the punishment that was inflicted for their sin. For the Earth mourns for it,
yea even unto the children (as Zoroastes speaks.) Though the father did only
eat the sour grape, yet his childrens teeth are also set on edge by it: so
that we were Damnati antequam nati. Condemned to die, even before we began
to live. Glorious was man's condition being created in Gods Image, but better
had it bin that he had never bin created, then so to have defaced the glory of
that Image. But as God is the happiest and chiefest good, containing all
happiness and goodness in himself, so such was his love and favor toward man,
that he would make him partaker also of that his happiness, and therefore
presently he promised him a medicine for his malady, and a salve for his sore,
namely, that as Satan had dejected him into the pit of hell, so his son
should erect and lift him up into the kingdom of heaven, if he would believe
in the one, as he had given credit to the other. Falsehood had seduced and
deceived him, and Truth must reduce and instruct him, yet so, that after he
know the Truth, he renounce falsehood, and cleave unto the Truth: this Truth
was that word: this word was that Son: this Son was that Savior, which was
made short, became little, and was borne as this day in the City of David.

But lest this so precious and peerless a Iem should lie hid in the dunghill,
and be in the world, and the world know him not, it pleased the Lord by many
signs and tokens, by many Prophesies and prefigurations to describe him
plainly unto all posterities, that none might aledge Ignorance for an excuse
of their wickedness. Therefore his star was shown unto the wisemen of the
East, by the conduct whereof they came from the rising of the Sun, to the
city of Jerusalem, to signify that a new Son of Righteousness was risen
in the Earth, who by his bright and resplendent beams should inlighten and
delight every one that comes into the world: many rare and prodigious things
also were seen at that time even amongst the Infidels and Heathen people,
declaring the Restoration of the world, the Restitution of man, the Solace of
the Jew, and the Salvation, and Redemption of all mankind to be come into the
world. For as Orosius reporteh out of a certrine street in Room there sprung
up a fountain of oil, which flowed most abundantly for the space of a whole
day, and also (which is worthy to be noted) though the Roman Emperor had
obtained the Scepter of the whole world, and a general peace was concluded, so
that the Temple Ianus was shut up close (a thing scarce ever seen before.) Yet
Augustus forbad that any should call him Lord, not without the wondering of all
that heard it, and about that time he set at liberty 30000. bond-slaues which
had fled from their Lords, (being provoked no doubt) by the motion and
Instinction of God himself: These things did God ordain to be done in the
Imperial city, even in the city of the Earths Emperor, to declare unto the
world that the mediator of mankind, the Oil of Gladness, the Prince of
peace, was come into the world; unto whom the title of Lord, is only, or most
rightly to be attributed, seeing he is the true deliverer of miserable man, the
Vassal and Bond-slaue of Sin, flying from God, from life* and from Heaven
unto Hell, unto Death and the service of the Devil, and restores him unto his
true Lord and Master again, that so being freed from Sin, and made the
servant of God, he might attain unto Liberty of the Angels in Heaven. What
need I recite many Records hereof, seeing God did point at him, and distinctly
name him: the Angels came and ministered unto him, millions of men did hear him
and see him: and the very devils of Hell did acknowledge and confess him. But
of all manifestations, that is none of the obscurest that was shown the very
night of his Nativity unto the shepherds of Jury, which we have chosen for
the groundwork of this book, and the foundation of our writing. An History
which will bring you like the Wisemens star unto the place of his Birth, and
an History, which if you mark it, will unfold unto you, the fruits of his
Birth.

Fear not: for behold, I bring you tidings of great joy which shall be unto all
People. That is, unto you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord. These words are an Epitomy or short sum of the whole
Book of the new Testament, co^taining the long expected Tidings of man's happy
salvation in Jesus Christ. They were uttered as (I said) unto certain
shepherds of Jury, Shepherds that were faithfully attending their flocks in
the fields, being the true Resemblance of gods spiritual pastors, and
faithful ministers, and that by an Angel sent as a solemn Ambassador from
the Court of Heaven. The sum of whose message was this. That God considering
the wretched estate, of his woeful creatures and the damnable condition of the
sons of Adam, how they lay sweltring in their fathers goare, how they stuck
fast in the mire and clay, and were not able to Recover the tree of Life, from
which they had fallen, but continued subject unto the Doom of damnation, from
which, by the Law, there was no Redemption, without satisfaction for their
fathers transgression. That therefore God of his mercy, not unmindful of his
promise that he had made unto Adam. That the seed of the Woman should break
the serpents Head. Which also, by an oath he had ratified unto Abraham viz: That
in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed. Had now sent his
son from Heaven into earth to bring man from earth into Heaven unto him; and
that by beco^ming Sin for Man though he knew no sin, that man might be made
the righteousness of God in him. And therefore that they needed not to fear
the death and damnation that was due unto them for their Fathers
transgressions, but with Joyful hearts should embrace the Life and Salvation
that was coming unto them by the son of Gods Incarnation, in whom whosoever
believed should not perish, but have life everlasting.

Fear not: for behold I bring you tidings of great Joy which shall be unto, etc.
The words as you may see do generally contain an argument unto encouragement,
and in it more perticularly I observe these 3. parts. First the encouragement
it self, in these words, Fare not. Secondly, the reason of it, for I bring you
Tidings of Joy. Thirdly, the joyful tidings what it was, in these words, unto
you is borne this day in the City of David, etc. And first of the first.

Fear not] As the comfortablest comfort that Adam received in his Paradise of
pleasure was the pleasant fruition of his Creators presence, it being
replenished with all joys and consolations: So since his fall, like a guilty
malefactor, he has shunned nothing more then that his sight and presence, and
therefore as soon as ever he heard his voice in the garden, he presently
sought a bush to hide his head, thinking to fly from him, from whom no man can
fly, but by flying unto him. So likewise all of his posterity, being partakers
of their fathers impurity, have shunned the fight of God, as the Executioner of
their eternal misery. The Israelites had rather been encountered by an host
of the Philistines, by whom they were in no other likelihood, but to be
utterly destroyed, then to come into the presence or voice of God, by whom
oftentimes they had been most mightily protected. And Sampsons wifes parents
thought the sight of God so fearful and deadly a thing, that they half
despaired of life, when but an Angel appeered. And so these simple shepherds
were stricken down amazed, when the Glory of this God began to shine about
them. Thus sinful Cain shakes at every shadow; every tree he thinks a
gallows, every one that meets him, he deemeth will massaker him: yea, even
his own friends he mistrusteth will kill him, for he knows that stuble can
not stand before the fire, that darkness cannot continue when the light
approaches, and that man must needs perish, when as the God of Justice is
come in presence, seeing man is as stuble, and God a consuming fire, seeing man
is Darkness, and God is a Light, seeing man is wicked, and God is righteous.
Timuerunt ergo timore magno. They feared therefore (says Luke) with a great
fear, their sins were the cause of their fear, and ours deserving no less
then theirs, we have no cause but to fear with them: but what comfort has the
Angel brought with him? marry this. Fear not.

As though he should have said, ye sorrowful and sinful shepherds, who by
reason of your manifold sins and iniquities, are ashamed like the pensive
Publican to cast up your polluted eyes unto the unspotted throne of the
righteous God, but go mourning like rejected Cains, and cursing with Job, the
days of your Nativity, because ye lie subject unto the horrible curse of
Lucifer and his Angels, by reason of your original and actual sins, and
therefore fear lest God should cause the earth to swallow you up, as it did
Corah and his confederates, or else to be consumed with fire, by reason of this
fiery Light that shines about you, as the Sodomites were in the days of Lot.
If ye knew for what cause I am come down unto you, ye would be so far from
fear or sorrow, that you would rather with that Democrites pass over your
days in perpetual Laughter. For behold I bring you Tidings, and Tidings of so
great Joy, that the very mountains, if they could hear it, would skip like
Rams, and the little hills like young sheep: so that henceforward you may sing
Salomons song, as heretofore ye have sighed out leremies Lamentations, wherefore
look up and behold; behold the Angel of God who am sent from the Throne of
his Almighty Majesty, with all the rest of these heavenly Soldiers, to declare
tidings of joy unto you; wherefore seeing that you are in such favor with the
King of Kings, the Almighty Jehovah, the Lord of hosts, in that he has
regarded you more then all the nations of the earth, in that you shall see the
Redeemer of mankind, even Jesus Christ the Son of God before any else. Seeing.
(I say) you are in such favor, and so regarded of him, who is only to be
feared, there is no cause that ye ought to fear.

But here by the way we must note what Fear is meant in this place: for a
Division must needs be granted, else there will be found an Opposition in
Religion, which Religion denies, and a concordance of repugnant contrarieties
in one subject, which Reason in no sort admits. For Fear is called
Principium sapientiae, the beginning of wisdom, and Solomon says, it is the
root of Life, the fulness of knowledge, the glory and renown of a Christian,
and the most happy gift. And David says, that the Lord has provided an
everlasting heritage for them that fear him: and yet it is said here, Fear
not. S. Paul in the eight to the Romans sets down two kinds of fear, the
one a Seruill fear, proper unto the devils and his damnable adherents, the
other a filial fear, or the fear of children toward their parents, which is
peculiar unto the Servants of God. A seruil fear may be seen in Pharao, who
feared the Lord when he let the people of Israel depart; but it was only for
fear lest he should be destroyed by those plags and punishments which were
denounced against him, and which he had begun already to have tasted of: So
Cain feared when he had slain his brother, so Judas feared when he had
betrayed his master. Thus the Gentiles feared their Idols; for it was not for
any Love that they could bear the^, being so wicked and ungodly as they were;
but only lest they should be hurt by them, if they did not serve them. Of this
fear Saint Peter speaking says Timorem eorum ne timueritis, Fear not their
fear, or fear not after their manner of fearing. meaning the seruil fear of
wicked men. But of the other kind of fear he says presently after Dominum
autem Christum sanctificate in Cordibus vestris cum modestia et timore. But
sanctify the Lord Jesus in your hearts with modesty and fear. And S. Paul
writing of this fear says, Cum timore and tremore vestrum etc. work out your
salvation with modesty and fear. And this fear is called the fear of
children, which fear their Parents, more for displeasing them, or provoking
their anger, then for the punishment, which by the offense might redownd unto
themselves. This fear was neither forbidden the shepherds. nor us, nor any
else, but only that seruil fear, which the Law did bring with it, when
nothing but plagues and punishment was denounced against them that did not
whatsoever by the Law was commanded unto them. Therefore many of the Jews
did seruilely fear God, but they loved him not, as may appear, in that they
had rather have worshipped any stock or stone if they might have had their
choice without fear of punishment. But now, seeing Christ is come to fulfill
the Law for us, and that God; does require nothing but our endeavor, if with
firm faith we cleave unto the merrits, and sufferings of his son, therefore in
this respect it is said unto the Shepherds, and in them unto us, Fear not.
And thus much of the comfort, now of the reason thereof why we need not fear.

For behold, I bring you Tidings, of Great Joy which shall be unto all people.
Non oportet esse tristitiae locum vbi est natalis gaudiorum: There ought not to
be any place for fear or care says Augustine, when the Birthday of Joy and
bliss is come in presence; for can the children of the Bridechamber moorne
when the bridegroom is with them? have the thunderclaps of Sinai bin able to
deiect us, and shall not the songs of Sion be as forcible to erect us? shall
the Law terrify us, when the Gospel is sent to cheer us? But what is this
that he says, that this Joy shall be unto all people? shall all be saved?
shall there be no lost sheep in the house of Israel? no goats to stand on the
left hand in the day of judgment? shall all be carried into Abraham's bosom?
shall all be void of fear by his coming? I answer, the Lord knows who are
his: And has told us, that as the way of Life is narrow and the gate
straight, so there shall be but few that shall find it. For many says he shall
cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, and shall be sent away with Nescio vos, I know you
not; And in his prayers Christ says of himself that he prayed not for all the
world, but only for those that his father had given him out of the world.
Therefore it is manifest, that although the Angel says, that this Joy of his
Birth should be unto all, yet that all shall not be made Pertakers of the
fruits thereof. But as touching the merrits of Christ we must speak after two
sorts; either according to Sufficiency; or as touching Efficiencie. Christ his
Death was sufficient to have saved all, but it was not efficient unto any, but
only unto those that believed in him, which were not borne of water and blood,
but of the spirit of God. And so, by all, we may understand the kinds of
people, as a learned father says, Non pro singulis generum, sed pro generibus
singulorum, etc. Christ died not for all, of every kind, but for the kind of
all; even for those that were of his Church, and believed in him. And in this
respect says Augustine, let every one wipe his tears from his eyes, and
bannish fears from his heart, that does beeleeue in this Savior that is sent.
Art thou a sinner (says he) Rejoice now, because a pardon is sent from the
Judge unto thee. Art thou a Gentill, Rejoice now: because thou shall receive
salvation with the Jews, have thou bin a stranger from God, and an Aliant from
his covenant? be glad now because thou may be ingrafted into his Body. And
in an other place he says, Rejoice ye Just, because it is the Birthday of your
Iustifier: Rejoice ye feeble and sick, because it is the Birthday of your
spiritual Physician: Rejoice ye that live in captivity, because it is the
Birthday of your Deliverer: Rejoice ye servants, because it is the Birthday of
your Lord: Rejoice ye freemen in heaven, because it is the Birthday of him that
did set you free: Rejoice all Christians, because it is the Birthday of Christ:
and to be short, Rejoice all people, because it is the Birthday of the Savior
of all people. If any man have cause to fear or be sorrowful still, this is
the cause; that though Light came into the world, yet he loved Darkness more
then the Light, because his works should be evil. And thus much of the reason
of the comfort why they should not fear: now to the Tidings of Joy it self.

Unto you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord.] Wherein we will note, first the Person who was borne: Secondly, the
Person of whom he was borne: Thirdly, when: Fourthly, where: and Fifthly, for
what cause he was borne.

In the beginning of this Treatise, you heard, in part, of the misery of Adam
after his fall, that whereas he had bin placed in Paradise, a garden of
pleasure, inioying the sight and presence of God, his state was comparable even
to the Angels of Heaven: for though he were subject unto God his Creator, yet
was he Sovereign over all his Creatures, his labor was rest, and his rest
might have bin continual: his pain was pleasure, and his pleasure might have
bin eternal; he had health without danger of sickness, and life without fear
of death, the flesh and the spirit never striued, the body obeyed the soul;
and the soul governed the body: In a word, neither hell nor grave, death nor
devil, could so much as touch or trouble him, so standing as God had
appointed. But when he presumed to taste of that fruit that only was
forbidden him, presently the case was clean altered, so that in stead of life,
he heard that fearful sentence: Thou shall die the Death. Then was the Earth
accursed for his sake, and he was thrust out of Paradise, in the entrance
whereof, God set the Cherubines with the blade of a sword shaking, to keep the
way of the tree of life: so that he was feign to betake himself to this
miserable and wretched world, the kingdom of the Serpent: whither could he now
go, but he should meet with a curse, seeing all things were accursed? What
might he do, but lie sweating in the miserable and pitiful pangs of
desperation? What comfort might he find in his wife, or his wife in him, but
tears and torments, sorrows and sighs, crying and howling, weeping and
wailing, groaning and gnashing of teeth? Being so clogged with the
intolerable burden of their sins, so overwhelmed with the bloody floudes of
Gods vengeance, so pitifully and plentifully powered out upon them: now they
perceive the wages of their sin to be death and damnation: now they pine away
for hunger, and would be glad of the worst and sowrest apple in all Paradise:
now they thirst like the Heart after the water of those sweet running Rivers:
now they feel the want of Gods presence and amiable countenance, they perceive
the Serpent to be busy about their heels, most greedily sucking their blood,
neither can they both find out the means to shake him off, or bruise his
head: therefore they sit like two children having by misfortune slain their
dear and loving father, weeping and howling the one to the other: they had
slain the Image of their heavenly father, they had poisoned their souls with
an Apple which the venomous serpent had spit upon: they feel the worm of a
guilty conscience lie gnawing their bowels, and all Creatures disobeyed them,
and rebelled against them, in that they had showed themselves disobedient
rebels against their Lord and Creator. But what followed? The merciful and
loving Lord, when we stood at this point, and in a manner at defiance with him;
although he saw that the imaginations of man's heart would be evil, and that he
would always bear a stiff stomach against him and his holy will; yet did he
not utterly cast us off, but blessed, O blessed be his name therefore, he has
shown us a glad and cheerful countenance, it grieved him that we had
deserved his wrath, but it would have grieved him much more, if that we had
died the deserved death: therefore that Justice might have his course, and his
mercy nevertheless might be seen over all his works, he was content to send
the Diadem of his deity, that precious pearl, his own glory, in whom was all
his delight, his only begotten, his best beloved Son, even him before whom
the 24. Elders threw down their Crowns humbly: whom the Angels magnified,
and all the host of heaven worshipped continually: and to this end, that he
might be borne of sinful flesh, that it being defiled with sin, might be
cleansed by the seed of righteousness; to be hungry for material bread; that
our hungry souls might be fed with the bread of life: to be polluted with our
spitle, that we might be cleansed by his spirit to be condemned to death by us,
that we might attain unto life by him, to be crowned with a crown of
thorns, that we might be crowned with crowns of glory, to sustain our
sorrows that we might attain his joys: and in a word, to be borne in misery,
to live in beggary, and to die with ignominy: for his cradle was a cratch, his
life crossed, and his kind of death accursed, that mankind might be blessed:
but of this hereafter.

The person of whom he was born is most distinctly expressed, and expressly
designed in Luke, both with the name of her espoused Husband, the City she
dwelt in; the lineage and Tribe she came of, and the messenger that was sent
from god unto her. All which I think was not superuacaniously, or in vain set
down, seeing that neither a leaf from the tree, nor an hair can fall to the
ground without the will and providence of God. There is not a Letter or
syllable in the Gospel, but has some special use, and also is replenished
with celestial and heavenly sweetness, if it have a dilligent examiner, that
can tell how to suck Honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of the Flint stone,
as the prophet speaks Esaias. 45. The Angel Gabriell was sent to a virgin
espoused to a man, whose name was Joseph. Luke 1. etc. But what virgin was it
that was so venerable, as to be saluted of an Angel, and yet so humble as to
be espoused to Joseph a carpenter? O most excellent no doubt was the commixtion
of virginity and humillity; neither does that person smally delight God, in
whom Humility commends Virginity, and Virginity exorneth, and beautifieth
humility. We hear she was a Virgin, and and we hear she was humble; if we
can not imitate the virginity of this humble woman, yet let us follow the
Humility of that Virgin. Commendable is Virginity, but more necessary is
Humillity: for that is but Counseled. but this is commanded: that we are
invited unto, but unto this we are compelled. Of that it is said, I would that
every one were a virgin as my self; but of this it is affirmed, That except
we be as humble as little Children we cannot enter Heaven. For without
Virginity a man may be saved, but without Humillity he can not. And therefore
says Mary in her song of thanksgiving. He respected (what? not my Virginity)
but the Lowly estate of his handmaid. Of this humble virgin came Christ in his
humility, and for this he respected her, to show us how he respects the
humble. It was meet that she should be meek and Humble: of whom the meek and
humble in heart should proceed; and it was requisite that she should be a pure
Virgin and vnspoted, of whom the Immaculate and unspotted Savior should be
born, that should cleanse the spots of the impure world. Adam and Eve as they
were the begetters of all, so were they the destroiers of all; yea and which is
a more mischief, they first destroid us before they begat us; for their Seed
being impure by their sin we were al conceived sinful, and subject unto
destruction; The consideration whereof might cause us to fear with the
Shepherds; But says the Angel, Fear not, for ye have wherewith to redeem
the Impurity of your conception: even the purity of the conception of your
Redeemer. If he had bin unclean himself in his co^ception, how could he have
cleansed ours; therefore to make them clean which were borne of unclean seed he
was conceived without any seed of man. For (as the Angel Gabriell told her)
the Holy Ghost came upon her, and the power of the most High ouershadowed her.
And therefore that holy thing that was borne of her, was, and is called the son
of God: what greater miracle then this? yea who ever heard so great miracles as
these, as that God should be man and yet God still? That a virgin should be a
mother without the corruption of her Virginity? Surely I may now with security
expect, that that holy one shall not see corruption, but shall rise again for
our Justification, seeing he would not suffer corruption in the Virginity of his
mother.

Further, we may observe this in the wisdom of God, how he makes the woman a
Conduite Pipe of our comfort and Felicity, which before was the instrument of
our care and misery; so that as before we laid the fault upon Eua, Saying, The
woman which thou gave me, gave to me to eat, etc. So now we may with ioiful
hearts say to God; Mary which thou gave me, gave me of the Tree of Life, and I
did eat of it. And it was sweeter the^ honey unto my mouth, for in it thou have
revived me: Thus the wise woman rebuildeth the house, which the foolish had
cast down before. Mary, like the tree of life, bears the fruit of Salvation
for us, as Eve offered the apple of Damnation unto us.

Now let us proceed to the time of his birth, which was in the midst of
winter, even of the cold and tempestuous winter, when all things seem dead
and withered, when the Trees, not only bear no fruit, but also, want their
Leaves: when the birds sing not, nor the Sun warmeth, nor the heavens are
clear, nor the Air tolerable, nor the Earth delightful, nor any creature
cheerful, even in this withered, barren, and frozen time of the year; nay of
the world: yea in the dark night of this winter was our Savior Borne: for then
was the night of which the Apostle speaking says now is past, when darkness
was over the face of the deep, yea a spiritual and inward darkness of the
mind when the Light of Knowledge and Understanding was very much obseured, and
the darkness of ignorance had possessed men's hearts, that few had the true
knowledge of God, or could be instructed in the path of his ways. There was no
Prophet amongst them, no chirping of birds was heard in their Land, there was a
barrennes, not only of good works, but even of the leaves of good words.
Thieves made their dens in the Temple, and Foxes crept into Sion. Charity was
cold, and men's hearts were frozen: Justice was banished, and unrighteousness
embraced: and therefore according to the time of the year, I mean the course
of their life, the storms and tempests of Gods heavy judgments, might with
reason be exspected. But even in this cod dead winter, and dark time of the
night, warm and cheerful Light appeered unto the Shepherds, and the glory
of the Lord did shine most brightly upon them, and the Tidings of this joyful
Nativity was told unto them, which is all one with that which the apostle
says. That when we were Sinners Christ died for us. And this was the fullness
of time. Gal. 4. for the fullness of Earthly and temporal things, had made a
dearth and barrenness of heavenly and spiritual. This was the time which the
Prophet Ioell prophesied of, when the mountains should drop down new wine,
and the hills should flow with milk, and all the Rivers of Judah should flow
with waters. This was the day wherein God promised the Heavens should send
down their Dew, and the Clouds drop Righteousness, and Salvation and Justice
should grow forth of the Earth together. This was the day which many Kings
and Prophets desired to see, and could not see it: Yea happy were they that
were so happy as to hope for this day: Father Simeon desired to live to this
day, though he lived not a day longer, and therefore as soon as ever he saw
him whom his soul had so long longed after, presently he said, Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. etc. This was the comfortable day, in the hope whereof the Prophets
comforted up themselves and the people, declaring it in such sort, as though
the insensible creatures, as the mountains and the valleys should be refreshed
thereby: Such was the prophecy of Esaias: Rejoice, O heavens, and be glad O
earth, burst forth into praises O mountains, for God has visited his people,
and will have mercy on his afflicted. And the Prophet Zachary says: Rejoice,
for great joy O daughter Sion, shout out for joy O daughter Jerusalem, Behold
thy king comes unto thee. If these reioiced so much in that the Messiah
should come, How much more should our souls magnify the Lord, and our spirits
rejoice in him, who already is come, and as this day born unto us? This is the
day which the Lord did promise to our forefathers, let us rejoice and be glad
in it. Let us clap our hands for joy and gladness, let us sing unto the Lord
with the voice of melody: for Christ our Savior is borne as this day, let us
sing praises therefore all of us with understanding: But some man will say, this
day was long ago, it is old and stale news that Christ was borne, I know
indeed that the Messiah was borne, not only long before our times, but even
before all times. But I read also, that Jesus is yesterday, and to day, and
the same for ever: and therefore if the fathers reioiced to see his day before
it came, we may as well celebrate the memorial of it as present now it is come.

But now let us proceed and inquire out the place of his birth: And that the
Evangelists affirm to be Bethlehem the city of David, what if it be a poor
village? what if it be the least in all the land of Judea? shall it be an
argument that he was not born there? nothing less, for what was more beseeming
him, that when he was rich, became poor for us: and of a great and mighty
Lord, became a little child, then to be born in a poor and little village. And
in this he declares unto us, how greatly he affects the poor in spirit,
and those that are of a lowly and humble heart: For as he said unto his
Disciples of his washing of their feet, so it may be said of his other
actions, I have given you an example, that you should do as I have done: And
in this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples. If thou would
distinguish betwixt the corn and the chafe, cast them forth; the good corn
descends, but the chafe will ascend: the wicked are still aspiring, and
mounting upward in this world, but the godly cast down their crowns with the
24. Elders at the feet of the Lamb: Dicit se filius indignum vt, pater eum
iudicet dignum; The prodigal son terms himself unworthy, that his father
might term him worthy: for it is always true, that Cum inclinatur humilitas,
excitatur miserecordia, when humility stoupeth down, mercy arises up. And
therefore says Peter: Humisiamini sub potenti manu domini, vt vos exaltat in
diem Iudicij, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt you in the day of judgment: The tree does not grow upward except it
first take root downwarde: The higher we mean to build an house, the lower
we must lay the foundation, for he that thinks to do the one, without
performing the other, may seem frugall in the beginning, but will prove a
fool in the end: The high hills seem next unto the clouds, but the low
valleys are most refreshed by them, even so God resists the proud, but
gives grace unto the humble: The glow-worme shines bright, and in the dark
gloriously, but is black and ugly when it comes to light: whatsoever the
condition of the proud man seems now in the darkness of this world, I am
sure that when the Son of righteousness shall shine in the last day it shall
prove very low and base.

I would that ye were all little Bethelem of Judah, poor in spirit, and little
in your own eyes, that Christ might vouchsafe to be borne in you by his
spirit, as he was there in the flesh. Bethelem signifies as much as the house
of bread, therefore it is good to be there: and if we may not build
Tabernacles of abode in that place, yet let us send thither with Jacob, our
Camels and Asses, I mean our affections, that we may live, and not die: It is
the house of bread, even of that living bread that came down from heaven, of
which whosoever eats shall live for ever. Happy were the people that were in
such a case, yea blessed was Bethelem that had the Lord for their bread. Let us
pray, beloved, that we may be also Bethelem, the house of bread, that the Lord
may turn in unto us; for otherwise, if we be unprovided, as he that was feign
to trouble his neighbor at midnight for a few loaves, we are not fit to
receive so great a guest. But who has this Bread? even he whose heart is
confirmed and strengthened, for bread strengthens the heart of man; and who is
confirmed or strengthened in heart? but he whose heart is settled to the
Commandments of the Lord, which does not waver in his faith, but goes forward
with a determined heart toward the heavenly Canaan, forgetting the flesh pots
of Egypt which are behind, and not so much as looking back toward the
forsaken Sodom. For if any one be doubtful and wavering in his faith, if a man
be not resolved to proceed in his vocation, but is in a quandary, whither he
should go forward or backward, deny his faith, or maintain it, forsake his
sins, or return to his vomit: this man is not prepared to receive the Lord:
Christ will not be borne in such a man's house who wants faith the bread of
life, as the Scripture calls it, saying, the just shall live by faith. But
what! did Bethelem believe in Christ? did she so abound with the bread of
faith, that the Lord chose his Inn there, rather then any where else? nay
surely, she was far from that in nature, which she seemed to be by her name,
though she brought forth this Son, according to the duty of a mother, yet she
was far from a motherlike affection toward him: though the walls of her
house contained him carnally, yet the affections of her heart would not
entertain him spiritually. And indeed, we may say of this as Paul does of
other like mysteries: All things were done in former times, in tipes and
figures. The believing soul is that true city of bread wherein Christ is
daily borne spiritually, as he was in Bethelem carnally: So that I think this
name was given her, rather as a prophecy that the bread of Life, Christ Jesus
should be borne in her, then for that she was fed or nourished by him.

Furthermore, the holy ghost not only has expressed the name of the town,
but also the very house, yea, and the very place or room of the house wherein
he was borne, neither is it to be thought curiosity in us to search the meaning
of every particular, which the spirit of wisdom so curiously has expressed.
Sub sordido palliolo lateat sapientia. Under a patched coat may lurk
wisdom, and under a plain style, may mystically be contained most learned
institutions; so that, not only the deep Ocean sea is to be sounded, but also
the shallow foords of Meander are diligently to be considered. Neither do I
think it haphazard that Christ was borne in a stable (for such is the place
that the Evangelists affirm that he was born in) but that it was appointed by
God for special reasons long before, who does nothing rashly, but has a
reason of all his actions.

Ye heard before how honorable was the condition of Adam in his Innocence,
being like unto God, and created in his Image; But the Psalmist witnesses, man
being in honor, and wanting understanding, he was compared unto the Beasts that
perish, and in natural affections became indeed a very beast, and for his
beastly similitude and resembla^ce stood tied as it were at the manger, to
receive the fodder of beasts. A strange alteration (beloved) that he that was
the possessor of Paradise, the lord of the whole earth, the household servant of
the god of saboth, the brother of the blessed and celestial spirits, and the
perfect Image of the holy Trinity, should so degenerate from his kind, as to
become so low and base as a Beast. But mark here, and consider the
proceedings of god: for whereas man being become a beast had left the Heavenly
bread of Life, delighting more in the fodder of Beasts; Behold now that bread
of Life is turned into Flesh, nay into grass, which is the food of Beasts (for
all flesh is grass) and lies in a rack or manger to be eaten and chewed of
us beasts. Therefore let the Ox now know his own, and the Ass his masters
crib. Let them draw near to him in the stable, whom they fled from in the
garden. Let them honor him in the manger, whom they contemned in his majesty,
and let them feed on him being grass, whom they loathed when he was bread;
yea let them with an eager and lively faith ruminate and chew upon him, that
they may be nourished and grow up by him. He must be received by Hearing,
chewed by Understanding and disiested by believing, or as an other says. The
eating of his flesh, is a certain hunger and desire, to be incorporated into
him. And indeed as our savior says. He that eats the flesh of the son of
man etc. shall live for ever.

A Sauiour] But wherefore did Christ so debase himself? Even that he might be
a Savior unto us? that he might draw us unto him with the ropes of man, and
with the cords of his love, as Ose speaks. And therefore he leaves no means
untried, to bring us unto him, no not though they be never so base, as to be
borne in a Stable.

There is none of us that live in this region of death, in the infirmities of
the flesh, and amidst the Temptations that are commonly offered, but has need
of Counsel, of Help, and of comfort, for we are Faciles ad seducendum, debiles
ad operandum, and fragiles ad resistendum: if we would discern betwixt good
and evil, we are easily deceived. If we try to do good, we are quickly tired.
And if we are tempted, we are sudenly subdued. Therefore to enlighten our
blindness, to help our weakness, and to defend our frailnesse, Christ was borne
unto us. Therefore Fear not. For if he be in us, who shall deceive us? If he
be with us, what can we not do in him that strengthens us? If he stand for
us, what need we care who be against us? seeing he is the faithful Counselor,
which can neither deceive nor be deceived, seeing he is the Almighty God;
which is never wearied; seeing he is the strong man, that binds Satan,
breaks the Serpents Head, and is never vanquished. Wherefore Fear not, O
Adam, neither fly any longer. Run not in to the bushes from the sight of thy
Maker, for behold, he has sent thee this day a Savior. Once thou wast
persuaded by the serpent, to sin against God, and being taken in the fact, thou
had reason to fear. Yea perhaps he brandished his fiery sword against thee:
but now it is not so. He comes not with weapons, to punish, but with mercy,
to preserve. If thou say thou heardst his voice, and therefore fledst; why?
he is an Infant, and without any voice, and if he have a voice, it is a voice
more to be pitied then feared. Yea in this thou shall know, that he is come to
save thee, and not destroy thee, in that he fights for thee against such as
rose against thee. Thou had but two enemies, Sin and Death, the death of
the body, and the death of the soul: he comes to destroy either, and to
save thee from both: therefore fear not, he destroyed sin in his own
person, when he took man's flesh upon him without any pollution: For great was
the violence that was offered unto sin, when humane nature, which was always
before as it were in a leprosy, was found in Christ as white as snow:
therefore I hope, yea I am assured that he can pluck out the beam in mine
eye, which has never a moate in his own, that he may satisfy for my sin,
which was never defiled himself with any. I read of two that were called
Jesus, that is, Savior, who as they went before this that we speak of, so I
think they were tipes and prefigurations of him. One of which brought the
people out of Babylon, the other brought them into Canaan, both defended them
from their enemies, but neither saved them from their sins: But this
delivers us from our sins, brings us out of bondage, and places us as
kings in the land of the living. Sin had made a separation of the body from
the soul, and the soul from the body, and of both from God: but Jesus has
brought them all together again, yea and in a far nearer conjunction then ever
before. For now they that were at mutual variance, are now reconciled friends.
Yea and so reconciled, that as in the blessed Deity there is a trinity in
persons, but an unity in substance: Even so in this happy reconciliation there
is a Trinity in substance, but an Unity in the persons. And as there the
Triplicitie of persons does not break the unity, nor the simplicity of the
unity does not diminish the trinity: So here in like manner the persons does
not confound the substances, nor the substances do hinder the unity of the
person; for the word, the Soul, and flesh, are become one person, and these
three are one, and this one thing is three, not by confusion of the substances,
but by the unity of the person: O wonderful and superexcellent union! who
ever heard that things so diverse should so meet together, as to be one
person; yea, soon person, that whatsoever God may be said to have done in the
body, the body may be said to have done it. And whatsoever the body suffers,
God may be said to have suffered, by reason of this conjunction. The Angels
surely were astonished here at, seeing him beneath themselves, whom they did
always adore and worship above themselves. The Cherubins which God commanded
to be placed at the two ends of the Arc of the covenant, with their face being
turned one toward another, and both looking on the mercyseate, do signify as
much unto us, as that they admyred and wondered to see a work of so great
piety. viz. To see God made the propitiatory sacrifice of the world, and to
debase himself so low as to become a man But behold the prophecy (as I may
term it) of Adam fulfilled, Man (quoth he) shall leave father and mother, and
cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Christ Jesus leaves
his Father and the Angels in Heaven, for to associate himself unto his
spouse in earth, and (as you have heard) she is bone of his bone; and flesh of
his flesh, for they are no more two but one person. And this beloved, is
tidings of great joy; for now, according to the laws of wedlock, we may
assure our selves to have all things in common with him; so that he shall take
upon him our sins and transgressions as his own, and we again shall be
partakers of his purity and holiness as our own; That our debts shall be
required at his hands, and we be saved harmles and discharged of them, which is
all one with that which is said here; that a Savior is born unto us. But this
by the way, we must not now forget, that it is our parts and duties to forget
likewise our own people and fathers house; to abandon all strange loves, and
to admit none into the fellowship of that spiritual bed, but to cleave only
unto him, to honor and obey him, to reverence and love him, to keep our
chastities unspotted, our souls and bodies pure and undefiled for him: And as
our nature is one with his who so is heavenly and divine; so to live an
heavenly and divine life, neither loving any thing that he lotheth, or lothing
any thing that he loves, but that his will be our will, and his precepts our
continual practices.

As he has overcome Sin in his own person, in being conceived, and living
without Sin, so has he delivered us also from the guilt thereof, by suffering
the punishment for us, and imputing his Righteousness unto us: also in that he
overcame Sin, it appears plainly that he has vanquished death. For death is
but the stipend and wages of Sin, and as it were the effect and fruit of
Sin. For if man had avoided the first, he should surely have escaped the
latter, for it was not the corruption of our bodies that made our souls
sinful, but the Sin of our Souls that made our bodies corruptible. And
therefore if the fountain be dry, the brooks must needs be dry: If the cause
be taken away, the effects must of necessity follow, as if the Sun be dark,
the Moon and the Stars can give no light: death a great while amazed al
mankind. (I speak of the eternal and neuer-dying death, of which Gregory
speaking faith Mors erit immortalis, defectus indeficiens, and finis infinitus,
unto which belongs the worm that never dies, when a man shall be always
dying and never dead everlastingly, having an end, and yet no end; still
decaying, and never decayed. Because his end ever begins, his death ever
lives, and his decay never cease, From which, by the Law, there was no
Redemption, which would have brought into eternal subjection all creatures
whatsoever, if this Savior and deliverer had not bin born unto us, so that
every soul like the mothers in Rama^, might have justly sighed forth those
doleful dirges of weeping, mourning, and lamentation; and with Job have cursed
the days of their Nativity, by reason of the torments and tortures of the
dead. But as the Ass called Cumanus asmus, getting up and down in a Lions
skin, did for a while terrify his master, but afterward being descried, did
do him no good service: So death which sometimes made afraid the wisemen of the
world, by his skin or sting of Eternity. Now since our Savior has bereaved
him thereof, seems contemptible, even unto Children, so that they dare boldly
go unto it, for they know it shall benifite them very much: for if they be
oppressed with any miseries or calamities in this life, when they shall come to
death, they shall be discharged, and death as an Ass shall bear their burdens
for them; yea they know, that death unto them shall be no death, but an
entrance into everlasting life, and therefore they fear not.

God is the life of the soul, as the Soul is of the body, by sinning
voluntarily the Soul lost God her life, therefore she can not now at her
pleasure give life. She would not be governed of God, therefore now she can not
govern the body. Having not obeyed her superior why should she command her
inferior. God found his creature rebellious against him. The Soul was found a
transgressor of Gods law, now therefore she finds a law in her members
repugning the law of her mind. Sin separated betwixt God and her, therefore
death does separate betwixt her and the body. The Soul could not be divided
from God, but by sin, neither can the body from the Soul, but by death: what
injury therefore suffered she, if she suffered that of her subject which she
committed her self against her prince? Nothing surely was more agreeable unto
Justice, then that death should be rewarded with death; spiritual with
corporal, and voluntary with necessary. Whenas man therefore had deserved
according to either nature, to suffer this double death, the one spiritual and
voluntary, the other corporal and necessary; from either of them the man-god
Christ Jesus most mightily has delivered us, by his own corporal and
voluntary death: and in that one of his, has satisfied for both of ours. If he
had not died corporally, he had not paid our debt, and if he had not died
voluntarily, his death had not bin meritorious. But now if (as it is said) the
merit of death is sin, and the woges of sin is death. Christ remitting and
forgiving our sin, and dying for sinners, the merit is abolished, and the
debt is discharged. But how shall we know that Christ can forgive us our
sins? even by this, in that he is God: But how shall we know that he is
God? his miracles do prove it: for he does the works which no no man else can
do, yea God himself from heaven has confirmed the same. Therefore if Christ
be for us, who is against us? If Jesus justify us, who shall condemn us? It
is he, and no other, to whom we confess our sins, saying, Against thee only
have I sinned, etc. Who could better, nay who could at all forgive us that
which was committed against him? Or how can he not do this, which can do all
things? In a word, if I can pardon that which is committed against me, if I
will, shall not God our Christ be able to forgive that which is committed
against him, if he will? If therefore he can forgive and pardon our sins,
both because he is omnipotent, and only can, because they are only done
against him. Surely blessed is the man to whom this Lord Christ will not impute
sin. Therefore we know that Christ, by the power of his divinity is able to
forgive sins: now of his will who need to doubt? For he that debased him self
so much, as to take our flesh upon him, and to suffer death for us, shall we
think that he will not imparte unto us his righteousness? surely yes, so that
as it is evident by the consideration of his deity, that he is able to forgive
our sins: so it is manifest by the consideration of his Humanity, that he is
willing so to do. But what other argument have we that he has vanquished
death? marry this, because he suffered it which did not deserve it. And
therefore with what reason can that be required of us, which an other has
already paid for us? he that took away the merit of sin, by giving his
righteousness unto us, he has paid the debt of death, and restored life unto
us; for so death being vanquished, life is restored, as sin being taken away,
righteousness is returned.

But how could he die which was God* Even in this respect, that he was man.
But how could the death of one man satisfy for an other? because he was Just
and Innocent that died. As he was a man, he might die, but being guiltless, it
was not necessary. Indeed a sinner is not able to satisfy the debt of death
for an other sinner, for every one dies for his own sin: but he that has
no cause to die for his own, shall we not think his death may be a ransom
for an other? Surely by how much the more unjustly he dies which has not
deserved death, by so much the more justly he lives for whom he so dies. But
what equity is it (say thou) that an innocent person should die for the
guilty? I tell thee, it is not Justice, but mercy: if it should have bin
Justice, then he had not died voluntarily, but of duty: if of duty, then he
himself should die indeed, yet he for whom he so died should not live. But
nevertheless if it be not Justice, yet it is not against justice, otherwise
God could not have bin just and merciful at once. But although one just man
may satisfy for one sinner, yet how is it that one may satisfy for many? for
it might seem enough, if one dying for one, do restore Life unto one. To this
the Apostle shall answer, As by the offense of one, the fault came on all men
to the Condemnation of death: So by the Righteousness of one, the benefit
abounded toward all men to the justification of Life. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made Sinners: So by the Obedience of one, many are
become Righteous. But perhaps one man might restore Righteousness unto many, but
Life, not so. By one man (says he) death entered into the world, and so by one
is Life regayned; For as by Adam all die, so by Christ shall all be made alive.
For what! shall one man sin and all become guilty, and shall the Righteousness
of one redownd but to one only? was gods Justice such, as to condemn al for
one, and cannot his mercy be as great, as to save all by one? Or could Adam do
more in evil, then Christ in good? Shall Adams Sin be imputed unto me, and
shall not Christ's righteousness belong unto me? Shall his disobedience be the
cause of my Death, and shall not Christ's obedience restore me to life? but thou will say, we are worthily guilty of Adams Sin, because we were contained in
him when he sinned, and were begotten of his flesh in the sinful Lust of the
Flesh. But I say, more truly are we begotten of god according to the spirit,
then of Adam according to the flesh: I mean, if we are of the number of those
whom God has predestined before the creation of the world unto Life; And
that we are begotten of god S. John witnesses where he says, Which were not
begotten of blood, nor after the will of the Flesh, nor of Man, but of God. And
in one of his Epistles he likewise makes mention of this holy generation,
saying. He that is borne of God sins not. But thou will say, our carnal
concupiscence and sin, testifies that we have descended of sinners according
to the flesh, and not of God. I answer, this generation or birth is not seen
in the flesh, but in the spirit and mind: and that of those only that can say
with the Apostle, we have the mind of the Lord, and who have the spirit,
bearing witness to their spirits, that they are the sons of God: for by the
spirit of God, chastity is infused into our minds, as by the flesh which is
of Adam, concupiscence is diffused about in our members: and as that which is
descended unto us from the parents of our bodies, does never depart in this
life from the flesh: so the other proceeding from the father of our spirits, is
never excident from the intention of the minds of his children that are
perfected in him. If then we are borne of God, and elected in Christ, what
equity is it that our earthly and humane generation should hurt us more then
our spiritual and heavenly is able to help us? Can our carnal succession
hinder the election of God, and a momentary sin be a let unto his eternal
and everlasting purpose? Nay if by one man death entered upon all, shall not
life by one man, especially such a man as Christ, be given unto all? And if in
Adam we all died, shall we not much more in Christ be made alive* for the
fault was nothing so much as the gift; for judgment came for one sin unto
condemnation, but grace was of many sins unto justification. Christ therefore
both could remit our sins, in that he was God, and die, in that he was man,
and by dying, deliver us from death, in that he was just, and though but one,
yet be sufficient unto justification and life for all, because both sin and
also death did enter into us all by one. Thus all of Christ was powerful to
help us, in every thing he was profitable for us, neither was his infirmity
less available then his majesty; for although by the power of his deity he
removed the yoke of sin from our necks* yet in the infirmity of his flesh*
he destroyed the power of death by his death. And therefore true is that of the
Apostle, the weakness of God is strongest unto men; for his death has freed
us from death, as his life did from error, and his grace from sin. But some
man may say, if Christ has thus delivered us from the power of sin and
death, what is the reason that we die daily, and are not presently clothed with
immortality? mary that the truth and verity of God may be fulfilled, for
seeing God loves both mercy and truth, it is necessary that man die because
God has spoken it, and yet that he rise and live again, because God is
merciful. So that death, although it does not perpetually reign over us, yet
it remains for a time in us for the truth of Gods sake; even as sin also,
though it reign not in our mortal bodies, yet it is not altogether abolished
out of us.

Thirdly, as death was put to death by this Lord of life, so likewise was
satan the prince of death: for as Origin testifies there were besides the
Thieves, two crucified on the Cross of Christ. Christ himself visibly, with
his will, and for a time: the devil inuisibly, against his will, and for ever:
so that now the band of death which was drawn together, by the sinful life of
one, was loosed by the righteous death of an other, and our malicious adversary
that never meant us good is now overtaken in the effect of his malice: for by
hastening the Son of Gods execution, he brought on all the sons of men's
redemption, and his own confusion. Ruens dum irruens, captus dum capit,
mortalem persequens, and in saluatorem incidens. Falling whilst following,
caught whilst catching, pursuing a creature, and lighting on the Savior: so
that as before he had overcome the first Adam, and in him, had held all
mankind captive, now he is overcome himself of a second Adam, and by his
puissance loses the Christian kind that were chosen out of mankind, and now
set free from the sin of man, by this his adversary, that was without sin,
though he were of mankind. And is not this (blessed brethren) Tidings of great
joy, that such a Savior is borne unto us, that has subdued all those that
were any whit against us? Therefore now, O dead Adam, lift up thy head again;
take heart unto thee, and be of a good courage, for he is borne that has
vanquished thy enemies, Sin, Death, and the Devil: that will reconcile thee to
thy creator, and make thee a new creature: thou have bin dead a great while
like Lazarus, and we may think with Mary, that thou stinkest, but he that
could make the dry bones come together, and stand up, is able to raise thee
from the dust of death, and to set thee with the Princes of the living God.
Thou have layne a long time in thy goare, like the wounded man of Jericho, and
many have passed by thee, but none showed compassion on thee; but behold, here
is come a good Samaritane to bind up thy wounds, and to restore thee to thy
health, despair not. This (beloved) is the comfort of a Christian, the solace
of a sinner, and the tidings of joy that is come unto all people: even that
there is borne unto us a Savior. O name above all names, and most worthy to
be ever named; It is even as honny unto my mouth, and as marrowe unto my bones;
O blessed be this name of the Lord, for it turns my water into wine, my
malady into melody, my sorrows into sollace, my musing into music, and my
sighing into singing: like oil, it makes me to have a cheerful countenance,
and like bread, it strengthens my fainting heart: it is as sweet incense
powered forth, and therefore says Solomon, the virgins love him. I will not now
be afraid for any terrors by night, nor for the arrows that fly by day: for
my Savior will save me under his wings, and I shall be safe under his feathers,
his mercy and truth shall be my shield and buckler.

Many were the favors that God showed unto the Israelites, in bringing them
from their grievous bondage in Egypt, to their stately government in Canaan,
whereof David seems very proud in that Psalm that he compiled of it. But if
you consider them they will appear nothing, in comparison of those benefits
which this sweet name Savior does import unto us. First, says David, he
divided the red Sea, and led them safely through it, when their foes were
drenched and overwhelmed in it, and in the day time he led them with a Cloud.
This was their Baptism under Moses as Paul says, but if we compare it with
ours, we shall find that we have drowned a greater enemy, even the infernal
Pharao the diuill of hell, as many as are baptized in the red Sea of this our
Saviors blood. David goes farther and says; As he led them in the day time
with a cloud, so did he in the night time with a light of fire. This was, I
confess, a token of Gods great love, to give them such a Light; but it was
nothing in comparison of that light which shines in the darkness of our
hearts and minds, by whch whosoever walks, shall never see darkness, but
shall have the Light of Life. Furthermore he says, for the glory of the Jew he
claue the rock in the wilderness and gave them Drink as out of the great depth.
But Paul says for the comfort of us Gentiles. This rock is Christ, which
being cloven on the cross by the soldiers spear, there gushed out most
plentifully that water of Life which serves to satisfy the thirst of every
soul. David adds. God opened the Doors of Heaven, and rained down Manna
upon them to eat, which was the food of Angels: but that was but a figure of
this bread of life, which is come down from Heaven unto us, of which whosoever
eats shall live for ever. Finally, David reioyseth that God by the hand of
his servant Joshua, conducted his people into Canaan, and set them in
possession of that good and pleasant land. But that was but as dung in
comparison of our inheritance, our heavenly Canaan the kingdom of God, of
which Iosuah our Jesus will crown us Kings for ever, if we follow him as he
has commanded. Seeing then (O happy Christians) that David so much rejoiced
for those temporal blessings that God had bestowed upon his forefathers, how
much more ought we to triumph in the remembrance of those spiritual
benedictions and graces which we shall be pertakers of for ever, by the
coming of our Savior, wherein we seem as far to exceed the Jews in the
favor of GOD, as the Jews exceeded all other nations of the world whatsoever.

Even Christ the Lord] It is added moreover for the increase of our comfort,
that our Savior is Christ. This word Christ is a Greek word, and sounds as
much as Anointed in English. Whereas then we hear that our Savior is Christ
that is anointed, we are assured that he is come into the world by the
special decree and appointment of God himself. The external or visible Oil
that was used in the time of the Law, God ordained for the creating or
appointing of three sorts of officers, viz. Kings, Priests, and Prophets,
whereby he did signify that by the hand of this King, he would govern and
defend his people, in the person of this Priest, be called upon and
worshipped, and by the mouth of this Prophet, declare his will and pleasure unto
the people. Unto all these Offices was our Savior anointed, not with
material or visible oil, but with the oil of gladness wherewith David
Prophesied he should be anointed above his fellows. Neither bears he these
names and titles in vain, but also he executes the Offices belonging
thereunto: For first he has delivered us, like a King, from the power of our
enemies, and has made us freemen with the Angels in heaven, yea he has given
us Laws and Statutes to observe, which whosoever keeps, shall live in them:
blessing also them that serve him, and damning such as rebel against him.
Therefore in that we hear our Savior is anointed our King, to rule over us,
we have no little cause to rejoice, in that we may be assured, that the
kingdom of darkness, which our adversary the devil had begun to erect and
stablish in us, shall now be ruinated and plucked down: In stead whereof
Christ will establish his heavenly kingdom, which is justice, peace, and joy of
the holy ghost: also, that he shall bridle, with his might, and bruise with his
rod of iron, not only wicked and devilish men, but also the devil himself and
al his Angels, which go about to hinder the increase of his glory, or our
health and salvation.

Secondarily, in that he is anointed our Priest, we have this comfort given
unto us, that we have one that will sacrifice continually, like good Job for
his children, and make intercession for us. The office of the Priest in the
time of the Law was, to pray for the people, to bless them, to sacrifice for
them, to consecrate and sanctify them according to the commandment. This was
a great comfort in those days, unto the afflicted consciences of distressed
sinners, groaning and groueling under the heavy burden of their manifold
transgressions, to have a Priest to pray for them, and to reconcile them unto
the favor of God, whom by their sins and iniquities they had provoked unto
anger. Since then that we hear that Christ is anointed our Priest, we may
assure our selves that he is tied to the self same Offices; but indeed to so
much more excellent then these, as he has obtained a more excellent
Priesthood. The Priest after the order of Aron, served in the corruptible and
figurative Tabernacle; but our Priest is taken up into the true Tabernacle,
heaven it self, where he sacrifices for all the saints and servants of God:
there he makes intercession for us, for he ascended thither, that he might
follow all our suites faithfully and earnestly. He blesses us also, in that he
was made a curse for us: he sacrifices for us, in that he offered up himself
a sacrifice once for all, for the sins of the whole world: lastly he
sanctifies and consecrateth his Catholic church, renewing her mind, and
washing her in the fountain of regeneration by the word, that she may be holy,
even as he is holy. Seeing then he is anointed of God, to sacrifice and make
intercession for us, to bless, consecrate, and sanctify us, and to reconcile
us again into the favor of Almighty god, that we may now without fear
approach unto him: what a joyful thing is this, that our Savior is a Priest?

Lastly, in that he was anointed to be a prophet unto us, we may rejoice: and
be glad therein, because we shall truly understand know the will and pleasure
of our God, seeing the Son of god himself, who is one with his father, to
whom the eternal will and counsel of God is manifest and open, is anointed
and appointed to declare it unto us. And thus much of the Joy which a sinner
may receive when he understands that his Savior is Christ.

Thus (beloved) have I acquainted you with the particularities of Joy that
occur unto us in the message of the Angel; what remains now? but that you
should sing psalms of praise and thanksegiuing unto god, who has sent these
joyful Tidings unto us; Seeing he has so graciously regarded the low estate
of us his poor Creatures, as that he has not spared his own son to save
us. Unto which son, if ye run with penitent and contrite hearts, though ye
be never so heavy laden, he will ease and refresh you. You know, that in Adam
ye were al alients from the house of God, but you heard how that in Christ ye
are brought home unto the bishop and shepherd of your souls; you did walk in
darkness, but, Christ is come to give you light, you have mourned for your
sins, but a Savior is come to make you glad; you have bin poor, but Christ
is come with all the Treasures of the Trinity to make you rich. You have
sorowed for being shut out of Paradise, but now Rejoice in that more then in
any thing else; For as far as Adam, being in Paradise, did exceed us in
temporal blessings, so far do we out of Paradise exceed Adam in spiritual
benedictions: for though we were condemned to death for the tree of knowledge,
yet Christ is come, that by the tree of his Cross we might have life, and
that we might have it more abundantly: more abundantly! what is that? that
abundantly we might have more life by the Cross of Christ, then ever we had
or could have had by the tree of life, that abundantly we might gain more by
the obedience of Christ in his death, then ever we lost or could loose, by the
disobedience of Adam in his life: and therefore, though the sin of Adam was
so heinous and horrible, that it cast the Image of God out of Paradise, that it
polluted all the race of mankind, that it condemned the whole world, that it
defaced the very frame of heaven it self; yet now considering the sequel,
how not only the guilt of sin, but also the very memory of it is abolished
by the coming of Christ: we may not be afraid to say with S. Gregory, O faelix
culpa quae talem ac tantum meruit habere redemptorem. O happy man was Adam that
ever he so sinned and transgressed against God, seeing both he and all we have
found such plentiful redemption, such inestimable mercy, such superaboundant
grace, such felicity, such eternity, such life by one Savior. Wherefore (dear
Christian) whatsoever thou art, fear not any more as a man without hope, but
let thy spirit rejoice in God thy Savior. Do thy sins grieve thee, and the
punishment due unto them terrify thy conscience? Why, behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the whole world: art thou stung with the old
serpent Satan? Look then on the brazen serpent Christ, who heals the sting
of the other: art thou hungry? Christ is borne the bread of life, of which
whosoever eats shall live for ever: art thou thirsty? behold Christ the
fountain of living water, of which who so drinks shall thirst no more; but
it shall be unto him a well of water springing up unto eternal life: live
thou in darkness, behold Christ the light of the world, who only disperseth
the clouds of error: art thou desirous to enter into life? repair unto
Christ, for he is the door thereof, yea he is the way, the truth, and the
life, without which way, there is no walking into heaven, without which truth,
there is nothing but falsehood and error, and without which life, there is
nothing but death eternal. Seeing then that such a Savior is born unto thee,
in whom is the fulness of al iov, how can thou be sorrowful, or how can
thou fear? Shall Peter be sad, when he sees the boults of Iron beaten off
from him by an Angel, and the gates of the prison set open that he may go
forth and enjoy his former freedom? Should Jonas fear a storm when he was
cast up safe on the land out of the belly of a whale? Or Sidrack Misaack and
Abednago mourn, being delivered by the Lord from the fury of the furnace? Can
Daniell but rejoice being saved from the Lions? Or Joseph mistrust the goodness
of the Lord being promoted from a slave, to be Lord of all Egypt? We are
delivered from a darker prison then Peter, from a more fiery furnace then
Sidrack, from a more cruel Lion then Daniel, and adopted heirs of a more
noble kingdom then Joseph was, even the kingdom of Jesus: how then should we
but rejoice, being thus saved, and so highly promoted? Why art thou heavy, O my
soul, or why art thou at any time disquieted within me? List up thy head,
pluck up a good courage; celebrate with joy the Nativity of thy Savior;
dance now and be merry, not as Herodias did, but as David did, leap up in
affection as high as heaven, where thy Savior now sits, not in the lap of
his mother, but on the right hand of his father in all glory and majesty. Come
then, my brethren, let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the
strength of our Salvation. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, and let the
children of Sion be joyful in their King: Praise his name in the dance, sing
praises unto him with Tabret and Harp: Young men and maidens, old men and
children, praise the name of the Lord, sing (...) Iustily unto him with a good
courage. For why? the Lord is known now to have pleasure in his people in that
he has received us unto mercy, and has sent his own, Son to satisfy his
Justice, that we might be ^^ued. He has anointed him to be our King, let us
therefore obey him: he has ordained him to be our Priest let us therefore have
recourse unto him: and he has appointed him to be our Prophet, let us
therefore harken and give ear unto him.

O Lord God, how greatly are we indebted unto thy majesty, being redeemed with
so great a price, being saved so franckly and freely. O how art thou to be
loved of us poor creatures! how greatly art thou to be Reverenced, honored,
and glorified of us? which have so exceedingly loved us, saved us, sanctified
and exalted us; who exceeded all thy creatures in Rebellion against thee? We
were unworthy servant, but now we are made free, yea now we are free
indeed, in that thy son has made us free. O give us thy grace to receive thy
son being now come into the world; that we may be received of him in the
world to come. And for this cause sanctify our sinful and polluted hearts,
that he may vouchsafe to enter into us, and abide in us; for a clean Lord must
have a clean habitation; That so being sanctified in earthly Babilou we may
be thought worthy to be glorified in thy heavenly Jerusalem. Here there is
but Tidings of Joy, but there we shall enjoy the Joy it self. Here there is
but news that he came, but there we shall reap the fruits of his coming,
when we shall be wedded unto him in spiritual unity, and reign with him in
the kingdom of his deity; replenished with that Joy that no man shall take
from us. Of the which we beseech thee, O father, to make us pertakers and that
for the merrits of that thy son and our Savior through the mighty operation
of the holy ghost. To which Trinity, yet one power and vnparted majesty, we
ascribe all honor and glory, praise and thanksgiving, both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

