THE MERCHANTS AVIZO. VERY NECESSARY FOR THEIR sons and servants, when they
first send them beyond the seas, as to Spain and Portingale or other
countries. Made by their hearty well willer in Christ. I. B. Merchant.

ECCLES. 40.18. To labor and to be content with that a man has, is a sweet
life: but the fear of God is above all, etc.

printer's device of Richard Field, featuring an anchor suspended by a hand
from the clouds (related to McKerrow 192 and 195 -- possibly an intermediate
recutting) ANCHORA. SPEI


Imprinted at London by Richard Field for William Norton, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Queens arms. 1589.

CONSTANTINI CRVX.
emblem featuring Christ's cross with the five wounds, including the crown of
thorns and the sacred heart, encircled by a crown of thorns and a circle of
flames IN HOC SIGNO VINCES


TO THE WORSHIPFUL MASTER THOMAS ALDWORTH MERCHANT of the city of Bristowe:
and to all the worshipful company of the Merchants of the said city: your
bounden in good will John Brown, wishes unto your worships, felicity in
heaven, and prosperity in earth.
Worshipful, upon very earnest motion and persuasion of a friend unto me, to
set forth in public this matter, which I only had made private for
instruction of me and mine. And then calling to remembrance some necessity and
duty: necessity, because by mine own experience I know how greatly my self
and many other my countrymen, at our first going into Spain were troubled with
difficulties, for want of such a pattern as this, for ease of our tender
wits. And duty, because I acknowledge my self bounde^, both to your Worship,
and to all those of my profession, to employ my whole labors to do you any
pleasure or profit that I might. I therefore have emboldened my self to
dedicate and offer this my poor myte unto our Worships: whereby not only your
name may therein be still remembered, but may also make manifest your kind
favors, who are still willing to be furtherers of any general good. Mine own
labor or skill I confess, is but very little or nothing in this thing, because
I my self do but only as a poor willing labourer, to help forwards that
work, the foundation and platform whereof, is settled and builded already. But
my chief purpose herein is, only to work a general ease to all Merchants:
whereby they may the less trouble them selves, either with writing, invention,
or thought of these matters. And likewise that it might be some stay to young
and weak wits: yielding them thereby the more freedom of mind toward their
other business. Being careful in my self to order this work, that not only
(as I hope) it shall be lawfully permitted to be seen and read in any parts
beyond the If this book may not be thought tolerable beyond the seas: then
will it be yet a good exercise and but little labor, for every prentice to
copy it all out in writing: and so carry it with him for his instruction.
sea: but also shall instruct young nouices, to use greater brevity in their
writings then commonly they are wont.

Wherefore I commit my self and my doings, first to the praise of God, and
then to your good acceptance and favorable patronage. Desiring your Worships
all, that howsoever you do determine of the inability of this my labor: yet
that you vouchsafe to take in good part the ability of my love and good
meaning in it. So I rest, beseeching God to give unto you all, eternal
felicity in heaven, and prosperity to your lives end here on earth.

From my house in Bristow the 26. day of October. 1589. Your Worships bounden
in good will. I. B. MAR.

To the Reader.
WHen merchants trade proceeds in peace.
And labors prosper well:
Then commonweals in wealth increase,
As now good This was spoken when was a long stay of the marchantes trade, to
the great decay of many a one.
proof can tell.
For when the merchants trade was free,
His ventures for to make:
Then every art in his degree
Some gains thereof did take.
The merchant made the Clothier rich,
By venting of his cloth:
The Clothier then sets many at work.
And helps every craft.
For first the Spinster hereby live,
The Weauer and the Dier:
By cloth, the Shearman also thrive,
When Merchant is the buyer.
The Landlord and the Tenant sell,
By this means all their wool:
Their Biefe, their Corn, they sell the more,
When Merchants purse grow full.
The Grocer with the Vintener,
And Mercer profit reap:
When Spices, Silks, and Wines, come store,
By Merchants ventures great.
The Vitler and the Husbandman.
And handicraftes each on:
Makes gains, when Marcha^ts Ships and goods
Do merrily come home.
The Sailers herehence gets their skill,
To rule the stately Ship
And so become right worthy men,
For Sea and Land most fit.
Yea diverse more the Merchants trade,
Does succor and relieve:
As Bargeman, Craneman, Porter eke,
To him that Cart does drive.
Let no man then grudg Merchants state,
Nor wish him any ill:
But pray to God our Queen to save,
And Merchants state help still.
I B

THE TABLE OF THOSE things which are contained in this Book.
A General remembrance for a servant at his first going to sea. folio 1. A
letter to send to his master when he is forced by weather into any Port upon
his voyage. folio 8 A letter to be sent presently upon his arrival at his
Port. folio 9 A letter to be sent next after his first letter that he wrote of
his arrival. folio 10 A letter to be sent from his second Port of arrival.
folio 12 A letter to be sent in that ship where he has laden goods. folio 13
A letter to be sent unto one that has left some business to do under your
hands. folio 14 A letter of thanks to a friend that has done you some
pleasure: wherein you also request again some farther good turn of him. folio
15 A letter to desire the goodwill of a friend to help you in some matter of
your business. folio 16 Certain brief notes worthy observation: as first of
the Kintal or hundred weight of Portingale, Spain, and France. folio 18 Of the
measure of cloth in Portingale, Spain, and France. folio 19 Of the measure of
corn and salt in Portingal, Spain and France. folio 20 Of the value of
moneys, in Portingale, Spain, and France. folio 21 A brief instruction for
the better knowledge of diverse wares of Portingale, Spain and France. folio
23 A brief form for making a Spanish or any other account. folio 30 A rule to
take out your provision of two and a half in the hundred. fol. 32. And also in
what sort you must gather it upon the Impliments. folio 34 A rule to bring
Portingale Res into Spanish Meruedis. folio 46 Diverse particular notes worthy
observation, as appears in every leaf of the Spanish account, beginning fol.
30. A form for making a bill of lading. folio 49 A merchants particular
remembrance. folio 50 A bill of exchange for the country of Spain and
elsewhere. folio 53 A bill of exchange for our country of England. Ibid. An
acquittance. folio 54 A bill of attorney. Ibid. A bill of debt. folio 55 A bond
or Obligation. folio 56 A policy for assurance. Ibid. Certain godly
sentences, necessary for a youth to meditate upon. folio 61 The conclusion,
which is an history very profitable and delightful for a youth to read and
meditate. folio 65
A GENERAL REMEMBRANCE FOR A SERVANT WHEN HE FIRST trauelleth to the Sea, as
to Spain or Portingale, or other countries.
Emanuel
A GENERAL remembrance for you my servant I. A. that when it pleases God you
shall travel unto the sea, first and principally you do not forget upon your
fafe arrival at your Port, to give unto God most hearty and humble For to
fear God, and to be thankful unto him, is the beginning of all happiness
and prosperity in our affairs.
thanks for his gracious protection of you, by saying as in token of your
thankfulness, some godly prayer of thanksgiving, or say only with reverence
the Lords prayer, giving him withal thanks in some words of your own spirit.

Secondly, that presently upon your arrival, you do make diligent inquiry,
whether any ships be bound either to this Port of Bristowe, or to any part of
England. And then have especial care, that the nearest that comes to this
Port, you write letters by them unto me, and to them that you have to deal
for, of the arrival of your ship: according to this plain and brief form of
inditing, as I will hereafter show you. And so write likewise by your first
letters, of the state of your business, and of the news of the country,
according as that time passes. And when you have learned of any ship that
comes for England, do not your self make it This I say: to procure the more
care and diligence in a youth.
known to any body at all: but write and deliver your letters secretly, for
it shall sound much to your especial credit and good liking, when your
diligence shall be so seen, that your letters shall show the first arrival of
your Ship: because it is the thing that every Merchant does especially long
after to understand.

Thirdly, deal closely and secretly in all your affairs and busynes, and
before you enterprise any thing, do you after courteous and gentle manner ask
counsel, either of some Merchant in the Ship, or your Host, or of some English
man: how you are to deal about your wares, both touching the landing it, the
customing it, the selling it, the receiving of your moneys, the buying of any
wares again, the customing the same again, and to have out all your writs and
dispatches for every such thing, as is needful to be had. And having bin thus
once instructed, do you with carefullnes remember it of your self against
another time. Also be earnest in noting and marking every thing that you may,
but be your self as secret and silent as is possible.

Fourthly in any case show your self lowly, courteous, and serviceable unto
every person: for though you and many of us else may think, that too much
lowliness brings contempt and disgrace unto us: yet assuredly (it is well
known by experience) that there springs of no one virtue so great fruit unto
us, as of gentleness and humility: for it will both appease the anger and ill
will of our enemies, and increase the good will of our friends. Also in any
wise be not seduced by any person, to play at any kind of game, especially
dice or cards, nor to use feasting or banketing, or keeping company with women,
nor to go fine and costly in apparel: for all these things are especially
noted, and do bring any young beginner to utter discredit and undoing.

Fifthly carry this for an especial note, that whenever you have dealings for
any merchants, you do in all things and every point observe according to
their commission and direction. For although I know, it will sometimes seem
to your self, that you shall better please your merchant, not to buy those
wares which he appoints, because of the dearness of them: yet (I say) you
shall give evermore best contentment to your merchant, and save your self
harmless, when you follow his own order and remembrance. And take this also
for a caveat, that you never think the same ware which is best cheap, and is
most bought up, that it will be best to bestow your money thereon: for
ordinarily it falls out, that the quantity of the best cheap wares that is
brought home, has smaller utterance and less profit, then such dear wares
as there comes but very little quantity of. Also be careful in setting up
safely your money when you have received it: and likewise be wary when you
receive your moneys for your wares, craving the pains of some merchant your
friend, as to help you the first time to receive it for you, until you have
more knowledge to receive it your self.

Moreover be you in any wise circumspect touching your behavior when you be in
the country of Spain or else where: and show your self lowly and courteous
to all people, and learn what be their civil laws and customs, and be
careful to keep them. If any of the rude and common sort of people (as so it
is in all countries) will by chance offer you any abuse or wrong, appease
them again rather by sufferance and gentleness, then by revenge: for so shall
you best quiet your self, and overcome your enemy. In the sales of your
wares, do you, before you set price of it to any man, make inquiry how other
English men have sold the like commodities, and so do you accordingly set prise
of yours. And lightly do not refuse the second or third chapmans offer: for
most ordinarily it falls out, that the first and fourth offer is never so
good as the third offer: but in this you are to have a good insight your self,
and to do according as is your have and necessity for your sales.

Be most faithful and just in all your accounts with every man, and defraud no
man willingly not the value of a farthing. See that at no time you do take any
man's doings or dealings into your hands, without my leave and counsel: because
by the trouble of other men's business, you may neglect and frustrate mine
own. And have also regard, for those small adventures which I shall license
you to make for your own private benefit, that every voyage you do deliver
mean account of it, whereby from time to time I may see and know your estate,
and what of right does aperteine unto you. Be circumspect and nigh in all your
expenses; making your reckoning, that what you now spare and save unto me, it
may grow the more to your own benefit in time to come.

Lastely let this be yet your first and chiefest point in all your actions:
that especially you omit not your dutiful service toward almighty God, but
every morning and night, to pray that God will still prosper and protect you,
and to give him humble thanks that he hitherto has always mercifully
defended you. And this do you perform, by saying silentlie, reverently, and
atentiuely, such prayers as you have learned by heart: or it your memory cannot
well remember any other prayer, say only to the praise of the blessed Trinity,
the * Lords prayer and the This order of prayer I have thought, might be good
and godly: both because of the country beyond the seas, and because of
merchants lets and hinderance to continue in long prayer.
Creed, using evermore withal these three points of meditation. First, to
meditate your sins, and ask God heartily mercy, and steadfastly purpose
amendment. Secondly, meditate Gods benefits: and humbly thank him. Thirdly,
meditate your necessities: and crave his holy help for them. The which you may
then conlude the effect of these meditations, by saying lastly again the Lords
prayer. And this dutiful exercise of prayer, I do require you never once to
pretermit both at morning and at night, how hasty and urgent soever be your
business For how great equity and reason is it, that we should spend at the
least one half hour or little moment of the day in thanks, service, and
mindfullnes of God: who is both careful and mindful to serve and succor us,
even all the whole day and ever all our life long. Also never sit down, or
rise up from meat, but be mindful of God: and in expressing your thanksgiving,
say some Godly grace or other: or only say (rather then fail) no more then, In
the name of the father, of the son, and of the Holy Ghost, and let those
words show your thankfulness to God. Finally in all your actions, use
diligence, conscience, silence and patience. Thus making no doubt, but if you
be mindful of your duty and service to God, all things shall go well and
have happy success that you take in hand. But the contrary doing: your
labors will not prosper, nor any thing that you do, will ever come to good
pass or perfection. The holy Ghost be evermore your Protector.

Your master to do you any good that you shall deserve. T. A.

Here follows a brief form of all such letters as you shall need to write
throughout your whole voyage. The which form is effectual and sufficient
enough, and may still be observed, until by experience you may learn to
indite better your self.
A Letter to be written to your Master, if your ship be forced by vveather
into any place, before you come to your Port of discharge.
Emanuel
AFTER my duty remembered, I pray for your good health and prosperity. etc.
These are certifying you, that by means of ill weather and contrary winds, we
were within vi. days after our departure from Kingrode, forced into Milford:
where here we abide according to Gods pleasure, hoping that he will shortly
better provide for us. Little news I hear worth the writing: only I
understand that there is [Here write your nevves, if you have any.] Thus
taking my leave with my dutiful commendations remembered to my good mistress
etc. I heartely desire of God to protect and prosper you and all yours.

From Milford the 4. day of October 1589. Your faithful and obedient servant
R. A.

A Letter to be written to your Master presently upon your arrival at your
Port.
Emanuel.
AFTER my duty remembered, I pray for your good health and prosperity, etc.
These are certifying you, that on the 24. day of October, within 16. days
after our departure from Kingrode, we arrived here at Lisbon (God be thanked)
in good safety, and the Gabriel and the Minnyon also. As yet we have not
landed our goods nor sold any thing, for it is but 3. days since we arrived.
Touching Sales or Impliments, I do understand that it will not fall out so
well as I wished or hoped it would: but I will do my very best endeavor for you
according as time shall serve.

Broad clothes of the finest sorts, I do hear may be worth about 50. Ducats:
and sorting clothes 38. Ducats: fine Stammels 80. Ducats a cloth: Reading
Kerseis about 14. Ducats a piece: Bays about 12. Ducats a piece: Lead 19.
Rials the Kintal: wheat 3. Rials and a half the Alquer. Of the wares here of
the country: pepper is worth about 50. Ducats the Kintal: cloves 75. Ducats:
maces 80. Dks: Nutmegs 80. Ducats: Sinamond 68. Ducats: Callicowes of Sancto
Passes at 50. Ducats the Corge: Soap at 7. Ducats the Kintal: Brasill at 7.
Ducats and a half the Kintall: Oils 86. Ducats the tun: Salt at 11. Rials
the Muy Note that you inquire and also write the pryses of all other vendible
wars
. Little news I hear worth the writing, only it is said that the king, etc.
[Here write your nevves.] Thus taking my leave with my dutiful commendations
remembered to my good Mistress, etc. I heartely desire of God to protect and
prosper you and all yours.

From Lisbon the 27. day of October. 1589. Your faithful servant whiles I
live. R. A.

A Letter to be written to your Master, or some other man that is of
worship, next after your first letter.
Emanuel.
AFTER my duty remembered unto your Worship: I pray for your good health and
prosperity, etc. These are certifying your worship, that by a ship of London
called the Merchant royal, I wrote to you before of our arriual here at
Lisbon. But lest some chance should let the coming of it to your hands, you
shall again understand that on the 24. day of October, within 16. days after
our departure from Kingrode, we arrived here at Lisbon (God be thanked) in good
safety, and the Minion and the Gabriel also. Touching Sales or Implime^ts it
falls not out so well as I hoped and wished it would: but I have done my very
best endeavor for you as time served. Your 10. fine broad clothes, I sold them
for 50. Ducats and 6. rials a piece: but they forced me in rebates 8. Ducats
upon the^ all. Your Stammell broad cloth I have sold for 84. Ducats and 3.
Rials. Your lead I have sold for 23. Rials the Kintall. The wax for 24.
Ducats and a half the Kintall. And as for your impliments, I have according
unto your remembrance laden for you in the Gabriell, 6. Kintals and 2. Roues of
pepper, which cost the first penny 50. Ducats the Kintall. Also in that ship
1. Kintall of Cloves which cost the first penny 75. Ducats and a half: and
have marked it all according to your mark in the margent. mark or monogram of
Thomas Aldworth


Mases are here worth 80. Dks. the Kintall: Sinamond 68. Dks. Nutmegs 80. Dks.
Callicowes of S. Passes at 50. Dks. the Corge. Oils 86. Dks. the tun: soap at
7. Dks. the kintal: brasil 7. Dks and a half the kintal: salt 11. rials the
Muy. Of our English commodities: Reding kersies are worth 14. Dks. a piece:
bays 9. Dks. 4. rials a piece: wheat 3. rials and a half the Alquer, etc,

Within this four days we hope to make ready to go for Andalozia: God be our
good speed whenever we go. In Andalozia we understand that oils are worth
about 78. Ducats the tun: and Secks 12. Ducats the But. Little news I hear
worth the writing: etc. Thus taking my leave, I commit your worship to
Almighty God.

From Lisbon the 7. day of November. 1589. Your Worships at commandment to the
uttermost of my power. R. A.

A Letter to be written upon your arrival from Lisbon unto your second Port.
Emanuel.
AFTER my duty remembered, I pray for your good health and prosperity, etc.
These are certifying you, that on the 7. day of December, within 5. days after
our departure from Lisbon, we arrived at S. Lucar (God be thanked) in good
safety. Touching sales or impliments here, it falls out not so well as I
hoped and wished it would; but I have done my very best endeavor for you as the
time served. Your 12. pieces of bays I have sold for 11. Ds. and 7. Rials the
piece: and your 15. tons of lead, after 21. Rials the Kintal, etc. [Here
write forwards as it is in the Letter next before, cha^ging only the names
of the vvares which you have to buy or sell in that country.]

Your faithful and obedient servant. R. A.

A Letter to be sent in that ship where you have laden goods for any Merchant.
Emanuel.
AFTER Note that when you write to a Merchant or any other, which is not your
Master or is not a man of worship: then may you well enough begin always
your letters after this manner.
my very hearty commendations unto you, I pray for your good health and
prosperity, etc. These are certifying you, that I have laden for your account
in the Gabriell of Bristow according to your remembrance, 4. tuns of oil,
which is marked with your mark in the margent. The which does cost the first
penny 11. Rials and a half the Roue, and does amount unto 75. Ducats, 3.
Rials the tun. More I have laden for you 2. Roues of Cochenele, which cost
after 160 Ducats the Kintal, and is marked according to the other mark. More
12. buts of Seck which cost the first penny 15. Ds. the But: marked also with
the former. mark or monogram of Thomas Aldworth
Al which goods (Godwilling) I hope you shall well and safely receive. Here
within enclosed I send you a bill of lading for all your goods, and likewise
your account. Thus for this time I take my leave, trusting my self very
shortly to be at home, for by the grace of God I purpose to come along in the
Pleasure: until which time I commit you to Almighty God.

From S. Lucar the 23. day of december. 1589. Your assured to my power. R. A.

A Letter to be written to one that has left some business to do for him under
your hands, there in the Country.
Emanuel.
AFTER my very hearty comendations unto you, I pray you for your good health
and prosperity. etc. These are certifying you, that touching such business
which you appointed me to do for you: I have now sold the 4. broad clothes which
you left herewith me, for 48. Dks. a piece: and have employed the money
according to your direction. Namely in 1. Kintal of pepper, which cost the
first penny 45. Ducats and a half the kintall, and have laden it in the
Minion. More in the same ship I have laden 3. Roues of cloves, which cost after
76. ducats the kintall, and have marked it all with your mark as in the
margent. mark or monogram of Thomas Aldworth
The money which you appointed me to receive of F.B. he has paid it me: and I
have passed it (and all the rest of the money in my hands, being in the whole
184. Ducats, 2. Rials): by exchange to Civil in B. E. as was your
remembrance. I do send you your account here within enclosed. Also your letter
that you left with me, I have sent by my brother in law I. R. in the Tobie. I
pray you do my hearty co^mendacions unto my good friends at Bristow, master I.P.
etc. Little news I hear worth the writing. Thus taking my leave I commit you
to Almighty God.

From Lisbon the 5. day of January 1589. Yours assured to my power. R. A.

A Letter to be written to a friend, giving him thanks for some pleasure he
has done for you, and requesting again some farther good turn of him.
Emanuel.
AFTER my very hearty co^mendacions unto you: I pray for your good health and
prosperity, etc. These are giving you most hearty thanks for your great pains
and gentleness heretofore showed unto me: assuring you that you shall find me
to the uttermost of my power, both grateful and mindful to pleasure you
again in the like and greater if I can be able. Desiring you heartily yet once
more, to let me crave so much your good will, as to do me again this one
pleasure: which is, to deliver this letter herein closed, to master P.R. Draper,
that dwells in Lisbon in the Roa noua: and that you would receive for me of
him 100. Ducats which I have written to him to pay you. And when you have
received it, that you would be so good as to imploie it all in good pepper, and
to set my Masters mark on it, which is as in the margent. Praying you to agree
for freyte, and to procure to have it laden in the Pleasure, and to write a
letter unto my Master about it. I am sorry that I am driven to make still so
bold upon you: wishing that you had the like or greater occasion to try also
my good will toward you. Little news I hear worth the writing etc. Thus
taking my leave, I commit you to Almighty God.

From Ciuel 25 day of January. 1589. Your assured to my power. R. A.

A Letter to be written to a friend when you would have him to pleasure you
in any matter.
Emanuel.
AFTER my very hearty comendations unto you: I pray for your good health and
prosperity. etc. These are most heartily to desire so much your friendship and
good will, to do me this pleasure: as to receive for me out of the Gabriel
when she comes to S. Lucar, 6. tu^nes of Lead containing 105. pieces, being
marked as in the margent: and to do so much as make present sale of it, the
best you can as the time serves. And when you have made sale and received
monyes for it, that you would be so good as to ride unto Sheres and buy for me
8. Buts of very good Secke the best that possible can be gotten, though they
cost a Ducket or two the more in a But: and to lade them away as soon as is
possible abord the Gabriel, marking them with the former mark in the margent.
And the rest of the moneys that you shall have left, I pray you to pass it with
all speed hither to Siuil unto me. Herein (if without seeming ouerbold) I may
crave your pains to pleasure me: I do assure you that you shall find me to
the uttermost of my power, both grateful and mindful to pleasure you again
in the like and much greater if I can be able. Little news I hear worth the
writing. Thus taking my leave I commit you to Almighty God.

From Siuil the 27. day of January. 1589. Your assured to my power. R. A.

This brief and plain order in your letters, I think it best you should for
a time use, because of easing a while your own young invention of Inditing:
for after this manner of style you may write to most sorts of persons.

The superscription of your letters may be thus.

To the worshipful, Alderman Aldworth Merchant, dwelling in Smalstreat in
Bristow: give this with speed. Or say: to the worshipful my Master Master
Ihon Barker merchant. etc. Or: to my assured good friend Master Thomas Pits
merchant. etc. CERTAIN ESPECIAL BRIEF NOTES OF WAIGHTS, measures, and value
of moneys in Portingale, Spain and France, with an instruction for the better
knowledge of diverse wares in those countries.
Of the Kintal or hundred weight of Portingale, Spain, or France.
Of the Kintal of Portingale.
Observe besides these instructions following, to make diligent inquiry your
self, in all places where you trade, of every of these points for these notes
may in some co^tries and through time be a little altered and changed from the
rules here set down.
NOte that in Lisbon in Portingale, the kintal of pepper and of ginger (which
they call the lesser kintal) is 112. pound. And their Roue or quarterne weight
is 28. pound, and holds out with our English hundred of 112. pound, and
sometimes two or thread pound more.

The kintal of most sorts of all other spices, as cloves, maces, nutmegs,
Sinamo^d, etc. contains 128. pound, and is called the great Kintal: and the
Roue contains 32 pound, and does hold out about 15. or 16. pound more then
our English hundred.

Of the Kintal of Spain.
Note that in most parts of Spain, their Kintal is, 100. li. and contains of
our English weight but Note that the lead does most commonly hold out after
this rate of weight: but most sorts of other english wares, do not so.
102. li. So as our hundred weight is 10 in the 100. greater then theirs.
Excepting the Kintal weight of Iron in Biskey, which is 150. pound, and does
make about 114. pound of our English weight.

Of the Kintal of France.
Note that in Rochel and Bordeaux, and so in most parts of France, the Kintal
is 100. pound: and holds out with our English hundred: saving that through
falsehood of the wayers, it falls less in one place then in another.

OF THE MEASVRES OF cloth in Portingale, Spain, and France.
Portingale.
NOte that the measure of cloth in Lisborne is the Couada: which contains
about 3. quarters of our English yard. But the measure of Linen cloth, is
chiefly bought and sold by the Vare: which is about an Ell less a nail of
our English measure.

Spain.
Note that the measure of Spain is called the Vare: which contains an
English yard less a nail.

France.
Note that the measure of France, is the Aulne: which contains almost a nail
longer then our English Ell,

OF THE MEASVRES OF Corn and salt in Portingale, Spain, and France.
Portingale.
Note that the measure of corn in Lisborne is the Alquer: and 3. Alquers make
about a Bushel of our Bristow measure, which is The corn measure of Bristow is
8. gallonds Winchester.
8. gallonds Winchester: and 5. Alquers or near therabouts, makes a Hanic of
the measure of Spain.

Spain.
Note that the measure of Spain, is his Hanic, which contains about a
Bushel and a half of our measure of Bristow: so as 2. Hanicks makes about 3.
bushels of ours.

France.
Note that the measure of Rochel and Bordeaux is the Boiseau: which contains
near about 3. peckes of our Bristow measure.

OF THE MEASVRE of Salt.
Portingale.
ITem the measure of salt of Portingale, is called the Muye: and 60. Alquers
makes a Muye: and 2. Muyes and 15. Alquers or thereabouts, The water mesure of
Salt of Bristow: 10. gallonds Winchester: and the tonne is 40. of those nusurs
or bushels.
makes a tonne of our water mesure of Bristow.

Spain.
Item the measure of Salt of Spain, is called the Kayis, and 12 Hanicks goes
to a Kayis. And 2. Kayis and 3 Hanicks or thereabouts, makes a tun of our water
measure of Bristow.

France.
Item in Rochel in France, the measure of salt is the Boiseau: and 24. Boiseans
makes a Muy: and 28. Muyes makes a hundred: and 2. Muyes makes about a tun
and 5. bushels of our Bristowe measure. The best measure of all is the Oldron
measure, which is 36. Muyes to a hundred: and every hundred makes about 20.
tons of our Bristow measure.

OF THE VALVE OF Moneys in Spain, Portingale and France.
Spain.
NOte that the Ducket of Spain, has 11. rials of plate: and every rial of
plate has 34. Meruedis: and every Ducket 374. Meruedis. The Ducket is Note
that the Spanish ducket, is so much in number; but more in value.
5. shillings six pence of our English money: the rial of plate is six pence,
and the Meruede is less then our farthing. The half rial of plate is 17.
Meruedis: and the quartel is 8. Meruedis and a half: and the single pistolet
of gold is 11. Rials, 3. quartels being 400. Meruedis, which is 6. shillings
less 3. half pence of our English money.

Portingale.
Note that the Ducket of Portingale is 10. Rials, and every Rial 40. Res: and
every Ducket 400. Res. The Ducket is just our English crown: the Rial of plate
is six pence: and the Res is about half a farthing. The Teston of Portingale
is 2. Rials and a half, which is one shilling and three pence English: and the
half Rial or Vinten is 20. Res, which is three pence English: and the Milres
of gold is 1000. Res just, which is two Ducats and a half, and is twelve
shillings six pence English.

France.
Note that the French crown of France called the Escu, is 3. Livers: and every
Liver 20. Sous: and every Escu 60. Sous. The Escu is six shillings English
money: the Liver is two shillings: and the Sous is almost one penny and
farthing, for five Sous is six pence English. The Sous also is divided into
Liardes and into Deniers: for there goes to the Sous 6. Liards, and to the
Liard 2. Deniers, and 12. Deniers to a Sous The Flemish crown is 2. Sous less
then is the French crown. The Teston of France is 14. Sous and a half, which
is one shilling five pence half penny: and some of the newer Testons are worth
15. Sous, which is one shilling and six pence English.

A BRIEF INSTRVCTION FOR THE BETTER KNOWledge of certain wares of Portingale,
Spain and France.
Pepper.
NOTE that of pepper, the greatest and largest is best, and that which is
cleanest without much dust. The which you shall try the cleanenesse of it, by
taking up a handful of it somewhat low in the bag, for the dust will appear
on your fingers after letting down the pepper. The russet colored pepper is
best, and that which is sound: the which you may prove the soundness of it, by
rubbing it hard betwixt your hands If it be very black of color, and the
dust of it moist, and sticking to your fingers then has it taken wet, and is
not so good.

Cloves.
Note, that of Cloves the longest and smallest stems are best, and which are
clean without dust, and without much of the mother cloue and which are dry.
The which you may prove the dryness of them, by breaking the stems of some of
them: that if they break short and not bow, then is it a sign that they are
good and dry. But if they be very black, and will bend: then is it like they
are moist and wet.

Mases.
Note that of Maces: the greatest and largest are best, and which are of fayer
and bright orange color, and and such as are cleanest and best without the
nutmegs, and without the bright yellow mases.

Sinamond.
Note that of Sinamond, the largest and thinnest rind is best, and those which
are of fayer and bright orange color, and which are quickest and pleasantest
on the tongue. But the thick rind and dusky colored Sinamon is not so good.

Nutmegs.
Note that of Nutmegs, the largest and greatest are best, and which are of a
bright russet color, and sound, weighty, and quick on the tongue.

Ginger.
Note that of Ginger, the greatest and largest are best, and which are of
yellow or fair russet color, and sound, weighty, and hot on the tongue.

Sugar.
Note that of Sugar, the fair and white color is best, and which is hard, and
without brownnesse in the heart of the loaf: the which brownnesse of it is
seen, by having the loaf broken in the midst, or otherwise if the whole head
of the loaf round about be brown and dark colored.

Calicovves.
Note that of Of Calicowes are diverse and sundry sorts: and therefore the
knowledge of them all can not be perfectly described.
Calicowes: the whitest and cleanest without starch are best, and which are of
fine third, close made, and that have substance in feeling the^. But those
which are much starched, of great third, and thine wouen, are not so good.

Salt.
Note, that of Salt the brightest and whitest color is best, and which is
clean without durte or strawes, and that which is old and not new salt. The
which if it be new, it is perceived by the moistnes of it, and by the sticking
of it to your fingers, after hard wringing of it in your hand.

Cochenele.
Note, that of Cochenele the largest and brighest gray or silver color is
best, and that which does cast the quickest and most orient red in the palm of
your hand, after you have rubbed and mingled it with a little spitle.

Oils.
Note of Oil, the swetest, and clearest, yellowest, greenest, and without
water or foot, is the best. But if it be dark colored, very rank and with
much foot, it is not good.

Soap.
Note that of Portingale Soap: the whitest, hardest, dryest, and swetest is
best, and which has most of the blew vains and the color clear and fair, and
which (as I said) is hardest and driest. The which is somewhat perceived, by the
noise or rattling that it will make within the Scarne when it is shaken. But if
it be duskie colored, of few blew veins, soft, of greasy and rank savor,
moist, and clinging one to another, it is not so good.

Ode.
Note that of Ode: the knowledge and goodness thereof, is very hardly perceived
before it come to proof of boiling, and men choose it either by experience or
good report of Soyles where it grows, or else of the fatnes of the ode. The
which is somewhat perceived the fatnes of it, by breaking a clot betwixt your
fingers, wherein will apeere certain veins or thrids: the which veins if they
be many, and will spin long, it is a good sign: but if there be few or none,
and do break short, it is an evil sign. Also some use trial of it, by
rubbing it with a little spitle on a knife: the which if it do cast a good
quick color, and does somewhat stain the knife: they say it is a good sign.
etc.

Iron.
Note that of Iron, the smallest and thinnest drawn, and which has least
crackes though most flawes, it is the best. And if in breaking a tongue or bar,
it do break tough, and not short, it is good. But if it look after a fiery red
color, and has many crackes, it is not good.

Train.
Note that of Train: the clearest and swetest is best, and that which is
without much foot or water. But if it be thick and dark colored and very
rank of savor, it is not good.

VVines.
Of wines: it can not be set down by pen or words, the right knowledge of it,
for it is perceiuable only by the taste and savor. But the best sorts of wines
generally are, when they do taste pleasant and strong withal, and when they
drink clean and quick in the pallet of the mouth, and when they are clear
and white hued if they be white wines, or of fair orient red, if they be red
wines. But if they drink weak, rough, foul, flat, inclining to egernesse, or
long: they are not good.

Here follows the Form of a Spanish account, and how to make a bill of
lading, a letter of remembrance, a bill of exchange, a bill of debt, an
acquittance a letter of Attorney, an obligacion, and a Policy for assurance.
etc.
Set this following as the superscription upon the Account.

THE ACCOUNT OF MY MASTER, ALDERMAN Aldworth merchant of the city of Bristowe,
given by me his servant R. A. the sixteenth day of January. 1589. The 14. day
of December 1589. Broad clothes 10. pieces and one fine Stammell: for the
account of my master Alderman Aldworth merchant of the city of Bristow,
marked under this mark in the margent, received out of the Gabriel in Lisbone:
owes these charges following. mark or monogram of Thomas Aldworth

Nuo. 1. "For barkage, landing, and other charges, which comes to 4. Rials 5.
Res. Amount into Portingall Res. 0 Res 000 * M. 000 * V. 165 "For Marco custom
at 10. Res the pack. 0 V. 010 "For measuring at 10. Res the Cloth. 0 V. 110
"For wyndage at 20. Res the pack. 0 V. 020 "For brokerage at half per 100. 0
1. V. 236 "For aueredge at 3. Ria the cloth. 0 1. V. 320 "For my * provision at
2. and half per 100. 6. V. 180 The Neat hereof is 238 V. 159 Res: for which I
will make you creditor in account current. Fol. 38. 000 M. 238 V. 159 Sum
total. Res 000 M. 247 V. 200 Note that this letter * M. stands for Million,
and this letter * V. stands for thousand.

Observe here in the account of Sales: that you write first on the other side,
what is due to your master and so shall you by sight of that, the better draw
out the Neat of the charges, and also of your customs, brokerage, and
provision.

Note that * provision is not but in certain degrees to be charged, nor
Auerege.



The 14. day of December 1589. Per contra: is due 247. V. 200 Res in the Sales
of 10. fine broad clothes, and one Stammell, and a cotton wrapper: sold to
Jacques Magomes Draper of Lisbone at 53. Ducats 4. Rials a cloth: and the
Stammel at 75. ducats: and the cotton wrapper containing 40. couades, at 2.
Rials 10. Res the couada, etc. amount. Sum total. Res 000 M. 247 V. 200

The 18. day of December 1589. Wax 14. Kintals and 9. pound: for the account of
my master Alderman Aldworth: marked under this mark in the margent, received
out of the Gabriel in Lisbone: owes these charges following. mark or monogram
of Thomas Aldworth

"For barking, landing, and other charges, which comes to 2. Rials 5. Res.
Amount into Portingall Res. o Res 000 M. 000 V. 085 "For windage at 5. Res the
hogshed. 0 V. 040 "For auerege at one Riall and a half per kintall. V. 440
"For brokerage at half per 100. 0 V. 662 "For my provision at 2. and a half
per 100. 3. V. 312 The * Neat hereof is 127. V. 961 Res: for which I will
make creditor in account current. Fol. 38. 0 000 M. 127 V. 961 Sum total.
Res 000 M. 132 V. 500 * Sum all the charges in a wast paper, and then
substract it out of the total in the other side: and the remainder thereof is
the * Neat.

Note that the customs and duties upon wares in Portingall and Spain, does
oftentimes change: therefore you must every voyage, make diligent inquiry of
it, and so accordingly charge the account.



The 18. day of December 1589. Per contra: is due 132. V. 500. Res in the Sales
of 14. kintals and 9. pound of wax, sold to Bernard Priget merchant of Lisbon
at 23. Ducats 5. Rials the kintall. Amount. Sum total. Res 000 M. 132 V.
500

The 28. day of December 1589. Lead 15. Tons containing 270. pieces, for the
account of my master Alderman Aldworth, marked under this mark in the margent,
received out of the Joseph in Saint Lucar, owes these charges following. mark
or monogram of Thomas Aldworth

"For barkage, landing, and other charges which comes to 2. Ducats 5. Rials.
Amount into Spanish Meruedis. o Mer. 000 M. 000 V. 918 "For lodge room and
waying it. Amount. V. 730 "For windage at 17. Mer. the Tun. 0 V. 255 "For *
custom at 7. and and a half per 100. 16. V. 437 "For brokerage at half per
100. 0 1. V. 096 "For auerege at 3. Rials per Tun. 0 1. V. 530 "For my *
provision at 2. and a half per 100. 5. V. 484 The Neat hereof is, 192. V.
910. Meruedis: for which I will make you creditor in Account current. Folio 38.
o 000 M. 192 V. 910 Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 219 V. 360 The easiest rule to
take out your custom or provision upon the 100. is only to multiply your
Total by your number of 7. and a half, or 2. and a half. And then for your
half, take the half of your first sum and set it under your Multiplier, and
so sum it up altogether: and all saving the 2. last figures, is your
provision or custom.

Example. ^



The 28. day of January 1589. Per contra: is due 219. V. 360. Meruedis: in the
sales of 300. Kintals and ten pounds of lead: sold to Francisco Berea
merchant of Civil at 21. Kials, 17. Meruedis the Kintall. Sum total. Mer.
000 M. 219 V. 360

The 4. day of January 1589. Bays 20. pieces, for the account of my master
Alderman Aldworth, marked under this mark in the margent, received out of the
Pleasure in S. Lucar: owes charges following. mark or monogram of Thomas
Aldworth

Nu. 1. "For barkage, landing, and other charges, which comes to 4. Rials.
Amount into Spanish Meruedit. 0 Mer. 000 M. 000 V. 136 "For lodge room and
carriage. 0 V. 086 "For custom at 7 and a half per 100. 7. V. 346 "For
windage at 17. Mer. The Pack. 0 V. 017 "For Auerege at 1. Rial and a half the
piece. 0 1. V. 020 "For broker age at half per 100. 0 V. 489 "For my provision
at 2. and a half per 100. 0 2. V. 548 The Neat hereof is, 86. V. 318.
Meruedis: for which I will make you creditor in Account current. Folio 46. 0
000 M. 086 V. 318 Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 097 V. 960

The 4. day of January 1589. Per contra: is due 97: V. 960. Meruedis: in the
sales of 20. pieces of Bays, fold to Pedro Meris Draper of S. Lucar at 13
Dukets 4. Rials a piece. Amount. Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 097 V. 960

The 15. day of December 1589. Pepper for the account of my master Alderman
Aldworth merchant of the city of Bristow, owes 124. V. 800. Res for 6. l.
intals laden in the Gabriel of Bristow, which cost the first penny 52. Dukats
the kintall. Amount. 0 Res 000 M. 124 V. 800 More owes these charges
following. "For 16. Vares of Canuas to double bag the pepper, at 65. Res the
vare. 0 1. V. 040 "For carriage and barkage. 0 V. 090 "For custom at the
portage at 9. Res per kintall. V. 054 "For custom at the India house at one
per 100. 1. V. 248 "For windage. Amount. 0 V. 017 "For brokerage at half per
100. 0 V. 624 "For auerege at 80. Res the bag. 0 V. 240 "For a Dispacho in
the portage cost 10. Res. 0 *V. 010 "For my *provision at 2. and a half per
100. 0 3. V. 203 Sum total. Res 000 M. 131 V. 326. Here now in the
impliments observe to write down first your master dettor, for the charges of
those wares which you lade him.

* Note here that in taking your * provision: you must sum all the Items
before, and so of the total take it out.



The 15. day of December 1589. Per contra: is due 131. V. 362. Res, in the
whole charges of 6. Kintals of pepper marked under this mark in the margent:
and bought of Michaell Sebra merchant of Lisbon, at 52. Ducats per Kinkats per
Kintall. Amount. mark or monogram of Thomas Aldworth

Sum total. 000 M. 131 V. 326

The 16. day of December 1589. * Cloves 2. kintals, and * Mases 3. Roues: and *
Sinamon one kintall 2. Roues: for the account of my master Alderman Aldworth,
owes 103. V. 220. Res, which cost the first penny 75. Ducats 4. Rials the
kintall of Cloves: and 83. Ducats the kintall of Mases, and 68. Ducats the
kintall of Synamon. Amount. 0 Res. 000 M. 103 V. 220 More owes these charges
following. "For 10. Vares of Canuas to double bag the spices, at 65. Res the
vare. 0 V. 650 "For carriage and barkage. 0 V. 120 "For custom at the portage
at 20. Res per kintall. V. 080 "For custom at the India house at one per 100.
1. V. 032 "For windage at 5. Res the bag. 0 V. 010 "For auerege at 80. Res
the bag. 0 V. 240 "For brokerage at half per 100. 0 V. 516 "For my provision
at 2. and a half per 100. 0 2. V. 646 Sum total. Res 000 M. 108 V. 514 *
Note that if you lade any great quantity of diverse sorts of spices: then is it
convenient that you charge and make an account of every one severally by it
self. But if you but but a small quantity of each sort: then for brevity and
ease of trouble, you may observe that form above prescribed, for the charges
thereof will not be great, and every Merchant can quickly guess the several
charge.

The 16. day of December 1589. Per contra: is due 108. V. 514. Res in the whole
charges of 2. kintals of Cloves: 3. Roues of Mases: and one kintall 2. Roues of
Synamon: laden in the Gabriel under this mark in the margent: and bought of
Lewis Betron and Martin Ferbuc merchants of Lisborne. mark or monogram of
Thomas Aldworth

Sum total. Res 000 M. 108 V. 514

The 3. day of January 1589. Oils 10. Pipes for the account of my master
Alderman Aldworth. owes 115. V. 600. Meruedis for 400. Roues of Oil, which
cost the first penny 18. (...) and a half the Roue. Amount. 0 Mer. 000 M. 115
V. 600 More owes these charges following. "For 10. leare Pipes for the Oils,
which cost 24. Rio. and a half the Pipe. Amount into Spanish Meruedis. 0 8. V.
330 "For watring the Pipes, and carriage of them at 15. Mer. the Pipe 0 V. 150
"For Marco almeran: and bota fuera, at 25. Mer. the Pipe. 0 V. 250 "For S.
Georges custom at one Riall per Tun. V. 170 "For yesso for the Pipes at 10.
Mer. the Pipe. 0 V. 100 "For carriage of them to the Shrof at 21. Mer. the
Pipe. 0 V. 210 "For filling, rolling, and hooping of them, at 45. Mer. the
Pipe. 0 V. 450 "For the Coopers wages at 3. Rials the day, being 5. days. 0 V.
510 "For Nails, Cork, Canuas, and Leather. 0 V. 170 "For Incomiendo at one
per 100. 0 1. V. 156 "For brokerage at half per 100. 0 V. 578 "For cartage at
5. Rials the Tun. 0 V. 850 "For barkage at 7. Rials 12. Mer. the Tun. 0 1.
V. 250 "For hooping again aboorde the ship at 17. Mer. the Pipe. 0 V. 170
"For hundage at one Riall per Tun. 0 V. 170 "For windage at 17. Mer. the
Tun. 0 V. 085 "For auerage at 3. Rials per Tun. 0 V. 510 "For my provision
at 2. and a half per 100. 0 3. V. 267 Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 133 V. 976
Note that the customs and duties upon wares in Spain and Portingale do
oftentimes change: therefore you must every voyage, make diligent inquiry of
it, and so accordingly charge the account.

The 3. day of January 1589. Per contra: is due 133. V. 976. Meruedis: in the
whole charges of 5. Tons of Oils containing 400. Roues: laden aboard the
Gabriel in S. Lucar in Andolosia under this mark in the margent: and bought of
Sebastian de Lega Gentleman of Cyuell. Amount. mark or monogram of Thomas
Aldworth

Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 133 V. 976

The 5. day of January 1589. Sackes for the account of my master Alderman
Aldworth, owes 89. V. 760. Meruedis, for 20. butts which cost the first pennoe
12. Ducats the Butt 0 Mer. 000 M. 089 V. 760 More owes these charges
following. "For custom in Sheeres at 7 and a half per 100. 6. V. 630 "For
imposition at 15. Mer. the Butt. 0 V. 300 "For Cartage to Portall at 4. Ri. the
Butt. 0 2. V. 720 "For hooping, barring, and other charges, at 25. Mer. the
Butt. 0 V. 500 "For nails, cork, and canuas, at 8. Meruedis the Tun. 0 V.
080 "For Almerant at 14. Mer. the Butt. 0 V. 280 "For brokerage at one Riall
the Butt. 0 V. 680 "For hundage at one Riall the Tun. 0 V. 340 "For barkehyre
at 7. Rials the Tun. 0 2. V. 380 "For custom to S. Georges chapel at 6.
Mer. the Butt. 0 V. 120 "For Auerage at 3. Rials the Tun. 0 1. V. 020 "For
vllaging aborde the ship, which came to 187. Mer. the Butt. 0 3. V. 740 "For
windage at 17. Mer. the Tun. 0 V. 170 "For my provision at 2. and a half per
100. 0 2. V. 788 Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 111 V. 508

The 5. day of January 1589. Per contra: is due 111. V. 508. Meruedis: in the
whole charges of 20. Buttes of Socke, laden aboorde the Mynnion in S. Lucar in
Andolozia, under this mark in the margent: and bought of Martinde Leso Citizen
of Sheres. mark or monogram of Thomas Aldworth

Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 111 V. 508

The 10. day of January. 1589. "My master Alder man Aldwoorth merchant of the
city of Bristow, owes 131 V. 326 Res or Portugal moneys, which being reduced
into Spanish Meruedis, make 123. V. 118. Mer. for so much cost with all charges
6. kintals Pepper, as appears more at large Folio 34. Mer. 000. M. 113. V.
118 "More owes 108 V. 514 Res, which in Spanish Meruedis is 101 V. 731 Mer.
for so much cost with all charges 2 kintals of Cloves: 3. Roues of Mases, and
one kintall 2. Roues of Synamom, as appears more at large. Fol. 35. 0 000 M.
101 V. 731 "More, owes 133 V. 976 Mer. for so much cost with all charges 10.
pipes of Oil: as appears more at large: Fol. 36. 0 000 M. 133 V. 976 "More
owes 111. V. 508 Meruedis, for so much cost with all charges 20 Buttes of
Sack, as appears more at large. Fol. 37. 0 000 M. 111 V. 508 "More owes
914. Meruedis for registring the bills of exchange in Cyuill, and recovering
the moneys, which is one Meruedi upon the Ducket. 0. 000 M. 000 V. 914. "More
owes 10 V. 608 Mer. which is 28. Ds. 4. Res, for so much cost all my charges
and expenses of the voyage, as appears by the particular account thereof,
which I will deliver you. 0 000 M. 010 V. 608 "Item 140 V. 610 Mer. (which is
376. Ducats less 14. Meru.) rests to balance this account: for the which I
will be countable unto you at the sight hereof. 0 000 M. 140 V. 610 Sum
total. Mer. 000 M. 622 V. 465 Note here in the account current: that you must
bring all your portingall (Res) into Spanish (Meruedis) which is only to
multiply your some of Res, by the number of 15. and so to divide the
multiplier of that, by the number of 16. and that makes it into Meruedis. Mul.
15 Deu. 16.
This is a principal rule, and it were too long to yield the plain reason of
it. But note withal, that you must account after 375. Mer. to the spanish
Ducket: which one Meruede is commonly allowed to the Factor or recouerer of the
moneys.

The 10. day of January 1589. My master Alderman Aldwerth merchant of the
city of Bristowe, is due 238. V. 159. Res of Portingall moneys: which being
reduced into Spanish Meruedis, makes 223. V. 274. Meruedis and is the Neat of
10. sin: broad clothes, one Stammell and a wrapper: as appears more at large.
Fol. 30. Mer. 000 M. 223. V. 274 More is due 127. V. 961. Res, which in Spanish
Meruedis is 119. V. 963. Mer. and is the Neat of 14. kintals and 9. li. of
Wax: as appears more at large. Folio. 31. 0 000 M. 119 V. 963 More is due
192. V. 910. Meruedis, and is the near of 300. kintals and 10. pound of Lead,
as appears. Folio. 32. 0 000 M. 192 V. 910 More is due 86. V. 318. Meruedis:
and is the neat of 20. pieces of Bays, as appears. Fol. 33. 000 M. 086 V.
318 Sum total. Mer. 000 M. 622 V. 465 Note that you still observe, to keep
a copy of every merchants account that you deal for: for so will it be
auailable for you, if you should be called in question again, about your
account.

Thus ends the Account.
CONSTANTINI CRVX.
emblem featuring Christ's cross with the five wounds, including the crown of
thorns and the sacred heart, encircled by a crown of thorns and a circle of
flames IN HOC SIGNO VINCES


HERE FOLLOW CERTAIN POINTS NECESSARY FOR young beginners.
A brief order for making of a bill of lading, the which may serve for
diverse men's goods, and may be sent to one Merchant alone, and request him to
give advertisement of it to the others.
Has Note here that you observe to make still a several byll of lading for
your masters goods: and not to use this form and order, but when your haste of
business is great, or when you lade but some small cabo for a Merchant
laden by the grace of God in in good safety in Lisbon in Portingale, and in
S. Lucar in the province of Andalouzia in Spain: by R. A. merchant of the
city of Bristow, abord the ship called the Pleasure, whereof is master for the
present voyage W. M. and bound for the Port of Bristowe in England, these goods
and merchandise following Namely 5. bags of pepper containing 12. Kintals and
2. Roues: for the account of my master T. R. merchant of the city of
Bristowe, and marked under this mark in the margent. More 10. pipes of oil
for his account, marked also with the former mark. More 20. buts of Secke for
his account, marked with the former mark. mark or monogram of Thomas Aldworth


More also 3. Roues of Cochenele for the account of master I. B. merchant of
Bristowe, and marked as in the margent. More 5. buts of seck for his account,
marked with the former mark. mark or monogram of John Brown


mark or monogram of T I
More 8. buts of Secke for the account of master T. I. merchant of Bristow, and
marked as in the margent. All which goods and marchandises, I R. A. purser of
the said ship, do acknowledge to have received aborde, well and sufficiently
condicioned. And by these presents I do bind my self with the ship, her
apparel and freight, to deliver the said goods in just order and condition
again unto the merchants and owners aforsaid, God sending the ship and goods
to her Port in safety. In witness of truth I R.A. Purser have unto Note that
your are to make either 2. or 3. of these bills
two of these bills of lading set my hand, given the 20. day of January. 1589.

By me R. A.

A brief order for making a merchants particular remembrance.
A Remembrance for you my servant R. A., that principally you do with diligence
These words have relation to the General remembrance spoken of in the
beginning.
read and regard the counsel of that little book which I now give you. And now
(God willing) at your coming to Lisbon, you shall receive out of the Joseph
wherein you go, one pack of 10. fine broad Clothes, and 1. fine stamell cloth,
with a gray cotton wraper, the which are marked as in the margent. mark or
monogram of Thomas Aldworth Nuo. 1.
The broad clothes stand me with all charges twelve pound a cloth, and I hope
they will yield you in Lisbon about 52. ducats. The Sta^mel stands me in 17.
pound, and I hope will yield you 75. Ducats: and the wrapper cost 30.
shillings. All which do you your best endeavor, to sell as the time serves.
More (God willing) you shall receive 3. Hogs heads of wax, marked also with
the former mark, wherein is 14. hundred and 13. pound. It does stand me all
charges, about 5. pound 12 shillings the hundredth: the which you may sell for
25. Ducats a Kintall, if time so offers. More also you shall receive for my
acompt 20 tons of lead, containing 345. pieces marked as in the top of the
former page: the which if you cannot sell to some reckning in Lisbon, do you let
it go along in the Ship to S. Lucar, and there to sell it as well as you may: I
hope it will be worth 22. Rials the Kintal.

And now for my impliments, do you lade me in the Joseph 8. Kintals of good and
large pepper, and se that it be well made up in good bags, and give charge it
may be stowed in the driest part of the ship. more at your coming to S. Lucar,
do you lade me in the Gabriel 5. tuns of good oils: and do you see well both
to the watring and hooping of your caske, and to the cleannes of the Oil that
it be without foot. More do you also lade in the Unicorn 12. pipes of Oil,
and have care unto it as before I have said. More lade me in the same ship the
Unicorn 16. Buts of very good Secke, and do you give a Ducket or two the more
in a But, to have them principal good. And if after you have bought al these
wares, there be any surplus money remaining: do you bestow it in good
Cochenele, so far as it will rise, and mark all these goods with my mark as
is before in the margent. But if it fall out that you shall want any moneys, to
furnish the lading of 15. tons in the Unicorn, which I am bound unto: the^
request so much frie^dship of T. M. to furnish that which you want, in monyes
by exchang: and agree with him for the exchange so good cheap as you can, as
about 6. shillings and 4. pens or 6. shillings and 8. pens the Ducket, and this
my letter shall be your warrant. Make master W. O. in Lisbon, and master I. T.
in S. Lucar, your friends to aid and instruct you, in the buying and selling of
all your wares: and give the^ that thing, which I delivered you, for a token of
goodwill from me. Inquire secretly what wares are in good request and best
vendible: and send me speedy and secret intelligence of it. See that the purser
of the Unicorn firm you bills of lading. Thus exhorting you to remember your
duty toward God: whom I beseech to protect you evermore by his holy Spirit,
and prosper you in all your affairs. Bristow this 17. day of December. An.
1589.

Your Master to do you any good that you shall deserve. T. A.

The form of a bill of exchange for the country of Spain.
Worshipful: may it please you to pay upon this my first bill unto R. N. or
the bearer hereof, within 15. days after the safe arrival of the Gabriell of
Bristow to her Port of discharge: Note that you must make 3. of these bills
Thirty and three pound six shillings and eight pence.
thirty and three pounds, six shillings and eight pence. Which is for 100.
Ducats that I have taken up by exchange for your use of T.M. a merchant of
London at six shillings and eight pence the Ducket. From S. Lucar the 16. day
of December. 1589.

By me R. A.

Say as follows in your second bil of exchange, and so accordingly in the
third.
Worshipful: may it please you to pay upon this my second bill (my first not
being paid) unto R. N. or the bearer hereof: and so forth as in the other.

A bill of Exchange to be made in England.
Witnesses this present bill of exchange: that I R. A. merchant of the city
of Bristowe, do owe unto T. M. merchant of the said city, the sum of 100.
Ducats: I say an hundred Ducats of current money of Spain, accompting after
11 rials of plate to the Ducket. To be paid unto the said T. M. or his
assigns, within 10. days next and immediately after the safe arrival of the
good ship called the Gabriel of Bristowe, to the port of S. Lucar in Andalouzia
in Spain, or any other port of her discharge. And for the true payment
thereof, I the abouenamed R A. do bind me, my goods my heirs executors, and
assigns, firmly to these presents. In witness of the truth, I have caused two
of these bills to be made (the which the one being paid, the other to be
void): and have put my firm and seal unto them, and delivered them as my
deed, in Bristow the 15. day of September 1589. and in the 31. year of our
sovereign, Queen Elizabeth her majesty's reign. etc.

An aquitance.
Witnesses these presents: that I R.A. merchant of the City of Bristow, have
received of T. M. merchant of the said city, the sum of a hundred Ducats
current moneys of Spain, due unto my master T. A. as apeared by a bill of
exchange. Wherefore to testify that I am truly satisfied and paid of the
aforesaid sum: I have unto this aquittance set my firm, and delivered it as
my deed the 18. day of November. 1589.

By me R. A.

A bill of Attorney.
Witnesses these presents: that I R. A. merchant of the City of Bristow, do
substitute and appoint my true and lawful attorney T. M. merchant of
Bridgwater: to recover and receive of G. H. marcha^t of the aforesaid City of
Bristow the sum of 25. pound, due unto me as appears by his bil. Wherefore I
give also to the said T. M, all my own full power and authority, to deal and
to do as in steed of my self. In witness of the truth, I have unto this
present bill of Attorney, put my firm and seal, and delivered it as my deed,
in Bristow the 17. day of our Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth her Majesty's Reign
etc.

A bill of debt.
BE it known to all me^ by these presents: that I R. A. merchant of the City
of Bristowe, owe unto T. M. merchant of the said City: the sum of 25. pounds
8. shillings, of good and current moneys of England, to be paid unto the said
T. M. or his assigns, at or upon the 25. day of July next ensuing the date
hereof. And for the true payment thereof: I the abouenamed R. A. do bind me,
my goods, heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns firmly by these
presents. In witness of truth I have caused this bill of debt to be made, and
have hereunto put my firm and seal, and delivered it as my deed, in Bristow
the 4. day of May 1589. and in the 31. year of our Sovereign, Queen
Elizabeth her Majesty's Reign. etc.

A Bond or Obligacion. Nouerint vniuersiper praesentes me R. A. de ciuitate
Bristoliae mercatore^, teneri et firmiter obligari T. M. de eadem ciuitate
Mercatori: in viginti libris bonae and legalis monetae Angliae. Soluendis eidem
T. M. aut suo certo Atturnato executoribus, sieve administratoribus suis. Ad
quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciendam, obligo me, heredes,
executores and administratores meos, firmiter per praesentes. Sigillo meo
sigillatum, datum septimo die Nouembris, anno regni Dominae nostrae
Elizabethae, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hyberniae Reginae, fidei defens.
etc. tricesimo primo.

The condition of this Obligacion is such, that if the abouebounden R. A. his
heirs, executors or assigns, do well and truly content and pay, or cause to
be contented and paid, unto the above named T.M his executors, administrators,
or assigns, the sum of ten pounds of good and current money of England, on
the sixteenth day of May next ensuing the date above written, without couen or
fraud: That then this obligacion to be void, or else to stand in full force
and virtue.

A Policy or vvriting of assurance.
IN the name of God Amen. Be it known unto all men by these presents: that
Thomas Aldworth merchant of the city of Bristowe does make assurance and
causes him self to be assured from the Port of the said city of Bristow
called Hungrode unto the port of Lisbon in the kingdom of Portingale, and
therehence directly back again to the aforesaid Port of Bristow: upon the
body, tackle, apparel, ordinance, munition, artillery, boat, and other
furniture, of the good ship called the Gabriell of Bristow, of the burden of
60. tons or thereabouts. And also upon all goods, wares, and marchandises
laden or to be laden in the aforesaid ship the Gabriel, whereof is master
under God for this present voyage R.M. or by what other name the master of the
ship may or shall be called. Beginning the adventure from the day and hour of
the lading of the anchor, spreading the sail, and departure of the said ship
from Hungrode aforesaid. And so shall continue and endure until such time as
the said ship with all her said furniture, and all the goods and marchandises
laden in her, shall return and safely arrive back again from Lisbon unto the
Port of Hungrode aforesaid, and there has surged and mored at an anchor by the
space of 24. hours in good safety. Touching the adventures and perils which
we the assurers hereafter named are contented to bear and take upon us this
present voyage, are of the seas, men of war, fire, enemies, pirates, rouers,
thieves, Iettesons, letters of mark and countermarke, arrests, restraints, and
detainment of Kings and Princes and of all other persons, barratry of the
Master and mariners, and of all other perils, losses, and misfortunes
whatsoever they be, or howsoever to the damage or hurt of the said Ship and
goods or any part or parcel thereof. And that in case of any misfortunes: it
shall then be lawful to the assured his factor, servant, or assign, to sue
labor, and trauail, for in and about, the defense safgard and recovery of the
said Ship and goods, and all other the premises, without any prejudice to this
assurance. To the charges whereof we th'assurers shall contribute each one
according to the rate and quantity of his sum herein assured. It is to be
understood that this present writing and assurance shall be of as much force,
strength and effect, as the best and most surest policy or writing of
assurance which has been ever heretofore used to be made in Lumbard street,
or now within the Roial exchange in London. And so we the assurers are
contented, and do promise and bind our selves and every of us, our heirs,
executors and assigns, for the true performance of the premises, acording to
the use and custom of the said street, or Royal exchange. Confessing our
selves to be fully satisfied and paid of and for the considerations due unto
us after the rate of 7. upon the 100. And in testimony of the truth we the
assurers have hereunto severally subscribed our names and sums of money
assured,

given in London the 19. day of September. 1589. I W. N. merchant of London am
content with this assurance (which God preserve) for 25. pounds this 19. day of
September. 1589. 25 li.
I R. T. merchant of London am content with this assurance (which God preserve)
for 25. pounds this 20. day of September. 1589. 25 li.
I M. R. merchant of Bristow am content with this assurance (which God)
preserve for 15. pound this 21. day of September 1589. 25 li.



CONSTANTINI CRVX.
emblem featuring Christ's cross with the five wounds, including the crown of
thorns and the sacred heart, framed by a crown of thorns and a circle of flames
IN HOC SIGNO VINCES


HERE FOLLOW CERTAIN GODLY SENTENCES, Necessary for a youth to meditate
upon.
FIRST seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof: and then all
things shall be given thee that thou have need of.

Apply thy self unto labor while thou art young, lest in thine old age thy
body become full of diseases, and thy end be in reproach and poverty.

The godly and diligent man shall have prosperity in all his ways: but he
that follows pleasure and voluptuousness, shall have much sorrow before he
die.

Take heed of using a false balance or measure, for it is an abomination
before God: and a swearing and lying tongue, makes hot the curse of God upon
his house.

Covet not overmuch familiarity amongst men: for it makes thee spend much
loss of time.

Let not thy expenses be equal with thy gaynes: for either Sickness, naughty
dettors, let of trade, and misfortune by the sea or land, may soon ouetthrow
thee.

Link not in amity with too many me^ that are above thy calling: for it will
much increase thy trouble and charge.

Beware in any case of suertiship: for it makes thy friend thine enemy; it
indangereth thy estate; and impaireth thy own credit.

Be not hasty in giving credit to every man; but take heed to a man that is full
of words, that has red eyes, that goes much to law, and that is suspected to
live unchaste.

When thou promisest any thing: be not slack to perform it, for he that
gives quickly, gives double.

If either of goodwill or necessity thou must do a thing, see thou do it
gladly and cheerfully: for so shall thy gift be well accepted, and thy labor
and cost never a whit the more.

Remember often thy Creator, and how he has made the whole compass of the day
and night to serve thee, but thee to serve only him. Wherefore if thou requite
not thy maker, to serve him one hour or little moment of the day, for four and
twenty hours which he serves thee: for thy beastly unthankfulness thou have
lost both thy light in this world, and shall find darkness in the world to come.

If thou will prosper, pray: if thou will have blessings, restore what thou
have evil gotten: if thou will have joy of thy labors, be single in thy
tongue and eye, use no lying nor deceit.

Think it not enough to refrain thee from doing evil: but know that it is
also thy duty to do that which is good. Therefore be fervent for the praise of
thy Creator: give good example: put forwards thy Children and servants in the
service of God: help the widow, the fatherless, the stranger, the poor, and
the oppressed.

Do unto another as thou would be done to thy self: and offer not that unto
another, which thy self would take in offense.

Be not greedy nor in lust after that, which is both displeasant unto God;
hurtful to thy body; an enemy to thy soul; and a shortner of thy life: which
is: Wine, Wealth, and Women.

What wins a man by whordome? even but a moment any pleasure; a present
sorrow to his mind; a perpetual sickness to his body; and eternal damnation
(without hearty repentance and amendment) to his soul.

What profits a man by deceit, forswearing, and dissimulation? he heapeth to
himself the horrible vengeance of God? and servants who shall serve him the
like; and offers his soul as a pray unto Satan.

What avails it a man to fare delicately, and to drink much of pleasant and
strong drinks? His mouth receaueth twice so much bitterness as it had before
delight; he shall become corrupt as the Tode, and shall return to vomit with
the dog.

What gets a man by lying? Not to be believed when he speaks truth.

Fear God: for he can destroy both thy body and soul.

Honor thy Prince: for she has power over life and death.

Love thy parents: for they are the best friends thou shall ever have.

Give reverence to thy betters: for therein thou shall have honor to thy self.

Be courteous and lowly to all men: for thereby thine enemies report shall be
doubted of.

Be not wise in thine own conceit: for thou can not know all thine own
imperfections.

Be not careful to please thine eye: for it is the deceiptfullest enemy thou
have.

Remember who made thee: it was God: remember of what thou wast made: even of
earth and clay. Remember wherefore thou wast made: to honor and glorify God.
Remember to what thou shall be made: even to dust and ashes. Remember to what
thou may be made again: even a glorious and immortal body.

Who so takes upon him the degree of a servant, let these three things be his
chiefest thought and meditation. The first that every morning and evening, he
perform his dutiful obedience and thanksgiving, by his prayers unto God. The
Second, that he always carry in mind, what carfulness, truth, and diligence,
is required in his service toward his master. The third, how he himself may
live with honesty and credit in time to come.

THE CONCLUSION, WHICH is an history very profitable and delightful for a
youth to read and meditate.
THere was a certain Philosopher, who lying on his death bed, called his
son, and said these words unto him. My son when I thy father am dead,
remember me by recompting often unto thy self this counsel which now I give
unto thee. First learn of the little singing birds, who never miss in the
morning and at evening, but in their kind, they yield forth their voices in
praise and rejoicing of their Creator and maker: and so see that thou also do
never forget and neglect the same.

Learn of the little emet, that provides in the summer her food for the
winter: and so see that thou also in thy youth, labor for thy maintenance
against thine age. Learn of the cock, that often watches and croweth in the
night, both to preserve himself and his fellows from the wefell: and so se
that thou often watch, and stretch forth thy voice in prayer by night unto God,
and in that quiet time, study to prevent thy dangers. Learn of the little dog,
who because he is the humblest creature of all unto man, is therefore most loved
and esteemed: and so see that thou evermore show thy self humble and lowly
unto every man. Learn of the silk worm, who as soon as she gathers strength
to yield any virtue from her, never ceasseth nor waxes weary until she die:
and so see that thou also content not thy self, to do thy duty to God and man
for a time, (as most men do) but still continue in virtue till thy very lives
end.

Thus my son (quoth he) if thou will obey this my counsel, it shall always
go well with thee: but contrariwise if thou forsake it, and follow thine own
imaginations, it will happen unto thee according to this example. There dwelt
by a forest side a shepherd, who to preserve his sheep from a lion, which
oftentimes had carried them away for a pray to his whelp, prepared many snares
and engines to destroy this lion: but the old lio^ perceauing these traps to be
laid for him, departed with his young one to another forest. But when the whelp
grew to be as big a lion as his father, he thus says unto him: Father me
thinks I can remember that this place is not the country where I was born, what
then was the cause that made thee to depart there hence? Says the old lion, my
son it is not indeed our native country: but there is a little dwarf a man
dwelling in that place, who^ for his subtle traps that he laid to take from me
my life, I feared, and so fled therehence. Says the young lion: and I swear by
my beard that I will be revenged of him, and will go now and tear him in
pieces with my teeth. Nay (says the old lion) do not so, for if I my self
could not possibly get revenge against him, thou can not in any sort do it.
But the young lion would not be ruled by his father, but goes unto this forest
where the shepherd dwelt: who finding him within his house and the doors shut,
called unto him and said, o thou naughty and vile wretch, why have thou so
abused my father, as to drive him from his native country, over which and all
the beasts thereof, he reigned as king: I tell thee that I his son will be
revenged of thee for making him so to loose his right. The man being within his
house stoutly answered: I regard not a rush either thee or thy father, but if
thou once offer to enter within my doors, I have here both my staff and my
axe to beat and to cut thee in pieces. The young lion was straight ways amazed
at his stout words, and said: then come thou forth, and go with me to yonder
moyle, and let him be judge betwixt thee and me, whether thou have done my
father wrong or not, Says the shepherd: if thou will adjure and swear to do
me no harm, I will go with thee. So the young lion swear unto him to do him no
harm. The man then leads the way unto the lion, by those engines that he had
prepared long before: and anon the young lion fell into one of his pits, and was
entangled by his 2 forefeet. O (says the lion) help me, for I know not what
is this that has bound my feet very fast together. Says the shepherd, I am
not able to help thee, but tarry thou here, and I will go and call hither the
moile. But the lion as well as he could, did yet get forth of the pit, and went
iumping and leaping to follow after the man. By and by again he fell into
another pit, whereby his two hinder legs were also caught fast. The shepherd
now seeing him well tied and bound: he then cutteth with his knife a good
green staff, and begins to lay blows strongly upon the lion. The lion then
remembered his father, and said to the man: o beat me not on my back nor my
belly, but rather beat me on mine ears and on my heart: because with mine
ears I would not hear the counsel of my father, nor with my heart would not
believe it, when he said thou had more subtlety to prevail, then I had
strength. So the man beat him so long, both on the ears and the heart, that in
the end he killed him. Even so (says the Philosopher to his son) will
destruction come upon those which shall not accept and obey the good counsel
and instructions of their aged fathers.

FINIS.

