QVAERES CONCERNING The state of the Church OF SCOTLAND.

DEVT. 27.18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to go out of the way: and
all the people shall say, Amen.

Reprinted in the year 1638.

Quaeres, concerning the state of the Church of Scotland.
Quaeres. I.
WAS there ever any Realm since Christ's Incarnation professed Christian
Religion so universially through all the parts thereof, even to the utmost
corners, in such purity both for Doctrine, Discipline, and public worship,
with such liberty and for so many years together, as our Realm has done? In
the Apostles days we read not of whole Cities, let be kingdoms, to have
professed the name of Christ. Soon after the departure of the Apostles,
sundry corruptions entered into the Church, and the mystery of iniquity which
was working under ground in their time, was advaunced by little and little till
it came to the full ripeness. Neither was there any Nation free from the open
profession of Paganism the first 300 years. Since Constantines time, that
Christianity began to prevail above Gentilisme, there has been no Church,
which has not been defiled with much superstition, and corrupted with many
errors, till the days of late Reformation. From the first time of reformation
to this hour, no reformed Church has spread it self so universally through any
Kingdom, with such purity of profession, but either their profession is not
so universal, being intermingled with Papists, Anabaptists, Lutherians, or not
so pure, as in our neighbor Church.

II. WAS there ever any Nation which sealed their profession with Oaths,
Covenants and Subscriptions, so universallie, and so often, as our Church has
done. How often has the Confession of Faith, called the Kings Confession, been
subscribed by persons of all Estates through the Realm, or by particular
persons from time to time, as occasion was offered to require their
subscription? A more fearful oath cannot be conceaved, then is taken in the
end of that Confession, in these words: Promising and swearing by the great
Name of the Lord our God, That we shall continue in the obedience of the
Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, and shall defend the same according to
our vocation and power, all the days of our lives, under the pains contained
in the Law, and danger both of Body and Soul, in the day of Gods fearful
judgment. This is the Promissorie oath. The Assertorie oath, whereupon it is
grounded, is this: We, therefore willing to take away all suspicion of
hyprocrisie, and of such double dealing with God, and his Church, protest and
call the Searcher of all hearts for witness, That our minds and hearts do
fully agree with this our Confession, Promise, Oath, and Subscription. So that
we are not moved for any worldly respect, but are persuaded only in our
Consciences, through the knowledge and love of Gods true Religion, printed in
our hearts by the holy Spirit, as we shall answer to him in the day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. To underlye the pains contained in
the Law, and danger both of Body and Soul in the day of Gods fearful
judgment, and to answer to him in the day, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed, are not lightly to be considered, but to be pondered
deeply, and ever to be remembered, specially when we have to do with this our
Confession.

III. I appeal to every man's Conscience, Whether we have adhered to all the
general and particular clauses of this our Confession, or not? When we say in
this Confession, that we detest and abhor the Antichrist, his five bastard
Sacraments, with all his Rites, Ceremonies, and false Doctrine added to the
ministration of the true Sacraments, without the Word of God, his cruel
judgment against Infants departing without the Sacrament, his absolute
necessity of baptizing, do we not protest that we will abhor and detest,
confirmation one of the five bastard Sacraments, kneeling, which is a Rite
added to the ministration of the Supper, without the warrant of Gods Word, and
invented by the Antichrist, private Baptism, which is grounded upon the
necessity of baptism, and doubting of the Salvation of all Infants dying
unbaptized; When we protest we abhor and detest his dedicating of days, do
we not condemn observation of aniversarie holy days? And when we protest
we detest and abhor not only his own worldly Monarchy, but also his
wicked hierarchy, Do we not condemn the degrees of Bishops and Archbishops?
When we say, we abhor and detest all contrary religion and doctrine, (to
wit, to the former Confession mentioned immediately before, and the Christian
faith received, believed, and defended by the Church of Scotland) but chiefly
all kind of Papistrie in general, and particular heads, even as they are now
damned and confuted by the Word of God and Kirk of Scotland. Do we not
condemn Archbishops, Bishops, Holy days, Kneeling, Confirmation, private
Baptism, seeing all these particular heads were damned by our Church either in
the former Confession, the first or second Book of Discipline, and Acts of
general Assemblies before the said Confession was sworn to and subscribed,
and if any preased to practice them after they were damned, the censures of the
Church was inflicted upon them. Have we not of late failed in all these
particulars, and consequently violated our oaths, promises, and
subscriptions, underlying the danger both of body and soul in the day of Cods
fearful judgment, unles we repent, which we cannot seriously do, except
we recover, so far as in us lies, what is lost, to the loss of any
temporal thing whatsoever, to the spending of the least drop of our blood,
and defend what is yet reserved whole and sound, with the same hazard? For what
is that hazard or loss in comparison of all the pains contained in the Law,
and danger both of body and soul, in the day of Gods fearful judgment. Let
no man deceive himself, thinking to deceave God with evasions and shifts. The
Searcher of all hearts knows what was thy meaning, when thou saydest, We
call the Searcher of all hearts to witness, that our minds and hearts do
fully agree with this our Confession, Promise, Oath, and Subscription: And
what was the meaning of the Church of Scotland, with which thou protested, thou
would not use double dealing, was too manifest both in practice, preaching and
the authentic Records above mentioned. And put the case the particular heads
above specified, had been a matter indifferent, howbeit they were not so
esteemed by our Church, yet who can deny but thus far at least was intended
to eschew all occasions and provocations to tyranny, and superstition, and
therefore the oath, howbeit in a matter indifferent, was lawful and so
remains, as long as they remain occasions and provocations to tyranny, and
corruption, yea as long as the forbearance of them is not proved to be a sin.
For great regard should be had even to a rash oath if it be not or prove not
unlawful, for the reverence we ought to carry to the great name of God.
Remember of the breach of the Oath made unto the Gibeonites.

IIII. Joining all the three former Quaeres together, I ask, If ever a Realm
professing Christian Religion so universallie, in such purity, with such
Liberty, for so many years together, and sealing their profession with such
solemn promises, oaths, and subscriptions (if there were any such to be
found in any History) that did make such defection, as if they did, if the
heavy judgment of God did not overtake them? Or, secluding the consideration
of our oaths, subscriptions, and solemn Covenants, I ask, If any of the
Reformed Churches in any Realm, or Province, professing the Gospel in the
same purity, and so many years, as we have done, has made so great defection
as many of us have done. Have they returned to their vomit, taken up that which
they rejected and condemned, remaining still a reformed Church, and not
overturned with force of arms? If not, then suppose we had never sealed our
profession with such solemn seals, our defection is singular, and our
punishment will be exemplarie, unless we repent, recover what is lost, and
defend what remains uncorrupted.

V. WHereunto does this defection tend? Does it not tend first to persite
conformity with the English Church, then at last will it not end in full
conformity with the Roman Kirk? The intent of the first is professed by his
Majesty in express terms extant in print: and therefore be not deceaved
with the promises and protestations of our usurping and pretended Prelates. As
for example, They will say to you, his Majesty cares neither for He Saint
nor She Saint, but for days dedicat to Christ. They lie: For his Majesty
observes both He and She Saints days, as well as days dedicat to Christ. So
howbeit you could digest both a Christmas Preaching and a Christmas Pie, which
once ye lothed, ye must and shall ere it be long, do as much for Saint
Bartholomew, Virgin Mary, the Innocents, and all the rest of their Saints, and
for five Ceremonies ye shall have fifty, yea, a hundred. All the Relicts of
Rome, which are lying like stinking filth in their Church, shall be
communicated to us; the pattern of their Altar, their Service, their
Hierarchy, and Romish policy, shall be set up in our Church. This defection
tends yet further, to wit, to conformity with Rome. What means the Bishop
of Spalato, in the Preface before his fifth Book, to exhort his Majesty to
proceed as he has already begun, to restore the Christian Church to
unity: Papist, Lutherian, Formalist, and Calvinist, must then all be
reconciled together, and united in one. How, I pray you, are we united to the
English Church? We must yield all to them, they will not yield any thing at
all to us, no not a hoof, said Whitgift, Bishop of Canterberrie, neither are
they urged to yeald any thing unto us. But we are unmercifully dealt with to
yealde unto them. Shall we for conformity with the Lutherian the next day
except of his monstrous opinions, and other fond ceremonies, after the same
manner, and the third year for reconciliation with Rome, drink of the diep of
her abomination? Or, how shall that great work come to pass? Neither England
nor Rome gives the least token of their coming toward us. Yet we must play
the fools, and turn our face to them, and take our journey first to England,
then to Rome. The Bishop of Spalato has not ridden all the foordes of Tweed
well, whatsoever is intended, this our conformity will of it self tend in the
end to full Popery. For, suppose we should give place to these disturbers of
our Church, who for their own gain and glory, have laid aside all respect
to Gods glory, the gaining of souls, and the weell of their Brethren, yet
Popery should increase more mightily, as it has done in our neighbor Church.

VI. WHether our conformity end at last in conformity with Rome, or not? What
reason have we to leave our conformity with the pure Apostolical Churches,
or the best Reformed Churches in foreign Nations? Brightman compares our
Church, and the rest of the best Reformed, to the godly Church of
Philadelphia; the English to the glorious and lukewarm Church of Laodicea.
Shall we cast off our conformity with Philadelphians, and conform to
Laodiceans? Is not their Church government the same that it was this day 100.
years since in time of the grossest darkness and blindness, Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, Chancelours, Officials, Commissaries, exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in their spiritual Courts, as they did in time of
Popery, excluding both Preaching and ruling Elders from the Government of
their own Parishes, and the joint government of the Church, excommunicating,
suspending, depryving, by their own sole authority, meddling with
Testamentarie, and other causes, not belonging to Ecclesiastical Consistories;
the Bishop taking to himself the sole administration of spiritual
Jurisdiction over many hundredth Churches; yea, deputing the same to Civilians,
Chancelours and Officialls, and meddling with the administration of Civil
Affairs, as best beseeming his Grandeur. This Bishop is not Paul's Bishop, nor
yet the Bishop which was first erected in the Ancient Church; He differs as
far from him as the Consul in a Senate does from a King or Monarch. So,
seeing he is neither the divine, nor humane Bishop, He must be that
Satanicall, brought in by the Antichrist. It were wearisome to go through the
calling and functions, of their Suffraganes, Deanes, Canons and Prebandaries,
Organists, Singing boys, Pistlers, Gospellers, Priests, Deacons, who are half
Priests: their Fasts, their Eawes, their Feast-dayes, their Crossing, Kneeling,
Bishopping, Houseling of the sick, Baptism by supposition, private Baptism,
Copes, Capes, Tipets, Surplices, Rochets, Churching of women, Marriage toys,
Funeral rittes, the gestures waried superstitiouslie at Service, the form of
their Prayers, and the rest of their Ceremonies. It suffices, that the best
and worthiest among them, has continually pleaded against them, that they had
never quiet possession in their own Church; that they were disused in many
Congregations in the latter years of Queen Elizabeth, of worthy memory, till
they got strength again, immediately after the Kings Coronation; that they are
obtruded only by authority, not liked off by many of the Formalists
themselves, who do temporise only, with a bad conscience, how shall we then
conform to a Church enthraled, and under bondage? How many times have the
godly among them put up their Prayers to God, and preferred petition to King
and Parliament for the Church policy of Scotland, and the liberty of that pure
Profession, which we have enjoyed many years; and shall that our glorious
Garland be stamped underfoot? The morning clouds which eclipsed the beginning
of their Reformation remain unscattered to this day: and shall they be
suffered to come within our horizon: Not in our morning, but after many years,
at the noone tide of our day, to obscure the glorious Gospel, which has
shined to us in as clear and pure brightness, as ever to any nation. Consider
the charges which must be bestowed upon these idle functions, and superstitious
Ceremonies; If the Abbeyes be recovered out of Noblemens hands, I persuade my
self, they will either be converted to the maintenance of Deanes, Canons and
Prebendaries, Organs, Copes, and other unlawful uses; or else in time be
restored to the old Crows to build their nests in again.

VII. IF there were a time of Conformity to be granted, which we will never
grant; yet, is this a fit time? When the reformed Churches abroad are in so
great hazard, and some presently under the fiery trial. When the Antichrist,
and all his adherents, has resumed fresh courage to prosecute their bloody
designs, hoping wholly to extirpate true Religion out of Europe; is it time to
conform to them, to take on the badges of their profession? Will not this
encourage the enemy and discourage our friends?

VIII. IF the Antichristian government, before described, and the many
superstions be not matters of weight, but trifles; which they shall never be
able to prove with sound and solid arguments; why are we persecuted for them?
Is it a small matter to turn a Minister out of his Office, wheerein he has
served many years, to send him and his family, wife and children, to beg
their Bread, so far as in them lies. For, having dedicated themselves to the
service of God, and spent their former time in studies, they are unable to make
shifts, as Artizans and Tradesmen can do. Was there ever a persecutor since
the days of Christ, who with one breath did both persecute, and pronounce the
cause wherefore then are worse by many degrees, then the Ethnicke, Heretical,
or Popish persecutors, and consequently the worst that ever were. Our case is
yet the more to be pitied, that we are denied the protection of Law: when we
would fly to the Sanctuary of Justice, we are shut back, like unworthie
beasts, and no more pitied, then if we were dogs, left or redelivered, into
the hands of merciless Tyrants, who have given testimony out of their own
mouths, of the loyalty, and good behavior of those whom they have persecuted.

IX. AFter so many Quaeres, and expostulations, in all humility and reverence,
to the honorable, the true, and native estates of Parliament, Nobles, Barronnes,
and Burgesses: not regarding that bastard estate of Prelates, I would demand
two things: First, Why they suffer the high Commission, a Court not established
by the Statutes of the Realm, thus to tyrannise over the Church, over dutiful
and loyal Subjects, fyning, confyning, suspending, depriving, warding, and
directing the Lords of Secret Counsel, to banish, or to give out letters of
horning, against Ministers, or other Professors, for not conforming to Popish
Ceremonies against their conscience. The Parliament is the highest Court of the
Realm, and therefore should provide that no strange Court be set up to oppress
the Subjects, without their approbation and consent, and therefore it is, not
only our Quaere, why it is not, but our request, that it may be put down. For
it is the strangest, the most tyrannical, and lawless Court, that ever came
in this Land, lyker to nothing, then to the Spanish Inquisition, whereunto it
will turn in the end to the full, as Papistrie increases. That one or two
Archbishops, with two or three associats, Ecclesiastical, or civil persons,
such as they please to assume to themselves, being nominat in the Kings Letters
Pattents, should judge in all Ecclesiastical causes, and inflict both
temporal and spiritual censures, and punishments, according to their
pleasures, is contrary and repugnant to the word of God. For spiritual power,
nether Princes not Parlaments, may give to Ecclesiastical, or Civil persons;
nether are Ecclesiastical persons capable of the power of the Temporal Sword.
Seeing then, nether the one, nor the other can be lawfully done, this high
Commission, so much grieved at in our neighbor Church, should not be suffered
to have place amongst us. Next, I demand in all humility and reverence, Why
acts of pretended and null assemblies, are ratified in Parliament, and Statutes
made, wherewith our pretended Prelates, make snares to entrap their brethren,
and wherewith they countenance their tyranny? Was ever the general Assembly
convocat in time of Parliament, or their advice and information sought, since
these alterations began. In England, howbeit the Prelates sit in the upper House
as Barrons, yet they have besides, a convention of the Clergy, which is called
the Convocation House, which represents almost our general Assembly (for
they have no other) whose advyce was never neglected, no not in time of
Popery. What has our Church deserved, as thus to be neglected and
misregarded, and the report, advice, consent and wot of Prelates to be taken,
who are both judge and party in this cause? The Acts of that corrupt, and
pretended assembly at Glasgow, were not only ratified, and confirmed, but
also under name of explanation enlarged, and Bishops exemed from the judgment
and censures of the general assembly. Shall the like be done now for that
pretended and null Assembly holden last at Perth, God forbid, that the
honorable Estates should make so light account of their own credits among the
Reformed Churches, to whom the proceedings of that pretended Assembly are
discovered; and if need be, may yet be further discovered: or that their
Honors should make light account of many faithful Subjects, their own dear
Countrymen, who are resolved, rather then to conform, to suffer temporal
losses, and to render their lives. Howbeit some of them have defiled themselves
with these corruptions, will they be avenged on their Brethren, who for
conscience sake have kept themselves free, Queen Elizabeth of famous memory,
did at the suit of the Commons, and upon a Bill preferred into the House, at
the Parliament holden the 14. year of her Reign, signify in express words,
yet upon record, that her Will and Pleasure was, that no Preacher or Minister,
should be impeached, or indicted, or otherwise molested, or troubled, for the
Rites and Ceremonies in question, as the preamble of the said Bill did purport:
Adding these comfortable words further, Dial betwixt the old Protestant, and
now Formalist. p. 54.55.
That her Majesty, as Defender of the Faith, would aid and maintain all good
Protestants to the discouragement of all Papists. We do expect the like, not
only at the hands of honorable Barrons and Burgesses, but also of our Nobles,
who should be nourish Fathers to faithful Subjects, but no maintainers of
proud Prelates, enemies to their Estate, and the estate of Church and Country.

FINIS.

