THE BEGINNING OF THE DOCTRINE of CHRIST. OR A Catalogue of sins, showing how
a Christian may find out the evils he must take notice of in his Repentance.

With Rules, that show a course, how any Christian may be delivered from the
guilt and power of all his sins.

By N. BIFIELD Preacher of Gods Word, at Isleworth in Middlesex.

LAM. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.
LONDON, Printed by G. P. for R. Rounthwaite, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Flower de-luce and Crown. 1619.

TO THE MVCH Honored Ladies, the Lady ANNE GLEERE, and the Lady ANNE FINCH,
and the Lady IONE HERICK, N. Bifield wishes all increase of the true grace of
Christ, and the blessed fruition of the glory of God in Heaven.
Worthy Ladies,
LAmentable are the ruins, into which the natures of men are generally fallen
by their sins; which appears especially by the ways men take in the
business of their soul: The most men are clean out of the way to heaven, and
walk in by-waies of their own, which are called in Scripture, the ways of
the wicked; the ways of their own hearts; Perverse ways; Dark and slipperie
ways; The way of iniquity: All meeting in that broad way that leads to
destruction, being wholly ignorant of the way of life and peace; yea, the most
of them speak evil of the good way of God, and persecute it. Some there are,
that are so far enlightened, as not to like the common roadeway of the
multitude; and after some inquiry have found them out ways that seem good in
their own eyes; and they are wonderfully well pleased with their course, but
the issues of these ways are death too, as well as the former: and the more is
this danger increased upon men, because the way of life is but one, and it is a
narrow way, and hard to find, and may be sought by many, and yet not found:
Yet this hope is left unto forlorn men, that there is a way to heaven and
happiness: A way of righteousness and peace, a way of mercy and truth, of
wisdom: A way that men may securely and safely walk in; a way, in which
Christ will guide them, God the Father will keep them, and the holy Ghost
lead them by the hand, and direct them in all the passages thereof: Only it
concerns us to ask the way, with all importunity, of God, and to attend unto
the directions of the word of God, and apply our hearts, and suffer our selves
to be disposed aright, that our eyes may see the salvation of God: and in
particular we must look to three things: First, that if the Lord show us that
mercy to direct us in the way, we must take heed that we neglect not, or
despise not the care of walking in the way: Secondly, that with all diligence
we avoid going about, and make straight steps to our feet: and thirdly, with
all fear watch our selves, that we fall not off with the errors of the
wicked, from the good way of God, and so our latter end be worse then our
beginning.

I have undertaken by the assistance of God, and the directions of his blessed
Word, to single out the choicest things I could find in the Scriptures,
concerning the entrance into this way of God, and those first paths which are
called holy. The substance of these directions I have digested into the
Treatise following, which I dedicate unto your Ladyships, as a testimony of my
thankfulness, for the respect you have showed unto my Ministry, both in your
constant resort unto it in the week days, while you lived in a neighbor
Parish; and in that two of you are pleased to come to live amongst us, and so
are become a part of my charge; as also to manifest to the world my observance
of your Ladyships, for the good report you have amongst the godly for the grace
of Jesus Christ, and your unfeigned love of the truth: Beseeching your
Acceptance, Perusal, and Patronage of these, I take my leave, and commend
your Ladyships to the God of mercy and truth, who guide, comfort, deliver,
sanctify, and preserve you all unto the Day of Jesus Christ.

Your Ladyships to be commanded in Christ Jesus, N. BIFIELD.
Febr. 12. 1619.
The chiefest things contained in the first BOOK.
CHAP. I.
THE Contents of all the six Treatises, briefly set down, page 1. to the 11
The persons whom those Treatises concern, page 11. 12 Encouragement to the
study of those things, p. 13. to 18 General directions by way of preparation,
p. 18. to 22
CHAP. II.
THe rules that show distinctly what men must do about their sins. p. 22 to 59
Motives to persuade to the care of these rules. page 23. 24 Three rules of
preparation. page 24. 25. 26 Four things deliver us from all sins past. p.
27 About the gathering of the Catalogue of sins. p. 27. to 35 About the
confession of our sins. p. 35. to 38 About sorrow for our sins, and how it
may be attained. p. 38. to 43 About the application of the promises, and how
it may be done. p. 43. 44. 45. to 51 The special promises made to such as have
confessed and sorrowed for their sins. p. 46. 47. 48 How men may know,
whether their confession and sorrow for their sins be right or no. p. 52.
53. 54 Three sorts of men may profit by these Directions. p. 55 Other uses of
the Catalogue of sins. p. 56 The misery of such as will not be advised to
take a sound course about their sins. p. 57
CHAP. III.
THE sins against the whole Law; where, of original sin, ignorance,
procrastination, vainglory, security, hypocrisy, self-love, inconstancy,
etc. p. 59. to 67
CHAP. IIII.
THE division of the sins against the first Table, and the sorts of sins
against Gods Nature. Seven monstrous offenses. pa. 68. 69 Of natural Atheism,
page 70. 71. and Epicurisme. p. 72 Of the defects of grace, and the mis-placing
of our affections. p. 7^. 7^ How many ways men sin against the mercy of God,
page 74. 75. and the fear of God, page 78. 79. and the trust in God. page 80
CHAP. V.
HOw many ways men offend against the means of Gods worship. How many ways
men offend. By not worshipping. p. 83. 84 By will-worshipping. p. 85. 86 By
Idol worshipping. p. 87. 88
CHAP. VI.
HOw many ways men sin against the manner of Gods worship. Offenses that may
be committed in the manner of doing any part of Gods service. page 91 Sins
in hearing. p. 92 Sins in prayer. p. 93 Sins about the Sacraments. p. 94
Sins about an oath. p. 95
CHAP. VII.
Sins about the time of Gods worship. The secret offenses against the
Sabbath. p. 96 The open breaches of the Sabbath. p. 97
CHAP. VIII.
THE divisions of the sins against the second Table. The sins Of wives and
husbands. p. 101 Of children and parents. p. 102. 103 Of servants and Masters.
p. 105 106 Of Subjects and Magistrates. p. 107 Of Hearers and their Ministers.
p. 108

CHAP. IX.
Sins against the persons of men; 1. By omission. p. 100 2. By commission;
where The sins internal. pa. 111. to 116 The sins external: In gesture.
p. 116 In words. p. 117. 118 In works. p. 119. 120. 121 How we sin against
the bodies of men. p. 122 How against the souls of men. p. 123. to 128
CHAP. X.
THE sins against chastity. In the gross acts. p. 129. 130 In the thoughts
and affections, and senses and gestures, and words. p. 131 The occasions of
uncleanness. p. 132. 133. 134
CHAP. XI.
Sins against the estates of men: Internal. p. 136 External: Of omission.
p. 137. 138 Of commission, where the several ways of stealing. page 139. 140.
with the aggrauations, to p. 145
CHAP. XII.
Sins against the good names of men. By omission. p. 146 By commission:
Internally. p. 147 Externally. pa. 148: to 153
CHAP. XIII.
OF the sins without consent. p. 154
CHAP. XIIII.
HOw many ways men offend against the Gospel. Sins against Christ. page
156. 157 Sins against repentance. page 158. 159 Sins against faith. page
160 Sins against the Spirit of grace. page 161
THE PREFACE to the Reader, containing the scope of all the six Treatises, and
certain General things, which by way of Introduction belong unto them all.
FOR thy sake ( Christian Reader) I have bin willing to prepare for the Press
six little Treatises, which may inform thee of six things of the greatest
consequence, that I know can concern thee in this life; and though I have
reason to abase my self in the acknowledgement of mine own frailty, and
insufficiency for these things, yet thou have cause to awaken to the
consideration of the matter, which so nearly concerns thee, using the help
of this labor, till God afford thee better helps from more able instruments.
The matter in all of them is so necessary, that I know not which of them thou
may safely neglect.

1. The first thing which any man, disposing himself The Contents of this
Treatise.
for the kingdom of God, will, and ought to enquire after, is, What he should
do to be rid of those many sins he has been, and is guilty of: rid (I say)
from the guilt and danger of them, and from the power and dominion of them. For
the satisfaction of thy Conscience in this most needful question, I have in
this first Treatise gathered for thee, out of the whole Bible, a Catalogue of
those sins, which in our repentance God will have with special notice to be
confessed and avoided: and these sins I have set down, as near as I could,
in the express words of the Text, that thou might see the Lord himself
describing thy offenses, and so might have no excuse or doubt to imagine,
that it was but the judgment of some men, that made such things to be thought
to be sins. By this course of surueying the whole Scriptures, I have both
found out diverse particular offenses plainly proved to be so, which I could
not observe to be mentioned in any exposition of the commandments which I had,
and also diverse things proved clearly to be sins, which were only barely
affirmed to be so in other writers. I have likewise plainly showed thee by
express Scriptures, what course thou may distinctly take to be rid of thy
sins, a course that cannot fail thee, being grounded on the most evident
directions, which God himself has prescribed unto thee, if thy own
slothfulness and procrastination, or wilful perverseness hinder thee not;
and I doubt not, but by experience thou will confess, the course is
comfortable and easy, considering the great benefit and rest thou may bring
to thy Conscience thereby.

2. The second thing a The Contents of the second book.
man would desire to be satisfied in, (that has been entered into the practice
of Repentance) is, How he might come to be infallibly assured, concerning Gods
favor, and his own salvation; and for answer hereunto, I have in the second
Treatise gathered out of the Scriptures, signs of Gods own making, by which
men may try their estate, and these such, as both describe wicked men, not yet
in Christ, and such, as describe godly men, that shall certainly be saved:
and withal, I have now added directions, how by the help of those signs men
may fettle their assurance, and how such, as yet want those signs, may attain
them.

3. The third thing every The Contents of the third book.
Christian ought to seek satisfaction in, is this, How a man, that has
attained unto the assurance of salvation, when he dies, may comfort and
establish his heart against all the miseries and distresses, which may, and will
befall him in this life before his death; and to this end I have gathered out
of the whole Scriptures those admirable consolations, which may be abundantly
sufficient to uphold him with much joy in the worst estate can befall him; and
this is done in the Treatise which I call the Promises.

4. The fourth question a The Contents of the fourth book.
careful Christian, that has thus found out the gain of godliness, would
ask, is this, What he should do in the whole course of his life to glorify
God, who has thus loved him, and given his Son to dye for him, and purchased
such a glorious Inheritance for him; and for answer heereunto, I have likewise
out of the Scripture garhered the rules of Life, which will show him
distinctly, how he should carry himself both toward God, and toward men in
all parts of his life; how he should behave himself at home and abroad, in
company, and out of company, etc. and all this showed him by the express words
of the Scriptures.

5. In the fifth place, If a man ask himself what yet he wants that is
necessary for his state, he may, and ought to bethink himself of this
question; What are these necessary trueths, which God has absolutely tied him
to know and believe, without which he cannot be saved, and which are
fundamentally needful for him. To this end I have collected a fifth Treatise,
the principles of which are an extract out of all the Doctrine of religion, of
such truths in every part of religion, as a man is bound of necessity to know;
and this I have not only proved by Scripture, but showed what uses he may put
such knowledge to, all the days of his life.

6. The sixth and last thing which ought to be enquired after, is, how a man
thus fitted to live the life of God, may also be cured of the fear of death;
and to this end I have published that Tretise of the Cure of the fear of
Death: which shows plain and comfortable ways, how any Christian may deliver
his heart from those fears.

I suppose that no man Whom these treatises concern.
that reads this, will conceive, that any of these are needless. And as I
would advise such Christians as abound with ability and leisure, to furnish
themselves with the labors of such worthy Divines, as have written of any of
these subjects: so unto such Christians as have not that ability or leisure, I
commend these Treatises, both for their breuity, and the distinct digesting of
the things he would seek after; there being nothing of mine in these, but
the labor of disposing them, the maine substance of them being Gods own
Word, and things devised and invented by God himself. I may lawfully commend
the care and study of these things unto thee, and that with so much authority
from the Lord, as to tell thee, that thou may not safely be negligent in any
of these, if thou consider the worth of them, or thy own need.

If thou say, that here is In couragements to the study of these things.
prescribed a hard task, and so many things are to be done, as may make any
man afraid to meddle with directions of such variety, and number:

I answer; that in any of these Treatises the way is not made harder then is
required, or in the doctrine of the Church manifested, but rather things are
made more plain, and so more easy. Besides, thou know already, that the
way to heaven is a narrow, and straight way, and few find it. But especially
thou should wey with thy self the great encouragements and motives to abide
the hardship and difficulties of any godly and necessary course. Though the way
to Canaan (with the Israelites) were through a solitary wilderness, yet it
should comfort thee, that it is but a way of three days, as they said, being
about to get out of Egypt. God will keep thee at work but a little time, and
therefore thou should not think much of thy pains. And further think of
it, that this is a course of wonderful comfort and safety: when a Christian
follows the evident directions of Gods word in these most weighty things, he
walks safely: He is in the good way, the way of life, the way of peace; he is
sure to see the salvation of God: to follow these directions soundly, is to
keep our souls: all Gods ways will be mercy and truth to us: God will cause
us to hear his loving kindness in the morning; our way will be full of
refreshing: Gods ways are ways of pleasure, and if any man set himself
exactly to take notice of Gods will in these things, and will be at the pains
to store his heart distinctly in such solid Trueths: It is certain, the Lord
will recompense his way upon him, God will not cast away the exact man, till
he fill his mouth with laughter, as it is said, Job. 8. 19. 20. Sure it is,
that in the study of these things lies the way of eternity, and though thou
think the way to be hard and narrow, yet this may somewhat ease thee; it is a
plain way. For the simple may profit by it, as is avouched to be true of all the
courses, which God by his Word so expressly required, Psalm 119. Isaiah 35. 8.
and 42. 16. Pro. 8. and besides thou have many helps; the Word of God will not
only show thee what to do, but it will beget in thee a secret power to do it,
God will teach thee to profit, and the Spirit of God will help thy
infirmities; and God will send his Angels to guide thee in thy way: Christ will
be the Way and the Life to thee, and thou have good company: for this is the
old way, the way of all Gods servants in the substance of the course.

Only before thou set upon General directions by way of preparation.
any of these directions, let me give this general advice to look to these few
things.

1. First, thou must give over, and forsake ungodly company; for else it is in
vain to meddle with any religious course, as these places will show thee,
Psalm. 1. 1. 2. Prou. 4. 14. 15. and 9. 6. and 23. 19. 20. and 29. 27 Psalm. 26.
2. Cor. 6.

2. Thou must get thee into the way of good men, provide for thy self, if it
be possible, the fellowship and society of godly persons, Prou. 2. 20. Isaiah.
19. 23. 24. 25. For their fellowship will take away the tediousness of the
way, and much preserve thee against giving over, and their examples will be as
patterns for thee, and by acquaintance with them, thou will be brought into
acquaintance with God himself, Isaiah 19. 23. 24. 2. Cor. 6. 16. 17. 18. Prou.
20. 20.

3. Thou must remember to pray unto God by all means to direct thee, and show
thee thy way in all these things, thou must beg a way of God, and beseech him
to remove from thee all lying and deceitful ways, Ezech. 8. 21. Ps. 119. 29.
Ier. 10. 23.

4. Thou must, when thou come to Gods directions, lift up thy soul, and not
give way to thy own carnal reason, and the sluggishnes of thy own nature, or
the deceitfulnes of thy own heart: but let the Lord see thou art willing to do
any thing thou can, Ps. 143. 8. Bring a mind desirous to obey in all things.
By any Note.
means take heed, thou be not like those complained of, Isa. 58. 2. that have
a great mind to know Gods ways, and to read all sorts of directions, as if
they sought righteousness in a special manner of care, and yet do not follow
any of the courses they so much desire to know, and seem to commend and like.
If ever thou would have thy soul to dwell at ease, choose out for thy self
those ways which GOD does teach thee, Psalm. 25. 12. 13. Let the Lord know,
that if he will be pleased to teach thee a sure way, thou will walk in his
paths; and to that end, beforehand beseech him to unite thy heart to his fear,
Psalm. 86. 11. Thou should be of David's mind to say, O that my ways were
directed to keep Gods statutes, and then thou wo^uldest resolve to keep them,
Psalm. 119. 58.

CHAP. II.
Showing what rules he must observe, that would be delivered from his sin.

HItherto in General. The first thing then to be done by that Christian that
would settle himself in a sound course, to lay as it were, the foundation of
his salvation, is to practice those rules that may deliver him from the
horrible danger and distress he is in, in respect of all the power of all the
sins he has hitherto committed.

If he consider of the Motives.
dreadful curses which he is liable unto in respect of all his sins, he
ought not to think it much to undergo the hardest task can be enjoined, to
make himself capable of the grace of God, and pardon for so many offenses. And
therefore with so much the more willingness, and unchangeableness of religion
should he with much desire set upon these rules now to be given, seeing they
are but few in number, and such as he may perform by the grace of God, with
much ease and comfort, and the more may he encourage his own heart, because
when he has done, he may clearly see he has done distinctly that which God
required of him, and that, with which he is satisfied through Christ. But
before he set upon the practice of these rules, he must in judgment be
thoroughly resolved of three things. 3. Things he must be resolved of in his
judgment.


1. That Jesus Christ has made a full and sufficient satisfaction for the sins
of all men: As he became a sacrifice for him, he paid a price in his blood,
sufficient to redeem us, Ephesians. 1. 6. He is the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1. 1. Pet. 18. 19. Ephesians. 1. 10.

2. That God is well pleased with this satisfaction made by Christ for our
sins, which he declared by that voice from heaven, Mat. 3. and 17, etc. Yea,
he has set Christ forth in the view of all men, as the propitiation for
their sins, Romans 3. 25. and has sent us the Word of reconciliation, and
beseeches us by the Word to be reconciled, 2. Cor. 5. 19.

3. That thou may attain unto this redemption by Christ, if thou will
practice those things which are required of thee: and this thou may be
assured of, both because Christ is said to take away the sins of the world,
and because God offers this reconciliation in the Gospel, to every creature,
and exempts none; and because the Apostle says, If any man sin, he may have
an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous; and besides, thou
feel the Spirit of God knocking at the door of thy heart, and would come
in, John 1. Mark 16. 1. John 2.

When thou have thus prepared thy self by these If we do 4. things, we are rid
of the danger of all sins past.
three resolutions, then if thou do these 4. things following, thou may be
sure to be clearly rid of al danger that can any way befall thee for thy sins
past, though they were never so many, or great.

1. The first rule concerns 1 Make a Catalogue of thy sins
the examination of thy self, and it is this: Thou* must make thee a Catalogue
of all the sins thou can discern by thy self, and be sure thou do this
seriously, and effectually; and for this purpose retire thy self into some
secret place, and set thy self in Gods presence; and then call to mind all
the sins thou can remember by thy self particularly, write them down as
they come to thy mind; ask thy self this question: What have I done all the
days of my life, which if I were now to dye, would fear me, if they were not
forgiven? Take the answer to this question, as thy sins come to thy mind,
till thou can remember no more, so as thou could in the sincerity of thy
heart say, that thou dealest plainly before the Lord, and do not hide any
fault, and out of the liking thou have to any sin, do not forbear to set
it down.

Trouble not thy head with the thought of any other thing, till this be done:
and thou need not care for order or phrase in setting it down, but do it
in such words as thou have to utter it in, and be sure to spare none of thy
special known sins, but let the Lord see, that thou art as willing to
indite thy self for them in his presence, as thou art willing he should
forgive them. When thou have in this manner taken a particular notice of thy
sins, then look upon the Catalogue following, and examine thy self
distinctly by it. For this Catalogue will be like a Lookingglasse from all
parts of Gods Law, to show thee thy offenses, and so thou may observe, what
faults thou could not find, or remember by thy private examination, and
withal see in what phrase or order to digest thy sins. Let not thy thoughts
trouble thee, but cheerfully endure this trial of thy self, and take heed
thou do it not cursorily, but take time enough, and so thou may, if thou will
only take one of the Chapters, or two of them, as they lie in the Catalogue,
and no more in a day, till thou come to the end of the Catalogue, neither
need thou to trouble thy self about such sins, as thou do not clearly
see that thou art guilty of, but take only such, as thou art most sure thou
have offended in: It is enough in the practice of Repentance, to take
particular notice of known and apparent evils. A general acknowledgement will
serve for the rest: If thou think thy sins be How our sins are innumerable.
innumerable, and so cannot be gathered into a Catalogue, understand, that the
acts of sin are innumerable, but not the kinds of sin. There is no sin,
but it is condemned in the Scripture: and if there were as many sins, as
there be lines in the Scripture, yet they might be numbered; and therefore that
speech of David, that his sins were innumerable, must be understood of the
acts of sin; for he might in one sin be guilty of innumerable acts: as if it
were a sin in thought, it might be committed oftener, then can be by us
numbered; But in repentance, it is enough to humble our selves for the several
kinds of sins we have been guilty of, which will not be so many, but they
may easily be numbered. The several acts of the same sin serve but as a
general aggrauation of the offense: Only in this Look to 2. things.
examination look to two things. The one, that thou beseech God by prayer, to
show thee the sins are most displeasing unto him. The other is, that thou take
heed thou leave not out any special known sins, because else, those sins
so spared, may buffet thee a long time after thou have finished this course;
and besides, they may get head and prevail against thee in practice, if by
this course they be not brought under.

Now that thou ought The proof
thus seriously to examine and call to mind thy sins, and that this is one of
the things God requires of thee to be distinctly done, these places of
Scripture do evidently prove, and withal show, that GOD does take even this
beginning of thy Repentance well, Lamen. 3. 40. Psalm. 4. 4. Ezech. 16. 43. 61.
and 20. 43. and 36. 31. Ierem. 8. 6. 1. Cor. 11. Galat. 6. ^. Job 11. 13. While
thou art doing this thou shall do well to do no other exercise of Religion at
that time, but only attend to this.

The second thing that 2 Secondly, thou must confess thy sins particularly
in the best words thou can
God requires of thee distinctly to be done, is the expression of those sins
thus gathered into the Catalogue, and for the performance of this duty, set
some time apart, and present thy self before the Lord: and if thy memory will
not carry all the particulars Note.
of thy offenses, take with thee the written enditement, and as Hezekiah did
with his letter, spread thy Catalogue before the Lord, and then take unto thee
words in the best manner thou can, to judge thy self for those offenses. Let
the Lord know, that it is thy hearts desire to plead guilty to each of those
sins, and in special, urge against thy self those sins, wherein thou have
more especially offended. Be not over careful for words; the Lord requires
thee but to do it in the best words thou can; only let thy words be the
true voice of thy heart, and thou may be sure the Lord understands the
meaning of thy heart. Let no objection drive thee off from the practice
hereof, but do it so, as thy own Conscience may witness with thee, that
thou have done it in the best manner thou can. Now that this is a duty
necessarily required, these Scriptures plainly The proofs.
show, Hosh. 14. 3. 4. Prou. 28. 13. Leuit. 16. 21. and 26. 40. 41. Job 33. 27.
28. Psalm. 32. 5. Ier. 3. 12. 13. Math. 3. 6. Acts 19. 18. Dan. 9. Nehem. 9. 2.
Romans 10. 10. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. 9. This is the second duty.

The third thing thou 3 Thirdly, thou must seek godly sorrow, and not give
over, till thou feel thy heart melt within thee.
must labor for distinctly, is, to conceive true mourning and sorrow for these
sins thus confessed. This is that sacrifice is so wellpleasing to God, and
this is every where in Scripture expressly required, and the promises fastened
(diverse of them) upon this condition, as these places manifestly show, Math. 5.
5. Iam. 4. 9. Joel 2. 12. 13. Zach. 12. 12. Isaiah 1. 16. Psalm. 31. 17.
Isaiah 61. 1. 2. 3. Ierem. 50. 4. Ierem. 31. 18, 19. Now that thou may attain
unto How it may be attained.
softness of heart, I advise thee to take this course: Resolve with thy self
to set some time apart, at least once every day for this business; and when
thou do stand before the Lord with thy former mournful indictment, and
while thou striuest to judge thy self, and to keep an assise upon thy own
soul, beg of God to give thee that soft heart he promised, Ezech. 36. 26. beg
it (I say) of God, but let thy prayers be without limitation for the time. If
the Lord hear thee not the first time, yet pray for it the next time again,
and so the third day, and so still, till the Lord do hear thee, and make thee
feel thy heart to melt, and (if it may be) tears to trickle down thy cheeks
before the Lord; yea, put on this resolution, that thou will never stand before
the Lord for any request while this course lasts, but thou will remember this
petition, to beseech him to give thee secret sorrow and sensible for thy sins.
It may be, the Lord will hear thee at the first, or in the beginning, while
thou art preparing thy self to speak unto him, or while thou call upon him
at the first or second time, but yet if he do not, persist thou: thy suit is
just; and importunity will ouercom the Lord: and this very desire to sorrow
being resolute, is a degree of true godly sorrow. But yet, that thou may be
sure of it, give not over, till the Lord hear the letter of thy desire, if it
may be, and withal strive against the perplexities of an unquiet heart; fear
not, but at time of the day which thou setst apart for religious duties, be as
earnest as thou can, and when that is done, go cheerfully about the works of
thy calling. Hang not down thy head like a bulrush, as if thou must do
nothing else but sigh and bemoane thy self, and show a troubled mind in all
things: Even the freer and readier thy mind is, the more fit thy heart will
be for this or other holy employments.

And further know, that the use of this Catalogue is not for ever, nor do I
require this special mourning all the days of thy life, but in this case of
first repentance, by which the body of sin may be removed. Therefore thou
ought so long to use the Catalogue of thy confessions of sins, till thou
feel in some measure this sorrow and melting of heart, which when thou have
attained, either sooner or later, then address thy self to the fourth rule.

The fourth rule concerns 4. Fourthly, thou must then lay hold upon the
Promises distinctly.
the application of the Promises, especially the promises of two sorts. First,
such as show that God has given Jesus Christ to make satisfaction for the
sins of men: and then in special, such 2. Sorts of promises.
promises as show, that through the merits of Christ, he that has thus
confessed and felt sorrow for his sin, shall be received to favor. Now for
How this may be done.
this purpose, thou must get thee a distinct Catalogue of promises made to such
as confess their sins with sorrow and mourning, and in them thou shall see
most plainly unto how much riches and treasure this entrance unto godliness
has brought thee. For the condition of the Promises being already formed in
thee by this grace of God, thou may safely assure thy soul of so much favor
from God in particular, as is expressly contained in those Promises. Mark it
thou; as yet dare not claim all the prerogatives or good things contained in
any Promises in Scripture, yet Note.
thou may safely lay up as treasure, so much as the Promises that concern
confession and godly sorrow do assure and estate upon thee; and so thou shall
find that thou have right in Christ already for great and rich favors, and
may show Gods express Word to warrant thy claim, as for example, A taste of
the particular happiness of such as have gone thus far.
God has assured thee;

1. That thou shall not be damned, thou may rest upon it, these be plain
Scriptures, 1. Cor. 11. 31. 32. Job 33. 27. 28.

2. That GOD will have mercy upon thee, and love thee freely, and take away
his anger from thee, Prou. 28. 13. Joel 2. 12. 13. Hos. 14. 3. 4. Ierem. 31.
18. 19. 20.

3. That all thy sins are forgiven thee, 1. John 1. 7. 9. Zach. 12. 10. and
so forward to the 2. verse of the 13. chapter.

4. That GOD is at peace, and reconciled, and that thou have a free right unto
his Word, and shall find his presence in his Word, Isaiah 57. 15 16. 17. 18.

5. That GOD will now henceforth heal thy nature of thy sinfulnes, Hosh. 14.
3. 4.

I do but instance in these few particulars; but I could wish thee to make thee
a full Catalogue, and write out the words verbatim, and learn them without
book, or at least study the^ soundly to understand them, and for thy case I
have set down the chief places of Scripture as they lie in order.

Leuit. 26. 41. 42. 44. 2. Kings 22. 19. 20. Job 33. 27. 28. Psalm. 32. 5. and
51. 17. Prou. 28. 13. Isaiah. 57. 15. 16. 17. 18. and 61. 1. 2. 3. Ierem. 31.
18. 19. 20. Zach. 12. 10. and so forward to the second verse of Chap. 13. Hosh.
14. 3. 4. 5. 6. Math. 5. 6. 1. Cor. 11. 31. 32. Iam. 4. 9.
Now when thou have written out these Promises and do understand the How
these promises are to be used.
meaning of them, then carry them into Gods presence, as thou did the
Catalogue of sins, and now beseech God for Jesus Christ's sake, to incline thy
heart to believe these promises of Grace; and to this end pray unto God from
time to time, till the Lord be pleased to let thee feel life in the Promises,
or a clear persuasion; and withal beseech God by the Spirit of Promise from
Heaven, to seal up thy interest herein; and if thou feel the joys of the
holy Ghost fall upon thee in any of these Promises, O happy man that ever thou
wast born to such a rich estate; I say the same of this sensible life in the
promises, that I did before of godly sorrow. It may be, the Lord will hear
thee at the first; if not, persist thou to beg this grace till thou obtainest
it. Thou see, forgiveness of all thy sins which thou have confessed, is
promised thee, urge the Lord with most humble deprecation to hear thee for the
pardon and forgiveness of them, for the mediation sake of Jesus Christ and his
merits, that sits at his right hand, to make request for poor sinners that seek
mercy. Now when thou have felt the Promises to be any of them spirit and life
to thee, then have thou done this most glorious exercise, and thou have cause
to praise GOD all the days of thy life, and what thou should afterward do,
the Treatises following will show thee; but for thy more clear satisfaction, I
will answer a question.

Qu. Thou will say, I could take comfort in this course, having done these
things, but that I doubt whether my confession or sorrow be right, or no. For I
find, that wicked men in Scripture have confessed their sins, and mourned
too.

An. Thou may evidently try thy confession and sorrow, by these signs of
difference.

1. Wicked men have confessed their sins, and sorrowed, but both were
compelled, whereas thine is voluntarily, and so a free will offering.

2. Caine and Judas confessed sin, but it was not all sorts of sins, but
only the capital crimes known by them, by which they had shamed and undone
themselves.

3. The sorrows of wicked men were more for the punishment, then for the
sin; No wicked man can be sorry for sin, as it is sin; nor did they
sorrow for all sorts of sins, but for the sins before described.

4. Their confession and sorrows were not joined with an unfeigned desire to
forsake sin; whereas this is an infallible sign of true repentance, when a man
can as heartily desire that he might never commit sin, as heartily (I say)
desire it, as he would that God should never impute it. When a man can say
before the Lord, that there is no sin, but he does as unfeignedly desire God
to give him strength to leave it and forsake it, as he does desire that God
should forgive him, and not plague him for it: I say this is such a sign, as
was never found in a wicked man in any age of the world.

5. The confession and sorrows of the wicked were not joined with any
persuasion of Gods goodness, or any constant desire to find mercy with GOD in
Jesus Christ.

Thus have I showed thee the directions, which concern this first and most
weighty business that can concern thee.

There are three sorts of This direction concerns 3. sorts of men.
men whom this direction concerns. 1. Such as never repented. 2. Such as
though they have repented, yet have not the comfort and assurance of their
repentance, who by following these directions, may make all out of doubt. 3.
Such as after calling fall into gross sins: These have need to recover
themselves by the help of these directions. The Catalogue following may serve
for other uses, besides Other uses of the Catalogue.
this of a man's practice in his repentance at his first conversion, or after
Apostacy: For

1. As in a small Map, a man may here see the sorts of sin, and so may get
knowledge quickly, what evils to avoid, which hitherto he has not taken
notice of.

2. It may serve before the Communion, for such as would make a general survey
of their sins, in discharge of that examination which the Apostle mentions
1. Cor. 11. For howsoever this large Catalogue be not of necessity requisite to
that examination, yet unto such as have leisure and fitness, it is profitable
for their more abundant satisfaction. The misery of such as will not be
advised to take a sound course about their sins.


To conclude, if any man that reads these presents, and is guilty to himself,
that he has hitherto taken no sound course about his sins, and yet will not
be persuaded to practice these directions: Let him consider, that so long as
his sins be unrepented on his part, and vnremitted on Gods part, the
pollution of all the sins he ever committed, still cleaues unto him; so as
he may justly with the Leper cry, Unclean, unclean: yea all his sins are
written, as it were with a pen of iron in Gods Book of remembrance, and that
he is a mere stranger from all Gods promises; and lives without God, and
without Christ in the world, and that all he does, even his best works are
abominable to God, and that seas of wrath hang over his head, and unspeakable
woe will be to him in the appearing of Jesus Christ, if he prevent it not by
sound and speedy repentance.

CHAP. III.
The division of Sins, and the Catalogue of Sin against the whole Law.

ALl the sins mentioned and condemned in the Bible, may be cast into 4.
ranks. For they are,

1. Either sins against the whole Law, that is, such, as may be committed
against any of the Commandments.

2. Or sins against the first table of the Law.

3. Or sins against the second table of the Law.

4. Or sins against the Gospel.

1. The first sort of sins are sins against the whole Law, and thus he
sins, That is conceived in sin, Original sin.
Psalm. 51. 5.

That allows not the good he does, Romans 7. 15.

That does the evil he hates, verse. 15.

That has not goodness dwelling in him, ver. 18.

That does not the good he would, ver. 19.

That has evil present, when he would do good* verse. 21.

That has a Law in his members, rebelling against the law of his mind, ver.
23.

That has not knowledge Ignorance.
to do good, Ier. 4. 22. Hos. 4* 6. Isaiah 1. 3.

This is aggrauated.

1. If thou refuse knowledge, and wilt not understand, Job 21. 14. Ps. 36. 4.

2. If thou walk not in the light, whilst thou have the light, John 12.

3. If thou hate him that instructs thee, Amos 3. 10.

4. If thou detain the truth for the love thou bear to wickedness, Romans 1.
18.

5. That will not understand, Procrastination.
though the foundations of the earth be moved, Psalm. 82. 5.

That has present occasion to do good, and yet puts it off, though but till
the morrow, Prou. 3. 28.

That seeks his own Vainglory
glory, Prou. 25. 27.

That boasts of a false gift, Prou. 25. 14.

That praises himself, Proverbs. 27. 2.

That is pure in his own eyes, being not washed from his filthiness, Prou.
30. 12.

That causes others to go astray, especially the righteous, Prou. 28. 10.

That calls evil good, or good evil, or puts light for darkness, or
darkness for light, or that puts bitter for sweet, or sweet for bitter, Isaiah
^^ 20.

That changes the ordinances, or adds to Gods Word, or diminishes ought
from it, Isai. 24. 5. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Prou. 30. 6.

That protects or defends others in sin, Ier. 44. 15.

That sits still, and is at Security.
rest in sin, Zach. 1. 11. and considers not that God remembers his
wickedness, Hosea. 7. 2. and is without fear of Gods judgments, Proverbs 28.
14. 1. Thessal. 5. 6. 7.

That receives not correction, Incorrigiblenesse.
but proudly hardneth his heart, and is wilful in evil, Ierem. 5. 23. Ezech.
7. 10. Hebr. 3. 15. 16.

That fears reproach for Carnal fears.
well-dooing, Isaiah 51. 7. or fears the displeasure of God, for breaking man's
traditions, Matthew 15. 2. 9. or in things indifferent, makes conscience of
sin, where there is no sin, Romans 14.

That does his work to Hypocrisy.
be seen of men: Math. 6. and 23.

That has the form of godliness, but donyeth the power of it, 2. Timoth. 3.
5.

That is a lover of himself, Self-loue.
2. Tim. 3. 3.

That is neither hot nor Lukewarmenesse. Vncheerfulnesse.
cold, Reu. 3. 15.

That does not good with a joyful heart, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

That esteems the way of the multitude, Exodus 22. 2.

That is not circumspect, Inconsideration.
but foolish and rash, and rusheth upon things without knowledge or counsel,
or consideration of opportunities, circumstances, means, or end, Ephesians. 5. 15.
Prou. 15. 22. Ierem. 8. 6.

That is childish or unconstant, Inconstancy.
Ephesians. 4. 14.

That is carried about with every wind of doctrine.

That has a divided heart, Hos. 10. 2.

That is mutable in his affection to godliness, Galat. 4.

That falls away from the truth, or goes back, Ier. 15. 6. Hosh. 6. 4. Isa.
1. 4.

Hitherto of the sins against the whole Law.

CHAP. IIII.
The division of the sins against the first table: and the sorts of sins
against Gods nature.

THe sins against God forbidden in the first table of the Law, are of 4.
sorts.

1. Some against his nature.

2. Some against the means of his worship.

3. Some against the manner of his worship.

4. Some against the time of his worship.

For the first, the sins against the nature of God, are of two sorts.

1. Some more unusual and personal.

2. Some more usual and natural.

The more unusual sins are such, as are not found amongst Christians, except
it be in such persons only, as are most monstrously visible, such as are,

1. Blasphemy; to reproach God.

2. Idolatry; to worship the creature.

3. Witchcraft, or the service of the Devil.

4. Atheism, to defend there is no God, or to desire constantly there were no
God.

5. That matchless Pride, for a man to say, he is God, or to exalt himself
above all, that is called God.

6. Heresy, to hold, after conviction, errors against the foundation of
Religion.

7. The inward hatred and loathing of GOD: It shall suffice to have thus
touched these sins.

The more usual sins, and such as are found in the most men by nature, are
such as these.

That natural Atheism Natural Atheism.
of which he is guilty.

1. That customarily spends his time without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12.

2. That conceiues Atheistical thoughts, and of such thoughts he is guilty.

That has inward reasonings, whether there be a God, to which his heart
inclines, Psalm. 14. 1.

That says, or thinks, God will neither do good, nor evil, or that he
neither sees, or regards, Isai. 29. 15. 16. Zeph. 1. 12. Ezech. 9. 9. Job
22. 13.

That says or thinks, there is no profit in serving the Almighty, Job 21.
14. and 22. 17.

That in affliction says or thinks, it is impossible to be delivered, 2.
King. 7. 2.

That has inward boylings about such things as God shows not the reason of,
Job 33. 13.

That conceiues rebellious thoughts about the decrees or providence of God,
Romans 9.

Thus of natural Atheism.

2. The second sin is Epicurisme, which is showed, Epicurism


By fullness of bread and idleness, Ezech. 16. 49. Phil. 3. 18.

By living in pleasure* Ecclus. 11. 9. James 5, 5.

By vanity and strangeness of apparel, Isaiah 3. Zeph. 1.

3. The third sin, is the Defects.
defect of those graces, by which we should cleave unto God, and that also
when we want that life of them should be in us; such are the defects of the
warmth of the knowledge, love, and fear of God, and of our ioying and trusting
in God, Psalm. 36. 1. Zep. 3. 2 Prou. 30. 1. 2. Romans 7. These defects are the
worse, by reason of our impotency, and extreme indisposition to seek to mend
those things. And therefore it is an aggrauation of any of these defects, that
men do not stir up themselves to take hold of GOD, Isaiah 64. 7:

4. The misplacing of Misplacing of our affections.
our affections in setting them upon earthly things, employing our confidence,
fear, joy, or love upon the world, and the things thereof, whereby our hearts
are any way alienated from God, Jeremy 17, 5. Isai. 51. 7. 1. Ioh. 2. 15. Math.
6.

5. Pride: And there is a fourfold pride, 4. Sorts of pride.


1. Arrogancy, showed

By high looks, or indignation of spirit, Isai. 10. 12. and 16. 6.

By fearelesnesse of a fall in prosperity, and that boasting hopefulnesse in a
broken estate, Psalm. 30. 6. Isaiah 9. 10. Obad. 3.

2. The pride of life, which has in it the secret lifting up of the heart, and
glorying in friends, money, means, houses, riches, beauty, or the like, 1. John
2. 17. 2. Kings 20. 3. with 2. Chron. 32. 25.

3. The pride of gifts, expressed,

By great thoughts of our selves, being wise in our selves, Romans 12. 16.

By fretting with envy at the gifts and respects of others, Numb. 12. 2, 8, 9.

By being ouer-confident of our own innocence, Job 34. 5, 6.

By desire to pry into the secret things of God, being not content with things
revealed, Deuteronomy. 29. vlt. Romans 12. 3.

4. Pride in sinning, and so he is guilty,

That dares commit great evils against his knowledge.

That seems wise in maintaining sin, Prou. 3. 7. Psa. 52. 7.

That hardens his heart against repentance, 1. Sam. 15. 22, 23. Numb. 15. 30,
31. Ierem. 16. 12* Job 34. 37.

That sins with affectation, that glories in it, as he that takes a pride in
drunkenness, Isaiah 28. 1. 3.

That frets, because he is crossed in sin, Prou. 19, 3. How many ways men
sin against Gods mercy.
and thus of Pride.

6. The sixth sin is the neglect of Gods mercy: and this is the more grievous
offense, because mercy is the most eminent attribute of God. For the sins of
this kind, worlds of men are damned in hell, Ioh. 3. 19

And against Gods mercy he offends,

That asks wherein God has loved him, Mal. 1. 2.

That abuses Gods blessings, Hos. 10. 1. and 11. 3, 4.

That observes not the mercy of God in his providence, Hos. 2. 8.

That in adversity says, God cares not for him, or has passed over his
judgments, or has forsaken him, Isaiah 40. 28. and 49, 14.

That inquireth not after God, Zeph. 1. 6.

That belieues not Gods promises, through neglect or despair.

That blesses his heart against Gods threatenings, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

That forsakes his own mercy, by trusting to lying vanities, Jonah 2. 8.

That scoffs at the signs of Gods mercy, Isaiah 7. 12, 13.

That sacrifices to his own net, ascribing the praise to himself, Hab. 1.
16.

That seeks not to God in his distress, 2. Chr. 16. 12.

That says, God cannot deliver, 2. Kin. 6. 33. and 7. 2.

That answers not when God calls, Isaiah 50. 2.

That limits God, Psalm. 78.

That has a spirit of bitterness through discontent, Hos. 12. 14.

That dishonors God by his evil life, Romans 2. 24.

Thus of the sins against Gods mercy.

7. The seventh sin is resorting to witches, Isaiah 8. 19, 20. Leuit. 20. 6.
Deuteronomy. 18. 4.

8. Eighthly, he offends, that disregards GODS works, Isaiah 5. 12.

9. That lies against God, having professed to have God to be his God, Isai.
19. 13. and so he does,

That opposes the truth, and objects against it.

That performs not what he promised in his sickness, or adversity, or at the
Saraments.

That falls away from the Truth.

10. That fears not Offenses against the fear of God.
God, or not in a right manner, and so he sins,

That fears God only for reward, Job 1. 9*

That fears God only, because of punishment, Hosh. 3. 5.

That is not afraid of Gods presence, or threatenings, Psalm. 36. 1, 2. Isai.
66. 1. Ierem. 6. 10.

That comforts not men in misery, Job 6. 14.

That meddles with changers, or the seditious, Prou. 24. 21.

That in matter of sin is wise in his own eyes, and will not depart from
iniquity, Prou. 3. 7.

That sins, because God does forbear to punish, Eccles. 8. 13. Psalm. 50. 19.

That fears the signs of heaven, Ierem. 10. 2.

That finds any hardness of heart against Gods fear, Isaiah 63. 17.

Thus of the sins against the fear of God.

11. That trusts not in Offenses against the trust in God.
God, and so he offends,

That asks not counsel of God, Isaiah 31. 1. and 30. 1, 2. but uses carnal
helps.

That says, There is no hope, Ierem. 2. 23.

That trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, Ier. 17. 5.

That puts his confidence in his wealth, Prou. 10. 15. Job 31. 24.

That leanes to his own understanding, Prou. 3. 5.

That draws not near unto God in adversity* Zeph. 3. 2.

That impatiently desires death, Job 7. 15.

Thus of the sins against trust in God.

12. That neglects communion with the godly: he has not God for his God, that
is not joined to Gods people: and this is aggrauated against him,

That in contempt of godliness, goes in the company of the wicked, Job 34. 8,
9.

That reproacheth Gods people, Psalm. 74. 1018. Isai. 57. 3, 4.

That accounts the godly as signs and wonders, Isai 8. 18.

That rejoices in their disgraces, Ezech. 25. 6.

That forsakes their fellowship, either through carelessness and Apostasy,
Hebr. 10. 25. or through schism, Isai. 65. 2, 5.

That for malice persecutes them, or casts them out of the Church, Isaiah 66. 5.

And thus of the sins against the nature of God.

CHAP. V.
Showing how men offend against the means of Gods Worship.

THe sins against the means of Gods worship follow, and these are of three
sorts.

1. Not worshipping.

2. Will-worshipping.

3. Idoll-worshipping.

For the first, he offends in general,

That worships not God, Zach. 14. 17.

That calls not upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 14. 4. Isai. 64. 7.

That comes not to the Church, 2. Chron. 29. 6, 7.

That prays not in his family, Ier. 10. 25.

That receives not the Preachers of the Gospel, Math. 10. 14.

The aggrauations are, when a man is so far from worshipping aright,

That he offers the blind and the lame for the maintenance of Gods service,
Mal. 1* 8, 14.

That he deuoures things sanctified, that should be employed for the
furtherance of Gods service, Pro. 20. 25.

That forbids Gods faithful Ministers to preach in the name of Christ, Acts 4.
1. These. 2. 16.

That disswades men from Gods worship, upon pretense, that it is either
polluted, Malac. 1. 7, 12, 13. or vain, Mal. 3. 15.

That is wayward, or never pleased with all, or any part of Gods worship, or
the means thereof, Math. 11. 1.

Thus of sins of irreligiousnesse, or not* worshipping,

VVill-worship follows, and so he offends,

1. That deuiseth any thing of himself, to the intent to serve God by it, Number.
15. 38, 39.

2. That serves God for custom, or after the old manner, making the example
of Fathers, or forefathers the rule of his service, 2. Kin. 17. 34. Ierem. 9.
13, 14. Amos 2. 4. 1. Pet. 1. 18.

3. That fears God after the precepts of men, Esaias 29. 13.

4. That being not a minister, does the work of a Minister, upon pretense of
necessity or devotion, 2. Chron. 26. 16.

5. That urges the lesser things of the Law, and neglects the greater, Math.
23. 23.

The aggrauations are,

To urge men's traditions with opinion of necessity, and with neglect of Gods
Law, Math. 15. 2, 3, 9.

To desire to be taught vain things, Isaiah 30. 9, 10, 11.

To borrow rites and observations from the professed enemies of God, to add
them as parts of Gods worship, 2. Kings 17. 34. Deuteronomy. 12. 4. 13. Ezech. 11. 12.

Idoll-worship follows, and so men offend either 1. inwardly, or 2. outwardly.

Inwardly he offends, that conceiues of God in the likeness of any thing
created, and manifests his offense, if he direct his worship to that likeness,
commanded, 2. Acts 17. 19. 1. John 2. 23.

Outwardly he offends,

That makes an image to resemble God by it, Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 15. Esaias 40. 18.

That uses any gesture of love and reverence unto such images, by whomsoever
made, Hos. 13. 2.

That mentio^s the names of Idols, either by way of swearing, or Apology,
Exodus 23. 13.

That is present at the idolatrous feasts, and therefore he much more offends
that is present at the service of the Idol; 1. Cor. 10 21, 22. Exodus 34. 15.
Psalm 116. 8.

That worshippeth the Image, or GOD in the Image, Commandment 2. Exodus 32.
Hosh. 2. 16.

Thus of the sins against the means of Gods worship.

CHAP. VI.
Showing how many ways men sin against the holy manner of Gods worship.

THe sins against the manner of Gods worship follow.

And because it were tedious to reckon up the several sins against each part
of Gods worship, because in diverse things the same offenses may be committed
against any one of the parts of Gods service: Therefore I will briefly touch
the general ways of offending in the manner of any worship of God, and then
more specially reckon the sins against those parts of Gods worship, that are
most usual, and ordinary:

It is an offense in any Sins in any part of Gods worship.
service due to God, to serve him

Hypocritically; in show and not in deed, Isa. 29. 13.

Without Repentance: to bring the love of any sin to any part of his service,
Esaias 1.

Without delight and willingness, Josh. 24. 15.

Without constancy to serve him, but by fits, Hos. 6

Without consideration, or reverence, Eccl. 5.

Thus in general.

In particular,

1. He offends in hearing Sins in hearing.
the Word.

That is unteachable, Esaias 28. 9, 10, 11.

That has Idols in his heart through Lust, or Malice, or Covetousness, Ezech.
14. 7. Iam. 1. 18.

That hears without attention, and comes for customs sake, Eccl. 5. 1. ^^c.
33. 31, 32.

That is not a doer of the Word, Math. 7. 26.

2. He offends in Prayer, Sins in prayer.


That prays not at all times, or with perseverance in prayer, Job 27. 10. Luke
18. 1.

That prays without understanding, or power of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 14. 15.

That delights not in the Almighty, Job 32. 26.

That regards wickedness in his heart, Psalm. 66. 18. Prou. 21. 27. Isaiah 1.
15, 16.

That doubts and wauers, or is discontented upon false surmises, that God
hears him not, Iam. 1. 5, 6 Mal. 2. 13.

3. He offends in the Sins about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Sacrament of the Lords Supper,

That discernes not the Lords Body, 1. Cor. 11.

That examines not himself before he eats of that bread, and drinks of that
cup, refusing to judge himself for known offenses, 1. Cor. 11.

That believes not the operation of God, Col. 3. 12.

That reconciles not himself to such as he has offended by trespassing
against them, Mat. 5.

That despises the Church and people of God, 1. Cor. 11.

4. He offends in swearing,

That swears by that About swearing.
which is no God, Ierem. 5.

That swears in common talk, and fears not an oath, Ierem. 23. 10. Mat. 5.
34. Eccl. 9. 2.

That swears falsely, Zach. 5. 2.

That loves false oaths, Zach. 8. 17.

CHAP. VII.
Which shows how men offend in breaking the Sabbath.

HItherto of the sins against the means and manner of Gods worship; the time
of Gods worship follows, which is principally the Sabbath.

Now sins against the Sabbath are either more secretly, or more openly.

More secretly he offends,

That remembers not More secret offenses against the Sabbath.
the Sabbath day before it come, to unload his heart of worldly cares and
business.

That longs to have the Sabbath ouer-past, Amos 8. 5.

That spends the day in idleness.

That flourishes not according to the blessings of GOD, in respect of the
means on the Sabbath day, Psalm. 92. The title, with verse. 13. 14.

That honors not the Sabbath with delight to do Gods work on that day, Esaias
58. 13.

That is unwilling to be informed concerning the authority and service of the
Sabbath. This is to hide his eyes from the Sabbath as the phrase is, Ezech. 22.
26.

More openly he offends, The open breaches.


That omits public or private duties, or comes in too late, or goes out too
soon, Ezech. 46. 10. Ps. 92. the title with verse. 2. Leuit. 13. 3.

That does any manner of work on that day, Exodus 20. 10, 11. and 31. 15.

And thus he offends,

That sels wares, Nehem. 10. 31. and 13. 15, 20.

That carries burdens, Nehem. 13. 15, 19. Ierem. 17. 20.

That travels abroad, Ex. 16. 24.

Yea, he offends,

That works in harvest on that day, Exodus 34. 22. Nehem. 13. 15.

That works, upon pretense Note.
it is a light work, Exodus 16. 27, 28. and 35. 2, 3. Numb. 15. 32. Math. 12.
1. etc.

That imployes his Cattle or Servants, though he work not himself, Exodus 23.
12.

That finds his pleasures, that is, that uses recreations, Isaiah 58. 13.

That speaks his own words, Isaiah 58. 13.

That having power, reformes not the abuses of others against the Sabbath,
Nehem. 13. Ierem. 17.

The aggrauation is, to do any of these things presumptuously.

CHAP. VIII.
The division of the sins against the second Table; and how men offend in the
Family, Church or Commonwealth.

HItherto of sins against God.

The sins against man are to be considered, 1. either more specially, 2. or
more generally:

More specially we offend against others in respect of that relation, wherein
we stand as superiors, or inferiors to them, and so men offend,

1. In the Family.

2. In the Commonwealth. The sins.


3. In the Church.

In the Family,

1. The wife offends, Of wives.


That is not subject to her husband, or not in every thing, Ephesians 5. 22,
24. Hosh. 1. 12.

That is wastefull, Prou. 14. 1.

That is froward, Prou. 21. 9. 19.

That is idle, Prou. 31.

2. The husband offends, Of husbands.


That loves not his wife, Ephesians. 5. 25.

That dwells not with her as a man of knowledge, 1. Pet. 3. 7.

3. The child offends, Of children


That disobeyes his parents, Romans 1. 30. Tit. 1. 6. Ephesians. 6. 1.

That uses any vnreuerent behavior, or any way sets light by them,
Commandment 5. Eze. 22. 7.

That receives not rebuke or correction with submission and reverence, Prou.
13. 1. Hebr. 12. 9.

That releeues not his Parents in their wants, Math. 15. 5.

The aggrauations are,

To despise their instructions, Prou. 15. 5.

To discover their infirmities, Genesis 9. 22.

To despise their persons, either for deformity, or infirmity, Proverbs 23. 22.

To shame them, or grieve them, Prou. 28. 7. and 27. 11. and 10. 1.

To mock them, Prou. 30. 17.

To curse them, Pro. 20. 20. and 31. 11. Exodus 21. 17.

To smite them, Exodus 21. 15.

To waste their estates, or chase them away from him, Prou. 19. 26.

4. The parents offend, Of Parents.


In general, that bring not up their children in nurture, and instruction of
the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4.

In particular,

That restrain not sin in them, 1. Sam. 3. 13.

That correct them not, but leave them to themselves, Prou. 22. 15. and 23. 13.
and 29. 15.

That provoke them to wrath by immoderate correction, or rebuke, or intemperate
speeches, Ephesians. 6. 4.

That provide not for them in their callings, or outward estates, or marriage,
1. Tim. 5. 8.

5. Servants offend, Of servants.


That are idle and slothful.

That obey disorderly, as Without reverence and fear, Without singleness of
heart, not as unto Christ, With eye-seruice, as men-pleasers, Grudgingly, and
not from the heart, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8.
That are unfaithful, and show it, either by purloyning, Titus. 2. 10. Or by
carelessness, when they are such as cannot be trusted in any business, Prou.
13. 17.

The aggrauations are,

To answer again, Tit. 2. 9 out of contempt, or sullenness, not to answer,
Prou. 29. 19. Job 19. 16.

To run away, Philemon.

Through pride and folly, to seek to rule, Pro. 19. 20. and 30. 22.

6. Masters offend, Of Masters.


That entertain wicked servants, Psalm. 101.

That govern their family negligently, 1. Tim. 1. 4.

That withold what is just and equal, in diet, wages, encouragement, etc.
Colos. 4. 1. Iam. 5. 4.

That use indiscreete and immoderate threatening, Ephesians. 6. 9. Thus of the
offenses in the family.

In the Commonwealth.

1. Subjects offend, Of Subjects.


That speak evil of their rulers, Exodus 21. 28. Eccles. 10 vlt.

That are disobedient to them, Romans 13.

That pay not tribute or custom, Romans 13.

That rebel, or are seditious, 1. Tim. 3.

2. Magistrates offend, Of Magistrates.


That oppress the people by exactions, or otherwise, Prou. 28. 15. Ezech. 45.
9.

That make unjust laws, or execute not just laws, Esaias 10. 1. Ier. 5. 1.
Mich. 3. 9.

That are unrighteous in judgment, either by bribery, or lenity, or rigor, or
covetousness, or wresting the Law, Leuit. 19. 15.

In the Church,

1. The people offend, Of hearers.


That pay not their tithes, or contributions, Malac. 1. 1. Cor. 9. Gal. 6.

That subject not themselves, but disobey them that have the ouer-sight of
them, Heb. 13. 17.

2. The Ministers offend, Of Ministers.


That preach not, or not constantly: but more of their sins afterward
amongst the sins against the souls of men.

CHAP. IX.
Of the sins against man's person.

THus of the sins against man, considered more specially.

More generally man sins against man,

Either with consent of his will, Or without consent.
The sins with consent are,

Either against the person of man, Or the purity of man, Or the possessions and
state of man.
Or the name and praise of man.

The sins against the persons* of men are

Either against the whole persons, Or against their souls,
Or against their bodies.

The sins against the persons of men generally considered, are

Either by Omission,

Or by Commission.

1. By Omission he offends,

That pitties not the afflicted, Job 6. 14.

That releeues not the afflicted, 1. John 3. 17. Math. 25. Job 31. 19.

That is implacable, and will not forgive, Romans 1. 29. Iam. 2. 13.

The aggrauations are,

To profess to take no charge of his brother, Genesis 4. 9.

To stop his ears at the cry of the poor, Pro. 21. 23.

To estrange our selves from the very servants of God in their misery, Psalm.
38. 11.

2. By Commission men sin, 1. either outwardly, 2. or inwardly.

Inwardly he offends,

1. That enuies his neighbor, Gal. 1. 20. either

For his wealth* Genesis 26. 14.

For his respect with others, Genesis 37. 11.

For his gifts, Number. 11. 27, 28. 1. Cor. 3. 3.

The aggrauations are,

So to envy others, as to desire their restraint, Number. 11.

To envy the very wicked, especially so, as to desire to partake of their
delights, Prou. 24. 1.

2. That is angry unadvisedly, Math. 5.

The aggrauations.

To be hasty to anger, Ecclus. 7. 9. Prou. 14. 17, 29.

To continue long in anger, Amos 1. 11.

To rage and be confident without fear or care, Prou. 14. 16.

To be incensed against the servants of God, and strive with them, Esaias 41. 11

To make friendship with the angry man, Pro. 22. 24, 25.

3. That hates and is malicious, which sin is not avoided, though the person
thou hate

Be poor, Iam. 2. 6.

Be infirm, and have many weaknesses, Mat. 18. 10.

Yea, though they sin, Leuit. 19. 17, 18.

The aggrauations are,

To increase in anger and hatred upon every occasion, Genesis 37. 8. Eze. 25. 15.

To wish a curse to others Job 31. 30.

To rejoice at their destruction, Prou. 24. 17. Job 31. 29.

To recompense evil, Pro. 24. 29.

Not to be satisfied with the trouble of those, whom he pursues, Job 19. 22.

That hates righteous men, and shows it,

By wishing their evil, Psalm. 40. 14.

By rejoicing at their hurt, Psalm. 35. 26.

By gathering sinful surmises into his heart, when he comes amongst them, and
then telling them, when he comes abroad, Psalm. 41. 6.

By judging uncharitably of their afflictions, Ps. 41. 8.

Especially, that hates them for this reason, because their works are better
then his, 1. John 3. 12. and 2. 11.

4. That vexes himself with worldly sorrow, and causes distractions, Prou.
17. 22. 2. Cor. 7. 10. and uses crying, Ephesians. 4. 31.

The aggrauations are,

To refuse comfort, Ps. 17. 7.

To wish his own death, Number. 14. 2. Job 3. Jonah.

Thus of the sins internal. The external sins are,

Either in gesture, or in words, or in works.
1. In gesture men offend by shaking of the head, sharpning of the eyes,
casting down of the countenance, putting out of the finger, gnashing of the
teeth, Job 16. 4, 9. Esaias. 58. Psalm. 35. 19. and 37. 11. and 12. 5 Genesis 4.

2 In words he offends, that speaks evil of any man, Tit. 3. 2. Mat. 5.
whether it be

By censuring, Romans 14. 10. Iam. 4. 11. Galat. 5. 15.

Or by reuiling or reproching, Math. 5.

Or by any kind of piercing bitter words, Pr. 12. 8.

Yea it is an offense, to Render reuiling for reuiling, 1. Pet. 3. 9.

To whisper evil of others, though never so secretly, Psalm. 41. 7.

To wrest the words of others for evil, Psalm. 56. 1.

The aggrauations are,

1. To speak evil of dignity, Jude 8.

2. To reproach Gods servants, this is blasphemy, Colos. 3. 8. and it is worse
when men tear their names, Psalm. 35. 15. and it is increased* when men revile
Gods Ministers, 1. Cor. 4. 3. 2. Kings 2. 23.

3. To curse the deaf, or put a stumbling block before the blind, Leuit. 19.
14.

4. To deride men in misery, Job 3. 1.

5. To take a pleasure in brawling and contention, James 4. 1. Psalm 52. 4.

6. To have a mouth full of cursing and bitterness, Romans 3. 14. James 3. 9.
and an habit of frowardnes and perverseness of lips, Pro. 4. 24. and an
unruly tongue that cannot be tamed, Iam. 3. 8.

7. To boast of his mischief herein, Psalm. 52. 1.

8. To complain of his neighbor in all places, and to be given to it, Iam. 5.
9.

Thus he offends in words*

3. In works he offends.

1. In general, that practices any way the hurt of the persons of others,
either by fraud or violence. The aggrauations of hurtful practices are,

1. To add affliction to the afflicted, Psalm. 96. 26.

2. To deal unfaithfully with our friend, and to betray him, Psalm. 41. 9.

3. To practice against the righteous, or any way to trouble them, Psalm. 37.
12. 14. 2. Thessal. 1. 6. and this receives increase of aggrauation.

If thou practice against them because they follow goodness, Psalm. 38. 19.

If thou wrong them, when thou have received good from them: Psalm 38. 20. and
the worse, if thou do it daily, Psalm 56. 1.

If thou mark their steps, waiting for occasion to bring evil upon them, Psalm.
38. 12. and 56. 6.

If thou set on others to hurt them, out of delight, and with joy, Ezech. 36. 5.

If through dissimulation thou cause one privily to betray them, Galathians 2.
4.

If thou abuse them when they are dead* Psalm. 72. 9.

2 In particular.

That is contentious, Romans 13. 13.

The aggrauations are,

Through contention to be scandalous, Genesis 13. 7. 1. Cor. 6. 1, 4.

To sow discord, Prou. 6. 14.

To fall at strife without consideration, especially to bring others in trouble
too, Prou. 17. 14. and 20. 3. and 26. 17. and 19. 19.

To oppress the fatherless in suites, Job 31. 21.

Thus of sins against the whole person.

Sins against the body follow, and so men offend,

1. By fighting, and so he offends that any way wounds or blemisheth
another, Exodus 21. 24. Leu. 24. 19. Exo. 2. 13, 14. Whether he smite in scorn
or in fury, 1. King. 22. 24. Especially, that hurts a woman with child, Exodus
21. 22.

2. By murder, and so he offends that takes away the life of another
willingly.

The aggrauations of murder are,

To kill Father or Mother, 1. Tim. 1. 9.

To kill ones children, 2. Kings 3. 27. though it were done for sacrifice.

To kill Gods servants, Heb. 11. 37. Revel. 16. 6.

To kill himself.

Thus of offenses against the body.

The sins against the soul follow.

Against the soul offend,

1. Ministers, and so he That is ignorant and cannot teach and warn the people
of their sins, Isaiah 56. 10. Ezech. 31.

That is profane in his disposition and life, Ierem. 23. 14, 11.

That runs before he be sent, Ier. 23. 21.

That is negligent in his calling, and uses not his gifts, 1. Tim. 4. 14.

That teaches false doctrine, and prophecieth in Baal, Ierem. 23. 13.

That preaches peace to wicked men, and strengthens them in their evil
courses, Ezech. 13. 18, 22. Ierem. 23. 14, 15, 17.

That teaches unprofitably, doting about vain questions, and strife of
words, using railing or old wives fables, and profane conceits, etc. or the
like unprofitable matter, 1. Tim. 1. 3, 4, 7. and 4. 7. and* 6. 4.

That in his teaching disgraceth and reuileth the godly, Ezech. 13. 22. Phil.
3. 2.

2. The people, who may be guilty of murdering either others or themselves.

Others, and so he offends,

That suffers his brother to sin, and does not reprove him, Leuit. 9. 17.

That gives offense, and is a stumbling block to the weak, Romans 14. 13. 1.
Cor. 8. 12. Math. 18. 6.

That instructs not others when he may and ought.

That makes or partaketh in any Schism in the Church, 1. Cor. 10. 11, 12.

Our selves, and so he offends,

That neglects Vision, or the means of knowledge, and Grace, Hosh. 4. 6.

That is subject to no settled Ministry, but has itching ears, and seeks a
heap of Teachers, 2. Tim. 4. 3.

That is wilful in impenitency, Ezech. 18.

That forsakes the fellowship of the Saints, Hebr. 10. 25.

That refuses admonition, 2. Chron. 16. 10. Prou. 29. 1.

That resists the Truth, 2. Tim. 3. 8.

Thus of sins against the persons of men.

CHAP. X.
Showing the sins against Chastity.

THe sins against the purity of men follow, and are either more gross and
unusual, and against the light of nature, or else more usual.

The gross offenses are

1. Buggery, Exodus 22. 19

2. Sodomitry, Romans 1. 27. 1. Tim. 1. 9.

3. Incest, Leuit. 18.

4. Poligamy, Mal. 2. 15

5. The unnatural filthiness of women one with another, Romans 1. 26.

6. Selfe-pollution, or the transgression of Onan, Genesis 38. 9.

7. The sins about divorce, so he offends,

That puts away his wife, and not for fornication, Math. 5. 32.

That marries her that is unjustly divorced.

That marries himself again, after he has unjustly put away his wife,
Math. 19. 9.

8. Fornication, Ephesians. 5. 3.

9. Whoredom or adultery, 1. Cor. 6. 9. Jude 15.

The aggrauations of whoredom are

1. To force any to it, 2. Sam. 13. 14.

2. That a man and his Father should go in to a maid, Amos 2. 7.

3. To condemn it in others, and yet commit it himself, Romans 2. 22.

4. To intise others, Genesis 39. 7. Prou. 2. 14.

10. To marry the daughter of a strange god, Mal. 2. 11. Nehem. 13. 27. 2. Cor.
6. 17.

The more usual sins sins follow:

And so men offend either internally, or externallie.

Internally he offends,

That has impure thoughts, Math. 5. 19. Ephesians. 2. 3. 1. Thessal. 4. 5.

That has inordinate affections, and burning lusts, Colos. 3. 5.

Externally men offend,

1. In their senses, as by impure looks, Job 31. 1. Math. 5. 27. 2. Pet. 2. 14.

2. In their gestures, and so they are guilty of chambering and wantonness,
Romans 13. 13.

3. In their words, by filthy speaking, Col. 3. 8.

4. By using the means, or occasion of uncleanness.

And in respect of the means of uncleanness he offends,

That makes light of the fornication of others, 1. Corinthians. 5. 2. 2. Peter
2. 7.

That keeps company with fornicators, 1. Cor. 5. 9. Prou. 29. 3.

That gives himself to ease and pleasure, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. Tit. 1. 12.

That uses lascivious dancing, Zeph. 1. 9. Mark 6. 22.

That uses lascivious books or pictures, 1. Thessal. 5. 23. 1. Corinthians
15. 35.

That having not the gift of Continency, does not marry, 1. Cor. 7. 2.

That disposes not his children in marriage, 1. Cor. 7. 37.

That sorteth with winebibbers, and the riotous, Prou. 23. 20.

That is desirous of dainties, or any way given to gluttony, Prou. 23. 3.
Ierem. 5. 7, 8.

That is given to prattling or idle gadding from house to house, Prou. 7. 11. 1.
Tim. 5. 13.

That uses whoorish attire, or perfumes, Prou. 7. 10, 16, 17. Zephaniah 1. 8.

That uses the attire of another sex, Deuteronomy 22. 9.

That beguiles another in marriage by error of person, state, or disease, or
the like, Genesis 29. 25.

That marries without consent of parents, Genes. 26. 34, 35.

That is guilty of drunkenness, or uses excessive drinking, 1. Pet. 4. 4.

The aggrauations of drunkenness, are,

To take a pride in it, Esaias 28. 1.

To be mighty to drink wine, Esaias 5. 22.

To continue long at it, Esaias 15. 11. Proverbs 23. 30 33.

To make others drunk, Hab. 2. 15.

Thus of sins against Chastity.

CHAP. XI.
Showing the sins against man's estate.

THe sins against the estates of men follow, and these are either internal,
or external.

Internal, and so he offends,

That is discontented with his estate, Heb. 13. 5.

That is worldly, and distresseth himself with bootlesse cares about his
estate, Prou. 15. 27. Math. 6. 25, 34 Luke 21. 34.

That delights not in his calling, Prou. 12. 17.

That is covetous, and in love with the things of this world, Ephesians. 5. 5. 1.
Tim. 6. 10. 1. John. 2. 15.

The external sins follow, and so men offend both by Omission, and Commission.

By Omission he offends,

That implies not the good things he has, Iam. 5. 2, 3.

That relieues not the poor, and so withholds the good from the owner
thereof, Prou. 3. 28.

The aggrauations are,

To forsake the poor, Job 20. 19.

To hide his eyes from the poor, Prou. 28. 9.

That brings not forth his corn to sell, Prou. 11. 26.

That detaines wages, Ier. 22. 23. Leuit. 19. 23. James 5. 4.

That pays not what he has borrowed, Psalm. 37. 21.

That is idle, and neglects his calling, Eccl. 4. 5. and of this sin he is
guilty also,

That with-draweth not his foot from his neighbors house, Prou. 25. 17. 1.
Tim. 5. 13.

That is given to much sleep, Prou. 6. 9, 10.

That is stacke in business, Prou. 10. 4. and 14. 13.

That neglects the opportunities of his calling, Pro. 10. 5.

The aggrauations are,

To be pertinacious in the defense of it, Prou. 26. 16.

To be a busie-body in other folks matters, 2. These. 3. 11.

That is slothful in the business of others, Prou. 26.

That prouides not for his family, 1. Tim. 5. 8.

Thus of sins of Omission.

By Commission he offends,

That steals, robs or pilfers, which is the sin mentioned in the eighth
commandment.

That steals by consequent; as he does

That is an Usurer, Exodus 22. 25. Leuit. 25. 36. Deuteronomy. 23. 19.

That is guilty of Oppression, Job 31. 38, 39. Amos 4. 1. Prou. 4. 17. Esaias 5.
8. and 30. 12. especially he that loves oppression, Hos. 12. 7. Micha 2. 9.

That uses fraud in buying and selling, in meteyard, weight or measure,
Deutero. 25. 13, 14, 15. and he is guilty of this sin also,

That sells refuse, Mi^ha 6.

That makes advantage of the poverty of others, Leuiticus 25. 39. etc. Prou.
22. 22.

That takes the mil-stone to pledge, etc. Deuteronomy 24. 6. 12.

That being a buyer, says, It is naught, contrary to his own judgment: and
so likewise on the other side, that being a seller, does commend it for good,
when he knows it is not so, Pro. 21. 14.

That uses any other fraud, though it be not in buying or selling, 1. These. 4.
6.

And this sin of stealing is to be extended further also, as

1. To lesser stealths, as robbing of Vineyards, or Orchards, or corn in the
field, Deuteronomy. 23. 24, 25.

2. To rash suretiship, Prou. 6. 1, 2. and 22. 26.

3. To extreamities used in recovering our own rights, Job. 24. 3, 4, 9, 10.

To not restoring of evil gotten goods, Ez^^h. 33. 15

5. To removing of landmarkes, Deuteronomy. 19. 14.

6. To living in unlawful callings, such as begging is, 2. These. 3. 11.

7. To unthriftiness in following vain persons, or spending prodigally on
pleasures, or diet, Proverbs 12. 11. and 21. 27. and 22. 22. and 23. 26.

8. To the concealing of Theft, Prou. 29. 24.

9. To the Lordly usage of the borrower, Proverbs 22. 7.

The aggrauations of the sin of stealing are,

To take from the poor, Deuteronomy. 24. 14. Job 20. 19.

To reprove it in others, and yet commit it himself, Romans 2. 21.

To do it under pretense of Religion, 2. Corinthians. 11. 20.

To oppress strangers or widows, or the fatherless, Exodus 22. 21, 22.

To bless the covetous, Psalm. 10. 3.

To commit it in the place of judgment, by perverting of Justice, or by
extortion, Ezekiel. 22. 12. or by bribery, Amos 5. 12. Exodus 23. 8. or by
refusing to to do Justice, Proverbs. 21. 7.

To steal thy Masters goods, Tit. 2.

To steal consecrated things by sacrilege, or simony, Mal. 3. 8. Acts 8. 18,
20.

To steal a man or maid, Exodus 22. 16.

CHAP. XII.
THus of the sins against man's goods.

The sins against men's good name follow, and so men offend by Omission, or by
Commission.

By Omission he offends,

That sets not forth righteousness, Prou. 12. 9.

That does not clear or deliver the afflicted, when he may, Genesis 40. 23.

That disgraceth others, by forbearing their company without just cause, Job
19. 3, 19. Psalm. 58. 3.

That is unthankful, 1. Tim. 3. 2.

By Commission men offend, Internally, or Externally.

Internally he offends,

That despises his neighbor in his thoughts, Prou. 14. 21.

That disdaines at the credit and praise of others, as the Pharisees did.

That thirsts after all occasions of the contempt of others, Job 34. 7.

That is suspicious, and thinks evil, 1. Cor. 12. 5.

Externally men offend,

1. In witnesse-bearing, and so he offends,

That condemns a man without witness, Deuteronomy. 19. 15.

That bears false witness.

That is fearful to bear witness to the Truth, Reu. 21. 8.

That furthers the evil causes of wicked men, Exo. 23. 1.

2. In lying, Reuelat. 22. 15. and the blame of this sin reaches,

To such as use dissimulation, Gal. 2. 25.

To such as speak untruth for fear, Genesis 38. 2.

The aggrauations of lying are,

To love lies, Reuclat. 22. 15. Psalm. 52. 3.

To hate those thou have wronged with thy lies, Pro. 26. vlt.

To break promise, 2. Tim. 3. 3.

To preach falsehoods, 1. Cor. 15. 15.

To say one has no sin, 1. John 1. 8.

To say to men in distress, There is no help, Psalm. 3. 2. Job 13. 14.

To color sin with pretense of Religion, Mark 12. 40.

3. In slandering and evil reports, Ex. 23. 1. which is to be extended also to

1. Biting jests, Ephesians. 5. 4.

2. To revealing of secret infirmities, Prou. 11. 13. and 20. 19.

3. To the carrying about of tales, Leuit. 19. 16. Prou. 16. 28.

4. To the receiving and furthering of slanders, Ier. 20. 10.

5. To the wresting of men's words, or telling the truth of malice, 1. Sam. 22.
9, 10. Psalm. 52. 1, 2.

The aggrauations of slander are,

1. To encourage themselves in an evil matter, and to commune together about
it, Psalm. 64. 5.

2. To boast of his wickedness therein, Psalm 52. 1.

3. To slander the righteous, and quiet of the land, Psalm. 31. 18. and 59. 2.
and 102. 8. and 35. 20. and 83. 3, 5. and 4. 2.

4. To raise evil report of his parents, Genesis 9. 22

5. To fill the ears of Princes with clamor, Hos. 3. 8.

6. To be a makebate, or a railer, 1. Cor. 6. 9. 2. Tim. 3. 3.

4. In censuring and judging, Iam. 2. 4.

The aggrauations are,

To search and pry for faults in others, that he might censure them, Psalm. 64.
6. Prou. 16. 27.

To do it for things indifferent, Romans 14.

To censure small faults in others, and to be guilty of great offenses
himself, Math. 7.

5. In vainglory and minding too much our own praises.

And so also he offends,

That boasts of a false gift, Prou. 27. 1.

That justifies himself overmuch, Job 35. 2.

That boasts of to morrow, Prou. 17. 1.

That measures himself by himself, 2. Cor. 10. 12.

6. In flattery, Psalm. 12. 3. Prou. 27. 14. and 26. 26.

7. In justifying the wicked, Proverbs 15. 15. and 24. 24.

CHAP. XIII.
HItherto of the sins with consent of the will.

The sins before consent of the will, are:

1. To want desire of the good and welfare either of himself, or other men.

2. To conceive evil thoughts, Math. 15. 19. or covet evil.

3. To delight in the inward contemplation of evil, whether in dreams* or
awake, though it be without purpose to act them outwardly, Jude 8. Iam. 1. 14.

Hitherto of the sins against the Law.

CHAP. XIIII.
Showing how many ways men offend against the Gospel.

THe sins against the Gospel may be referred to four heads, as they are
sins,

Against Christ.

Against Repentance.

Against Faith.

Against the graces of the Spirit.

1. He sins against Christ,

That says he is Christ, Math. 24.

That denies directly, or by consequent, that Christ is come in the flesh, 1.
John. 4: 3. and 2. 23.

That has base thoughts of Christ, Esaias 53. 3.

That says, he has no sin, 1. John 1. 7, 8, 10.

That worships God without Christ, Ioh. 17. 3. 1. Ioh. 2. 23.

That uses not Christ as his own and only Advocate, 1. John 2. 1. 2. Tim. 2.
5.

That loves not the Lord Jesus Christ with inflamed affections, 1. Corin. 16.
12. Ephesians. 6. 24. Phil. 3. 9.

2. The sins against repentance.

That confesses not his sins without hiding, distinctly, Prou. 28. 13.
Psalm. 32. 5.

That mournes not for his sins, Ierem. 5. 2.

That forsakes not his sins, Prou. 28. 13.

Yea he sins against repentance,

That repents faynedly, Ier. 3. 10.

That repents desperately, as Cain and Judas.

That repents too late, Job 27. 9.

That repents by halues, and in some things only, as Ahab and Herod.

That falls away from his repentance, 2. Pet. 2. 19, 20.

The aggrauations are,

To be wise to do evil, Ierem. 4. 22.

To pursue evil, Proverbs 11. 9.

To rejoice in doing evil, and make a mock of sin, Prou. 2. 14. and 14.

To be without shame, and to declare his sin like the Sodomites, Isaiah 5.
9. Ierem. 3. 3.

To be incorrigible, Ier. 5. 2.

To frette, because he is croffed in sin, Prou. 19. 3.

To bless himself against the curses of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

To freeze in security, Zeph. 1. 12.

To refuse to return.

3. He sins against Faith,

That believes not in Jesus Christ for his Justification and salvation, John 3.
17.

Yea he offends,

That is careless, and neglects the assurance of faith, Hebr. 6. 12. Romans 1.
16.

That in affliction doubts of Gods favor and goodness, Esaias 41. and 49. 15.

The aggrauations.

Not to seek after God at all, Zeph. 1. 6.

Not to stir up our selves to take hold on God, when mercy is offered, Esaias 64.
7.

Not to answer when God calls, Esaias 50. 2.

To forsake our own mercy, or scoff at the signs of it, Ion. 2. 8.

4. He sins against the graces of the Spirit,

1. That receives the grace of God in vain, 2. Cor. 6. 5.

2. That turns the grace of God into wantonness, Jude 3.

3. That falls away from the grace of God, either wholly by forsaking the
acknowledgement of the Truth, 2. Pet. 2. 20. Or in the measure, by losing his
first love, Revel. 2.

4. That tempts, grieves, or quenches the Spirit: Ephesians. 4. 30. 1. These. 1. 19.

5. That despights the Spirit of Grace, and of malice persecutes the known
truth, which is the sin against the holy Ghost, Hebr. 10. 26.

FINIS.

