THE TRAGEDY OF Caesar and Pompey OR CAESAR'S Revenge.

Privately acted by the Students of Trinity College in Oxforde.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Nathaniel Fosbrooke and John Wright and are to be sold
in Paul's Church-yarde at the sign of the Helmet. 1607.

The names of the Actors.
Discord.
Titinnius. Brutus. Pompey. Caesar. Anthony. Dolobella. Cornelia. Cleopatra.
Achillas. Sempronius. Cassius. Cato Sen. Casca. Roman 1. Roman 2. Bonus Genius.
Calphurnia. Augur. Praecentor. Senators. Bucolian. Octauian. Caesar's Ghost.
Cicero. Cato Iun. Camber.
The Tragedy of Caesar and Pompey.
Sound alarm then flames of fire. Enter Discord. Hark how the Roman drums
sound blood and death,
And Mars high mounted on his Thracian Steed:
Runs madding through Pharsalias purple fields.
The earth that is wont to be a Tomb for Men
It Is now entombed with Carkases of Men.
The Heaven appal'd to see such hideous sights,
For fear pu^s out her ever burning lights.
The Gods amazed (as once in Titans war,)
Do doubt and fear, which boades this deadly iar.
The stars do tremble, and forsake their course,
The Bear does hide her in forbidden Sea,
Fear makes Boots swiften her slow pace,
Pale is Orion, Atlas gins to quake,
And his unwieldy burden to forsake.
Caesar's keen Falchion, through the Adverse ranks,
For his stern Master hewes a passage out,
Through troops and troonkes, and steel, and standing blood:
He whose proud Trophies whileom Asia field,
And conquered Pontus, singe his lasting praise.
Great Pompey; Great, while Fortune did him raise,
Now vailes the glory of his vanting plumes
And to the ground casts of his high hanged looks.
You gentle Heavens. O execute your wrath
On vile mortality, that has scornd your powers.
You night borne Sisters to whose hairs are tied
In Adamantine Chains both Gods and Men
Wind on your web of mischief and of plagues,
And if, O stars you have an influence:
That may confound this high erected heap
Down power it; Vomit out your worst of ills
Let Rome, grown proud, with her unconquered strength,
Perish and conquered BE with her own strength:
And win all powers to disioyne and break,
Consume, confound, dissolve, and discipate
What Laws, Arms and Pride has raised up.
Enter Titinius Tit. The day is lost our hope and honors lost,
The glory of the Roman name is lost,
The liberty and common weal is lost,
The Gods that whileom heard the Roman state,
And Quirinus, whose strong puissant arm,
Did shild the tops and turrets of proud Rome,
Do now conspire to wrack the gallant Ship,
Even in the harbor of her wished greatness.
And her gay streamers, and fair wavering sails,
With which the wanton wind was wont to play,
To drown with Billows of orewhelming woes.

Enter Brutus. Bru. The Foe preuayles, Brutus, thou striuest in vain.
Many a soul to day is sent to Hell,
And many a galant have I don to death,
In Pharsalias bleeding Earth: the world can tell,
How little Brutus praizd this puff of breath,
If loss of that my countries weal might gain,
But Heavens and the immortal Gods decreed:
That Rome in highest of her fortunes pich,
In top of souerainty and imperial swaye.
By her own height should work her own decay.

Enter Pompey Pom. Where may I fly into some desert place,
Some uncouth, unfrequented craggy rock,
Where as my name and state was never heard.
I fly the Batle because here I see,
My friends lie bleeding in Pharsalias earth.
Which do remember me what erst I was,
Who brought such troops of soldiars to the field,
And of so many thousand had command:
My flight a heavy memory does renew,
Which tells me I was wont to stay and win.
But now a soldier of my scatred train:
Offered me service and did call me Lord,
O then I thought whom rising Sun saw high,
Descending he beheld my misery:
Fly to the holow root of some steep rock,
And in that flinty habitation hide,
Thy woeful face: from face and view of men.
Yet that will tell me this, if naught beside:
Pompey was never wont his head to hide.
Fly where thou will, thou bearst about thee smart,
Shame at thy heels and grief lies at thy heart.

Tit. But see Titinius where two warriers stand,
Casting their eyes down to the cheareles earth:
Alas to soon I know them for to be
Pompey and Brutus, who like Ajax stand,
When as forsook of Fortune mong'st his foes,
Greise stopped his breath nor could he speak his woes,

Pom. Accursed Pompey, lo thou art descried.
But stay; they are thy friends that thou behouldest,
O rather had I now have met my foes:
Whose daggers points might straight have piercd my woes
Then thus to have my friends behold my shame.
Reproach is death to him that lived in Fame*

Bru. Brutus Cast up thy discontented look:
And see two Princes thy two noble friends,
Who though it greeues me that I thus them see,
Yet joy I to be seen they hung be.
He speaks unto them. Let not the change of this successes fight,
(O noble Lords,) dismay these daunteles minds,
Which the fair virtue not blind chance does rule,
Caesar not us subdued has, but Rome,
And in that fight it was best be overthrown.
Think that the Conqueror has won but small,
Whose victory is but his Countries fall,

Pom. O Noble Brutus, can I live and see,
My Souldiars dead, my friends lie slain in field,
My hopes cast down, mine Honors overthrown,
My Country subject to a Tirants rule,
My foe triumphing and my self forlorn.
Oh had I perished in that prosperous war
Even in mine Honors height, that happy day,
When Mithridates fall did raise my fame:
Then had I gonne with Honor to my grave.
But Pompey was by envious heavens reserved,
Captive to follow Caesar's Chariot wheels
Riding in triumph to the Capitol:
And Rome often graced with Trophies of my fame,
Shall now resound the blemish of my name.

Bru. Oh what disgrace can taunt this worthiness,
Of which remain such living monuments
Engraven in the eyes and hearts of men.
Although the oppression of distressed Rome
And our own overthrow, might well draw forth,
Distilling tears from faynting cowards eyes,
Yet should no weak effeminate passion sease
Upon that man, the greatness of whose mind
And not his Fortune made him termed the Great.

Pom. Oh I did never taste mine Honors sweet
Nor now can judge of this my sharpest sour.
Fifty eight years in Fortunes sweet soft lap
Have I been luld a sleep with pleasant joys,
Me has she dandled in her foulding Arms,
And fed my hopes with prosperous euentes:
She Crowned my Cradle with success and Honor,
And shall disgrace a wait my haples Hearse?
Was I a youth with Palm and Laurel girt,
And now an old man shall I wait my fall?
Oh when I think but on my triumphs past,
The Consul-ships and Honors I have borne;
The fame and fear where in great Pompey lived,
Then does my grieved Soul inform me this,
My fall augmented by my former bisse.

Bru. Why do we use of virtues strength to vant,
If every cross a Noble mind can daunt,
We talk of courage, then, is courage known,
When with mishap our state is overthrown:
Never let him a Soldiers Title bear.
Wihch in the cheifest brunt does shrink and fear,
Thy former haps did Men thy virtue show,
But now that fayles them which thy virtue knew,
Nor think this conquest shall be Pompeys fall:
Or that Pharsalia shall thine honor bury,
Egypt shall be unpeopled for thine aid.
And Cole-black Libians, shall manure the ground
In thy defense with bleeding hearts of men.

Pom. O second hope of sad oppressed Rome,
In whom the ancient Brutus virtue shines,
That purchased first the Roman liberty,
Let me embrace thee: live victorious youth,
When death and angry fates shall call me hence,
To free thy country from a Tyrants yoke.
My harder fortune, and more cruel stars.
Envied to me so great a happiness.
Do not prolong my life with vain false hopes,
To deep despair and sorrow I am vowed:
Do not remououe me from that settled thought,
With hope of friends or aid of Ptolomey,
Egypt and Libia at choice I have.
But only which of them I Will make my grave.

Tit. It Is but discomfort which misgreeues thee this,
Grief by despair seems greater then it is.

Bru. It Is womannisn to wayle and moan our grief.
By Industry do wise men seek relief,
If that our casting do fall out a miss,
Our cunning play must then correct the dice.

Pom. Well if it needs must be then let me go,
Flying for aid unto my forrayne friends,
And sue and bow, where erst I did command.
He that goes seeking of a Tirant aid,
Though free he went, a servant then is made.
Take we our last farewell, then though with pain,
Here three do part that never shall meet again.

Exit Pompey at on door, Titinius at another. Brutus alone. ACTVS 1. SCENA 2.
Enter Caesar Caes. Follow your chase, and let your light-foote steedes
Flying as swift as did that winged horse
That with strong fethered Pinions cloue the Air,
Or'take the coward flight of your base foe.

Bru. Do not with-drawe thy mortal woundring blade,
But sheath it Caesar in my wounded heart:
Let not that heart that did thy Country wound
Fear to lay Brutus bleeding on the ground.
Thy fatal stroke of death shall more me glad,
Then all thy proud and Pompous victories;
My funeral Cypress, then thy Laurel Crown,
My mournful Beer shall win more Praise and Fame
Then thy triumphing Sun-bright Chariot.
Here in these fatal fields let Brutus die,
And bear so many Romans company.

Caesa. It Was not against thee this fatal blade was drawn
Which can no more pierce Brutus tender sides
Then mine own heart, or ought then heart more dear,
For all the wrongs thou did, or strokes thou gave
Caesar on thee will take no worse revenge,
Then bid thee still command him and his state:
True settled love can near be turned to hate.

Brut. To what a pitch would this man's virtues sore,
Did not ambition clog his mounting fame,
Caesar thy sword has all bliss from me taine
And give me life where best were to be slain.
O thou have robbed me of my chiefest joy,
And seek'st to please me with a babish toye.

Exit Brutus. Caes. Caesar Pharsalia does thy conquest sound
Jove's welcome messenger fair Victory,
Has Crowned thy temples with victorious bay.
And Io joyful, Io does she sing
And through the world thy lasting praises ring.
But yet amidst thy grateful melody
I hear a hoarse, and heavy dolfull voice,
Of my dear Country crying, that to day
My Glorious triumphs work her own decay.
In which how many fatal strokes I gave,
So many wounds her tender breast received.
Here lies one that is boucher'd by his Sire
And here the Son was his old Fathers death,
Both slew unknowing, both unknown are slain,
O that ambition should such mischief work
Or mean Men die for great men's proud desire.

ACTVS 1. SCENA 3.
Enter Anthony, Dolobella, Lord and others. An. From sad Pharsalia blushing al
with blood,
From deaths pale triumphs, Pompey overthrown,
Romans in foreign soyles, brething their last,
Revenge, stange wars and dreadful stratagems,
We come to set the Laurel on thy head
And fill thy ears with triumphs and with joys.

Dolo. As when that Hector from the Grecian camp
With spoils of slaughtered Argians returned,
The Troyan youths with crowns of conquering palm:
The Phrigian Virgins with fair flowery wrethes
Welcomed the hope, and pride of Ilium,
So for thy victory and conquering acts
We bring fair wreths of Honor and renown,
Which shall enternally thy head adorn.

Lord. Now has thy sword made passage for thy self,
To wade in blood of them that sought thy death,
The ambitious rival of thine Honors high,
Whose mightiness erst made him to be feared
Now flies and is enforced to give thee place.
Whilst thou (...) the conquering Hercules
Triumphing in thy spoils and victories.

Caes. When Phoebus left fair Thetis watery couch,
And peeping forth from out the goulden gate
Of his bright palace saw our battle ranked:
Often did he seek to turn his fiery steedes,
Often hid his face, and shund such tragic sights.
What stranger passest ever by this cost
Thee this accursed soil distainde with blood
Not Crystal rivers, are to quench thy thirst.
For goaring streams, their rivers cleerenesse stains:
Here are no hills wherewith to feed thine eyes,
But heaped hills of mangled Carkases,
Here are no birds to please thee with their notes:
But ravenous Vultures, and night Ravens horse.

Anto. What means great Caesar, droopes our general,
Or melts in womanish compassion:
To see Pharsalias fields to change their hew
And silver streams be turned to lakes of blood?
Why Caesar often has sacrificed in France,
Millions of Souls, to Plutoes grisly dames:
And made the changed colored Rhene to blush,
To bear his bloody burden to the sea.
And when as thou in maiden Albion shore
The Roman, Aegle bravely did advance,
No hand paid greater tribute unto death,
No heart with more courageous Noble fire
And hope, did burn with glorious great intent.
And now shall passion base that Noble mind,
And weak events that courrage overcome?
Let Pompey proud, and Pompeys Accomplices
Die on our swords, that did envy our lives,
Let pale Tysiphone be cloyd with blood:
And snaky furies quench their longing thirst,
And Caesar live to glory in their end.

Caes. They say when as the younger Affrican,
Beheld the mighty Carthage woeful fall:
And saw her stately Towers to smoke from far,
He wept, and princely tears ran down his cheeks.
Let pity then and true compassion,
Move us to rue no traterous Carthage fall,
No barbarous periurd enemies decay,
But Rome our native Country, haples Rome,
Whose bowe's to ungently we have peerc'd,
Fair pride of Europe, Mistress of the world,
Cradle of virtues, nurse of true renown,
Whom Jove has placed in top of seven hills:
That thou the lower worlds seven climes might rule.
Thee the proud Parthian and the cole-black Moore,
The stern Tartarian, borne to manage arms,
Does fear and tremble at thy Majesty.
And yet I bred and fostered in thy lap,
Durst strive to overthrow thy Capitol:
And thy high Turrets lay as low as hell.

Dolo. O Rome, and have the powers of Heaven decreed,
When as thy fame did reach unto the Sky,
And the wide Ocean was thy Empires bounds,
And thou enricht with spoils of all the world,
Was waxen proud with peace and sovereign reign:
That Civil wars should loose what Foreign won,
And peace his joys, be turned to luckles broils.

Lord. O Pompey, cursed cause of civil war,
Which of those hel-borne stern Eumenides:
Inflamed thy mind with such ambitious fire,
As naught could quench it but thy Countries blood.

Dolo. But this no while thy valor does destayne,
Which found'st unsought for cause of civil broils,
And fatal fuel which this fire enflamd.

Anto. Let then his death set period to this strife,
Which was begun by his ambitious life.

Caes. The flying Pompey to Larissa hastes,
And by Thessalian Temple shapes his course:
Where fair Peneus tumbles up his waves,
Him we will pursue as fast as he us flies,
Nor he though guarded with Numidian horse,
Nor aided with the unresisted power:
The Meroe, or seven mouthed Nile can yield:
No not all Afric armed in his defense
Shall serve to shroud him from my fatal sword.

Exit. ACT. 1. SC. 4.
Enter Cato. Ca. O where is banished liberty exiled,
To Afric deserts or to Scythia rocks,
Or whereas silver streaming Tanais is?
Happy is India and Arabia blessed,
And all the bordering regions upon Nile
That never knew the name of Liberty,
But we that boast of Brutes and Colatins,
And glory we expeld proud Tarquins name,
Do grieve to loose, that we so long have held.
Why reckon we our years by Consuls names:
And so long ruld in freedon, now to serve?
They lie that say in Heaven there is a power
That for to wrack the sins of guilty men,
Holds in his hand a fierce three-forked dart.
Why would he throw them down on Oeta mount*
Or wound the under ringing Rhodope,
And not rain showers of his dead-doing darts,
Furor in slame, and Sulphures smothering heat
Upon the wicked and accursed arms
That cruel Romans against their Country bear.
Rome ware thy fall: those prodigies foretold,
When angry heavens did power down showers of blood
And fatal Comets in the heavens did blase,
And all the Statues in the Temple blast,
Did weep the loss of Roman liberty.
Then if the Gods have destined thine end,
Yet as a Mother having lost her Son,
Cato shall wait upon thy tragic hearse,
And never leave thy cold and bloodles corse.
I Will tune a sad and dol-full funeral song,
Still crying on lost liberties sweet name,
Thy sacred ashes will I wash with tears,
And thus lament my Countries obsequies.

ACT. 1. SC. 5.
Enter Pompey and Cornelia. Cor. O cruel Pompey whether will thou fly,
And leave thy poor Cornelia thus forlorn,
Is It our bad fortune or thy cruel will
That still it seuers in extremity.
O let me go with thee, and die with thee,
Nothing shall thy Cornelia (...) think*
That she endures for her sweet Pompeys sake.

Pom. It Is for thy weal and safty of thy life,
Whose safty I prefer before the world,
Because I love thee more then all the world,
That thou (sweet love) should here remain behind
Till proof assures Ptolomyes doubted faith.

Cor. O dearest, what shall I my safty call,
That which is thrust in dangers harmefull mouth?
Looks not the thing so bad with such a name,
Call it my death, my base, my woe my hell,
That which indangers my sweet Pompeys life.

Pom. It is no danger (gentle love) at all,
It Is but thy fear that does it so miscall.

Cor. Ift be no danger let me go with thee,
And of thy safty a partaker be,
Alas why would thou leave me thus alone:
Think thou I cannot follow thee by Land
That thus have followed thee over raging Seas,
Or do I vary in inconstant hopes:
O but think you my pleasure ^uckles is
And I have made the^ more unfortunate.
It Is I, it is I, have caused this overthrow,
It Is my accursed stars that boade this ill,
And those misfortunes to my princely love,
Revenge thee Pompey, on this wicked brat,
And end my woes by ending of my life,

Pom. What means my love to aggrauate my grief,
And torture my enough tormented Soul,
With greater greuance then Pharsalian loss?
Thy rented hair does rent my heart in twain.
And these fair Seas, that rain down showers of tears,
Do melt my soul in liqued streams of sorrow.
If that in Aegipt any danger be,
Then let my death procure thy sweet lives safety,

Cor. Can I be safe and Pompey in distress,
Or may Cornelia survive they death,
What danger ever happens to my Soul*
What danger ^ke shall happen to my life,
Nor Libians quicksands, nor the barking gulf,
Or gaping Scylla shall this Union part,
But still I Will chain thee in my twining arms,
And if I cannot live I Will die with thee.

Pom. O how thy love does ease my grieved mind,
Which bears a but then heavier then the Heavens,
Under the which steele-shouldred Atlas groans.
But now thy love does hurt thy self and me,
And thy to ardent strong affection,
Hinders my settled resolution.
Then by this love, and by these crystal eyes,
More bright then are the Lamps of Jove's high house,
Let me in this (I fear) my last request.
Not to endanger thy beloved (...),
But in this ship remain, and here awaite,
How Fortune deals with our doubtful State,

Cor. Not so persuaded as coniurd sweet love,
By thy commanding meek petition.
I cannot say I yield, yet am constraind,
This never meeting parting to permit,
Then go dear love, yet stay a little while,
Some what I am shure, it is more I have to say,
Nay nothing now but Heavens guide thy steps.
Yet let me speak, why should we part so soon,
Why is my talk tedious? may be (...) the last.
Do women leave: their husbands in such have,

Pom. More faithful, then that ^^yre deflowred dame,
That sacrifizde her self to Chastety,
And far more loving then the Charian Queen,
That drank her Husbands never sundred heart.
If that I dye, get will it glad my soul,
Which then shall feed on those Elisian joys,
That in the sacred Temple of thy breast.
My living memory shall shrined be.
But if that envious fates should call thee hence,
And Death with pale and meager look usurp,
Upon those resiate lips, and Currall cheeks,
Then Air be turnde, to poison to infect me,
Earth gape and swallow him that Heavens hate,
Consume me Fire with thy devouring flames*
Or Water drown, who else would melt in tears.
But live, live happy still in safety live,
Who safety only to my life can give.

Exit. Cor. O he is gone, go hie thee after him,
My vow forbids, yet still my care is with thee,
My cries shall wake the silver Moon by night,
And with my tears I will salute the Mo^ne.
No day shall pass with out my daily plaints,
No hour without my prayers for thy return.
My mind misgiues me Pompey is betrayed.
O Egypt do not rob me of my love.
Why bears Ptolomy so stern a look?
O do not stain thy childish years with blood:
Whilst Pompey flourished in his Fortunes pride,
Egypt and Ptolomy were feign to serve
And shue for grace to my distr^ssed Lord:
But little boots it, to record he was,
To be is only that which Men respect,
Go poor Cornelia wander by the shore
And see the waters raging Billows swell,
And beat with fury against the craggy rocks,
To that compare thy strong tempestuous grief.
Which fiercely rages in thy feeble heart,
Sorrow shuts up the passage of thy breath:
And dries the tears that pity feign would shed,
This only therefore this will I still cry,
Let Pompey live although Cornelia die.

Exit. ACTVS. 1. SCENA. 6.
Enter Caesar, Cleopatra, Dolobella, Lord and others Caes. Thy sad complaints
fair Lady cannot choose*
But move a heart though made of Adamant,
And draw to yield unto thy powerful plaint,
I will replant thee in the Aegiptian Throne
And all thy wrongs shall Caesar's valor right,
I Will pull thy crown from the usurpers head,
And make the Conquered Ptolomey to stoop,
And fear by force to wrong a maiden Queen.

Cleo. Look as the Earth at her great loves approach.
When goulden tressed fair Hipperions Son
With those life-lending beams salutes his Spouse,
Does then cast of her moorning widows weeds,
And calls her handmayde, forth her flowery fair,
To cloth her in the beauty of the spring,
And of fair primroses, and sweet violets,
To make gay Garlonds for to crown her head.
So has your presence, welcome and fair sight,
That glads the world, comforts poor Aegipts Queen,
Who begs for succor of that conquering hand,
That as Jove's Scepter this our world does sway.

Dolo. Who would refuse to aid so fair a Queen.

Lord. Base be the mind, that for so sweet a fair,
Would not adventure more then Perseus did,
When as he freed the fair Andromeda.

Caesar. O how those lovely Tyranizing eyes,
The Graces beauteous habitation,
Where sweet desire, darts woundring shafts of love:
Consume my heart with inward burning heat,
Not only Aegipt but all Africa,
Will I subject to Cleopatras name.
Thy rule shall stretch from unknown Zanziber,
Unto those Sands where high erected poastes.
Of great Alcides, do up hold his name,
The sun burnt Indians, from the cast shall bring:
Their precious store of pure refined gould,
The laboring worm shall weaue the Afric twiste,
And to exceed the pomp of Persian Queen,
The Sea shall pay the tribute of his pearls,
For to adorn thy goulden yellow locks,
Which in their curled knots, my thoughts do hold,
Thoughts captiud to thy beauties conquering power.

Anto. I marueyle not at that which fables tell,
How ravished Hellen moved the angry Greeks,
To undertake eleven years tedious seege,
To re-obtayne a beauty so divine,
When I beheld thy sweet composed face.
O only worthy for whose matchles sake,
Another seege, and new wars should arise,
Hector be dragde about the Grecian camp,
And Troy again consumed with Grecian fire.

Cleo. Great Prince, what thanks can Cleopatra give,
Naught have poor Virgins to requite such good:
My simple self and service then vouchsafe,
And let the heavens, and he that althings sees.
With equal eyes such merits recompense,
I do not seek ambitiously to rule,
And in proud Africa to monarchize.
I only crave that what my father gave,
Who in his last be-hest did dying, will,
That I should jointly with my brother reign:

But. How sweet those words drop from those hunny lips
Which whilst she speaks they still each other kiss.

Caesa, Reign, I, still reign in Caesar's conquered thoughts,
There build thy palace, and thy sun-bright throne:
There sway thy Scepter, and with it beat down,
Those traitorous thoughts (if any dare arise:)
That will not yield to thy perfection,
To chase thee flying Pompey have I cut,
The great Ionian, and Egean seas:
And dredeles past the toyling Hellespont,
Famous for amorous Leanders death:
And now by gentle Fortunes so am blessed,
As to behold what mazed thoughts admire:
Heavens wonder, Natures and Earths Ornament,
And gaze upon these fiery sun-bright eyes:
The Heavenly spheres which Love and Beauty move,
These Cheeks where Lillyes and red-roses strive,
For sovereignty, yet both do equal reign:
The dangling tresses of thy curled hair,
Nets weaud to cach our frail and wandering thoughts:
Thy beauty shining like proud Phoebus face,
When Ganges glittereth with his radiant beams
He on his goulden trapped Palfreys rides,
That from their nostrels do the morning blow,
Through Heavens great pathway pau'd with shining (stars)
Thou art the fized pole of my Souls joy,
Bout which my resteles thoughts are over turned:
My Cynthia, whose glory never waynes,
Guyding the Tide of mine affections:
That with the change of thy imperious looks,
Do make my doubtful joys to eb and slow.

Cleo. Might all the deeds thy hands had ere achiu'd,
That make thy far extolled name to sound:
From sunburned East unto the VVestern Isles,
Which great Neptunus fouldeth in his arms,
It shall not be the least to seat a Maid,
And inthronize her in her native right.

Lord. What need you stand disputing on your right,
Or proving title to the Aegiptian Crown:
Borne to be Queen and Empress of the world.

An. On thy perfection let me ever gaze,
And eyes now learn to tread a lovers maze,
Here may you surfeit with delicious store,
The more you see, desire to look the more:
Upon her face a garden of delight,
Exceeding far Adonis feigned Bower,
Here staind white Lyllies spread their branches fair,
Here lips send forth sweet Gilly-flowers smell.
And Damasck-rose in her fair cheeks do bud,
While beds of Violets still come between
With fresh varyety to please the eye,
Nor need these flowers the heat of Phoebus beams,
They cherisht are by virtue of her eyes.
O that I might but enter in this bower,
Or once attain the cropping of the flower.

Caes. Now wend we Lords to Alexandria,
Famous for those wide wondered Piramids.
Whose towering tops do seem to threat the sky,
And make it proud by presence of my love:
Then Paphian Temples and Cytherian hills,
And sacred Gnidas bonnet veil to it,
A fayrer saint then Verus there shall dwell.

Antho. Led with the lode-starre of her looks, I go
As crazed Ba^k is tosl'd in trobled Seas,
Uncertain to ariue in wished port.

ACT. 1. FINIS.
Enter Discord. Flashes of fire. Antho. Now Caesar has thy flattering Fortune
heapt
Those golden gifts and promised victories,
By fatal signs at Rubicon foretold:
Then triumph in thy glorious greatest pride,
And boast thou cast the lucky Die so well,
Now let the Triton that did sound alarm,
In his shrill trump resound the victory,
That Heaven and Earth may Ecco of thy fame:
Yet think in this thy Fortunes Iollity.
Though Caesar be as great as great may be,
Yet Pompey once was even as great as he,
And how he rode clad in Setorius spoils:
And the Sicilian Pirates overthrow.

Ruling like Nepoune in the mid-land Seas,
Who basely now by Land and Sea does fly,
The heavenly Rectors prosecuting wrath,
Yet Sea nor Land can shroud him from this iar,
O how it joys my discord thirsting thoughts,
To see them weight, that whilom flowed in bliss.
To see like Banners, unlike quarrels have.
And Roman weapons shethd in Roman blood,
For this I left the deep Infernal shades
And past the sad Auernus ugly jaws,
And in the world came I, being Discord hight,
Discord the daughter of the greesly night.
To make the world a hell of plauges and woes,
It Was I that did the fatal Aple fling,
Betwixt the three Idean goddesses,
That so much blood of Greeks and Trojans spilt,
It Was I that caused the deadly Thebans war.
And made the brothers swell with endless hate.
And now O Rome, woe, woe, to thee I cry
Which to the world do bring al misery.

ACTVS 2. SCENA 4.
Enter Achillas, and Sempronius. Ach. Here are we placed, by Ptolomies command,
To murder Pompey when he comes on shore,
Then brave Sempronius prepare they self.
To execute the charge thou have in hand,

Sem. I am a Roman, and have often served,
Under his colors, when in former state*
Pompey has bin the General of the field,
But cause I see that now the world is changd:
And like wise feel some of King Ptolomies gould.
I Will kill him were he twenty Generals,
And send him packing to his longest home
I marvel of what mettell was the French man made*
Who when he should have stabbed Marius,
They say he was astonished with his looks.
Marius, had I been there, thou near had lived,
To brag thee of thy seven Consulships.

Achil. Bravely resolved, Noble Sempronius,
The damnedst villain that ere I heard speak:
But great men still must have such instruments,
To bring about their purpose, which once done,
The deed they love, but do the doer hate:
Thou shall no less (stout Roman) be renowned,
For being Pompeys Deaths-man, then was he,
That fired the fair Aegiptian Goddess Church.

Sem. Nay that is al one, report say what she list,
It Is for no shadows I adventure for:
Here are the Crowns, here are the wordly goods,
This between Princes does contention bring:
Brothers this sets at ods, turns love to hate;
It makes the Son to wish his Father hanged
That he thereby might revel with his bags:
And did I know that in my Mothers womb,
There lurked a hidden vain of Sacred gould,
This hand this sword, should rape and rip it out.

Achil. Compassion would that greediness restrain.

Sem. I that is my fault, I am to compassionate,
Why man, art thou a soldier and do talk
Of womanish pity and compassion?
Men's eyes must mil-stones drop, when fools shed tears,
But soft heeres Pompey, I Will about my work

Enter Pompey. Pom. Trusting upon King Ptolomeys promised fay^n,
And hoping succor, I am come to shore:
In Egypt here a while to make aboade.

Sem. Faith longer Pompey then thou do expect.

Pom. See now worlds Monarchs, whom your state makes (proud)
That think your Honors to be permanent,
Of Fortunes change see here a president,
Who whilom did command, now must entreat
And sue for that which to accept of late,
Unto the giver was thought fortunate.

Sem. I pray thee Pompey do not spend thy breath,
In reckning up these rusty titles now,
Which thy ambition graced thee with before,
I must confess thou were my General,
But that cannot a veil to save thy life.
Talk of thy Fortune while thou list,
There is thy fortune Pompey in my fist.

Pom. O you that know what hight of honor means,
What it is for men that lulled in fortunes lap,
Have climd the heighest top of soueraignety.
From all that pomp to be cast hed-long down,
You may conceive what Pompey does sustain,
I was not wont to walk thus all alone,
But to be met with troops of Horse and Men.
With plays and pageants to be entertaynd,
A courtly train in royal rich array,
With spangled plumes, that daunced in the air,
Mounted on steeds, with brave Caparisons decked,
That in their gates did seem to scorn the Earth.
Was wont my intertaynment beautiefie,
But now thy coming is in meaner sort,
They by thy fortune will thy welcome rate.

Sem. What do thou for such entertaynement look,
Pompey how ere thy coming hither be,
I have provided for thy going hence.

Achi. I will draw near, and with fair pleasing show,
Welcome great Pompey as the Siren does
The wandering shipman with her charming song.

Pom. O how it greeues a noble hauty mind,
Framed up in honors uncontrolled school,
To serve and sue, who erst did rule and sway*
What shall I go and stoop to Ptolomey,
Naught to a noble mind more grief can bring
Then be a beggar where thou were a King,

Ach. Welcome a shore most great and gracious prince
Welcome to Aegipt and to Ptolomey.
The King my Master is at hand my Lord,
To gratulate your safe ariuall here.

Sem. This is the King, and here is the Gentleman,
Which must thy coming gratulate a non,

Pom. Thanks worthy Lord unto your King and you,
It joys me much that in extremity,
I found so sure a friend as Ptolomey,

Sem. Now is the date of thy proud life expird,
To which my poniard must a full point put,
Pompey from Ptolomey I come to thee,
From whom a presant and a gift I bring,
This is the gift and this my message is

Stab him Pom. O Villain thou have slain thy General,
And with thy base hand gored my royal heart.
Well I have lived till to that height I came,
That all the world did tremble at my name,
My greatness then by fortune being envied,
Stabd by a murtherous villaynes hand I died.

Ach. What is he dead, then straight cut of his head,
That whilom mounted with ambitions wings:
Caesar no doubt with praise and noble thanks,
Regarding well this well deserved deed,
Whom we will present with this most pleasing gift,

Sem. Lo you my masters, he that kills but one,
Is straight a Villain and a murderer called,
But they that use to kill men by the great,
And thousands slay through their ambition,
They are brave champions, and stout warriors called,
It Is like that he that steals a rotten sheep
That in a dich would else have cast his hide,
He for his labor has the haltars hier.
But Kings and mighty Princes of the world,
By letter pattens rob both Sea and Land.
Do not then Pompey of thy murder plain,
Since thy ambition half the world has slain.

ACTVS 2. SCENA. 2.
Enter Cornelia. Corn. O traterous villains, hold your murdering hands,
Or if that needs they must be washed in blood,
Imbrue them here, here in Cornelias breast.
Ay me as I stood looking from the Ship
(Accursed ship that did not sink and drown:
And so have saved me from so loathed a sight)
Thee to behold what did betide my Lord,
My Pompey dear (nor Pompey now nor Lord)
I saw those villains that but now were here:
Bucher my love and then with violence,
To draw his dear beloved Body hence;
What do thou stand to play the Oratrix,
And tell a tale of thy dear husbands death?
Does Pompey, does thy love move thee no more?
Go cursed Cornelia rent thy wretched hair,
Drown blobred cheeks in seas of saltest tears.
And if, it be true that sorrows feeling power,
Could turn poor Niobe into a weeping stone
O let me weep a like, and like stone be,
And you poor lights, that saw this tragic sight,
Be blind and punnish'd with eternal night,
Unhappy long to speak, be near so bold
Since that thou this so heavy tale have told.
These are but womanish exclamations
Light sorrow makes such lamentations,
Pompey no words my true grief can declare,
This for thy love shall be my best welfare.

Stab her self. ACT. 2. SCE. 3.
Enter Caesar, Cleopatra, Anthony, Dolobella, a Lord, Caesar. There stern
Achillas and Fortunius lie,
Traytorous Sempronius and proud Ptolomey,
Go plead your cause fore the angry Rhadamant,
And tell him why you basely Pompey slew.
And let your guilty blood appease his Ghost,
That now sits wandering by the Stygian banks.
Unworthy sacrifice to quite his worth,
For Pompey though thou were mine enemy,
And vain ambition moved us to this strife;
Yet now in death when strife and envy cease.
Thy princely virtues and thy noble mind,
Move me to rue thy undeserved death,
That found a greater danger then it fled;
Vnhapy man to escape so many wars,
And to protract thy glorious day so long,
Here for to perish in a barbarous soil,
And end lives date stabd by a Bastards hand,
But yet with honor shall thou be Entombed,
I will enbalme thy body with my tears,
And put thy ashes in an Vrne of gold,
And build with marble a deserved grave.
Whose worth indeed a Temple ought to have.

Dolo. See how compassion draws forth Princely tears
And Virtue weeps her enemies funeral,
So sorrowed the mighty Alexander,
When Bessus hand caused Darius to die.

Ant. These grieved sorrowing Princes do with me.
Jointly agree in Contrariety,
Alack we mourn, grieved is our mind alike,
Our gate is discontented, heavy our looks,
Our sorrows all a like, but dislike cause.
Their foe is their grifes causer which my friend,
It is the loss of one that makes them wayle,
But I, that one there is a cruel one,
Do wayle and grieve and unregarded moan.
Fair beams cast forth from these dismayfull eyes,
Chain my poor heart, in love and sorrows gives,

Cleo. Forget sweet Prince these sad perlexed thoughts,
Withdraw thy mind in clowdy discontent,
And with Aegiptian pleasures feed thine eyes,
Will thou be hold the Sepulchers of Kings,
And Monuments that speak the workemens praise?
I Will bring thee to Great Alexanders Tomb,
Where he, whom all the world could not suffice,
In bare six foot of Earth, intombed lies,
And show thee all the cost and curious art,
Which either Cleops or our Memphis boast:
Would you command a banquit in the Court,
I Will bring you to a Royal goulden bower,
Fayrer then that wherein great Jove does sit,
And heaues up boles of Nectar to his Queen,
A stately Palace, whose fair doble gates:
Are wrought with garnished Carved Iuory,
And stately pillars of pure bullion framd.
With Orient Pearls and Indian stones imbost,
With golden Roofes that glister like the Sun,
Shall Be prepared to entertain my Love:
Or will thou see our Academick Schools,
Or hear our Priests to reason of the stars,
Hence Plato fecht his deep Philosophy:
And here in Heavenly knowledge they excel.

Antho. More then most fair, another Heaven to me,
The stars where on I Will gaze shall be thy face,
Thy moral deeds my sweet Philosophy,
Venus the muse whose aid I must implore:
O let me profit in this study best,
For Beauties scholar I am now prefest.

Lord. See how this fair Egiptian Sorceres,
Enchantes these Noble warriars man-like minds,
And melts their hearts in love and wantones.

Caes. Most glorious Queen, whose cheerful smiling (words)
Expel these clouds that over cast my mind.
Caesar will joy in Cleopatras joy,
And think his fame no whit disparaged,
To change his arms, and deadly sounding droms,
For loves sweet Lays, and Lydian harmony,
And now hang up these Idle instruments.
My warlike spear and uncontrolled crest:
My mortal wounding sword and silver shield,
And under thy sweet banners bear the brunt,
Of peaceful wars and amarous Alarmes:
Why Mars himself his bloody rage alayd,
Dallying in Venus bed has often played,
And great Alcides, when he did return:
From Iunos taskes, and Nemean victories,
From monsters fell, and Nomean toils:
Reposed himself in Deianiras arms.
Here will I pitch the pillars of my fame,
Here the non vltra of my labors write,
And with these Cheeks of Roses, locks of Gold,
End my lives date, and trauayles manifould.

Dolo. How many lets do hinder virtuous minds,
From the pursuit of honors due reward,
Besides Caribdis, and fell Scyllas spite:
More dangerous Circe and Calipsoes cup,
Then pleasant gardens of Alcionus:
And thousand lets voluptiousnesse does offer.

Caes. I will regard no more these murtherous spoils,
And bloody triumphs that I liked of late:
But in loves pleasures spend my wanton days,
I Will make thee garlondes of sweet smelling flowers,
And with fair rosall Chaplets crown thy head,
The purple Hyacinth of Phoebus Land:
Fresh Amarinthus that does never die,
And fair Narcissus dear respendent shoars,
And Violets of Daffadilles so sweet,
Shall Beautify the Temples of my Love,
Whilst I will still gaze on thy beauteous eyes,
And with Ambrosean kisses bath thy Cheeks.

Cleo. Come now fair Prince, and feast thee in our Courts
Where liberal Caeres, and Liaeus fat,
Shall power their plenty forth and fruitful store,
The sparkling liquor shall ore-flow his banks:
And Meroe learn to bring forth pleasant wine,
Fruitful Arabia, and the furthest Ind,
Shall spend their treasuries of Spicery,
With Nardus Coranets we will guird our heads:
And all the while melodious warbling notes,
Passing the seauen-fould harmony of Heaven:
Shall seem to ravish our enchanted thoughts,
Thus is the fear of unkind Ptolomey,
Changed by thee to feast in Iolity:

Antho. O how mine ears suck up her heavenly words,
The whilst mine eyes do prey upon her face:

Caes. Wind we then Anthony with this Royal Queen,
This day we will spend in mirth and banqueting.

Antho. Had I Queen, Iunoes heard-mans hundred eyes,
To gaze upon these two bright Suns of hirs:
Yet would they all be blinded instantly.

Caes. What has some Melancholy discontent,
Ore-come thy mind with trobled passions.

Ant. Yet being blinded with the Sunny beams,
Her beauties pleasing colors would restore,
Decayed sight with fresh variety.

Lord. Lord Anthony what means this trobled mind,
Caesar inuites thee to the royal feast,
That fair Queen Cleopatra has prepared.

Antho. Pardon me worthy Caesar and you Lords,
In not attending your most gracious speech
Thoughts of my Country, and return to Rome,
Som-what distempered my busy head.

Caes. Let no such thoughts distemper now thy mind,
This day to Bacchus will we consecrate,
And in deep goblets of the purest wine,
Drink healths unto our several friends at home.

Antho. It of my Country or of Rome I thought,
It Was that I never meant for to come there,
But spend my life in this sweet paradise.

Exeu^ ACT. 2. SCE. 4.
Enter Cicero, Brutus, Casca, Camber, Trebonius. Cice. Most prudent heads, that
with your councels wise,
The pillars of the mighty Rome sustain,
You see how civil broils have torn our state:
And private strife has wrought a public woe,
Thessalia boasts that she has seen our fall,
And Rome that whilom wont to Tiranize,
And in the necks of all the world has ranged,
Loosing her rule, to serve is now constraynd,
Pompey the hope and stay of Commonweal,
Whose virtues promised Rome security
Now flies distressed, disconsolate, forlorn,
Reproach of Fortune, and the victors scorn.

Caes. What now is left for wretched Rome to hope,
But in laments and bitter future woe,
To wey the downfall of her former pride:
Again Porsenna brings in Tarquins names,
And Rome again does smoke with furious flames.
In Pompeys fall we all are overthrown,
And subject made to conqueror Tirany.

Bru. Most Noble Cicero and you Roman Peers,
Pardon the author of unhappy news,
And then prepare to hear my tragic tale.
With that same look, that great Atrides stood,
At cruel alter staind with Daughters blood,
When Pompey fled pursuing Caesar's sword,
And thought to shun his following desteny.
And then began to think on many a friend,
And many a one recalled he to mind
Who in his Fortunes pride did leave their lives,
And vowed service at his princely feet,
From out the rest, the young Egiptian King,
Whose Father of an Exild banished man
He seated had in throne of Majesty,
Him chose, to whom he did commit his life,
(But O, who does remember good-turnes past)
The Rising Sun, not Setting, does men please,
To ill committed was so great a trust,
Unto so base a Fortune favoring mind.
For he the Conquerors favor to obtain,
By Treason caused great Pompey to be slain:

Casca. O damned deed.

Came. O Traiterous Ptolomey.

Tree. O most unworthy and ungrateful fact.

Cum. What plages may serve to expiate this act,
The rouling stone or euerturning wheel,
The quenchles flames of fiery Phlegeton,
Or endless thirst of which the Poets talk,
Are all to gentle for so vilde a deed.

Cas. Well did the Cibills unrespected verse.
Bid thee beware of Crocadilish Nile,

Ter. And art thou in a barbarous soil betrayed,
Defrawded Pompey of thy funeral rites,
There none could weep upon thy funeral hearse,
None could thy Consulshipes and triumphs tell,
And in thy death set fourth thy living praise,
None would erect to thee a sepulcher.
Or put thine ashes in a precious vrne,

Cice. Peace Lords lament not noble Pompeys death,
Nor think him wreched, cause he wants a Tomb,
Heaven couers him whom Earth denies a grave:
Think you a heap of stones could him enclose,
Who in the Oceans circuit buried is,
And every place where Roman names are heard,
The world is his grave, where living fame does blaze,
His funeral praise through his immortal trump,
And ore his tomb virtue and honor sits,
With rented hear and eyes bespent with tears,
And wail and weep their dear son Pompeys death,

Bru. But now my Lords for to augment this grief,
Caesar the Senates deadly enemy,
Aims eke to us, and means to triumph here,
Upon poor conquered Rome and common wealth,

Cas. This was the end at which he always aymd,

Tree. Then end all hope of Romans liberty,
Rise noble Roman, rise from rotten Tombs,
And with your swords recover that again:
With your brave prowes won, our baseness lost,

Gi^. Renowned Lords content your trobled minds,
Do not ad Fuel to the conquerors fire.
Which once inflamed will borne both Rome and us.
Caesar although of high aspiring thoughts,
And uncontrolled ambitious Majesty,
Yet is of nature fair and courteous,
You see he comes conqueror of the East,
Clad in the spoils of the Pharsalian fields,
Then we unable to resist such power:
By gentle peace and meek submission,
Must seek to pacify the victors wrath.

Exeunt. ACT. 2. SCE. 5.
Enter Cato Senior, and Cato Junior. Cat. Sen. My Son thou see how all are
overthrown,
That sought their Countries free-dome to maintain,
Egypt forsakes us, Pompey found his grave,
Where he most succor did expect to have:
Scipio is overthrown and with his haples fall,
Afric to us does former aid denay,
O who will help men in adversity:
Yet let us show in our declining state,
That strength of mind, that virtues constancy,
That erst we did in our felicity,
Though Fortune fayles us lets not fail our selves,
Remember boy thou art a Roman borne,
And Catoes Son, of me do virtue learn;
Fortune of others, above althings see
Thou prize thy Countries love and liberty,
All blessings Fathers to their Sons can wish
Heavens power on thee, and now my son with-drawe
Thy self a while and leave me to my book.

Cat. Iun. What means my Father by this solemn leave?
First he remembered me of my Fortunes change,
And then more earnestly did me exhort
To Counrries love, and constancy of mind,
Then he was wont: som-whats the cause,
But what I know not, O I fear I fear,
His to courageous heart that cannot bear
The thrall of Rome and triumph of his foe,
By his own hand threats danger to his life,
How ere it be at hand I will abide,
Waiting the end of this that shall betide.

Exit. Cato Senior with a book in his hand. Cato Sen. Plato that promised
immortality,
Does make my soul resolve it self to mount,
Unto the bower of those Celestial joys,
Where freed from lothed Prison of my soul,
In heavenly notes to Phoebus which shall sing:
And Pean Io, Pean loudely ring.
Then fail not hand to execute this deed,
Nor faint nor heart for to command my hand,
Waver not mind to counsel this resolve,
But with a courage and thy lives last act,
Now do I give thee Rome my last farewell.
Who cause thou fear ill do therefore die,
O talk not now of Cannas overthrow,
And raze out of thy lasting Kalenders,
Those bloody songs of Hilias dismal sight:
And note with black, that black and cursed day,
When Caesar conquered in Pharsalia,
Yet will not I his conquest glorify:
My overthrow shall near his triumph grace,
For by my death to the world I Will make that known,
No hand could conquer Cato but his own.

stabs himself. Enter Cato Junior running to him. Ca. Iun. O this it was my
mind told me before,
What means my Father, why with naked blade,
Do thou assault, that faithful princely hand:
And make the base Earth to drink thy Noble blood,
Be not more stern, and cruel against thy self,
Then thy most hateful enemies would be,
No Parthian, Gaul, Moore, no not Caesar's self,
Would with such cruelty thy worth repay,
O stay thy hand, give me thy fatal blade:
Which turns his edge and waxes blunt to wound*
A breast so fraught with virtue excellent.

Ca. Seni. Why do thou let me of my firm resolve,
Unkind boy hinderer of thy Fathers joy,
Why do thou slay me, or will thou betray
Thy Fathers life unto his foe-mens hands,
And yet I wrong thy faith, and love too much,
In thy souls kindness, it is thou art unkind.

Cat. Iun. If for your self you do this life reject,
Yet you your Sons and Countries: sake respect,
Rob not my young years of so sweet a stay,
Nor take from Rome the Pillor of her strength.

Cat. Seen. Although I die, yet do I leave behind,
My virtues favor to be thy youths guide:
But for my Country, could my life it profit,
I Will not refuse to live that died for it,
Now does but one small snuff of breath remain:
And that to keep, should I mine Honor stain?

Cat. Iuni. Where you do strive to show your virtue most,
There more you do disgrace it Cowards use,
To shun the woes and trobles of this life:
Basely to fly to deaths safe sanctuary,
When constant virtues does the hottest brunt's,
Of griefs assaults unto the end endure.

Ca. Seni. Thy words prevail, come lift me up my Son,
And call some help to bind my bleeding wounds.

Cat. Iuni. Father I go with a more willing mind,
Then did Aeneas when from Troyan fire,
He bare his Father, and did so restore:
The greatest gift he had received before.

Exit. Cat. Seni. Now have I freed me of that hurtful Love,
Which interrupted my resolved will,
Which all the world can never stay nor change:
Caesar whose rule commands both Sea and Land,
Is not of power to hinder this weak hand,
And time succeeding shall behold that I
Although not live, yet died courragiously,

stab himself. Enter Cato Junior. Ca. Iuni. O have thou thus to thine own
harm deceived me
Well I perceive thy Noble dauntles heart:
Because it would not bear the Conquerors insolence,
Used on it self this cruel violence,
I know not whether I should more lament,
That by thine own hand thou thus slaughtred art,
Or Joy that thou so nobly did depart.

Exit. FINIS. ACTVS. 2.
Enter Discord. Dis. Now Caesar rides triumphantly through Rome,
And deckes the Capitol with Pompeys spoil:
Ambition now does virtues seat vsurp,
Then thou Reuengfull great Adastria Queen.
Awake with horror of thy dubbing Drumm,
And call the snaky furies from below,
To dash the Joy of their triumphing pride,
Erinnis kindle now thy Stigian brands,
In discontented Brutus boiling breast,
Let Caesar die a bleeding sacrifice,
Unto the Soul of thy dead Country Rome.
Why sleep thou Cassius? wake thee from thy dream*
And yet thou naught do dream but blood and death.
For dreadful visions do afright thy sleep.
And howling Ghosts with ghastly horrors cry,
By Cassius hand must wicked Caesar die,
Now Rome cast of thy gaudy painted robes
And cloth thy self in sable colored weeds,
Change thy vain triumphs into funeral pomps,
And Caesar cast thy Laurel crown apart,
And bind thy temples with sad Cypres tree.
Of wars thus peace insues, of peace more harms,
Then erst was wrought by tragic wars alarmes,

Exit. ACT. 3. SCE. 1.
Enter Cassius. Cas. Hark how Caesarians with resounding shoutes,
Tell heavens of their pompes and victories,
Caesar that long in pleasures idle lap,
And daliance vain of his Proud Curtezan,
Had Iuld his stern and bloody thoughts a sleep,
Now in Rome streets ore Romans come to triumph,
And to the Romans shows those Tropheyes sad,
Which from the Romans he with blood did get:
The Tyrant mounted in his goulden chair,
Rides drawn with milk white palferies in like pride,
As Phoebus from his Oriental gate,
Mounted upon the fiery Phlegetons backs.
Comes prauncing forth, shaking his dewie locks:
Caesar thou art in gloryes cheifest pride,
Thy son is mounted in the highest point:
Thou placed art in top of fortunes wheel,
Her wheel must turn, thy glory must eclipse,
Thy Sun descend and loose his radiant light,
And if none be, whose countries ardent love,
And loss of Roman liberty can move,
I Will be the man that shall this task perform.
Cassius has vowed it to dead Pompeys soul,
Cassius has vowed it to afflicted Rome,
Cassius has vowed it, witness Heaven and Earth,

Exit* ACTVS 3. SCENA 2.
Enter Caesar, Antony, Dolobella, Lords, two Romans, and others Caesar. Now
have I shaked of these womanish linkes,
In which my captiud thoughts were chayned a fore,
By that fair charming Circes wounding look,
And now like that same ten years trauayler,
Leaving be-hind me all my trobles past.
I come awayted with attending fame,
Who through her shrill triump does my name resound,
And makes proud Tiber and Lygurian Poe,
(Yet a sad witner of the Sunne-Gods loss,)
Bear my names glory to the Ocean main,
Which to the worlds end shall it bound it again^,
As from Phaegiean fields the King of Gods,
With conquering spoils and Tropheus proud returned,
When great Typheus fell by thundering darts,
And rod away with their Caelestiall troops,
In greatest pride through Heavens smooth paued way,
So shall the Pompeous glory of my train,
D^ring to match old Saturns kingly Son,
Call down these goulden lamps from the bright sky,
And leave Heaven blind, my greatness to admire.
This laurel garland in fair conquest made,
Shall stayne the pride of Ariadnes crown,
Clad in the beauty of my glorious lamps,
Cassiopea leave thy starry chair,
And on my Sun-bright Chariot wheels attend,
Which in triumphing pomp does Caesar bear.
To Earths astonishment, and amaze of Heaven*
Now look proud Rome from thy seuen-fould seat,
And see the world thy subject, at thy feet,
And Caesar ruling over all the world.

Dolo. Now let us cease to boast of Romulus,
First author of high Rome and Romans name.
Nor talk of Scaurus, worthy Africans,
The scurge of Libia, and of Carthage pride,
Nor of unconquered Paulus dauntles mind,
Since Caesar's glory them exceedes as far
As shining Phebe does the dimmest star.

Ant. Like as the Ship-man that has lost the star.
By which his doubtful ship he did direct,
Wanders in darkness, and in Cloudy night,
So having lost my starr, my Gouernesse.
Which did direct me, with her Sonne-bright ray,
In grief I wander and in sad dismay:
And though of triumphs and of victoryes,
I do the out-ward signs and Trophies bear,
Yet see mine inward mind under that face,
Whose colors to these Triumphs is disgrace.

Lord. As when from vanquished Macedonia,
Triumphing ore King Persius overthrow,
Conquering Aemelius, in great glory came.
Showing the worlds spoils which he had bereft,
From the successors of great Alexander,
With such high pomp, yea greater victories,
Caesar triumphing coms into fair Rome,

1. Romans In this one Champion all is comprehended,
Which ancient times in several men commended,
Alcides strength, Achilles dauntles heart,
Great Phillips Son by magnanimity.
Stern Pyrhus valor, and great Hectors might,
And all the prowes, that either Greece or Troy,
Brought forth in that same ten years Trojans war.

2. Romans Fair Rome great monument of Romulus.
Thou mighty seat of consuls and of Kings:
Ouer-victorious now Earths Conqueror,
Welcome thy valiant son that to thee brings,
Spoils of the world, and exquies of Kings.

Caesar. The conquering Issue of immortal Jove.
Which in the Persian spoils first fetch his fame.
Then through Hydasspis, and the Caspian waves,
Unto the sea unknown his praise did propagate,
Must to my glory veil his conquering crest:
The Lybick Sands, and Africa Sirts he past.
Bactrians and Zogdians, known but by their names,
Whereby his arms resistles, powers subdued,
And Ganges streams congeald with Indian blood,
Could not transeport his burden to the sea.
But these nere learned at Mars his games to play,
Nor tossed these bloody bals, of dread and death:
Arar and proud Saramna speaks my praise,
Rohdans shrill Tritons through their brazen trumpes,
Ecco my fame against the Gallian Towers,
And Isis wept to see her daughter Thames.
Chainge her clear cristall, to vermilian sad,
The big bond German, and Heluetian stout,
Which well have learned to toss a tusked spear,
And well can curb a noble stomackt horse,
Can Caesar's valor witness to their grief
Iuba the mighty Afric Potentate,
That with his cole-black Negroes to the field,
Backed with Numidian and Getulian horse,
Has felt the puissance of a Roman sword.
I entered Asia with my banners spread,
Displayed the Aegle on the Euxin sea:
By Jason first, and ventrous Argo cut,
And in the rough Cimerian Bosphorus*
A heavy witness of Pharnaces flight,
And now am come to triumph here in Rome,
With greater glory then ere Roman did.

Exeunt. Sound drums and Trumpets amain. Enter Anthony. Antho. Alas these
triumphs move not me at all,
But only do renew remembrance sad,
Of her triumphing and imperious looks,
Which is the Saint and Idol of my thoughts:
First was I wounded by her percing eye:
Next prisoner taken by her captiuing speech,
And now she triumphs ore my conquered heart,
In Cupids Chariot ryding in her pride,
And leads me captive bound in Beauties bonds:
Caesar's lip-loue, that never touched his heart,
By present triumph and the absent fire,
Is now waxt could; but mine that was more deep^,
Engraven in the marble of my breast,
Nor time nor Fortune ere can raze it out.

Enter Anthonies bonus genius. Genesis Anthony, base femall Anthony,
Thou woman's soldier, fit for nights assaults,
Have thou so soon forgot the discipline,
And wilsome taskes thy youth was trained to,
Thy soft down Pillow, was a helm of steel:
The could damp earth, a bed to ease thy toil,
Afrigted slumbers were thy golden sleeps:
Hunger and thirst thy sweetest delicates,
Stern horror, ghastly wounds, pale greesly death:
Thy wind depressing pleasures and delights,
And now so soon has on enchanted face,
These manly labors luld in drowsy sleep:
The Gods (whose messenger I here do stand)
Will not then drown thy fame in Idleness:
Yet must Philippi see thy high exploytes,
And all the world ring of thy Victories.

Antho. Say what thou art, that in this dreadful sort
Forbidd'st me of my Cleopatra^s love.

Genesis I am thy bonus Genius, Anthony,
Which to thy dull ears this do prophecy:
That fatal face which now does so bewitch thee,
Like to that vain unconstant Greekish dame,
Which made the stately Ilian towers to smoke,
Shall thousand bleeding Romans lay one ground:
Hymen in sable not in saferon robes,
Instead of roundes shall doleful dirges singe.
For nuptial tapers, shall the furies bear,
Blew-burning torches to increase your fear:
The bride-grooms scull shall make the bridal bonds*
And hel-borne hags shall dance an Antic round,
While Hecate Hymen (heu, heu) Hymen cries,
And now methinkes I see the seas blew face:
Hidden with ships, and now the trumpets sound,
And weak Canopus with the Aegle strives,
Neptune amazed at this dreadful sight:
Calls blew sea Gods for to behold the fight,
Glaucus and Panopea, Proteus old,
Who now for fear changes his wonted shape,
Thus your vain love which with delight begun:
In Idle sport shall end with blood and shame.

Exit. Antho. What wast my Genius that me threatened thus?
They say that from our birth he does preserve:
And on me will he power these miseries?
What burning torches, what alarums of war,
What shames did he to my loves prophecy?
O no he comes as winged Mercury,
From his great Father Jove, to Anchises son
To warn him leave the wanton dalliance,

And charming pleasures of the Tyrian Court,
Then wake the Anthony from this idle dream,
Cast of these base effeminate passions:
Which melt the courrage of thy manlike mind,
And with thy sword receive thy sleeping praise.

Exit. ACT. 3. SC. 3.
Enter Brutus. Bru. How long in base ignoble patience,
Shall I behold my Countries woeful fall,
O you brave Romans, and among'st the rest
Most Noble Brutus, fair befall your souls:
Let Peace and Fame your Honored graves awaite,
Who through such perils, and such tedious wars,
Won your great labors prise sweet liberty,
But we that with our life did freedoms take,
And did no sooner Men, then freemen, breath:
To loose it now continuing so long,
And with such laws, such vows, such oaths confirmed
Can nothing but disgrace and shame expect:
But soft what see I written on my seat,
O vtinam Brute viueres.
What means this, thy courage dead,
But stay, read forward, Brute mortuus es.
I thou art dead indeed, thy courrage dead
Thy care and love thy dearest Country dead,
Thy wonted spirit and Noble stomach dead.

Enter Cassius. Cassi. The times draw near by gracious heavens assignd
When Philips Son must fall in Babylon,
In his triumphing proud persumption:
But see where melancholy Brutus walks,
Whose mind is hammering on no mean conceit:
Then sound him Cassius, see how he is inclined,
How fares young Brutus in this tottering state*

Bru. Even as an idle gazer, that beholdes,
His Countries wrackes and cannot succor bring.

Cassi. But will Brute always in this dream remain,
And not be moved with his Countries moan.

Bru. O that I might in Lethes endless sleep,
And near awaking pleasant rest of death
Close up mine eyes, that I no more might see,
Poor Romes distress and Countries misery.

Casi. No Brutus live, and wake thy sleepy mind,
Stir up those dying sparks of honors fire,
Which in thy gentle breast wear wont to flame:
See how poor Rome oppressed with Countries wrongs,
Implores thine aid, that bred thee to that end,
Thy kins-mans soul from heaven commandes thine aid:
That lastly must by thee receive his end,
Then purchase honor by a glorious death,
Or live renowned by ending Caesar's life.

Bru. I can no longer bear the Tirants pride.
I cannot hear my Country cry for aid,
And not be moved with her pitious moan,
Brutus thy soul shall never more complain:
That from thy lineage and most virtuous stock,
A bastard weak degenerat brahch is borne,
For to distaine the honor of thy house.
No more shall now the Romans call me dead,
I Will live again and rowze my sleepy thoughts:
And with the Tirants death begin this life.
Rome now I come to rear thy states decayed,
When or this hand shall cure thy fatal wound,
Or else this heart by bleeding on the ground.

Cas. Now heaven I see applaudes this enterprise,
And Rhadamanth into the fatal Vrne,
That lotheth death, has thrust the Tirants name,
Caesar the life that thou in blood have led:
Shall heap a bloody vengance on thine head.

Exeum. ACT. 2. SCE. 4.
Enter Caesar, Anthony Dolobella, Lords, and others. Caes. Now servile Pharthia
proud in Roman spoil,
Shall pay her ransom unto Caesar's Ghost:
Which unrevenged roues by the Stygian strond,
Exclaming on our sluggish negligence.
Leave to lament brave Romans, lo I come,
Like to the God of battle, mad with rage,
To die their rivers with vermilion red:
I Will fill Armenians playnes and Medians hills,
With carkases of bastard Scithian brood,
And there proud Princes will I bring to Rome,
Chained in fetters to my chariot wheels:
Desire of fame and hope of sweet reueng,
Which in my breast has kindled such a flame,
As nor Euphrates, nor sweet Tybers stream,
Can quench or stack this fervent boiling heat:
These conquering soldiers that have followed me,
From vanquished France to sunburned Meroe,
Matching the best of Alexanders troops.
Shall with their looks put Parthian foes to flight,
And make them twice turn their deceitful looks,

Ant. The restless mind that harbors sorrowing thoughts,
And is with child of noble enterprise,
Does never cease from honors toilesome task,
Till it bringes forth Eternal gloryes brood.
So you fair branch of virtues great descent,
Now having finished Civil wars sad broils,
Intend by Parthian triumphs to enlarge,
Your contryes limits, and your own renown,
But cause in Sibilles civil writs we find,
None but a King that conquest can atchiue,
Both for to crown your deeds with due reward,
And as auspicious signs of victory.
We here present you with this Diadem,

Lord. And even as kings were banished Romes high throne
Cause their base vice, her honor did destayne,
So to your rule does she submit her self,
That her renown there by might brighter shine,

Caesar. Why think you Lords that it is ambitions spur.
That pricketh Caesar to these high attempts,
Or hope of Crowns, or thought of Diadems,
That made me wade through honors perilous deep,
Virtue unto it self a shure reward,
My labors all shall have a pleasing doom,
If you but Judge I will deserve of Rome:
Did those old Romans suffer so much ill?
Such tedious seeges, such enduring wars?
Tarquinius hates, and great Porsennas threats,
To banish proud imperious tyrants rule?
And shall my euerdaring thoughts contend
To mar what they have brought to happy end:
Or think you cause my Fortune has expeld,
My friends, come let us march in iolity,
I Will triumph Monarke-like ore conquering Rome,
Or end my conquests with my countries spoils,

Dolo. O noble Princely resolution.
These or not victoryes that we so call,
That only blood and murtherous spoils can vaunt:
But this shall be thy victory brave Prince,
That thou have conquered thy own climing thoughts,
And with thy virtue beat ambition down,
And this no less inblazon shall thy fame.
Then those great deeds and chiualrous attempts,
That made thee conqueror in Thessalia.

Ant. This noble mind and Pincely modesty,
Which in contempt of honors brightness shines,
Makes us to wish the more for such a Prince,
Whose virtue not ambition won that praise,
Nor shall we think it loss of liberty.
Or Roman liberty any way impeached,
For to subject us to his Princely rule,
Whose thoughts fair virtue and true honor guides:
Vouchsafe then to accept this goulden crown,
A gift not equal to thy dignity.

Caes. Content you Lords for I will be no King,
An odious name unto the Roman care,
Caesar I am, and will be Caesar still,
No other title shall my Fortunes grace:
Which I will make a name of higher state
Then Monarch, King or worlds great Potentate.
Of Jove in Heaven, shall ruled be the sky,
The Earth of Caesar, with like Majesty.
This is the Scepter that my crown shall bear,
And this the golden diadem I Will wear,
A far more rich and royal ornament,
Then all the Crowns that the proud Persian gave:
Forward my Lords let Trumpets sound our march,
And drums strike up Reuenges sad alarms,
Parthia we come with like incensed heat,
As great Atrides with the angry Greeks,
Marching in fury to pale walls of Troy.

ACT. 3. SC. 5.
Enter Cassius, Brutus, Trebonius, Cumber Casca. Tree. Brave Lords whose forward
resolution,
Shows you descended from true Roman line,
See how old Rome in winter of her age,
Reioyseth in such Princely budding hopes,
No less then once she in Decius virtue did,
Or great Camillus bringing back of spoils.
On then brave Lords of this attempt begun,
The sacred Senate does commend the deed:
Your Countries love incites you to the deed,
Virtue her self makes warrant of the deed,
Then Noble Romans as you have begun:
Never desist until this deed be done.

Casi. To thee Reueng does Cassius kneel him down.
Thou that brings quiet to perplexed souls,
And borne in Hell, yet harborest heavens joys,
Whose favor slaughter is, and dandling death,
Bloodthirsty pleasures and mis boding bliss:
Brought forth of Fury, nurse of cankered Hate,
To drown in woe the pleasures of the world.
Thou shall no more in duskish Erebus:
And dark-some hell obscure thy Deity,
Insteede of Jove thou shall my Godesse be,
To thee fair Temples Cassius will erect:
And on thine alter built of Parian stone
Whole Hecatombs will I offer up.
Laugh gentle Godesse on my bold attempt,
Yet in thy laughter let pale meager death:
Be wrapped in wrinkels of thy murdering spoils.

Bru. An other Tarquin is to be expeld,
An other Brutus lives to act the deed:
It Is not one nation that this Tarquin wrongs,
All Rome is stayn'd with his vnrul'd desires,
She whose imperial scepter was invr'd:
To conquer Kings and to control the world,
Cannot abate the glory of her state,
To yield or bow to one man's proud desires:
Sweet Country Rome here Brutus vows to thee,
To loose his life or else to set thee free.

Cas. Shame be his share that does his life so prize,
That to Romes weal it would not sacrifize,
My Poniardes point shall pearce his heart as deep,
As erst his sword Romes bleeding side did goare:
And change his garments to the purple die,
With which our blood had staynd sad Thessaly.

Came. He does refuse the title of a King,
But we do see he does vsurp the thing.

Tree. Our ancient freedom he empeacheth more,
Then ever King or Tyrant did before.

Cas. The Senators by him are quite disgraced,
Rome, Romans, City, Freedom, all defaced.

Cassi. We come not Lords, as unresolved men,
For to show causes of the deed decreed,
This shall dispute for me and tell him why,
This heart, hand, mind, has marked him out to die:
If it be true that furies quench-les thirst,
Is pleased with quaffing of ambitious blood,
Then all you devils whet my Poniards point,
And I will broach you a bloud-sucking heart:
Which full of blood, must blood store to you yield,
Were it a peerce to flint or marble stone:
Why so it is for Caesar's heart's a stone,
Else would be moved with my Countries moan.
They say you furies instigate men's minds,
And push their arms to finnish bloody deeds:
Prick then mine Elbo: goade my bloody hand,
That it may* goare Caesar's ambitious heart.

Exeunt. ACTVS 3. SCENA 6.
Enter Caesar, Calphurnia. Caes. Why thinks my love to fright me with her
dreams?
Shall bug-beares fear Caesar's undaunted heart,
Whom Pompeys Fortune never could amaze,
Nor the French horse, nor Mauritanian boe,
And now shall vain illusions me affright:
Or shadows daunt, whom substance could not quell?

Calphur. O dearest Caesar, have thou seen thy self,
(As troubled dreams to me did feign thee seen:)
Torn, Wounded, Maimed, Blod-slaughtered, Slain,
O thou thy self, would then have dread thy self:
And feared to thrust thy life to dangers mouth.

Caes. There you bewray the folly of your dream,
For I am well, alive, vncaught, untouched.

Calphur, It Was in the Senate House I saw thee so,
And yet thou dreadles thither needs will go.

Caes. The Senate is a place of peace, not death,
But these were but deluding visions.

Calphur. O do not set so little by the heavens,
Dreams at divine, men say they come from Jove,
Beware betimes, and be not wise to late:
Men's good endeavors change the wills of Fate.

Caes. Weep not fair love, let not thy woeful tears
Bode me, I know what thou would not have to hap
It will distaine mine honor won in fight
To say a woman's dream could me affright.

Call. O Caesar no dishonor can thou get,
In seeking to prevent unlucky chance:
Foole-hardy men do run upon their death,
Be thou in this persuaded by thy wife:
No valor bids thee cast away thy life.

Caes. It Is dastard cowardice and childish fear,
To dread those dangers that do not appear:

Call. Thou must sad chance by forecast, wise resist,
Or being done say boote-les had I wist.

Caes. But for to fear where is no suspicion,
Will to my greatness be derision.

Call. There lurkes an adder in the greenest grass,
Dangers of purpose always hide their face:

Caes. Persuade no more Caesar's resolved to go.

Call. The Heavens resolve that he may safe return,
For if ought happen to my love but well:
His danger shall be doubled with my death.

Exit. Enter Augur. Augur. I come they are, but yet they are not gone.

Caes. What have thou sacrifiz'd, as custom is,
Before we enter in the Senat-house.

Augur. O stay those steeps that lead thee to thy death,
The angry heavens with threeatning dire aspect,
Boding mischance, and balfull massacers,
Menace the overthrow of Caesar's powre^
Saturn sits frowning on the God of War,
Who in their sad conjunction do conspire,
Uniting both their bale full influences,
To heap mischance, and danger to thy life:
The Sacrificing beast is heart-les found:
Sad ghastly sightes, and raised Ghostes appear,
Which fill the silent woods, with groaning cries:
The hoarse Night-rauen tunes the chearles voice,
And calls the bale-full Owl, and howling Doge,
To make a consort. In whose sad song is this,
Near is the overthrow of Caesar's bliss.

Exit. Caesar. The world is set to fray me from my wits,
Heers harteles Sacrifice and visions,
Howlinge and cries, and ghastly groans of Ghosts,
Soft Caesar do not make a mockery,
Of these Prodigious signs sent from the Heavens,
Calphurnias Dream lumping which Augurs words,
Show (if thou markest it Caesar) cause to fear:
This day the Senate there shall be dissolved,
And I Will return to my Calphurnia home,
One gives him a paper. What have thou hear that thou presents us with,

Pre. A thing my Lord that does concern your life.
Which love to you and hate of such a deed,
Makes me reveal unto your excellence.
Caesar laughs. Smilest thou, or think thou it some ilde toy,
Thout frown a non to read so many names.
That have conspird and sworn thy bloody death,

Exit. Enter Cassius. Cassius. Now must I come, and with close subtle girdes,
Deceive the prey that I Will devour anon,
My Lord the Sacred Senate does expect,
Your royal presence in Pompeius court:

Caesar. Cassius they tell me that some dangers nigh.
And death pretended in the Senate house.

Cassi. What danger or what wrong can be,
Where harmeles gravity and virtue sits,
It Is past all danger present death it is,
Nor is it wrong to render due desert.
To fear the Senators without a cause,
Will be a cause why they will be to be feared,

Caesa. The Senate stays for me in Pompeye court.
And Caesar's here, and dares not go to them,
Pack hence all dread of danger and of death,
What must be must be; Caesar's pressed for all,

Cassi. Now have I sent him headlong to his end,
Vengance and death awayting at his heels,
Caesar thy life now hangs on a twine,
Which by my Poniard must be cut in twain,
Thy chair of state now turned is to thy Beer,
Thy Princely robes to make thy winding sheet:
The Senators the Mourners ore the Hearse,
And Pompeys Court, thy dreadful grave shall be.

Senators cry all at once. Omnes. Hold down the Tyrant stab him to the death*

Casi. Now does the music play and this the song
That Cassius heart has thirsted for so long:
And now my Poniard in this mazing sound,
Must strike that touch that must his life confound.
Stab on, stab on, thus should your Poniards play,
Aloud deep note upon this trembling Kay.

stab him. Buco. Bucolian sends thee this.

stab him. Cum. And Cumber this.

stab him. Cas. Take this from Casca for to quite Romes wrongs.

C^s. Why murtherous villains know you who^ you strike,
It Is Caesar, Caesar, whom your Poniards pierce:
Caesar whose name might well afright such slaves:
O Heavens that see and hate this heinous guilt,
And thou Immortal Jove that Idle hold
Deluding Thunder in thy faynting hand,
Why stay'st thy dreadful doom, and do withold,
Thy three-fork'd engine to revenge my death:
But if my plaintes the Heavens cannot move,
Then blackest hell and Pluto be thou judge:
You greesly daughters of the cheereles night.
Whose hearts, nor prayer nor pity, ere could lend,
Leave the black dungeon of your Chaos deep:
Come and with flaming brandes into the world,
Revenge, and death, bring seated in yout eyes:
And plauge these villaynes for their trecheries.

Enter Brutus. Bru. I have held Anthony with a vain discourse,
The whilst the deed's in execution,
But lives he still, yet does the Tyrant breath?
Chalinging Heavens with his blasphemies,
Here Brutus makes a passage for thy Soul,
To plead thy cause for them whose aid thou crauest,

Caes. What Brutus to? nay nay, then let me die,
Nothing wounds deeper then ingratitude,

Bru. I bloody Caesar, Caesar, Brutus too,
Does geeue thee this, and this to quite Romes wrongs,

Cassius. O had the Tyrant had as many lives.
As that fell Hydra borne in Lerna lake,
That hear I still might stab and stabing kill,
Till that more lives might be extinquished,
Then his ambition, Romans Slaughtered.

Tree. How heavens have justly on the authors head,
Returned the guiltles blood which he has shed,
And Pompey, he who caused thy Tragedy,
Here breathles lies before thy Noble Statue,

Enter Anthony. Anth. What cries of death resound within my eats,
Whom I do see great Caesar buchered thus?
What said I great? I Caesar thou wast great,
But O that greatness was that brought thy death:
O unjust Heavens, (if Heavens at all there be,)
Since virtues wrongs makes question of your powers,
How could your starry eyes this shame behold,
How could the sun see this and not eclipze?
Fair bud of fame ill cropped before thy time:
What Hyrcan tygar, or wild savage bore,
(For he more heard then Bore or Tiger was,)
Durst do so vile and execrate a deed,
Could not those eyes so full of majesty,
Nor priesthood (o not thus to be prophand)
Nor yet the reverence to this sacred place,
Nor flowing eloquence of thy goulden tongue,
Nor name made famous through immortal merit,
Deter those murtherors from so vild a deed?
Sweet friend accept these obsequies of mine,
Which hear with tears I do unto thy hearse,
And thou being placed among the shining stars.
Shall down from Heaven behold what deep reueng,
I will inflict upon the murderers,

Exit with Caesar, in his arms. FINIS. Act. 3.
Enter Discord. Dis. Brutus thou have what long desire has sought,
Caesar Lies weltring in his purple Goare,
Thou art the author of Romes liberty,
Proud in thy murdering hand and bloody knife.
Yet think Octauian and stern Anthony.
Cannot let pass this murder unrevenged,
Thessalia once again must see your blood,
And Roman drommes must strike up new alaromes*
Hark how Bellona shakes her angry lance:
And envy clothed in her crimson weed,
Me thinks I see the fiery shields to clash,
Eagle against Eagle, Rome against Rome to fight,
Phillipi, Caesar, quittance must thy wrongs,
Whereas that hand shall stab that traiterous heart.
That durst encourage it to work thy death,
Thus from thine ashes Caesar does arise
As from Medeas haples scatered teeth:
New flames of wars, and new outrageous broils,
Now smile Aemathia that even in thy top,
Romes victory and pride shall be entombd,
And those great conquerors of the vanquished earth,
Shall with their swords come there to dig their graves.

ACTVS. 4. SCENA. 1.
Enter Octauian. Octa. Mourn gentle Heavens for you have lost your joy.
Mourn grieved earth thy ornament is gone,
Mourn Rome in great thy Father is deceased:
Mourn thou Octauian, thou it is must mourn,
Mourn for thy Uncle who is dead and gone.
Mourn for thy Father to ungently slain,
Mourn for thy Friend whom thy mishap has lost,
For Father, Vnkell, Friend, go make thy moan,
Who all did live, who all did die in one.
But here I vow these black and sable weeds,
The outward signs of inward heaviness,
Shall changed be ere long to crimsen hew,
And this soft raiment to a coat of steel,
Caesar, no more I hear the mornefull songs.
The tragic pomp of his sad exequies,
And deadly burning torches are at hand,
I must accompany the mornefull troop:
And sacryfice my tears to the Gods below.

Exit. Enter Caesar's Hearse Calphurnia Octauian, Anthony, Cicero, Dolobella,
two Romans, mourners. Calp. Set down the hearse and let Calphurnia weep,
Weep for her Lord and bath his Wounds in tears:
Fear of the world, and only hope of Rome,
Thou whilst thou liuedst was Calphurnias joy,
And being dead my joys are dead with thee:
Here does my care and comfort resting lie:
Let them accompany thy mournful hearse.

Cice. This is the hearse of virtue and renown,
Here stroe red roses and sweet violets:
And laurel garlands for to crown his fame,
The Princely weed of mighty conquerors:
These worthles obsequies poor Rome bestows,
Upon thy sacred ashes and dear hearse.

1. Romans And as a token of thy living praise,
And fame immortal take this laurel wreath,
Which witnesses thy name shall never die:
And with this take the Love and tears of Rome,
For on thy tomb shall still engraven be,
Thy loss, her grief, thy deaths, her pitying thee,

Dolo. Unwilling do I come to pay this debt,
Though not unwilling for to crown desert,
O how much rather had I this bestowed,
On thee returning from foes overthrow,
When living virtue did require such meede,
Then for to crown thy virtue being dead,
Lord. Those wreaths that in thy life our conquests crowned
And our fair triumphs beauty glorified,
Now in thy death do serve thy hearse to adorn,
For Caesar's living virtues to be crowned,
Not to be wept as buried under grownd,

2. To. Thou whilst thou liuedst wast fair virtues flower
Crowned with eternal honor and renown,
To thee being dead, Flora both crowns and flowers,
(The cheifest virtues of our mother earth,)
Does give to gratulate thy noble hearse.
Let then they soul divine vouchsafe to take,
These worthles obsequies our love does make.

Calp. All that I am is but despair and grief,
This all I give to Celebrate thy death,
What funeral pomp of riches and of pelf,
Do you expect? Calphurnia gives her self.

Ant. You that to Caesar justly did decree
Honors divine and sacred reverence:
And often him graced with titles well deserved,
Of Countries Father, stay of Commonwealth.
And that which never any bare before,
Inviolate, Holy, Consecrate, Vntucht.
Do see this friend of Rome, this Contryes Father,
This Son of lasting fame and endless praise,
And in a mortal trunk, immortal virtue
Slaughtered, profaned, and bucherd like a beast,
By traiterous hands, and damned Paracides:
Recounte those deeds and see what he has don,
Subdued those nations which three hundred years.
Remaynd unconquered; still afflicting Rome,
And recompensed the fiery Capitol,
With many Cities unto ashes burnt:
And this reward, these thanks you render him:
Here lies he dead to whom you owe your lives:
By you this slaughtered body bleedes again,
Which often for you has bled in fearful fight.
Sweet wounds in which I see distressed Rome,
From her pearc'd sides to power forth streams of blood,
Be you a witness of my sad Souls grief:
And of my tears which wounded heart does bleed,
Not such as use from womanish eyes proceed.

Octa. And were the deed most worthy and vnblamed.
Yet you unworthily did do the same:
Who being partakers with his enemies,
By Caesar all were saved from death and harm,
And for the punnishment you should have had,
You were preferred to Princely dignities:
Rulers and Lords of Provinces were you made,
Thus thanke-les men he did prefer of naught,
That by their hands his murder might be wrought.

All at once except Anthony and Octauian. Omnes. Revenge, Revenge upon the
murderers.

Antho. Brave Lords this worthy resolution shows,
Your dearest love, and great affection
Which to this slaughtered Prince you always bare,
And may like bloody chance befall my life:
If I be slack for to revenge his death.

Octa. Now on my Lords, this body lets inter:
Amongst the monuments of Roman Kings,
And build a Temple to his memory:
Honoring therein his sacred Deity.

Exeunt omnes. ACT. 4. SC. 2.
Enter Cassius, and Brutus with an army. Cassi. Now Romans proud foe, worlds
common enemy,
In his greatest hight and chiefest Iollitie,
In the Sacred Senate House is done to death:
Even as the Consecrated Ox which soundes,
At horny alters in his dying pride:
With flowery leaves and gar-lands all bedight,
Stands proudly waiting for the hasted stroke:
Till he amazed with the dismal sound,
Falls to the Earth and stains the holy ground,
The spoils and riches of the conquered world,
Are now but idle Trophies of his tomb:
His laurel gar-landes do but Crown his chair,
His sling, his shilde, and fatal bloody spear,
Which he in battle often against Rome did bear,
Now serve for naught but rusty monuments.

Bru. So Romulus when proud ambition,
His former virtue and renown had stained:
Did by the Senators receive his end,
But soft what boades Titinnius hasting speed.

Enter Titinnius. Titin. The frantike people and impatient,
By Anthonyes exhorting to revenge:
Run madding throw the bloody streets of Rome,
Crying Revenge, and murdering they go,
All those that caused Caesar's overthrow.

Cassi. The wavering people pytiyng Caesar's death,
Do rage at us, who fore to win their weal:
Spare not the danger of our dearest lives,
But since no safety Rome for us affordes:
Brutus weell have us to our Provinces,
I into Sire, thou into Maccedon,
Where we will muster up such martial bands,
As shall afright our following enemies.

Bru. In Thessaly we will meet the Enemy,
And in that ground distaynd with Pompeys blood,
And fruitful made with Roman massaker,
We Will either sacrifice our guilty foe,
To appease the furies of these howling Ghostes,
That wander restles through the shemy ground
Or else that Thessaly be a common Tomb:
To bury those that fight to infranchize Rome.

Titin. Bravely resolved, I see young Brutus mind,
Strengthened with force of virtues sacred rule:
Contemns death, and holds proud chance in scorn.

Bru. I that before feared not to do the deed,
Shall never now repent it being done,
No more I Fortuned, like the Roman Lord,
Whose faith brought death yet with immortal fame,
I kiss thee hand for doing such a deed:
And thank my heart for this so Noble thought,
And bless the Heavens for favoring my attempts:
For Noble Rome, and if thou be not free,
Yet I have done what ever lay in me:
And worthy friend as both our thoughts conspired,
And joined in union to perform this deed,
This acceptable deed to Heavens and Rome,
So lets continue in our high resolve:
And as we have with honor thus begun,
So lets persist, until our lives be done.

Cassi. Then let us go and with our warlike troops,
Collected from our several Provinces,
Make Asia subject to our Conquering arms,
Brutus thou have commanded the Illirian bands:
The feared Celts and Lusitanian horse,
Parthenians proud, and Thrasians borne in war:
And Macedon yet proud with our old acts,
With all the flower of Lovely Thessaly,
Under my warlike colors there shall march:
New come from Syria and from Babylon,
The warlike Mede, and the Arabian Boe,
The Parthian fighting when he seems to fly:
Those conquering Gauls that built their seats in Greece,
And all the Costers on the Mirapont.

ACT. 3. SCE. 1.
Enter Caesar's Ghost. Gho. Out of the horror of those shady vaultes,
Where Centaurs, Harpies, pains and furies fell:
And Gods and Ghosts and ugly Gorgons dwell,
My restles soul comes here to tell his wrongs.
Hayle to thy walls, thou pride of all the world,
Thou art the place where whilome in my life.
My seat of mounting honor was erected,
And my proud throane that seemed to check the heavens.
But now my pomp and I are laid more low,
With these asosiates of my overthrow,
Here ancient Assure and proud Belus lies,
Ninus the first that sought a Monarchs name.
Atrides fierce with the Aeacides,
The Greek Heroes, and the Trojan flower,
Blood-thirsting Cyrus and the conquering youth:
That sought to fetch his pedigree from Heaven,
Stern Romulus and proud Tarquinius,
The mighty Sirians and the Ponticke Kings,
Alcides and the stout, Carthagian Lord,
The fatal enemy to the Roman name.
Ambitious Sylla and fierce Marius,
And both the Pompeyes by me don to death,
I am the last not least of the same crew,
Look on my deeds and say what Caesar was,
Thessalia, Aegipt, Pontus, Africa,
Spain Britain, Almany and France,
Saw many a bloody trial of my worth.
But why do I my glory thus restrain,
When all the world was but a Charyot,
Wherein I rode Triumphing in my pride?
But what auayles this tale of what I was?
Since in my chefest hight Brutus base hand.
With three and twenty wounds my heart did goare,
Give me my sword and shild I Will be Revenged,
My mortal wounding spear and goulden Crest.
I will dishorse my foemen in the field,
Alas poor Caesar thou a shadow art,
An ayery substance wanting force and might,
Then will I go and cry upon the world,
Exclame on Anthony and Octauian,
Which seek through discord and discentions broils,
Timbrue their weapons in each others blood,
And leave to execute my just revenge,
I hear the drums and bloody Trumpets sound,
O how this sight my grieved soul does wound,

Enter Anthony, at on door, Octauian at another with Soldiers. Anth. Now
martial friends competitors in arms,
You that will follow Anthony to fight,
Whom stately Rome has often her Consul seen,
Graced with eternal trophes of renown,
With Libian triumphs and liberian spoils,
Who scorns to have his honor now distaind,
Or credit blemished by a Boys disgrace,
Prepare your dauntles stomakes to the fight,
Where without striking you shall over come.

Octa. Fellows in war-faire which have often served,
Under great Caesar my disceased sier,
And have returned the conquerors of the world,
Clad in the Spoils of all the Orient:
That will not brook that any Roman Lord,
Should iniure mighty Julius Caesar's son,
Recall your wonted valor and these hearts,
That never entertaynd Ignoble thoughts
And make my first warre-faire and fortunate:

Ant. Stike up drums, and let your banners fly,
Thus will we set upon the enemy.

Gho. Cease Drums to strike, and fould your banners up,
Wake not Bellona with your trumpets Clange,
Nor call unwilling Mars unto the field:
See Romans, see my wounds not yet closed up,
The bleeding monuments of Caesar's wrongs.
Have you so soon for got my life and death?
My life wherein I reard your fortunes up.
My death wherein my reared fortune fell,
My life admired and wondered at of men?
My death which seemed unworthy to the Gods,
My life which heaped on you rewards and gifts,
My death now begges one gift; a just reueng.

Ant. A Chilly cowld possesses all my Joints,
And pale wan fear does cease my fainting heart,

Octa. O see how terrible my Fathers looks?
My hair stands stiff to see his greisly hue:
Alas I dear not look him in the face,
And words do cleave to my benumbed Jaws.

Gho. For shame weak Anthony throw thy weapons down
Son sheath thy sword, not now for to be drawn,
Brutus must feel the heavy stroke thereof:
But if that needs you will into the field,
And that wars envy pricks your forward hate.
To slack your fury with each others blood,
Then forward on to your prepared deaths
Let sad Alecto sound her fearful trump.
Reueng a rise in loathsome fable weeds,
Light-shining Treasons and vnquenced Hates,
Horror and ugly Murder (nights black child,)
Let stern Maegera on her thundering drum,
Play ghastly music to comfort your deaths.
Banner to banner, foot against foot opos'd,
Sword against sword, shild against shild, and life to life,
Let death go raginge through your armed ranks,
And load himself with heaps of murdered men,
And let Heavens justice send you all to Hell,

Anth. Shamst thou not Anthony to draw thy sword,
On Caesar's Son, for rude rash youth full brawles,
And do let pass their treason vnrevenged,
That Caesar's life and glory both did end,

Octa. Shame of my self, and this intended fight,
Does make me fear to approach his dreadful sight:
Forgive my slacknes to revenge thy wrongs,
Pardon my youth that rashly was mislead,
Through vain ambition for to do this deed,

Gho. Then join your hands and hear let battle cease,
Chang fear to Joy, and war to smooth-fac't Peace.

Oct. Then Father here in sight of Heaven and thee,
I give my hand and heart to Anthony,

Ant. Take likewise mine, the hand that once was vowd',

To be imbrued in thy lukewarm blood,
Which now shall strike in young Octauians rights.

Gho. Now swear by all the Dieties of Heaven,
All Gods and powers you do adore and serve:
For to return my murder on their cruel head,
Whose traiterous hands my guiltles blood have shed.

Anth. Then by the Gods that through the raging waves,
Brought thee brave Trojan to old Latium,
And great Quirinus placed now in Heaven:
By the Gradinus that with shield of Brass,
Defendest Rome, by the ouerburning flames
Of Vesta and Carpeian Towers of Jove.
Vows Anthony to quite thy worthy death,
Or in performance loose his vital breath.

Octa. The like Octauian vows to Heaven and thee.

Gho. Then go brave warriors with succesfull hap,
Fortune shall wait upon your rightful arms,
And courage sparkell, from your Princely eyes,
Darts of revenge to daunt your enemies.

Antho. Now with our armies both conjoined in one,
We Will meet the enemy in Macedon:
Aemathian fields shall change her flowery green,
And die proud Flora in a sadder hew:
Silver Stremonia, whose fair Crystal waves,
Once sounded great Alcides echoing fame:
When as he slew that fruitful headed snake,
Which Lerna long-time fostered in her womb:
Shall in more tragic accentes and sad tunes,
Echo the terror of thy dismal fight,
Hemus shall fat his barren fields with blood:
And yellow Ceres spring from wounds of men,
The toyling husbandmen in time to come,
Shall with his harrow strike on rusty helmes,
And find, and wonder, at our swords and spears,
And with his plowe dig up brave Romans graves:

Finis. Act. ACT. 5. SCE. 1.
Enter Discord. Dis. The balefull harvest of my joy, thy woe
Gins ripen Brutus, Heavens command it so.
Pale sad Auernus opes his yawning Jaws,
Seeking to swallow up thy murtherous soul,
The furies have proclaym'd a festival:
And mean to day to banquet with thy blood,
Now Heavens array you in your clowdy weeds:
Wrap up the beauty of your glorious lamp,
And dreadful Chaos, of sad drery night,
Thou Sun that climest up to the eastern hill:
And in thy Chariot rides with swift steedes drawn,
In thy proud Iollity and radiant glory:
Go back again and hide thee in the sea,
Darkness to day shall cover all the world:
Let no light shine, but what your swords can strike,
From out their steely helmes, and fiery shildes:
Furies, and Ghosts, with your blue-burning lamps,
In mazing terror ride through Roman ranks:
With dread affrighting those stout Champions hearts,
All stygian fiendes now leave whereas you dwell:
And come into the world and make it hell.

Enter Cassius, Brutus, Titinnius, Cato Junior, with an army marching Casi.
Thus far we march with unresisted arms,
Subduing all that did our powers with-stand:
Laodicia whose high reared walls,
Fair Lyeas washes with her silver wave:
And that brave monument of Perseus fame,
With Tursos vaild to us her vanting pride,
Fair Rhodes, I weep to think upon thy fall:
Thou were to stubberne, else thou still had stood,
Inviolate of Cassius hurtles hand,
That was my nurse, where in my youth I drew
The flowing milk of Greekish eloquence:
Proud Capadocia saw her King captived,
(And Dolabella vanting in the spoils.
Of slain Trebonius) fall as springing tree,
Seated in lovely Tempes pleasant shades:
Whom beuteous spring with blossoms brave has decked,
And sweet Fauonia manteled all in green,
By winters rage does loose his flowery pride,
And has each twigg barred by northern winds.
Thus from the conquest of proud Palestine,
Hither in triumph have we marched along,
Making our force-commaunding rule to stretch,
From fair Euphrates crystal flowing waves
Unto the Sea which yet weeps Io's death,
Slain by great Hercules repenting hand,

Bru. Of all the places by my sword subdued,
Pity of thee poor Zanthus moves me most;
Thrice have thou ben beseeged by thy foe,
And thrice to save thy liberty have felt
The fatal flames of thine own cruel hand.
First being beseeg'd by Harpalus the Mede,
The stern performer of proud Cyrus wrath:
Next when the Macedonian Phillips son,
Did raise his engines against thy battered walls,
Proud Zanthus that did scorn to bear the yoke,
That all the world was forced to sustain,
Last when that I my self did guirt thy walls,
With troops of high resolved Roman hearts,
Rather then thou would yield to Brutus sword,
Or stayne the maiden honor of thy Town,
Did sadly fall as proud Numantia.
Scorning to yield to conquering Scipios power.

Cas. And now to thee Phillipi, are we come,
Whose fields must twice feel Roman cruelty,
And flowing blood like to Darcean playnes,
When proud Eteocles on his foaming steed,
Rides in his fury through the Argean troops,
Now making great Aerastus give him way,
Now beating back Tidaeus puissant might:
The ground not dried from sad Pharsalian blood,
Will now be turned to a purple lake:
And bleeding heaps and mangled bodies slain,
Shall make such hills as shall surpass in height
The Snowy Alps and aerie Appenines,

Titi. A Scout brought word but now that he descryd,
Warlike Anthonius and young Caesar's troops,
Marching in fury over Thessalian playnes.
As great Gradinus when in angry mood,
He drives his chariot down from heavens top,
And in his wheels whirleth reueng and death:
Here by Phillippi they will pich their tents,
And in these fields (fatal to Roman lives)
Hazard the fortune of the doubtful fight,

Cat. O welcome thou this long expected day,
On which depends Roman liberty,
Now Rome thy freedom hangs in suspense,
And this the day that must assure thy hopes.

Cassi. Great Jove, and thou Try^onyan warlike Queen:
Armed with thy amazing deadly Gorgons head.
Strengthen our arms that fight for Roman wealth:
And thou stern Mars, and Romulus thy Son,
Defend that City which your self begun.
All heavenly powers assist our rightful arms,
And send down silver winged victory,
To crown with Lawrells our triumphant Crests.

Bru. My mind that's trobled in my vexed soul,
(Oppressed with sorrow and with sad dismay,)
Misgiues me this will be a heavy day.

Cassi. Why faint not now in these our last extremes,
This time craves courage not dispayring fear,

Titin. Fie, twill distayne thy former valiant acts.
To say thou faintest now in this last act,

Bru. My mind is heavy, and I know not why.
But cruel fate does sommon me to die,

Cato. Sweet Brute, let not thy words be ominous signs,
Of so mis-fortunate and sad event,
Heaven and our Valor shall us conquerours make.

Cassi. What Bastard fear has taunted our dead hearts,
Or what vnglorious vnwounted thought,
Has changed the valor of our daunted minds.
What are our arms grown weaker then they were?
Cannot this hand that was proud Caesar's death,
Send all Caesarians headlong that same path?
Look how our troops in Sun-bright arms do shine,
With vaunting plumes and dreadful bravery.
The wrathful steedes do check their iron bits,
And with a well graced terror strike the ground,
And keeping times in wars sad harmony.
And then has Brutus any cause to fear,
My self like valiant Peleus worthy Son,
The Noblest wight that ever Troy beheld,
Shall of the adverse troops such hauock make,
As sad Phillipi shall in blood bewail,
The cruel massacre of Cassius sword,
And then has Brutus any cause to fear?

Bru. No outward shows of puissance or of strength,
Can help a mind dismayed inwardly,
Leave me sweet Lords a while unto my self.

Cassi. In the mean time take order for the fight,
Drums let your fearful mazing thunder play.
And with their sound pierce Heavens brazen Towers,
And all the earth fill with like fearful noise,
As when that Boreas from his Iron cave.
With boisterous furyes Striving in the waves,
Comes swelling forth to meet his blustering foe,
They both do run with feerce tempestuous rage,
And heaues up mountains of the watery waves.
The God Oceanus trembles at the stroke,

Bru. What hateful furyes vex my tortured mind?
What hideous sightes appalle my grieved soul,
As when Orestes after mother slain.
Not being yet at Scithians Alters purged,
Behold the greesly visages of fiends.
And ghastly furies which did haunt his steps,
Caesar vpbraues my sad ingratitude,
He saved my life in sad Pharsalian fields,
That I in Senate house might work his death.
O this remembrance now does wound my soul,
More then my poniard did his bleeding heart,

Enter Ghost. Gho. Brutus, ungrateful Brutus see thou me:
Anon In field again thou shall me see,

Bru. Stay what so ere thou art, or fiend below,
Raised from the deep by inchanters bloody call,
Or fury sent from Phlegitonticke flames,
Or from Cocytus for to end my life,
Be then Megera or Tysiphone,
Or of Eumenides ill boading crew.
Fly me not now, but end my wretched life,
Come greesly messenger of sad mishap,
Trample in blood of him that hates to live,
And end my life and sorrow all at once.

Gho. Accursed traitor damned Homicide,
Know thou not me, to whom for forty honors:
Thou three and twenty Ghastly wounds did give?
Now dare no more for to behold the Heavens,
For they to Day have destyned thine end:
Nor lift thy eyes unto the rising sun,
That nere shall live for to behold it set,
Nor look not down unto the Hellish shades,
There stand the furyes thursting for thy blood,
Fly to the field but if thou thither go,
There Anthonyes sword will pierce thy traiterous heart.
Brutus to day my blood shall be revenged,
And for my wrong and undeserved death,
Thy life to thee a torture shall become,
And thou shall often amongst the dying groans,
Of slaughtered men that bite the bleeding earth.
With that like balefull cheer might thee befall,
And seek for death that flies so wretched wight,
Until to ^^ unne the honor of the fight,
And dreadful vengeance of supernall ire.
Thine own right hand shall work my wished reueng,
And so Fare ill, hated of Heaven and Men.

Bru. Stay Caesar stay, protract my grief no longer,
Rip up my bowels glut thy thirsting throat,
With pleasing blood of Caesar's guilty heart:
But see he is gone, and yonder Murder stands.
See how he points his knife unto my heart.
Althea raueth for her murdered Son,
And weeps the deed that she her-selfe has done:
And Meleager would thou liuedst again,
But death must expiate. Altheas come.
I, death the guerdon that my deeds deserve:
The drums do thunder forth dismay and fear,
And dismal triumphs sound my fatal knell,
Furyes I come to meet you all in Hell,

Enter Cato wounded. Cato. Bloodles and faint; Cato yield up thy breath;
While strength and vigor in these arms remaynd,
And made me able for to wield my sword,
So long I fought; and sweet Rome for thy sake
Feared not effusion of my blood to make.
But now my strength and life does fail at once,
My vigor leaves my could and feeble Joints,
And I my sad soul, must power forth in blood.
O virtue whom Philosophy extols.
Thou art no essence but a naked name,
Bond-slaue to Fortune, weak, and of no power.
To succor them which always honored thee:
Witness my Fathers and mine own sad death,
Who for our country spent our latest breath:
But oh the chains of death do hold my tongue,
Mine eyes wax dim I faint, I faint, I die.
O Heavens help Rome in this extremity.

Cass. Where shall I go to tell the saddest tale,
That ere the Roman tongue was forced to speak,
Rome is overthrown, and all that for her fought:
This Sun that now has seen so many deaths,
When from the Sea he heaued his cloudy head,
Then both the arms full of hope and fear,
Did wait the dreadful trumpets fatal sound,
And straight Revenge from Stygian bands let loose,
Possessed had all hearts and banished thence,
Fear of their children, wife and little home.
Countries remembrance, and had quite expeld,
With last departed care of life it self:
Anger did sparkell from our beauteous eyes,
Our trembling fear did make our helmes to shake,
The horse had now put on the riders wrath,
And with his hoofes did strike the trembling earth,
When Echalarian soundes then both gin meet:
Both like enraged, and now the dust gins rise,
And Earth does emulate the Heavens clouds,
Then yet beutyous was the face of cruel war:
And goodly terror it might seem to be,
Fair shieldes, gay swords, and goulden crests did shine.
Their spangled plumes did dance for solity,
As nothing privy to their Masters fear,
But quickly rage and cruel Mars had staynd,
This shining glory with a sadder hew,
A cloud of darts that darkened Heavens light,
Horror instead of beauty did suceede.
And her bright arms with dust and blood were foyld:
Now Lucius falls, hear Drusus takes his end,
Here lies Hortensius, weltring in his goare.
Here, there, and every where men fall and die,
Yet Cassius show not that thy heart does faint:
But to the last gasp for Romans freedom fight,
And when sad death shall be thy labors end,
Yet boast thy life thou did for Country spend.

Enter Anthony. Ant. Queen of Revenge imperious Nemesis*
That in the wrinkels of thine angry brows,
Wrapst dreadful vengance and pale fright-full death:
Rain down the bloody showers of thy revenge,
And make our swords the fatal instruments,
To execute thy furious bale-full Ire,
Let grim death seat her on my Lances point,
Which percing the weak armor of my foes,
Shall lodge her there within there coward breasts,
Dread, horror, vengance, death, and bloody hate:
In this sad fight my murdering sword awaite.

Exit Enter Titinnius. Titin. Where may I fly from this accursed soil,
Or shun the horror of this dismal day:
The Heavens are colored in mourning sable weeds,
The Sun does hide his face, and fears to see,
This bloody conflict; sad Catastrophe,
Nothing but groans of dying men are heard:
Nothing but blood and slaughter may be seen
And death, the same in sundry shapes araied.

Enter Cassius. Casi. In vain, in vain, O Cassius all in vain,
It Is Heaven and destiny thou striuest against.

Titin. What better hope or more accepted tydinges,
Is It Noble Cassius from the Battle bring?

Cassi. This haples hope that fates decreed have,
Philippi field must be our haples grave.

Titin. And then must this accursd and fatal day,
End both our lives and Roman liberty:
Must now the name of freedom be forgot,
And all Romes glory in Thessalia end?

Casi. As those that lost in boisterous troublous seas,
Beaten with rage of Billows stormy strife:
And without stars do sail against stars and wind.
In drery darkness and in chereles night,
Without or hope or comfort endless are:
So are my thoughts dejected with dismay,
Which can naught look for but poor Romes decay.
But yet did Brutus live, did he but breath?
Or lay not slumbering in eternal night,
His welfare might infuse some hope, or life:
Or at the least bring death with more content:
Weried I am through labor of the fight:
Then sweet Titinnius, range thou through the field,
And either glad me with my friends success,
Or quickly tell me what my care does fear:
How breathles he upon the ground does lie,
That at thy words, I may fall down and die.

Titin. Cassius, I go to seek thy Noble friend,
Heaven grant my goings have a prosperous end.

Cassi. O go Titinnius, and till thy return,
Here will I sit disconsolate alone,
Romes sad mishap, and mine own woes to moon:
O ten times treble fortunate were you,
Which in Pharsalias bloody conflict dyed,
With those brave Lords, now laid in bed of fame:
Which near protected their most blessed days,
To see the horror of this dismal fight,
Why died I not in those Aemathian playnes,
Where great Domitius fell by Caesar's hand?
And swift Eurypus down his bloody stream
Bare shieldes and helmes and trains of slaughtered men,
But Heavens reserud me to this luckles day,
To see my Countries fall and friends decay.
But why does not Titinnius yet return?
My trembling heart misgiues me what is befalne,
Brutus is dead: I: herke how willingly
The Ecco itterates those deadly words,
The whisling winds with their mourning sound,
Do fill mine ears with noise of Brutus death,
The birds now chanting a more cheerles lay,
In doleful notes record my friends decay.
And Philomela now forgets old wrongs,
And only Brutus wayleth in her songs.
I hear some noise, O it is Titinnius,
No it is not he, for he does fear to wound,
My grieved ears with that hearts-thrilling sound.
Why do thou feed my thoughts with lingering hope?
Why do thou then prolong my life in vain?
Tell me my sentence and so end my pain:
He comes not yet, nor yet, nor will at all,
Linger not Cassius for to hear reply,
What if he come and tells me he is slain?
That only will increase my dying pain,
Brutus I come to company thy soul,
Which by Cocytus wandreth all alone.
Brutus I come prepare to mere thy friend
Thy brothers fall procures this balefull end.

Enter Titinius. Titi. Brutus does live and like a second Mars,
Rages in heat of fury mongest his foes,
Then cheer thee Cassius, lo I bring relief*
And news of power to ease thy stormy grief,
But see where Cassius weltreth in his blood,
Does beat the Earth, and yet not fully dead.
O Cassius speak, O speak to me sweet friend,
Brutus does live; open thy dying eyes,
And look on him that hope and comfort ^^^^gs.
O noe, he will not look on me but cries,
That by my long delays he haples dies:
Accursed villain murderer of thy friend,
Why has thy lingering thus wrought Cassius end,
How cold thy care was to prevent this deed,
How slow thy love that made no greater speed,
Care winged is, and burning love can fly,
My care was feareles, love but flattery,
But sithence in my life my love was never shown,
Now in my death I Will make it to be known.
Accursed weapon that such blood could spil,
Nay cursed then the author of this deed,
Yet both offended, both shall punished be,
I Will take reueng of the knife, the knife of me,
It shall make a passage for my life to pass,
Cause through my life his master murdered was.
And I on it again will venged be.
Cause it did work my Cassius tragedy.
Then this reueng shall be to end my life.
Mine to distayne with baser blood the knife.

Enter Brutus the Ghost following him. Bru. What do thou still pursue me
ugly fend,
Is this it that thou thirsted for so much?
Come with thy tearing claws and rend it out,
Would thy appeaseles rage be slacked with blood,
This sword to day has crimsen channels made,
But heare's the blood that thou woulds drink so feign,
Then take this percer, broch this traiterous heart.
Or if thou think death to small a pain,
Drag down this body to proud Erebus,
Through black Cocytus and infernal Styx,
Lethean waves, and fires of Phlegeton,
Boil me or burn, tear my hateful flesh,
Devour, consume, pull, pinch, plague, pain this heart,
Hell craves her right, and here the furyes stand,
And all the hell hounds compass me a round
Each seeking for a part of this same prey,
Alas this body is lean, thin, pale and wan,
Nor can it all your hungery mouths suffice,
O it is the soul that they stand gaping for,
And endless matter for to prey upon.
Renewed still as Titius pricked heart.
Then clap your hands, let Hell with Joy resound?
Here it comes flying through this aerie round.

Gho. Hell take their hearts, that this ill deed have done
And vengeance follow till they be overcome:
Nor live to applaud the justice of this deed.
Murder by her own guilty hand does bleed.

Enter Discord Dis. I, now my longing hopes have their desire,
The world is nothing but a massy heap:
Of bodies slain, The Sea a lake of blood,
The Furies that for slaughter only thirst,
Are with these Massakers and slaughters cloyde,
Tysiphones pale, and Megeras thin face,
Is now puffed up, and swollen with quaffing blood,
Caron that used but an old rotten boat
Must now a navy rigg for to transport,
The howling souls, unto the Stigian stronde.
Hell and Elisium must be digd in one,
And both will be to little to contain,
Numberles numbers of afflicted ghostes,
That I my self have tumbling thither sent.

Gho. Now nights pale daughter since thy bloody joys,
And my reuengfull thirst fulfilled are,
Do thou applaud what justly heavens have wrought,
While murder on the murderers head is brought.

Dis. Caesar I pitied not thy Tragic end:
Nor tyrants daggers sticking in thy heart,
Nor do I that thy deaths with like repayd,
But that thy death so many deaths has made:
Now cloyde with blood, I Will hye me down below,
And laugh to think I caused such endless woe.

Gho. Since my reueng is full accomplished,
And my deaths causers by them selves are slain,
I will descend to mine eternal home,
Where everlastingly my quiet soul,
The sweet Elysium pleasure shall enjoy,
And walk those fragrant slowry fields at rest:
To which nor fair adonis bower so rare,
Nor old Alcinous gardens may compare.
There that same gentle father of the spring,
Mild Zephirus does Odours breath divine:
Clothing the earth in painted bravery,
The which nor winters rage, nor Scorching heat,
Or Summers sun can make it fall or fade,
There with the mighty champions of old time,
And great Heroes of the Goulden age,
My dateles hours I Will spend in lasting joy.

FINIS.

