THE SPIRITVAL TOVCHSTONE: OR, THE SIGNS OF A GODLY MAN: Drawn in so plain
and profitable a manner, as all sorts of Christians may try themselves thereby.

Together with Directions, how the weak Christian, by the use of these Signs
may establish his assurance.

By N. BIFIELD Preacher of Gods word at Isleworth in Middlesex.

2. COR. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be reprobates? LONDON, Printed by R. FIELD, for JONAS MAN. 1619.

TO THE MVCH HONOred Lady, the Lady RVTH SCYDAMORE increase of peace and joy
in believing.
HOw great the benefit of assurance of Gods favor and of our own salvation
is, those only know that are either scourged with the conflicts and terrors of
their own doubtings, or that are solaced and established with the sweet dewes
of refreshing that arise from a rooted and well grounded faith. If men study
assurances so much for their outward possessions in this world, how much more
earnest and diligent should men be to assure Gods love and the inheritance of
the glory to come? There is not a clearer sign of a profane heart, then to
account these cares needless: nor do I know a iuster exception against any
religion, then that it should teach, that when a man has done what he can to
observe the directions of that religion, yet he cannot be sure he shall go to
heaven.

But since I know that all that are possessed of the grace of Jesus Christ, do
account assurance great riches, I therefore conceive hope that my pains about
this subject will not be altogether unacceptable: and the rather because in
this present treatise I have endeavored to express the signs of trial in a
much more easy way then before; and besides have added directions, that show
how a weak Christian may establish himself in his assurance.

I make bold to dedicate my new Essay herein unto your Ladyship. You have heard
the substance hereof preached, and received it with much gladness; and in the
private use of these signs, you have been pleased to profess (to the glory
of God) that you have found much contentment and establishment of your own
assurance. Your eminency in the sincere profession and practice of true
religion, and the shining of the graces here entreated of, long acknowledged by
many witnesses, have made you worthy to be publikly observed and praised in the
Churches of Christ: and your great respect and favor showed to me, has made
this way of testifying my thankfulness, but as a small pledge and assurance of
my desire to do your Ladyship any service in the things of Jesus Christ. Thus
beseeching God to enlarge the comforts of his Spirit in your heart, and to
prosper you in all things that concern the blessed hope of the appearing of
Jesus Christ our mighty God and Savior, I end, and rest

Your Ladyships to be commanded, N. Bifield.

CHAP. I.
Describing the godly man by such signs as discover him to the observation of
other men.

THe signs of the true Christian that has true grace in this world, and shall
be saved in heaven when he dies, may be cast into two Catalogues. The Two
Catalogues of signs.
one more brief: the other more large. The one Catalogue of signs describe
him by such marks, as for the most part do outwardly distinguish him amongst
men. The large Catalogue I intend especially as a more infallible and
effectual way of trial, as co^taining such signs as for the most part are
not observed by other men, or not fully, but are known to himself, and can be
found in no reprobate.

For the first Catalogue: The shorter Catalogue handled in this Chapter.
The true Christian usually discouers himself by these marks.

First, he will not have 1. He auoids the company of the wicked.
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; he will not walk in the
counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners. He will not sort
himself with workers of iniquity. Psalm. 1. 1. and 26. 2. Cor. 6.

Secondly, he will afflict 2. He is sorrowful for his sin.
and humble his soul for his sins, mourning and weeping for them, till the
Lord be pleased to show mercy and forgive him. He does account his sins to
be his greatest burden. He cannot make a mock of sin, etc.

Thirdly, he labors 3. He is thoroughly reformed in conversation.
to be holy in all parts of his conversation, watching over his own ways at
all times, and in all companies. Psalm. 50. 23. Esa. 56. 8. 2. Pet. 3.

Fourthly, he makes 4. He makes conscience of lesser sins as well as greater.
conscience of the least commandments as well as the greatest, avoiding filthy
speaking, and vain jesting, and lasciviousness, as well as whoredom: lesser
oaths as well as the greater; reprochful speeches as well as violent actions,
etc.

Fifthly, he loves and 5. He loves preaching.
esteems, and labors for the powerful preaching of the word, above all
earthly treasures.

Sixthly, he honors 6. He esteems the godly above all men.
and highly accounts of the godly, and delights in the company of such as
truly fear God, above all others. Psalm. 15.

Seventhly, he is careful 7. He is careful of the sanctification of the
Sabbath.
of the sanctification of the Sabbath; neither daring to violate that holy rest
by labor, nor to neglect the holy duties belonging to Gods service public or
private. Esa. 56. and 58.

Eighthly, he loves not 8. He is not in love with the world.
the world, neither the things thereof, but is more heartily affected in things
that concern a better life, and so does in some degree love the appearing of
Christ.

Ninthly, He is easy 9. He loves his enemies.
to be entreated, he can forgive his enemies, desires peace, and will do good
even to them, that persecute him, if it lie in his power: Math. 5.

Tenthly, he goes 10. He is constant in good courses, though opposed.
on in the profession of the sincerity of the Gospel, and does such duties as
he knows God requires of him in businesses of his soul, notwithstanding the
oppositions of profane persons, or the dislike of carnal friends, etc.

Eleuenthly, he sets 11. He serves God in his family.
up a daily course of serving of God, and that with his family too, if he have
any; and exercises himself in the word of God, as the chief joy of his
heart, and the daily refuge of his life, calling upon God continually, etc.

CHAP. II.
Showing the general division of the Signs, and the ways how the signs were
found out.

THus of the shorter Catalogue of signs: Now it follows, that I proceed to
those infallible marks of Election, and salvation. And whereas I have diverse
years since published a Treatise which I called Essays, or signs of God
love, and man's salvation: Having observed The occasion of this Treatise.
that diverse have accounted the manner of setting the signs down somewhat
obscure in diverse parts of the book, I will now by Gods assistance, for the
helping of the weakest Christians in this Treatise, endeavor to express my
self in this doctrine of the trial of a true Christians estate in a more
plain and easy course of examination; and leave both the former treatise, and
his new Catalogue unto the blessing of God, and the free choice of the godly
reader of use, which he finds most agreeable to his own taste, being both
such as are warranted and founded upon the infallible evidence of Gods
unchangeable truth.

In this project then I consider of the trial of The signs referred to six
heads.
a true Christian six ways.

First, in his humiliation.

Secondly, in his faith.

Thirdly, in the gifts of his mind, with which he is qualified.

Fourthly, in the works of his obedience.

Fifthly, in the entertainment he has from God.

Sixthly, in the manner of his receiving of the Sacraments.

In all which he differs from all the wicked men in the world, so as never any
wicked man could find these things in his condition, which are true of the
weakest Christian in each of these signs.

And that the true Christian may not doubt of his estate, having found these
signs The infallibility of the signs.
in himself, let him consider the proofs annexed to each sign: and that
nothing may be wanting to his abundant consolation, I will tell him, how I
found out those signs, and by what grounds I proceeded.

There are three sorts 3. Ways to find out the signs of a godly man in
Scripture.
of places in Scripture (as I conceive) which do point out the grounds of
infallible assurance in those that can attain unto them: as first, such places
as expressly do affirm, that such and such things are signs: As for example 1.
John 3. 14. Hereby we know, that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the brethren. Here the holy Ghost shows us expressly, that the love of
the brethren is a sign, by which a Christian may know, that he is translated
from death to life: and so the Apostle Paul gives signs to know, whether their
sorrow were after God, or no. 2. Cor. 7. 11. So does the Prophet David, Psalm.
15. give diverse signs, by which the man that shall dwell in Gods holy hill, may
be known. So the Apostle James tells us, how we may know the wisdom from
above, by reckning the fruits and effects of it. Iam. 3. 17. So does the
Apostle Paul tell us, how we may know, whether we have the Spirit of Christ in
us or no, Romans 8. 9. 15. etc. Gal. 5. 22. and 4. 6. 7.

Secondly, I find out signs, by marking, what graces in man the promises of
God are made unto; for thus I reason: Whatsoever gifts of God in man brings him
within the compass of Gods promises of eternal mercy: that gift must be an
infallible sign of salvation. But such are such and such gifts, as the
instances in diverse Scriptures show: And therefore the man that can find those
gifts in himself, shall be certainly saved. As for example: The kingdom of
heaven is promised to such as are poor in spirit, Math. 5. 4. From thence then
I gather, that poverty of spirit is an infallible sign. The like I may say of
the love of the word, and of uprightness of heart, and of the love of God, and
the love of the appearing of Christ, etc.

Thirdly, I find out other signs by observing what godly men in Scripture have
said for themselves, when they have pleaded their own evidence for their
interest in Gods love, or their hope of a better life. For look how godly men
in Scripture have proved that they were not hypocrites: even so may any
Christian prove that he is not an hypocrite neither. As for example, Job being
charged to be an hypocrite, and lying under the heavy hand of God, pleades his
cause, and proves that he was not an hypocrite, by his constancy in Gods
ways, and by his constant estimation of Gods word, and desire after it, as
after his appointed food, Job 23. 10. 11. 12. More of this kind thou may find
in the proofs of particular signs.

Now whereas some signs are general, and thou might doubt of ye exposition,
namely how that sign is infallible in such and such senses: For thy
establishment herein, thou may observe, that I expound the sign as it is
expounded in other several Scriptures. As for example: The love of the
brethren, is a general sign. Now how shall I know that I have the right love
of the brethren? This I explane by flying to diverse other Scriptures, wherein
the particular explications of this sign are pleaded.

CHAP. III.
The trial of a Christian by the signs of true humiliation.

THe first way then, by which a Christian may try himself, is to examine
himself about his humiliation for sin, whether it be right or no. For under
this head is comprehended the explication of the doctrine of poverty of
spirit, and godly sorrow, and so in general of repentance for sins.

Now the true Christian in this matter of humiliation shows himself to have
attained 26. Signs of true humiliation.
that, which no reprobate could ever attain: and that in diverse particulars,
as,

First, he has a true 1. He sees his sins.
sight and sense of his sins. He discernes his sinfulness of life both past
and present, and is affected and pained under the burden of his daily wants
and corruptions, and sees his misery in respect of his sins. Ierem. 3. 12.
Math. 11. 29. Math. 5. 4.

Secondly, he trembles 2. He fears Gods displeasure.
at Gods word, and fears his displeasure, while it yet hangs in the
threatenings. Esa. 66. 1. 2.

Thirdly, he renounceth 3. He trusts not upon the merit of his own works.
his own merits, and disclaimeth all opinion of true happiness in himself,
or in any thing under the Sun; as being fully persuaded, that he cannot be
saved by any works of his own, or be happy in enjoying any worldly things;
and therefore is fully resolved to seek for the chief good in Gods favor in
Jesus Christ only.

Fourthly, he mournes 4. He mournes.
heartily and secretly for his sins; and so he does,

1. For all sorts of sins: For all sorts of sin.
for secret sins as well as known sins; for lesser sins as well as
greater; for the present evils of his nature and life, as well as sins past:
yea for the sins he has loved, or have been gainful and pleasing to him. Yea
he grieves for the evil that cleaues to his best works, as well as for evil
works, Esa. 6. 5. Romans 7. Esa. 1. 16. Math. 5. 6.

2. For sin as it is sin, For sin as it is sin.
and not as it does or might bring him shame, or punishments in this life, or
in hell.

3. He is as much troubled As much as for crosses.
for his sins, as he was wont, or now should be for crosses in his estate. He
mournes as heartily for the sorrows that fell upon Gods Son for his sin,
as if he had lost his own and only son, Zachar. 12. 10, 11. or at least
this he strives for, and judges himself, if worldly afflictions do trouble
him more then his sins. Psalm. 38. 5.

Fifthly, he is truly grieved 5. And for the sins of others.
and vexed in soul for the abominations that are done by others, to the
dishonor of God, or slander of true religion, or the ruin of the souls of
men. Thus Lot, 2. Pet. 2. 6. and David, Psalm. 119. 136. and the mourners
marked for Gods own people. Ezech. 9. 4.

Sixthly, he is heartily 6. And for spiritual judgments.
affected, and troubled, and grieved for spiritual judgments, that reach unto
the souls of men, as well as wicked men are wont to be troubled for temporal
crosses; and so he is grieved and perplexed for hardness of heart, (when he
cannot mourn as he would,) and for the famine of the word, or for the absence
of God, or for the blasphemies of the wicked, or the like. Psalm. 42. 2. 3. and
137. Nehem. 1. 3. 4. Esaias 63. 17.

Seventhly, he is most 7. And is moved thereunto by Gods mercy.
stirred up to abase himself and mourn for his sins, when he feels God to
be most merciful. The goodness of God does make him fear God, and hate his
sins rather, then his justice, Hos. 3. 5.

Eighthly, his griefs 8. And he is eased only by spiritual means.
are such as can be assuaged only by spiritual means. It is not sport or
merry company that eases him: his comfort is only from the Lord in some of
his ordinances. As it was the Lord that wounded him with the sight of his
sins, so to the Lord only be goes to be healed of his wounds, Hos. 6. 1. 2.
Psalm. 119. 23. 24. 50.

Ninthly, in his grief he is inquisitiue: he will 9. And is careful to learn
how to be saved
ask the way, and desires to know how he may be saved. He cannot smother and
put off his doubts in so great a business. He dares not now any longer be
ignorant of the way to heaven. He is not careless, as he was wont to be, but
is seriously bent to get directions from the word of God about his
reconciliation, sanctification, and salvation, etc. Ierem. 50. 4. 5. Acts 2. 37.

Tenthly, he is fearful 10. And is fearful of being deceived.
of being deceived, and therefore is not slightly satisfied. He will not rest
upon a common hope, nor is he carried with probabilities; nor does it content
him that other men have a good opinion of him; nor is he pleased that he has
mended some faults, or begun to repent: but repenting he repents still, that
is, he takes a sound course to be sure his repentance be effectually performed,
Ierem. 31. 19.

Eleuenthly, he is vehemently 11. And earnestly desires to lead an holy life.
carried with the desires of the sound reformation of his life. His sorrow is
not water, but washing; nor is it every washing, but such as makes clean.
Worldly sorrow may have much water, but it makes nothing clean; whereas godly
sorrow always tends to reformation and sound amendment.

Twelfthly, in all his sorrows he is supported 12. And trusts upon Gods mercy
in his grief.
by a secret trust in the mercy and acceptance of God, so as no misery can
beat him from the consideration and inward affiance and hope in the mercy of
God. In the very disquietnesse of his heart, the desire of his soul is to the
Lord, and before his presence; though he be never so much cast down, yet he
waits upon God for the help of his countenance, and in some measure condemns
the unbelief of his own heart, and trusts in the name of God, and his never
failing compassions, Psalm. 38. 9. and 42. 5. 11. Lam. 3. 21. Zepha. 3. 12.

13. He is wonderfully 13. And is in love with God if he hear his prayers.
inflamed with love to God, if he at any time let him know that he hears his
prayers. In the midst of his most desperate sorrows his heart is eased if he
speed well in prayer, Psalm 116. 1. 3.

14. He daily keeps 14. And daily judges himself for his sin.
an assise upon his own soul: he judges himself for his sins before God,
arresting, accusing, and condemning his sins. He confesses his sins
particularly to God, without hiding any sin, that is, without forbearing to
pray against any sin he knows by himself, out of any desire he has still to
continue in it; and by this sign he may be sure he has the Spirit of God, and
that his sins are forgiven him. Esaias 4. 4. Psalm. 35. 5. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. 1. Cor.
11. 32.

15. His requests are 15. And prays in the holy Ghost.
daily powered unto God. He cries unto God with affection and confidence, though
it be with much weakness and many defects, as the little child does unto the
father, and thereby he discouers the Spirit of adoption in him. Romans 8. 15.
Zach. 12. 10. Ephesians. 3. 12.

16. He is unfeignedly 16. Desiring to be rid of all sin.
desirous to be rid of all sins, as well as one. There is no sin he knows by
himself, but he does desire as heartily that he might never commit it, as he
does that Note this.
God should never impute it. This is a never failing sign, a fundamental one.
2. Tim. 2. 19.

17. He is content to 17. And is willing to suffer affliction.
receive evil at the hand of God, as well as good, without murmuring, or
letting go his integrity; as being sensible of his own deserts, and desirous
to approve himself to God, without respect of reward. This proved that Job was
an holy and upright man, Job 1. 1. and 2. 3. 10.

18. He dislikes sin 18. He dislikes sin in all.
in all, even in those that are near and dear unto him in other respects, 1.
King. 15. 12. 13. 14.

19. He is innocent from 19. Sin reigns not in him.
the great transgression, and keeps himself from his own iniquity. He is
not subject to the dominion of sin. Sin does not reign in him, Psalm. 19.
13. 2. Sam. 22. 24.

20. He finds a desire 20. He hu^bles himself for sin even in his prosperity.
to be rid of sin, and to humble himself for it in prosperity as well as
adversity. He leaves sin before sin would leave him. He forsakes it then, when
he could commit it without apparent danger, Job 8. 5. 6.

21. Or if he be in adversity, 21. And in adversity his heart is upright.
his heart is upright, without lying or dissimulation. He so seeks the pardon
of his sins then, and so promises amendment, as that he is also as careful
to practice it when he is delivered. He is not like the Israelites mentioned
Psalm. 78. 36. 37.

22. He makes a supernatural 22. He accounts of spiritual things as the best
things.
valuation of spiritual things, accounting them as pearls of the best price,
not too dear bought, if he purchased them with all the worldly things he has;
and contrariwise, accou^ting himself exceeding poor if he want them, or the
means of them, Math. 13. 45. 46. Psalm. 42. and 63. 1. 3.

23. He has lost his 23. He does not savor the things of the flesh and the
world.
wonted taste in earthly things: his heart is not transported with the
admiration of them, or the inordinate desires after worldly things. He loves
not the world and this life as he was wont to do. Though he use the world, yet
he easily confesses himself to be a stranger and pilgrim here. He gives over
the unnecessary pleasures and profits of this life, Heb. 11. 13. 1. Ioh. 2. 14.
15. Romans 8. 6. He is weary of the world, and willing to forgo society with
the men of this world, the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6. 8. 9. and 39. 12.
and 26. 1, 2, 3, 4.

24. If the Lord be silent, 24. He is much grieved if God hide himself.
and answer not his desires, but hides his face; his spirit fails, and he is
as one that goes down into the pit: it troubles him as a sore cross; and so
contrariwise, Psalm. 26. 1: and 88. 13, 14, 15: and 143. 7. Ioh. 16. 23. 28.

25. If he has been 25. Of a lio^ he becoms a lamb.
a man subject to boisterous, violent, and hurtful affections, he is now become
tame: of a Lion he is become a lamb, and a little child may lead him, Esaias 11.
9.

26. He has a spirit 26. His spirit is without guile.
without guile, Psalm. 32. 2. He is more desirous to be good, then to be thought
to be so; and more seeks the power of godliness, then the show of it, Job. 1.
1. Prou. 20. 6. 7. His praise is of God, and not of men: Romans 2. 26.

And thus much of the trial of his humiliation. The signs of his faith follow.

CHAP. IIII.
The trial of a godly man by his Faith.

FAith is the next thing to be tried in a child of God. And in as much as
there are diverse kinds of faith, Why we should try our faith.
and experience shows in many that give no signs of repentance, that they will
not be beaten from a confident presumption that Christ died for them, even for
them in particular: it stands us in hand to try our persuasion by true rules
of Scripture, that so if it will abide the trial of the touchstone, we may lay
it up as an hid treasure and a wonderful grace of God; and if otherwise, we
may repent us of presumption, as a deceivable sin.

But before I open the signs of this sign, the Reader must be admonished of
three things.

First, that I intend not The drift is to show how faith may be proved, not how
it may be bred.
by these signs to show how faith may be bred or begotten in us, but how faith
may be proved and declared to be in us. For it is the promises of God in the
Scripture that breed faith: nor can humane reason believe such great things
from God for any thing that is in us, but only because we see the word of God
assuring such happiness unto such as lay hold upon them. So that, that which
breeds faith, is the revelation of Gods promises by his word and Spirit. Yet
notwithstanding the assurance of faith is much increased and confirmed by the
sight of those signs of the truth of our faith, and other graces of God in us.

Secondly, that I stand A second caveat.
not precisely upon the order of these graces of God in us, nor determine that
question, which graces are first wrought in the heart of a man: but that which
I have specially aimed at in the order of setting them down, is to begin at
those that either first appear in a Christian, or are easiest (as I conceive)
to be discerned in him.

Thirdly, that I intend The 3. note by way of preface.
especially the trial of such Christians as agree in this, that they are
persuaded that Christ died for them; that so the true Christian may see reason
to comfort himself, that his persuasion is no presumption, as is the persuasion
of the most. It is true, that diverse of the signs of faith here to be handled,
will show faith in the weakest Christian, though he will not yet be brought to
acknowledge any persuasion. For this persuasion may be secretly wrought upon
the heart: as it is when it relieth upon the merits of Christ only for
salvation, though the judgment of the Christian be not resolved against his
doubts.

The question then is, how a Christian may try his persuasion of Gods mercy,
and his interest in Christ's merits, whether it be right or no.

For answer thereunto, I say, that the true Christian does prove his faith and
persuasion The true faith.
to be right, by those signs following.

First, his faithor persuasion 1. Was wrought by the word preached.
was wrought by the hearing of the word preached: and therefore thou must first
ask thy self, how thou come by thy persuasion. For if thou say, thou wast
always so persuaded, or did attain it by mere natural means or helps,
thou art deceived. For, faith is first wrought by the holy Ghost in the
preaching of the Gospel, as it is most clear by the words of the Apostle, How
shall they believe in him of who^ they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a preacher? Romans 10. 14. And whereas it may be, that many Christians
have not observed the workings of their faith; and have forgotten the time of
their conversion; and have not judgment to discern how the Lord by the
ministry of his servants did change their hearts, and lead them to Christ:
Therefore when this first sign cannot comfort, they must try themselves by
the rest that follow.

Secondly, he has an 2. Esteems Christ above all things.
high estimation of Jesus Christ. For the man that has true faith, accounts
all things most base in comparison of the knowledge of Christ, and the love of
God in him. He had rather be sure of Christ, then to gain the whole world.
Christ is more precious then all the world: yea is the only thing in request in
the desires of the Christian. Now Christ is precious only to them that
believe, 1. Pet. 2. 6. and by this sign Paul knew that he was grown far
beyond himself in his former life, and beyond all the Pharisees in the world.
Phil. 3. 9.

Thirdly, he readily 3. Receives the testimony of Gods ministers before all the
world.
receives the testimony of Gods ministers speaking out of the word, and sticks
to it against all the contradictions of the world. The Apostle Paul 2. Thessal.
1. 10. shows, that this sign will be pleaded and acknowledged in the day of
Christ: Christ, says he, will be made admirable in them that believe.

Now some may say, But how shall we know that we do believe?

Why, says he, you are true believers, because ye received our testimony; and
this shall be to your praise in that day.

Fourthly, he cannot 4. Casts out hypocrisy.
abide counterfetting and hypocrisy. If it be a right persuasion, it is a faith
unfeigned; Unfeigned I say, as in other respects, so in affects, because it
cannot abide fainings, but with special hatred purges out hypocrisy; which
the persuasion of hypocrites never does. 2. Tim. 1. 5.

Fifthly, this persuasion 5. Will abide trial.
is permanent: it will endure trial, it will hold out in the evil day; it
inclines the heart to cleave to Jesus Christ, even in the fire of tribulation,
in the midst of manifold afflictions, and disgraces, and temptations. It is
like the gold in the furnace that perishes not; nor will it barely hold out:
but a Christian by his faith comforts and supports himself in affliction, so
as his faith becomes to him both a breast plate and an helmet: whereas the best
faith, that is not the faith of Gods elect, will prove but dross, if it be
cast into the furnace of temptation, further then it is supported by carnal
means and helps. 1. Pet. 1. 6, 7. 2. Tim. 1. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Ephesians. 6. Luke
8. 13.

Sixthly, he will believe 6. It believes all things.
all things: I say all things that he apprehends to be required, threatened,
or promised in the word. To believe some things only, may be in any other kind
of faith, especially when they are such things as stand with their own
reasons, or wills, or affections, or the common opinion of other men: But this
is the glory of a lively instifying faith, it will give glory to God in all
things. What God can speak, it can believe: so soon as it knows it is spoken
of God, though it be never so contrary to the judgment of flesh and blood, Act.
14. 14.

Seventhly, he will not 7. Will not make haste
make haste. This was the sign given in the Prophet Esays time: He that
believes will not make haste. He had prophesied of hard times to fall upon all
the people: now this would show amongst them, who were true believers. For those
that trusted in God, would not make haste to use ill means to help
themselves; they would stay their hearts in rest and quietness, and they would
stay their feet too from running to Egypt, or to Asshur, which God had
forbidden, Isai. 28. 16.

If faith be right, and thy persuasion a sound persuasion, and well grounded,
there are joined with it these things following.

Eighthly, his persuasion 8. Is accompanied with a pure conscience.
is joined with a good and pure conscience; a conscience, I say, that makes him
careful to avoid sin, and do good duties, and to serve God in sincerity:
whereas the persuasion that is in wicked men, is not accompanied with a good
conscience, they do not make conscience of their ways. Now this is a clear
rule of difference, 1. Tim. 1. 5. 19. and 3. 9. Heb. 10. 22.

Ninthly, he has a spirit 9. And a spirit of discerning.
of discerning. There is a great deal of light comes into the heart with
faith. A man cannot believe, and be ignorant still. The Christian that is
endued with faith from above, is endued with wisdom from above: so as he can
conceive of the things of God that concern salvation, which the natural man
perceives not. Though he may want still in many knowledges, yet he has skill
in some measure to learn how to be saved. The doctrine of salvation he can now
understand, which is taught in the ministry of the word; and he now can make
some good use of reading the Scriptures, that before discerned little or nothing
in them. The veil that lies upon the hearts of all flesh; is now taken from
his eyes; yea the very entrance into Gods word gives light to the simplest
believer. He that was stupid and unteachable before, does now hear as the
learned, with a holy kind of insight and judgment: 2. Tim. 3. 15. Psalm. 119.
130. Prou. 1. 4. 8. and 5. 9.

Tenthly, he has a 10. And the witness of the Spirit of adoption.
witness within himself. He that believes has a witness in himself, 1.
Ioh. 5. 10. For he has the Spirit of adoption to certify him infallibly of
Gods love to him, and that he is the child of God, Romans 8. 15. 16: and thus the
believers are said to be sealed by the Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. God
leaves a pawn, a pledge with every Christian that shall be saved, to be as the
earnest of his salvation, and this pledge and earnest is Gods Spirit. And the
Spirit testifies to the believer, partly by revealing to him the certainty and
truth of Gods promises in his word; and partly by printing upon his heart these
saving graces, which distinguish him from all others; and partly by pouring
upon him the joys, which are called the joys of the holy Ghost, in the use of
Gods ordinances, as the inward ratificatio^ of the assurance of Gods love and
goodness to the believer. Of which after.

Lastly, Faith may be 11. Bears those fruits following.
discerned by many things it works, which are the fruits of it: and by the
fruits of faith, we may know faith it self. Faith is like the root of a tree,
that lies under ground, and cannot be seen without much digging; but by the
fruit the tree bears, we may know what kind of root it has, and of what sort
it is. Now the fruits of faith are these that follow, and such like, as,

1. Love to God and 1. Love.
the godly: for Faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6.

2. Cleanness of the 2. Purity of heart.
thoughts and affections. For Faith purifieth the heart. It makes a man strive
after inward purity, as well as outward: to get a clean heart as well as
clean hands. It works humiliation for inward sins as well as outward, Act.
15. 9. and drives a man to seek pardon in the name of Christ, for all sorts of
inward perturbations and secret evils.

3. Victory over the 3. Victory over the world.
world. Faith overcomes the world, 1. Job. 5. 4. 5: and so it does, when it
makes a man so rest upon God, and his truth and promise, as, if he be put to
it, to deny the respect of his own credit, or profit, or pleasures, or the
displeasure of carnal friends, or his hopes in matters of the world; resting
satisfied with the expectation of the treasures and pleasures of a better
world, yielding himself over to be guided by Christ, and his truth, unto the
death, Psalm. 48. 14. He lives by his faith, Gal. 2. 20.

4. Humility. For a 4. Humility
true faith excludes boasting of our own labors, gifts or praises; and makes
us able, out of the sense of our own vileness, to acknowledge all the glory
to Gods free grace and love in Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 17. Gal. 3. 22.

5. The confession 5 Confession
and profession of the truth. Faith will make a man speak in defense of the
truth: I have believed, therefore have I spoken, says David, Psalm 116: which
the Apostles plead to prove their faith also: 2. Cor. 4. 13. 14.

6. The putting on of 6. Application of Christ's righteousness.
righteousness, which is not by the works of the Law done by us. The
application of, and relying upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ, is the
proper and only work of true faith. Romans 10.

7. It opens a spring 7. A very spring of grace.
of graces in the heart of a true Christian: he that is a true believer, is
qualified with sundry heavenly gifts, which were not in him by nature; which
gifts do daily discover themselves in his heart, flowing from thence, as if
there were a spring of living waters in his belly. Sanctification of the
spirit, and faith of the truth be inseparable, Ioh. 7. 38. 2. Thessalonians, 2.
13.

CHAP. V.
The trial of a godly man by such heavenly gifts as serve him in his journey
to heaven.

THus of his trial in his humiliation, and in his faith. It follows in the
third place to try him by his gifts, which are the fruits of faith. The true
Christian differs from the wicked man in two sorts Two sorts of graces in a
Christian.
of gifts: Some of them are such gifts as are bestowed upon him from above, but
serve him only for his spiritual use, while he is on the way in his journey
to heaven, and so only in this life; such as are the sacred thirst: The love
to the word, and means of his holiness: The spirit of supplication: The love
of his enemies, and his desire after the appearance of Jesus Christ. Other
gifts he has, which will accompany him home into his heavenly country, and
abide upon him for ever, and are not abolished by death: such as are saving
knowledge, the love of God, and the love of the godly. First therefore of those
heavenly gifts which will pass away: and so he is qualified with five distinct
holy gifts, which cannot be found in any reprobate.

The first is his holy The holy thirst that is in the godly Christian tried by
four signs.
thirst, which is a heavenly kind of appetite, by which he is carried to the
desire of things above nature; such as are the merits and righteousness of
Christ: the favor of God: the presence of God: the full deliverance from all
sin: the removing of spiritual judgments: the salvation of other men, and
the like; and this thirst is a sign the more infallible.

1. Because it is constant and indelible in this life. There is no part of his
life, but it continues either in the sense of his affection, or in the
judgment of his understanding, so as he accounts spiritual things to be the
best things: and though at some times his affections may be the less moved
after them, yet his appetite is daily renewed, as it is in the hunger, or
thirst, that is bodily.

2. Because it is industrious. For this holy thirst will guide him to a
careful use of all the means, by which good things may be attained; and does
not breathe it self out only with sudden and vain wishes, or flashes of
desire, Psalm. 27. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Psalm. 63. 1. 2. Psalm 1. 2. Acts 2. 37.

3. Because it works a constant and secret meditation of heavenly things
desired, the heart frequently seeks after God day and night. Isaiah 26. 9.
Psalm 63. 1. 6. For what we desire fervently, we think on almost continually.

4. Because if the Lord quench his thirst, and satisfy his desire in
spiritual things, the soul becomes as a watered garden; and then follows in
him an heavenly kind of satisfaction and contentment with singular delight in
the soul, and vows and wishes of infinite and eternal thankfulness, Psalm
63. 4. 5. Iere. 31. 25. 26.

And thus much of the first gift.

Secondly, the love His trial by his love to the word.
to the word is another sign that he is the child of God, and a clear
evidence of his salvation. Now because all sorts of wicked men may resort to
the exercises of the word, and those that have but a temporary faith may show
a great estimation of the word, and find joy in the hearing of it, and show
much zeal in things that concern the word, and may yield some obedience to
the directions of the word also: it is profitable to consider how the true
Christian may prove that his affection to the word is more sincere then that
affection which any wicked man can bring to the word. And thus he may find that
his heart is sound in his love to the word, by these marks.

1. By his manner of 13. Signs to try his affection to the word by.
receiving it, when he does receive the word, as the word of God, and not of
men: setting his heart before Gods presence, and being affected as if the Lord
himself should speak unto him. This no wicked man dares do: he dares not
present himself with the whole intendments of his heart before the Lord. For
this sign the Apostle Paul acknowledged the Thessalonians to be true
Christians, 1. Thessal. 2. 13.

2. By his Appetite to the word. For there is in a godly man as true an hunger
after the word, as the food of his soul, as there is in his stomach after the
food of his body; which shows it self to be the more sincere, because it is
constant, he desires the word at all times, and as his appointed food daily;
as it is in the bodily appetite, though after feeding the stomach may seem to
be full and satisfied, yet the hunger reuiues again every day, so it is with
the heart of a child of God: whereas wicked men regard the word but by fits,
and in a passion, and then at length fall clean away from the affection to it,
Psalm. 119. 20. Job. 23. 12.

3. By his love to them that love the word.

4. By his sorrow, because other men keep not the word, Psalm. 119. 136.

5. By his unfeigned estimation of the word above all worldly things, accounting
it to be an happy portion to enjoy the word in the power and profit of it,
Psalm. 119. 14. 72. 111.

6. By his desire and delight to exercise himself in it day and night, that
is, constantly, Psalm. 1. 2.

7. By his grief either for the want of the means by which the word might be
taught unto him with power, accounting such want of the means to be a sore
famine; or for want of success in ye use of the means when he does enjoy it,
Psa. 42. 3. Am. 8. 12.

8. By the extent of his love to all the words of God, even the Law, that with
threatening shows him his sin, and searches out his most secret corruptions;
being most affected with that ministry that does most sharply rebuke sin.

9. By his resolution to labor as hard for the food of his soul, as men do,
or he would do for the food of his body, Ioh. 6. 27. Amos 8. 12.

10. By the constant sweet taste he finds in it, especially when it is
powerfully preached, Psalm. 19. 10. 2. Cor. 2. 15.

11. By the end he propounds unto himself in the use of the word, which is,
that he might not sin; and that his ways might be made pleasing to God,
hiding the word in his heart to this purpose, Psalm. 119. 11.

12. By his willingness and resolution to deny his own reason and affections,
his credit, his carnal friends, his profits, or his pleasures in any thing,
when God should so require it of him, and upon any occasion to show his hearty
respect of the Gospel, Mar. 10. 2. 9. 1. Cor. 1. 18.

13. By the effects of it: as,

1. When for the love he bears to the word; he will separate himself from the
wicked, that might any way withdraw his heart, or endanger his disobedience,
Psalm. 119. 115.

2. When he accounts the word to be his chief comfort in affliction, and finds
it to be the maine stay, and solace of his heart, Psalm. 119. 23. 24. 50. 51.
54. 143.

3. When it works in him effectually the redress of his ways, and freedom
from the dominion of sin, Ioh. 8. 33. Psalm. 119. 45. 9. 59. 1. These. 2. 13.

4. When it works in him certain and sensible assurance of heart before God.
This assurance is an infallible sign of the right use of the word, 1 Thessalonians.
1. 5.

And thus of the second gift.

The third gift is the His trial by his gift of prayer.
spirit of prayer or supplication, as the Prophet Zachary calls it, Zach. 12.
10: and this gift he has above all wicked men, which he shows many 13. Rules
of trial.
ways: as,

1. He asks according to Gods will, 1. Ioh. 5. 14.

2. He prays with persuasion that God will hear him. He believes in some
measure that he shall have what he prays for. He prays in faith, Mark. 11. 14.
Iam. 1. 6. 7. Psalm. 6. 9. 1. Ioh. 3. 19. 22.

3. He prays in the name of Christ, and is affected with the sense of his own
vileness, and relies upon the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, Ioh. 14.
13. Psalm. 86. 1. 2. and 143. 4.

4. He will pray at all times, Job 27. 9. Psalm 106. 2.

5. He is fervent in prayer: his heart prays: he has the affections of
prayer, Iam. 5. 16. Psalm. 6. 8.

6. Prayer makes him exceeding weary of the world: it gives him such a taste of
his own sinfulness, and of Gods goodness, and of the glory of heaven, that
he is vehemently carried with desire to be absent from the body, that he might
be present with the Lord, Psalm. 39. 12.

7. When he knows not how to pray as he ought, the Spirit prepares his heart,
excites in him holy desires, supplies him sometimes with words, sometimes with
affections, and sometimes works inward inexpressible groans, which yet it
presents to God, as effectual prayers, To. 8. 26. 27.

8. He finds an holy rest, and quietness in his conscience and heart, with
spiritual boldness and confidence of trust in God, if he hear him
graciously, and answer him in mercy, Psalm. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 116. 1. 7. and 91.
15. 17. Ierem. 33. 3.

9. He loves the Lord exceedingly for hearing his prayer, and desires to keep
himself in the love of God, Psalm. 116. 1. Jude 20.

10. His prayers proceed from a heart that loves no sin, but desires to depart
from iniquity, and to do that which is pleasing in Gods sight, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
1. Ioh. 3. 22.

11. He loves prayer in others, 2. Tim. 1. 22.

12. He strives against deadness of spirit and distractions, as an heavy
burden, Psalm. 86. 3. 4.

13. He makes prayer his chief refuge; and he will pray, though prayer be in
never so much disgrace, Psalm. 69. 10. 13. and 142. 2. 5.

And thus of the third gift.

The fourth gift is the love of his enemies. Any His love to his enemies tried.
Christian may love such as love him; but to love his enemies, is only to be
found in the true Christian, which he proves by these tokens of the sincerity
of his love:

1. He can pray heartily for them, yea in some cases he can mourn, and humble
his soul before God for them in their distresses, Psalm. 35. 13. 14.

2. He desires their conversion so unfeignedly, that he is sure, if they were
converted, he could rejoice in them as heartily, as in those he now much
delights in.

3. He can likewise forgive them their particular trespasses against him; being
more grieved for their sins against God, the^ for the wrongs they do him, Mat.
6. 14.

4. He can freely acknowledge their just praises.

5. He can not only patiently endure their reuilings, but can forbear, when
he could be revenged by bringing shame or misery upon them, 1. Pet. 3. 9. Romans
12. 14. 1. Sam. 24. 18. 19: yea he does, as he has occasion, strive to
overcome their evil with goodness, being willing to help them, or relieve
them in their misery, and do them any good for the soul or body.

The last gift which is found in the true Christian, His trial by the love to
the appearing of Christ.
while he is in the way in this life, is, His love of the appearing of Christ,
which he shows:

1. By the longing after the time of Christ's coming, whether by death or
judgment.

2. By his gladness at the promises, or signs of his particular or general
coming.

3. By his often meditations of that day, and his hearty prayers for the
hastening of it, Reu. 22. 10.

4. By his daily care to dispatch all those godly duties which he desires to do
before his death, and accordingly by his willing disposing of his estate, and
endeavors to set his house in order:

And this desire of Christ's coming is apparently the more sincere in him:

1. Because it arises out of his love to God, and his hatred of his own sins,
and his wearines under the observation of other men's sins.

2. Because this desire is accompanied with the care of the means, by which he
may be prepared for salvation.

3. Because he is thus affected even in his prosperity when he thriues in the
world, and is not in any notable distress.

Hitherto of his trial in such gifts as he is endowed withal in this life
only: his trial in the gifts that will abide in him for ever, follow.

CHAP. VI.
His trial in respect of such heavenly gifts as will not be abolished by
death.

THe gifts that will abide in him for ever The trial of his knowledge.
are these three: Knowledge, the love of God, and the love of the brethren.
These are perfected, and not abolished by death.

And first, in his knowledge And so he differs from wicked men.
he differs from all wicked men, and so in diverse things: as,

First in the things he In the things he knows.
knows: he knows the nature of God in a right manner: he knows God in Jesus
Christ: he knows the vileness of his own sins: he knows after an
effectual manner the mysteries that concern the salvation of his soul: he
knows his own conversion, and the forgiveness of his sins, and the things
that are given him of God: Mat. 13. 13. John 17. 3. Iere. 31. 34. 1. Cor. 2.
12. He knows that Jesus Christ is in him, 2. Cor. 13. 5.

2. Secondly, in the 2. In the cause of his knowledge.
cause of his knowledge. For flesh and blood did not reveal those things unto
him, he came not by them by the use of natural means, but they are wrought in
him by the word and Spirit of God, Mat. 16. 17. 1. John 2. 27. and 5. 10. 1.
Cor. 1. 30.

Thirdly, in the effects 3. In the effects of his knowledge.
of his knowledge, for

1. It breeds in him an unspeakable refreshing and gladness of heart in Gods
presence, Psalm. 36. 8. 9. 10. Philip. 1. 9.

2. It inflames him to a wonderful love of the word of God above all earthly
things, Psalm. 119. 97. 98.

3. It works in him an effectual sauouring and tasting of the goodness of
spiritual things: To. 8. 5.

4. It enclines him to a constant obedience and practice of Gods will, Pro. 8.
9. 17. John 7. 17. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. It redresseth his ways, Psalm. 119. 10. 1. Ioh.
2. 3. and 3. 24.

5. It beats down pride and conceitednes, and frowardness, and makes him
humble and teachable, Pro. 3. 5. 6. and 8. 13. 14. James 3. 17.

Fourthly, in the properties 4. In the properties of his knowledge
of his knowledge: for

1. It is infallible: his knowledge has much assurance in many things with
strong confidence, and resolution at some times especially, when he is before
God, 1. These. 1. 5.

2. It is indelible, it cannot be utterly blotted out, it is fast graven in his
heart; contrary doctrine, or persecution cannot raze it out, Iere. 31. 34. Ephesians.
4. 13. Prou. 4. 5. 6.

3. It is sincere, for first it inclines him to give glory to God, and
receive all truth, as well as any truth. He receives the doctrine of God,
though it be above reason, and against the common opinion of men, or cross his
profit, or desires, or the like. Secondly, it leads him principally to
understand his own way, and guides him to study the things chiefly that
concern his own reformation and salvation, Pro. 14. 8. Colos. 3. 16.

And thus he differs from wicked men in his knowledge.

Secondly, in his love His love to God tried by 9. signs.
to God he has these things, which no wicked man can attain to.

1. He has a deliberate inward inflamed estimation of God above all things,
accounting his loving kindness better then life, and the signs of his favor
his greatest joy, Psalm. 63. 2. 11.

2. He loves and longs for the Lord Jesus Christ with certain and sincere
affection, Ephesians. 6. 24. 2. Tim. 4. 8.

3. He delights in Gods presence, and shows it by his unfeigned love to Gods
house, Psalm 26. 8: and by his hearty grief for Gods absence, Cant. 3. 1:
and by his carfulness to set the Lord daily before him, walking in his sight
Psalm. 16. 8.

4. He hates sin heartily because God hates it; and he dislikes sinners,
because they hate God; accounting Gods enemies as if they were his own
enemies, Psalm. 139. 21. 22. and 97. 10.

5. He constantly desires to be like God in holiness, being careful to
approve his affection to God by his obedience to his commandments, so as it is
not grievous to him to receive directions, but serves God with all his heart,
being fearful to displease God in any thing, Ioh. 14. 21. 1. Io. 5. 3. Deuteronomy.
10. 12. and 11. 22: and is more affected with Gods approbation then all the
praise of men, Romans 2. 26.

6. He is much affected with Gods mercy, and the blessings bestowed upon him,
which he thankfully remembers to the praise of Gods free grace, Esa. 63. 7.
Psalm. 63. 2. 3. 4. 6. 8. and 107. 22. Job 36. 24. Deuteronomy. 6. 2.

7. He loves all the godly for this reason chiefly, because they are like unto
God in holiness, as being begotten by him, 1. Ioh. 5. 1.

8. He is as heartily vexed for any dishonor done to God, as for any disgrace
offered to himself.

9. Finally he shows it in diverse cases that befall him in his course in this
life: as,

1. If he be put to suffer any thing for Gods sake, he endures it with much joy
and patience, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Act. 5. John 22. 15, to 19.

2. If at any time he offend God by his own faultiness, he is heartily
grieved and cast down, and does constantly desire to forsake any sin, though
never so pleasing or gainefull unto him, rather then he would displease God,
Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

3. In all streights and wants, he runs to God, relying upon God as his
defense, rock, and refuge in all times of troubles, making his moan unto him,
and pouring out his prayers and complaints before him, Psalm. 18. 1. 2.

Thus of his love to God.

Thirdly, his love to His love to the godly tried by ten signs.
the godly does also distinguish him from all the wicked men in the world,
because here are diverse things to be noted in his affection to them, which
cannot be found in wicked men:

1. As first, he loves the godly above all other sorts of me^ in the world, he
accounts them as the only excellent people, Psalm 16. 3. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. and
affects them as if they were his natural kindred, Romans 12. 9. 10.

2. He loves them not for carnal respects, but for the graces of God in them,
for the truths sake, and because they are begotten of God, 1. Ioh. 5. 1. 2.
Ioh. 1. 2. 3. Ioh. 1.

3. He delights in their fellowship and society in the Gospel, as accounting
them the happy companions of this life, Psalm. 16. 3. 3. Ioh. 8. Philippians 1.
5.

4. He has a fellow feeling of their miseries: he is in some measure
affectioned to weep with them that weep, and rejoice with them that rejoice;
especially he is glad when their souls prosper: Romans 12. 16. 3. Ioh. 3.

5. His desire is to walk inoffensiuely, as being loath any way to be an
occasion of stumbling, or scandal to any Christian, 1 Ioh. 2. 10.

6. He can bear their infirmities, take things in the best sense, suffer long,
and is not easily provoked: he hops all things, and boasts not himself, or
enuies them, nor will receive an evil report against them, 1. Pet. 4. 8. 1.
Cor. 13. 4. 5. 6. but rather makes Apology for them.

7. He easily praises them in all places for their grace, or obedience, Romans
16. 19. 3. Ioh. 6. Psalm. 15. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

8. His well-doing extends it self to them to his power, he is bountiful,
pitiful, and tender; he has bowels of mercy, according to the occasion of
mercy, either corporal or spiritual. He gladly receives them, and with a
ready mind communicates to their necessities, Philemon 7. 1. Pet. 3. 8. and 4.
8. 1. John 3. 17. 3. Ioh. 5.

9. He loves all the brethren. He has not the glorious faith of Christ in
respect of persons, Iam. 2. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 5. Col. 1. 4. He can make himself
equal to them of the lower sort, Romans 12. 16.

10. Lastly he loves them at all times, even when they are in adversity,
disgrace, sickness, or any other misery.

Hitherto of the godly man's trial by his gifts.

CHAP. VII.
The trial of the godly man by his works of obedience.

THe fourth way to His works tried by 7. signs.
try him, is by his works, or by his obedience in his life and conversation;
and so his works excel all the works of unregenerate men many ways: as,

1. Because what he does, arises out of the love he hears to God and
goodness; and therefore he does good heartily, and not by constraint, or with
repining, or delay: yea he is so stirred up with the sense of Gods goodness to
him, that he is much humbled when he has done his best, that he cannot bring
more glory to God, Deuteronomy. 30. 20. Josh. 22. 5. Mat. 4. 19. Romans 6. 27.

2. In doing good he has respect unto all Gods commandments: there is no part
of an holy life but he desires to practice it; and therefore he will obey Gods
will in some cases when it is against his profit, credit, ease, or the liking
of carnal friends, preferring Gods commandments above all things, yea life it
self, Ier. 35. Heb. 11. 8. Genesis 22. 12. Prou. 7. 2. Act. 5. 29. Mat. 16. 25.
Exodus 15. 26. 1. Kin. 9. 4. Ier. 11. 4. John 15. 14.

3. He will do good at all times, and not for a fit; making conscience of his
ways in all companies as well as any; absent as well as present; before mean
Christians, as well as before the best: at home as well as abroad, Phil. 2. 12.
Gal. 5. 7. 2. Kin. 18. 6. Psalm. 106. 2.

4. He makes conscience of the least commandment as well as of the greatest,
Mat. 5. 19. Gal. 3. 7.

5. He comes to the light, that his deeds might be manifest, that they are
wrought in God, Ioh. 3. 21. He is desirous in all things to be guided by the
warrant of the word of God.

6. He exercises his faith in the very discharge of the duties of his outward
conversation. He lives by the faith of the Son of God, and commits his way to
God, and trusts upon the name of the Lord, Gal. 2. 20.

7. He knows that his obedience is right, because God hears his prayers,
and entertaines him graciously, when he calls upon him in secret; whereas God
hears not sinners; and if wickedness were in his heart, God would not regard
his prayers, Ioh. 9. 31. Psalm. 66. 18.

And thus of his works.

CHAP. VIII.
His trial by the entertainment he has from God.

Six favors God bestows upon him which the wicked never feel. 1. Election
in time.
specialities of favor which God shows to him, and not to any unregenerate
man: As

1. His election in time is a manifest token of Gods election of him before
time: the Lord shows that he has chosen him from everlasting, when by the
power of the Gospel he seizes upon him particularly, and effectually
persuades him to leave the world, and the sinful society he lived in, and to
deuote himself as a living sacrifice unto God.

2. He is baptized with 2. The baptism by fire.
the holy Ghost and fire: the baptism by fire is only proper to Gods Elect:
the holy Ghost at some times falls upon him, and sets him all on a fire, on a
fire I say, both of sudden and violent indignation at sin, as it is sin;
as also the fire of holy affections, with which from God he frequently and on a
sudden is inflamed, while he stands before the Lord. For besides the affection
which a godly man brings with him to Gods worship, he does feel his heart
oftentimes on a sudden surprised with strange impressions, sometimes of sorrow,
sometimes of fear and awful dread of God; sometimes of fervent desires after
God: sometimes of strong resolutions of holy duties to be done by him, and the
like, Math. 3. 11.

3. He feels at sometimes 3. Much assurance.
in the use of Gods ordinances a marvelous work of the holy Ghost, in respect
of much assurance and strange establishment of his heart, both in the certain
persuasion of Gods love, and the infallible belief of the truth; so as at that
time no danger or death could amaze him, but he could willingly witness his
confidence by undergoing any thing could befall him, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.

4. He feels at sometimes 4. Joy unspeakable.
the unspeakable and glorious joys of the holy Ghost, which are differing from
the carnal joys or illusions may be found in wicked men, because they are such
joys, as he feels only in the use of some ordinances of God, and such as by
effect make him more humble, and vile in his own eyes, and do inflame him to
an high degree of the love of God and goodness; which illusions can never do.

5. The sanctification of 5. The sanctification of his afflictions.
his afflictions is another infallible sign of Gods love to him. For God makes
his crosses to become blessings unto him, and work his good, so as he may
plainly see, that it was good for him to be afflicted: and besides, God gives
him many times the experience of his goodness both by unexpected consolation
in his distresses, and gracious deliverance out of them* Romans 8. 28. Ps. 119.

6. Lastly, to this place 6. The answer of his prayers.
I may refer Gods hearing and answering of his prayers; whereas God does not
hear sinners, as was showed in the end of the former Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
His trial by the Sacraments.

THe sixth and last way Six rules of his trial about the sacrament.
of trial of the estate of a Christian, is by the Sacraments, and in
particular by the Sacrament of the Lords supper. For God has appointed the two
Sacraments to be his broad seals to assure his favor unto his people: and
because none but worthy receivers ca^ be partakers of so great a privilege as
the covenant of Gods grace, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ: therefore hereby
does the true Christian distinguish himself from all men. For in becoming a
worthy receiver he does diverse things not only required in co^municants, but
such as none but godly men can attain unto: As,

1. He does forgive his enemies, as heartily as he desires God to forgive him
his trespasses.

2. He examines himself, and upon examination he both eats with sour herbs
(that is, comes with some measure of grief for his offenses) and withal finds
as unfeigned a desire, that he might never offend God in any thing as that God
should there assure him of the forgiveness of his sins, and that he will never
punish him for any of them, 1. Cor. 11.

3. The covenant of his heart is to cleave to God, and the care of godliness
all the days of his life, 1. Cor. 5. 8.

4. He is in some measure persuaded of Gods love to him in Christ's, and
discernes the Lords body, so as he is secretly in some degree persuaded of the
spiritual presence of Jesus Christ, and of the operation of God: so as he
believes, that Christ will as certainly nourish his soul, as the outward
elements can any way be fit to nourish his body, Mar. 16. 16. Col. 2. 12. 1.
Cor. 11.

5. He sometimes feels the holy Ghost inwardly, setting to Gods privy seal by
sudden refreshings falling like the dew upon his heart, and establishing his
soul before the Lord, Ephesians. 1. 13. 1. Cor. 1. 12.

6. His heart is knit unto the godly more and more, and increases in his
resolution to cleave to them only, and forsake all other professions of men in
the world; loving them unfeignedly, and desiring for ever to be a partaker of
their lot. 1. Cor. 10. 16.

CHAP. X.
The directions that show him how to get assurance by the help of these
signs.

HItherto of the signs of the godly man. Now follows the course that the
weak Christian should take by the use of the former signs of trial, to
establish his heart in the assurance of Gods favor, and his own eternal
salvation.

My advice is therefore, that the weak Christian that finds want of
establishment and clear assurance, should take the former signs of trial, and
go apart, and set himself in Gods presence, emptying his heart of worldly
distractions, and seriously consider of every rule of trial apart; and gather
out into some little paper-book so much as in every sign he can clearly find to
be in himself, and that which he durst through Gods mercy resolutly avouch to
be wrought in him by the grace of God. And this I would have him to do with
deliberation, trying himself by one or two of the chief heads at most in a
day, spending no more time about it then he may well allow, without weariness
or dullness.

Now because he may be perhaps discouraged with the observation of diverse
things, which he may find wanting in himself in every sign; he must therefore
take some sound notice of the distinction of Christians made by the Apostle
John, 1. Ioh. 2, who casts all true Christians into three sorts. Some are
Infants, and either newborn, or but weakly qualified with the graces of
Christ: yet are right, and have true grace in some measure. Others are strong
men, that is, such as have the gifts of the Spirit lively and in their power in
them. Others are Fathers, that is, such as have had long experience in the
powerful practice of godliness, and have been long exercised in all kinds of
weldoing. Now all these three sorts may be supposed to come to these signs.
The weak Christian only takes to a few of the plainest marks in the
explication of each sign. The strong Christian he takes to the most of the
marks. The Fathers they in a manner discern all the particulars of Gods
graces, and the several workings of them. Each of these, eue^ the weak
Christian may see so much as may stay his heart in assurance, and so settle his
faith and joy.

When there are many signs of one and the self-same thing, it is sufficient if
it can be demonstrated, though it be but a few ways, seeing every particular
mark being warranted by Scripture, has force to conclude for assurance, and
to prove, that we differ from all the wicked men in the world.

Though at the first in reading but a sign or two, thou get but a few things
may comfort thee, yet hold out till thou come to the end of all the signs, and
then thou shall see a fair army (as it were of arguments) to prove thy
election and salvation. For whereas the most and best of us, if we be asked
this question, By what marks do we know that we are the true children of God,
and not wicked men? If we answer on a sudden, and by present memory, we can
scarce give two sound reasons to prove the infallibility of our happy estate:
which shows, that the most of us live at a great uncertainty. Now he yt has
gone through the signs, shall find perhaps 20, or 30, or 40 several and
distinct arguments or marks, which when he has collected them all together,
may serve to answer all the objections of all the devils in hell. The gates of
hell cannot prevail against his faith: which I declare thus: If the devil
say, thou art a wicked man, and an hypocrite; thou may readily answer, that
by ye grace of God in Jesus Christ thou art none such; and may put the
devil to prove by the word of God, that ever any wicked man did attain to all
those signs thou have collected. Which, because it cannot be done, thou may
with much rest and full assurance commit thy self to God, and bind thy self by
covenant, never more to dishonor him by such unbelief, as to call his love and
thy salvation into question. If a threefold cord cannot be broken, how weak
then should thy heart be, if thou should fear thy estate, unto which God
has so sealed, and so many ways marked thee out for himself?

And for thy further satisfaction: after thou have collected thy signs
together, thou may carry them to thy godly Pastor, and desire him to peruse
them, and accordingly to give thee his ministerial testimony concerning them
in the name of Jesus Christ; and this may add much satisfaction and rest to
thy conscience.

If in reading any of the signs, thou find any special doubts; at any hand
suppress them not, but seek resolution from doubt to doubt, and from sign to
sign. Thou may gain much profitable knowledge by propounding these cases of
thy particular conscience.

The least gain that can be imagined by this course, is, that whereas before
thou had few euide^ces or none for thy estate, thou shall now have many of
all sorts: and it must needs be thy own waiwardnes, if assurance follow not.
For these signs will ransacke thee, and try thy very heart and reins, and all
thy secretest desires and practices.

Yea this benefit thou may reap by the signs, that they will tell thee all
the days of thy life, how it is with thee, whether thou go forward or back
ward. For if by examination now thou gather out all thou can find by thy
self, these will not only lie by thee to help thee against any temptation at
any time; but besides, if thou try thy self again, either against the next
Sacrament, or the next year, thou may discern what ground thou have gotten
or lost. If thou prosper, thou will discern it, by taking in diverse things in
each sign, which before thou durst not acknowledge; and besides it will
excellently show thee what thou want in each grace of God, and so what thou
should set thy self about to get thy wants supplied. It will at all times
make a true Anatomy of thy estate; which to the well-aduised Christian ought to
be accounted a matter of great moment.

The God of peace give thee all peace and joy in believing. If thou receive any
good by this Treatise, praise God, and pray for me.

FINIS.

