decorative border THE POESY OF Floured Prayers. Containing sundry
Meditations and Prayers: gathered out of the sacred letters and virtuous
Writers: disposed in form of the Alphabet, of the most virtuous Lady, the Lady
Elizabeth's name. Set forth by Sir JOHN CONVVAY.

Multae tribulationes Iustorum, and de omnibus liberabit eos Dominus. Psalm. 34.
AT LONDON, Printed for Va. Sims, and are to be sold by Ed: White. An. 1611.

decorative border TO THE MOST Gracious Lady the Lady ELIZABETH, eldest
daughter to our Sovereign Lord the KING.
I MAY NOT doubt (most gracious Lady) but certainly believe, that as
decorative border you are religiously devoted: so you are sufficiently stoared
with Meditations, Prayers, and Supplications of Saints, best befitting your
Royal Estate: So that by reprinting of these ancient Prayers, and causing them
to be disposed to your Graces Name, I may seem to offer a needless decorative
border Supply: Nevertheles, presuming upon your wel-knowe^, Princely, and
gracious acceptance of all that which proceeds from well-meaning minds, I
have adventured in all humility to offer them unto your most Royal Service,
to be respected, or rejected at your pleasure; for decorative border whose
most happy continuance in this world, and participation of perfect joy in the
world to come, I also will not cease to pray to almighty God.

Your Graces most humbly, VALENTINE SIMS.

decorative border HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
Royal arms of King James I of England.

decorative border decorative border Prou. 31.
Beauty and favor, are things deceitful and vain, but the heart of a woman
that fears the Lord, her body is a rich portion, and she is worthy to be
honored: for she opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the Law
of grace.

decorative border Prou. 16.
Confess thy works unto the LORD, and look what thou deuisest, it shall
prosper.

Esaias. 58.
THy light shall spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as
the noone day.

Pro. 28.
HE that hydeth his sins shall not prosper: but who so acknowledges them,
and forsakes them,shall have Mercy.

decorative border A Morning Prayer.
O LORD Jesus Christ, which have redeemed all mankind from sin, Death, and
Hell: thou which have said, I am the way, truth, and life: A way in doctrine,
commandments, and examples: Truth in promises: Life in reward. I come unto
thee, early now this morning I pray thee by thine ineffamable love, wherewith
thou have vouchsafed wholly to bestow thy self for our security, that thou will not suffer me ever decorative border to straye from thee, because thou art
the way; nor at any time distrust thy promises, which art Truth, and performest
whatsoever thou promisest: neither let me rest in any other thing, because thou
art eternal life: without the which there is nothing that ought to be
desired, neither in Heaven nor in Earth. But let me learn as thou have exactly
taught what to believe, and what to do, what to hope for, and in whom we ought
to rest.

Thou which by the examples of thy life have showed us the way to immortality:
and by thy steps have restored to decorative border us a plain, easy, and
profitable way, out of an uneven and rough way. Uphold me in thy benignity
with thy sure promises, that after this life I may enter into thy heavenly
heritage. Therefore whilst I am in this journey, be a sure hope unto me, to
be in steed of a staff unto me wherewith I am sustained. O Lord that know
the weakness of my flesh, in the mean time with the comfort of thy Spirit so
refresh my strength, whereby I may run cheerfully.

And as thou being made unto me a way, do drive away all error. So being
made Truth, take away all decorative border distrust.

Finally, being made life unto us, I beseech thee revive me dead in sin, to
live by thy spirit, relieuing all things, until in the resurrection, all
mortality utterly abolished, I may always live with thee, and in thee, when
Christ shall be to us all in all. For eternal life is, to know the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost to be one true God, whom now through Faith we
behold only in a glass and Riddle: and then seeing more felowly the glory of
the Lord, we shall be transformed into the same Image.

Therefore I beseech thee decorative border most merciful Savior, that thou
would nourish Faith in thy Servant, that I may never waver in thy heavenly
doctrine. Increase obedience, that I never turn from thy Precepts.

Fortify constancy, that entering into thy steps, it be not pulled back,
nor through the terror or intisementes of Satan overthrown, but may persevere
in thee, which art the true-waye unto life. Build my sure trust, that being
accustomed with thy promises, I never wax old in the exercise of Virtue: but
forgetting those things which are past, I may continually decorative border
strive to come to perfecter. Accept my contrite heart, the woonted sacrifice of
thy delight, and the oblation of these my Peticions, granting the sum of my
requests. Blot out all my offenses for thine own sake; defend me this day with
thy mighty hand, and increse thy grace in me, yt I may in all things carrye
upright sway, and equal judgment; living with thy people in the light of thy
word, and fear of thy Laws. And daily more and more die to my self, and
live and be lead by thy Spirit, fearing nothing but thee, then the which
nothing is greater or mightier: loving decorative border nothing beside thee:
then whom, nothing is more to be beloved: glorying in nothing but in thee,
which art the glory of all Saints: requiring nothing beside thee which art the
best: desiring nothing but thee, which art the full, and perfect felicity with
the Father and the holy Ghost above the Starrie Firmament: to whom be praise
both now and ever, Amen.

decorative border A discreet and wise woman is an high portion: she honors
GOD, and beautifieth the world: upon her right hand stands Joy and Peace,
and upon her left hand, Riches and Honor: her body is the sweet tree of long
life to him that lays hold on her, and blessed is he that keeps her fast. A
Prayer for the Evening.
O Gracious GOD and most merciful Father, being infinitely bound unto
decorative border thee for thy manifold mercies extended toward me, I humbly
give thee thanks among the rest, for thy protection of me this day: And I most
humbly pray thee to forgive me all my sins and naughtines, whereby I am made
unworthy of thy further goodness and mercy. O Lord receive the intercession of
thy Son for all mine offenses. Accept this sacrifice of my soul and body,
which I offer to be: disposed off at thy pleasure. Consider the unfeigned sighs
which I send from my heart, for that I have offended thee, and give ear to my
prayers which I power decorative border forth before thee to obtain thy
pardon. Give me a true and lively faith, whereby I may lay hold upon the
merits of the death and passion of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Let his
righteousness make satisfaction to thy justice for my unrighteousness: and his
obedience, procure pardon for my disobedience; and his holy perfection, help
and amend my vn-holy imperfections.

Protect me this night with thy mighty hand, and bring me to the light of the
next day. Renew in me a right spirit, that I may receive strength and ability
to do thy decorative border righteous will, and to stand against all the
assaults of Satan, that the old man which I bear about in my body may be
crucified daily in me, and the desire of sin and error of worldly vanities
may be destroyed, and the life of my Savior may always appear in me. Lord
grant me these and all other good graces, even for Jesus Christ's sake, my only
Lord and Savior, in whose name I humbly beg them at thy hands, saying as he
has taught me, Our Father, etc.

decorative border A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord thou high, and mighty, whose Glory and Majesty may not be
comprehended, whose word is true, whose commandment is strong, thou that
ridest upon the Cherubins, and flyest with the wings of the wind: Thou God of
all mercy, most worthy to be sought, before whom the Hoastes of Heaven stand
with trembling, whose Ordinance is dreadful, whose Looks dries up the
depthes, whose hands rules decorative border the starrie Firmaments, whose
goodness only gives the fruits of the Earth, whose wrath makes the
Mountains to melte, and consumes the wicked, whose truth bears witness,
and mercy saves the sorrowful Sinner: Thou, thou incomprehensible Creator,
that never tookest beginning, and want end: Since of nothing thou have
wrought me (with the wonders of the world) to thy most seemly shape, and
vouchsafest thy drery Death and passion, to drown the danger of my sinful
deserts, and have as a careful Captain, cherished my body with comfortable
decorative border gifts unto this present day: Continue (oh God) such
goodness toward me unworthy, which do here with a contrite heart and bowed
Knees, appeal to the height of thy mercy and loving kindness, to accept my
unequal thanks for the same: humbly beseeching thy Fatherly goodness, that
thy holy hand may still renew in me thy former gifts, plenteouslie powered upon
me from the prime of my birth unto this present: not remembering (good Lord) my
unworthiness of the same, nor frailty of my passed years that speaks against
me, but altering the ministers of thy wrath into decorative border mild
mercy. Grant I beseech thee, that through the assistance of thy holy Spirit,
I may be led to correct what is amiss, and that I may now this day and ever
hereafter persevere in setting, ordering, and performing all my travails,
councels, and studies as best may accord with thy blessed will, and cancel the
hands of my heavy charge. Assist me (oh Lord) of all power, with thy prudent
skill and heavenly grace, that I may be truly able to advance Justice, and
to hate wrong, and so be found faithful in all that I take in hand. Plant I
beseech thee, by thy decorative border heavenly grace, and fear, with
obedience in me, and kindle in me ye love of thy holy spirit, that I may
persevere in the truth of thy word, without doubt or wavering, to the end.
Grant this, oh mighty God of Hoastes, for the Merits and Passion of thy
dear Son, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Most merciful GOD and loving Father, with fear and reverence I approach
decorative border to thy throne this night that steals on me like a thief. I
thank thee for preserving me this day past, and I beseech thee suffer me not
to fall into the horrors of the night. Forgive me the innumerable offenses
that I have committed this day; and those also which (if thy Grace prevent me
not) I am like to fall into this night. Pardon them (oh Lord) they are more in
number then the sand in the Sea, and more heavy to me then if Mountains were
laid upon my breast: But I beseech thee receive me to mercy, and give me grace
to be more careful of the performance of thy decorative border holy will.
Suffer no unclean thoughts to pollute my body and soul: and whether I sleep
or wake, give thine Angels charge over me, that at what hour soever thou
call me, I may like a faithful soldier be found ready to attend thee my
Lord and God, even for Jesus Christ's sake my only Lord and Savior, Amen.

In the multitude of thy mercies will I enter into thy house (oh GOD) and in
thy fear lift up my hands and heart, toward thy sacred seat, and honor
thy Holy name. decorative border The Confession of a Sinner.
O Most blessed Father of everlasting bliss, and gracious giver of all
goodness, I say most precious Patron of all Princely power, and God of all
mercy, I wretched sinner, and unclean Creature, with so much humility as
possible in me is, and with full trust in thy goodness, do prostrate my self
before thy Sacred seat: confessing my grievous, huge, and deep offenses,
wherewith I have offended thee, my most loving decorative border Father, even
until this hour: I have not feared to commit those execrable wicked deeds,
which thy only beloved Son my humble Lord and Savior, by his bitter
bloud-shedding has washed, and with so pinching panges purged. I confess also
unto thee, most merciful father, my great and horrible ingratitude wherewith I
unworthy creature, have ever most vnthankefullie answered thee, and thy Son,
in liew of all the love, goodness, and fidelity, which thou have bestowed on
me: which now, so long and many years have spared my wickedness and sin,
and benignely decorative border suffered all injury, and contempt offered thee,
through my disobedience and wilfulness. Yea, thou have required me to
repentance with great gentleness, that thereby thou might win my heart to
deck thy Habitation therein, with the Boughs of thy Love. And how often (oh
Lord GOD) haste thou knocked at the Door of my Conscience, by thy inspiration:
wooed me with thy benefits: cheared me with thy comforts, and most mightily
put to flight my dreadful dangers: yet have thou suffered repulse, I have
always turned ny back to thee, and decorative border thou notwithstanding
haste meekely suffered it. Oh how justly could thou have thrown me to Hell:
yet mercifully have spared me. Truly it is marvel (most sweet Savior)
that my heart breaks not through vehement sorrow, when I recount these
things. Neither is Hell it self, with all his pains, of force to correct my
malicious wickedness, I am unworthy to be called thy creature, or one whom
the Earth should sustain, or nourishmentes yield their natural food. Marvel
it is (oh Lord) that thy Creatures and Elements, do not revenge the injury,
and decorative border contempt which I have made thee through my manifold
iniquities.

But now, most loving Father have mercy (I beseech thee) on me, and to me
miserable and desolate sinner. Turn the eyes of thy divine favor, and with
the wings of thy mercy cover my infirmity. Open unto me the Bowels of thy
benignity: and receiving me into thy favor, forgive my slackenesse in turning
to thee: Open to me thy bosom of bounty and loving kindness, and replenish
me with the nourishment and solace of thy grace. I beseech thee, Lord God, since
decorative border of thy mercy, and for thy Sons sake, thou have hitherto
spared me; confirm now that swiftly in me, whereunto from the beginning I am
ordained. And woe to me unhappy sinner, that have left so loving and merciful
a Father, who ever tendered me. Yet have I denied thee in my heart, wherein
thou had determined the Tabernacle of thy delight, and have defiled it, and
made thereof a vessel of iniquity, and a den of unclean Spirits. I
confess my self (oh Lord) the most wicked of all that the world sustaineth:
But nevertheless, I trust in thy goodness: decorative border For as my sins
be above number, so is there no number of thy mercies: O most loving Father, if
it seem good to thee, thou can make me clean: Heal my soul, I confess I
have sinned. Remember Lord those comfortable words, which thou spakest by the
Prophet, saying: Thou have done wickedly with many, yet turn to me and I will
receive thee. Truly most merciful Father, I trust assuredly in these sweet
words, and with my whole heart turn me to thee, as though thou had spoken
these words to me alone, and would call none other, for I am the unclean
decorative border and unfaithful soul, the prodigal and wandering Son, who
has alienated my self from that Father of Light, from whom all goodness
springs, loosing and neglecting all thy large gifts, which of thy bountiful
liberality thou have granted: I have straied from thee like a wandering
sheep. I have forsaken thee the fountain of Living Water, and dug to my
self muddie pittes: seeking outward comforts which hold no water, have
followed Temporal and transitory delights, which vanish swiftly as smoke. I
have left also the bread of Life, and decorative border eat the dregs of
Swine, following mine own sensual appetite and beastly affections. I have
forsaken thee, the chief, most perfect, and continual good, and have inclined
to terrestrial and transitory things. Therefore I am become Naked, Poor,
Miserable, and unclean, and as a Calfe tied, do festure through mine own
infirmities. But I pray thee (oh Father) remember not the contempt and Injury
thou have received of me; pardon the passed faults of my tender years: let not
the old soars of wandering youth in settled years break out to new bleeding
decorative border wounds. Accept the pitiful passion of thy dear Son, in
satisfaction of my former heaped evils, and grant Lord to me sorrofull
sinner, the assistance of thy holy Spirit, to continue this I have begun, to
the health of my Soul and quietness of mind, and my tongue and heart shall
speak the Triumph of thy loving kindness and mercy, both now and ever. Amen.

Eccles. 4.
Deliver him that suffers wrong, from the hands of the oppressor, and be not
faint-hearted when thou sit in decorative border Judgment, decide Law with
Equity, and Justice with mercy, be favorable to the Fatherless, and be in
stead of a Husband unto their Mother, so shall thou be blessed in sight of
the Highest, and he shall love thee more then does thy Father and Mother.

Eccles. 9.12.
Day and night let the broad Gates of thy bounty be open to the Discreet and
Virtuous. Set honor always upon the head of the lowlye. But to the proud
and ambicious, keep thy self secret and strange: give not thy decorative
border bread unto him, least he become mightier then thy self, nor trust not
thine Enemy, at any time: for like as Iron cankereth, so does his wickedness,
though he humble himself greatly, yet lock up thy mind and beware of him, set
him not by thee, nor on thy right hand least he turn, get into thy place, take
thy room, and possess thy Seat.

Pro. 16.
The cherefull countenance of the King, is Life: his loving favor, is as the
Evening deaw.

decorative border L Love God above all.
A Accept the wise
D Do no man wrong.
I In mercy delight.
E Expect a reward.
E Increase Knowledge.
L Let virtue guide.
I In Prayer persever.
Z Zelously ask.
A Acknowledge Sin.
B Beware of presumption.
E Envy no man.
T Tender the Helpelesse.
H Hope for Heaven.
decorative border Holy, brief, and comfortable Meditations, or Prayers
discifering in Alphabet form, the gracious name of the Lady Elizabeth.
L
LOath not the Prayer of one that is in trouble: turn not away thy face from
the needy: despise not the selie sewter: nor grieve the heart of the
helpelesse: for if he complain in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer
shall be heard, even he that made him shall hear him.

LIghten in me (oh decorative border God) the Image of thy self, though I
looked back from thy Laws, chastise me to amendment: but suffer not the
work of thy hands to perish.

Thou have created my heart, and given me a will to order the same: so Lord I
most meekelie yield the same again into thy hands.

I pray thee by thy holy spirit, so direct my ways, counsels, and works,
that they may be of chief regard with thee, good God the giver of all mercy,
suffer not my Soul to perish through the infirmity of my flesh.

For thy Sons sake; and decorative border thine own glory, set both now and
ever his death and passion between thy just Judgment and the peril of my
soul.

I thirst after thee, oh God, and since thou see my hearty desire is to serve
thee, and live in thy rule, and to die in thy Faith and favor, allow of me,
and with thy mighty hand assist me.

Grant that the Celestial kingdom of thy grace and mercy ever occupy my
heart, and worthily purchase me the sweet participation of thy glorious Throne
and Majesty.

Deliver me Lord through thy grace: for in all my proper decorative border
works and devises can be found no sure shield of defense for me.

Cast not away my sorrowful soul: Remember the pitiful Passion of thy dear
Son, and suffer it not to perish.

Guide my feet in the shining light of thy Verity: carry me aloft from the
snares of the ungodly: and from the traitorous trappes of the malicious save
me.

Suffer not thou (oh Prince of all power, who rulest the heavens and earth)
that any canckred, or malicious stomach rebel, or increase against me.

decorative border Pardon my cursed crimes: release my direful debts: give me
again thy grace: wrappe up my woeful wounds that fester in my feeble flesh:
graffe me a new with the garnishing of thy grace: so shall thy glory grow,
and my gained gladness heal my groaning griefs.

If I deserve the fullness of thy fury to fall upon me, yet as a loving
Savior rule over the roughness of thy rage, and let thy most meek mercy
measure my pain, as thou haste done unto numbers.

Grant most gracious God of all victory, that I may ever decorative border
have thy power, and right hand to be my resident Rock of refuge.

Give gracious ear to my requests, be thou my stay in every storm and
peril, for all man's stays are vnsteadie.

Beat down therefore mine enemies with thine own hand and Sword, which art
mine only aid and Protector: give me thy grace, and I shall never cease to
give thee glory: both with my tongue and heart shall I joyfully sing. Dominus
illuminatio mea, and salus mea, quem timebo? Dominus Protector Vitae me, a quo
trepidabo? The Lord is my light and my salvation, decorative border whom then
shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be
afraid? Amen.

A
ALL thy delight being in equity and Justice, incline thine heart to me cy:
then shall thy light break forth as the morning spring, and thy health
flourish: thy righteousness shall preserve thee, and the glory of the Lord
shall embrace thee.

ASsist me (oh God) with thy grace, and enrich me decorative border with thy
Spirit: illuminate my mind with thy understanding: be unto me a sure salvation,
and whom should I fear.

Truly neither will I fear any bodily or ghostly enemy, thou being the
strength of my life.

Though innumerable hosts do rise against me, my Spirit shall trust in thee,
and in my heart will I never be affraide.

Arm me with strength of war (oh GOD) and teach my hands to wage battle.

And I shall lay flat the enemies of thy truth, and joyfully decorative
border resist all those that rise against me.

My life shall ever declare thy saving health, and my soul shall not cease to
sing thy praise.

Thou haste delivered me from the chains of Hell: and when I have been
wrapped in the dangers of death, thou have cleared my paths of all stumbling
blocks, and made thy rich mercy my Candle.

Lord, if I have been unthankful, a broken mind shall be thy sacrifice: my
heart shall ever dwell in the house of thanksgiving, and my sptrit still mourn
for her unkindness.

decorative border Save me Lord I beseech thee, in the day of my distress,
for thou art the Horn of my health, the shield of my glory, and bear up
mine infirmity.

Let them be consumed in their devises, that shall work against me, and
fail of their force in the hour of their pretense.

Power upon them the Vial of thy wrath, let them sink by themselves, and save
thy Servants that trust in thy mercy.

I will honor thee for my savior, and praise thee for a God above all Gods.
Amen.

decorative border D
Doubtless, God is gracious and merciful, he forgiueth sins in time of
trouble, and is a defender of them that seek him with hearty prayer, and
wholly put their trust in his mercy and truth.

DIrect my feet (oh Lord) in the ways of peace, and keep my hands clean
from innocent blood.

Lord give me grace to perform the travails of this Pilgrimage before thee,
with a pure mind and clear conscience, decorative border that when thou shall
show thy self toward every creature according to their deeds, I may be rich
in thy mercy, and not dread thy presence.

To thy mercy I appeal, I fly unto thee, I depend on thee, fearing thee, and
reuerencing thee, loving thee, and trusting in thee.

If thy wrath wax hot against me, I cannot withstand. If thou punish me
according to my deserts, I cannot bear: deal mercifully therefore with me,
heal my sores, and pardon my sins.

Whilst I tread this weary Laborinth, leave me not decorative border Lord to
my self, but grant me thy continual grace for my staff.

I am not of might in my self to do any thing that is good: my righteousness
and glory stand in thy hand.

Therefore (oh Lord) I appeal to thy mercy, and pray thy grace, that I may in
mind be made strong with thy holy Armor, which I desire may be thy
righteousness for my Breast Plate: firm faith for my Target: hope of mercy
for my Helmette, and true knowledge of thy word for my Banner: so that I may
stand here strong and perfect against thine enemies, and decorative border in a
new life participate thy joys.

I will blow thy wondrous name through thy people, and will praise thee
amongst all the faithful.

My praises shall have being unto the farthest part of thy congregation, and my
vows will I perform in the sight of all them that fear thee.

I will endeavor that the ends of the World shall remember themselves, and
will do my best to turn them unto thee.

Give me therefore ioyfulnesse of heart, rest of conscience, continual comfort
in decorative border thy word and truth, and that I may with a thankful mind,
advance thy name for ever.

y
YEa, in the fear of God who so lives, shall gather his Fruits in a pleasant
Garden of blessings; it gives thee true Honor, Glory, Triumph, and joyful
Crown.

YEa, in the multitude of all my sorrows that ever I have had in my heart: Thy
comforts (oh Lord) have ever refreshed me.

Such is thy loving kindness decorative border and above all, thy mercy: that
if I should straie farther in my unthankfulness, mine own thoughts would
accuse me.

Therefore I do come unto thee to be taught thy Testimonies, that I may make
thy Laws my delight.

Truly hoping of thy grace for my assistance, I do mean to make thy
commandments an Alley of my pleasure to walk in, and the Truth of thy words
will I wear on, as an Armor against mine enemies.

Guide my fleshly eyes (oh Lord) least they behold vanities, and my heart in
thy righteousness.

decorative border Pluck my feet into the paths of thy Precepts when they
would wander: print the remembrance of thy goodness always in the table of my
heart, and let my power fail to offend thee.

Heap my hands with sure hope of my salvation, satisfy my faith in the
forgiveness of my sins, that my frail flesh waver not in thy mercy.

Temper my tongue (oh Lord) that it always teach thy Testimonies, lock up
my lips, that out of my mouth do not proceed neither blasphemy of thy name,
Hazard to my soul, nor hinderance decorative border to any creature.

Bow down thine ears (oh Lord) and strengthen me in these requests. For
behold, I bow the knees of a contrite heart, and with assured mind do hope
them for ye truth-sake, which I will everlastingly praise. To thee be glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

decorative border E
EXercise mercy, and set thy bread and Drink upon the table of the poor and
hungry: cover the Naked with thy clothes, and these shall deliver thee from
Sin, and Death, and not suffer thy Soul to come in darkness.

EZechiell the Prophet says, When the wicked turns from his ungodliness he
has done, he shall save his Soul.

With thy Servant Esaias, therefore I say (oh Lord) thou art a great, and
fearful God. Thou keep covenant, and mercy with them which love decorative
border thee, and keep thy commandments.

And with thy Apostle Barnabie, I acknowledge I have sinned, I have offended, I
have been disobedient, and gone back, yea, I have departed from all thy
paths, and Judgments.

Lord to thee belongs righteousness and Mercy, to me shame and destruction
for my Iniquity.

Yet Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is righteous
in thy sight: neither correct me in thy wrath, for then I shall not abide it.

Have mercy upon me, (oh decorative border Father) from the depth of thy
mercy take pity upon me: forgive (Lord hear my Prayer) and blot out mine
offense.

Let thy loving face shine over the work of thy hands, that lies waste: Lord
for thy own sake do it.

Incline thine ear and hear me, behold how desolate I am, stretch out thy
hand and help me Lord, I desire to come to thee, and my weakness is such,
as without thy help, I am not able to raise my self unto thee.

Therefore Lord remember thy sweet promises, tarry not ouerlong, strengthen me
with thy holy Spirit, hear my decorative border Prayers, and wash me in thy
righteousness.

I cast not these peticions before thee, hoping in mine own Merits, which,
are are none, but trusting in thy great mercy, and sweet promises. Wherefore
Lord hear me, and forgive me, and I shall live for ever.

L
LEt Enmity pass, which seeks Death and Destruction, and before thou
prayest, forgive, else thou heapest vengeance on thy self.

LOrd make thy ways known unto me, that I may decorative border walk so
perfectly, that no kind of Sin overcome me.

Thou leadest straight in judgment, and give sight to the blind.

Thou art near unto them that call upon thee with faithful heart: have mercy
upon me, hear me, and give me a Heart to pray unto thee.

Lay not against me my sins past: but for thine own sake forget them.

I understand not all mine errors, my sins have taken hold on me, and of my
self I am not able to return.

Send me therefore thy holy help, to strengthen mine infirmity.

decorative border Keep my mouth and lips: and let the thought of my heart be
acceptable in thy sight.

Permit not the word of Truth to depart my breast: suffer not Malice to
dwell in my heart.

Deliver me from false surmises, and accusations of men: rule me after thine
own will and pleasure.

Remove from me vanities and let not the foot of Pride take hold on me, so
shall I be free from the greatest sin.

Stay and keep me from every evil way, for in thee I trust, it is thou
only that can help, Look unto me decorative border with thy mercies, and
grant me grace in thy sight. Amen.

I
IN equity, Love, and Truth, gather all thy riches: in the hands of the poor
lay up thy Alms, and these shall defend thee from evil: fight for thee
against thy enemies, better then the strength of mighty men, preserve thy
favor as the apple of an Eye, and rise with thee in the day of Judgment, to
pay thy reward on thy head.

IN hope of thy mercy, and forgiveness (most mighty decorative border and
dreadful God) whose truth is unspotted, I am bold to come before thee.

My trust is good, I shall be heard, for that thou have ever been the true
head of all Justice, and delightest in truth.

Deny thy self thou can not; for thou have promised, In what time soever a
Sinner does with a broken heart, repent his wickedness: at that instant thou will cansell the records of thy remembraance: and the fowlenesse of his fault
shall remain no blemish to his soul.

Hear me now therefore (oh Maker of Heaven and earth) I acknowledge I have
decorative border sinned, and done unpleasant things in thy sight.

I confess the misdeedes, which rebel against my Soul, with Saul, saying: I
have sinned, I have played the Fool, and have erred exceedingly.

And with like humble, lowly and faithful heart, as did King David: who
unfeignedly cried out his Sin, and became thy servant.

So (most Holy) in hope of the same hire, with contrite heart I sigh and say:
I have broken thy Laws, and not walked in thy Commandments.

If I should now recite, decorative border and number the Mountains of my
misdeedes, which ouerwhelme my body, and that are eager enemies to my pining
Soul, the day were too short.

Lord I need not, thy blisfull Seat is above the starry Firmament, and thou
sit on high beholding what is done amiss in the Earth below.

My wickedness that I most secretly have committed to the Celestial eyes: have
been manifest.

Forgive me good Lord, that my tongue may justify thy everlasting Truth, that
others beholding in me thy manifold decorative border mercies, may likewise
with me be ashamed of their evil, and seek after thy mercy.

Woe am I, that my heart has been so long unacquainted with the Welspringes of
thy Truth, that my hands have wrought unrighteousness, and heaped sin upon
sin.

Turn away from the sight thereof, the fullness of thy fury.

Exchange the roughness of thy rage into meek mildness, before thou correct
me, most loving Savior.

I am not able to abide thy heavy displeasure: if thou chastise me with thy
rod of decorative border Justice, I perish.

I have not one good deed to prefer, mine offenses bear number with the
flowers and blossoms of the Spring: my truth is no whitte, and with
unrighteousness all is defiled.

Forgive me oh Heavenly King: forget, thou that art the sweet spring of my
soul.

Give me thy holy Spirit, that it may be with me, and labor with me to
attain thy blessed favor: for mine ignorance cannot desire that I ought,
neither can my feeble strength without thine aid, raise me unto thy presence.

decorative border Thy Spirit will help my debility, and make right
intercession for all my necessities.

Thy Spirit will make me pray with such humbleness of heart, and sorrowful
sighings, as no tongue can tell.

That gift most precious, will hold me up, where flesh would fall, and guide
my feeble feet in the light of the Lord.

The Spirit (I say) will purge me from all earthly affects, and lift me up to
heavenly things.

Therefore conioyne me (oh God of all mercy) to thy holy Spirit, to teach me
to decorative border tread the steady steps of thy worthy will.

So shall I lead my Life in the true Law of thy loving kindness, and with a
strong and stable mind, persevere in Prayer unto the end.

Grant me therefore for thy Truth and Sons sake, that I may enjoy this
sweet possession of thy holy Spirit, which may always lead my labors after
thy lyking, and keep my heart in thy fear.

Sweet Jesus make a covenant with me, that I never may become an enemy unto
thee any more, nether be found unworthy of thy rich mercy and bountiful
benefits: but decorative border that the remainder of my life employed in thy
Service, may justly move thee to forget ye iniquity of my tender years.
Continue thou God of all comfort with increase, by the assistance of thy grace,
what I have begun: So shall I live to glorify thy might and mercy for ever and
ever. Amen.

decorative border Z
Zeal, anger, carfulness, and sorrow, cause celeritie of old Age, Justice,
mercy, equity, and truth, make glad the holy Ghost and to a merry heart is
given long life, and sweet taste.

Zachary spoke from thee (O Lord) saying: Like as I devised to punish you,
what time your Fathers provoked me unto wrath, and spared not:

Even so am I now minded to do well unto the house of Judah and Jerusalem,
therefore fear it not.

decorative border Now the things you shall do (says the Lord) are these:
speak every man the truth to his neighbor, execute Judgment truly and
peaceable within your Ports, none of you Imagine evil in his heart, and love
no false oaths.

O Lord, of my self I am so sinful and ignorant, that I cannot speak nor
think a good thought, much less to do well in deed.

Assist me therefore with thy grace, that I may do as thou have commanded.

And let me comfort my self with thy sweet words by thy Prophet, which are,
That as decorative border the house of Judah and Israel were accursed amongst the
heathen, so thou do promise to make them a blessing.

Am not I an Ofspringe of that seed (O Lord) to whom thou did promise
this blessing?

Or were not these things written to put me in mind of thee, and cause me
turn from my wickedness, and trust by thy mercy to obtain favor again?

Remember then O Lord) in thy Mercy. Turn me, and I shall be turned: say to my
Soul, I am come unto thee, thy health and thy salvation.

decorative border A
A Double tongued man is to be abhorred: and he that bears hatred, can nether
pray rightly, nor speak truly, of whom beware, for the malicious and double
tongued, has overthrown high Palaices, and laid wast strong Cities: who so
harkeneth to the^ shall never find rest, nor dwell in safety; near the Prince
they are more perilous then a Fistula in the breast to the health of Man.

AVenge not thy cause decorative border on me thou God of al Justice: forgive
me my contempts of thy Commandments, and omission of prayer.

If thou give me equal pay of my Merits, I perish.

Forget my wickedness I beseech thee, and clothe me with the comfort of thy
compassion. Purify my Soul and Body, wash away my wickedness with the blood
breaking from the Wounds of my Savior Christ, and I shall no more be unkind.

Give me Wisdom to know all thy precepts and pleasure: grant thy mercy
ever to keep me, and thy grace to guide me.

decorative border It yrketh me that ever I did forsake so sweet a Lord and
Savior: my sorrow wastes me, and my sighs ouer-whelme my heart.

Have me in remembrance therefore, for I tremble and quake: were not thy
mercy known, I should utterly despair.

Turn away the stroke of thy vengeance from me, bring my mind out of trouble,
into rest.

Fetch now again (thou most precious Prince of all power) that which thy
puissant might has shapen.

Restore (Son of the Father Almighty) that which decorative border thou have
so well guided, and bought with terrible torments.

Take again into the Sacred seat of thy blessed custody (Lord God Holy
Ghost) my Body and Soul, that have wandered.

Thou have pitifully preserved them long from the violence and utter
destruction of the wicked Serpent, and throws of worldly chance.

Most mighty God since thou have advanced thy Glory by such compassion, continue
in me hearty Prayer: put about me the girdle of thy grace, and lincke my love
in the lore of thy laws, and my heart shall decorative border be thankful.

Day and night will I say, blessed is the Lord. And will praise thy Name, and
magnify thy mercy for ever and ever.

B
BE ashamed of sins and unrighteousness: be ashamed to turn thy face away from
thy friend in his need: be ashamed to obbraide thy friend with thy gifts: be
ashamed to take, and not to give: but be not ashamed of the truth of god and
his Covenant: but do thy best to fulfill it, and thou shall live.

BE my comforter in decorative border al counselles and dangers (oh God) make
clear my understanding and heap my Forte with new effects, and Spiritual
motions.

Renew my Body and spirit, that all sin fly from me, and grant that I live to
righteousness.

Power upon me the Spirit of thy grace: lead me with the True knowledge of thy
word.

Hold my heart always in thy fear, build a true faith, and hope of thy
promises and mercy, in the Bowels of my breast.

The heavenly Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has promised decorative border
it unto me, for his sons sake I seek it: and for that thou may overcome
when thou art Judged, deny me not.

Though there belong nothing to me but confusion and shame, yet (Lord) correct
me not in thy dreadful displeasure, but with the loving favor of thy face,
look upon my festured wounds. Heal them (good Lord) from the bottom let them
be healed.

Mingle thy mercy and precepts, and sow the seed of them so deep in my heart,
that no burning blasts of persecution make ashes thereof: neither any thorny
cares of this life do decorative border choke it: but that it may bring forth,
as thou have appointed like good ground, thirty six, and an hundred fold.

The fruits of my harvest Lord, shall be the flowers of thy glory: my tongue
shall always speak of thy maruailous works, and my heart shall keep thy
Laws.

I will not deny thee (my God) for the power of any wicked, but will seek thy
grace, hope of thy mercy, and say: The mighty God of Israel is to be loved,
feared, and obayed, world without end. Amen.

decorative border E
Evil seeds see thou sow not in the Purrowes of unrighteousness, so shall
thou not reap thee seuenfoulde labor: sue not unto man for any Lordship,
neither unto the King for the Seat of Honor.

EStablish my heart (oh Heavenly Father) in league and love with thy laws:
print thy Precepts in the bowels of my breast, and sequester my mind from all
thoughts, studies, and labors, that may draw me from thee.

decorative border My soul consumes in care to be with thee, and my bodily
eyes tremble to behold thee: only because thou hate sin, and abhorrest
iniquity.

Alas there is nothing in me but unrighteousness, and the examples be
dreadful, which declare how grievously thou have punished sin.

Thou did drown the world for sin: Thou did send fire upon Sodom and
Gomorrha: Thou did cast forth Adam and his offspring out of Paradise for
sin: Thou did grieuouslye punish thy servant David notwithstanding his hearty
repentance: Yea thou persecutedst Solomon in decorative border himself and his
Posterity, with many other to our example, and all for shameful sin.

Lord since these examples are true, and mine iniquity equal with theirs: what
should become of my Soul, if I had not amediatour, Christ, whose bloody
Passion then appeased thy wrath when nothing else could.

By his Death I am once redeemed, (oh God) therefore let me not now be
consumed, bearing thy Image: but grant the pains of his pitiful Passion,
may put out all mine offenses.

With my voice I will spread thy mercies over all decorative border Nations: my
Life shall glorify thy name, and all that thou give me, I will acknowledge
to be thine, with everlasting praise. Amen.

T
THe greater thou art, the more humble thy self in all things, and thou shall
find favor in the sight of God: for great power belongs only unto God, and
he is honored of the lowly.

TVrne away thy face from mine unrighteousness: Lord, no Creature is clear
in thy sight.

decorative border If thou should call thine Angels to the Bar, they
might not abide the Sentence of thy just Judgment.

I come unto thee for succor, Lord under the wings of thy mercy receive me.

Thou delightest not in any Sacrifice or burnt Offerings: but thy accustomed
condition has been ever to accept a sorrowful Spirit, and a broken heart.

Lord, if thy loving kindness be such: I hear present thee with a heavy
heart, a broken body, a martyred mind, and a sighing Soul.

These all appeal to thee (O Lord) for thy mercy, and cry decorative border
out with the Prodigal Son, saying: I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee: wash me therefore with thy rich mercy, not that any good in me does
deserve it, but because thou art God of all mercy, and it declares thy
mightiness to forgive.

Thou did show compassion upon the woman of Canaan for her great Faith, and
from the beginning thou have not rejected the effectual prayers of a single
heart.

Lord I give glory to thy name with the highest: thy mercy stretches above the
Firmaments: the sure hope and trust I have in thy unspeakable decorative
border truth and compassion, is equal with the strong Faith of the Cananite
woman.

I confess my sins are manifold: But Lord I know thy mercy and saving
health are infinite: Lord, since thou art of power to forgive above that I can
offend: for thy names sake, release my sorrow, cut the sack of my sins, and
make me strong in thee. So shall I live, and all my thoughts acknowledge thy
praise. Amen.

decorative border H
HAppy is the man that has not fallen with the Word of his mouth, and is not
pricked with the conscience of sin, that has no heaviness in his mind, and is
not fallen from his Hope.

HOw mighty thou art (oh God of Hoastes) in thy precelling power: by Creating
this world of nothing, we are taught to know.

Thou do govern the same and put down with thy hand the proud and
traitorous Tyrants thereof.

decorative border Thou destroyest their devises, and keep the raging Sea
within her bounds.

These and such like declare thy power over all.

The plenty of thy bountiful hand gives not only increase of things; but
also the increase of every kind of thing show forth thy loving kindness.

Thou do multiply yearly and daily these kinds: how many seeds (good Lord)
do thou increase of one seed, Lord what manifold springs comes thereof.

These cannot but keep us mindful of thy exceeding Riches and Mercy.

decorative border Lord, if to thy enemies (as to the greatest number of the
world which love thee not) thy condition be to deal thus bountifully, what
shall I deem, rests with thee for thy frindes?

Truly such blisfull joys and rest as makes me only desire of thee to be
dissolved from this earthlye and unclean body when thy pleasur is.

I am the fresh Image of thy self, and the work of thine own hands, take
me therefore unto thee, burnish me a new, free my soul from the poisoned
prison of sin, that it may give equal thanks decorative border unto so sweet
a Lord and guide. Whilst I abide in this wretched body of Sin, I cannot see
thee (oh Lord) yea it is a heavy habitation, and depresseth down sore my Spirit
from the familiarity which it else should have with thee my loving Father.

Lord this world and life, is a Dungeon of Darkness, a Mountain of miserable
Martirdomes, a lewd Laborinth of loathsome Lusts, a cankred course of chokinge
Calamities: being void of all virtues to gain eternal Life.

Make me therefore strong to walk upright in this wretched wilderness, and
decorative border arm me with the gift of thy grace, against the power of
Satan my Ghostly enemy.

Here is nothing where I am Lord, but daily assaults of Temptations, troubles,
torments, careful calamities, contention for thy word, horrible hatred, and
worldly ambition: against which Lord perfect me in knowledge and strong faith,
and with thy right hand beat down mine enemies, that thou may be known to
be my God and Shield.

decorative border The Versicle.
FOR thy dear. Sons sake (O Lord) hear and receive my Prayers.

The Answer.
AND in thy truth and mercy pardon mine offenses, and grant me thy grace.

The Collect.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the pure Virgin Marie, thou art not only the
sweet spouse of my souls decorative border health, but with God the Father a
most meek Mediator, full of mercy and truth, wash away my sins with the most
precious blood of thy holy passion: make me rich in thy mercy, and my faith
so strong in thee, that assisted with thy grace and holy Spirit to all duty,
and works in this life toward thee, I may enjoy afterward the glory of thy
blessed kingdom, with thy holy Saints, in everlasting honor and triumph. Amen

decorative border L
Loving Father, plant thy grace so surely in me, (oh Lord) that from this day,
I never become enemy with thee again, but that I may only rest in thee.
Guide me with the clear light of thy word through the dark deserts of this
wretched world. Here no misery nor trouble lacks: Here every place is
full of snares of mortal enemies: yea, here one trouble decorative border and
temptation being ouerpassed, an other ensues, and after the first enduring, a
new battle suddenly assaileth, whereby I never have peace, and want
wherewith to war. O Lord keep me, help me, save me; regard me (oh Lord):
Lord assist me with the power of thy holy Spirit; and as thou have commanded
I come unto thee, praying for the gift of all these my requests; and
specially Lord, I require the Sword of my savior Christ, true and firm
Faith, yt established in thy Truth, holding that for my defense, I may be
safely armed against all mine decorative border enemies, and strong to cut
down the thorns which shall spring in my way of passage unto thee, in whom
sweet Savior, above all honor, glory, triumph, swaye, rule, power, and
dignity, make me settle all my joys: yea, above all health, riches, beauty,
fame, and felicity, to desire thee, love thee, and magnify thee which give
all: and therefore of all to be beloved and sought, art most worthy. Amen.

decorative border A
ARise (O Lord I beseech thee) and ease the pains I suffer, and the troubles
of my soul: let the fountains of thy grace ouerflow my barren body, and the
floudes of thy mercy strengthen my feeble Spirit: let thy loving kindness
cover mine infirmities, and thy suffered drops of deaw upon the Cross, drown
mine iniquity. Thy word is Truth, and thou have said, thy delight is not in
the death of a Sinner, but would decorative border he should convert and
live.

Teach me therefore to number my days in the love of thy Laws, that I may
always thirst after thy kingdom, and never forget thee: but in this, that I
have here begun, may persevere and increase, setting at naught all worldly
pomp, respect of persons, and man's help, and only cleave to thy Omnipotent
power, mercy, strength, and goodness: wherein Lord make me so rich, that I
never may have power to swerue from thee, nor want thy grace to resist all
temptations, neither yet thy strength to tread down mine enemies, and so my
heart shall decorative border joyfully live, and give thanks to thee my God of
all truth, mercy, and victory. Amen.

D
Dear God thou merciful father of my redeemer Christ, which have promised to
hear the petitions, of them that ask in thy sons name, give down thy fear
into my heart: conioyne thy holy spirit to the fellowship of my soul, power upon
me the blessed deawes of thy grace: enritch me with thy high understanding, and
send wisdom decorative border in her glory from thy Sacred seat to dwell in
me that she may giude me, uphold me, and labor with me, to the end, that in
all my trauelles, enterprises, proceedinges, and studies, I may preuail to thy
glory. Do this dear Father, for the triumph of thy name. Bow down thine
ears, and mercifully hear, and receive the sum of all my requests, and
grant that all things which I ask according to my necessity, I may
effectually obtain to thy glory, and profit of my soul, through Jesus Christ
my only Lord and Savior. Amen.

decorative border I
I Give and commit into thy hands my Spirit, yea rather I may say thy Spirit:
seeing thou have given it me, link it to my body for a season, and seeing it
is thy image and Figure, made after thine own likeness, seeinge thy dear
Son did climb the direful steps of death for redemption thereof. O most
favorable Father and meek God of all mercy and compassion, I eftsoons
commend this my Spirit into thy hand, decorative border I am thine whatsoever
I am, receive thine. I beseech thee preserve me, and comfort me, for no man
can help me besides thee. Only thou art the sureste resister of all
mischief, thou art (oh God) the readiest help in all trouble, thou art my
hope and strength. In thee do I put my trust, let me not be confounded, let
me never be rebuked: thou art my strong rock and my Castle, thou art my
savior, my portion is in thy hands. Lighten thy face upon thy Servant, and
save me (O Lord) in thy mercy. Amen.

decorative border E
EVen now I see that no brickle nor corrupt gold or Silver has redeemed my
soul (O Heavenly Father) but the precious blood issuing from Christ as of a
lamb undefiled and without spot, make me therefore (O Lord) for his sake to
put on his humility, patience, virtue, and unspotted life, rendering such
account of this my pligrimage as best may agree to his merit and thy mercy. Let
me not be found unthankful to so sweet decorative border a Lord and Savior:
what is most righteous, acceptable, and pleasant in thy sight, let me always
(O God) prefer in faith and works: and whatsoever is to approve me
unworthy of his tender and surmounting love, that may alter his loving
kindness, or exchang his wonted compasion toward me, Lord let me ever fail
in strength to do it: but assisted by thee, I may everlastingly be found to
live in him. Amen.

decorative border E
EVery one, that says, Lord, Lord, shall not enter the Kingdom of heaven.
Therefore confirm my Faith strong in thee, O heavenly Father, and in my Savior
Jesus Christ: quiet my mind with sure hope of his promises, and thy Salvation.
Destroy in me the kingdom of Sin, the power of Satan, the desires of the
world, and the delights of the flesh. Guide decorative border my feet in the
paths of thy precepts: bring ye conflicting days of mine enemies to an end.
Make me, that am weak in my self, strong in thee, to co^quer ye force of their
arms.

So shall my lips power out continual praise unto thee, O god of my
Salvation, and magnify thy Majesty, world without end. Amen.

L
Look not extremly what is done amiss in me, for no flesh is righteous in
thy sight. I offer up my self wholly decorative border with all my unsavory,
and corrupt abuses: both in will and works unto the flowing fountayn of thy
mercy, to be chasticed, pollished, and washed, and made clean even at thine
own will and pleasure. Wherefore impute not the frailty of my tender years
unto my charge, but that thou may ouercom when thou art judged. Forgive me,
receive me, and so arm me with thy holy Spirit, that I may tread the rest of
my days with an upright sway, a clear conscience, and a single heart, to thy
Glory, and profit of my Soul. Amen.

decorative border I
I Live (Oh God) in a most wretched Vale of mysery, where continually thy
creatures are stained with sin, assailed with affliction, vexed with
troubles, choked with cares, infected with ambition, vexed with temptations,
blinded with errors, ouercom with vanities of ye world and miserably wrapped
in all untruth, and wretchedness, wherefore (O Lord) arise, stretch out thy
hand, help, and comfort me. Assuage my decorative border sorrow, assist me
with thy Holy Spirit, that mine own substance overcome me not: this
glittering vain world of infinite sorrows and few felicities deceive me not:
that Satan supplant me not: but give me invincible power to encounter them:
patience in suffering them: and in thy word, constancye in perseuering to the
end, Amen.

Z
Zeal, anger, hatred, and from respect of any persons in Judgment, LORD
decorative border make me free. Arm me with the patience of my Savior Christ:
give me the Breastplate of his righteousness, and ye helmet of his equity.
Make me to exercise his Mercy, Truth, Meekenes, Faithfulness, Temperance,
and Humility. Cast out of my heart, all that may offend thee, and disprofit my
soul.

Let all worldly things be vile unto me: for thy sake let me rejoice in
nothing without thee, nor love nothing, but to thy glory. So shall my heart
keep thy laws, and my mouth for ever and ever speak thy praise Amen.

decorative border A
Accept me (Lord) in the number of thy elect: behold in me ye Image of thy
self, and the work of thine own hands: remember thou have given thy dear
Son to the bitter Passion of the Cross for my redemption. Let me not be
rewarded therefore according to the deep sea of my sins, for then I perish.
But for thy Truth, Mercy, and dear Sons sake, correct me, strengthen me,
and embrace me: yea, linck me so decorative border surely to ye love of thy
laws, that I never leave thee: and in the day of my trouble, and hour of
death, Lord deliver me: so shall I live, and glorify thee, through all worlds,
Amen.

B
Behold my infirmities (O Lord) and consider my frailnes, best known unto
thee. So often as I shall fall, make me lift up my heart again unto thee, seek
thee, fear thee, and love thee, and ever to be sorry with so steadfast
decorative border a purpose of amendment, that my earnest desire may rightly
stire up thy mercy, and procure me the assistance of thy grace to conioyne me
to all Heavenly things, and to destroy al earthly affections and temptations,
that daily pluck me back, and rebel, not suffering my soul to live in rest.
Against which, build thy fear in my breast: true knowledge of thy word in my
heart: fortify my faith with sure hope of thy Heavenly bliss: and enter the
shining light of thy word so deep in my mind, that all my studies and
thoughts being only occupied therein, my other parts decorative border may
ever want power to offend thee, and my tongue and lips ever be singing thy
laud and glory. Amen.

E
ENritch my Soul with the continual fellowship of thy Holy Spirit, whose
divine humanity may so temper my gross substance with true condition, that
always I may seem low in mine own sight, and neither pride nor self love
overtake, or at any time allure me to exercise the unseemly pleasantnes of
decorative border nature, but ever preferring a pure and chaste life, may winn
the victory of all uncleanness, and glorify thee, which art the head and
Patron of al mercy, truth and singleness, whose triumph my tongue shall
never cease to advance. Therefore most loving Savior, leave me not to my
self, but stand always by me, and with thy strong hand make my ways sound
and perfect, and confound mine enemies in their devises. Amen.

decorative border T
THou have said (most sweet redeemer Christ) that the Mountains shall
remove, and the Hiles shall fall down, but thy loving kindness, word,
mercy, and truth shall not move: and also, that the band of thy peace shall not
fail us. Dear Father I beseech thee for thine own truth and mercyes sake,
remember this thy promise and Covenant, grave it so deep in the inward parts
of my heart, that I may never forget, neither decorative border fall from thee,
but ever acknowledge thee mine only God and Savior: Love thee with all my
heart, and thy people for thy sake: exercising justice, mercy, and Truth to all
thy Creatures, and never suffering me to do that may move thy wrath, but
more and more assisted with thy grace, may increase thy love and liking, and
finally obtain thy joys everlasting. Amen.

H
Hear these my Prayers, (sweet Lord Jesus) decorative border and for thy
exceeding Love, which brought thee from the Sacred seat of thy Fathers breast
into the womb of the blessed vergin, to banish death and Sin, to redeem
man's nature, whereby in thy austere Passion, as thou have restored me and with
so blessed a Shield defended mine eternal death: by the self same Love call
me (that have wandered) home again to thy Fold: renew me with thy spirit:
confirm me with strong faith: nourish in me, such thy abundance love:
garnish me with thy plentiful grace: lade me with infallible hope of thy mercy:
finally restore decorative border all parts in me which are decayed, and
quicken in me, what so is dead, and should live, that my spirit set at liberty
from Terestriall things, thou may ever dwell in me. And my Soul and body
assisted with thy rich gift of all these, may fully, purely, safely, and
strongly settle them in thee. To whom be praise both now and ever. Amen.

A Prayer.
Almighty God, which flyest with the wings of the Air, rydest upon the
Cherubins, and have Empire above the Starrie Firmaments. decorative border Thou
that sit in Sacred seat most hye, beholding the wretchedness of man in this
low Earth, attending through thine own love his deserts, when with any
occasion thou may offer thy mercy, Bow down thy pitiful eyes, and favor in
me the Image of thy self, as thou did vouchsafe in Zache when thou
calledst him out of the Fig tree: enritch my ears with the same voice of
Remission and Gladness, as thou did his: incline thine ears and hear
these cries, (oh Lord redeemer) for though I am but Dust, Earth, ano Ashes, yet
I am bold (strengthened decorative border with thy truth and the merits of
Christ's death and passion) to lay my prayers before thee, requiring mercy and
forgiveness of all my sins, and also the assistance of thy grace, to do thy
will all the days of my life, and to obtain all these my peticions, through
Jesus christ thy dear Son and my only savior: to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost be all honor, power, dominion, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

decorative border A MEDITATION upon the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven.
Truly, thou (O Almighty Father) have just Cause to execute thy severe
judgment upon us sinners, decorative border which so often and grievously move
thy wrath and indignation against us, but sithence by thy mercy thoue do not
only pardon, but also commaundest and teach by thy Son Jesus Christ, that
we should hold thee for a father, we pray thee through him that thou will give
us a full and sure trust in thy Fatherly clemency, and that we may likewise
feel some taste of that security which thy Children have, and with joy call
thee Father, acknowledge thee, love thee, and in all our troubles call upon
thee: defend and guide us that we may perpetually abide thy Children,
decorative border and let us not go out of thy protection. Though we be the
Children of wickedness, yet let us not hold thee in steed of a severe Judge,
when thou will that we shall not only call thee Father, but our Father: and
that we pray not in our own name alone, but in ye name of all thy Children.
Give us therefore an uniform and brotherly love that in deed we may perceive
our selves to be Brothers and Sisters, and thee our general Father. Let us
pray for all the rest, no otherwise then Fathers were wont to pray for their
Children: neither suffer any of us to seek his decorative border own, and
forget his brother: but taking away what envy, hatred, or discord, so ever
reigns among us, that as becomes Gods children, we may mutually love one
another, and trewly call thee not Father, but our Father. Of our carnal and
earthly Fa, there we receue this brickle body, and he is such a one as is
subject to death, neither are we sure how long he shall remain a Father.
Furthermore if adversity happen, he can not change that, but thou art a
heavenly Father, truly far better and more Nobler. So much more right is it
then, that we contemn decorative border for thee, our Father, Country,
kindred, Riches, Flesh, Blood, yea and whatsoever is in this world under the
scope of Heaven.

This also grant to us, yt we may be thy heavenly Children, whom thou do
teach, that we shall regard nothing but the souls health, and that heavenly
Heritage, least in this carnal and earthly country, deceived, stirred, up, or
let by riches, we become heirs of sensuality, but trwely let us say our
heavenly Father, and that truly we may be thy heavenly Children.

decorative border Hallowed be thy name.
ALmighty GOD heavenly Father thy holy name is miserably profaned many ways
in this world, scorned, taunted, and blasphemed, when it is applied to those
things, in which is no glory of thy Deity: yea many abuse it, employing it to
sin, and truly that unworthy life in a christian man, deserves to be
called a Profanation of thy holy name: grant therefore to us good Lord,
through thy mercy, that decorative border we may beware of all those things,
by which the honor and glory of thy name is diminished, and purify us that
the Arts of Magike may be abolished, let people cease to enchaunt Devils or
other cretures, by thy name, see that all disturst and supersticion perish.
Heresy and wicked doctrine also (which notwithstanding they prefer thy
name, yet they deceive many) let them perish and be brought to nothing:
grant that thy people be not deceived through any outward show only of Truth,
righteousness, or holiness. Suffer not any man to forswear himself, lie, or
decorative border deceive others, by thy name.

Take from us (O Lord) all false aids, which take upon the^ a show of thy
name: remove from us that Spirit of Pride and vayn glory, and the study of
praise and glory. Grant that in all our troubles and euilles we may call upon
thy holy name, yea in the fear of our conscience and even when death
assayleth, let us not be forgetful of thy holy name. See that in all our
success both in words and deeds, we may praise and worship thee only, and
not seek out of these, ours, but the glory of thy name, which alone possessest
all things: take from decorative border us (O Lord) that most foul vice of
ingratitude: Plant in us such good works and life, that others may be allured
to us, not to our, but unto thy praise and glory. Lord let not other be
offended, through the vices or evil works which yet remain in us, least thy
name for our sins should be ill spoken of, or not henceforth praised. Suffer
us not to ask any thing of thee, either momentary or eternal, which agrees
not to the glory of thy holy name and praise: if we do ask any such thing of
thee, in that hear us not: grant us so to live as becomes Gods Children,
that we seem decorative border not unworthy of thy holy name.

Thy Kindgome come.
IN this miserable and wretched life all kinds of sensual apetite and
wickedness bear rule in us, and the evil spirit, head, and fountain fo all
siin, has government. But in thy kingdom (O Lord) grace and virtue guide the
sway, and Jesus Christ thy dear son true patron of all grace and virtue,
holds empire. Thou therefore dear Father, favor us with thy grace: Give unto
decorative border us a true and constant faith in Christ, fortify us with a
firm and sure hope in thy mercy, where with our weak and feeble conscience may
be raised up from the feling of sins: load us with an earnest love, both
toward thee and all other thy good Creatures. Take from us distrust,
desperation, and hatred, remove from us the delights of the flesh, and plant
in their steed an earnest study of chastity, with perfect faith in thee, which
may worthily win the reward of undefiled battle. Make us free (O Lord)
from discordes, ambition, war, and discention, and let thy kingdom
decorative border come, and let us lead a peaceable, mutual, and quiet life.

Grant, that neither zeal, anger, or other vices (with the which dissembling
and hatred are nourished) rain in us: but a mild simplycitie, brotherly love,
all kind of duties, contentment, and humility, suffer us not to be afflicted
with immoderate sorrow and heaviness, but let us feel the pleasantness of
thy grace and mercy: and that in fine, al our sins may be taken away, and we
abounding through grace and virtue, in our good works, may be thy kingdom. I
say, our mind, our soul, with all our strength, decorative border which thou
have powered on us, may obey thy commandments, and bear thy government, and
neither follow themseules, the world, the flesh, nor the Devil. See Lord that
this thy kingdom happily begun in us, may so grow, and be increased, that we
be not unadvisedly oppressed of sin, neither causeles do cease from good
works, for so it may come to pass that we shall labor in vain. Give
therefore unto us a firm faith, wanting no strength, which not only may
instruct us to a better kind of life, but also in that same may happily go
forward and ever amongst us increase decorative border as the Prophet says,
Psalm. 13. Illuminate mine eyes that I sleep not, lest whilst the Christian
life is but begun, we negligently go forward, and finally come again into
Satan's power.

Grant that we may constantly endure, and thy kingdom to come, may perform
and consummate the rule begun in us. Take us from this life which is full of
sin and dangers: make us to desire that other life, and let us begin and
continue to hate this: grant that we do not fear death, but rather wish and
desire it: let us cast out of our mind the love of decorative border this
life, thot thou only may reign in us.

Thy Will be done.
IF we should confer our will with thine, it is always naught, but thy will
is ever best, which deserves that we should love and desire that. Therefore
have mercy upon us dear Father, and let not any thing be done after our will.
Grant if any thing happen contrary to that we would, we may patiently bear
it: temper so our brickle metal, being the work of thy decorative border
hands, that if any either speak or hold his peace, do or omit any thing
contrary to our will, that thereby we be not provoked to anger and
impatience. Let us not blaspheme, complain, cry out, judge, condemn, or
maliciously accuse others therefore, but grant that we may quietly give place
to those which work contrary to our will, and praise them, giving thanks as
to those which stir up thy will which is good, against ours which is ill. And
further, assist us that we may patiently bear all trouble, need, poverty,
sickness, slander, imprisonment and all other discommodities, decorative
border and acknowledge all these to happen unto us by thy will, that our will
may be mortified: let us patiently bear injuries, and take from us the desire
of reuengement: suffer us not to encounter one evil with another, nor resist
force with strong arms, but grant thy will which has thrown us into those
evils may satisfy us, and that with thanksgiving, we may bear adversities.
If any ill come contrary to that we would, grant we beseech thee, that we
judge not that calamity to proceed either of Satan our wicked enemy, or of
ill men, but of thy divine will which decorative border does minister all
things, so that it may let our will, whereby thou might the better reign and
bear rule in us. Grant that we may patiently and with joyful mind die,
least any being overcome with impatience or desperation, we seem less
obedient to thy will. Grant that all members of our body, eyes, tongue, heart,
hands and feet, follow not their own delights, but overcome and constrained,
may do all things after thy will. Take from us O Lord a hardened and an
intractable heart, free us from frowardness, obstinate and stubborn minds,
grant that we may obey decorative border thy will, that we commit our self
wholly to thy judgment in all things, whether they pertain to the body or the
soul, whether they be momentarie or eternal: take from us these horrible
vices, that we impeach not the fame of any, slander any, rashly judge,
accuse, or condemn the^, that vice of the tongue (I beseech thee) amend in us:
and teach, that if others commit any evil, we may retain and hide it, to
thee only let us show it, and leave it to thy judgment, that we may remitte
what is committed against us: and let us take pity upon them, teach us to
know decorative border that none can hurt us, but he shall more disprofite
himself before thee, that we may be the rather stirred to mercy then to
anger: in any thing let us not rejoice, if they be thrown into calamity,
which either have not obeyed our will, or whose life has been little
allowable to us, neither let us hate their good success.

decorative border Give us this day our daily bread.
THe Bread is our Lord Jesus Christ which feeds and refreshes the soul.
Thou therefore heavenly father, grant us this through thy mercy, that the
life, words and deeds of Christ with his Passion may be every where truly
preached, acknowledged, followed and kept. Grant that both his doings and
sayings may be example to us, to the which we may compare our life, and live
more rightly. decorative border Confirm us that in calamity and trouble, his
Cross and passion may strengthen and comfort us. Assist us, that by his death
our death may be overcome in true faith, that we may constantly follow him
being our Captain to eternal life. Bring to pass that they which have taken
upon them the ministry of thy word, may happily teach, and with the great
profit of the hearers, work that those which hear thy word aknowledge
Christ, and diligently go forward. Let it come to pass, that the strange and
wicked sects, who teach not Christ be thrown out of his Church. decorative
border Let the true understanding of thy word so shine in Bishops and Pastors,
and likewise upon al Magistrates, whether they have care of the body or soul;
that being illuminated with thy grace, they may rightly teach us, and be
example unto us, as well in doctrine, as in pure life. Let not the weak in
faith be offended through the Sins of the Magistrates. Purge us (O Lord) from
all heresies and wicked faith, that we may be single and daily fed with one
bread, and may abide agreeable in Christ's words, teach us by thy grace that we
may well study upon Christ's Passion, and rightly decorative border hold
that, and let his imprinted steps stick and be found in us.

Grant that the Ministers of the Church may treat, and use the holy Sacrament
worthily, and to the great profit of thy Church. And furthermore that we, and
all Christians may in his kind worthily and to his souls health, receive the
Sacrament.

Give us peace and concord; take from us wars, contention, ambition, privy
hatred, bloody hearts, usurping hands and all other kind of strifes, that those
things which we have to the sustentation of our body, we may enjoy with
decorative border thanks giving. Give unto thy servant James our most gracious
King and Governor, thy equal gifts to his estate and dignity, with upright
Judgment in all things, and to all Magistrates true faith, and single
judgment, with loiall minds to keep the public peace, that his joys and
rule may long stand and multiply. Take from all Subjects, Sedition and
Disobedience: Teach us by thy holy Spirit to order our household affairs, that
we may instruct our Children and families to worship, praise, and glorify
thee. Grant O good Father, that our Children and Family decorative border fall
not into any sin and wickedness, neither be overthrown in any danger or
calamity, whether it be either of body or Soul. Comfort, and deliver thou
most loving Father the Captive, the hungry, thirsty, naked, oppressed,
miserable, the comfortless widow, the orphant, sick, and the sorrowful, and
defend the fields and cattle from tempest, venomous worms and wild beasts.

decorative border Forgive us our rrespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us,
GOD will that we patiently bear all things, and requite not evil with
evil, nor revenge injury done against us, but that we should return a
benefit for an injury, after the example of our Father, which suffers his
Sun to shine as well on the evil as on the good, and powers down his rain
both upon the thankeful, and unthankful. O good Father stir up decorative
border our conscience, both now and in the end of our life, which is grievously
feared with the sight of our sins, and dread of thy judgment: make our
hearts quiet and sure, that with joy we may expect thy judgment when thou
shall judge, for in thy sight shall not any man be found righteous, teach us to
learn, not to our our own good works and merits, but to thy unmeasured mercy,
and thereunto let us wholly commit us: likewise suffer us not to fall into
desperation for our sins committed, but grant that we may perceive and feel
thy mercy to be far more ample, greater, decorative border and stronger, then
our wicked led life. Be present with all those which are either in danger of
death, or afflicted with desperation. Forgive us, and even our sins, comfort
us, and bring us again into thy favor. As thou have commanded, so render
thou also good for ill unto us: beat down Satan that horrible false
detractor and accuser of our life, both now and at the hour of death, and in
all other anguishes of our conscience, Satan does accuse us, our conscience
likewise does accuse us. But thou (Lord) do not judge after their sentence,
hear not the voice

decorative border E
ENgraue thy laws in the depth of my heart (O lord) that being instructed in
thy commandementes, I may serve thee in fear, and rejoice in thee with
trembling, and take hold upon thy discipline in all things.

Least at any time thou become angry, and I perish from the right way Amen.

decorative border L
LOrd give me help from my trouble, for vain is the help of man: in thee I
have strength, and thou bring unto nothing those which trouble me, let my
soul be subject unto thee, for from thee proceeds my patience, for thou art
my God and Savior, my helper, and I will not depart from thee. In thee is my
health and my Glory, thou art the God of my help, and my hope is in thee, Amen.

decorative border I
I Have broken thy fold, and wandered long as a lost sheep, let me return
again O Lord, because I have not forgotten thy commandments, the misdeedes
and ignorances of my tender years, remember not Lord, according to thy mercy,
have mind on me. For thy goodness (O Lord) keep my soul, and deliver me: let
me not be ashamed because I have trusted in thee. Turn my heaviness into
joy, cut off my sack of sorrows, decorative border and gird me with gladness,
that my Glory may sing unto thee, and I shall not be grieved.

Z
ZOrobabel King of Judah, in the depth of thy displeasure tasted of thy mercy,
and received by the mouth of Aegeus thy Prophet, sweet comfort and knowledge
of thy favor and grace; yea, after thy determination to destroy the whole
kingdom of the Heathen, thy right hand did preserve him, and thy incomparable
decorative border mercy did choose him for a seal to thy self. Lord this
happy King in thy goodness was but an earthly Creature, and then could he
have no righteousness in him self to move such thy compassion. If it proceed
from the multitude of thy mercies, that surmount the iniquity of the whole
world, and that thou did only vouchsafe to behold in him the Image of thy
self: Bow down thine eyes Lord, and behold the self same in me: Certify my
conscience with remission of my sins, that my sorrowful Soul be at rest
within me; send down thy holy decorative border Spirit to remain with me,
that I may become with that good king thy chosen seal and servant. And so
govern me always, that I may never deserve further, then to taste of thy rod
of favorable correction, but that all my labors and studies may ever bend to
the performance of thy holy will, and discharge of my duty. Amen.

decorative border A
ARise and illuminate my mind (most benign Savior) that I sleep not at any
time in death, least mine enemies say they have prevailed against me. They
which trouble me will be glad if I be cast down: but I have fixed my hope in
thy mercy. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no living creature
shall be justified in thy sight, I will ever look upon the Lord, for he shall
be on my right hand, that I be not moved: decorative border for this my heart
is glad, and my tongue rejoices, yea moreover, my flesh shall rest in hope,
Amen.

B
BE thou unto me (O lord) in the day time a defender, and in the night season a
place of refuge, that thou may save me: for thou art my strength, and unto
thee I fly, Lord God deliver me from the hand of sinners, and from the
Law-breaker, and the wicked doer: for thou Lord art my patience, thou art my
hope decorative border even from my youth; in thee I am confirmed even from my
mothers womb, thou art my protector: in thee shall be my song for ever and
ever. Amen.

E
EVer my tongue shall be telling of thy rich mercy and wondrous works (O
Lord) for thou have caused me to pass through fire and water, and have lead
me into a fresh place: thou have given my Soul life, and have not suffered my
feet to fall. According decorative border to the multitude of my sorrows, thy
comfortes have made my soul merry.

My soul is like a Sparrow taken out of the fowlers snare: Thou have hitherto
preserved me, that I may please thee (O Lord) in the light of the living, Amen.

T
THou art just (O Lord) and all thy commandments be true, and all thy ways
mercy, truth and judgment. And now (Lord) be mindful decorative border of
me: take not reuengeme^t of my sins: remember not mine offenses, neither the
offenses of my Fathers, because we have not obeyed thy precepts. Give me an
heart of understanding, and set thy fear always before mine eyes, that I may
be obedient in word, deed and thought, to all that is thy will.

Lord give unto me the power of thy holy Spirit, to rule and govern my self
in all good fear and knowledge of of thy word, and that I may be unto all an
example in all godliness and virtue: to the praise of thy holy name, Amen.

decorative border H
Heal me (Lord) and I shall be healed: save me and I shall be saved. My life
cleaves unto the earth; Quicken me according to thy word, and according to thy
mercy relieve me, and I will keep the testimonies of thy lips: Help me
(Lord) so shall I be safe, and I will from henceforth study thy
righteousness: thy mercies are many (O Lord) according to thy word restore my
health Amen.

decorative border JOHN. I.
SI confiteamur Peccata nostra, Deus fidelis est and iustus, vt remittat nobis
Peccata nostra, and emundet nos ab omni iniquitate. Si dixerimus, quoniam non
peccauimus, Mendacem facimus eu^, and Verbum eius non est in nobis.

IOSVE.
Fili mi, da Gloriam Deo Israel, and confitere, atque indica mihi quid feceris,
ne abscondas.

decorative border AVGVSTINVS.
COnfessio est salus animarum, dissipatrix vitioru^, restaurattix Virtutum,
expugnatrix Daemonum. Quid plura? Obstruitos Inferni, and Paradisi portas a
perit.

Cassidorus super Psalm. 77.
OBeata Confessio, quae aeternum tollit opprobrium. Nam quicquid Rearu^
inuenerit Poenitentia, perpetuis Seculis reddit absolutum.

decorative border An inward speech wherewith Christ does comfort the Soul of
the sinner desiring to live better. Gathered out of the works of sundry holy
Writers.
I Love them says Christ, that seek me, and my delight is among the Children
of decorative border men. Sic dilexi mundum, vt in mortem darem animam meam, vt
non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam, quicunque in me crediderit. I have so
loved the world, that I gave my self unto death, that who so ever believed in
me, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

O thou Soul, O Daughter, I have labored, hungered, thirsted, I have been
despised, and suffered persecution for thy sake: I am wounded for thine
iniquity, I am wearied through thy wickedness, I am dead for thine offenses,
and risen again for thy justification: the love which I decorative border
bear to thee, has forced me to do and suffer al these things, and to make
choice of thee for my Child. Wherefore amend thou, and return to me, wash thee
in the blood of my wounds and deck thee with virtues and merits of my life.

All these things I willingly give, nay rather as a most loving Father
offering these things, I run to embrace thee, and receive thee with embracing
and kissing, assuring thee to love me: again return daughter, and be clean.
Praebe cor tuum mihi, quia praeter hoc aliud abs te non desidero. Be sorry
that thou have sinned because thou have decorative border offended me, or at
the least, sorrow because thou can not perceive thy self pensive, for often it
comes to pass, that it better pleases me, and is more profitable to man, to
have a will to be contrite and denout, then to perceive contrition or devotion:
Because this contrary desire of willing and unwilling engenders affliction of
mind. Therefore be sorry and angry with thy self, yea judge thy self worthy
to be damned, because thou have sinned, and art not sorry as thou ought.

This contrition although it be not sensible, yet it is such, although thou
suffer persecution, decorative border as will bring thee to health eternal: for
I know your misery, your weakness and necessity, so that in no wise a
willing mind ought to despair whatsoever oldnesse or coldness of conscience
he feel. But thou will say, I have committed innumerable offenses: how shall I
particularly sorrow every one of them? O my daughter need thou comfort:
let only truth comfort thee, if thou have many sins, have also one general
Contrition, in the which thou will include all and every offense, so that there
be no sin: which (although it came unto thy mind,) thou decorative border
would exempt from thy penitencie and which thou would not eschew and
forsake.

For this general contrition extends it self to all and every offense, yea
unto those which thou have forgotten and can not remember, neither do I
require that you should necessarily have for every offense several
contritions, according to the number and manner of your sins: for thus I have
spoken of Marie Magdalene, I have forgiven her many offenses, for that she
loved much. I said not because she loved oftentimes, neither could this
Magdalene in so sudden a compunction decorative border be otherwise sorry
then for all together.

Thou likewise to be sorry for all, that there be no sin which may delight
thee, whether generally or particularly it come into thy mind. Sorrow not out
of measure, nor suffer such imaginations and fa^tasies take place, as though I
were so angry that I would not be pleased, pardon nor receive thee again into
favor, for these are the suggestions of the wicked Serpent, wherewith he
endeavors to train thee to desperation, whose custom is in the beginning of
his illusions to pluck the remembrance of me from their decorative border
hearts, to promise my mercy to them that sin, and confirm the security,
boldness and obstinacy of an ungodly will, but afterward finding them
declining, and that they will forsake him (if by other means he cannot procure
them to evil,) he sets upon the weak and fearful minds with the assault
of Desperation, he persuades to unbelief, he tells them that evil custom
cannot be overcome, he fears them with the greatness of their sins
committed, and like a liar tells, that I will not forgive sin.

But thou my Daughter, believe him not whatsoever decorative border thou
feel, fall not into Desperation. This Contrition suffices that it pittieth
thee of mine anger, wishing thou had not transgressed: and determinest not
to sin any more. But if thou do err, yet rise again, yea again with hearty
repentance, purpose to sin no more: if thou fall the third time, yet rise
again, if the fourth or fifth time: yea lastly, if thou fall seventy times
seven times, so often return to me, and I will receive thee. Is it not better
that I should receive thee, then lose thee, together with all my labors and
pains which for thy redemption I have suffered? Let nothing decorative border
O Daughter call thee away, O Daughter let nothing keep thee from me, which art
redeemed with my blood: though thou have given thy self to the Devil, denied
me an hundred times, taken my name in vain, spitt at me, slaundered my holy
word, only be forie from thy heart that thou have done this, and I will
forgive thee. Let no offense be so great in thine eyes, that it pluck away the
hope of pardon: no sin so ponderous, that it may be able to overcome my
mercy: I make no difference, whether from few or many sins I deliver thee:
all have need decorative border of my mercy, which flows abundantly to
every man faithfully asking it. Thy wickedness cannot exceed my mercy, the
more thou have sinned, the more willingly I forgive thee being penitent: for
the greater the sinner is on whom I bestow my compassion, so much the greater
is my glory, I am not hard nor sparing, but liberal and bountiful to thee
(my Daughter) if thou only had committed all the offenses that be, and I
forgave them, my mercy is no whit the less. There is peradventure some other
thing yt fears thee, yet when thou were ouerpressed with sin, decorative
border that which thou did then willingly commit now against thy will, are
compelled to bear whatsoever unwillingly thou suffer, shall not damn thee
nor spoil thee of my grace, for sin must be so voluntary, that if it be not
voluntary, it is no sin: bridell therefore thy will from consenting, and
then suffer the Flesh and the Devil to rage, and though by thy former life and
conversation, thou have deserved evil, yet because thou truly repentest
thereof, and do study to live better, thou shall not be guilty of that
thou suffer, so thy will consent not. And if at any time the Devil suggest
decorative border thee with blasphemous or cursed thoughts against me and my
Omnipotency, be not therefore troubled or faint hearted. For so long as thou
have not voluntarily erred or performed consent, thou do rather suffer, then
do offense: when these things bring thee rather heaviness, and affliction,
then delights, they are no way to be feared, but I suffer thee to feel them,
and they to molest thee, that thou might be rather thereby defiled.
Therefore truly the Devil stirs up those things that whilst thou go
about to resist them, thou might be hindered and let from the decorative
border taste of my love: and being so much astonished, fear to come to me.

For he rejoices when thou wallowest in doubts, and troubles: but thou
Daughter, fear no such thing, look not toward them, answer them not, strive
not against them, nor take any heed to them: but rather as one untroubled, go
forward in thy exercise, passing by, and contemning such chances, as the
barking of dogs and hissing of geese: for if thou would renew, dispute,
fear and discuss them, thou do always more printe them in thy mind, and
tangle thy self in greater trouble.

decorative border The penitent Soul, after it has taken some knowledge and
taste of my goodness, considering that I am so good and so merciful: and
finally that I am so slow to impute sin, that I do not only pardon it, but
also receive him into my favor and friendship, as though he had never sinned: I
comfort him, and bestow on him gifts.

Thus whilst the afflicted conscience does meditate, yea even of his fall, I
say, he gets to himself a great occasion of feruentnesse, and thankfulness
toward me: a far greater occasion of hatred and displeasure toward himself,
decorative border whilst he rigorously accuses his own folly, for despising
me a God so merciful unto him, as whom justly I might both condemn and
destroy, I spare, comfort, and deal bou^tifully with: so that how much the
more he perceives my mercy to him, so much the more is he moved with greater
zeal of Justice against himself, and in a manner desires to be revenged on
himself, for the contempt of me: whereby it comes to pass, that he does
not only desire pardon and reconciliation for his sins, but suffers the
dignity of my justice: humbles himself, and punishes decorative border
himself, because he has wickedly lift up himself against me, whereof
proceeds, that how much the more he perceives himself comforted of me, so
much the more he abhors and detesteth his own unworthiness, and with
sorrow disdaineth the enormitie of his sins, maruailing how he could be so
ungrateful to me. As a drop of water on the burning fire, so are the sins
consumed of that Soul, which is come to this zeal, that it no less loves my
justice, then mercy. Therefore amongst all kinds of repentance, there is not a
better for decorative border man, then continually to consider my great love
and fidelity toward him, and contrarily his own infidelity, ingratitude, and
frowardness toward me.

The Devil is so envious to my Servants, that he omitteth no time in tempting
them: and even when they are about to repent, and bewail their sins, he
chiefly casts in doubts, causing the^ again and again to confess their
faults, that thereby they might never attain to any quietness, but distrust all
their confessions, when they find any circumstance or offense neglected,
whereof they have decorative border not made mention. But beware O my Daughter,
thou fall not? I am thy Confessor. It is only I that can ease thy burden,
cure thy wounded conscience, and refresh thy hungry Spirit.

Oh how it grieueth me to see thee always conversant in corruption, and
troubled in recounting thy sins to him, that cannot forgive thee! Wherefore
cast thy self on me only, and I will deliver thee; for if a thousand years
thou would search thy self, and be confessed of ten thousand, thou shall
not be cleansed. Quando enim exhauries Abissum: decorative border Therefore
commit thy self to me only: I will make thee safe, whenever with all
diligence thou shall go about to confess thy fault: let me alone with Mercy
to thee, acknowledge that thou can not cleanse thy self, say that thou
had need of my mercy, confess that thou can not answer one word to a
thousand things wherewith I might charge thee: but art in every work
insufficient, and have need of my Mercy. Wherefore trust not to thy
Confessions, but in my Mercy, for by it thou shall be justified. And whilst
thou art too much conversant in the care decorative border of thy sins, thou
might turn unto me, and enjoy my gracious presence. Do thou not note the
subtlety of the enemy? To this end he suggesteth thee with the number of thy
sins, and thoughts of thy wickedness, that thou might neglect things to
thee more wholesome. Know thou this therefore chiefly, that my delight is that
thou should think of my goodness, and seek me in simpleness. Thou shall
find me gentle, godly, full of compassion, and chief in mercy: trust in me,
hope in me, seek my favor, seek my friendship, and familiarity: and for
the better obtaining decorative border of these, direct thy exercise in
holiness.

Thou shall undoubtedly feel a far more beautiful fruit, if thou
diligently care how to love, please, and follow me, then by brusing thy self
with scruples of thy confessions, for deeming to search out and abolish doubts,
thou do rather engender to thee doubtfuller things: thou can not think me
too pitiful, or merciful, so that thou do not presume upon my mercies,
neither can thou give me over much credit. Wherefore accustom thy self to
think well of me, and believe that I will not condemn thee: For decorative
border truly, whosoever is willing to correct his life, and despayreth not, him
will I save.

I am well pleased, O Daughter, that thou art so sorry thou have offended, and
that thou will not sin hereafter. Now thou art in State of salvation, why
fear thou? I am rich in infinite mercies. Thus think of me, for thereby thou
do me more hodour, then if thou did imagine me cruel, and hard, or
should so much fear, as though I watched only to intrappe men, in this or
that doubt or circumstance, they had omitted: But yet when any great offense
comes in thy mind, decorative border confess thy fault with all humilty, and
sorrow of heart, and desire grace to amend, and after rest in peace, and cast
all the Devilish doubts upon me I desire thee.

I am willing to enjoy thy friendship, I require to be loved of thee: see
therefore that thou answer my good will. Understand, know, and judge thy self
to be a sinner. Say in many things thou have offended, that thou art most
ungrateful, a Rebel, spiteful, and blasphemous against thy Commandments and
will: And hereof so much humble thy felfe, that thou dare not once lift up
thine eyes decorative border before me, since thou art full of loathsomeness,
and abominations.

There be certain so esteeming their committed evils, that they are moved with
the^ either to pleasure and delight, or contrariwise to desperation, or some
such like inconvenience. But thou, when thou will think thy self a sinner,
and humble thy self, shake off the dreams of thy sins, and turn unto me:
confer with me touching thy sins and infirmities: power out thy complaints
before me: reason with me: accuse thy self to me of thy crimes committed so
shall thy accusation of decorative border sins be converted into prayer.

Wherefore when thou have turned to me, plead thy cause in Prayer: for by this
means thy conscience shall be made clear and quiet, thy affection also to me
directed, shall be by me inflamed.

But now of Satisfaction for Sins: Embrace this counsel. That whatsoever thy
hand is able to do, that instantly work: yet not with that mind, or to that
end, as though therewith thou could make satisfaction for thy sins: For to
the accomplishing of this, thou ought to think all thy works too
unworthy, decorative border and far unable. But do that thou can every way
to please me whom thou have offended: desire me that with the merits of my
passion, and most holy life, I will punish thine offenses, and satisfy my
Father for them.

This humility, this sure trust in me, with which thou debasest thy self and
thy works, and extollest me and my merits, excelling the works of thy
satisfaction, since that one drop of my blood is of more value to
Satisfaction, then al man's deserts, which has already made Satisfaction for
the sins of the whole world. Such humility allureth me decorative border to
thee, and causes me to communicate with thee the treasure of my merits.

Wherefore let this chiefly be thy study, that thou neglect not my good
pleasure, but continually to think on me, desire me, love me, and whatsoever I
command and will, diligently perform: then if thou had infinite heaps of
sins, I will forgive them all, as freely as if thou had but one, neither
is it less easy for me to forgive many, then few: It is a maruailous thing
that I will say, but yet most true and certainly to be believed: if the whole
world were a fiery Globe, and in decorative border the midst of it were
thrown a bundell of Flax: this of his natural effect should not so soon
receive the slame of fire, as I will receive the repentant and sorrowful
sinner to mercy, for in that natural act is required some tarriance, though
very little and peradventure not to be perceived, but here is no tarriance at
all, between the penitent and him that forgiueth, between the sorrowful and
him that hears the sighs. Thou therefore daughter, reject all inordinate
fear, desirous to please me with thy holy heart: study to be holy, for I am
holy, willingly offend decorative border not, though in never so little or
light a thing, but shun the occasion so much as in thee lies, wisely
withdraw thy self from the society of man's superstitious communicatio^s and
from unprofitable and evil occupations: be not solitary, be not idle, spend
the time thriftily to my honor: occupy thy self in reading the Holy
Scriptures, where thou shall find my Life and Passion. Plant in thy heart my
trouble, Cross, and persecution, walk before me in Holiness, with fear, and
reverence, persuading thy self that I am never absent from the Godly, but do
decorative border instantly hold them, diligently bridle and keep thy senses
and tongue, if thou love much babbling, thou can not profit, embrace
soberness and reasonable continences, shun vanity, and the pomp of pride:
sensuality and unlawful pleasures see thou follow not: but diligently endeavor
to keep thee undefiled: fight courageously against vices, and faithfully pray
to me that thou may break and overcome the wicked passions and
inclinations: do as much as thou art able, yet trust not to thy endeavor, but
to the help of my Grace, for if thou trust to thy self, and to thine own
decorative border industry, thou shall easily fall: thy well doing never ascribe
to thy self, nor usurp any thing upon my gifts, for of thy self thou can
not but offend, of thy self thou have nothing but sin, which is proper to
thy self, desire not vainly to please any mortal man, wish rather to be
known of sew then many, and to be despised rather then praised, never esteem
thy self any thing worth nor think thy worthiness of any value, but without
saying account thy self ungrateful, unworthy, and the vilest creature alive:
Humble, and imbase thy self beneath all men for my sake, love all men
decorative border with a pure love, yea those also which persecute thee, wish
the prosperity of thy brother: despise none, despair not at the well doing of
any: slander none, judge no man, what thou see and hear of others,
interpret it to the best, with all study mortify thine own appetite, and
singularly embrace my will gladly, and willingly obey me in all things, and
men in those which be lawful: leave thine own will and deny thy self; commit
and yield thee wholly to my providence, with firm trust in me, in all
temptation, peril and necessity, for I have care of thee, and diligently
attend thee, as decorative border if thou only liuedst: Daughter, learn to
receive every adversity and affliction, no otherwise then as from my hand sent
only, and patiently bear it to the end for my sake, for trouble is the cupp of
blessing, whereof I have made al my chosen to drink. There has not been any
of mine, which outwardly or inwardly has not suffered some trouble. Wherefore
rejecting all weakness, whatsoever comes to thee, take it in good part, and
believe it to be sent to thee for thy health, for the great love I bear thee:
suffer adversity, it is the kingly way which leads to heavenly heritage,
decorative border walk therefore in it, rejoicing, and give me thanks that I
have so regarded thee, that I would give thee somewhat that thou should
suffer when any do molest thee, and work thee injury or spite, think him
sent by me to prove thee. Be not agrieued with him, give him not sharp and
bitter words, neither think of reuengeme^t, mark not the man (which is my
Instrument and scourge) but attend on me, which suffer such things to be done
by man. O Daughter, in every trouble and sorrow be patient, resigning thy self
to me, for I purge thee by afflictions, and decorative border make thee apt and
worthy to be married to me. But if of thy humane infirmity, or other defect thou
fall to impatience, be not discouraged, neither waver dispayring in thy good
endeauours: but forthwith arise, turn to me, and call upon me, with a sure hope
of pardon, I know the general weakness of man, I know also thy peculiar
frailety, trust to me, thy hope and full trust cannot be too assured in me, if
thy life and repentance be good. Wherefore hastily fly unto me, I will take
thee up, heal and defend thee, what do thou fear yet? O Daughter, why
do thou decorative border not even now desire death, for what evil can
death bring thee? Truly after thou have bequeathed thy carkas to the ground,
thou shall no more offend me: thou shall no more be defiled with sin, if thou
love nothing in this world, Death can take nothing from thee: if thou love any
worldly thing, will thou stand to the danger, nay rather thou love thine
own perilles. Therefore before thou die, cease to love worldly and transitory
things, if thou fear not too much to die, yea if thou love me alone in this
life, be glad thou shall die, for but by death thou can not get what
decorative border thou love. But I know what thou fear, truly nothing in
this world thou love, nothing thou do possess, that either thou carest to
enjoy, or would sorrow the loss, but trembling and fear vexes thee
because thou know not whether thou be worthy love or hatred. Thou know not
how thou shall be received of me, either to rest or pain: None of these shall
thou know O Daughter, as thou wooldest know yet. Though thou fear, yet abide
in hope and sure trust in me, whether thou live or die: of thy self thou
can neither live nor die well, both decorative border thou have of me, if I
give thee to live well, shall not I also grant thee well and happily to die?
seeing therefore thou have all of me, seeing thou look for all things at
my hand, how is it then that thou hopest one thing, and dispayrest another?
Trust then and cast all thy thoughts and care upon me, as living thou art able
to resist no temptation, nor avoid any sin, so neither dying art thou able,
if faithfully I prevent temptations, and moderate them in thy life, the same
will I do in thy death. Never enter battle with thine own force and arms,
but leave it unto decorative border me, and leaning unto me, I will fight for
thee, and I fighting for thee, and defending thee, what cause have thou of
fear, neither doubt thou of the condition or kind of death.

Nullum est genus mortis, quod nocere potest iusto. No kind of death is able to
annoy a just man: for the just with what death soever he be beset is in
safeguard, Therefore be nothing careful whether at home, or abroad, in bed or
in field thou shall die, neither fear whether thy death be natural or
violent: but as the Apostle counsels, study to live soberly, justly and
godly, decorative border that thou may well and happily die. An evil death
does not follow a good and just life, but the death of the just is precious in
my sight, howsoever they end this life, whether in the water, in the fire, or
in bed they Dye.

decorative border A Sweet and comfortable Consolation for all weak minds, to
confirm and strengthen them against Desperation.
WHo soever refusing the hope of pardon, runs headlong into the gulf of
desperation: does not only distrust the omnipotency of decorative border God,
persuading himself that there is some crime which he is not able to
extinguish: but also makes him a liar. By the mouth of his Prophet he has
promised a free remission of sin so soon as the offender bewayleth: but
frowardly does the posterity of Cain say: Such is mine iniquity as I shall
never obtain remission.

What say thou Caitief? If God be not able to pardon because of the
greatness of thy sin, thou robbest him of his Omnipotency. If he will not
do that which he can do, he is a Liar, and too light, not to perform the
thing decorative border which so often he has promised by the mouth of his holy
Prophets. It is said of the Psalmist: God is gracious and merciful, long
suffering, and of great goodness. The Lord is loving to all men, and his mercy
is over all his works. Is there any thing then more admirable, then the
Creation of the heavens, with so many shining bodies? then the making of the
earth with such singular variety of living creatures, Trees, Plants, Fruits,
and all other things? then the fabrication of so many pure Celestial Souls?
so that who durst be bold to affirm (had not the Prophet decorative border
manifestly spoken it,) that the mercy of God does excel the glory of his
handie works.

Holy Scripture sometime terms the mercy of God great, sometime too great,
and sometime it amplifieth the force thereof by the name of multitude or
number. The Kingly Prophet David in one self place comprehends both the
greatness and multitude of Heavenly mercy, saying: Have mercy on me O God,
after thy great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies do
away mine offenses.

Where great iniquity is, decorative border there needs much compassion. If
thou do but weigh how heinous the offense of David was, thou will acknowledge
the greatness of Gods goodness: If thou consider how often he offended in that
sin, thou shall see the multitude of his mercies.

That GOD which is our King, our Father, our Master, our Spouse, prescribes no
determinate number of offenses, but as often as through true Repentance we
return to him, he forgets and forgiueth the punishment which he threatens
to us: he entertaineth us amongst his Family, leads us into the decorative
border Chamber of his Love, and receives not us only, but forgets our
offenses: He brings the lost sheep upon his shoulders, to the staules, and
bids the Congregation of the Chosen to his rejoicing. He goes to meet the
Prodigal Son, returning from his long and loathsome journey, and puts a
Robe and a King upon him, and commands the fattest Calfe to be killed for
him.

What other thing does this signify but the Immense, or as I may say, the
overmuch mercy of God? It is no marvel, though his mercy exceed which loves
us so exceedingly. decorative border Paul fears not to write thus to the
Ephesians. We are (saeth he) by Nature become the Children of wrath: But God
which is rich in mercy, for his tender love, wherewith he loved us, when we
were lead to sin, has raised and reconciled us again to Christ.

Saint John in his Gospel more plainly expresses the maruailous Love of God
our Father toward us, saying: So God loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that who so believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Whereunto Paul aptly agrees, He decorative border that
spared not his only Son, but gave him for us all: has he not given us all
things together with him? This so great love: this so great kindness, does it
not worthily appear unmeasurable, because we have nothing which we have not
freely received of God.

Whatsoever we do, whatsoever we possess, it comes by the mercy of God:
Yea it is the mercy of God that made the Angels, and created the world. If he
had wrought it to himself, his power and policy might have been praised: but
since to our use he has framed all these things, decorative border shall we
not acknowledge his mercy to be maruailous. For whom have the Celestial Airs
their course: to whom lends the Sun his beams by day: the Moon with the
Stars, their brightness by Night, but for Man? For whose use made he these
things of nothing? For whose sake, but for man's only, do the hanging clouds
give their shade, and bedew the pleasant fields?

Why blow the winds? why flow the Rivers, why spread the Springes, why increase
the Seas but for the use of man? Who reapeth the commodities of the fertile
earth, decorative border which engenders so many living things, such wealthy
store, but man? There is nothing that God has not made Subject to man: only
he would that man should be obedient unto him. Many times our merciful God
sends adversity, either to clear us of our transgressions, or to deter us
from sin, or to minister occasion of well-doing. Thus was Abraham tried: so
was Job proved with many miseries: thus is every one which lives in Jesus
Christ tried in this world with sundry afflictions, as the Gold with the fire.

Where are those that decorative border murmr against GOD, when either
infirmity of health, or death, and loss of wife and Children, or decay of
worldly wealth happens to them: no thing knowing that these are the manifest
signs of a merciful GOD. Let us give ear to the counsel of Solomon, My Son
(says he) Despise not the word of God nor forsake his correction: For whom the
Lord loves, he chasteneth and delights in him, as a Father in his Son.
The Apostle Paul has the like saying to the Hebrews. Whom the Lord loves, he
corrects, and rebukes every Child that he decorative border receyveth.

Then (by Paul's Counsel) when any storm of adversity arises, let us stand
fast in the Truth, knowing, that he offers himself to us, as to his
Children, like a merciful God. If the love of God lend us prosperity, let us
give him thanks, and be careful that we abuse not his bounty. If misery
oppress us, let us nevertheless give thanks to him, and commit our selus to
his judgment.

To obtain health thou give thy self up to the Physician: thou yeeldest thy
self to the Coard, Saw, and Searing of the Surgeon: And decorative border
to enjoy everlasting health: fear thou to trust thy Creator, thy Master, thy
Father, and only Savior? Thou dare not say to the Physician, thus and thus
cure me? And will thou prescribe to God the means of thy saving health? Let
every one of us descend into the depth of his conscience: let us consider how
often, and how grieuouslie we have offended God, how his benefits are defiled
with our iniquities, and so we shall see, how much we are indebted to his
infinite mercy, which has borne with our frailety so gently, which by so many
means calls us to repentance: decorative border which so wllingly pardons
the penitent, and convert.

Truly he is greatly to be lamented which refuses the fountain of
everlasting life, and never by repentance returns whence he departed.

The Prodigal Child straied far, left and forsook his Fathers House, and yet
returned.

Peter was far gone when he denied his Master thrice: but yet remembering the
words which Jesus spoke to him, he recanted, and wept bitterly.

How gently does the Lord in Hieremie under the decorative border person of the
wife (which having forsaken her husband, and gave herself to every man) Call
his people to repentance: Return my Children and be converted (says he)
because I am your husband.

But oh wretched is the man that stops his ears at this voice of the Lords.
To day (says the Psalm) If you hear my voice, harden not your hearts. This is
our day as long as we live, in which the Lord cease not to call bpon us to
repentance, offering us prepared pardon.

God himself in Ezechiel does not only promise remission to him that
forsakes decorative border his evil, but voweth oblivion of all his former
offenses. For after he had reckoned all the errors which man fell into, he
added: If the wicked man will be sorry for his sins, keep my commandments,
and do the thing that is right, he shall live and not die; and I will not
remember ought that he has done. Have I pleasure in the death of a Sinner,
(says the Lord God) or rather would I not his conversion from his evil ways,
that he might live? And again he says, Return and repent you of your
faults, and your iniquity shall not prevail against you. Cast away evil
decorative border cogitations, and take you a new Spirit. And why will thou
die, O house of Israel, I will not the death of a sinner, return and thou shall
live.

O wretch, why despayrest thou, since to this end GOD sent his Son into the
earth, that thou might have comfort? This is the love of God, whereof David
speaks saying: We have seen thy loving kindness, even in the midst of thy
Congregation: Be early at the church occupied in prayer: abide in the
Apostolic Faith: beware of Idolatry, embrace the loving kindness of God who
cries incessantly: I will not decorative border the death of a Sinner, but
rather he convert and live.

Hark to this sweet Oracle, shake off the drowsinesse of error: and rise with
Christ, that thou may live in him.

Mark how liberally he promises: At what hour soever a Sinner shall repent,
I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance.

He has no respect to the nature of thy faults, he forces not the greatness,
or number of thine offenses: repent but as thou ought, and he will blot thy
wickedness out of memory.

That our Prayer may be decorative border more acceptable to God: the Prophet
O see tells us how we should pray: Return unto the Lord and say to him: Lord
take away mine iniquity, and receive (if I have any) my goodness, and I will
give thee the batlinges and sacrifice of my lips.

Let us reuert that have shamefuly erred, to him which takes away the sins
of the world, and let us say: Take away from us the evil which we have done,
and accept this good: What good? Even the sacrifice of our Lips: We give
thee thanks mighty God, to whom we owe all that we have. Take from decorative
border us which is ours, and accept of us that which is thine own. Return
(says Joel) to your God, because he is loving and gracious, long suffering,
and of much mercy, and ready to pardon mischief.

Though the weight of sin astonish thee, yet let the mightiness of Gods mercy
uphold thee, which the Prophet does many ways exaggerate.

God (says he) is gentle: which he adds, that we should not despair of
pardon: God (says he) is gracious, that we should understand how he not only
helps us, but that he pittieth our miseries. And thinking not this
sufficient, he decorative border adioineth Long suffering. And yet art thou
doubtful, sinner? Hearken then what follows: And of great mercy, If thy
faults be many, care not, great is the goodness of God.

What remains now, but that thou turn and go to him that inuiteth thee?
thou will say, the horrible threatenings of punishment fear me: Give ear and
mark: And he is ready to pardon mischief: that God which is so often stirred
to anger: of his own accord moves thee to repentance: calls thee to
forgiveness, forgets his threats, denies thee the decorative border
torment of Hell: in stead of punishment, gives thee his blessing: not only
turns to thee that repentest, but willingly goes to meet thee, and embraces
thee.

This is it which was promised by Zachary; Turn unto me (says the Lord of
hosts) and I will be converted unto you: What means he by Return unto me?
that is acknowledge thy weakness and ask mercy. And what is meant by this?
And I will be converted unto you: That this, of a revenger I will become a
helper: I will assist your endeauours, and look what through your own
decorative border strength you can not bring to pass, thou shall attain to buy
my favor.

No man can freely hate his own sin: unless God mollify his stony heart,
and give him a fleshly heart: unless for a defiled Conscience, he make a clean
heart, unless for a corrupt soul, he renew a right Spirit in him. Peruse
and read the conversation and life of Christ, there thou shall find nothing,
but of his everlasting mercy toward all men.

He freely healed the sick: fed the hungry: delivered them that were in
danger: cleansed the Leapers: gave decorative border sight to the Blind:
restored the Lame: cast out Devils: raised the dead to life: and pardoned the
wicked.

Search again the universal discipline of GOD, what other thing contains
it, then the maruailous compassion of the Almighty? does he not inculcat into
our minds by parables, to the intent we should not fall by any means? To that
end serves the Parable of the lost sheep, which was brought again on the
Sheepeheards shoulders: the Parable of the lost, and found groate: of the whole
man that wanted not a Physician: of the Servant to whom his decorative border
debts were forgiven, of the Publicane and the Pharisie, of the broken man whom
the Samaritane cured, of the good Steward toward his debtors, and of the
crafty Steward toward his Master: of the Prodigal Child taken again into
favor.

As touching the bare name of the Gospel, does it not promise mercy? Yes, it
gives light to the blind, liberty to the Captive, health to the broken, and
last of all a grateful gain to the Lord, who thirsts nothing, but the
Salvation of sinners: Likewise the name of Jesus, that is (of a Savior) what
else does it decorative border promise to the Sinner, but mercy and
blissefulnesse? If he had come representing the Majesty of a Judge, there had
been some cause why every one might have feared: but knowing him to come as a
Savior, do thou despair Salvation? for the surer hope of Salvation, the
Son of God suffered death, and offered up himself a valiant sacrifice for
the sins of man.

And hanging on the Cross, prays for his persecutors: and think thou that
he will deny thee forgiveness of thy sins, that do acknowledge thy
wretchedness, and crave remission? Trust him that is decorative border
merciful, and thou shall find compassion. A sure hope obtains any thing at
Christ's hand: who so mistrusteth the Physician, hinders his own health.

The woman of Canaan cried, and her daughter was cured: The Centurian believed,
and his Servant was made whole again. The Father prayed, and his Son was
cleansed of the foul spirit. The Apostles cried out, Help Lord for we
perish, and they were delivered.

And we see that in diverse he has not respected the prayers of the mouth,
but only the Faith. He did but perceive decorative border the faith of the
people, and said to the sick of the Palsy, Be of good cheer my son, thy
sins are forgiven thee.

The Mother and her companions do but weep, and her Son is raised from
death to life: Martha and Mary did but mourn, and Lazarus was received: Mary
the sinner bewayleth, he annointeth her, kisseth her and says, Thy sins are
forgiven thee. He sufficiently asks, that confesses his infirmity: he asks
effectually, that lamenteth and believes.

The woman troubled with superfluity of blood, secretly touched the vesture of
Jesus: decorative border and immediately she felt the force of his mercy.

We read also of many others that were healed by touching his garment: so never
unprovided is his goodness, and at all times he gives comfort to the weak.
If thou be afraid to call upon Jesus: if thou can not come unto him, yet at
the least touch the edge of his garment. Read the Scriptures, follow the
doctrine of the Apostles: for by them he often shows his virtue, and tells
of thy saving health. O blind and unthankful, which despise the grace of God
so ready to be obtained! But O thrice wretched, decorative border which
despair in that which is willingly and freely offered! he is easily pacified,
that is revenged against his will.

What other meaning has this Phrase, but that the Lord leaves no way unsought
for, to bring us to Salvation, and we wittingly forsake the hope of Salvation?
And why will thou die O house of Israel? with tears he lamented Jerusalem,
which heaped vengeance unto it self by their malicious errors. O Jerusalem
(says he) how often would I have gathered thee together, as the hen gathers
her Chickens, and thou would decorative border not? Our humble Savior
weepeth, because he may not save us miserable sinners, and we despair in him
as though he would not save us, who have deserved his fearful judgments for
our iniquities committed against him All the House rejoiced where the Son which
dyed was revived, and received again that perished.

That good Father calls the company of the Heavens to rejoice over the
penitent Sinner: and thou wretch despayrest, envying both thine own safeguard,
and the gladness of God.

Shall we believe that he decorative border will not pardon malefactors, who
lamenteth the death of a Sinner, and rejoices at the conversion of the
Penitent? He calls all men to the marriage Feast: he would have his house
filled with strangers: makes the Blind and the lame to come in: And why
stayest thou Caitife? Why forsakest thou not thy Swinish soil? Why striuest
thou against the mercy of God? there can be no greater folly, then for vain
and variable things to forsake Eternity.

There is no greater wisdom then for a little sufferanee, to gain
immortality. Great is their ignorance decorative border therefore, which
persevere in their naughtines: But greater is the wisdom of those that live
in newness of life. O what cost we bestow, what pains we take in finding
corruptible metals, and how little we care for the treasure of Gods mercy,
which is laid open, and freely offered to us.

The Lord is rich in mercy.

The treasure of worldly wealth may be wasted by profuse expense: but the
bounty of Gods goodness has no bottom. God has assured his Faith to man,
and (as Paul writes) he cannot deny decorative border himself. He offers
to be challenged and reproved, if he has not performed his promises. For thus
he speaks in Esaias to a wicked generation: Lift up your selves and be clean;
take away the thought of evil cease from mischief, learn to do good: seek
judgment, help the oppressed, judge the innocent: defend the widow, and come
and reprove me (says the Lord.)

Hear thou now wretched man? what else requires our gracious God of thee,
but amendment of life? And that the enormity of thy heinous crimes may not
exanimate decorative border thee, attend to the ready remission. If thy sins
(says he) were as red as scarlet, I will make them as whit as Snow, and if you
will harken to me, you shall eat the Fruits of the earth. O cursed Progeny of
Eve, why do thou yield to the deceitefull promises of the Devil, that
allureth thee to destruction? and art deaf at the Son of God, which would
associate thee with everlasting joy? Repent (says he) for the kingdom of God
is at hand.

The Son of God promises, the Father commands thee, the holy Ghost
inuiteth thee, and yet thou art decorative border scrupulous to receive that
which is offered.

The voice of the Apostles, is the voice of God, and they cry, Repent and be
baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of your sins, and
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Forsake your foul, filthy, and abominable
traditions, and seek the kingdom of Heaven. There run unto Christ,
Soldiers, Publicans, Harlots, Idolaters, man-slears, sorcerers, bawds,
Incestuous persons, none are exempted, all have free course to the mercy of
God; their former life is not imputed to decorative border them, if they repent
and amend their lives. Like as the ground often moistened with heavenly dew, and
yet yields his Tiller nothing but thorns and brambles, is worthy to be had
in contempt, and to be given to the fire: So God many times, for the contempt
of his goodness, gives Sinners up to their reprobate sense. wherefore it is
best to leave off procrastination of amendment of life: and when the Lord
calls us to cast of the Old man with his deed, and concupiscenses: least God,
which has been denied to be hard, as the least refuse to hear our complaints.
Horrible is the voice decorative border wherewith he threasneth those which will
not hear him, that so graciously calls. Because (says he) I have called,
and you have refused: I have stretched out my hand, and there was no man that
would look: because you have despised my counsel, and set at naught my
admonitions, I will laugh at your destruction, when that shall come to pass
which you feared, when abortiue misery shall come upon you, and the storms of
destruction shall prevent you: when sorrow and anger shall possess and
oppress you; then will you call upon me, and I will not hear: they will rise
betime in the morning, but decorative border they shall not find me, because
they have hated my discipline and have been void of the fear of God, have
not hearkened unto my counsel, and have defiled my correction.

In this life there is hope of mercy. Wherefore while thou live, call for the
grace of God, and amend thy life. The careful God of our salvation has
suffered mighty and maruailous men to err, that we by their example might
have comfort, and not despair in hope of pardon. In Holy Scripture who is more
commended then King David, who was both a King and a Prophet, a chosen man
after decorative border the hearts delight of God? out of whose stock came the
Savior Christ. But into how. many and grievous crimes fell so mighty a man:
Yet hearing Nathan pronounce the grievous threatenings of God, cried out, Lord
I have sinned. And Nathan said, But the Lord has taken away thy sins, thou
shall not die. God suffered Peter to offend grieuouslie, and yet when he had
lamented, he obtained mercy. When he gave him charge over the sheep (for which
he shed his precious blood) was it likely that he meant to remember the denying
of him thrice? no, decorative border no, he had so freely forgotten it, that
there remained no jot imprinted in the memory of our loving God. We have many
examples of Sinners, and not a few of the penitent: the example of none ought
to move us to sin: let us not too much try God: if any man be encumbered
with iniquity, he has examples of repentance: let him not despair.

They do evil which will not repent with them whom they have transgressed
withal. After David had willingly confessed his fault, and acknowledged the
just judgment of God: behold what great hope he conceived of the mercy of
decorative border God: Sprinckle me O Lord (says he) with I soap, and I shall
be clean: Wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. By the sprinckling of
the blood of the immaculate Lamb, he promises to himself clearenesse too,
though he acknowledge his conception to be sinful, yet by this washing, he
hops after the whiteness of iunocency, which passes the whiteness of the
Snow. And he trusts not only in the innocence, but looks to see his
doubtful penitency turned into heavenly joy. Thou shall make me hear joy and
gladness (says David) that the bo^es which thou have decorative border broken
may rejoice. Give me the comfort of thy help, and stablish me with thy free
spirit.

O singular faith of a sinner, what man has at any time cried, Jesus have mercy
on me: but forthwith he has obtained grace. Take pity Lord, (says the woman
of Canaan) and her daughter was was healed. The blind poor man cried out, O
Son of David have mercy on me, and he receyved sight. Let us heartily,
zealously, constantly call on him, and in the midest of our miseries say, Jesus
thou Son of David have compassion upon us. And of poor decorative border
impotent beggars he will make us fellow heirs with him of the kingdom of
Heaven. He has opened the sanctuary of his holiness, and thou runnest into
the dungeon of despair: he has stretched out his hand to thee, and thou
turnst away thy face: he opens the gates of Heaven, and thou hastest to
destruction: behold the bosom of his goodness, and thou creepest into the lake
of unhappiness. The Thief that hung on the Cross heard him saying, This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise: and thou offerest thy self to the Devil.

decorative border The mercy of God came unto us, when he sent his Son into the
earth: Let us therefore go to it: Let us incline to him, as he did to us: The
way is first to leave our life. For first the Physicians use to purge the body,
that they may minister wholesomer Medicines.

Forsake O thou Sinner, thy wicked imaginations, which fight against God: leau
to lust, be not covetous, refrain riot, fly arrogance, that God may power his
blessings upon thee.

He that persisteth in his wickedness and calls for grace, is like to an
enemy, decorative border which being ready armed, asks peace of his Master:
he that asks receives: he that seeks finds: and he that knocks has
it opened unto him: if thou will desire mercy, crave it truly: if thou seek
it, seek it indeed, if thou knock at the gate of forgiveness, knock
earnestly. If thou require an example of one that faithfully craved the favor
of God, Mark the Prodigal Child, who leaving his Swine, returned to his
Father, and said: Father I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, make
me as one of thy hired servants.

Mark the Publicane, decorative border which for the guiltiness of his
conscience, dare not lift up his eyes to heaven, dare not come to his redeemer,
but standing a far off, he knocks his breast, and says: Lord be
merciful unto me a Sinner. S. Hierome affirms the offense of Judas to be
greater in despayring the mercy of God, the^ in betraying Christ, as Cain
stirred God to anger, more through desperation of pardon, then by the slaughter
of his brother Abel. Many which have persecuted Christ being converted, and
believing in him have obtained pardon, and are made examples to man, that he
ought not to distrust decorative border the remission of his wickedness, seeing
the death of our Savior is forgiven to the penitent: Will thou hear says
Augustine the mercy of God, leave thy abomination and he will forgive thee?
Will thou see the truth of God, do good, and thou shall be crowned with
Justice? God is not so merciful to use injustice, nor so just to be
unmerciful: but some man will say, me^ increase their offenses by too much hope:
but how much do they enlarge their guiltines by distrust of remission? If
there were no forgiveness, then thou would^t rage and say, I am wretched, I am
condemned: why is not my decorative border law: why shall I not fill my self
with sacietie? if after this there be naught but torment: this would be thy
saing, O worse then despair it self. He does better therefore that
corrects thee with promise of forgetfulness, and says, I will not the death
of a finner, but that he convert and live. God by his promise would not have
sinners to presume: but his will is, they should not in any wise distrust: and
therefore he has made them ignorant of the day of their death: if thou repent,
present pardon is provided: no day is prefixed.

Wherefore to conclude, if decorative border thou have lived well till this
day, and still abidest in this life, live well, amend thy life, and behold
forgiveness, and be sure that what he has pardoned, shall not be imputed
to thee again, which for his merry he grant that takes away the Sins of the
world, Amen.

decorative border CONSOLATIO.
NVLLA maeroris magnitudo, nulla angustiarum acerbitas, nulla defectuum
multitudo, nulla scelerum enormitas, te ad desperationem, nimiamve
pusillanimitatem adducat; Quantumcunque peccaveris semper Dej misericordia in
infinitum excedit decorative border tuas iniquitates: Quantumcunque infirmus
sis, semper illius benignitas a diuvare parata est tuam fragilitatem. Vult, and
potest Deus sanare, ac liberare te, si ad eum vere conuerteris, atque humilis
factus, ipsum pie inuocas, and speras in eo. O quam homini salutaris and Deo
grata est spes, atque confidentia illa, quam Dei amor, sanctaque humilitas
parit, and quae homine^ non ad negligentia^ vel incuria^ sese emendandi, neque
ad facilitatem peccandi pertrahit, sed magis ad conatum proficiendi extimulat.

decorative border THE AVTHORS Prayer.
IN the deapth of thy mercy (O Lord) bow down thine eyes, and behold, incline
thine ears and hear, stretch out thine Arm and help, for I am thine
unworthy creature, and haples man, that through thy rod of wrath have
experience of most wretched misery. Mine enemies pursue me with gaping jaws,
decorative border and whetted teeth, saying within themselus, let us now
devour him for the time that we looked for is come, we do find and see it.
They have fortified round about me, and have enclosed me with torment and
travel. My flesh and skin are made old, my bones are bruised, they have hedged
me, that I cannot get out, and have said heavy links upon me.

Help Lord thy servant whom thou never faylest, I cry and call pittiously,
yet am I not heard: my innocence is trodden down, and my life suddued with
like surmises. My mourning they daily hear, but comfort I find decorative
border far off. They have stopped up my ways with quartred stones, and made
my paths crooked. They lay wait for me as wild Bears and devouring Dragons
with open mouth: deliver me from their greedy gripes, and free my feet from the
paths of such venomous Serpents.

O Lord thou see they have stopped up my well-springes of truth, how they
have broken me in pieces: preferred their guils, and altogether laid me waste:
I am made their mark to shoot at: their strongest Bows have been against me
out of their malicious quiver, they have shot their sharp decorative border
shafts of eger envy, yea, even into my raines. They laugh me to scorn in
their dissembling hearts, and yet bear me fair countenance.

No regard is had of my Truth, and utter confusion is come upon me, thy gifts
Lord proper to my self are holden from me, and I perish in want, having of
mine own. The leaven of my bread is made with cruel cares, and my drink
mingled with salt tears: they have overwhelmed me with heaped stones, and
have buried my innocence in shameful grave, I am sequestered from all freedxme,
and thou Lord know I am decorative border not guilty.

Correct me not in thy justice, for in my misdeedes toward thee Lord, but in
the mildness of thy mercy: for I acknowledge I have don things unlawful
against thy throne, and am no more worthy to be called thy Child. Yet Lord from
the bottom of a broken heart I ask thy pardon, and my Spirit trusts in thy
mercy, and requires that mine enemies may no longer triumph ouermee. Lord
look down and remedy my misery and thraldom. Remember how long I have been
fed with sorrow and care, how my body wastes, and my Soul decorative border
melts away. I fear Lord thou have forsaken me, and set up the horn of mine
enemies, that thou give the^ this long Glory over me.

O merciful Father, do not so I beseech thee. If my scorge be determined (with
thee) for any my contemptes of thy will: yet deliver me from the hands of the
malicious. I acknowledge my faults toward the Celestial Seat, and say: my
righteousness al is stained, I appeal to thy mercy, for thy truth and sons
sake. But Lord if my breast ever harbored any unjust pretense, or act against
thy seruaant James my gratioua decorative border King and Governor, as a
joyful pray bestow me amongst mine eager enemies. To this day from my birth,
thou know Lord, I have honored him with loyal love and served him with true
heart, and innocent hands.

Now Lord if such discharge of duty has ever won victory over any his
worthy thoughts, I beseech thee not in my deserts to thee, but for my truth
to him: multiply in secret breast such thoughts to sure increase of firm
belief, as through thee inspired with my large truth, which might never boast
her self: I may be saved from the snares of decorative border the malicious,
and my innocence known to him.

Wake Lord I beseech thee, and renew on me thy mercies, and help, as ever thou
have done of old. My Soul says within me, thou Lord art her only portion:
and therefore she will hope in thee. And my body have thou always delivered in
greatest peril whenever I have put my trust in thee. Arise most mighty
helper and aid thy Servant, who only seeks succor of thee. Sure I am in
mine enemies pitts, thou will not that mine Innocence perish: neither destroy
me utterly in mine unrighteousness toward decorative border thee: for that
my contrite heart appealeth to thy mercy: and thy condition is not to seek the
death of a sinner, neither to be found untrue in thy promises, wherein my
spirit only trusts.

Amiddest my forrowfull plaints and scorching sighs, Lord power out the
comfortable dew of thy compassion: for in no other help will I trust but in
thine, though the whole Earth would assure me: mine enemies swarm as Bees to
the Hieue, and spread as flowers of the spring: my friends walk in single
number, and hundreds that erst professed says, deny their sentence: decorative
border such as would me good, want the mean thereto: and those that best may,
with Fort nes threats are beaten down, and made lame. Wherefore Lord wash the
understanding of my gracious Governor with the flowing springes of thy Truth.
Cause him with speedy hand to comfort the comfortless: Guide his mind still in
thy love and fear, with such perfect wisdom, true justice, and pitiful
compassion, showing whose member he is that has thus worthily preserved thy
people.

Yea further Lord, guide so his course on earth, that thou may afferwardes of
decorative border right equal him in joys with the blessed Cherubines about
the hie heavens.

Continue in him thy grace, which give every good gift: that as he is thy
chosen vessel, no usurping heart, nor bloody hand may ever have power against
him. But replenished with thy holy Spirit, may execute thy will, and walk in
thy paths, never wanting the strength of thy right hand to beat down his
enemies. But found worthy of thy rich goodness, we may long enjoy so
matchless a head and Governor: grant this Lord I beseech thee, with exchange
of my hard state into decorative border better, even at thine own will: and my
Spirit shall never cease to give praise and thanks to holy Name, Amen.

To the Reader.
MY willing mind sundry ways a^oied in the purpose of my penn, is forced here
to offer thee courteous Reader, in supply of void paper, these few selected
Sentences out of decorative border Holy Scripture, and other divine and ancient
writers which for their worthiness, thy behoof and less labor, if thou
accept better placed the^ barren paper, and grant their once reding I have my
desire. after I deem, that if knowledge of Virtue may allure thee, or view of
vice abash thee, thou will often read and unread them, to embrace the good, and
eschew the evil, which the heavenly Father grant us all his grace to fulfill.

decorative border Sentences out of the Holy Scripture.
THe fear of God is worship and triumph, gladness, and a joyful crown: yea,
who so fears the Lord, shall be happy, and when he has need of comfort, he
shall be blessed.

decorative border The Seed of them which fear the Lord shall be brought to
honor: but the generation of the proud, deceitful and malicious, shall perish
with the shame of their wickedness.

Labor to get thee a good Name: for that shall continue by thee surer then a
thousand greater treasurs of gold: A good life has a number of days, but a
good name endures for ever. The untruth of a lying tongue murdereth the Soul,
upon the head of the backbiter, and blasphemer, with terror shall the Lord
send the thunder of his wrath, and consume them hastily.

decorative border He that loves Riches shall not be justified: and who so
follows corruption, shall perish in the same.

Gold and Silver is the tree of falling to every one, that greedily seeks the
same: blessed is the Rich, which is found without blemish.

Travail and carfulness for riches takes away the sleep, and makes the
flesh to consume: they help not in the day of judgment: Righteousness shall
crown thee: Through thy evil gotten goods, shall thou perish.

The joy and chearefulnes of the heart, is the pure life of man: And his clear
conscience decorative border a fure fortress against death.

The tree of the field is known by his fruit: So are the rotten thoughts of
the dissembling person by his open deeds of malice.

Forgive thy Neighbor the hurt that he has done thee: so shall thy sins be
forgiven thee when thou prayest.

Remember the end, and let enmity pass which seeks death and destruction:
abide in the commandment of thy God, that thou may reap his blessing.

They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous, shall be taken decorative border
in the snare, anguish of heart shall consume the^ before they die.

Wrest not thou the Law: nor know any person, neither take any reward: for
gifts blind the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous: that which is
just follow, that thou may live.

He that leads a godly life, and speaks the truth: he that abhors
gain won by violence and deceit: he that keeps his hand, that he touch no
reward: which stops his ears that he hear no counsel against the innocent
blood: which holds down his eyes that he see no evil: decorative border he
it is that shall dwell in hie, whose sauegard shall be on a Bulwark of rocks,
and his joys incomprehensible, Esa. 33.

The Congregation of disse^bling Hipocrites shall be desolate and unfruitful,
and the fire shall consume the houses of such as are greedy to receive gifts,
the dissembling person conceiueth crauell, and bears vanity, and their body
brings forth deceit. Job. 15.

There be many that for their sundry friendshipps, and benefits which are
diversely given unto them, be ever the more proud and hie minded, decorative
border and undertake not only to harm the benefactors, but are unthankful
for their received goodness, go about to escape the judgment of God, whose
eyes vieweth all virtue: seeks to punish all wickedness, be not in the number
of such. Hester. 16.

My right hand shall not spare the sinners, and my sword shall not cease over
them that shed the innocent blood upon earth, Esdras. 15.

Despise not a man that turns himself away from sin, and cast him not in the
teeth withal: but remember we be all frail and offenders. Eccle. 8.

decorative border Three things there be that my Spirit favors: the unity
of Brethren, the love of Neighbors, and a man and wise that agree well
together.

Three things there be which my soul hates: a rich man covetous, a poor man
proud, and an old man that is unchaste. Eccle. 25.

Oppress not thou the law, nor know any person, neither take any reward, for
gifts blind the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous: that which is
just shall thou follow, that thou may live. Levit. 19.

See that thou know no faces decorative border in judgment, nor do any
unrighteousness in judgment in meat yard, in weight or in measure, true
Balances, true waights, a true Epha, and a true line shall you have to all
men, Ibidem.

Thou shall not favor the poor, nor honor the mighty: but in righteousness
shall thou judge thy neighbor. Ibidem.

Thou shall not avenge thy self, nor be mindful of a wrong, but shall love
thy Neighbor, even as thy self. James. 21.

As the Sun rises, is heat, and the Grass withers, and decorative border
his flower falls away, and the beauty of the fashion of it perishes: even so
shall the malicious, rich, unrighteous, and dissembling person, perish in the
wickedness of his ways.

Judge nothing before the time, which will lighte^ things that are hidden in
darkness, and open the counsels of the hearts, so shall every man have praise
of GOD. Cor. 4

See thou robb not the poor, because he is weak, and oppress not the simple
in judgment, for the Lord himself will defend their cause, and do violence to
them that have used decorative border violence. Pro 22.

God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the lowly, James 4.

Despise not thou the chastening of the Lord: neither despair when he gives
thee adversity: for whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth: yea he scourges
with affliction every Son that he receives. Heb. 12.

Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: for the wrath
of man works not that which is righteous before God: wherefore lay apart all
malice, and with all meekness of heart, exercise truth and quietness.
decorative border James. 1.

Lay aside all malitiousnesse, and all guile: faynednesse, and envy: all
backbiting: and as new born babes desire ye that milk, not of the Body, but of
the soul: which is without deceit, that ye may grow thereby unto Salvation. 2.
Ep. Peter.

The eyes of the Lord do govern the Righteous, and his ears open unto their
Prayers. Ibid. Cap. 3.

The desire of the Lowly is acceptable, and the Lord will increase it: but the
hope of the Proud, is the Indignation: and in the freshness of their Labors
he will root decorative border them out.

He that casts out his words rashly, works care to his life, but who so
through silence seasoneth his thoughts with wisdom, is the Author of long
rest.

Every labor gives forth his fruit, only lip labor destroys time, and
brings forth penury.

The days of adversity are a blessing of God, and a clear conscience is a
continual Feast: A malicious man kindles strife. A Fool utters his wrath
in have: but a discreet person covers wrong.

The Lord abhors the Prayer of the malicious: but decorative border who so
humbles his Prayer in faith and Charity, shall find his desire.

The desires of the Covetous man, bring upon him confusion, but who so
gathers his riches with love and favor, shall prosper.

Through Mercy and Truth sins are pardoned, and through Righteousness and
Faith are thy Prayers heard, and evil eschewed.

Righteous lips are pleasant unto Kings, and dissembling tongues overthrow
hie Palaces.

Better it is to be of humble mind with the lowly, then to divide the spoils
with the decorative border proud.

Presumptuousnesse goes before destruction: and after a proud stomach
follows a foul fall. Mercy and faithfulness preserves the King, and with
loving kindness his seat is holden up.

Who so follows Righteousness and Mercy, shall find both life,
righteousness, and honor.

Like as the golden pillars are upon the Sockets of silver: so are the
beautiful parts of the Body upon a woman that has a constant mind.

The heart of the foolish is like a Cart wheel, and his thoughts run about
like decorative border the Axiltree.

The wiseman tempereth his rage with Patience, and seasoneth his words with
wisdom.

Who so is merciful and gives Alms, that is the right thanks offering: but
he that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, shall be cast down: cry
himself, and not be heard.

All that is of the eath, shall turn to the earth again: all brides and
unrighteousness shall perish: but Faithfulness and Truth shall endure for ever.

Rewards and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and make decorative border him
run that he cannot tell men their faults.

Let not thy mouth be accustomed with swearing, for in it there be many faults.

The heaviness of the heart is all the punishment, and the wickedness of a
woman goes above all.

Like as to clime up a sandy way, is to the feet of the aged, even so is a wife
full of words to a still quiet man.

That woman that has been unfaithful to the Law of the highest, and has
broken Covenant with her husband, her children shall take no root: and as for
her branches, they shall bear no fruit: A shameful decorative border report
shall she leave behind her: and her dishonor shall not be put out.

Like as the Sun when it arises, is an ornament in the high Heaven of the
Lord: so is a virtuous wife the beauty of all her house.

Perpetual are the foundations that be laid upon a whole stony Rock: so are
the commandments of God upon the heart of a holy woman.

Whatsoever happen unto thee, receive it: suffer in heaviness, and be patient
in thy trouble. For like as gold and silver are tried in the fire, even so are
acceptable men in decorative border the furnace of adversity.

God is gracious and merciful: he forgiueth sins in the time of trouble,
and is a defender to all men that seek him in the truth: Woe be to him that
has a double heart, wicked lips, and evil occupied hands, and to the
sinner, that goes two manner of ways.

The blessing of the Father builds up the houses of the Children: but the
mothers curse rooteth out the Foundations.

Who so honors his father, his sin shall be forgiven him, and when he
makes his prayer, it shall be decorative border heard.

He that forsakes his Father shall come to shame: and he that defiles his
mother, is accursed of God.

The more greater thou art, the more humble thy self in all things, and thou
shall find favor in the sight of God: for great power belongs only unto
God, and he is honored of the lowly.

Seek not out things above thy capacity, nor search the grounds for such
things as are too mighty for thee: many things showed unto thee, that be
above the capacity of men.

Be not ashamed of thy decorative border friend in his adversity, and keep not
back thy counsel when it may do good: neither hide thy wisdom in her beauty.

For righteousness and truth, strive unto death: and God shall fight for thee
against thine enemies.

Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for
suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall destroy
thee.

Trust not in wicked riches for they shall not help thee in the day of
punishment, and wrath: equity, mercy, justice, and Truth shall deliver
decorative border thee.

In the beautiful days of thy prosperity forget not the foggy mists of
adversity: and when it goes not well with thee, have a good hope it shall be
better.

Happy is he that has no heaviness in his mind: and is not fallen from his
hope.

Let not to pray always, and stand in fear reformed unto death: for the
reward of God endures for ever; and unto them that will repent, he has given
the way of righteousness.

Note all these hither, to be out of Ecclesiast.

decorative border A dissembling person will unfold thy Secrets: But he that
loves thee in truth, will faithfully stand with thee in peril.

Through the lying lips of the malicious, the innocent is destroyed: But in
the beauty of his truth, time shall deliver him.

The innocent dealing of the just, shall lead them: But the wickedness of such
as dissemble, shall be their own destruction.

The Lord abhors them that be of fained heart: But he has pleasure to
increase the seed of the humble and faithful.

decorative border Every man shall enjoy good according to the sayings of his
mouth, and after the works of his hands: Do they some righteousness, and
speak the Truth.

The Innocent person shall be delivered out of trouble: and the double dealer
shall come in his stead.

Mercy and faithfulness let never go from thee, bind them about thy neck, and
write them in the Tables of thy heart. Pro. 3.

Be not wise in thine own conceit, but fear the Lord and depart from evil:
So shall thy virtue shine, and thy healthes grow Ibidem.

decorative border These six things does the Lord hate: A proud look: a lying
tongue: hands to shed innocent blood: an heart that goes about with wicked
imaginations: feet that be swift in running to do mischief: a false witness
that brings up lies: and such a one, as sows discord amongst brothers. Pro
6.

Dissembling lips keep hatred secretly: evil will stirs vpstrise, but
love covers the multitude of sins. Prou. 10.

The patient abiding of the Innocent shall be turned to gladness: and the
days of his trouble are the sure signs decorative border of his Sauation.
Ibidem.

The peril that the ungodly are afraid of, shall come upon their heads: but
the faithful, and the righteous shall inherit their desires.

He that by violence sheddeth any man's blood, shall be a Runnegate to his
grave, and his posterity shall be confounded with shame.

A man that deals faithfully, shall be filled with blessings: and he that
makes too much have to be Rich, shall not be unguilty.

Like as Hell and destruction are never full: even so the eyes of the covetous
men can never be satisfied.

decorative border The Seat of the King, that with Justice and equity
faithfully judges the poor, shall increase and stand for ever.

Many men like the Bread that is gotten with deceit: but at the last their
mouths shall be filled with gravel. These three, Proverb. all.

No force is left unprepared against the day of Battle: But the Lord gives
the victory.

He that sows the seeds of malice, shall reap sorrow: and in the harvest of
his cruelty, shall he perish.

The end of Equity, Justice, Patience, and Truth, is decorative border riches,
honor, prosperity and health.

Who so gives Rewards shall obtain victory, and triumph: but he takes away
the soul of such as receive them.

Rejoice not thou at the fall of thine enemies, and let not thy heart be glad
when he stumbleth, least the Lord when he sees it, be angry, and turn his
wrath from him to thee.

He that turns away his ear from the needy, or from his Neighbor in
necessity, his Prayer shall be abominable.

Sow no evil seeds in the decorative border furrows of unrighteousness, for
the lucre of any other ma^s Lordshippe, labor not unto the King for the Seat
of Honor: so shall thou go untouched of any misfortune. Ecclesiast. 7.

Who so unjustly challenges rule to himself, shall be hated of the people.
Ecclesiast. 20.

Carry thy wrongs with patient heart, and think of no revenge: the Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of anguish, and to reserve the malicious
unto the day of judgment. Peter. 4.

If our hearts condenm us not, then have we trust to decorative border
Godward, and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him. Job. 3.

For this purpose appeared the Son of GOD, to loose the pains of Hell, and
the Works of the Devil. Ibidem.

Wars with great discretion ought to be taken in hand, for through strength
of good Counsel, things prosper that men devise. Pro. 24.

When thou go to battle against thine enemies, and also, see Horses and
Charrets, and people more then thou, be not afraid of them, for the Lord thy
God is decorative border with thee. Deu. 20.

If you go to war against your enemies that vex you, you shall blow with
the Trumpettes, and you shall be remembered before the Lord your God, to be
saved from your enemies. Number. 10.

The Victory of the Battle stands not in the multitude of the host, but
the Strength and Triumph comes from Heaven. Macha. 3.

He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, and that has not lifted up his
mind to vanity, nor sworn to deceive his Neighbor: he shall receive decorative
border the blessing from the Lord, and victory of his enemies, and
righteousness from the God of his Salvation, etc. Psalm. 24.

decorative border Here follows the Letanie, to be used upon Sundays,
Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, and at other times when it shall be thought
convenient.
O God the father of Heaven have mercy upon us miserable Sinners.

O God the Father of, etc.

decorative border O God the Son redeemer of the World, have mercy upon us
miserable Sinners.

O God the Son, etc.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
us miserable Sinners.

O God the holy Ghost. etc.

O holy blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God have mercy upon
us miserable Sinners.

O holy blessed, etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our Sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed decorative border with thy most precious blood, and be not
angry with us for ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindesse of heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred, and malice, and from all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From Fornication and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

decorative border Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy:
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and
circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody decorative border sweat, by thy Cross and
passion, by thy precious death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection, and
ascension, and by the coming of the Holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us O Lord God, and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

decorative border That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true
worshipping of thee, in righteousness and holiness of Life, thy servant James
our most gracious King and Governor.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee, etc.

decorative border That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious
Queen Anne, Prince Henry, and the rest of the King and Queens royal Issue.

We beeseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to illuminat al Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of the
Church with true understanding and knowledge of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the Counsel, and all the
Nobility with decorative border grace wisdom and understanding.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to decorative border live after thy Commandments.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekely thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruits of thy spirit.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall: and finally,
decorative border to beat down Satan under our feet.

We befeech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to succor help, and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may pleafe thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring with Child, al sick persons and young Children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that be desolate decorative border and oppressed.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time wae may enjoy them.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and decorative border to endue us with the
Grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy Holy Word.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of God we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

decorative border Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil, Amen.

The Versicle.
O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.
Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God merciful Father, that despisest not the decorative border sighing of a
contrit heart, nor ye desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our
prayers, that we make before thee in all our troubles and adversities
whenever they oppress us, and graciously hear us, that those evils which
the craft and subtlety of the Devil, or man works against us be brought to
naught, and by the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we
thy servants being hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto
thee in thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and decorative border deliver us for thy Names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our Fathers have declarud unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

From our enemies defend us O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

decorative border Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our Prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ, graciously hear us O Lord Christ.

The Versicle.
O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answer.
As we do put our trust in thee.

decorative border Let us Pray.
WE humbly beseeth thee O father mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us al those evils that we most
righteously have deserved, and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only mediator and
advocate Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

decorative border A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty King of Kings, Lord of Lords the
only Ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne behold all the dwellers
upon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behoid our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King James, and so replenish him with the grace of thy
holy Spirit, that he may olway incline to thy will, and walk in thy way:
decorative border indue him plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant him in
health and wealth long to live, strengthen him that he may vanquish and
overcome all his enemies, and finally after this life, he may attain
everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for the Queen, and Prince, and other the King and Queens Children.
ALmighty God, which have promised to be a father of all thine Elect, and of
decorative border their seed, we humbly beseech thee to bless our gracious
Queen Anne, Prince Henry, and all the King and Queens Royal Progeny, endue
them with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly Grace, prosper them
with all happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting kingdom through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which only workest great maruailes, send down
upon our Bishops and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their
decorative border charge, the healthful Spirit of thy Grace, and that they
may truly please thee, power upon them the continual dew of thy blessing:
grant this O Lord, for the honor of our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus Christ,
Amen.

A Prayer of Chrysostom.
ALmighty God which have given us Grace at this time with one accord to make
our common Supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
be gathered together in thy Name, thou will decorative border grant their
requests: fulfill now O Lord the desires and petitions of thy servants as may
be most expedient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth,
and in the world to come, life everlasting, Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of GOD, and the Fellowshippe
of the Holy Ghost, be with us al evermore, Amen.

decorative border For Rain if the time require.
O God Heavenly Father, which by thy Son Jesus Christ, have promised to all
them that seek thy Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, all things
necessary to their bodily sustenance: se^d us we beseech thee in this our
necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of
the earth to our comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

decorative border For fair weather.
O Lord god which for ye sin of man did once drown all the world except eight
persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to destroy it
so again: we humbly beseech thee, that although we for our iniquities, have
worthily deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet upon our true
repentance, thou will send us such seasonable wether, whereby we may receive
the fruits of the earth in due season, and learn both by thy punishment
decorative border to amend our lives, and for thy clemency to give thee praise
and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Ame^.

In the time of Dearth and Famine.
O God heavenly Father, whose gift it is that the rain does fall, the earth is
fruitful, beasts increase, and fishes do multiply: behold we beseech thee,
the afflictions of thy people, and grant that this scarsitie and dearth (which
we do now most justly suffer for our iniquity) may through thy goodness
decorative border be mereifully turned into cheapenesse and plenty, for the
love of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all
honor, etc. Amen.

In the time of war.
O Almighty God, King of all Kings, and Governor of all things, whose power
no Creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish Sinners,
and to be merciful to them that truly repent: save and deliver us (we
humbly beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies, abate their decorative
border pride, assuage their malice, and confound their devises, that we being
armed with thy defense, may be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorify
thee which art the only giver of all victory, through the merits of thy
only Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

decorative border In the time of any common plague or sickness.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath, in the time of King David, did slay
with the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering
thy mercy did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable Sinners, that
now are visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did
then command thine Angel to cease from punishing: so it may now please thee
to withdraw decorative border from us this plague and grievous sickness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O God whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to forgive, receive
our humble Petitions, and though we be tied and bound with the chain of our
sins, yet let the pittifulnesse of thy great mercy loose us, through Jesus
Christ's sake, our Mediator and Advocate, Amen.

decorative border A Thanksgiving for Rain.
O God our heavenly Father, who by thy gracious providence, do cause the
former and the later rain to descend upon the earth, that it may bring forth
fruit for the use of man: We give thee humble thanks that it has pleased
thee in our greatest necessity to send us at the last a joyful rain upon
thine inheritance, and to refresh it when it was dry, to the great comfort of
us thy unworthy servants, and to the decorative border glory of thy holy Name,
through thy mercies in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for fair weather.
O Lord God who have justly humbled us by the late Plague of immoderate rain
and waters, and in thy mercy have delivered and comforted our Souls by this
seasonable and blessed change of weather: we praise and glorify thy holy name
for this thy mercy, and will always declare thy loving kindness from
generation to generation, through decorative border Jesus Christ our Lord, Ame^.

A Thankesgiving for Plenty.
O Merciful Father, which of thy gracious goodness, have heard the deuote
prayers of thy church, and turned our dearth and scarsity into cheapenesse and
plenty: We give thee humble thanks for this thy especial bounty, beseeching
thee to continue this thy loving kindness unto us, that our land may yield us
her fruits of increase, to thy glory and our comfort, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

decorative border A Thankesgiving for peace and victory.
O Almighty God, which art a strong Tower of defense unto thy Servants, against
the face of their enemies: We yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers, wherewith we were compassed:
we acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over as a prey unto
them, beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us, that all the
world may know, that thou art our Savior and mighty deliverer, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

decorative border A Thanksgiving for deliverance from the Plague.
O Lord God which have wounded us for our sins, and consumed us for our
transgressions, by thy late heavy, and dreadful Visitation, and now in the
midst of judgment, remembering mercy, have redeemed our souls from the
jaws of death: we offer unto thy Fatherly goodness, our selves, our souls
and bodies, which thou have delivered, to be a living sacrifice unto thee,
always praising, decorative border and magnifying thy mercies in the midst
of the Congregation through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Or thus.
WE humbly acknowledge before thee, (O most merciful Father) that all the
punishments which are threatened in thy Law, might justly have fallen upon us
by reason of our manifold transgressions and hardness of heart: yet seeing it
has pleased thee of thy tender mercy, vpoo our weak and unworthy

decorative border Grace after meaet.
GOds Name be blessed for his benefits now and ever bestowed on us. God send
the King long life, the Realm good peace, the Gospel continuance: increase
our faith, and comfort all those, that be comfortless, and give unto us and
our friends health, and prosperity, peace and truth, in Christ Jesus our Lord,
Amen.

decorative border Grace before meat.
BLessed Lord, that fillest with thy blessing every living thing, sanctify
thy gifts which we shall receive to the nourishment of our mortal Bodies.
Remove away thy judgments far from us: prepare our hearts to serve thee in
all righteousness and holiness: Prosper us in our lawful affairs, and grant
us life everlasting Amen.

decorative border Grace after meat.
BLessed be the name of God for his blessings now and ever bestowed on us. God
preserve the Church universal, our gracious King James, the Queens Majesty,
and the young Prince of Wales, with all the royal issue. God send us health,
and holiness in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
decorative border decorative border decorative border Sententiae Diuinae, e
Sacris Scripturis, Patribusque collectae.
Deus.
DEus est Spiritus, qui adorant eu^ oportet vt spiritu ac veritate eu^ adorant.
Alanus de conquestione Naturae. Deus est splendour nunquam decorative border
deficiens, vita indefessa non moriens, fons semper scaturiens, seminale vitae
feminarium, sapientiae principale principium, initiale bonitatis initium.

August. super illud Pater Nost. Deus est in seipso, sicut Alpha, and Omega: in
mundo, sicut Rector and Auctor: in Angelis, sicut Sapor and Decor: in Ecclesia,
sicut paterfamilias in Domo: in Anima, sicut sponsus in Thalamo: in Justice,
sicut adiutor and protector: in reprobis, sicut pauor and horror.

August super Io. Ser. 29. Deus tibi totum est: si esuris, decorative border
panis tibi est: si sitis, aqua tibi est: si in tenebris es, lume^ tibi est: si
nudus es in mortalitate, tibi vestis est.

Christus.
Io. 8. EGo sum lux mundi, qui sequitur me, non ambulabit in tenebris, sed
habebit lumen vitae.

Ambro. in quodam ser. Omnia habemus in Christo, and omnia in nobis Christus.
Si a vulnere curari desideras, medicus est: si febribus aestuas, fons est: si
graueris iniquitate, Iustitia est: si indiges anxilio, decorative border virtus
est: si tenebras fugis, lux est: si Coelu^ desideras, vita est: Si cibum
quaeris, alimentum est.

August. super Mat. 155. Ego sum via, veritas, and vita: tanquam diceret, qua
vis ire, ego sum via: quo vis ire, ego sum veritas: vbi vis permanere, ego vita.

August. super Joan. Ambulare vis, ego sum via: falli non vis, ego sum veritas:
mori non vis, ego sum vita.

Homo.
Job. 14. HOmo natus de Muliere, brevi vivens tempore, repletur decorative
border multis miserijs: qui quasi flos egreditur, and conteritur, and fugit
velut vmbra, and nunquam in codem statu permanet.

Bernardus. Video hominem prius quatuor virtutibus amictu^: quid huic decrat,
quem misericordia custodiebat, veritas docebat, iustitia regebat, pax fouebat.

Aristoteles interogatus, quidnam esset homo? respondit, imbecillitatis
exemplum, te^poris spolium. Fortunae Lusus, inconstantiae Imago reliquum vero,
pituita and bilis.

Bernar. de consid. vtili. humanae. Septem sunt de essentia hominis, decorative
border quae si homo consideraret, jn aeternum non peccaret. Scilicet materia
vilis, operatio turpis, exitus flebilis, status instabilis, mors tristabilis,
dissolutio miserabilis, damnatio detestabilis, and consideratio gloriae
ineffabilis.

Peccatum.
Io. 1. Cap. 1. SI dixerimus peccatum non habemus, ipsi nos seducimus, and
veritas in nobis no^ est.

Hieron. lib. 1. super Amos. Primu^ peccatum, est cogitasse quae mala sunt.
Secundum, cogitationibus acquieuisse peruersis.

decorative border Tertium, quod mente decreueris opere compleuisse. Quartum,
post peccatum non facere poenitentiam, and in suo complacere sibi delicto.

Cass super Psa. pro eo vt me diligerent, detrahebant. Tribus modis omne
peccatum contrahitur. Primus gradus delictorum est, non reddere bona pro nobis.
Secundus, reddere mala pro malis. Tertius est, tribuere mala pro bonis: contra
haec sunt tria laudabilia. Primum, impendere bona pro bonis. Secundum, malu^
pro malo non reddere. Tertium, perfectissimum virtutis genus est, bonum pro
malo tribuere.

decorative border Poenitentia.
Luc. 5. NOn veni vocare Iustos, sed peccatores ad poenitentiam.

Luc. 15. Dico vobis, quod ita gaudium erit in Coelo super vno peccatore
poenitentiam agente, quam super nonaginta nouem justice qui non indigent
poenitentia.

August. lib. de poenitentia. Poenitentia languores sanat, leprosos curat, and
mortuos suscitat, sanitate mauget, gratiam conseruat, claudis gressum, aridis
copiam, coecis restituit decorative border visum, vitia fugat, virtutes exomat,
mentem munit ac roborat.

Conversio.
Ezech. 33. IN quacunque hora ingemuerit peccator, salvus erit.

Ambros. Si aurum tibi offeram, non mihi dicis, cras veniam, sed am exigis:
nemo differt, nemo excusat: redemptio animae promittitus and nemo festinat.

August. In inferno erit poenitentia, sed sera, ergo infructuosa: Vis vt sit
fructuosa, non sit sera: decorative border Hodie te corrige, qui vivus es: nam
qui iudex tuus futurus est, ipse hodie tuus aduocatus est.

Oration.
Mat. 26. VIgilate and orate, ne intretis in tentationem.

Io. 6. Si quid petieritis patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis.

Gregor. in moralibus. Ille Deo veram orationem exhibet, qui semetipsum
cognoscit, quia pulvis sit humiliter videt: qui nihil sibi virtutis tribuit,
qui bona quae agit, esse de misericordia conditoris agnoscit.

decorative border Isiodor. de Sum. Bon. Lib. 3. cap. 8. Oration Cordis est, non
Labiorum, ne quc verba deprecantis Deus attendit, sed orantis cor aspicit:
Melius est cum silentio orare Cord sine sono vocis, quam solis verbis, sine
intuitu mentis.

Cassiod. Oration est Consolatio flentium: Cura dolentium: sanitas aegrotorum
Haec Animae remedium: haec Miseriaru^ omnium cognoscitur esse suffragium: nam
qui tali munere priuatur, ab omni benificio Consolationis excluditur.

decorative border Ieiunium.
Tobias. 12. BOna est Oration cum Ieiunio, and Eleemosyna, magis quam thesauros
Auri re condere: quoniam Eleemosyna a morte liberat: and ipsa est quae purgat
peccata, and facit inuenire vitam aeternam.

Orig. sup. Leuit. Hom 10. Vis tibi vt ostendam quale te oportet jeiunare
leiuntum? jeiuna ab omni peccato: nullu^ Cibum sumas Malitiae: nullas Epulas
Voluptatis: nullo Vino luxuriae concalescas: Ieiuna a prauitatibus: abstine a
malis decorative border Actibus: contine a malis Sermonibus, imo a
cogitationibus pessimis: noli contingere panes furtiuos peruersae Doctrinae:
non concupisces fallaces Philosophiae Cibos, qui te Authoritate seducant. Tale
leiunium Deo placet.

August. in Ser. de Ieiunio. Ieiunium purgat Mentem, subleuat sensum, Carnem
spiritui subjicit: Cor facit contritum, and humiliatum: Concupiscentiae nebulas
dispergit: Libidinum ardores extinguit: Castitatis vero Lume^ accendit.

decorative border Eleemosyna.
Proverb. 2. QVi obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis, and ipse clamabit,
and non exaudietur.

Petr. Rau. in quodam Ser. Manus pauperis est Gazophylatiu^ Christi, and
quicquid pauper accepit, Christus acceptat. Da ergo pauperi Terram, vt accipias
Regnum: da Micam, vt accipias totum: da Pauperi, vt detur tibi. Omnia quicquid
pauperi dederis, tu habebis: quod pauperi non de deris, habebit alter.

Iea^. Chris. sup. Mat. ser. 9. decorative border Eleemosyna amica Dei
consistit, and semper ei propinqua est pro quibuscu^que voluerit, facile manus
gratiae impetrat: vincula peccatorum dissoluit: fugat tenebras: extinguit
ignem, Huic cum multa fiducia portae Coeli aperiuntur.

August. Eleemosyna mundat Peccata, and ipsa interpellat pro nobis ad Dominum:
quia quicquid pauperibus de derimus, ipsu^ integre posside bimus.

Charitas.
Pau. ad Collos. ca. 2. SVper omnia aute^ haec Charitate^ habere, quod est
vinculum decorative border perfectionis.

Aug. de doctrina Christiana. Sola Charitas est quae vincit omnia, and sine qua
nihil valent omnia, quae vbicunque fuerit trahit ad se omnia. Scientia si sola
sit, inflat: quia vero Charitas aedificat, scie^tia non permittit inflari.

Gregor. in Pastor. Nihil perfectius Deo, virtute Dilectionis. Nihil
desiderabilius Diabolo, extinctione Charitatis.

August. ad Martianum. Dilectio est pacis vnda, Ros gratiae, Charitatis Imber,
semen Concordiae, affectus Gentium, amoris Fructus, and ad summum, Dilectio
Deus est.

decorative border Vbi Charitas non est, no^ potest esse Iustitia, Dilectio
enim proximi malum non operatur.

Iustitia.
Prouer. 10. BEnedictio Domini super Caput Iusti: Os autem impiorum operit
iniquitas. Memoria Iusti cum laudibus erit, and nomen impioroum subvertetur.

Prouer. 21. Facere Iustitiam, and iudicium magis est apud Deum, qua^ immolare
Hostias.

Gregorius. Iustitia omnium virtutu^ princeps, tuta and fida comes humanae
vitae, ea enim imporia, decorative border regna, populi, Civitates regu^tur:
quae si e medio tollatur, nec constate posset hominum societas.

Cassid. sup. illud Psalm. and operatur Just. Iustitia non nouit patrem, non
nouit matrem, Veritatem nouit, personam non accipit. Deum imitatur.

Ambros. de Offic. Bonus circuitus est, si justitia quaerit: prudentia jnuenit:
Fortitudo vendicat: Temperantia possidet: vt justitia sic in affectu, prudentia
in intellectu, fortitudo in effectu, temperantia in vsu.

Menander. Vir justus est qui non injuria decorative border afficit, sed qui
injuria afficere potens, non vult.

Budaeus. In justitia administranda, secundum merita causae, non sa^guinis
Gradum, Affinitatem, Nobilitatemque agendum.

Lex.
Esaias. 10. VAe qui condunt Leges iniquas: and scribentes injustitiam:
scripserunt, vt opprimerent Pauperes in judicio.

Paul. ad Collos. 3. Lex est vinculum Perfectionis.

Marcus Tullius. Lex vinculum Ciuitatis est: decorative border Libertatis
fundamentum: Fo^s aequitatis: Men's, Animus, Consiliu^, vt corpora nostra sine
me^te: Sic Civitas sine Lege, suis, partibus ac Nervis, Sanguine, and Membris
vti non potest.

Cicero 2. de Legibus. Legis virtus est imperare, vetare, permittere, punire,
persuadere aliquid, non omnia vi, ac minis cogere.

Cassiod. Iura publica certissima sunt humanae vitae solatia, Infirmiorum
auxilia, and potentiu^ siaena: vnde and Securitas venit, and Conscientia
proficit.

decorative border Iudex.
Exodus 23. NOn declinabis in Iuditium pauperis: insontem, and justum non
occides, nec accipies munera, quae excoecant etiam Prudentes, and subvertu^t
verba Iustorum.

Levit. 19. Non facies quod jniquum est, neque jniuste judicabis: non
co^sideres personam pauperis, nec honores, vultum Potentis, Just judica
Proximo tuo.

Gregor. in Moral. Iudicare digne de subditis nequeunt, qui in subditorum
decorative border causis non Merita, sed odium vel gratiam sequuntur.

Isio. de sum Bon. Ca. 58. li. 3. Quatuor modis humanum peruertitur Iudicium,
Timore Cupiditate, Odio, Amore* Timore, dum metu Potestatis alicuius veritate^
loqui crubescimus: Cupiditate, cum premio Muneris alicuius corrumpimus: Odio,
cum contra que^libet aduersarium molimur: Amore, dum Amico, vel propinquis
placere contendimus.

Innocentius de miseria Hom. 6. Iudices mali non attendunt merita causarum, sed
Pecuniarum merita: non Iura, sed Munera: non justitiam, sed pecuniam:
decorative border non quod ratio dictat, sed quod voluntas affectat: non quod
Lex sentit, sed quod men's cupit: non inclinant adjustitiam animum, sed
justitiam declinantab animos non vt quod licet hoc libeat, sed vt liceat quod
libet.

Isiod. de Sum. Bono. Lib. 2. Grauius lacerantur pauperes a prauis judicibus,
quam a cruentissimis hostibus.

Cassiodor. Si judicas, cognosce: si regnas, jube. Qui iustificat impium, and
condemnat iustum, vterque abhominabilis apud Deum.

decorative border Acceptio Personarum.
Deuteronomy. 11. NVlla erit distantia personarum, ita parvum audies, vt magnum.

Hier. super Amos. Quicunque consanguinitate, aut amicitia, vel e converso,
hostili odio, vel jnimicitijs in judicando ducitur, peruertit judicium Dei
Christi, qui est justitia.

Hiero. in Epist. Alienum te a personis omniu^ read iudicio: ac propter
Iniustitiam in iudicio Pauperem ne defendas, nec propter decorative border
gratiam Diviti indecenter assistas: aut fi non potes facere, cognitione^ respue
causarum.

Iudices iniqui errant a veritate sententiae dum intendunt qualitatem personae,
and exulcerant saepe iustos, dum improbe defundunt iniquos.

Isiod. Lib. 4 de Sum. Bon. Dives cito muneribus corrumpit iudicium, pauper dum
non habet quid offerat, non solum audiri contemnitus, sed etiam contra
veritatem opprimitur.

Inno. Li. 4, de Huma. Con. Pauperum causam cum mora negligitis, Divitum causam
cum instantia promovetis, in illis rigorem ostenditis, in decorative border
istis ex mansuetudine dispe^satis: illos cum difficultate respecitis, istos cum
facinore tractatis, illos negligenter auditis, istos auscultatis subtiliter.

Adulatio.
Ecclesiast. 28. LIngua duplex multos co^movit, eosque exalia in aliam gentem
transtulit, Civitates muratas Principum destruxit, and Domos magnatum effodit
Lingua duplex strenuas profligavit Mulieres, suisque laboribus defraudauit. Qui
attente audit eam tranquilitatem non inueniet, nec decorative border quietam
vitam.

Hieronim. Adulatores sunt Hosts and scintillae Diaboli.

Ecclesi. 18. Est qui nequiterse humiliat, interiora eius plena sunt dolo.

Alanus de Complaust. Naturae. Adulatores a voluntate vultum, ab animo verbum,
a mente linguam, ab intellectu loquelam amplo dissensionis interuallo
dissimulant, plerumque enim exterius plausibiliter applaudendo collaudant, quos
interius contradictoria derisione defrauda^t, foris vultu applaudant virginaeo,
intus scorpionis pungunt aculeo, decorative border foris adulationis mellicos
co^pluvnt imbres, intus detractionis evomunt tempestates.

Ambitio.
Regum. 14. COntentus esto Gloria, and sede in Domo tua.

Eccle. 7. Principatum a Domino ne petas, nec a Rege sedem Magnificam.

Gal. 6. Non afficiamur inanis gloriae cupidi, invicem provocantes, invicem
invidentes.

August. sup. Psalm. Quoties hominibus praeesse desidero: Toties Deo meo
decorative border praeire contendo.

August. Diabolus ruit, quia elegit potius praeesse quam subesse.

Innocen. de Vilit. conditionis Humanae. Ambitiosus semper est pauidus,
semperattentus, ne dicar, quod desiderat, humilitatem simulat, honestatem
mencitur, affabilitatem exhibet, benignitatem ostendit, subsequitur and
obsequitur: cunctos hoc norai, vniversis inclinatur, frequentot curias, visitat
optunates, assurgit and amplexatur, applaudit and adulatar, vnde novit illud
Poeticum. Et si nullus erit pulver, tamen excute nullum.

decorative border Ibidem. Ambitiosus statim vt est ad honorem promotus, in
superbiam extollitur, iactantia effraenatur, non curat prodesse, sed praeesse
gloriatur, praesumit se meliorem, quia cernit se superiorem, priores dedignatur
Amicos, notos ignoros, externos comitatur, contemnit antiquos, vultum avertir,
Cervicem erigit, faustum ostendit, grandia loquitur, sublimia mediatur, subesse
non patitur, praeesse molitur, subditis onerosus, omnibus infestus, praeceps,
molestas, artogans, grauis, and importunus.

decorative border Superbia.
Ecclesi. 10. INitium Superbiae hominis apostatare a Deo.

Cas. super Psalm. 18. Superbia de Angelo Diabolum fecit, and homini morte^
intulit, and concessa beatitudine vacuavit, omnium malorum matter, scaelerum
fons, vena nequitiae.

Hugo. Quatuor sunt, quae editionis curnam trahunt, amor dominandi, amor
propriae laudis, contemptus, and inobedientia: rota vero sunt, iactantia mentis
and arogantia, verbositasque decorative border levitas, Auriga in hoc Curru est
spiritus superbiae. Amatores Mundi sunt, qui seruntur in hoc Curra, infraenes
sunt equi, volubiles Rotae, auriga perversus, and qui portatur, infirmus.

Cass. in Epist. Humanae Con. Omnis fere vitiosus diliget sibisimilem, solus
superbus odit elatum: vnde inter Superbos sempet sunt iurgia.

Euripides. Quum videris in sublime quempiam elatum, splendidis gloriantem
opibus, ac genete supersilioque supra fortem suam fastuosum, illius celerem
divinitus exspecta brevi vindictam.

decorative border Ne sis superbus Sapientia: neque fortitudine: neque
divitijs, vnus Deus est sapiens, potens, and Beatus.

Avaritia.
Luk 12. CAvete and videte ab omni Avaritia, quia non in abundantia cujusqua^
vita eius ex ijs qui possidet.

August. de verbo Domi. Rapit semper Avarus and nunquam satiatur: non Deum
timet: nec Hominem reveretur: nec Patri parcit: nec Matrem cognoscit nec Fratri
obtemperat: nec amico Fidem decorative border servat: viduam opprimit: pupillu^
invadit: liberos in servitium revocat: Testimonium falsum profert, res Mortui
occupantur, quare and qui faciunt non moriuntur? Quae est illa animarum
insania? amittere Vitam: appellare Mortem: acquirere Aurum: and perdere Coelum.

Bernard. super Canti. Ser. 38. Avaritia rotis vehitur quatuor vitiorum: quae
sunt, pusillanimitas, inhumanitas, contemptus dei, mortis obliuio. Porro
iumenta trahentia, tenacitas, repacitas, and hic vnus auriga ambobus praesidet:
Ardor habendi, hic auriga ad vrgendum decorative border trahentia flagellis
vtitur acerrimis, libidinae acquirendi, and metu amittendi: haec sola Avaritia,
quia conducere plures non patitur, vno contenta est servitore.

Hugo Lib 2. de Claustro animae. Duo sunt quae illicite solent acquirere.
Scilicet, Superbia and cupiditas: and duo quae male fruvntur acquisitis, Gula,
and Luxuria. Duo sunt qui male possidere volunt: Scilicet prodigus, and Avarus,
vnus vt congreget, alter vt dissipet, and duo quae possessi defendunt:
Scilicet, intemperantia, and prudentia. Mundi superbia a Diabolo clausit
Coelum. Gula primo decorative border parenti abstulit Paradisum, Avaritia
Diviti aperuit Infernum, Intemperantia vero adhuc corrumpit Mundum.

Hiero. in quodam Ser. Cum caetera vitia senescente homine senescant: sola
Avaritia in venescit.

Ibidem. Nihil aliud esta varus, quam bursa principum, cellarium latronum, rixa
parentum, sibilus hominum.

Cupiditas.
Pau. ad Tim. 1. Ca. 6. FOns Perditionis est Cupiditas, quam quidam appetentes
decorative border errauerunt a Fide, and inseruerunt se doloribus multis.

Petr. Rau. in Ser. Omnium malorum radix est Cupiditas, transgressionis Matter,
Magistra nocendi, primipilatis Iniquitatis, Auriga malitiae, Sicaria virtutum,
Seditionis origo, Fovea scandalorum.

Innocen. Tria maxim solent homines affectare. Opes, voluptates, Honores: de
Opibus, praua: de voluptatibus, turpia: de honoribus, va ua procedunt. Na^ opes
generant Cupiditatem and Avaritiam: Voluptates pariunt Gulam and Luxuriam:
Honores nutrivnt superbiam, and decorative border Iactantiam.

Innocen. de Vilitate Conditionis Humanae. Radix ne quitiae est Cupiditas, haec
sacrilegia commitat and furta, Rapinas exercet and praedas, Bella gerit and
Homicidia, Simoniace vendit, and emnit, injque petit and recipit, injuste
negotiatur and foeneratur, inst^t dolisque imminet fraudibus, d ssolvit
peccatum, and violat Juramentum, corrumpit Testimoniu^, and pervertit judiciu^.

Ira.
Proverb. 15. SIcut fremitus Leonis, ita and regis Ira: and sicut Ros super
decorative border herbam, ita and Hilaritas eius.

Ecclesi. 25. Non est Caput nequius super caput Colubri, jta non est Ira, Ira
jaimici perniciocior.

Gregor. li. 5. Moral. Per Iram justitia relinquitur, quia du^ perturbata men's,
judicium fine ratione exasperat, omne quod furor suggerit, rectum putat: per
Iram, gratia vitae socialis amittitur, quia qui se ex humana ratione non
temperat: necesse est, vt bestialiter viuat, per Iram ma^suetudo amittitur: per
Iram concordia rumpitur: per Iram Lux veritatis amittitur, quia menti Iracundia
confusionis decorative border tenebras incutit: Huic Deus radium suae
cognitionis abscondit.

Grego. 26. Moral. Si is qui corrigere nititur, Ira superatur: opprimitantequam
corrigat, nam dum plus quam debet, accenditur sub justae vltionis obtentu ad
immanitatem crudelitatis effraenatae.

Cass. Psalm. Irascimini. Vbi est fervida vindicta, non est temperata Iustitia.

Gregor. Quoties Ira animum juvadit, mentem edoma, vince tejpsum, differ tempus
furoris: quum tranquilla men's fuerit, fac quod placet.

decorative border Euripides in Aeole. Quisquis Irae preccps jndulget, in malum
finem eruit.

Invidia.
Iam. 3. VBi zelus and Invidia, jbi jnconstantia and omne opus pravum.

Isiod. in Syno. Invidia cuncta bona devorat ardore pestifero: Invidia animae
Tinea sensum comedit, Pectus vrit, mentem affligit. Cor hominis, quasi quaedam
pestis depascit.

Sen. in Episto. Venenum quod serpents in alienam pernicie^ effundunt,
decorative border sine sua continent, non ita vtium jnvidiae continentur: nam
invidus torquet and macerat, bona odit and extenuat, Injurias vero dilarat and
auget.

August. super Johan. Toll invidiam, and tuum est quod habeo: tollam invidiam,
and meum est quod habes.

Valerius Max. li. 4. de Amicitia. Nulla tam modesta foelicitas, quae
maligintatis dentes vitare possit.

Phocylides. Ne invideas bona socijs, ne maculam cantrahas: sine Invidia
coelestes etiam inter se sunt: non invident Luna multo prestantioribus solis
Radijs: decorative border non Tellus Coelestibus altitudinibus, cum subter ipsa
sit: non flumina, Pelagis sed semper concordiam habent.

Malitia.
Reg. 1. cap. 22. SI perseueraueritis in Malitia, and vos, and Rex vester
pariter peribitis.

Bernard. super Can. Habet Malitia Curnim suum Roris quatuor consistentem:
saevitia, Impatientia, Audacia, Impudentia: valde enim velox est Currus iste ad
effundendum sanguinem, qui nec innocentia sistitur, nec Patientia retardatur,
nec Timore decorative border fraenatur, nec Pudore inhibetur: Trahitur autem
duobus pernicibus Equis and ad omne^ peniciem paratissimis, terrena potentia,
and Seculi Pompa. Porro president his duobus Equis Aurigae duo, Timor, and
Livor: Timor quidem pompam: Livor, potentiam agit.

Gregor. li. 12. Moral. Men's praua semper in laboribus est, quia aut molitur
mala, quae inferat: vel me tuit, ne sibi ab alijs inferantur, and quicquid
contra proximos cogitat hoc contra se cogitari a proximis formidat.

Seen. in Epist. Malitia ipsa maximam partem veneni sui bibit, at venenum
decorative border quod serpents in aliena^ perniciem perferunt, sine sua
continent: non est huic simile hoc, habentibus pessimum est.

Idem in Prover. Malefacere qui vult, nusqua^ non invenit causam: malevolus
sempersua natura nititur.

Calumnia.
Malach. 3. ACcedam ad vos in judicio, and ero Testis velox Maledicis, and
Perjuris, and qui calumniantur mercedem Mercenarij.

Herodot. li. 3. Calumnia res est grauissima: decorative border in qua duo sunt
qui iniuriam faciunt, vnus qui afficitur: Calumniator enim Iniuriam facit, non
presentem accusans, and similiter, qui Accusanti fidem habet antequam vere rem
cognoscit: Qui autem abest, iniuriam patitur tu^ ab illo Calumniatore, tum ab
eo, qui ipsum, aures Calumnianti prebens pro malo reputat.

Theocrit. in Epist. Ea est Calumniatoris natura, in crimen vocare omnia:
probare vero nihil.

decorative border Loquacitas.
Prima. Petri. 3. QVi enim valt vitam diligere, and videre dies bo nos,
coerceat linguam suam a malis, and labia sua, ne loquatur dolum.

Eccle. 41. Non duplices sermonem auditus de reuelatione sermonis absconditi,
and invenies gratiam apud omnes homines.

Bern. in quodam Ser. Lenis quidem Sermo, quia leniter volat: sed grauiter
vulnerat: leniter transit, sed graviter vrit, leniter penitrat amicum,
decorative border sed non leniter exit: leniter prosertur, sed non leniter
reuocatur, facile volat, adeo Charitatem facile violat.

Gregor. lib. 8. Moral. Lingua sub magna moderaminis liberatione seruanda est,
non insolubiliter obliganda, ne aut laxata in vitium defluat, aut restricta
etiam ab vtilitate torpescat.

Hugo lib. 2. de Anima. Lingua labitur vt Anguila, penetrat vt sagitta: tollit
Amicos: multiplicat Inimicos: movet Rixas: seminat Discordias: vno ictu multos
percutit, and interficit: blanda est, and subdola, and parata ad exhaurienda
bona, and miscenda mala. decorative border Qui custodit Linguam suam, custodit
Animam, quoniam Mors, and Vita in potestate Linguae est.

Taciturnitas.
Jacob. in Epist. cap. 1. SIt omnis homo velox ad audiendum: tardus ad
loquendum, and tardus ad iram.

Ambr. li. 1. de Off. Silendi patientia, oportunitas loquendi, and contemptus
Divitiarum, sunt maxima fundamenta virtutum.

Proverb. ca. 25. Sicut Vrbs patens, and absque murorum ambitu, ira vir, qui
non potest in loquendo cohibere decorative border Spiritum suum.

Hieron. in quodam Epist. Div considera quid loquendum sit, and adhuc tace
provide, ne quid dixisse poeniteat, sapie^s vt loquatur multa prius considerat,
quid, aut cui loco vel tempore dicat.

Humilitas.
Luc. 1. DEposuit potentes de Sede, and exaltavit Humiles. Quanto maiores, eo
te geras submissius, and gratiam apud dominum reperies: multi quidem altitudine
fortunae, gloriae que excellunt, sed mansuetis revelantur Arcana, decorative
border Quoniam pontentia domini magna est and ab humilibus gloriam consequitur.

Pet. 1. ca. 5. Luc. 7. and 8. Dominus superbis resistit: Humilibus dat
gratiam, Et omnis qui se exaltat, humiliabitur: and qui se humiliat,
exaltabitur.

Bern. sup. Can. Ser. 45. Scio neminem absque sui cognitione saluari, de qua
nimirum matter salutis, Humilitas oritur, and timor Domini, qui and ipse sicut
injtium Sapientiae, ita and salutis est.

Bernar. super Miss. est. Non magnum est esse humilem in abjectione magna,
prorsus and rara virtus, Humilitas decorative border honorata.

Valerius in quodam Sermon. Humilitas in paupere grata est, in divite
gloriosa: Humilitas inter jnimicos, blanda: Superbia inter amicos, ingrata:
blanda est and officios semper humilitas, in amicitijs grata, in contumelijs
otiosa non extollitur prosperis, non mutatur adversis, non extorquet servitium,
non requirit voces Adulantium.

Bernard. in Epist. Fode in te fundamentum Humilitas, and pervenies ad
fastigium Charitatis: vis capere celsitudinem Dei? cape prius humilitatem
Christi: sola est decorative border virtus humanitatis, reparatio laesae
charitatis.

Amor Proximi.
Johan. Apost. Epist. 1. ca. 3. QVi diligit fratrem suum, in lumine manet, and
sca^delum in eo non est, qui autem odit fratrem suum, in tenebris est, and in
tenebris ambulat, and nescit quo eat, quia tenebrae obcoecaverunt oculis eius.

Grego. li, Moral 4. Duo sunt precepta Charitatis, dei: videlicet, and Amor
Proximi: per amorem Dei, gignitur amor Proximi, and per amorem Proximi, Dei
amor decorative border nutritur: Nam qui amare deum negligit, perfect diligere
proximum nescit. Et tunc before in Dei dilectione proficimus, si in
dilectionis gremio, Proximi charitatem colligamus.

Basil. in Hepam. Thesaurus indeficiens, est amor Divinus: quem, qui habet,
dives est: quo, quicunque caret, pauper est.

August. Vbi Charitas non est, no^ potest esse Iustitia, dilectio enim proximi,
malu^ non operatur.

Amicitia.
Proverb. 12. and 17. QVi negligit damnu^ proper Amicum, justus est. decorative
border Omni tempore diliget qvi Amicus est, and frater in Augustijs comprobatur.

Ambrosius Officior. Lib. 3. Pietatis custos, Amicitia est, and equalitatis
magistra: vt superior inferiori, and equalem se exhibiat, and inferior
superiori.

Ambrosius ibidem. Solatium huius vitae est, vt habeas cui peotus tuum aperias,
cui Arcana communices, cui secreta tui pectoris committas, vt colloces tibi
fidele^ virum, qui in prosperis gratuletur tibi, in tristibus compatiatur, in
persecutionibus adhor tetut: facilis vox and co^munis, decorative border tuus
sum totus, sed pautior est affectus.

Ecclesiast. 24. Qui denudat arcana Amici, fidem perdit, and non invniet Amicum
ad animum suum.

Ecclesiast. 12. Fidem posside cum Amico in paupertate illius, vt in bonis
illius laetaris. In tempore tribulationis illius permane illi fidelis, vt in
Haeriditate illius cohaeres sis.

Job. 6. Qui tollit ab Amico misericordiam, timorem Domini derelinquit.

Ecclesiast. 6. Amicus fidelis medicamentum Vitae, and immortalitatis and
decorative border qui metuvnt Dominum, invenient illum.

Fides sieve Fidelitas.
John. 22. QVi crediderit in me, etiam si mortu us fuerit viuet, and omnis qui
viuit, and credit in me, non morietur in aeternum.

Mar 9. Si potes credere, omnia possibilia credenti.

Ambro. li. de Caine and Abel. Fides radix omnium virtutum, and quod super hoc
fundamentum aedificaveris, hoc solum ad operis tui, fructus and virtutis
proficit mercedem.

decorative border August. de verbis Domini. Nullae maiores Divitiae, nulli
Thesauri, nulli honores, nulla huius mundi major est substantia, quam est Fides
Catholica, quae peccatores homines salvat, Coecos illuminat, Infirmos curat,
Cathecuminos baptizat, Fideles justificat, penitentes repanat, Iustos
augmentat, Martires coronat, Virgins and Viduas, Coniugales casto pudore
conseruat, Clericos ordinat, sacerdotes consecrat, in haereditate aeterna cum
Sanctis Angelis collocat.

Ambr. lib. 1. Officiorum. Liquet in bello fide^, and iustitia^ observari
oportere, fundamentu^ enim Iustitiae est Fides.

decorative border Aug. de fide ad Petrum. Hoc est humanae salutis initium,
sine hoc nemo ad filioru^ Dei numerum potest pertingere vel pervenire, sine hoc
o^nis labor hominis vacuus est.

Conscientia.
2. Corinthians. 1. GLoria nostra haec est, testinoniu^ Conscienciae nostrae, quod
in simplicitate cordis, and sinceritate Dei, and non in sapientia Carnali, sed
in gratia dei conversatisumus in hoc mundo.

Hugo. lib. de Anima ca. 9. Conscientia bona titulus est decorative border
Religionis, Templum Salomonis, Ager Benedictionis, Hortus Delitiarum, Aureum
Declinatorium, Gaudium Angelorum, Arca Foederis, Thesaurus Regis, Aula Dei,
Habitaculum Spiritus Sancti, Libet signatus, and clausus, and in Die Iudicij
apperiendus.

Bernar. li de Conscientia. Bona Conscientia quotidie virescit, laboribus non
affligitur, denique afficit gaudio viventem consolatur moriente^, aeternumque
durat.

Misericordia.
Luke 6. EStote Misericordes: sicut and pater vester Misericos est.

decorative border Proverb. 2. Misericodia and veritas custodivnt Regem, and
roboratur clementia Thronus eius.

Chrisost. super Matheum. Misericordia est salutis praesiduum, Fidei
ornamentum, Propitiatio peccatorum: haec est quae justos probat, Sanctos
roborat, dei cultores ostentat.

Misericordiae virtus tanta est vt sine illa, coetera, and si sint, prodesse
non possunt.

Quamvis enim aliquis Fidelis sit and castus, and sobrius, and alijs majoribus
ornatus insignibus, si Misericors tamen non est, Misericordiam non meretur.

Aug. de Seruo. domini. decorative border Beati illi qui subveniunt miseris
quoniam eis rependitur, vt per misericordiam Domini de miseria liberentur. Nam
id ipsum videtur justum, vt qui a potentiore adiuvari vult, adjuvet inferiorem,
in quo est ipse potentior.

Cass. in Epist. Benigni Principis est, ad clementiae commodum transilire
terminos Acquitatum: qua^do sola est Misericordia cui omnes virtutes
honorabiliter cedere non recusant.

Veritas.
Psalm. 116. VEritas magna est, and fortior prae omnibus. Omnis decorative
border terra Veritate^ invocat: Veritas domini manet in aeternu^.

Eccle. 4. Non co^tradicas verbo veritatis vllo modo, and de Mendatio
incruditionis tuae co^fundere.

Bernard. in Sermon. Veritas sola liberat, sola salvat, sola lavat.

Bernard. de Gra. Humana. Cum sint tres gradus, seu status Veritatis, ad Primu^
ascendimus per labore^ Humilitatis: ad secundu^, per affectum compassionis: In
primo veritas reperierur seuera: in secundo, Pia: in Tertio, Pura. Ad primu^
ratio ducit qua nos discutimus: ad secundu^ affectus producit, quo alijs
miseremur: decorative border ad tertium puritas rapit, qua ad jnvisibilia
sublevamur.

Christ. de Laudibus Pau. Hom. 3. Talis est conditio Falsitatis, vel Erroris,
vt etiam nullo sibi adsistente consenescat, ac defluat. Talis autem e diverso
Veritatis status vt etiam multis impugnatibus suscitetur, and crescat.

Seneca in Epist. Magna est Veritas, quae contra omnium Ingenia, Caliditatem,
solertiam, and contra fictas hominum Infidias facile se per sejpsum defendit.

decorative border Castitas.
Tim. 5 and Sapien. 4. TEipsum Castum custodi. O quam pulchra est Casta
Generatio cum Claritate. Immortalis est enim gloria illius: quoniam and apud
Deum nota est, and apud homines.

Corinth. 7. Qui Matrimonio jungit Virginem suam, been facit: and qui non
jungit, melius facit.

Cypr. de xij. Abusionibus. Castitas est ornamentum Nobilium, Exaltatio
Humilium, Nobilitas Ignobilium, Pulchritudo vilium, Solamen decorative border
Merentium, Augmentum omnis pulcritudinis, Decus Religionis, Minoratio Criminu^,
Multiplicatio Meritorum, Creatoris omnium Dei Amica.

Bernard. in Epist. ad Seuon. Sola est Castitas, quae in huius, Mortalitatis,
and loco, and te^pore, flarum que^dam Immorralis gratiae represe^tat, in qua,
nec nubent, nec nubentur.

Bernard in Epist. Castitas, sine Charitate, La^pas est sine Oleo: Subtrahe
Oleu^, Lampas non lucet: toll Charitate^, Castitas non placet.

Ibidem. Quid Castitate decorius? quae mundu^ de immu^do conceptum Semine: de
Host domesticum, decorative border hominem, denique Angelum facit?

Virginitas.
VIrginitas, Thesaurus inco^parabilis est, and Mons altus, ad quam Angelus
hortatur. Gregor. sup. Ire. Flos est Virginitas: Flos Martirium: Flos Actio
bona: In horto Virginitas: in Campo Martyriam: bonum opus in Thalamo.

Bosus. Mayor est victoria Virginu^, quam Angeloru^. Angeli enim sine Carne
vivunt: Virgins vero in Carne triumphant.

decorative border August. Virginitas est Soror Angelorum, Regina virtutum,
Possessio omnium bonorum.

Virtus.
Johan. Epist. 3. cap. 1. OVi benefacit, ex Deo est: qui malefacit non videt
Deum.

August. in Epist. ad Macedonium. In hac vita Virtus non est, nisi diligere
quod diligendu^ est: id diligere, prudentia est: nullis jnde averti molestijs
Fortitudo: nullis illecibris te^perantia est, nulla Superbia, Iustitia est.

decorative border Senec. Epist. Virtus extollit hominem, and super Astra
Mortales collocat.

Senec. in Epist. 75. Virtus, Regna, Vnbes, Provincias temperat, fert Leges,
colit Amicitias. Non minor est si ex altiore fastigio in privatum, ex Regio in
humilem subducitur, ex publico, ex spatioso rure, in angustas Domos vel Angulos
coit.

Cicero in Lib. Amicitiae in Princi. Virtute ipsa non tam multi prediti esse,
quam videri volunt. Hos delectat assentatio.

Boethius. Imperante, florenteque nequitia, decorative border virtus non solum
Praemijs caret, verum etiam Sceleratorum pedibus subiecta calcatur, and in loco
Facinorum supplicia^ luit.

Post Cineres virtus vivere sola facit: virtus nullius Fortunae Incommodis
obnoxia.

FINIS.

