A CHOROLOGICALL DISCOVRSE OF THE WELL Ordering, disposing, and governing of an
Honorable Estate or Reuennue.

BRIEFLY DESCRIBING the duties of diverse Officers therein to be employed: for
the better preserving, improuing and augmenting of the same.

TOGETHER WITH CERTAIN BRIEF AND NEcessary Tables for the valuation of
Leases, Annuities, and purchases, either in present or in reuersion.

Written by T. C. Gent.

Aestas quamprimum fuerit componite nidos. LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELD
dwlling in Little-Britaine. 1621.

TO ALL THE RIGHT Honorable, Noble, and Worshipful Lords, Owners, Possessors,
and Purchasers of Reuennue, to whose view and use this present Treatise shall
come.
RIGHT HONORABLE, and RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
IT being manifest, the two maine materials out of which Honor and Nobility
are created, to be Virtue and Reuennue: as the first being conspicuously to be
noted in the actions of men, both millitarie and civil, is of all to be
embraced: so the latter serving to sustain Honor, and being as it were the
very nerves and sinews thereof, is of none to be neglected. Reuennue
therefore, and the due ordering thereof to the best advantage, and least
charges of the Lords and Owners of the same, is the subject which in this
ensuing Discourse is entreated of: which although in some particular Offices,
others have heretofore more largely handled, yet in this brief and general
kind no man to my knowledge has hitherto labored. That I have endeavored to
be brief, is because I would not be tedious to such whose weighty affairs
otherwise abridge them of time for these matters. Yet I presume (for the most
part) this brevity is without obscurity, and being sufficient for the purpose
it intends, frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. Such as it
is, I humbly present it as the best means I have, to testify the great desire
in me to do service to the Nobility of my country, whose favorable
acceptance of these my poor endeavors I only crave and entreat, and so rest

Your Honors and Worships ever devoted. THO: CLAY.

CARMEN AD Auctorem, seu Passus ad Athenas.
TAm been, tam graphica describis singula penna,
Disponens docta, munia cuique manu:
Vt facile constet cuiuis tentare volenti
Commoda de studijs multa scatere tuis.
Ingenij specimen das non vulgar sagacis,
Et lumen genij non mediocre boni.
^sta legate Quaestor, studeat Geometricus ista:
Officij parts noscet vterque sui.
Tho: Widmerpoole.

IN DVE COMMENDATION OF THE Author, his Work and worth.
REuennues Order, Officers, and Laws,
With each man's duty how estates to raise:
Of every loss and profit the true cause;
Thou here describ'st, in plain yet pleasant phrase.
Thy precepts brief, yet pithy in each part,
Declares thy judgment, and extol thine Art.
In purchase, sale, exchange, or leasing out,
(Be it in present or reuersion)
This little Tract so clears every doubt,
As shows it self in such commersion,
For Lords and Owners all, a work so rare,
That none yet extant can with it compare.
ADAM SMITH.

A CHOROLOGICALL Discourse of the well ordering, disposing and governing of an
Honorable estate or Reuennue, wherein is briefly described the duties of diverse
Officers therein to be employed, for the better preserving, improuing, and
augmenting of the same.
CHAP. 1. Of the definition of an Honorable estate, and of the Officers and
Ministers belonging to the same in general.
FOr that, according to the precept of the grave and learned Roman Orator
Cicero, the institution of all things whereof any discourse is to be made, or
continued, ought to take his beginning at Definition: it shall not be amiss,
but very necessary, first to define what this Honorable estate or Reuennue
whereof we purpose to entreat is, and then orderly to proceed to the particular
precepts and observations to be handled in the ordering of the same.

As touching the definition therefore: I call that an honorable estate or
Reuennue, where any Lord or owner thereof is by the blessing and providence of
God, either by inheritance, gift, purchase, or otherwise, endowed with Honors,
Manors, Lordships, Houses, Lands, Tenements, and such like possessions as have
belonging unto them Royalties, services, franchizes, liberties, and other
privileges, and immunities, not incident to common estates, and tenures. For
although that honorable titles (in respect of men's persons) do properly belong
unto none but such who by descent, office, place, the Princes free gift, or
such like, may justly challenge the same, yet even men of meaner rank may be
seized of such honorable estates. And for as much as diverse Lords and owners of
such estates now a days (whether through negligence, ignorance, fear of too
much expense, or the like, I know not) for want of skillful, discreet and
faithful Officers and Ministers to that purpose, do not only daily lose
diverse of their Royalties, services, customs, and casual profits, to the
spoiling and dismembring of their Manors, but also suffer many encrochments,
concealements, and other nusances, to be oftentimes made and committed against
them to their great, and sometimes irrecouerable prejudice: which contrariwise
by the care and providence of skillful, discreet, and honest Officers would
quickly be found out and prevented: My purpose is therefore here to describe
such an order in the mannaging, disposing and governing of such estates, as
whosoever shall be pleased (after mature consideration) but to observe the
same, I doubt not but he shall find great profit and contentment therein, and
the course nothing so chargable to be maintained as many men may imagine, being
that the surplussage of of the profits arising by the well managing of such an
estate, shall yearly amount unto a greater matter then the surplussage of the
charge which otherwise it would come unto.

To proceed therefore, I say, that to the well managing of an Honorable estate,
there is required Officers and Ministers skillful, discreet, faithful, and
honest. And now we are to enquire what and how many they be; what is each man's
particular duty, and how to make choice of them.

Officers of Reuennue belonging to the well mannaging and government of an
Honorable estate, may generally be divided into Officers of order, and Officers
of charge.

Officers of order are the Auditor, Surueyor, learned Steward, and Solicitor,
which I so term, as well for that they serve to direct the whole business of the
Officers of charge, by enforming each man of the particular duties belonging to
his place, and by seeing that the same be duly performed: as also, for that
they themselves (in respect of their proper offices) are not chargeable with
the receipt of any profits, nor accomptable for the same.

Officers of charge are all such which have some charge or other imposed upon
them, as the receiving and disbursing of the Lord his moneys, the collecting of
his rents, fines, and casual profits, the ouerseeing of his Demesnes, cattle,
and husbandry, the custody and sale of his woods, the provision of his house,
or any other such employment for which they stand accomptable. And these
Officers are twofold, viz. of Receipt and of Expense.

Officers of Receipt are the Receivers general and particular, the Storer,
Woodward, Bailiffs, Collectors, and such other Ministers, which have the charge
and receipt of the Lord his Rents and other profits of his Reuennue: and these
are all accomptable to the Auditor for the same.

Officers of Expense are the Steward of the house, and under him all other
Officers of the household, which have any charge imposed upon them, whereof they
stand accomptable to him, as the Gentleman of the horse, Clerk of the Kitchen,
Baker, Brewer, Butler, and such like, all which for breuities sake I omit,
purposing in this discourse to entreat of none but such as are chiefly
necessary for the managing of Land-Reuennue, and which have some charge imposed
upon them for which they stand accomptable to the Auditor.

And now that we have sufficiently expressed what Officers are of necessity
requisite to the well ordring and mannaging of an honorable estate, we will
according to our former propounded method, set down the particular duty of
each several Officer as they fall out in order and dependence, reserving the
Auditor for the last place, because in his office, as in a maine stream or
River, the effects of all the other, as the branches thereof, do concur and
are made manifest.

CHAP. 2. Of the Office, duty, and choice of a Surueyor.
THe Surueyor is an Officer of order, and one of the principal in an honorable
Reuennue; whose Office is to view and survey all and singular the Honors,
Manors, Lordships, lands and Tenements of his Lord, and to search out all the
profits, Royalties, privileges, and customs thereunto belonging, expressing
the same orderly in his Books of Survey; and also to set down and distinguish
in his said Books, the particular lands of every Tenant within each Manor,
truly butting and bounding each several parcel thereof, and expressing the
ancient names of the same, the quality, quantity, and yearly value of each
man's Tenement, the tenure by which he holds, and the Rents and services
yearly due and payable therefore, with the Feasts and days of payment,
entering each tenure orderly and severally by it self.

To take notice of such encrochments concealements, purprestures, and such
like, as he shall meet withal in his view and perambulation, and to certify
the Lord or his Commissioners thereof, that the same may be reformed, or
presented to the Jury at the next Court, and arented to the Lord his profit,
as also to enquire of Rents decayed, and to do his best endeavor to revive
the same.

To make good and formal Terrars or Rent-rolls out of his Books of Survey,
expressing therein orderly all rents, services, and certain profits, within
each Manor, and the times that they are due, payable, and to be performed; and
to deliver the same to the Bailiffs whereby they may gather up and collect the
said profits, and also see the services duly performed to the Lord his use.

To make out Suite-rolls containing all the Tenants names that owe suite of
Court to the Lord his Manors, expressing therein each several tenure by it
self, and what services and customs each Tenant holds by, as fealty,
homage, relief, etc. and to deliver the same to the several Stewards that
they may thereby call the Tenants at the Lord his Courts, and be directed what
to do upon every change, as death, alienation, surrender, and such like.

And for the better performance of all these duties, and whatsoever else is
fitting to be required at the hands of this Officer, he ought to be
sufficiently skillful in all the parts of Survey, viz. the Mathematical,
Legal, and Judicial, which sufficiency to obtain, he must be endued with
these several gifts or qualities following.

First, he ought to have the perfect use of some Mathematical Instrument, as
the plain Table, Theodelite, Circumferentor, or such like, fitting for the use
of Survey; and also to be well seen in Arithmetic and the grounds of
Geometry: whereby he may be able as well to find the errors which he may
commit in platting of grounds, or casting up the contents, and amend the same,
as also to prove the truth of his work and to give a reason thereof.

Secondly, he ought to have some ^easonable knowledge in the common Laws,
especially in such general points as are incident unto, and do most concern
a Manor or Lordship: whereby he may be able to know and distinguish the
several tenures, rents, services, Royalties, and such like principal matters
required in a Survey: and to express the same orderly in his Books, Terrars,
Rent-rolls, etc.

Thirdly, he ought to be a reasonable good Clerk, and to have good skill in
evidences of all sorts, as well ancient as modern; to be able to read and
understand the same, whether they be in latin, French, English, or any other
language heretofore used in this land.

Fourthly, he ought to have good skill in the goodness of grounds, and in the
valuation of the profits and commodities growing and arising out of the same,
as Timber, underwoods, Mines, Quarries, etc. as also in the valuation of lands
or casual profits, to be leased, sold, purchased, or exchanged, either present
or in reuersion, either in fee-simple, fee-Farme, upon lives, or term of
years, etc.

And now that we have sufficiently declared the office of a Surueyor, and how
to make choice of him by the qualities he ought to be endued withal; we will
proceed a little further, to show the benefits and commodities that may and
do arise by this Officer executing his place honestly and well: which although
for the most part, they do clearly shine and are manifest in that which we
have before spoken, yet because this Officer of all others belonging to
Reuennue, is hardly thought of, and most calumniated by such as either
understand not what use to make of him, or rather such whose close packing and
secret injuries are by him in danger to be laid open; it shall not be amiss to
explain the profit of his faculty a little better. Wherefore I have here laid
down the principal commodities of a good and absolute Survey, (so far as at
this present my memory will serve me) in these six Articles following, viz.

Inprimis, it is a good means to conserve the Rents and Customs of all
natures from being concealed, left, or decayed: or their natures by evil
disposed Tenants or Officers any way altered or changed.

2 Item, to let, hinder, and avoid encrochments that might be made between
Lord and Lord, Lord and Tenant, and Tenant and Tenant: or being formerly made,
to lay open and discover the same: as also in times to come to decide
controversies that may happen in this and diverse other cases.

3 Item, in letting and setting of lands, in fineing of Coppy-holders, in sale
and exchange, a perfect Survey is able to inform the quality, quantity,
value, tenure, and situation, as well and better then any other view that can
be taken besides. And by perfect Surueyes so taken, the Lord or his
Commissioners sitting quietly at home, may not only themselves assesse fines
upon the leases, and customary estates, but also continually see both how
themselves and their Tenants be dealt withal by their Stewards or other
Officers put in trust for the like matters.

4 Item, to revive decayed Rents, Royalties, etc. and to bring to light
Concealements, forfeitures, and other such like trespasses and injuries.

5 Item, a good Survey is beneficial to the Lord and his posterity, being as
good evidence in law for any matter in controversy, as any other written
Instrument whatsoever of like antiquity.

6 Item, the Plat well made is excellent to explane Evidences concerning the
butting, bounding, and position, of any parcel that shall happen to be in
controversy, especially where the same controversy, or some principle thereof,
depends upon the position; which cannot well be conceived by evidences. And
thus much may suffice for the Office and duty of a Surueyor.

CHAP. 3. Of the learned Steward.
THe learned Steward is also an Officer of order, and as needful in an
honorable estate or Reuennue as any other whatsoever, by whose care and
diligence chiefly the ancient rights, privileges and customs of every
particular Manor, Lordship, Bayliwicke, or Liberty, are to be preserved and
kept, and the casual profits of the same yearly sought out and manifested.

He is by virtue of his Office, to keep duly the Leets and Courts within every
of the Lord his Manors, at the times and places accustomed, as well for the
good government of the Lord his Tenants in their due obedience toward him, as
in the administration of equity and justice among themselves, by inquiring of
all manner of offenses, injuries and trespasses, that are enquirable or
punishable in the said Courts; and such as are there to be reformed by pains,
amerciaments, or such like; to impose the same according to law and equity.

He is also to enquire of, enter, and estreate out unto the Bayliffe, all
manner of casual profits happening and growing due to the Lord of the Manor
by any forfeiture, concealment, escheate, ward, marriage, relief, herriot,
waiue, estray, fellons and outlawes goods, new erections, purprestures,
encrochments, Licenses of all sorts, as for digging clay, Chalk, Marle, etc.
for the passage of some watercourse, for letting and setting of customary
lands for longer term then the custom will bear, etc. as also by the common
fine, head-siluer, green-hewe, or any other such profit enquirable in the Court.

To assesse and extract out reasonably, and according to the custom of the
Manor, the Fines of the customarie Tenants, upon every new admittance; by
Surrender, death, or expiration of term, and to enter orderly upon the Roll
all the several Tenements, Cottages, and parcels of land contained in every
such admittance, with the ancient names, butts, and bounds of the same, and the
yearly Rents and services due therefore: that so the diverse alterations which
may happen by parcelling of lands and Tenements, may at all times plainly and
evidently appear without confusion, which is a matter of great moment and
necessity, though little regarded by most Stewards now a days, who for have,
to cut their business the shorter to their own gain, for the most part,
never butt and bound the parcels granted, nor many times so much as name the
same, or mention the Rents: whereupon it comes to pass that in few years,
not only the Tenements and lands are so mangled and dismembered, as by the
ancient Surueyes, Evidences, and Records, the same cannot possibly be set out
upon any occasion offered: but also the customary is converted to free, and the
Rents, Services, and casual profits thereof quite lost and obscured from the
Lord, besides the infinite troubles and suites that oft*times arise thereof
between the Tenants.

To make out his Extracts of Court bipartite in Parchment indented, delivering
the one part thereof, within one month next after every Court to the Bayliffe,
for him to collect the same, and to send the other part to the Auditor at the
time of the Audite, that so the Bayliffe may be duly charged therewith upon his
account: and also within the compass of the year following, to engrosse the
the Court-Rolls, to remain in the place accustomed, for the use and service of
the Lord and his Tenants.

Now concerning the gifts and qualities wherewith this Officer is to be endued
for the better execution of his place, and by which he is to be made choice of
for his sufficiency therein (honesty and discretion first and chiefly, as well
in him as in all other Officers of Reuennue, being respected) he ought to have
good knowledge and experience in the common laws of this land, thereby to be
able readily to know and distinguish of the authorities, privileges and
jurisdictions of such Courts as are incident and belonging to any Manor,
Liberty, or Franchise, whether the same be Court-Leete, Court Baron, Court of
ancient Demesne, Court of Pypowders, or the like; and to judge and determine of
the several matters, actions, and cases, which may happen, and are properly
enquireable or determinable in every of them. And to this end, it is good to
make choice of such a man as has been brought up at some of the Innes of
Court or Chauncerie, or has practiced as a Solicitor, Atorney or Councellor at
law, whereby he has gained good experience.

He must also be a good Orator, to be able orderly, distinctly, and
sufficiently to deliver a good and substantial charge to the Jurors, of such
matters as are to be enquired of and presented before him, and to expound the
law to them in cases needful.

He ought moreover, to be a good Clerk, to be able thereby to make good
Court-Rolls, and to enter orderly in the same all matters presented before him,
as Essoynes, defaults of apparences both of free and customarie Tenants,
deaths, alienations and devises of freehold-lands, which are things very
necessary to be enquired of in a Court Baron; (though for the most part now
adays neglected) for that when any Freeholder alieneth any parcel of his
Freehold-land to a stranger, or by his will deuiseth the same to diverse
persons, there the Lord has an increase of his Free Tenants, and of their
services, Wards, Reliefes, and such like; which are oftentimes quite lost for
want of such presentiments: as also deaths, alienations, and surrenders of
Customarie Tenants, with Encrochments, Purprestures, Waiues, Estrayes, Rescous,
Pleas of Court, Actions, Trespasses, and all other casualties and profits
presented.

CHAP. 4. Of the Office and duty of a Solicitor, and how to make choice of him.
THe Solicitor is likewise an Officer of Order, whose Office chiefly (in
matters of Reuennue, which only in this place we purpose to entreat of) is to
see that such Privileges, Customs, Rents, Services, Debts, and profits to the
Lord, which are to be revived, reestablished, or recovered by course of Law,
and of which he shall be informed by the Surueyor, Auditor, Steward, or other
Officer of authority, be duly and with best conuenience put in suite, and
diligently and carefully followed to the best advantage of the Lord.

To see that such Patents, Charters, Graunts, Feoffments, Deeds, Leases, and
other Evidences, whereby any Lands, Annuities, or other profits of Reuennue, are
to be assured to the Lord, or whereby any ancient Privileges, Customs,
Services, or such like, are to be revived and established, be formally drawn
and perused by skillful Council, to the intent the same may be good and
effectual in Law, to all such intents and purposes as they ought to be made.

These are the principal matters concerning Reuennue, which the Solicitor has
to look unto, and to be able to perform the same, he ought to be such a one
as has been trained up to the profession under some Councellor, Attorney, or
other Officer belonging to the Laws, or else some one which by following of
diverse causes has gained good experience, how to order his Affairs in every
several Court both Ecclesiastical and Temporal.

He ought also to be a good Clerk, and to be able to read and understand all
sorts of ancient Evidences, whereby he may the better declare unto Counsel the
effect of his causes, and also be able to make out Breuiates of such cases as
are in controversy, as well for the better information and memory of Counsel,
as for help of the Judges at the times of hearing.

And lastly, he ought to be conversant and well acquainted in all the Offices,
where the Records of every Court are kept, whereby to know where to search for
such Records as shall be needful in every cause, and to know the Fees of every
Officer and Minister in each Court upon every occasion and business that may
happen, and thus much of these Officers of Order.

CHAP. 5. Of the Office of the Bayliffe, Collector, etc.
THe Bayliffe is an Officer of Charge, belonging to some Manor, Lordship,
Franchize, or Liberty, whose Office principally is to collect and gather up
yearly at the Feasts and times of Payment due and accustomed, as well the Rents
of the Freeholders, Coppyholders, Feefarmers, Leaseholders, and Tenants at
Will; as also the Fines, Amerciaments, pains and profits of Courts, Waiues,
Estrayes, Fellons goods, Herriots, Reliefes, and all other casual profits
happening within his Charge, and yearly at the Audit to account for the same.

To take Distresses, to make Seizures and Re-entries to the Lords use, for
nonpayment of Rent, or upon other occasions when he shall be thereunto required
by the Auditor, Steward, or other Officer of Authority.

To summon the Lords Tenants that owe Suite and Service to his Courts, to
appear and give their attendance at the said Courts, whenever they shall be
appointed to be held, and to serve all manner of Precepts, Warrants, and
Process granted by the Steward in the Courts of the Manor, or by the Auditor
on the behalf of the Lord.

And note, that in some Manors the Office of the Bayliffe, as it is here
generally set down, is executed by two or three particular Officers besides
the Bayliffe, according to the custom of the said Manor. For in some places
there is one Officer which does only collect the Rents of Assize of the Free
and Customarie Tenants and no more, yearly making his Account to the Auditor
for the same; and this Officer is in some places called a Reeue, and in some
places a Grave, being always one of the Customarie Tenants of the Manor, an
Annual Officer changing every year, and bound to perform the Service by the
tenure of his Land.

Another serves to collect the casual profits yearly happening, as Fines,
Amerciaments, Herriots, etc. who also is always a Tenant of the Manor,
yearly chosen at the Court-Leete, or Court Baron, according to the Custom of
the Manor.

These Officers ought to be honest and trusty, of good discretion, ability,
and conversation; and it is fitting that the Bayliffe (whether he be an Officer
for life, or during pleasure) should put in good sureties for answering the
Lord his Rents and profits: for the other there needs no such matter, for if
they be delinquent it is a Forfeiture of their Customarie estates, which is
Security good enough.

As concerning other qualities, it were fitting they should be able to write
and read, whereby to make perfect Notes and Bills to the Auditor of the
particulars of their Accounts, that so they may be the less troublesome to him
in his Audits: and for all other matters they are to take direction, as
occasion shall serve, from the Steward, Auditor, Surueyor, or other Officer of
Authority.

CHAP. 6. Of the Office and duty of the Woodward.
THe Wood-ward is also an Officer of Charge, unto whose care and trust, the
custody of the Lords Woods, and Receipt of the profits arising out of the
same, are chiefly committed.

He is therefore carefully to look to the preservation of the Lords Woods, and
Underwoods within his charge, and to the well Fencing of such of them as are
enclosed, that the same be not spoiled or wasted, by breaking or putting in of
hurtful Cattle too soon after every fall, before the young stuff be grown
past danger, or by cutting and hewing thereof at all times by lewd and
disordered people, which if they be not carefully looked unto, are wont to
steal Rods, Poles, Fuel, and such like, out of men's grounds, and especially
the Lords Woods, upon the wastes and elsewhere.

To see that the Woodfalls be made at seasonable times, for the more speedy
renewing and growing again to the best advantage of the Lord, and at every
felling, to have special care of the shredding and cutting of Timber Trees,
that in doing the same the bodies be not spoiled and made to die, rot, or
corrupt, by the evil and unseasonable cutting of the Branches.

To make Sale of the Timber and underwood at such times as are fitting, and
when they shall be thereunto required, with good discretion, and to the Lords
best advantage, and to account yearly to the Auditor, not only for the felled
Timber and Underwood, but also for the tops of the Timber Trees, for the blown
Wood, and for the Herbage, Agistament, Pannage, and all other profits made of
the Lords Woods, and of the Soil of them.

To see that such Leasees as do hold any of the Lords Woods for term of
years, do not sell or cut down the same, but at seasonable and convenient
times, neither that they cut down and take away any more then is contained in
their Leases, and to see that they look to the Fencing and preservation of the
young Spring after each fall, and do in all things according as by their
Covenants they are bound to do.

To execute with good discretion, and to the Lords best advantage, such
Warrants as shall come unto him from the Lord or his Commissioners, for Timber
for the repayring of Houses, Bridges, Parke-pales, or such like: and finally,
to be careful in the due execution of his place, in all other things that may
concern the same.

Now to be able to perform all these duties, he ought to have good skill and
judgment in all these kinds of Commodities, the want whereof is often the
cause that some of them sell such good penyworths, as do much enrich the
buyer, and as much endamage the Lord: He must therefore be able to give a near
estimate in standing Woods, what numof Cord wood, Billet, Fagots, and Bauens,
one Acre with another does contain; and likewise for Tumber-trees, to know
what quantity both of Timber and Fuel each Tree will make, that so he may
apprize the same accordingly, otherwise he may often be ouer-reached by a
cunning Buyer.

And for the better performance of his Office, it were very fitting that he
should have very good knowledge in measuring of Timber, both round and
standing, as also felled and squared; and above all, that he be very honest and
conscionable, to account truly for the profits of his place: And thus much may
suffice concerning this Officer.

I might in this place bring in the Offices of Warreners, Clerks of
Iron-workes, Lead-workes, Coale-mynes, Quarries, and such other profits of
Reuennue accomptable to the Auditor; which I purposely omit, as well for
breuities sake, as also for that nothing is or can be required either in the
orderly performance of their places, or in the choice of them (skilfulnes only
in the Commodity they are to deal withal excepted) more then Mutatis
mutandis, has been showed in the rest.

CHAP. 7. Of the Office and duty of the Storer.
THe Storer is an Officer accomptable to the Auditor, who has in Charge all
such Demesnes of Pasture, Meadow, Arrable, and other Lands, as are peculiarly in
the Lords own Occupation, with the Stock thereupon employed: and his Office
principally is to show the profits that are made of the same, as of Corn,
Cattle, Fell-wooll, and such other Commodities: which Officer in mean men's
estates is termed the Bayliffe of the Husbandry.

This Officer is to ouersee the Husbandmen, that they do their duties in the
Manuring and Tilling of the Lords grounds, at fit and convenient seasons; to
provide of the best Corn for seed, and to see the same carefully and
profitably bestowed, in such grounds as are fittest therefore; to look to the
preservation of the Carts, Waines, Ploughs, and all such other Instruments and
Implements of Husbandry, and to see the same repaired when they are out of
order; to see that the Husbandmen have care, in the feeding and dressing of
their Teemes and working Cattle, and to look to the repayring and amending of
the fences, hedges, and ditches of the grounds in his charge, and all such
other matters belonging to Husbandry.

To see the Hay and Corn of all sorts, renewing, growing, and increasing upon
the Lords grounds, carefully and seasonably Inned: and after, at convenient
times Threshed out, sold and delivered to the Lord his use, and to keep true
reckoning of the same from time to time, until he have perfected his Account
before the Auditor.

To see that the Herds, Shepherds, and such other Hindes, as have the
custody of the Lords Cattle and flocks, do their true endeauours and duties
in the feeding, curing, and preservation of the same, and to keep true Account
of them from time to time, as well of what comes into the Stock, as Cattle
bred, bought, and received, (viz. Herriots, Waiues, Estrayes, Felons goods,
Presents, and such like) as of what goes out of the same: as Cattle sold,
delivered to the use of the Lords house, or otherwise by Warrant; Cattle dead,
lost, stolen, or such like; entreating the same orderly in a Book, each under
his proper title, that they may plainly appear to the Auditor, upon his
Account without confusion.

To set down in his said Book, the the true rates and prises of all such
Cattle, as shall be bought or sold by him, within the compass or time of his
Account, with the times and places, when and where the same were bought and
sold, and the age and quality of the Cattle, as also to rate and apprize all
such Cattle, as he has delivered to the Lords use, or by his Command, at
such rates and prizes, as they were reasonably worth in the Market at the time
of their delivery: that so the yearly profit of the Lords Demesnes, and
grounds employed with Stock, may the more plainly appear upon every Account.

This Officer, as concerning his qualities, ought to have good skill in all
manner of Husbandry, and in Cattle, Corn, and Grain of all sorts; as also,
to be perfect in buying and selling every Commodity belonging to his Charge,
and careful and honest in the execution of his place.

CHAP. 8. Of Receivers, both general and particular.
THe Receivers general and particular, being likewise Officers of Charge,
differ not much in the manner of execution of their places, neither indeed is
there any need of particular Receivers but only in great Reuennues, where the
Lords lands and profits lie dispersed in many and far distant places, and
Countries: And therefore of them in general.

They are for the due execution of their Offices, to keep their Receipts twice
in the year, at times and places convenient, and to give warning and notice to
the Bailiffs, Collectors, Farmers, and other Ministers, to bring in to those
places, the Lords Rents, and other profits due at those times.

To receive and take Charge of the Lords monyes at the Audite and Receipts, and
to see the same safely conveyed to such places, where the Lord has use thereof.

To keep perfect Abstracts of all the Lords certain Rents, especially of the
Farmers, and Leaseholders, whereby they may call to such Ministers as are to
pay them in, if they be slack in their payments.

To keep also perfect Notes and Abstracts of all Rents resolute, Annuities,
Pentions, Stipends, Salaries, Fees, Wages, and other certain payments, yearly
by them payable, and issuing out of the Lords lands, by virtue of any Patent,
Grant, or other certain assurance in being, and out of controversy; and to
make payment of the same, at the due and accustomed times, taking good and
effectual Acquittances and discharges therefore, to the use, and on the
behalf of the Lord.

To pay out unto the Steward of the household, and other Officers of expense,
as also to all Creditors, Tradesmen, and others, to the Lords use, all such
sums of money as by the Lords Warrant, he shall be appointed to deliver,
taking of them sufficient Acquittances for discharge of the same, on the Lords
behalf.

To keep perfect and formal Books of all their doings for the Lord; both in
Receipts, and Disbursments, and to Account for the same yearly to the Auditor.

These are the principal things belonging to the Office of Receivers, both
general and particular, which to perform, there is no great skill or
extraordinary sufficiency required, only they ought to be of ability,
whereby to put in good security for the due answering of the Lords moneys,
and profits, that shall come to their hands: also, they must be of good
discretion in the disposing of their businesses and payments, that the Lord be
not to seek of his moneys, when any extraordinary and sudden occasion shall
happen: and chiefly of all, they ought to be exceeding honest and conscionable,
for that many sums of money, both come to their hands and go out also, which
the Auditor cannot charge them with, nor give them allowance of, but upon their
own voluntary acknowledgement and confession.

And thus have we briefly described the duties of all the most necessary
Officers of Receipt belonging to an Honorable estate: and now we will proceed
to the Steward of the house, being the sole Officer of expense accomptable to
the Auditor, as concerning matter of Reuennue.

CHAP. 9. Of the Office and duty of the Steward of the Household.
THe Steward of the house, is the principal Officer of expense, in the due
execution of whose place many Oeconomicall precepts concerning the well
ordering of an honorable Family, might be considered, which here according to
my former propounded method, I purposely omit; and will only touch such
matters as do most depend upon Reuennue, for which he is charged and
accomptable to the Auditor, which are the monyes to him delivered by the
Receivers, and others, for the expense of the Lords Household, as also the
Beeues, Muttons, Corn, and grain of all sorts, Wood, Coals, and all other
provisions and Commodities received from the Storer, Woodward, Bayliffe,
Warriner, or other Officer of Charge belonging to Reuennue, all which
notwithstanding they be delivered to the peculiar Officers of expense, to whose
place they belong, yet the Steward is to have the oversight of them, and to
keep Account both of their Receipt and expense.

He is therefore to see to the delivery, and apprizing of all such Commodities
and provisions as are delivered in, from the Storer, Warriner, or other
Officer, for expense of the Lords Household; that the Rates be reasonable, and
according to the Market at the time of their delivery.

To call to Account weekly, or at the most monthly, all the inferior Officers
of expense: as the Gentleman of the Horse, Clerk of the Kitchen, Keeper of the
Granarie, Brewer, Baker, Butler, Pantler, and all others which have any Charge
of provision to account for, and to see that every of them do execute his place
frugally and without waste.

To keep fair and orderly Books, as well of the weekly or monthly Accounts
of all the foresaid Officers, as also, of all other his own Receipts and
Disbursments, entering in the same each particular, in his due and convenient
place, and under his proper title, that all things may appear without
confusion: and finally, to account unto the Auditor honestly and justly at the
end of every year.

Now concerning the qualities wherewith this Officer is to be furnished, much
might be said, if I should enter into Oeconomicall affairs, but to avoid
tediousnes, and to wade no farther then my first intent, I say, that it is
fitting this Officer should be of honest life and conversation, whereby to show
good example to others; of good ability and reputation, whereby to curb and
keep under stubborn and disordered spirits of inferior place and rank; and
also grave, wise and discreet, whereby to dispose and order the business
committed to his Charge, and to govern the Lords Family in honorable and
laudable fashion: And thus much may suffice concerning this Officer and all
other of expense; from whom we will proceed to the Auditor our last, yet not
least Officer of Order.

CHAP. 10. Of the Office and duty of the Auditor.
THe Auditor is an Officer of Order, and of all others belonging to Reuennue,
one of the principal and most necessary; for that by him the doings of all
the former, are ouerlooked and examined to the Lords profit: in which respect
this Officer represents the Lord his own person, and ought to have more
special authority conferred upon him then any of the former.

He is by virtue of his Office yearly to take and examine the particular
Accounts of all and singular the Officers and Ministers of Charge aforesaid
(except such as are accomptable to the Steward of the house) and to see that
all manner of profits, wherewith any of them are to be charged, be duly and
orderly collected and answered.

To enter duly in the Accounts so taken, all such material changes and
alterations as may happen in the Rents, tenures, and Tenants names, either by
Escheate, new Purchase, Sale, determination of estate, improuement, decay, or
any the like accident, that the same may evidently appear upon every occasion
without confusion.

To see that the casual expenses and Bills of Charges yearly brought in by
the Bayliffe, and other Accomptants, to be allowed for Court Dinners, keeping
of Strayes, repayring of the Pinfold, and such like, be reasonable and fitting,
and where they are excessive, unfitting, or unnecessary, to diminish or
disallow the same.

Note, that in great estates, this and many other such casual matters and
expenses are left to the consideration and disposing of the Commissioners
appointed for the ordering of the Reuennue, and there the Auditor of himself
has not this power of allowing or disallowing, but by consent and approbation
of the said Commissioners, and by Bill signed with their hands.

To make declaration of the said Accounts to the Lord, within short space after
the taking of the same, and within the compass of the year next following, to
engrosse them fair and in good order, to remain to the Lord and his
posterity.

To take notice, and keep true Accounts of all Arrerages of Rents, or other
profits that may happen, and to charge the Accomptants with them from year to
year, until they may be levied and answered: as also, to acquaint the Lord or
his Solicitor with such decayed Royalties, privileges, and Customs, as are
fitting to be revived, or re-established, and with such arrerages of Rents and
Debts as are to be recovered by Law, and to see that the same be put in Suite
with the best conuenience whiles they are recouerable.

To enroll fair and in a Book made for the same purpose, all the Leases,
Patents, and other Graunts yearly made by the Lord or his Commissioners,
thereby upon any occasion to be able to give the Lord satisfaction, as well of
the particulars of the thing leased or granted, as of the end and
determination of the same.

Now this Officer, in respect of the qualities he is to be endued withal, for
the better and more sufficient execution of his place, ought first and
especially, to be honest, free from corruption, and careful in all his
dealings.

He must be trained up in the faculty of an Auditor: whereby he may be able
orderly to draw down out of the Books of Survey, Rent-rols, and other the
Lords Evidences, perfect viewes, and Accounts, as well Receivers as Ministers,
of every several Lordship, Manor, Rectorie, Farm, Bayliwicke, Liberty, and
such like, duly distinguished the Rents and profits yearly happening, and the
reprises and deductions yearly going out, each under his proper title, and in
his due place and form.

He ought also to be a good Clerk, to write a fair hand, and to have the
perfect and ready use of his Counter, to be of good understanding, pregnant
wit, and good apprehension, thereby the better to look into the doings of such
Accomptants, as he shall have to deal withal, and to find out the shifts,
tricks, and deceipts, of such as are evil disposed: and finally, he ought to
be of good experience and sufficient practice, in all matters concerning his
faculty: which he being, and executing his place honestly, and with judgment,
the profits that will arise to the Lord by this Officer are great, and more
then suddenly can be drawn to memory: some of the principal whereof,
notwithstanding as a taste of the rest, I have here set down in these
Articles following.

1 Inprimis, an estate well ordered by a skillful Auditor, gives great ease
and comfort to the Lord of the same, and helps to improve it self: for that
every small profit is continually in the Lords eye; which in estates ill
managed, (by men of no skill in Auditorie) are often, and for the most part,
either quite concealed, or altogether neglected.

2 Item, a skillful Auditor, in keeping due account of arrerages of Rents,
amerciaments, fines, and such other profits, is not only the means to make the
Bailiffs, Collectors, and other Ministers careful to omit nothing of their
duties, but also to keep disordred Tenants in the better obedience: for where
there is no Auditor at all, or one that is remiss and of no skill, many
casual profits, especially amerciaments are utterly lost, by the neglect of
Ministers, and for want of careful looking unto, which very thing is a great
cause of disorder among the worst sort of Tenants, animating them, as well to
neglect their services and duties to the Lord, as to commit injuries and
trespasses, one against another, by hedgbreaking, wood-stealing, breaking into
Pastures, and Corn, with their Cattle, and such like: all which, if these
amerciaments were duly imposed, leauied, and answered, would be more carefully
looked unto and avoided.

3 Item, an Auditors account, is good Evidence to plead in Court, for the
holding or re-obtaining of any Rents, Royalties, Customs, Services,
Privileges, Franchises, or such like, formerly in possession, and after lost
by neglect or otherwise.

CHAP. 11. The Conclusion, showing the order how to govern an honorable
estate, by the Officers aforesaid: and in small estates, how to contract them
to the Lords best advantage,
Having before sufficiently declared the several duties of each particular
Officer and Minister of Reuennue; together with the qualities every of them
ought to be endued withal, for the better and more effectual performance and
execution of their several places, and Offices, it rests now only to show
and set down, a little more plainly, the dependence that one Office has of
another, and thereby the order of governing an honorable estate by them, and
how every particular profit of Reuennue may be brought in charge, and duly
collected, and answered to the Lords best advantage: wherein, for our better
proceeding, we will comprehend al profits of Land-Reuennue, under these two
general heads, Certain and Casual.

All Certain profits of Land-Reuennue are enquirable by the Surueyor, and by
him to be certified, and expressed in his Books of Survey, as Rents of
Freeholders, of customarie Tenants, of the Demesnes and Lease-lands, of
Tenants at will, of herbage, and agistament, of Parkes, Woods, Forests, etc. of
Mills and Mulcture, of Mines, Quarries, and such like: of all manner of
Royalties; as Fishing, Fowling, Hawking, Hunting, Free Warren, and such other:
Also, all manner of mouable Rents, as Hay, and Corn, Eggs, Hens, Geese, and
the like: And lastly, all Rents of Scruices and customs, being certain, as
for Licenses of all sorts, common Fine, release of Suite of Court, head-siluer,
green-hew, and such other. Out of which said Books of Survey, being fair
engrossed and made authentical by Evidence therein certified, and the Iuries
hands thereunto subscribed; a brief Abstract, and Suite-Roll, is to be made,
and delivered to the learned Steward, whereby he may not only call the Tenants
to do their Suite and Service at the Lords Courts, but also be directed by
value of the lands how to assesse Fines upon Coppyholders, and the like. Then
also a perfect Rent roll is to be made out, and delivered unto the Bayliffe,
whereby he may collect, and gather up the said certain profits, and account
for them yearly to the Auditor, as before has been said. Lastly, the Books
themselves are to be delivered unto the Auditor, that out of them he may draw
down, and make out the viewes of his Ministers accounts, and then to redeliuer
them to the said Surueyor, to remain in his custody for the use of the Lord
or his Commissioners, in letting of Leases, and such other occasions.

The Casual profits of Reuennue, are either enquirable by the learned Steward
in his Courts, or by the Auditor, at the time of his Audit.

Casual profits, enquirable by the Steward, are Herriots, Reliefes, Wards and
Marriages, Forfeitures, Waiues, Estrayes, Fellons and Outlawes goods, Fines upon
admittances of customary Tenants, fines upon Licenses, purprestures, and new
erections; amerciaments, and pains for default of suite of Court, mending,
scowring, and clensing of Fences, Ditches, and Highwaies, Rescous,
Pound*breach, and other like trespasses, nusances, and offenses Escheats,
Pleas, and Process of Courts, Fraies, bloudsheds, and the like; All these the
Steward is to extract out, to the several Bayliffes or other Ministers,
appointed to collect and leauie the same, and to return the duplicate of the
said Extracts to the Auditor, as before has been expressed. And it is fitting
that such of them, as are laid down in Court, the Receiver or Bayliffe should
be present, to take them up to the Lords use, and not to commit them to the
Stewards charge, least by that means he purse the small ones to his own
profit, and never account for the same, as fines of License of Brewing, digging
of gravel, sand, chalk, clay, and such like.

Casual profits enquirable, by the Auditor only, are profits of Faires,
Markets, and such like; wood-sales, Agistament and Pawnage; profits of the
wastes and Moors, as sale of Heath, Turfes, Peate, Sand, Gravel, Marle,
Chalk, Clay, and all other profits being casual, and not elsewhere
enquirable: In exacting of which accounts, the Auditor had need be very
circumspect, and the Collectors, of the same very honest, for that commonly
these are businesses committed to the sole trust and disposing of one man, both
to sell, and to account for the same, who if he be not honest and conscionable,
may yearly defraude the Lord of a great part thereof; but the Auditor, if he be
wise and circumspect, may both find out the falsehood, and take order to
prevent the same.

These Rents and profits, both certain and casual, being duly collected by
the Officers and Ministers thereunto appointed, ought at every half years end,
(or sooner if occasion require) to be paid unto the Lords Receiver, who upon
the receipt thereof, ought to give his Acquittance to the Minister which pays
them, as for so much by him received, of the issues and profits of his Office
for that year: and at the years end the said Minister upon the determination
of his account, shall deliver unto the Auditor the said Acquittance, whereby to
charge the Receiver with the monyes received, and shall for his own discharge,
take out a Quietus est for that years account under the Auditors hand.

All the Ministers thus having accounted, the Auditot shall call the Receivers,
charging them, as well by their said Acquittances, as by the viewes, of the
Ministers accounts, their own confession, and such other notes, as shall come
to his hands for that year; and they for their discharge, shall produce the
Lords Warrants, and the Acquittances of such persons, to whom they have paid
any money; as also the bills of al charges and expenses, by them that year
disbursed, signed with the Lord or his Commissioners hands: all which, upon the
determination of their accounts, they shall also leave with the Auditor, as well
for his warrantie of their said accounts; as for the more effectual charging
of the Steward of the house, and all other persons, which are to account for
monyes imprested by warrant or otherwise, accepting likewise of a Quietus est
under the Auditors hand for their own discharge. And thus shall the said
Auditors proceed, from accomptant to accomptant, as they depend one upon
another, until he have finished with them all: which being done, he shall make
out his Declaration of the whole years business, as before has been said,
bipartite indented, and declare the same before the Lord or his Commissioners,
who shall sign the one part thereof, to remain with the Auditor for his
discharge; the other part thereof, the said Auditor and Commissioners shall
sign, to remain to the use of the Lord.

But here me thinks, I hear some object, that the ordering of an estate
after this manner (being it requires so many Officers) will be too chargeable
for most men, and therefore not to be put in execution, but only by such as
have very great estates. To such I thus answer.

It is not so much the multiplicitie of Officers, that is required in the well
managing of an estate, as the order and method to be used in the placing, and
appointing of those Officers: for there is no man of ability, but has, and is
at charge with so many as serves his turn after his own manner, which number
would also (out of doubt) do it in the form heretofore described, the
Auditor only excepted, whose place the Lord himself in small estates, for the
most part, executes (and may well perform the same if he have leisure, and be
skillful, but that few are, and thereby ensues the most loss) therefore to
come to the matter, and to show how in small estates, with sewest number of
Officers, and least expense, an honorable Reuennue may be well ordered, these
two rules must be precisely observed.

First, that none of the Officers of order be wanting (the Surueyor only
excepted, who having once in the beginning perfected his Surueyes, there is
small use of him for many years after, so there be a skillful Auditor, and a
learned Steward) and these Officers of order, need be no great charge to any
Lord, for that one man may serve to manage diverse Lords estates, having no
further dependence upon any of them, but only a reasonable yearly Fee allowed
for his pains, which if they be skillful and honest, their diligence shall in
surplussage bring in, with advantage, and ease the Lord of much labor and
unquietness. And the more nearly to contract these Officers of order, one man
may supply both the places of learned Steward and Solicitor; and another, being
capable thereof, may supply the places of Surueyor and Auditor: and of this
Officer (the Auditor I mean) I would wish no Lord to be destitute, for where
the Lord himself takes the accounts of his Officers of charge, except he be
very skillful and painful also, although his estate be but small, yet for
want of this Officer he may well lose twice so much in the year (either by
negligence and corruption of Ministers, or by want of skill to examine their
doings) as would fee a good Auditor to do the same: Yet let him also be
careful in the choice of his Auditor, for many now a days take upon them,
both the name and place of Auditors, and yet are very ignorant in the due
execution of that Office.

Secondly, it must be duly observed, that no one man be put to execute Offices
of order, and Offices of charge both together, as Auditor and Receiver, Auditor
and Steward of the house, learned Steward and Receiver, Bayliffe, Woodward, or
such like: much less that the managing of an estate, should wholly, or for the
most part, be committed to the charge of one particular man: for in both these
cases, it may easily be perceived, what great means and strong temptations
they have (if they be not of exceeding honesty and good conscience) secretly
to enrich themselves, by the loss and hinderance of the Lord; or at the best,
what danger of losing many profits, by neglect, or for want of skill to prevent
the same. And yet it is seen in most men's estates of the meaner rank, that
one man has the governing of all, both for order and charge; and he for the
most part, of no further skill, then to set down confusedly his receipts, on
the one part, and his disbursments on the other, and so by comparing them to
find the difference: whereby also the Lord has no other declaration of his
doings, but the said confused account, in which all things for the most part
come in in gross; and the profits of many Manors, and disbursments of sundry
natures, are so mingled together, as they can neither for the present, nor in
aftertimes, upon any occasion that may happen, be distinguished, nor the Lord
see whether he have right or wrong.

But to conclude, although it be not fitting, that one man should execute both
Offices of order and of charge, nor that the whole should be committed to one
particular person: yet may these Offices of charge also in small estates be
conferred upon a few persons; for one man may be general Receiver, and Steward
of the house; another may supply the places of Bayliffe, Wood-ward, Storer, and
as many other Offices of charge as he is able to execute: and in this manner
the Lord is in most possibility to have all his profits truly answered, and
narrowly looked unto; where not only every small matter is taken notice of, by
two or three several Officers; but also every Officer of charge, is to give
account of the profits he receives, and the Officers of order meddle no
further, but to charge and discharge the moneys by the other received, to
search out the profits of Reuennue, and to see that each Officer of charge, do
execute his place with honesty and diligence.

And thus have I, in the best and briefest manner I can, described the well
ordering of an honorable Reuennue: wherein, in what I have failed, I submit my
self to the reformation of the more judicious: thus much by the way inferring,
that I have not in all points exactly followed the order and course observed in
the managing of the Royal estate of our Sovereign; who besides
Land-Reuennues, has many other, and great profits, yearly coming in by his
Subjects, (not here spoken of) the most of which are returnable into his
Majesty's Exchequer, where they are handled and ordered, by those great
Masters of Art and judgment in these faculties, from whom I acknowledge to
have received that little skill and experience which I have. What here is set
down, is drawn from them, and applied to the use of the Subjects in their
smaller Reuennues, which I leave to the consideration of all such, whom it may
concern, and who have hitherto lost, by ill ordering of their Estates.

FINIS.

