THREE PROFITABLE SERMONS.

1. A Pastoral Charge. 2. Christ's Larum-bell. 3. The Souls Sentinel.
Preached at several times upon sundry occasions, BY RICHARD CARPENTER Pastor
of Sherwill in Devon.



LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for Francis Constable, at the white Lion in
Paul's Churchyard. 1617.

A PASTORAL CHARGE.

Faithfully given and discharged, at the Trienniall Visitation of the Lord
Bishop of EXON: holden in BARNSTAPLE the seventh of September, 1616.

By Richard Carpenter Pastor of Sherwill in Devon.

1. TIM. 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self and unto teaching, continue therein,
for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.

Bern. sermon. 77. in Cantica. O vtin am omnes qui alacres currunt ad Cathedram
tam vig il^s reperirentur ad curam.

Greg 2ae. part. past. cu cap 7. Tunc semen verbi fa^ile germinat quando hoc in
pectore audientis piet as praedicantis rigat.

LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for FRANCIS CONSTABLE dwelling at the white
Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of
EXON: the increase of Grace and Peace in this life, and the complete happiness
of that to come.
Right Reverend,
TO whom should this Sermon preached by a Reverend man of your Diocese upon
your iniunction, and countenanced by your Honorable presence and patient
attention, have recourse for patronage but only to your Lordship; to whom for
many respects it does especially belong. Which having gained from the Author by
much entreaty, I was (after the reading thereof) so full and pregnant of the
birth, that I could bear no longer, but must needs bring forth the same, and
lay it in the lap of Gods children. In doing whereof albeit I had no warrant or
allowance from the Author, yet I presume that herein I shall the better
satisfy him, because I have made so good choice of dedicating it unto you.
Whom he is bound (as I have heard him profess) not only in duty to honor,
but in affection to love for many respectfull favors and encouragements
vouchsafed unto him in his Ministry. In whose behalf, as an unfeigned
well-willer of his, I cannot but be humbly thankful unto your Lordship; and in
token thereof do in all dutiful submission, consecrate to your survey and
service these his ministerial labors, this paper-present, and spiritual
gift, in steed of some more sightly oblation: hoping that it will be as
acceptable unto your Lordship, being now wout alteration truly presented to
your eyes, as it was not long since being without affectation plainly
delivered unto your ears. And so using no other olive branch of intercession
but the vowed sacrifice of thankful devotion, submitting the premises to
your favorable construction, and committing your Lordship to the Almighties
gracious protection, I humbly take my leave; resting ever pressed to be proved,
what (though unknown) I desire to be accounted,

Your Lordships in all Christian obseruancy truly devoted, R. C.
London the 18 of September 1616.
A PASTORAL Charge.
ACT. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock,
whereof the Holy Ghost has made you overseers to feed the Church of God which
he has purchased with his own blood.
THe Church of God and Spouse of Christ, (right Reverend, right worshipful,
and worthily regarded) is by the princely Preacher Solomon Cant. 6. 3. rightly
Cant. 6. 3.
termed and entitled, Castrorum acies ordinata, an army well marshalled, where
every company has his Captain, and both Captains and companies under one
chief commanding General Christ lesus, are well and wisely ordered. For the
preservation of which order by the corruption of times much decayed, and for
the reformation of such enomorties as in the declining ages of the world have
greatly increased, not only oecumenicall Counsels for whole Christendom, and
national Synods for several Regions and Countries have been constituted and
ordained, but also Episcopal Visitations for peculiar Diocesses, and
particular Countries, have been appointed, kept, and observed. Of all which
visitations and convocations of the Clergy, howsoever some supercilious
Critickes either preiudicating the sincerity, or vnder-valuing the
sufficiency, or maligning the superiority of Church-gouernours, have too
peremptorily concluded what Saint Paul once and but once 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor.
11. 17.
affirmed of the Corinthian assemblies, that they met together (...), not for
the better but for the worse, not for the grace and emolument, but for the
dis-esteeme and detriment of and detriment of the Church and Churchmen too:
yet the discreet and godly wise, not transported by passion, or sinister
suggestion, both know and acknowledge that as the use of them has somerimes
been and ought always to be wholesome and profitable, either ad medelam, to
cure the maladies, or ad cautela^, to prevent misheifes in the body
Ecclesiastical; so the authority of them is and certainly has been most
ancient and excellent and immediately grounded upon practice Apostolical,
viz: upon the practice of the blessed Apostle S. Paul recorded in Act: 15. 36.
and Act 15 36.
and in the 17 verse of this 20 Chapter, whence my text is taken, where S. Paul
is said to have summoned and called together the Elders or Ministers of Ephesus
in Asia, to whom when they came (as they came willingly and obediently,
reuerencing the graces of God in him) he made a grave and vehement Oration.
Wherein he declares the integrity of his humble and harmles conversation
amongst them, the painfulnes which he endured, and faithfulness which he used
to testify the gospel of grace, and to show the whole counsel of God unto
them, the constant resolution which he had to fulfill his course, and the
ministration received with joy, whatsoever dangers or difficulties might befall
him, and the certainty of his departure never to see them more: after which
departing wolves should enter into the flock and seek to devour them. From
the due consideration of all which premises, as President (if I may so say) of
that convocation, he commends unto the care of the Pastors assembled the good
government and incolumitie of the Churches, and earnestly presses upon their
consciences the most necessary duties of their calling in this pithy and
powerful exhortation, Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the
flock etc. which words being the select subject of that discourse which upon
your iniunction (right Reverend Father) I am this day to commend to your
christian consideration (right well-beloued brethren) seems not unlike the
sound of a loud claryon or voice of a shrill trumpet able to move those that
are musing, to rouse those that are slumbring, to awake those that are
sleeping, and is in effect as if in more words the Apostle had thus
pathetically and emphatically expressed his meaning, and excited the Pastors of
Ephesus, and in them all Ministers of the Gospel to the more watchfulnes,
diligence and faithfulness in their calling. My brethren, friends, and
fellowlabourers, Paraphr: T^^:
so it is that I must now depart from you without hope of ever visiting you
again, and I protest before you (such is my confidence to God-wards, and the
clearenes of my conscience witnessing for me) that I have opened to you the
whole will of God concerning the salvation of mankind, and the true way to life
everlasting, and have been wanting to you in nothing (oh that all Prelates and
Pastors could truly say the like) I have with sincerity and sedulitie done,
with meeknes and humility suffered whatsoever to the uttermost of my power and
patience and grace given to me might be suffered or done, to publish the
purity and to promote the peace and prosperity of the precious gospel
preached amongst you. And now since I can be no longer present to instruct,
counsel, comfort and encourage you, therefore in the bowels of Christ Jesus I
earnestly beseech you to supply by your own extraordinary care and diligence
whatsoever may be wanting through my absence. Watch, stand 1. Cor. 16. 13. 1.
Pet. 1. 13.
fast in the faith, gird up the loins of your mind, quit your selves like
men, be zealous in the way and work of the Lord, and jealous over your selves
with a godly jealousy, Take heed to your selves, make sure work for your own
souls, that ye be not corrupted or seduced, and take the like care and
thought with an equal bent and extent of good will and affection for the
flock, the whole flock, whereof (not the authority of man, or power of Angels,
or any private spirit of your own, but) the Holy Spirit of God has made you
overseers; suffer not this flock, or any part thereof to pine for want of
spiritual provision to be wandering, wounded, wearied, wronged, but see that it
be fed, refreshed, cherished, preserved: For hereunto are ye called, not to be
loyterers but laborers, not to be idle speculators, but painful Pastors to
feed with wholesome food in due season the family of God, Gods Church, Gods
chosen, Gods people, a precious people bought and redeemed with a price, a rich
price, a price of infinite value, even with blood, with Gods blood, with Gods
own blood, for so by reason of the hypostaticall union of two natures in
Christ that which is proper to the one is attributed to the other, per (...),
as we speak in schools, Take heed therefore to your selves and to all the
flock whereof the Holy Ghost has made you overseers etc. Suffer not the
sheep of Christ's pasture, his peculiar, his chief treasure, so much set by,
and so dearly purchased by the invaluable price of his most precious blood to
perish or miscarry through your default or negligence. For if you do, I call
heaven and earth to record against you, that both the blood of Christ shall be
charged on your heads, and the blood of his people perishing required at your
hands. O terrible blast like the sudden sound of a mighty thunderclap, or the
roaring of many waters able to make the two ears to tingle, and the
heart-stringes to tremble of all evil and idle Pastors, which either cannot,
so great is their ignorance; or do not, so little is their conscience; or will
not, so graceles is their negligence, feed the flock of Christ and take heed
thereunto. And thus having somewhat fully and freely by way of paraphrase opened
and enlarged the coherence, sense and substance of this parcel of Scripture;
for my more orderly proceeding therein, let me entreat you to observe with me by
way of division, two principal parts thereof.

[Therefore] h. v. Take heed therefore to your selves and to all the stock.

the Holy Ghost has made you overseers to feed the Church of God purchased
with his own blood.

Take heed to your selves, neglect not the care of your own salvation, for
sibi nequam cui bonus? hardly will he do good to others extensiue, that is not
good for himself intensiue. take heed to the flock, (...), to all the flock
and every part thereof, strengthen the weak, reduce the wandering, raise those
that are fallen, confirm those that stand. For this, and all this, and more
then this under this allegory and comparison of a minister to a shep heard is
comprehended.

As for the cause and consideration, that consists of a threefold reason. the
Holy Ghost which had made them Overseers, importing their calling to be not an
humane invention, but a divine institution, wherein they were assisted by the
presence, protected by the power, directed by the wisdom of Gods Spirit.

non ad deglubendum, sed ad pascendum, and as the original (...) will bear
it, Reu. 2. 17.
ad regendum, not to fleece, but to feed the flock of Christ pabulo coelestis
doctrinae and orationis, not to greiue but to govern the Church of God pedo
disciplinae and exemplo conversationis.

Church, and the quality of the flock which is to be fed, namely, (...), as
S. Peter calls it, a peculiar people purchased (as it 1. Pet. 2. 9.
is in my text) with Christ's own blood, he has paid full dearly for them,
he has best right unto them, he sets highly by them, and therefore will call
those to a strict account which take the charge of them, Take heed therefore to
your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the Holy Ghost etc. These (right
Reverend and worthily regarded) are the several branches of my text, and the
bounds and limits of my intended meditations, by the very surueigh whereof,
though I doubt not, but you (Fathers and brethren) may readily apprehend and
praeconceiue before I speak the sum and effect of all that I have to say;
yet since it is no disparagement to learning to hear what we know again
confirmed, no prejudice to a well ordered private life and public government
to hear and see what we do, and ought to do often preached, pressed, and
approved, I will now by Gods assistance and your continued patience descend
from the superficial pointing of them out unto your view for observation, unto
a more substantial prosecuting of them in their order for your better use and
application. And first of the first, viz* the charge or iniunction, and therein
of the first intrinsecall caveat or caution contained h. v. Take heed therefore
to your selves etc. Our blessed Savior Christ Jesus that good and great
shepherd of souls seeking the breed of his spiritual flock out of all the
herds that fed on the mountains of Judah, got unto himself in a short time
the number of twelve Apostles. All which though they did eat of their Masters
morsels, and drink of his cupp, and enjoy his company, yet receiving as evil
through the fleshes weakness, what Christ gave to them as life through the
spirits goodness, they became reprehensible both in doctrine and manners. In
doctrine, for they doubted whether Christ were the Messiah, and were ignorant
of the resurrection; In manners, for some of them were chilling cold in
charity, others exceeded in the heat of ambition. To which maladies that
there might be the fittest medicines applied, our Savior (Mark. 9. 50.) as a
skillful Physician Mark. 9. 50.
proposes a sovereign potion, wherein for the rectifying of their knowledge,
he prescribes salt to savor them, have salt in your selves, and for the
tempering of the heat of their ambition and coldness of charity, he warns
them to have peace the queller of factions and co^pounder of co^trarieties,
Have salt in your selves, and peace one with another. But first have salt in
your selves, that is the acrimony of true knowledge and godly wisdom, that
hereby you may the better season others, as here in my text it is, Take heed
first to your selves, that you may the better attend to the flock, whereof the
Holy Ghost has made you Ouer-seers. For as Philosophy tells us of a twofold
action, the one, immanent; and the other transeunt, and withal teaches us
that immanent actions, whereby some Action 2.
good thing is wrought in our selves are ways to the transeunt, whereby we
leave the end and effect of our well-doing in others; so divinity approving
this distinction of her handmaid philosophy groundeth hereupon this conclusion,
which is the first doctrinall point of my text worthy your observation.

hold clean water in our selves, before we become as conduits to convey the
same to others. Timothy ought first to take heed to himself, to walk warily
in the paths of holiness and righteousness for the furtherance and assurance
of his own salvation, and then he must attend diligently to his doctrine and
teaching, that as much as in him lies he may save others 1. Tim. 4. So the
Elders and 1. Tim. 4. 16.
Ministers of Ephesus are here enjoined first to look to themselves Act: 20.
28.
and to make sure work for their own souls, and then to attend to the
guidance and direction, to the safety and protection of the flock of Christ.
The Cock first clappeth his own wings to rouse himself, and afterward
croweth aloude that others may be awakened; so surely all they whose labors
God imployeth in drawing others to any good duty and well-doing ought to be
such themselves* and to show themselves such as they would have others to be.
He is too nice a Physician, says S. Ierom, either for the body or the soul,
that prescribes fasting to others, and is sick of a surfeit himself, si vis
me flere dolendum est primo tibi, if thou will work powerfully on my
affection, thou thy self must not be void and exempt of passion. When
Abimelech Judge: 9. 48 had cut down Judge. 9. 48.
boughs and carried them on his shoulders, then says he to the people, what
ye have seen me do do the like: so our blessed Savior Ioh: 13.
having washed Peter's feet, Ioh: 13. forthwith tells his disciples that
therein he had given them an ensample to do as he had done; and in the 11 of
Matthew, where he uses that gracious call, Venite ad Mat: 11. 29.
me omnes, Come unto me all and learn of me; he says not, learn of me
because I talk of humility, but learn of me because I am humble and meek,
and walk in humility, and am a pattern of that which I give in precept; and
such he was beyond all exception, his birth and education, his life and
conversation, his death and passion being altogether a pageant of humility. So
likewise S. Paul Philip 4. 8. 9.
from his own example and precedence commends to the pursuit and practice of
the Philippians, whatsoever things are true, are honest, just, pure, pertain
unto love, and are of good report, willing them to be followers of those
things even as they had heard of him and seen in him, they had heard his
doctrine, they had seen his virtues and virtuous life agreeable thereunto; both
these must go together, if we will take heed to our selves, as here we are
enjoined to do. And here to begin with our selves of the Ministry, this ought
to be our first and principal care to keep diligent watch and ward over our
own hearts, as Solomon advises Prou. 4. to keep Pre. 4. 23.
this precious vessel from all fraud and violence safe and sound, locked with
the key of faith, barred with resolution against sin, guarded with
supervisiting diligence, and to take heed that no pleasures, profits, or
preferments cause us to make shipwreck of a good conscience, which is the
casting away of all other excellencies, it being no rare thing to note the
soul of a wilful sinner stripped of all her graces and by degrees exposed to
shame; The more serious must our study and vigilance be with often and earnest
prayer unto God, that the peace of our consciences and purity of our hearts may
be preserved, and consequently our conversation so well and warily ordered, and
inoffensiuely guided, that intus puri, extus boni, vtrinque sani vitam Deo
gratam, gregi acceptam, omnibus probatam agamus, being sincere in heart, and
upright in life, our whole comportment may be accepted of God, approved of men.
Omnia, says Ierom, in sacerdote Hieron.
debent esse vocalia, all things in a Minister, Vestis, gestus, manus, mensa,
mores, his coat, his countenance, his gesture, his diet, his discourse, his
private as well as public behavior must preach sanctification and holiness:
thus integrity of life as he is (...) a disciple and sheep of Christ, is first
required in every worthy minister; and secondly soundnes of doctrine and
assiduity in preaching, as he is (...), a teacher of Christians, and a Pastor
of Christ's flock with his personal graces, (...) to walk uprightly and
circumspectiuely, Gal. 2. 14. the gifts of his Gal. 2. 14.
ministerial function, (...) to divide the word of truth with diligence and
dexterity, with modesty and gravity, 2. Tim. 2. must be 2 Timothy 2. 15.
tempered and conjoined, and both these implements, or rather complements of a
godly minister are typicallie and lively represented to the eyes of our
understanding by the two Cherubins in Salomons Temple, Chron. 2. 3. by the
mystical creatures Chron. 2. 3.
which had hands under their wings, Ezekiel. 1. and by the Ezekiel. 1. 8.
Vrim and Thummim in Aarons breast plate, and by the golden bells and pomgranates
in the skirts of his garments, Exodus 28. which two Exodus 28. 34.
whosoever shall carefully and conscionably join together (as all of us should
do) both observing and teaching to others the commandments of God, he shall
not only be great, but shall have the honor to be called great in the
kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 19. Such a one, Mat. 5. 19.
and amongst others, a singularly eminent and excellent minister of the Gospel,
and preacher of repentance, did John the Baptist show himself to be, of whose
worthy praise, that praiseworthy testimony of our Savior (who being truth
itself, Ioh. 14. would not flatter, could not lie) is registered for all
posterity, Ille erat lucerna ardens and lucens: he was a burning and shining
lamp, John. 5. 35. Lucerna praedicationis John. 5. 35.
beneficio ardens charitatis incendio, ardens and lucens virtutis exercitio,
burning inwardly with true zeal and charity, outwardly shining by the luster
of his lively preaching, burning and shining with the continual exercise of
virtue, of whose singular graces and virtues, we of the Ministry (men,
fathers, and brethren) should be studious emulators and followers, that so
like men of God, tam magisterio virtutum quam ministerio verborum, as well by
the example of our good works, as by preaching the incorrupt 2. Tit. 7.
and wholesome word, we may better and benefit the people of God; and with
Basil the great, whom Nazianzene emblazeth, doctrina Naz.
tonitruantem, vita coruscantem, thundering in his doctrine, glistring and
shining in his life may be enabled (...), every manner of way at all ^as. hom.
6. in ^ex.
times, in all places, amongst all persons, to edify the Church, (...) in
preaching, practicing, by practice preaching, as Clem. Alex. pithily Clem.
Alex. streom.
writes. And the reason for all this is very good, which Saint Gregory in his
pastoralls yields, quia exemplaris vita est concio optima, illudque cum
imperio docetur, quod Rat. Greg. in pastor.
prius ag^^ur quam docetur, because (says he) the exemplary good life is the
best sermon, and that is taught with authority, which is first acted by our
selves, before it be given in charge to others: semenque verbi facile germinat,
etc. and the seed of Gods word, and of wholesome instruction does easily bring
forth increase, when the godliness of the Preacher does water and moisten the
same in the hearts of the hearers. And so much of the duty of Ministers, in
taking heed unto themselves, that by composing their lives religiously, and by
proposing Gods word reverently they may go before the people with the lamp of
life and doctrine, to the heavenly Canaan, and land of the living. Which duty
of self heede-taking, not only concerns ministers, that bear the Lord's ark, but Magistrates also, which wear his armor, and weilde his sword, and
all inferior household governors too, who in the fear of the Lord m^st look
to it, that they be good, and well affected themselves, if Offic. mag. and pat.
fa.
they will work the like effect in others, which belong to their charge: they
must with David's resolution say, Psalm. 39. I will take heed to mine Psalm. 39.
1. 101. 2.
own ways: and Psalm. 101. I will walk with an upright heart in the midst
of mine house. They must resemble the snuffers in the Tabernacle, Exodus 25. 38
which being ordained Exodus 25. 38.
to purge others, were made of pure gold themselves. It is a rule or ouerruled
case in Philosophy, that the brain is senseless, though the fountain of
senses, and that the universal causes have not actually in themselves, what
they produce in their effects: howsoever this be, sure I am, it ought to be
far otherwise, not only with ministers, as I have in part showed, but with
Magistrates also, with Parents, Masters, and all Domestical Governors, with
whose wisdom and welfare, it stands much to be circumspect in their doings,
that by the staid government of themselves, they may impresse deep characters
of good behavior in all those which depend and attend upon them, who Lycurgus
like must make their lives the example of their Laws, and their Laws,
precepts and injunctions, must be as sound axioms drawn from the integrity
and uprightness of their lives, that so their inferiors their hearers, their
children, servants, and followers, may as well by that which they see in them,
as hear from them, be instructed and edified. This kind of instruction both
by doing and teaching, is that twoedged sword, which proceeds out of the
mouth of the Lamb, Revel. 1. able to divide betwixt the Revel. 1. 1.
marrow and the bones, betwixt the souls and the bosom darling sins of those
whom we would and should amend: With which double edged sword, sharp and keen
on the teaching side, and cutting deep on the doing side, If Prelates and
Preachers in their assemblies: if Judges and Justices in their circuites and
countries: if Magistrates in their towns and cities: and Masters in their
houses and families would resolutely fight withal against sin and
ungodliness, certainly they should prevail far more then they do in rep
essing of iniquity, and redressing of abuses and disorders: neither could
presumptuous impiety long stand out, and bear up the head against them, but
they would soon nip it in the blade, smite it on the head, yea pearce it to
the very heart. But alas, the condition of these times is much to be lamented,
wherein Ministers and Magistrates, which should join hand in hand, and unite
their forces to see iniquity punished; are for the most part; either in their
judgment or affections so divided, that whereas the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and the magistrates hands keep good order, the one
denounce Gods judgments against sin, the other execute them, and both
combine their strength, like Moses and Aaron, David and Jonathan, Judah and
Symeon, to reform abuses, in Church and commonweal: little or nothing (God
wot) is by them amended, whether through the wilfulnes and corruption of the
one, the pride and covetousness of the other, or the cowardlinesse and
slothfulness of both, or rather through the Churchwardens and sworn men's
neglect to present faults for fear, favor, or affection dangerously dispensing
with their oath, I leave it undetermined; neither is it my part or purpose to
publish the overthrow of the mighty in Gath, or the faults and 2. Sam. 1.
fallings out of great ones, in the streets of Ascalon, least the
uncircumcised should triumph. I will rather lay my finger on this scarre, so
far forth as the truth of my love may not prejudice the love of truth; only
this betwixt shame and sorrow I must say; that for want of the Laws judicial
execution, both the unbridled lusts of man's corruption in spiritual
consistories remain uncorrected; and the wicked attempts of man's presumption
in temporal courts remain vnrepressed, and the original of both defaults and
defects is this, that some officers in either, do too much resemble the Idol
Molech, Leuit. 18. 21. lively described, or are Leuit. 18. 21.
not much unlike those Giants which called themselves Rephaims Physicians and
reformes of vices, whereas they were Zanzummims, Deuteronomy. 2. 20.
most distempered, vicious and flagitious themselves, as in the 20. verse of
the second of Deuteronomy, it is plainly and pregnantly noted. O that my words
were in an Apostrophe.
ancients mouth, that gray hairs might give grace unto them: then would I the
more boldly beseech you, right reverend Father in God, that (according to your
wisdom and gravity, place and dignity, power and authority, being armed, with
the complete armor of temporal and spiritual jurisdiction) you would with
undaunted courage and resolution, strike at the very root of those enormities.
And since in this course of reformation, you have the prayers, help, and
approbation of all good men, and the assured assistance of God himself, who
will reward your care, and crown your diligence; O go on with the spirit of
fortitude, well tempered zeal, and godly constancy, to brandish the sword of
justice against the faces of presumptuous idolatrous Papists, of miscreant
irreligious Atheists, of profane Neutralists, and seditious Priscillianists,
and alother enemies of God and his Church, and with the spear of reproof, and
seuerest castigation, run through (as I may say) the very heart of far
spreading Popery, of whoredom, drunkenness, bribery, extortion, contempt of
the Ministry, perjury, blasphemy, sacrilegious Church-robbing, and of other
gross corruptions, whereof the Church wardens (whom I again, and again,
advise to make conscience of their sacred oaths) shall make presentation.
Magna quidem est in illa seueritate piet as per quam tollitur peccandi Sen.
libertas. O make the truth hereof to appear by your severity, in giving a
downright blow to those offensive evils which cry for a mighty stroke, that
they may no more stalk by you, much less stare upon you uncontrolled, but
that by your two staves of bands and beauty, in imitation of the great
shepherd of Israel (Zachar. Zach. 11. 7.
11.) that is, of doctrine and discipline of coactiue and correctiue
jurisdiction, either with an oportet haec facere, or decet haec fieri, with a
prohibe, or cohibe; a caveat or a capias; with an (...), Tit. 2. a cut Tit. 2.
13.
off, a put down, or shut up, the authors and actours of these ranging,
raging, roaring sins, in Clergy and Laity, may be severely censured, and as
much as in your Lordship lies, utterly suppressed. For the better
accomplishing of which needful work (to return to that from which I have a
little digressed) it is of us all (Dear Christians) to be heartily wished,
and by all good means to be endeavored, that such always be placed in the
Magistracy and Ministry, as may not only by the duty of their calling, seek
earnestly the reformation of those things which are amiss, but also may by
their well-ordered holy lives, be lanternes and spectacles of virtue and
godliness, patterns and presidents of well-doing grace, and goodness to all
others. That the people by them as by a glass (even as the youth of Greece did
by Epaminondas) may learn to timme and adorn themselves with all virtuous
ornaments; This, this, is the most hopefullest course to rectify things that
are depraved, to unite things that are divided, to set in order and reform
things, which had need to be amended. I do not deny but that multi multis
prosunt dicendo quae non Aug. tract. 46. in Ioh.
faciunt: but I also auerre with Saint Augustine: that long pluribus
prodessent faciendo quae dicunt, and without taking this course of making our
lips and our lives, our hands and our hearts, our words and our works, our
profession and practice to agree together in a competent commendable manner,
little amendment in public or in private, is to be expected, though the
complaints of Ministers concerning their hearers profaneness and ignorance; of
Magistrates concerning their peoples stubbornness and disobedlence; of Parents
and Masters concerning their children and servants wantonness, faithlesnesse,
and negligence be never so much aggrauated, never so often reiterated. For
when, I pray, will a leaud servant be dissuaded from his drunkenness and
whoredom, by the words of a luxurious and licentious Master? when will a
handmaid be reclaimed of her folly by the persuasion of a loose Mistress? when
will disordered people, and dissolute parishioners be reformed of their vain
and vile courses, by the counsel or threatenings of unruly rulers, and carnal
careless Ministers? But it is high time for me to shut up this point, (for I
have a long way to go, and but lirtle time to spend) and therefore I humbly
beseech you all, Men, Fathers, and Brethren, beloved in Christ, that you would
seriously meditate on so necessary and profitable a Christian duty, as has
now by way of doctrine of general exhortation, and particular application,
been commended unto you, Take heed unto your selves, and more especially, to
you my brethren in the ministry, who by your callings are captayns of Gods
army, dispensers of Gods mysteries, stewards of Gods household, builders of
Gods Church, sheepheards of his flock, and therefore should be courageous,
faithful, skillful, watchful, Take heed to your selves, and look to your
families, that there be not sound in them an Hophue or Phineas to make the
Lords sacrifices abhorred as it fell out in the time of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. beat 1 Samuel 2.
down the body of sin in your selves and others, that you may grow up in the
spiritual strength of your souls, be much in conference with God and practice
of holy duties, pray much, read much, meditate much, preach often and
earnestly; and least by any means after, you have preached unto others, and
prepared an arc for their safety, you your selves should be reproved, and
perish with Noah's carpenters, in the flood of your own iniquity: Take heed,
abandon all impiety and scandalous irregularity, and as S. Paul exhorts
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. Flee covetousness 1 Timothy 6.
and noisome lusts, and follow after righteousness, love, patience,
meekness, and labor always, amongst all persons, to manifest a laudable
congruity and correspondency between your good teaching, and godly living. Let
that profane proverb (doing and saying be two men's offices) be verified among
the Heathen, as for us (beloved) which would be accounted good Christians, and
indeed should be approved patterns of Christianity: Let it be our principal
care and study that our words and works, our doings and sayings, our
profession and practice may agree together in one tune, and draw in one line,
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ Jesus, which is truly called the Gospel
of Peace, 2 Ephesians. ^ Ephesians.
whose author is the God of Peace, 1 Cor. 14. whose ministers are messengers ^
Cor. 14. Romans 10.
of Peace, 10 Romans whose followers are the children of Peace Luke 10. whose
duty is the study Luke 10.
of Peace, Romans 12. and end that Romans 12.
Peace which passes all understanding, Phil. 4. and all to move us to Philip.
4.
have Peace amongst our selves, and as much as in us lies with all others that
so living in Peace, and spending our days holily, we may die in peace, and
end our days happily, and after this mortal pilgrimage ended, may pass by
the life of grace, to the life of glory, and immortality which never shall have
end. And so much, if not too much (in regard of the precise model of time
allotted for me to speak, and you to hear) be spoken of the first
intrinsecall caveat, Take heed to your selves.

Now it follows, and that by a necessary consequent (for Christianity
extends both her charity and industry to the good of others) Take heed to
all the flock, which I term the extrinsecall caveat or caution; wherein
before I descend to the distinct duties of Ministers in particular, without any
other curious induction, I obfurther this doctrine in general.

to their place and calling who are endued therewith. It was said to Peter,
Luke 22. when thou art Luke 22. 32.
converted strengthen thy brethren; and it is said by S. Paul, Gal. 1. 16. Gal:
1. 16.
that it pleased God to reveal his Son unto him, that he might preach him
to the Gentiles: and in the 2. Corin: 14. that God did 2 Cor: 14.
comfort him in all his tribulation that he might be able to comfort others in
their affliction. And hence it is that he gives that general charge, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. exhort 1. These. 5. 11.
and edify one another as ye do, admonish the unruly, comfort the feeble,
etc. and in the 10 Heb. 24. Heb: 10. 24.
Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works. and Rom:
15. 2. Let every man please his Romans 15. 2.
neighbor in that which is good to aedification. and to this purpose the
commandment of S. Peter, 1. Pet: 1. Pet: 4. 10.
4. 10. is very express and pregnant, Let every man as he has received the
gift minister the same one to another as good disposers of the manifold graces
of God.

being or entity, and his truth verity, and his existence an unity, and his
perfection goodness, and his happiness faelicity. If then we will be
conformable unto him, we must not content our selves in the excellency and
pleasure of our own contemplation without casting an eye downward upon our
brethren; neither must the receipt of infused graces purchased by christ, rest
upon our selves alone, but when we are in some measure filled, we ought to
look upon others that are lanke and lean, till they be as full as we; being
enlightened our selves, we must seek to make others wise unto salvation. Peter
Antaeus-like having gotten strength by his fall endeavors to breed the same
quality in his brethren; and Paul being converted addicteth himself wholly to
the converting of others, and Rom: 1. 14. acknowledges himself a debtor Rom:
1. 14.
both to Jew and Gentile in that behalf. David Psalm. 12. prays to be helped
and saved himself, but Psalm: 12. 1.
so as the word (Hoshignah) in the original imports, that he might help and
save others. The true lights of the firmament are ever in motion for the good
of others, whilst comets and blazing stars fed with corruption from below,
stand at a stay and vanish away. And surely this is a property of every
righteous and holy man, that having his own heart possessed with the true
fear of God and unfeigned love of religion, he has his desire also enflamed
to draw others thereunto, and it is the joy of his heart to see others as good
as himself; yea he thinks the framing of others to conformity with
himself to be a most necessary operation of the life of grace, Prove: 10. 21.
the lips of the righteous feed many, the righteous man who has obtained
pardon of his sins by the blood of Christ, and has his righteousness imputed
to him, and in assurance hereof endeavors with a sincere heart to please God
in all things, and has the good treasure of his heart filled with all
spiritual wisdom, the word of God dwelling plenteously in him; such a
righteous man hoordeth not up his treasure as the miser does his corn, and the
covetous his riches, but lets it pass through his lips thereby to feed, not
a few but many, and to spread abroad knowledge Pro: 15. 7. so that from the
Prove: 15. 7.
righteous man's treasure (and such a man especially every Minister should be)
the ignorant has a portion, and that is instruction; the perfract and
obstinate has a portion, and that is reprehension; the wanderer a portion, and
that is admonition; the penitent a portion, and that is consolation; and it
cannot well be otherwise. For if it be a true Maxim that every instrument
works dispositively at the command of the principal agent, then since God
has given lips to serve the soul as principal commander, either there must
be little store of grace in the heart, or else out of the store thereof the
lips will utter it, and from the abundance of the heart speak abundantly. To
be short, the spiritual good of those with whom the righteous man lives, and
whom he loves, takes up a chief room in his affections, he seeks their
conversion and salvation, this is an employment worthy his love, his labor,
his prayers, his pains. Herein he shows himself the child of God, and his
wishes accord with Gods; Oh (says the Lord Deuteronomy: 5.) that there were in Deuteronomy:
5. 25.
my people an heart to fear me; Oh (says the righteous christian) that there
were in my friends, kinsfolk, neighbors, and acquaintance, an heart to fear
the Lord and keep his commandments, that it might go well with them. Would to
God, says Moses Numb. 11: all Gods people were Prophets: and Numb: 11. 29.
Paul Act: 26. wishes that not only Acts 26. 29.
Festus the President, and Agrippa the King, but all that heard him were as he
was, not in bands, and captivity, but in grace and christianity. Seldom
shall you hear these or the like voices amongst worldlings; I wish others were
as rich as I, as learned as I, and in as good credit as I am; for these things
make men earthly-minded, base selfe-louers, and privately affected; but grace
and holiness is of an excellent royal nature, and enlarges the heart wherein
it is with such love to other men, that nothing more contents the righteous man
then to make others as good as himself, and to see them go in his Masters
heavenly livery. He takes heed to himself, he takes care of others,
tanquam sidus clarum and beneficum, as the Sun in the firmament is
beneficial to all.

enlived with the spirit of grace and power of godliness, so show your selves
to be such by communicating the good graces you have received to the benefit
of others, lay aside all hypocrisy in seeming to be what you are not, and
remove all slothfulnes in not appearing to be what you are, and as the elect of
God put on the bowels of mercy, and with cheerefulnes and alacrity spend
those talents wherewith God has enriched you, and adventure them for your
Masters best advantage, and use your gifts as David Psalm: fitted for the good
of all which may be or desire to be benefited by them. Be not spare in
spending, what God has been bountiful in bestowing, make known your selves
to be not only like the good tree which brings forth its own good fruit in
due season; but like the fire, and Psalm: 1. 3.
the fire, non in silice, sed in sinu, not in the flint, which will hardly be
beaten out, but in the bosom which cannot be concealed, but will soon show it
self, and having matter to work upon, will send out a flaming light to direct
and comfort others. O consider from what misery by nature you your selves are
freed, and to what an excellent estate by grace ye are translated, and be not
so thanklesse to the author of your happiness, or hard hearted to the good of
your brethren, as to neglect to pay to either what you do owe them. You owe
glory to God for his manifold mercies vouchsafed unto you, and the greatest
thing wherein you can glorify him is to be the means of drawing others to his
kingdom; you owe love unto your brethren, and the greatest thing wherein you
can show this love, is to seek their freedom out of the bands of sin and
Satan, and to be instruments of saving their souls O set then close to this
work, use all the good means of prayer, counsel, conference, comfort, and
admonition, and commit the success unto God. Petitur avobis cura non curatio,
as Bernard speaks: God requires Bern: lib. 4. consider:
not at your hands that you should cure your brethren, for that is his
immediate work, Hebr: 13. but that you should care for them, and do what in
you lies to procure not only their temporal, but especially their spiritual
and eternal good. Blessed and beloved Christians, we are all and ought to be
one another keepers, and it was but Cain a murderer which made question to
the contrary, Genesis 4. Gen: 4. 9.
Wherefore as brethren, sons of the same Father, seruant^ to the same Master,
heirs of the same promise, fellow-trauellers bound for the same country, let
us make on an other partakers both of our temporal goods, according to the
rule of Solomon, Prove: 5. Let thy Prove: 5. 16.
fountain flow forth, and thy rivers in the streets; and especially of our
spiritual graces, instructing, counselling, comforting, and aedifying one an
other in an holy faith and godly life. It is a true saying, (...), a good man
is a common good. Oh then let us show our selves to be such good men and loving
Christians indeed leaving behind us in all plaees where we live and have to
do some tokens of our goodness, some monuments of our godliness, some sweet
savor of our virtues; especially as occasion is now given, let us express our
bounty for a common good, namely in furthering (by our willing contribution
thereunto) the honorable plantation of Virginia, for the reducing Virginia.
of pagans unto Christianity; and the praiseworthy erection of the College
of Controversies, Chelsey.
for the speedier refuting of the errors, and repressing of the insolences of
malignant popish adversaries. Those worthies which are employed in these famous
works cry unto us as the Angel of Macedonia did unto Paul, Come and help us.
Let us then be helpful Act: 16. 9.
unto them; and as profitable members in the Bee-hiue of christ's Church, let us
bring by our love our largess; by our prayers, pains, or practice, wax or
honey thereunto, for the benefit of many; and not be like those haughty ungentle
spirits, in whom the gross humors of pride and covetousness have bred such an
obstruction of liberality and kindness, that neither good works, nor gracious
words at all proceed from them. Solon in Plutarch. in moral.
Plutarch made a law that if any one had dug 20 foot deep in his own
ground and found no water, his neighbor should permit him to draw water out of
his Well: Do then such and such men labor to live, and endeavor to learn,
and yet want some maintenance and learning, which God in some greater measure
has afforded us; why then we are bound to give unto them of that little which
we have, and to teach them of that little which we know, and to do them what
good we can; if we do, God will reward us; if we do not, the heathen man
will rise up in judgment against (...). In the 26 of Exodus, you may Exodus: 16.
20.
read how that Manna being hoorded up for private use continued not sweet two
days, but being potted up for a common remembrance lasted many years: So if
we keep up our goods and graces for our selves alone, they will rot, decrease,
or be diminished; but if we dispose them as we ought for a common benefit, they
shall last long, and increase, and for them shall we be rewarded: for the
merciful man rewards his own soul, Prou. 11. and the Prophet in Psalm.
Prove: 11. 17.
112. having said that the righteous man is merciful and distributeth, the
next news we hear of him is, that his righteousness endures for ever, and
his borne shall be exalted, Psalm: 112. 9. Thus and thus shall they be
rewarded, which honor God in bestowing for the public good, those gifts and
graces where with God has honored them. Which being a duty that concerns all
Christians in general, does in a more peculiar manner appertain to us
Ministers in particular. For to us of the Ministry, who are Ambassadors of
Christ, dispensers of his secrets, corriualls of his spouse, watchmen of his
City, ouer-seers of his servants, pastors of his flock, and therefore deserve
audience, reverence, love, obedience, and that which is most denied, or envied
unto us (by such as would bring on us verissimos labores, certissimam
egestatem, vnstinted pains, undoubted penury) liberal maintenance. To us (I
say) this charge of superuisiting diligence is chiefly directed, Take heed to
all the flock, and as it follows in my text, to feed the Church or family
of God, etc. which being things in sense and substance well agreeing, deserve
jointly to be handled, as on the contrary, things that differ, deserve to be
distinguished.

are to be nourished up unto everlasting life. This is our work, and as the
Apostle calls it, ^ Tim. 1 Timothy 3. 1.
3. a worthy work; If any desire the office of a Bishop, of a Prelate or
Pastor: he (says the Apostle) desires not a good dignity, a good delight,
good riches, great revenues, a good and gainful office, but a good duty, a
painful great and worthy work. For the better and more beneficial
accomplishing whereof, three principal virtues, as implements and ornaments in
us which would be accounted his 3 Virtues req. in godly min.
workmen, are necessarily required. First, skilfulnesse to begin. Secondly,
faithfulness to go on. Thirdly, zealousnesse to continue courageous unto the
end. 1. Skilfulnesse, and dexterity, been preesse. 2. Faithfulness and
sincerity, semper prodesse. 3. Zeal and constancy, nunquam dcesse aut
deficere. First, 1. Skill.
every Minister, and Pastor, ought to be skillful and dexterous in teaching,
knowing as the wise steward, Luke. 12. how to give Gods Luke 12. 42.
household their portion of meat in due season, and how to divide the word of
truth aright, that all may be edified, 2 Timothy 2. being not only 2 Timothy 2. 15.
learned himself, employed in that speech, Mal. 2. The Priests lips Mal. 27.
should preserve knowledge, but also (...), 1 Timothy 3. apt to teach 1 Timothy 3. 2.
others, which was signified in the old Testament by the golden bells which
hung on the skirts of the Priests Garments, the sound whereof was to be heard
when he went into the holy place, and came out upon pain of death, Exodus 28.
and Exodus 28. 35
in the new Testament by the descension of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, in
the likeness of cloven tongues, Acts 2. 3. not of Acts 2. 3.
hands, whereby to overcome the world by worldly force, or of feet, to flee
from the rage of persecuting Tyrants, nor of eyes and ears fit instruments to
learn, but of tungs to teach them their duty in teaching others, and what
else do their names and Titles declare? why are they called the light of the
world, but that being enlightened themselves, they should blaze forth the
Math. 5. 13. 14
beams of truth, to give light to those which sit in the shadow of darkness,
or the salt of the earth, but that being sauory themselves, they should season
with wholesome doctrine the weak souls that bend to corruption; or builders of
Gods house, but that with Bezaleell and Aholiab, they should be skilful in the
work of his sanctuary; or Captains of Gods army, but that they should know to
order and marshall his host, and to destroy the stratagems of the enemy. For
whereas they should be as the keepers of Salomons bed, Cant. 3. All valiant
men of Israel, Cant. 3. 7.
all handling the sword, and expert in war: these on the contrary, are as
Ieroboams Priests, of the reuersion and refuse of Israel, altogether 1 King.
12. 31.
unskillful in managing the weapons of this spiritual warfare, rurales
Nomades, and as Pindarus terms them, (...) not (...), fitter to be any thing,
then that which they take upon them, to be spiritual shepherds. It cannot
be denied, but that in many ancient Counsels, as also in our late
Church-Canons, it has been decreed, that none should enter into this sacred
function, but such whom morum innoce^tia and literarum scientia reddiderunt
insignes. The more scandalous to religion, and disgraceful to the Ministry it
is, that such should now adays be both admitted, and permitted, sacra mysteria
tractare, quos moru^ petulantia and literaru^ ignorantia reddunt infames, by
whom this Priestly order which in it self (as Chrysostom at large shows)
is Cbr. l. 3. desacerd. dig.
most holy and honorable, is made (...), ridiculous and contemptible, by whom
God is dishonored, good Laws are deluded, holy things are profaned, the
Church stained, the people starued. This, this, Fathers and Brethren, is a sore
which had need to be deeply launced. I would to God it might this day begin
to be cured; In hope whereof, and in hearty prayer for the same, I pass over
this vnrelishing reproof of wilful and unskillful ministers, and pass to the
second good quality, implement, or ornament required in every godly Pastor, to
wit, faithfulness, 2. Faithfulness.
which imports both sedulity in respect of the matter taught, that we should
be (...) 1 Timothy 5. laborious in the word and 1 Timothy 5. 17.
doctrine, and sincerity in the manner of teaching, that we should not be
(...) hucksterers of the word, 2 Cor. 2. Either adding 2 Cor. 2. 17.
thereto, or distracting there from, or adulterating the sense thereof. He that
has my word, says the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 23. let Ier. 23. 28.
him speak my word faithfully: for what is the chafe to the wheat, says the
Lord? The truth then, not lies; Scriptures, not fables; the precepts and word
of God, not the dreams and dotages of men are to be spoken: and the word of
God is to be delivered as the word, not 1 Pet. 4. 11.
cockishly, corruptedly, or unfruitfully, but gravely, modestly, piously,
profitably, as the religious silence of the people, the reverence of the place,
and the greatness of our office does require. Of this faithfulness, both in
respect of the matter and manner, S. Paul showed himself an excellent
pattern, not only teaching openly and in every house, Acts 20. there is his
industry; Acts 20. 20.
but in declaration of the truth, approving himself to every man's conscience,
in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. there is his sincerity, 2 Cor. 4. 2.
which having thus carefully practiced himself, he gives the same in charge
to Timothy, with a severe 2 Timothy 4. 2.
kind of adiuration, charging him before God and Jesus Christ, the Judge of
quick and dead, to preach the word in season, and out of season: in season,
volentibus and propitijs, for aworde in due season, is like apples of gold in
pictures of silver, Prou. 25. out of season, nolentibus Prove: 25. 11.
and iratis, for charit as ad saluandum est violenta, charity is earnest to
save all. And the like charge does Sen: 55. 11. ep.
our Savior with a thrice ingeminated expostulation, give unto Saint Peter,
John 21. If thou love me: John 21.
If thou love me: If thou love me: Feed, feed, feed, my sheep, my
lambs, my flock. Whereupon S. Bernard sweetly, Si me ames Bern.
plusquam tua, plusquam tuos, plusqua^ te, pasce oues meas, pasce agnos meos,
and pasce in pascuis pinguibus vbi est copia alimoniae, ibi in docendo
assiduitatem, pasce in pascuis salutaribus, ne inficiantur tabe, hic in docendo
sinceritatem, pasce in pascuis discriminatis (vt oues in gramine adulto and
laetiori, agnelli in tenera and molliori herba exspatientur) hic in docendo
prudentiam postulat: I know how the time passes, and to whom I speak, and
therefore forbear englishing. And the same charge, with a statute of addition,
S. Peter commends to al his successors, and to all faithful Pastors, 1 Pet.
5. saying, feed (non dicit 1 Pet. 5. 2. Beza in Locu^.
(says Beza) offerte pro viuis and mortuis and peregrina lingua centones male
consutos cantillata) But pascite feed, (not your flock, but) the flock of God
which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not
for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as domineering over Gods heritage,
but exhibiting your selves patterns of weldoing to the flock. as a portion
for faithless Pastors that receive Gods wages, and do not his work. For
faithless Captains that receive the Lords pay, and fight not his battles,
but the doung of disgrace and doom of woe: Woe unto the shepherds which cloth
themselves with the wool and feed not the sheep, Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 34. 2. 3. 4
34. which see the flock to putrify, and yet have salt, and savor them not:
to faint, and yet have Wine, and comfort them not: to wander, and yet have
light, and guide them not: to be besieged of sin and Satan, and yet see the
danger, and warn them not: to be even hungerstarued, and yet have bread and
refresh them not. If such as preach not in conscience of their wants, are to
be reproved, then those which for want of conscience, rather then knowledge,
remain dumb and open not their mouths, are more deeply to be censured. Woe
unto me, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 9. 16
9. if I preach not the Gospel, for why, a necessity is laid upon mee^ and is
it not likewise on you Fathers, on you Brethren, on us al^ Ministers? Yes
surely, Vt discamu^ inuit at nos veritatis suauitas, vt doceamus cogit, nos
charitatis and officij necessitas. Whereunto that earnes^ exhortation of Saint
Bernard in ser* Bern ser. 76. in Cant.
76. mainely tends, Attendite pretioso deposito quod vobis concreditum est:
ciuitas Dei est, vigilate ad custodia^^ sponsa, studete ornatui: oues,
attendit^ pastui, educite e lacu miseriae, conducite perviam iustitiae,
perducite ad pascula Vitae. Ardens post.
gifts to be wrapped up in an idle brain without practice, as Goliah^ sword
was in a cloth without use 1 Samuel 21. or to suffer the fountain of our
knowledge, like Labans well, 1. Sam. 21. 9.
to be shut up with a great stone of security or saturity, as some do which
make the Court with Diotrephes, or the University with Cleanthes, a sanctuary
for their idleness and non-residency. Rather let us stir up (...), as S. Paul
advises 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Timothy, and even blow up with a pair of bellows (as the original
imports) the graces of God in us, and strive to show our selves truly
learned, and to the flock of Christ truly loving, by truly laboring in the
diligent instruction and edification thereof, laboring so to nourish infants
with playnnes, that we deny not to feed great ones with profoundnesse;
descending so in our ordinary doctrine, to the meanest capacity, that at
sometimes we speak aloft, as beseems Gods Majesty, so using a sanctified
kind of sauce, to succor some men's weakness upon extraordinary occasion,
that at most times our spiritual provision be fitted for the better appetites
of the whole congregation. Believe me, brethren, idleness in action, argues
emptines in affection, and I leave you to judge what he is that has an head
full of learning, and a mouth full of nothing; sure am I, that he can hardly
be said to have the spirit of grace in his heart, which being a Minister, and
learned too, has no word of Prophecy at all in his mouth. From which
fearful censure that we (Fathers and Brethren) may be freed, let us hereunto
bend all our studies, and extend the uttermost of our endeavors, both by our
diligence and faithfulness in dispensing the word, by our discretion and well
aduisednesse, in handling the word, by our obedience and carfulness in
framing our lives according to the word, to show our selves gracious
Ministers. And that we may be complete (as far as is competent to humane
frailty) to our skilfulnesse and dexterity, to our faithfulness and sincerity.

In the third and last place zeal 3. Zeal.
and fervent constancy must also be adjoined, which by the rod of correction
(that was reserved in the Arc of the Testament, with the Manna of refection,
and Tables Exodus 37.
of direction) is lively prefigured, and by Gregory in his pastoralls Lib. 2.
past. c. 6.
plainly intended h. v. sit and districtio virgae quae feriat, and consolatio
baculi qui sustentet, sit p^etas sed non plus quam expedit parcens, sit zelus
sed non immoderate saeuiens; where he requires in every Minister, as well a
zealous disposition, as a pious affection. And what else was signified by the
donation of the Holy Ghost in fiery cloven tongues, but a zealous hot and
piercing ministry, such as will enter into, and quicken the hearts of Gods
children, and like a purseuant dispatchd from heaven will attach a wicked man
by the shoulder, yea and catch him by the bosom too unless he amend. I
confess there is no working in metals without very hot fires, nor in
distillations without soft and slow fires, yet there is fire in both, for else
how should the one be melted, and the other distilled? So in truth, there
ought to be the fire of zeal more or less in all Gods ministers, and the more
the better if discreet: As for that vn^^screet zeal of those which can endure
nothing read or said or sung, but what agrees with the consonants of their
precise Alphabet, which wrangle about forms and shadows, cavil about
ceremonies, and slight the Sermons, and censure the persons of those which will
not do the like, making the Pulpit oftentimes a Pasquill to ease their
spleenes, and to traduce superiors; I account it to be schismatic. But the
zeal of godly Pastors, which with a good conscience in Gods cause for the good
of his people are as earnest in the pursuit of sin, as Eleazar was of the
Philistims 2. Sam: 23. cleaning 2. Sam: 23. 10.
as fast in their hearts to the word, as his hand claue to his sword, I both
love and approve as spiritual. Such was the zeal of the Prophet David Psalm:
69. where he says, the Psalm: 69. 10.
zeal of Gods house had even consumed him. Such the zeal of S. Peter, when
he so pricked the hearts of his hearers with the razor of the word, that they
came to him and the rest of the Apostles with weeping eyes, and mournful
voices, saying, Men and brethren what shall we do that we may be saved, Acts
2. Such the zeal of Acts 2. 37.
John the Baptist, when he so pierced the hearts of his hearers by his
powerful preaching of repentance Luke 3. that they came to him by Luk: 3. 4.
several companies according to their several callings, as so many wounded
soldiers to a Chirurgian, saying, What shall we do then? what shall we do?
Such likewise was the zeal of S. Paul Acts 24. Acts 24. 26.
when preaching of righteousness, temperance, and the judgment to come, he
made the bribe-taking Governor Foelix, if not to blush for shame, yet to
tremble and shudder for fear. O let us (Fathers and Brethren) whether we be
young, as Samuel and Timothy; or old, as Paul and Eli; whether we have ten or
five or two Talents, strive to attain the like zealous vehemence, and to
express the like godly earnestnes in our effectual preaching, not only in
obscure Bethania, our private Parishes, but also in eminent Jerusalem, in more
public places, if we be called thereunto. What if the mountains being
touched do smoke? what if greatness being taxed for want of goodness do
fume, fret, swell, sweat? what if for rebuking of sin justly, ye be depraved
and maligned unjustly, yet dicatur veritas, rumpatur invidia: Rebuke (says S.
Paul) them that ^. Tim: 5. 20.
sin openly, even to their face, that the rest which are witnesses hereof may
stand in awe and fear. It becomes not those free and ingenuous spirits, to
whom Christ has committed the dispensation of his glorious gospel to fear
the face of man, to be dulled, daunted, dispirited. Be we then what we ought
to be, not only luciferi, as Bern.
Bernard speaks, and scientia fulge^tes, having some lights of knowledge in
our heads, but also igniferi and zelo flagrantes, having the fire of true zeal
in our hearts. And that our discourses be not weakened by ungraciousness, or by
any dullnes, and flatnesse of spirit, and so prove like moral philosophy
Lectures, and the collations of the Scribes and Pharisees, cold and comfortles,
let us join with our doctrine general exhortation; and to our exhortation
add particular application; and in our application speak home to the
conscience, and use a fervent feeling affection. To conclude, as skillful,
faithful, and zealous pastors our joint care and study must be that our
Sermons and public meditations may so well be sorted, that (the love of truth
conceiving them, the truth of judgment forming and framing them, variety of
learning amplifying and exemplifying them, modesty of style and distinct
utterance delivering them) the plain and powerful evidence of the spirit may
be seen in them, the congregation may understand them, feel the benefit of
them, receive instruction and comfort by them. This, this is to be worthy
preaching pastors; of whom it may be truly said, that the Holy Ghost has
made them Ouer-seers. Which title of ouer-seeing Ouer-seers.
and superintendency importing the dignity of Ministers should now be
considered. But on your patience I have already too much presumed, and
therefore will reserve this task for some other time and place. In the mean
time let us all make our retreit to the throne of Grace, beseeching Almighty
God to multiply his graces upon us all, that at all times, in all places,
amongst all persons, we may behave our selves as faithful and zealous
Ministers of the gospel of grace, and in the midst of our ouer-seeing and
ruling here may remember our account and reckoning hereafter, and so pass the
time of our dwelling here in his fear, that when we shall pass from this
earthly habitation to an heavenly, in his loving favor, we may be brought in
peace, with a good report, especially a good conscience to the bed of the
grave, that after the sleep of death, in the morning of the resurrection we
may awake to blessed immortality,

Amen.
FINIS.
CHRIST'S LARVMBELL OF LOVE RESOVNDED.

By R. C. Pastor of Sherwell in Deuon.

1. IOH. 3. 18. Let us not love in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed
and truth.

AVG. in lib. confess. Beatus qui amat te (Domine) and amicum in te and
inimicum propter te.



LONDON.

Printed by Edward Griffin for Francis Constable and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the White-Lyon. 1616.

TO THE Worshipful Magistrates and all the well affected Inhabitants of
BARNSTAPLE, Especially TO HIS APPROVED good friends Mr. Nicholas Down, and
Master John Delbridge etc. R. C. unfeignedly wishes the increase of all saving
knowledge, sanctified love, and Christian happiness.
RIghtly regarded. As I am bound to love where I find desert, so I cannot but
endeavor to deserve where I have ever found love. Hence it is that upon
reiterated importunity exhibiting to public view (amongst other my
ministerial labors extorted from me) this slender discourse as the first
fruits of my love many years sithence bestowed on you. I could do no less
then by way of dedication put the same into your hands, and present it to your
eyes, in the same singleness of spirit and spiritual afction wherewith at
first it was delivered to your ears; which if it be worth any respect, in
many respects belongs unto you, especially because you had a present
property and interest therein, as soon as it wtas preached; by the means of
a reverend and religious father * amongst Mr. Do^idge.
you, who by earnest entreaty obtained then a true coppie thereof from me,
even word for word as now it is printed. I could have been content to alter
some things therein to satisfy those which perchance like not the latinisme or
vnfamiliar strain thereof; but yet (knowing that he which in doing any thing
thinks to prevent all objections must lie still and do nothing) I have (as you
see) suffered it to pass through my fingers unto your hands in its proper
primitive habit, without any alteration of form or matter at all; Commending
it in liew of some better present and more sightly oblation to your general
acceptance, service, and devotion; especially to you two my especially named
good friends, as a deed of gift wherein I have bequeathed some part of the
goods of my unfeigned affection, which your many respectful favors have
worthily deserved. I forbear particulars, least my traveling thoughts should
transport me beyond the bounds of an Epistle, only in assurance of my
thankful remembrance of them, I recommend this little Tract of Christian love
to your Christian use, observation, and imitation too; beseeching the God of
love that (by an attractiue heavenly virtue and influence from above) it may
powerful draw you and others to follow the truth, painefullie preached, and
plentifully professed amongst you) with love unfeigned, with zeal well
tempered, and a conversation regular and rightly sanctified, and that you as
chief amongst the rest, loving each other entirely in the truth, and for the
truths sake, may (as much as in you lies) like two eyes one way looking, and
two hands together working carefully, and conscionably provide for the
preservation of peace and unity, and the propagation of true religion and
sanctimony in your well ordered society and corporation. Thus with my best
vows and wishes for your Towns welfare in general, and more particular
prayers for the increase of all sanctifying graces in you, that amongst the
many blazing stars of these days (who only make a show of godliness) you
may truly approve your selves in your private godly comportment, and
public government, to be fixed in the same firmament with the Sun of
righteousness, and have your affections so inclined and enlarged to the
pursuit and practice of holiness here, that you may attain everlasting
happiness hereafter; I rest always pressed to be proved

Yours in the Lord Jesus ever assured, Richard Carpenter.

CHRIST'S LARVMBEL OF LOVE REsounded.
IOH. 15. verse. 12. This is my commandment that ye love one another as I have
loved you.
AS courageous Judith having Judith. 13. 11.
beheaded Holofernes, returned to the gates of Bethulia, crying, open, for God
even our God is with us: So having made headless some vprising doubts and
difficulties which would have hindered my approach to this place, I appeal this
day to the gates of your hearts, calling and crying open, for God is with us,
even our God, the true Emmanuel Christ Jesus. In whose name I am at this time
to deliver a message unto you (Right worshipful and well beloved in the Lord)
not by way of petition to entreat you, or by fair promises and persuasions to
induce you, but by a precise peremptory commondement to require and charge you,
to perform a most necessary Christian duty of mutual love and charity one
toward an other: My message is taken out of the 15. Chapter of John the 12.
verse, the authority whereof depends not on the Messenger which brings it, but
on the majesty of God which sends it. Wherefore with reverence and attentive
regard harken unto it. This is my Ioh. 15. 12.
commandment that ye love one another as I have loved you. Which words commend
unto us all a lesson of love fit to be learned and practiced, not only on this
day of the fair, but all the fair days of our life: And so much the more to
be attended unto, because in these last and worst days, iniquity increasing,
deceit, dissimulation, craft, covetousness, hatred, and contention every
where abounding, the love of many, yea of Math. 24. 12*
most is waxen cold. For the blowing up of the dying embers whereof, least it
be wholly extinguished, our Christian hearts ought to give the best
entertainment to that which Christ has here commanded, This is my
commandment etc. Which charge of our Savior being somewhat enlarged, unfolds
it self to our better understanding in these terms, as though he had said: My
Disciples, my friends, and Paraphrasis textus.
followers, so it is that very shortly, I am to finish that great work of man's
salvation, for which I was sent into the world, and to seal the revealed
mystery of your redemption, by my precious blood, by my bitter death and
passion. Emulation.
commandment, which I do most urge, and by mine own example most plainly
teach, That ye love one another. That ye which profess Christianity, and are
joined together in my name, by my spirit, bear a most fervent and unfeigned
affection each to other (not but that your enemies and strangers, yea all men
in whom nothing but nature does appear, are also to be beloved) but the
fellow members of the same mystical body, yea brethren by grace and adoption,
by calling and profession Chtistians, begotten by the same word and spirit,
redeemed by the same blood, Heirs of the same promise and kingdom, are to
have the chief seat of love in your souls, and as it were the highest and
fairest room of true affection in the house of your hearts.

This is my commandment that ye so love one another, As I have loved you.
That which I have commanded in word, I have for your instruction and imitation
practiced in deed, I have made my life the example of my law, and therefore
may justly require, that love at your hands, whereof I have exhibited my self
a continual pattern before your eyes. I have most authority to command, and
my example should be of most force to induce; you will readily imitate him of
whom you think well, especially having received some great benefit from him;
now of whom should you think better then of me, and to whom are you more
beholding then to me, who have endured a miserable life, and must suffer a
contemptible death for your sakes; wherefore my disciples, my friends, my
followers, Love one another as I have loved you. And with cheerfulness and
constancy follow my example in this principal and most necessary Christian
duty of mutual charity each to other. This (beloved) is the full sense and
meaning, the maine drift and substance of my text. Which as a fountain of
living water divides it self into three streams, and in the division
thereof, commends to the duty of our observation these three distinct parts.

3 parts 1. A commandment or law prefixed, to win the Division.
greater reverence and attention, in these words, this is my commandment. 2.
A duty of mutual love enjoined to work in us the deeper impression in these
words, That ye love one another. 3. A reason or motive thereunto, grounded on
Christ's example, most worthy of imitation, in these words. As I have loved you.

This is my commandment* a commandment Illustratio ^^^tus.
of absolute sovereignty, and therefore to be obeyed; that ye love one
another, a work of excellent use and commodity, and therefore to be
performed; As I have loved you, an example or president of singular
sufficiency, and therefore to be followed.

This is my commandement] Not an earthly Prince though his ordinance be as full
of sovereignty as his seat of majesty: Neither heavenly Angels, though in
them all things make remonstrance of great power, and glorious excellency,
gave this charge; But the Lord Jesus, the Lord of Angels, the King of kings,
the Destroyer of Satan, the Savior of Saints, the Conqueror of death, the
Giver of life, whose goodness is such, as all are bound to love him; and
greatness such as none may disdain to obey him, the Lord Jesus Excelsus in
honor, August. enchyr.
suauis in amore, dives in haereditate, primus, supremus, liberrimus: The first
before all in eternity, the highest above all in infinite majesty, most free
and absolute, at his own liberty, by nature essential and very God, by
distinction of ^. Heb. 8. ^. Ioh 1. ^. Heb.
persons the Son of God, by office the word of God, by holiness the express
Image of God, the brightness of his glory, the sweetness of his goodness,
the greatness of his power. The Lord Jesus, the Creator of our persons out of
nothing, the Reformer of our natures out of sin, the Redeemer of our estates
out of misery, the raiser of our souls, from death to life, and the exalter
both of body and soul unto glory. Whose coming in the flesh the Patriarchs
honored, by their prefiguration, Princes and potentates by their expectation,
John Baptist by his preparation, the three Wisemen by their offerings and
oblation, the Angels by their song, the Sheepheards by their joy, Simeon and
Anna by their praise, even the Lord Jesus whose coming into the world was thus
honored, going now out of the world he thus commanded This is my commandment.

2. That ye love one another] That ye the natural branches of Christ the true
vine, of whose fullness ye 1. Ioh. 16.
have all received, from whom the soule-sauing-sappe of meekness, mercy,
love, liberality, temperancie, and humility, and all other spiritual graces,
are alone derived, that ye which are Christians, not in name only, but in
nature, not in outward appearance, but in real existence; not only by
external profession, but by eternal election, and internal regeneration,
that ye 1. Pet. 1. 21.
love one another. Brotherly, with a pure heart fervently, being of one mind,
will, and affection, not having your wills divided, your judgments distracted,
your affections alienated, but supporting one another through love, and always
consorting as Brethren therein, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace. This is Christ's commandment Ephesians. 4. 3.
that we which profess Christianity in sincerity should love one an other,
vere sine fictione, pure sine corruptione, Hug. Card.
constanter sine defectione: Truly without dissimulation, purely without
corruption, constantly without flinching or defection.

As he has loved vs] Who, so loved us that he made a progress from dignity
to baseness in his incarnation, from the joys of heaven to the pains of hell
in his bitter passion, to free us from sin and death, and to purchase for us
everlasting life and salvation. Who so loved us, that he turned the white robe
of his innocence into the red robe of his martyrdom, that the blacks rags of
our sins, and sable weeds of sorrow might be converted into triumphant robes
of gladness and joy. Who so loved us, qui tantus, tales, tantillos, Bern. in
lib. de dibde. Romans 5. 10. Ephesians. 2. 4. 1. Ioh. 4. 14.
tantum prior gratis dilexit. Who being so great and high in power and dignity,
loved us so bad by nature, so base in quality; and that so much, and that
before we loved him, and that freely. Who so loved us, as Bernard speaks,
Bern. in Cant. Ser. 20.
Suauiter quod carne^ induit, prudenter quod culpa^ cauit, fortiter quod mortem
sustinuit: so sweetly investing himself with our humanity, so wisely avoiding
every sin and impiety, so strongly in suffering death for us, and triumphing
over the powers of darkness victoriously, that this his love in respect of the
admirable and unmatchable perfection thereof, may rightly be termed and
entitled, A Nonesuch. Whereunto there has not been, been? no nor shall be
the like, like? no not the like in any degree. O amor sine exemplo, sine
gratia, sine merito, charitas sine modo. Ambr: Bern:
O love without it is like, o grace without merit, charity without measure! yet
in what manner or measure we can, let us (beloved) imitate this his measureles
love, and Love one another as he has loved us. And thus much for the
explication, division and illustration of my text. Now in the fear of God, let
us come to the handling of such plain and profitable doctrines, and
observations, as naturally arise out of the same. First, in that our Savior
gives so especial and strict a charge unto us of loving one an other in these
words, This is my co^mandme^t that ye love one another, etc. Thereby to incite
us the rather to love, and to teach us how to love one another. As I have loved
you.

Hence two doctrines, without wresting of the words from their proper scope,
are to be gathered.



nearer to that perfection of love, whereof Christ gave himself an example. Of
these three points of doctrine, their reasons, and uses in their order; and
first of the first, namely,

This is my commandment: there being nothing which our Savior does urge more
and call for, nothing which we his servants should more study and strive for,
then this vicissitude of love, and commerce of kindness, and practice of
mutual charity and goodwill. To have our hearts enlarged to our Christian
Brethren, and the doors of our souls and kind affections, set wide open to
the Saints, is that wherein he takes most pleasure and contentment, and
wherein we must take most pains, and use our chiefest endeavor and employment.
And indeed if we may judge either of the necessity of a duty on our parts, or
the acceptablenesse of a duty on his part, by the often and earnest repetition
of a commandment; then this wants not that proof. For besides that the
whole life of Christ, from the day of his conception, to the day of his
passion, was nothing else, but an actual service and continual preaching of
love and charity: even now when he was to take his last farewell of his
disciples, and to sing his dying song, as he went along to the place of his
apprehension (where Judas was to betray him most unnaturally; and that for
thirty pieces of silver most basely; and that to the murdrous Jews, most
cruelly; and that without cause most unjustly) even now did he thrice repeat
this precept, and three several times exact this duty. In the 13. chapter of
his gospel and 34 verse, he does (as I may say for fear of failing, twice
repeat in one sentence the same precept: A new commandment give Ioh. 13. 34.
I unto you that ye love one another. As I have loved you, that ye also love
one another. He calls it there a new commandment, not because it was then first
brought forth, but because the most absolute and excellent pattern thereof,
was then seen in himself; as also because he would have it new and always
fresh in their remembrance, as ^ charge newly given, that they might not suffer
it at any time, to be cancelld out of their minds and memories, and therefore
not content to speak it once, he doubleth it saying, that ye love one another,
that ye also love one another. As if he had said, of all things forget no^
this love, this is an inexhaustible fountain which cannot be drawn dry; a
precious mine, wherein the more ye dig, the more treasure ye shall find;
this is so sweet a grace, Mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilaeum in cord, as
Beruard speaks: and so full of profit and pleasure, and so fully taught by my
example, that at any hand, ye should not forget this, To love one another. So
likewise in this place which is my text, you see how he urges it, as a matter
of great consequence and importance; and as the famous Troiane Aeneas,
encouraged his son Ascanius, Disce puer virtutem ex me verumque labore^: So
does our Savior here from his Ioh: 15. 17.
own example make way for the better entertainment of this commandment, Love
one another as I have loved you. Again in the 17th Ioh. 17. 21.
verse of this chapter, he in general terms redoubleth the charge, These
things I command you, that ye love one another. And yet not content to give
the same commandment, with so many repetitions, he commends this duty also
to his Fathers care, chap. 17. begging of Ioh. 17. 21.
him, that he would keep all his in one, meaning both that they might be kept
one with him, and not to be plucked from him by the violence of any temptation,
affliction, or sinful affection; and also continue in unity and amity
amongst themselves, not having their judgments distracted, or their affections
estraunged from one another, but be united and knit each to other, in an
indissoluble band of love and good-liking. These proofs would suffice to make
plain the necessity of this duty: but because our Savior urges it so much,
his best beloved disciple, S. John, forgets not to press it, and that
often, and that hard and close unto the soul. I will not strive to show this
out of the Ecclesiastical history. Where it is recorded of him, that he
Eusebius. Socrat.
would shut up many of his discourses and maine sentences of his Sermons with
this sweet Epiphenema and exhortation, My little children love one another. The
evidence hereof is most pregnant in all his Canonical Epistles, in the third
1. Ioh. 3. 23.
Chapter and 23 verse, 1. Epist. he puts us in mind of Christ's
commandment in these express words, That is his commandment 1. Ioh. 3. 11.
that we believe in the name of Jesus Christ, and love one another as he has
commanded: and in the 11th verse of the same Chapter, as also in the 5. verse
of the second Epistle, 2. Ioh. 5. v.
he commends this, from its antiquity; for a good thing the more ancient, the
more excellent. This is the message or commandment, that ye had and heard from
the beginning, that ye love one another. It is a duty as old as Adam, wherein
wicked Cain failed, in that he slew his brother, and thereby abides in death;
but on the contrary we know that we are translated from 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
death to life, because we love the brethren. Whereby the Apostle sets it
down, for a sure mark of Gods children, to be loving one to another, which
he does more at large amplify in the 7, 8, 9, and 1. Ioh. 7. 4. 16.
12 verses of the fourth Chapter; and in the 16 verse concludes with this
prouerbiall sentence, never to be forgotten, or committed to oblivion, always
to be practiced, and by Christians put in execution: God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. I will not loose my self or
you, in heaping up any more needless proofs in a point so plain. S. Paul
Rom: 12. Cor: 1. 13. Ephesians: 4. 2. Col: 3. 12.
is very vehement in pressing this argument of mutual love, but I will leave
his plentiful exhortations, to your private meditations, holding it sufficient
for the confirmation of this doctrine, that Christ Jesus made his whole life,
the example of his law, this law of loving one another, being no other than an
irrefragable and most sound axiom, arising out of the irreprehensible and most
sincere actions of his life, who was borne, lived, and died to restore man to
the love and favor of God, to promote love and friendship betwixt man and man,
and to express the aeternitie and bounty of his love to all mankind, who
brought love as the prince of peace, and our King conquering death and Satan,
the enemies of it; who wrought love as our Priest, giving himself to his
Father, as a peace offering for it; who taught love as our Prophet, abundantly
praising and preaching it, often pressing and always practicing it, the more
strictly to bind us thereby to the embracing of it, and to the willing
obedience and conformity of our wills to his will therein. And so much of the
doctrine or lesson it self.

Let us now consider a few reasons, to riuet this doctrine and observation, the
better to persuade our hearts in this behalf, which reasons are especially
four.

First we are to love our Christian brethren, because God loves ^easons of
^octrine.
them.

2. Because we are near of kinn and condition, and tied together by many
linkes of love.

3. Because this brotherly love will make us most serviceable each to other in
Church or Commonwealth.

4. Because it will prevent a multitude of mischiefs and inconveniences.

Let these reasons be weighed a little in the balance of our Christian
judgment, and we shall soon perceive, if Satan have not exceedingly
captiuated our senses, that the love of our Brethren is a most requisite and
necessary, a most commendable and profitable thing.

loves, there we should love also, and that earnestly: for it is good in a
good thing to love earnestly, Gal 4. and where he hates much, Gal. 4. 18.
we should hate also, and that vehemently, for as our vehement hatred, cannot
but be good, if that No:
which we hate be naught, so our earnest love can never be naught, if that
which we love be good, and how can that be otherwise then good, which God
being goodness it self does effect. If then it be a sufficient argument, and
incitement to us to hates any thing, which is an abomination to God, then it
cannot be a weak consequent, but a strong encouragement for us on the
contrary, that where God loves most, we should love most also. Now the Lord
loves all his Creatures in a general manner, approving them as the
workmanship of his own hands, and therefore there should be a correspondency
in our affections, to love and like all the Creatures, as they are his
Creatures. But as for Christians, they are his peculiar, Christians Gods
peculiar
his children, the sheep of his pasture, his treasure, his chosen generation,
by all the possessiue, relative, respective terms of alliance and unity his,
as near and dear to him as the apple of his eye the signet of his right hand,
always under the eye of his protection and providence, under the light of his
loving countenance, the proper object of his looks and love too. Wherefore as
he does tenderly regard them, such should be the feruency of our love and
affection ^ John 5. 1.
toward them: for every one which loves him which begat, will love them also
which are begotten by him, and if we say we love God whom we have not seen,
and yet hate our brethren whom we have seen, we are but liars. It cannot be
1. John. 4 20.
that the fire of our affection should burn hot in the Lord, and but like ice
(that is to say) no whit at all toward those which are his sons, servants,
and chief friends. We have an old Proverb; somewhat homely, but true, and by
common experience verified, Love me, and love my dog, how much more, Love me,
and love my son or my wife. Seeing then God has adopted all true Christians,
(be they never so full of infirmities, wants, and imperfections) as sons
unto himself, and has married them in mercy and fidelity, giving them in
assurance thereof, a ring with six spiritual Hose. 2. 19. 20.
Jewels, described by the Prophet Hosea: How can we then ever approve our
selves to be well affected toward him, if our behavior be strange, our
kindness cold toward them? if either with cruel Ahab we prefer our beasts
before our brethren in the time of scarcity, as I fear too many have done. Or
else with churlish Nabal, deny the smallest 1 Kings 18. 5.
relief to David's servants, or to the servants of the Lord in their extremity,
2 Samuel 25. 10. 11. verses.
as too many amongst us at this day do. O let us blush for shame, and sigh for
sorrow that we cannot, that we do not affect, where the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost conspire with joint consent to favor: and let this be a
provocation to us all, to blow up the dying coals of our almost extinguished
charitable affections, and seeing our good things cannot extend to thee Lord in
Heaven, (as the Prophet speaks.) Let our Psalm. 16. 2.
well doing be extended, toward his Saints on earth. And because God does not
only love them, but professes this love, and proclaims to the world; that to
be done to himself, which is done to Christians in his name. Let us no way
exclude them from the benefit of our best friendship, which are every way so
much interrested in his bounty and favor: Let us love them, because GOD our
Father loves them, and this is the first reason.

most justly challenge kindness and good affection at our hands. If a man do
not show kindness to a stranger, to whom he is no way obliged, (though yet
such a one is not to be unkindly entreated) Exodus Exodus 22. 21.
22. 21; We do not so hardly censure him for it: but to be ungentle, froward,
and discourteous to those that are near unto us, and to whom we are bound by
many strong linkes of nature, duty or desert, we commonly hold it for a savage
and unnatural part. Now christians are all linked one to another in the
strictest, surest, and most inseparable manner which can be thought: we are
sons of the same Father, espoused to the same Master; we are heirs of the
same promises, we are begotten with the same seed of immortality; we travel
1 Pet. 1. 23.
toward the same Country: we are bound for the same haven, and in one word for
all: we are members of the same body, all flesh of Christ's flesh, and bone of
his bone; all fed at one Gods table, all eat 1 Cor. 12. 12.
by Faith of one Christ's flesh, all drink of one Saviors blood, all baptized
in one Baptism, all professing the same Faith, all sanctified 4 Ephesians. 4. 5.
by the same spirit. When we are knit together in so many bands of unity,
shall we not consort together in the same Christian affection of love and
Charity? If the Brother have cause to love the brother and be unnatural if he
do it not; if the husband have great reason to affect his wife, and be
barbarous if he affect her not; if the mother have cause to tender her child,
and be accounted cruel if she regard it not: Then how worthily are we
Christians to be esteemed cruel, barbarous, unnatural, if we regard not,
affect not, love not one another, seeing we are nearer each to other, then
Parent to Child, Husband to Wife, Brother to Brother? Arctius enim gratiae quam
naturae vinculum. Austin.
For the knot is straiter, and the band stronger of Grace, then of nature: the
love of Parents to children is natural, of children to Parents loyal: of
husband to wife reciprocal: of friend to friend mutual, but the love of
Christians, is all these, and more then these; immortal: for we are members
of the same body mystical, as near as the hand to the shoulder, the shoulder
to the neck, the neck to the head, the very members of one another. Where
then are the mutual 1 Cor. 12. 21.
offices, which as Pilgrims here on earth, though Citizens in Heaven, we
should perform one to another? When Merchants or travelers of the same
country meet together in a strange land, as Englishmen in Italy, France,
Spain, or Turkey, many of you do know, the most of us may easily conceive,
what a league of love there is betwixt them, what passages of kindness, and
exchange of courtesy, how forward they will be to benefit and pleasure one
another. Sith then we are no other then strangers, and Pilgrims here in this
world, all traveling toward heaven, the place of our habitation (paulumque
morati, serius aut citius metam properamus ad vnaem:) should we not much more
embrace each others acquaintance, and strive to express our bounden love, by
the readyest performance of the best Christian duties, wherein we might do a
favor, or be a furtherance, for the good and welfare one of another. In a
word, we are all tied together by many linkes, therefore we should have much
love.

will make us prone and willing to employ our wit, our wealth, our credit, our
knowledge, our counsel, our commodities, and all for the good of all. All
other things without this, make us worse: riches will make us wanton or
wilful, to our selves or others injurious. Honor will make us high minded,
and in contemning others, whom we should countenance, ouerhasty and
presumptuous. Wit will make us selfe-conceited, and either privately
slanderous, or publicly schismatic and seditious. Knowledge will make us
swell, to be ambitious, curious, censorious, scientia immo omnia haec entia
inflant, charitas Bern. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
solum aedificat: Knowledge yea wit, honor, wealth, and all do but blow and
puff us up. Charity only does edify and build us up, and others, and puts
it self forth to the uttermost, to be helpful and beneficial to all. The
Proverb is Epich.
ancient and excellent, (...). Love is all communicatiue, of a diffusiue
spreading nature, not for it self alone, but ready to impart wisdom, wealth,
counsel, credit, head, tongue, hand, foot, limbs, life and all to the
parties beloved. It makes the soul of him in whom it resideth to be more,
Vbi mat, quam vbi animat. Bern.
Where it loves, then where it lives or quickneth. Yea, it is of so
sovereign virtue and power, that it not only restrains us from rendering
Matthew* 26.
evil for good, as Judas did to Christ, which was monstrous villainy; and
curbeth us from doing evil for evil, as Ioab did to Abner, which was a
sinful infirmity; or 2 Samuel 3. 27.
urges us to do good for good, as Ahashuerus did to Mordecay, which Esth. 6.
10.
was but natural justice and equity: but it easily draws us to recompense
evil with goodness, as David did to Saul, and this is without 1 Samuel 24.
exception, complete Christianity. He therefore that has a loving heart, and
heartily affects the members of Christ, be he what he may be, for outward
respects never so base and contemptible, he is notwithstanding a profitable and
behoouefull member in the Beehiue of Christ's Church, he brings either wax or
honny by his pain or his prayers thereunto, for the benefit of many, (...),
such a good man is a common Epict.
good But on the contrary, he that has an haughty ungentle spirit, in whom the
gross humors of pride and covetousness, have bred a stoppage* or obstruction
of all liberality and kindness, so that in all his connsails, cogitations and
actions, he aims at his own proper gain or glory, not a whit regarding his
Christian Brethrens good, or relieuing them in their woes, their wants, their
wrongs and miseries: such a one be he whatsoever he be in the eye of the
world, never so great or glorious, he is yet in the vineyard of Christ, but as
a briar or thorn, and in Christ's Church, but as a humming droan. As the Church
of Sardy had a name a live but was dead, so has he And what the Apostle says
of the Revel. 3. 1 1 Timothy 5* 6.
voluptuous woman, 1 Timothy 5. 6. that may truly be said of him, that he is dead
whiles he lives: For a man without love is as a dead Carcass without life,
or like to a swollen arm or leg, that must be wrapped up and covered, and
tenderly touched, but when it comes to the use, it will not, it cannot
stir, it does us no service. Wherefore as any man desires to approve
himself a fruitful branch of Christ the true Vine, or would that his life
should be officious, or beneficial for the use and commodity of Christians;
yea for the glory and service of God; so let him strive to store up in his
soul this rich treasure of Christian love, which as an odoriferous perfume,
smells a far off, and causes a sweet sent where it is not seen, or rather
as the eye of the soul, (charitas enim oculus mentis) Greg. in mor.
is quickened in espying out all occasions and oportunities of doing good to
others. It is not like to fire in the flint which can hardly be stricken out:
but like fire in the Amor non est ignis in filice sed in sinu.
bosom, which cannot be concealed. This will make us in all cases, and in all
places to open our selves to our friends, and to deal friendly and faithfully
in the affairs of them which we do affect, and to help them by counsel, to
comfort them in grief, to succor them what we may in the sundry disasters of
fortune, which daily and casually occur, as Jonathan dealt 1 Samuel 19. and 20.
chap.
with David. And to shut up this reason, Love it is alone, which makes us all
one, This makes us vigilant to pry out every occasion, wise and prudent to see
every opportunity, painful and diligent to take any labor, cheerful to
undergo any travail or trouble, constant and indefatigable in going through
any business, for the bettering and benefiting of each other: If therefore we
would not be (which it is a shame any Christian should be) as stocks and
Images, which stand in a wall and do nothing, let us labor for love, which
will both set us a work, and get us wages, make us serviceable to each other
on earth, and advance us hereafter to be Saints in Heaven, according to that,
Charit as est viaticum in mundo, No:
Thesaurus in coelo, and this is the third reason, why Christians should be the
more willingly obedient to Christ commandment, of Loving one another.

John 2. It stops ^oh. 2. 14. v.
the course of ill violent passions, it makes them to turn sail or come
under the Lee: It causes the proudest man to stoop, the chollericke man to
be calm, the niggerdest man to be liberal, so far forth as it possesses
them, or it is possessed by them in any degree. This stinteth strifes and
contentions, musleth up censurings, and backbitings, blotteth out murrings and
repinings, and keeps the heart from thinking, the mind from conceiving, the
tongue from speaking, the hand from acting any thing which is evil, and
therefore is rightly compared to the herb panacaea, or to the general
medicines of the Physicians, called panchresta, which are good for all assaies,
accomodable to every disease. Pliny.
Saint Austin of purpose speaking August. de laud char.
hereof, says thus, Charitas est mors criminum, vita virtutum, gluten
animarum, quae diuisa unit, confusa ordinat, inequalia sociat, imperfecta
consummat (i.) Charity and love is the very death and queller of vice, the
life and cherisher of virtue, the glue, and as it were the sodder of the souls
and affections of Christians: It unites things divided, puts in order
things confused, matcheth and consorteth things unequal, and consummateth
things unperfected. In a word, love is the fulfilling of the Law, the
complement of Christianity, Romans 13. 18. Coloss. 3. 14.
and the band of perfection; the friend of a good conscience, the companion of
a lively faith, the prouoker of good words, the promoter of good works, the
throne of God in earth, the delight of God in heaven. Love speaks with the
tongue of every virtue. 1. Ioh. 4. 16.
Pity bids thee to succor the penurious, and indigent. Justice bids
thee to give every man his own, and not to wrong the impotent. Patience
bids thee to suffer. Mercy bids thee to forgive, to help, and relieve
others. But the voice of Christian love commands all these. A coward inflamed
with this holy spark of heavenly fire, banisheth fear, and becomes valiant
and manfull. The covetous oppressor commanded by the imperious resolution of
love, becomes liberal and bountiful; The ambitious Tyrant mollified hereby,
becomes humble, meek, and merciful; so true is that saying, Amor Aug. de
ci^^^. Dei l. (...).
meus pondus meum illo ferer quocunque feror: My love is my loadstone, where it
sets me, there am I fixed, whither it leads me, thither am I carried, so
that to close up this point: He that has much love, does least harm and most
good, he that has little love, does more harm and less good, and where no
love is, this is nothing but harm and no good at all. Whereof I may say as
Abraham Genesis 20. 11.
did of Abimelechs house, Lo Iereah Eclohim baernacon, the fear of God is not
in this place. But on the contrary, where love dwells, I may conclude
thereof as Ezekiell does Ezekiel. 47. 35.
his prophecy, Jehovah Shammah, God is there.

Not to stand longer on the point, you may see now by these proofs, and
reasons, it is most plain, that spiritual Christian love is a duty most
requisite and necessary to be exercised amongst Christians, if ever we will
be like God our Father, who is the God of love, or like unto our profession
which is the communion of Saints and the profession of love, or decline from
evil and do good 1. Cor. 13.
which are the properties of love.

Now very briefly (before we descend to the use of this doctrine, Definition
of love.
and come to the application) let us consider what this love is, which will
work such wonders, and bring men to such perfection. Love in brief is an
affection of the soul, by which it does settle it self in the liking of a
good thing according to the kind and degree thereof: or love is that power of
the heart, whereby it does rest it self in the approbation and liking of that
which is good in its kind, and according to the degree of goodness therein.
Hence (...) to love, is by the Greeks derived (...) from resting it self
quieted, and contented with the thing beloved. So then spiritual love is an
holy affection of the Spiritual love.
soul, whereby the soul in a spiritual manner does rest and settle it self
in the liking and approbation of a Christian man as he is a Christian and
according to the excellency of a Christian. When therefore in our hearts and
souls we are quietly and fully possessed with the liking and embracing of any
of our fellow members and brethren in Christ according to their worth and
dignity as they are Christians, then do we love them indeed spiritually, and
as Christians ought to love one another. I say not when we love and like them
as they are men, thus and thus be friended, thus enriched, thus enobled, thus
outwardly beautified, or accomplished, for this is carnal and partial love.
But when we lovingly regard them as they are Christians, considering the
spiritual excellency of them in Christ, and knowing that divine perfection
which is in Christ for them and in them, in some measure as the Apostle
speaks, and 2. Pet. 1. 4.
accordingly fixing our affections on them, and highly esteeming and heartily
loving them, as God does both us and them for Christ's sake. This, this is true
Christian spiritual love, and that love which our Savior here requires, the
which as a golden chain consists of these three linkes, the good will of
Threefold cord of charity. Bernard.
the heart, the good word of the mouth, and the good work of the hand.
(Triplex enim funiculus charitatis, beneuolentia in cord, benedictio in ore,
beneficentia in mann) As Bernard well observes. Wherefore he which in this
manner tenderly affects his Christian Brethren (whatsoever they be for
outward respects) that he can unfeignedly wish well unto them in his heart, as
Moses did unto the Israelites, Exodus Exodus 32. 32 1. Sam. 19. 4.
32. and bless them with his mouth, and speak good of them as Jonathan did of
David* 1. Sam. 19. and can be willing according to his ability to help and
relieve them in their necessity as Nehemiah did Nehem. 5. 8. 9. 10.
the Jews, by lending to them both corn and money freely in the time of
extremity, Nehemiah 5. 10. and all this for Christianities sake, he does
rightly and in truth love them, as Christ has prescribed, and in what measure
any of us, shall so do, in the same degree we have obtained that spiritual
amity, and are possessed of that Christian charity, which Christ Jesus does by
so many Commandments as it were extort, and with an holy kind of violence
wring from us.

should strike a terror into us, and make us all both to blush forshame and
sigh for sorrow, since we have been so cold and frozen, as it were, in the
performance of this duty of mutual love which Christ with such urgent
vehemence does so often require at our hands. Did he, he I say the total of
our love, the hight of our hope, the utmost of our fear; the way never erring,
the truth never failing, the life never ending, so precisely prescribe unto us
the way to love in truth, that we might attain to life; and have we (as the
wise man speaks) Ioh. 14. 6.
in the error or forwardness of life, sought death? have we so much
forgotten, and neglected, or most sparingly practiced, that lesson of love,
which he so abundantly commended unto us by precept, and the example of his
whole life? Here then is matter of bewailing and lamenting for the best of us,
to consider how we have been failing or fainting in this duty, and how we
have come far short of discharging that charge, which Christ has laid on us.
We cannot deny but Christians are most dear unto the Lord, yet who of us made
them so dear unto himself? we cannot but confess that we are tied unto
them many ways, and that most strongly, but yet whose heart does so fully
embrace them? whose heart does so rest it felfe in the liking of them as they
are Christians? may not the best say, that his affections are strongly settled,
on such and such rather as they be his friends or kinsfolk, his Creditors, or
Benefactors, then as they are good men, good Christians, and the friends of
Christ Jesus? If any be so far gone, that they dare deny this (for you shall
have those which never had any love, or came near the dwelling place thereof
most full of boasting, that they love their neighbors as themselves) spectemur
agendo, Let us come to the trial and make enquiry of our love by the effects,
and our common dealing, and daily practice will soon convince us of the
contrary. My little children says Saint Ioh. 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
Let us not love in word or tongue only (for this lip-labor wordy love is not
worthy the name of love) but in deed and truth. Well then in Greg. in mor.
Ne^^^ aliquem amat qu^m non vult esse meliorem.
truth and by our deeds let us in particular by our selves examine our own
souls, how we have loved our Christian brethren, and what service we have
done unto them for Christ's sake? What? have we been desirous that our
neighbors amongst whom we dwell or others with whom we have conuersed and had
comerce, and acquaintance, should be the better for us? have we left among
them some tokens of our goodness, some monuments of our godliness? have we
refreshed them in their need, with the sweet savor of our kindness,
gentleness, mercifulness? have we been content that some portion of their
sorrows and disastrous fortunes, should be laid on the shoulders of our
friendship, that thereby we might alleuiate and lesson their weight, least
they should otherwise sink under the burden of their wants, and woes? have
we in causes of extremity helped them by our counsel, sustained them by our
comfort, supplied their necessities by the superfluity of our wealth, supported
their decaying estate by our credit and countenance? have we endured much
trouble and travel for their sakes, and yet think no labor too much, to do
them good, because they are the members of Christ? these are buddes, blossoms,
and fruits of Christian love indeed (for true love as it makes us to grieve
when the person beloved is decayed in estate, or despised, so it makes us to
use all good means for his vpbearing, and to rejoice when we see him benefited
or advanced) But where is this love become now? when as a number of those that
be accounted, and we must hope are indeed Christians, though very weak ones,
do make their own profit, pleasure, and preferment, the end of all their
doings, dealings, and endeauours; yea ^ Phil. 21.
when as the most of those which profess Christianity, think all their riches
little enough to feed their fancy, to satisfy their pleasure, to maintain
their pride, and not a penny in a pound bestowed on the poor members of Christ
Jesus, when by experience we find all their time to be little enough to follow
their delights, their bowling, dycing, carding, hawking, hunting, and not an
hour in the week to be spent for the good of poor Christians, either in
relieuing their wants or in redressing their wrongs. When all their money is
little enough to make bargains, to purchase land, to chest up in their
Treasury, or to set forth to usury, and not a shilling in the hundred
employed for the use and benefit of their needy neighbors or distressed
brethren? Nay is it not almost every where, come so to pass, that a wanton
Gallant, or rich Glutton, though he be an open profane man, and a known
Whore-master, Drunkard, or blaspheming Swaggerer, shall yet have more kind
entertainment at our house, and better usage at our hands, than the best
Christian, being of mean estate, and in some manner of want? Are we not for
the most part carried as the blind world is, with that squint-eyed partiality,
so much condemned by the Apostle Iam. 2. Iam. 2. 2.
Let one come in with a gold ring on his finger, in gorgious apparel, we use
him with passing kindness, a chair and a cushion, presently, you are heartily
welcome, I am glad to see you well, the best cheer, the best lodging, the best
attendance, all is too little, much ado, and more then needs: But let a
poor Christian come to crave help at need, either the fatherless for
releife being distressed, or the Widow for justice or right being oppressed, a
scornful eye, a short answer, cold comfort, a near hand, a needy reward,
all is too much, little done for such, and that as good as nothing. Is not this
the common fashion, and the corrupt affection of the most of us? O my brethren,
beloved in Christ Jesus, is this to love one another, with a true Christian
love, as Christ has commanded? No: No: Christianity, Christianity, godliness
the Image of God in the poor members of Christ, and true godliness it self
is the proper object of this spiritual love. A man for his wisdom is much to
be regarded, for his religion more highly to be esteemed, but if eminent
sanctity beautify his profession, he is more entirely to be embraced: every
excellency in moral virtues carries with it a sweet grace and motive to
amability, but such is the bright luster of Christianity, that it alone
causes a more sollide friendship, love and amity; whom we affect for this,
and that earnestly, them we love indeed, here Christian love will pour
forth it self, here it thinks all that is don too little, no cost too much;
here it will spend and extend it self to the uttermost. Hence it was, that
Saint Paul was so kind to the Galathians, of whom he was disgraced, and so
lovingly devoted to the unkind Corinthians, who the less loved him, by how
much the more he loved them: surely the love of Christ and Christianity, as he
confesses, moved, yea constrained him hereunto. That sweet influence 2. Cor.
5. 14.
of kindness, which the spirit of God infused into his soul, testifying to
his heart that Christ was his Redeemer, and had done so much for him, would not
suffer him to be unkind, but did even offer an holy violence unto him, and
compel him to love all men in Christ, and to seek to gain all men unto
Christ. This was it which made the three thousand which were converted Acts 2.
to be so abundant in charity, that they communicated each to other, whatsoever
he had, every one esteeming his purse (as it is indeed) the common treasury,
and his house a common Inn for all the members of Christ. This caused Lydia
and the Iay lour Acts 16. to Acts. 2. 44.
be so kind to the Apostles, so full of love in heart, and outward behavior,
to the rest of their fellow Christians, they felt in themselves Acts 16.
the life of Christianity, and the hope of the life to come through Christ,
and in consideration hereof were liberal and bountiful of whatsoever good
things the liberality of Christ had made them partakers and Stewards of. O that
we did live now in that loving and giving age to Christians. O that our fathers
charitable devotion, sequestered from superstition were more abounding in us. O
that we did not live in the winter of the world wherein charity is grown
chilling cold, and the fire of true Christian love, is as it were put out and
quite extinguished by the water and frost of self love, the love of the world,
and worldly covetousness. But alas, so it is that there is a general
defection in this duty of Christian love, and our eyes may with David gush
forth Psalm. 119. 136.
rivers of tears, yea our souls may drop down tears in secret for the
same. reprehension.
whose heart does not in steed of love, give often and long harbor unto
hatred? whose lips are not polluted, with breathing forth of malice, and
malicious conceits? whose hands are free from offense in this behalf? Do not
all of us, come within compass of just reprehension, for that we have so much
neglected and transgressed this commandment of love so often proclaimed and
earnestly pressed by our loving Savior? whence is it that the false surmise of
a stale wrong does leaven our hearts with malice, and envy, and evil
intentions for twice twelve months together, so that we can neither think
well, or speak well of some of our neighbors, much less do any good unto
them? is it not because we have not tasted one sponefull of the sacred liquor
of Christian love, which is able to quench the fiery fury of any conceived
wrong? whence is it that Christians meeting together in a seeming love at Gods
table, do at their own tables so severely censure, vpbraide, backbite, and
slander one another, little regarding the Apostles admonition, if ye backbite
one another, take Gal. 5. 15.
heed least ye be devoured one of another, When is it that they are so
quick-sighted to see, and open mouthed to speak of their neighbors
imperfections, not before God in prayer for them; or in their bosom with
grief in secret to reclaim them, but in public amongst friends and foes to
disgrace them? Is it not for want of the holy spark of spiritual love? Whence
is it that Nero-like we write our enemies in marble, and register their
unkindness with deep Characters in the Tables of our minds and memories, and
upon every light occasion, vex them with suits in law or lawless suits: And in
brief arm both our tongues, and our hearts, and our hands to do mischief to
the name, goods and persons of those whom we should call Brethren? Is it not
because this christian love, the seasoner of our life, which makes us full of
good words and good works is banished from our society? Oh where is that love
now, whereof S. Paul makes mention unto the Corinthians, and 1. Cor. 15. 5. 6.
7.
sets it out by 15. properties, viz. That it is patient, bountiful, and not
puffed up, that it disdaineth not, seeks not her own, thinks not evil,
rejoices not iniquity, but in the truth, hops all things, believes all
things, endures all things, and so forth. Was love then neither malicious, nor
disdainful; nor suspicious, Nemine^ enim suspicit Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 59.
amor, nec dispicit quidem, as Bern. speaks? Was it liberal then and not
auaritious, humble and not ambitious? surely then is love changed much since
the Apostles time, or else ter^as astrea reliquit. Love with Justice is fled
from the earth, or couched in a narrow corner thereof, so that it is most rare
to find, being utterly exiled from the common society of men, as appears even
at this day. For otherwise how comes it to pass tbat in buying and selling,
and mutual marchandizing, men use so many false weights, false lights, and
crafty sleights. Mill actus ve^itos, and mill piacula tentant, to deceive
one another, and to hurt their brethren, whom they are bound to help? is it
not for lack of the holy spark of spiritual love? Whence is it that the
swallowers of the poor, and those iron hearts against whom the Prophet Amos
lifts up his silver Amo^ ^. 5.
trumpet, do wait when opportunity will buzz into their ears, the desirous
news of a new moon or Sabbath, that they may set forth their wheat, and make
the Ephah small, and the shekle great; and falsify the weights by deceit, and
buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes; is it not because their
hard hearts are not softened by the holy fire of true christian love? And that I
may lead you along as the Prophet Ezekiel was Ezekiel: 8. 13.
by the spirit, from abomination to abomination, and each greater than other:
Whence is it that subtilty sets on fire the tongue of the crafty buyer, so
that (as the Wiseman speaks) he cries out, It is naught, it is naught, but
when Prou: 20. 14.
he is gone boasts of his bargain, and gives his tongue the lie? Whence is
this dissimulation and division betwixt the tongue and the thought, and
breaking forth even for a little red or white earth, into lying, swearing, and
forswearing too, is it not for want of a dram of spirituall-vpright-dealing
love? Whence do these corrupt streams of extortion, usury, oppression,
bribery, mercilesnes, and cruelty, and the like crying sins, noisome in
quality, heinous in degree, dangerous in effects, proceed and flow? is it not
from the fountain, or rather the dead sea of an unloving, uncharitable frozen
heart? In a word, hence it is that some (I fear too many of this place)
rightly termed Latrones puluinarij, gracious thieves, do fill their coffers
and enrich their treasury by the Devils Alchymistry, by Jewish usury, little
better than Achans the every, Josh: 7. Josh: 7.
Hence it is that others justly called griping Extortioners, and merciless
oppressors do enlarge their livings and possessions by damnable designments,
as bad as Ahabs cruelty, 1. King. 21. Hence it is that the Rulers say with
shame, 1. King. 21.
Bring ye, Hosea 4. 15. and not only Hosea 4. 15.
superiors but inferiors too, maintain their estate by unjust dealing,
cogging collusion, and Trades more sinful and shameful than Gehezies bribery,
2. Kin: 5. To conclude, hence it is, that Monopolites, 2. King. 5. 7.
ingrossers, regraters, forestallers, transporters, and cormorant like
corne*hoorders (qui in loculis includunt salutem inopu^, and Stella in Luc.
in tumulis sepeliunt vitam pauperu^.) do secretly laugh at the public want
and penury, and make an exceeding benefit of the times extremity, and sacrifice
to their yarne and nets of policy: Hab: 2. 16. and Habac: 2. 16.
grind the faces of the poor without measure, without mercy, sowing in hardness
of heart now, and I fear hereafter reaping in horror of conscience, (for
judgment merciless, shall be to those which show no mercy, Iam: 2. 13.) even
James 2. 13.
because their corrupt hearts are not seasoned with the sovereign sauory salt
of Christian love and charity. The having whereof, as it is an Antidote and
preservative to keep us from running into mischeife and impiety; so the want
thereof is the original of all ungodliness and villainy. Witness this that
(without exception) most horrid and devilish powder treason plot, and damnable
project of our Antichristian adversaries, quibus nulla fides, nullus amor nisi
quantum expedit, according to the rule of the Parthians, with whom no
conscience, no religion, no band of nature, consanguinity, allegiance,
alliance, affinity, oath, or Sacrament stands good, so it withstand their
mischief plotting purpose: Witness this, I say, that their barbarous bloody
purpose and designement of cutting of all the heads of our Land, as it were
upon one and the same shoulder, by one Catholic blow of blowing up the
Parliament house, and so Judas like purchasing a field of blood, with no less
price, then the life of King, Queen, Prince, and the chief State of this
Land. Alas had they been possessed, but with one grain of that truly
Catholic Christian charity, whereof they do so fondly boast, they would
never have harbored the thought, much less have set forward the practice of
so unheard of a villainy, of a sin so exceeding sinful, that no pretense of
religion can excuse it, no shadow of good intention extenuate it, God and the
heavens condemn it, men and the earth detest it. But certain it is, they had
set apart all bowels of compassion and natural affection, all thoughts of
humanity, pricks of conscience, sparks of reason, and bars of religion, all
fear of God and reverence of men, in being authors of so execrable a work of
darkness and desolation, which to hear would make a man's ears to tingle, and
his heartstrings to tremble, and in steed of the spirit of love, they were
possessed with the Angel of the bottomless pit, the spirit Abadon, the spirit
Apoc: 9. 11.
of destruction and devastation. I would to God this spirit did not reign and
revel so much now adays also in the midst of them, and even in their
desperate hopes, make them to bear deadly hatred to this our Sion; so that
they cry, down with it, down with it, to the ground; but so it is that
notwithstanding the discovery and defeysance of their manifold mischievous
designments, and our miraculous deliverance, (for which the Almighties mercy be
ever magnified amongst us) they continue still our irreconcilable enemies, in
their erroneous bitter crosbiting books, they profess it; by their daily
machinations and practices they show it; God grant we do not hereafter to our
greater wrack and woe feel and find it. Howsoever let us be confident, and
commending the protections of our persons, and the defense of our cause to the
God of truth, who has hitherto graciously delivered and defended us, from
those massacring bloudyminded underminers of his truth and gospel; Let us
follow the truth in love, as the Apostle exhorts, Ephesians. 4. and love one
another, ^phes. 4. 15.
yea even our enemies, as our Savior in my Text commands, and be no ways
partakers of those fornamed gross sins of craft and cruelty, which proceed
from hatred, malice, covetousness, and envy, but be every way abundant in good
works, which are the fruits of true Christian love and liberality.

rightly conceiving what they be in Christ; this prayer, this meditation will
be an effectual means to make our love abound; whereunto if we shall adioyne
the commendable practice of other Christian duties, and in our often meetings,
confer and discourse charitably and conscionably of holy things, and make one
another partakers of the benefit of our reading and hearing, especially on the
Sabbath day, surely this would be as fuel, and towe, and bellows too to blow
and stir up this grace of love in our hearts, and to make it flame in a great
measure to our mutual comfort and commodity. 2. Tim 16.
Wherefore as ever we would have loving hearts, and be loved of him that alone
knows our hearts, let us always strive to have our companies and societies
seasoned with holy and religious exercises, and in steed of profane talking,
ripping up of other men's faults, scoffing, and jesting, which are things
uncomely, Ephesians: 5. and Ephesians. 5. 4.
faults too common in our private meetings, and as it were the puddle water to
quench love, and the incentiues to provoke hatred. Let us on the contrary, use
godly conference, and delight in the practice of prayers, and singing of
Psalms, and the like duties of Christianity, as often as our company in any
place is thereto required, whereby occasions of hatred may be prevented, and
whereby Christians perceiving the spiritual excellency which is in each other,
may be the faster glewed, and linked, and obliged in their judgments, wills,
and affections one to an other. Finally to shut up this point with the
exhortation of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. Beloved be ye followers of Ephesians. 5.
1, 2.
God as dear children, and walk in love as Christ has loved us. And, Let
every man please his neighbor in that which is good to aedification, Rom: 15.
2. and the To: 15. 2.
God of peace and love grant that in the eternal peacemaker Christ Jesus we
may love each other aeternally. And thus much of the first doctrine, and of the
several uses and reasons thereof. And so (the time cutting off the intended
handling of the two other points following) in the fear of God I commend you
all to the grace of his word, which is able to build you Act. 20. 32.
further, and to give you an inheritance with those which are sanctified: and
commit that which has been spoken, even this little grain of love to the
ground of your hearts, and the blessing thereof to him, who is able to make an
handful of corn to prove like the top of Lybanus, Psalm: 72. 16. and the
Psalm: 72.
least grain of mustard seed to ouertop the trees of the forest, Matthew: 13.
Math: 13.
though he which sowed the same depart: Even to God the Father the
inexhaustible fountain of goodness, the Son the incomprehensible, wisdom of
the Father, and the Holy Ghost the indivisible power of them both; To whom
being three in persons, one in essence, the same only wise, immortal and
invisible Diety, we ascribe, and desire to be ascribed, all praise, power,
might, majesty, and dominion now and for ever. Amen.

(...).

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND worthily regarded, Sir ROBERT CHICHESTER, Knight
of the noble Order of the BATH, etc. increase of all grace and true happiness
here, and the blessedness of immortality hereafter.
SIR, Being often solicited by the earnest entreaty of men of no mean
quality, to publish these slender fruits of some few days labor, and to let
them pass to the eye of this censorious world, as things in their judgment
worthy longer life, then to fade with the hour or two, to which they were
destinated: I have at length after much reluctancie, yielded consent to
satisfy their importunity, addressing my self with the more alacrity to the
business, because I saw opportunity offered thereby, to let the world see, how
I reverence your person, regard your place, and unfeignedly desire to make
public acknowledgement of my bounden service to you, for all such beneficial
favors as have bin at any time vouchsafed unto me, in that place and calling
wherein by Gods grace I stand Sentinel, for the soule-sauing good of you and
many others I hope, whom the Lord of grace has ordained to glory: being in
duty and conscience obliged, so far as the nature of my ministerial function
shall guide me, and the power of my poor ability can reach, to return unto
you the interest of spiritual bles sings and the comforts of a better life
eternal, in lieu of such corporal benefits as under Gods providence, and your
patronage, I do enjoy, for the maintenance of this frail life temporal.

As a pledge of which duty, I do here humbly present unto your eyes that
funeral sermon, which lately you heard with your ears, presuming that by your
favorable acceptance and benign countenance, you will give unto the same a
kind of second life, especially, because it was penned and preached upon the
occasion of your much esteemed friends death, and at the solemnising of his
burial. In the which if there be any sentence of instruction, rule of
direction, example of religious resolution, whereof your christian wisdom
(according to the pregnancy of your wit and apprehension) shall make a
conscionable and comfortable use, to the furtherance of your salvation; the
matter and occasion of my thanksgiving to God, for his blessing on my poor
labors shall hereby greatly be enlarged, and my respectfull readiness, upon
your encouragement to undergo the like employment, shall be much augmented. Thus
humbly beseeching your Worship to rest assured, that (how weak and mean
soever my counsels and endeauours be) my vows and prayers (for your truest
happiness and honor, and your virtuous and worthily honored Ladies greatest
welfare) are, and shall be ever, most powerful and plentiful, I rest always
pressed, to be proved your Worships, in all

Christian obseruancy truly devoted, RICH. CARPENTER.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, though it be often true, that he which puts in Print,
what he preached in the pulpit, binds himself to loose a portion of his
former reputation, because hereby his sayings become dispirited and without
life, in regard whereof the Author of this Sermon could have wished, that the
day of its birth, had been the day of its burial: yet notwithstanding,
yielding to the often and earnest importunity of his friends, and aiming rather
at thy benefit, ^hen affecting his own credit, he has been content to
suffer the same in its native attire, without any new dress at all, to pass
to the public view and thy proper use. Use it then and peruse it at thy
pleasure, and enjoy it in the Lord, for thy greatest good in life, and comfort
in death. Thus neither desiring to be commended of the ignorant for learned,
nor caring if he be condemned of the learned for ignorant, but wishing to both
as to himself, the increase of all true saving knowledge and Christian
happiness; he bids both thee and them heartily

Farewell.
Suspend thy judgment, censure not in have:
But ere thou judge the first, first read the last.
THE SOVLES SENTINEL.
JOB. 14. 14. If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of mine
appointed time will I wait till my changing shall come.
THis whole Chapter (Right Worshipful) is as a large map of man's misery and
mortality, and this verse now read unto you is as a lively mirror and
looking-glass of Christianity, representing at once three proper objects to
the Division.
eye of our understanding.

1. The frailty of this life present.

2. The certainty of the life to come.

3. The duty of watchfulness to be performed in the former, that we may
joyfully attain the latter.

If a man die, implying by force of Logic this plain and peremptory
proposition, Man must die, there is no remedy.

shall he live again? where by a question of admiration he does put it out of
all doubt and question; as Greg. Mor.
D. Gregor. notes on this place, that man dying shall surely rise and live
again.

commended to our consideration. h. v* All the days of mine appointed time (as
Tremelius interprets it) or of my warfare (as D. Greg. and Ierom read it) will
I wait till my changing shall come.

Wherein three particulars are remarkable. a secret concession, or granting of
that which was before questioned. an open confession, that our time here is
prefixed as the time of Sentinels in a watch, of Captains and soldiers in the
war, so that when the great General of heaven and earth shall call away the
greatest, there is no means of withdrawing, no place of avoiding, no power of
resisting.

The last is an express declaration, that this war-fare shall have an end, and
a change shall come, which

of the wicked is to be feared. the godly to be desired. all to be expected.

These (Beloved in Christ Jesus) are the several streams into which this
welspring of living water naturally deuideth it self. From the which very many
profitable Christian instructions, for the edifying of us in an holy faith and
godly life, might easily be deduced. But as the Eagle which Esdras saw in a
vision 2. Esd. 11. 1
had twelve wings, but only three heads, and as the vine which Pharaohs Butler
saw in a dream, Genesis 40. 10
had many clusters, but three chief branches: so this fruitful parcel of
scripture having many wings, many clusters, has yet but three maine branches
and heads, or principal points of doctrine of me to be discussed, of you to be
considered, if the Antecedent of my text with the consequent, the Interrogation
If a man die* shall he live? with the Inference and illation, All the days of
mine appointed time will I wait etc.) be rightly compared together.

1. Obser. The first, that The term and time of our life is appointed, and die
we must by ordinary prescription, and this I will term mors in Olla, death is
our lot.

2. Obs. The second, that A change shall come by death, and there shall be a
general resurrection, and this I will call spes in vrna, hope is in the grave.

3. Obs. The third, that we ought to prepare daily for death, and to live in
continual expectation of the judgment to come, particular and general, and
this I will entitle Viaticum in Via, provision in the way to bring us to the
iournies end of everlasting felicity: of each of these and their uses in their
order, as God shall give grace and assistance, and you (rightly regarded)
continue your Christian attention and patience, and first of the first.

1. Doct. The time of ma^s life is determined, Mors in Olla death is our lot.
and death by no man, by no means can be avoided. Seneca.
Vita cito auolat, nec potest retineri; mors quotidie ingruit, nec potest
resisti. Life flies away speedily, and cannot be retained; death comes on as
hastily, and cannot be resisted. What one writes wittily of the Gra^marian,
that being able to decline all other Nounes in every case, he could decline
death in no case, the same may serve fitly for every man's Motto and Memento;
The longest liver having no stronger charter of his life, then that Job 14. 2.
He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down; vanishes as a shadow, and
continues not. Yea the very stoutest and strongest, Gaeber, the man of might,
prowess, command and greatness, as the word in my text imports, must yield
to deaths stroke, and dance in deaths ring, leaving behind him only this
poor remembrance.

Ovid. 12. Metam.
I^m cinis est, and de ta^ magno restat Achille
Nescio quid: paruam quod ^ix been complete ornam.
If a man die, death is inexorable and inevitable, and admits of no ifs and
ands, man Gaber.
whatsoever or wheresoever he be must needs die. Iamuth.
Man in the old testament has three appellations; he is called Adam red
earth, homo ab humo, in respect of the substance whereof he was first created;
Aenosh mortal or wretched, in regard of the misery to the which by his fall he
was inthralled; Ish or Gaeber, vir a virtute, man indeed for his virtue and
valor as here he is considered. But notwithstanding these different
appellations, man without difference in respect of his final estate may rightly
be compared unto a tree, which sooner or later must be cut down by the axe of
death, to be fuel for burning, or timber for building: to become a cursed
brand in Satan's furnace, or a blessed beam in Christ's palace.

Indeed the time was (but a short time God knows) when as man the mortal
mirror of immortal Majesty, created in admirable perfection and beauty, and
endowed with the richest gifts and graces which could be compete^t to a
creature, did not only in the exquisite integrity of his soul lively resemble
his makers purity, but also in the most sound and healthful temper of his body
carry some excellent savor of his eternity, for the continuance whereof, it
pleased the Almighty to place him in the goodly garden of Eden stored with
matchless variety of whatsoever delights heart could desire, especially
garnished Genesis 2. 9
begnetz hacaijm with the tree of life, whose fruit had by Gods ordinance
naturally virtue to banish hunger, thirst, sickness, age, death.

So that if Adam had never sinned, mankind had ever continued in this his
primary estate and condition, free from sorrow, sickness, death and
corruption. But alas now the case is much altered, and lamentable is the
alteration, for no sooner had Adam by the entisement of Eve in eating the
forbidden fruit transgressed, but God passed upon him and his posterity, this
sentence of temporal condemnation never to be reuersed.

Genesis 3, 19
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return again.

As Leui was in the loins of Abraham when he paid tithe or tribute Heb. 7. 5
Heb. 7. so were we in the loins of Adam, when he plaide the traitor, his
disobedience is in us inexcusable, the doom and punishment of death due unto
it is irreuocable; and all of us, of what estate age or degree soever we be,
ar^ (without some rare and extraordinary dispensation, as that of Enoch and
Elias was) liable unto the same. Though Satan a liar from the beginning said,
Genesis 3. 4
Non omnino moriemini, ye shall not die at all, and Mother Eve minced the
matter with Genesis 3. 3
Ne forte moria mini least perchance ye die, yet God said expressly in that day
wherein thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Genesis 2. 17.
moth tamuth morte morieris, thou shall surely die, yea through the hereditary
contagion of this original rebellion, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, Heb. 9.
27.
It is decreed that all Adams sinful progeny shall once die. This is a
statute enacted by three states of the highest court of heavenly parliament,
and never to be repealed. We came by the womb, and must to the grave, whether
old or young, God knows how soon: death stands ready in the gate for old men,
and they cannot live long: death lies in ambush for young men, and they may die
soon: the difference is no more, the one goes to death, and death comes to
the other.

Belshazzars Emblem is on every wall, and his Impresa upon all flesh, able to
make the proudest Tyrant, the frolikest gallant, the prophanest Church-robber,
if not to blush for shame, yet to tremble Dan. 5. 25.
for fear r Mean mean Tekel vpharsin. God has numbered thy days, he has
balanced thee; thou art found lighter then vanity, away thou must.

We must needs die said the wise woman of Tecoah to David, 2. Sam. 14.
you a sovereign and I a subject, you a man and I a woman, we must needs die,
and are as water spilt on the ground. David confessed so much on his deathbed,
1. King. 2. 2
I must go the way of all the earth, and holy Job, Job. 30. 23.
I know assuredly thou will bring me to death, which is the house appointed for
all the living, as a haven for all shipping. It may be when a ship is come to
the mouth of the haven, a blast drives it back again, but thither it will
arrive at last, so must we to the gates of death. Bern: de conu. cler.
Non miseretur inopiam, non reueretur diuitias as D. Bernard speaks Death
pittieth not the poor, regards not the rich, spares not any.

It is not the Majesty of the Prince, or holiness of the Priest, strength of
body, feature of face, learning, riches, honor, or any secular regard can
plead against death, or privilege any person from the grave. Nereus the fair;
Thersites the foul; Pyrrhias the Cook, Agamemnon the King, Absolon with his
beauty, and Lazarus with his blaines must all the same way. Say Prince, say
pesant, say rich; say poor, say all with holy Job. Job. 17. 14
c. 17. Corruption thou art my father, rottenness thou art my mother, worms
and vermin ye are my brethren and sisters, say grave thou art my bed, sheet
thou art my shrine, earth thou art my cover, green grass thou art my carpet,
say death demand thy due, for thy seasure is without surrender, and from thy
sentence there is no appeal.

To this purpose the Prophets proclamation is so general, Isay. 40. 6
All flesh is grass. All flesh without any exception, is grass, which by the
Suns angry countenance, winds blasting, frosts nipping, man's trading, beasts
devouring, and many other ways is turned to corruption. All flesh is grass,
and the beauty and grace thereof is as a flower. 1. If any thing be more
seemly, more amiable, more goodly, more gracious, more glorious, in man it is
but as a flower, which though it be more fair in show, and more fragrant in
smell then grass, yet as the grass withers, so the flower fades. And even
so, the greatest power, pomp, authority, estimation, and most illustrious
estate of man decays.

Where is that wisdom, which folly has not tainted? where is that honor,
which slander has not stained? where is that strength which sickness has not
impaired? where is that beauty which age has not defaced? where is that high
and happy estate of ruledome and renown, which envy and time has not
ruinated? where are either of these, or all together which death has not
spoiled and lodged in the grave?

I have seen (says David) an end of all perfection. Psalm. 119. 96
Happy are they which have David's eyes, and thrice happy were we if upon true
insight of our frailty and imperfection, we did daily and duly forethinke of
our end and dissolution.

To incite us whereunto, Isaiah as the Lords Herald, is commanded to deliver
the former message, not whisperinglie in a soft still voice, such as that was
wherein God passed by Elias, 1. Kin. 19. 5.
but to cry aloud, and to make such a noise, as would move him that were
musing, rouse him that were slumbring, awake him that were sleeping; so
careful God is we should learn this lesson, and lay it to our hearts, that
our continuance in this life is but momentany, and our best estate (as the
princely Prophet protests) in this world Psalm. 39. 5.
altogether vanity.

For the better riuetting whereof in our minds and memories, the holy Ghost by
his penmen and actuaries, Moses, Job, David, Solomon, Saint Paul, and others,
has used very significant similitudes, comparing man's life to a Iam. 4. 14.
Vapor that vanishes: to a Sap. 5. 12.
Ship that saileth in the Seas, and the path there of cannot be found in the
floods: Reu. 15.
to Glass: 2. Cor. 2. 5.
to a Booth: Sap. 5.
to a Bubble: Job 14. 12.
to a sleep: Job 14. 2.
a shadow: Job 7. 6.
a weuers shittle: verse. 7.
to a wind: verse. 9.
a cloud: Isa. 29 8.
a dream: Psalm. 90. 9.
a thought: Sap. 5.
a passage: yea Sap. 5. 9. Psa. 39 and 103 1 Thessalonians. 4.
a swift post unto death, and what not? which argues vanity and mutability.

But what need have we of these resemblances, or of so great a noise to put us
in mind of our mortality? since we have both a continual sight of it in
others, in our parents, brethren, kinsfolk, neighbors, and acquaintance, which
are gone the way of all flesh before us: and also a daily sense of it in our
selves by the aches of our bones, heaviness of our bodies, dimnes of our eyes,
deafenes of our ears, trembling of our hands, baldnes of our heads, graynesse
of our hairs, that very shortly we must follow after them.

But alas, the Devil does so deaf us, the world does so blind us, and the
sensuality of the flesh makes us so extremely sensles, that we neither
hear, nor see, nor feel, what lies so heavy upon us. If we be young, we
fear not death at our backs; if sick we feel not death treading on our
heels; if old we look asquint and see not death before our eyes.

Indeed in temporal affairs, to procure security, we will all plead
mortality, and in some cases of coffeehouse, we will complain with Saint
Austine, that our life is a vital death, Splendida miseria (...) a glittering
misery, a living calamity, wherein Austin.
our best repose is full of anguish, our greatest security without foundation,
our travel often without fruit, our sorrows and cares always without profit,
our desires without success, our hopes without rewards, our mirth without
continuance, our miseries without remedies, dangers affrighting us, diseases
afflicting us, afflictions greeuing us, griefs tempting and tormenting us on
every side.

But notwithstanding these pleadings and complaints, the most of us put the day
of death far from us, and would have it rather to be the lot of others, then
to belong to our selves; being herein like to Cuspinian. Hist.
Vespasian, who seeing at once two presages of his death, a blasing Comet, and
a gaping Sepulcher, turned them both from himself, and forced the^ on others,
saying, the sepulcher gaped for the old Empress Iulia, and the blasing star
pretended the death of the King of Persia which ware long hair; thus we
dally and delude our selves, yea in a vain persuasion, that we shall see many
days, we sing sweet lullabies to our senseless souls, like to the rich
corn-hoorder in the 12. of Luke, who having plenty, and for the same safe
custody, promised to himself a kind of eternity, saying, Luke 12. 19. 20
Soul take thine ease, and why? thou have goods laid up for many years. But
alas, one day of ease did he not see. Fool (says God) this night thy soul
shall be taken from thee, and thou shall not live to enjoy that pelf which
made thee joy to live, but as hitherto thou have led a life ever dying, so now
thou must go to a death never ending, this being the last will and testament
of such wealthy worldlings. Bern.
Relinquunt diuitias mundo, corpus sepulchro, animam diabolo: They leave and
bequeath their riches to the world, their bodies to the grave, their souls to
the Devil.

by their great burdens of silver, plate, and other treasures wherewith they
are laden, but a gauled back; for when they come to their Inn or iourneys
end, their treasure is taken from them, and they tired and gauled as they be,
are turned into a filthy stable: so wretched worldly men get nothing by their
coffers crambde with crowns, their barnes filled with corn, their bags stuffed
with coin, but a conscience pitifully gauled with many a grievous crime, and
when they are come to the iourneys end of a toilsome life, stripped of all they
had, and thrust tired and gauled, tortured and grieved, as they be, into the
stinking stable of hell, having nothing there but ugly serpents for their
daintiest food, damned ghosts for their best company, horrible shriekings for
their chiefest music, and weeping and gnashing of teeth for their choicest
mirth. This doubtless is the case of all careless and secure persons, they may
wanton it for a time, but shall want at last; they may state it, and stout it
too, but shall stoop at last, and though they have now the sum of their
unsanctified desires, they shall have at length their full deserts.

Alas these deceive themselves much, by mistaking their tenure, taking that to
be a free gift, which God intends for loan, and holding themselves owners, not
only of lands but of life too in fee-simple, whereof they are but depositaries
and tenants at will.

But be not thou deceived o man whatsoever thou art, which hear me this
day, be not deceived, God is not mocked, thy days are numbered, away thou
must, death mounting on his Reu. 6. 2.
pale horse is posting toward thee, here is not thy rest, thou dwell in a
house of clay, in a tent pitched to day, removed to morrow.

Thou art a Didapper peering up and down in a moment, and as Aristotle rightly
terms thee, thou art, Fortunae lusus, inconstantiae Aristotle apud Sto^.
imago, temporis spolium, imbecillitatis exemplum. Miserable infirmity such is
thy person, foolish inconstancy such is thy prosperity, inconstant honor such
is thy crown, sins, sorrows, sickenesses, such thy comforters and
companions, depart thou must and be gone God knows how soon, Serius aut
citius mortis properamus ad oras.

David in the Psalm. 82. 6.
82. Psalm. sets men as high as they may go. I have said ye are Gods,
(nuncupatiue not substantive, as the schoolmen note) and the children of the
most high. This is man's advancement. But he brings them as low, and has a
But for them, But ye shall die like men* and ye princes and great ones shall
fall like others, here is his abasement. He that made the world at first of
nothing, can mar the greatest in a moment: he brings Potentates to nothing,
and makes the Judges of the earth as vanity. Isa. 40. 23.


Hormisda the Persian Ambassador said to Constantius the Emperor, demanding of
him how he liked the City of Rome with the Amphitheater, the Capitol, and
other such rich monuments as were showed unto him. Ammian. marc. lib. 16.
In truth I think it the most glorious City in the world, and all therein
pleases me well but this, that I see men die at Rome as elsewhere. The same
may truly be auerred of all other places, from which death cannot be
excluded, but if it enter not in at the gates with full force, it will ascend
by the windows with great fear. Ier. 9. 21.


To which purpose Socrates smilingly replied unto his friends that would have
rescued him from the officers, which were to put him to death. No I will no
longer live, except ye can tell me of a place without the territory of Athens
where men never die.

The King cannot save himself by the multitude of his host. Psalm. 33. 16.
Visuntur magni parua sepulchra Iouis says the Poet, Tamberlaine the terror
of the world died with three fits of an ague, as Paul. Iouius. de vit. ill.
Paulus Iouius writes. Saladine that mighty pagan which wan the holy Land from
the Christians, in the height of his pride and pomp, was surprised by death,
having no greater solemnity at his funerals then this, a Herald carrying his
shirt or shroud on a spear or spade, and crying aloud, G. Parad. in Heroic.
Hae sunt reliquiae victoris orientis: These are the conquests of great
Saladine.

Alexander that famous Monarch, acknowledged in his own person this humane
frailty, when in the Olympicke games falling in the dust, and perceiving
therein the length of his body, he confessed with grief that Q. Curt. in vit.
Alex.
seven foot of ground were sufficient to make him a grave, Iuuenal.
Mors sola fatetur quantula sunt hominum corpuscula.

Wherefore be our days never so few, or our years never so full, resolve we
must, wheresoever, or in what state soever we be, to come ere long to the
gates of death, there is we see no means of withdrawing, no place of
absenting, no power of resisting. God alone can say, Exodus 3. 14.
sum qui sum, I am what I am, and will be what I have been. Men can say nothing
else, but I am and shall not be.

Witness this the Lacedaemonians song of three parts; wherein the Elders sang,
we have been strong and are not now; the Youth replied, we shall be strong
but Plutarch.
are not yet; the Middle-aged sang, we are now strong but shall not be.
Witness this Jobs sons at a banquet, Job 1. 19.
suddenly destroyed; Judge. 9. 53.
Abimelech brained; Holofernes beheaded; Adrian with a Gnat, and Leo with a
fly, both Popes, suddenly choked. What shall I say more? All mankind must
needs sing this. Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possimus esse quod hic est: we
are, or have been, or may soon be, such as this breathles subject is. The
doleful pageant of whose mortality, is here presented to our sight, having in
every color a speaking grief, in every grief a mourning tongue, able to
work sad thoughts in our hearts, if not to wring salt tears from our eyes.

So that Hesiod may tell of Nectar Hesiod.
and Ambrosia, and sweet wine of the Gods, which will make men immortal, and
Pliny may pratle Pliny.
of the Herb Moly, which (he says) has virtue to make an old man yongue;
and Historians may write of certain fortunate Islands, where exceeding long
livers, for their prolonged life, are called Macrobioi. But alas, these fables
rejected, nothing can be indeed invented, whereby life may be prolonged beyond
its limited time; as burning torches we are daily consumed, as potters
vessels every hour endangered: Yea so dangerous a Sea is this world, wherein
we are wafted, so boisterous are the winds and waves of woe wherewith we are
tossed, and so extremely hazardous are the rocks of profit, pleasure, and
preferment, against which the silly Bark of our souls is carried, that in
every calm we fear a storm, in every storm we are swallowed quick, in all
our ease we look for pain, in every pain we pine away, in all our rest we
feel disease, in each disease we post to death. The very elements themselves
by burning, infecting, drow ning, and swallowing many, becoming caters for our
corruption, who were at first created for our consolation. Yea all things in
this life, making way like a marshall for death, that she may triumphantly
pass through the field of this world over the carkases of her slain.

Thus death rules on earth as eternity in heaven; there all live, here all
die. Ho^.
Omnes vna manet nox and calcanda semel via Lethi. It is Josh. 23. 14.
the way of all the world. Sen. Epist. 25
Hac condition intraui vt exirem, said Socrates.

All, both good and bad are actors on the stage of mortality, enery one acting
a part, some of less, some of greater dignity; and the play being ended
exeunt omnes every one goes off the stage, and as Chesse-men without difference
Simil.
they are swept from the table of this world, wherein one was a King, another a
Queen, a third a Bishop, or Knight, into the earths wide receptacle.

The only distinction betwixt good and bad being this, that the good are
always actors of a Comedy, and howsoever they begin, they end merrily; but
the bad are actors of a Tragedy, and howsoever they begin or proceed, yet
their end is miserable, their Catastrophe lamentable: Death being to the
wicked the devils seriant to arrest them, and carry them without bail, to a
prison of utter darkness; which to the godly is the Lords Gentleman usher to
conduct them to a palace of everlasting happiness; yea death being to the
one as Satan's cart to carry them presenly to execution in hell, which to the
other is as Elias his fiery Chariot to mount them up to heaven.

For Eccl. 11. 3. Olimpiod.
As the tree falls, so it lies: As a man dies in the favor or disfavor of
God, so without changing or recalling he remains. Vnusquisque cum causa sua
dormit, cum causa sua resurgit, as D. Austin speaks. And to conclude Aug.
this point; on every man's particular death, his particular judgment
attends, either of the souls eternal bliss in heaven, or everlasting woe
in hell, which all the praises, prayers, and preaching of men, Saints, or
Angels cannot reuerse.

(R. W. and beloved in Jesus Christ) by the miscreant Atheist much contemned,
by the temporizing Politician greatly neglected, by the carnal gospeller
slightly regarded, by the Popes pardon purchasing, and pickpurse Purgatory
believing Papist corruptly entertained, and by very few of the best professors
so sincerely and seriously thought on and embraced, as it ought to be. For it
is the great fault, not only of great men, whose greatness makes them too often
forgetful of goodness, but even of us all, high and low, rich and poor, great
and small, that we never think on death or prepare to die, till we find and
feel we can no longer live.

Yea we so embrace, admire, adore, and dote upon this glittering world, and are
so loath to leave the ruinous tabernacle of our corruptible flesh, that we are
not content or willing to go to heaven, till we see there is no remedy, we can
stay no longer on earth. For the reforming of which carnal and worldly
affection, and for the better inciting and stirring of us all up to a more
frequent meditation and Christian consideration of our soon expiring life, and
speedy approaching death; let us now in the name of God descend to some further
use and application of that which has been so largely delivered.

And seeing we have been every way sufficiently taught, what through the
frowardness of our carnal disposition we are otherwise dull enough to learn,
that in this wicked world (which is nothing else but a shop of vanity, a
theater of iniquity, whordoms, stews, oppression, slaughterhouse, thefts
refuge, and for every sin a sinful sanctuary) there is no sure rest or
residence for us, and that here we have no continuing City, but live every day
in such incertainty, that the highest, healthiest, holiest, happiest among men,
cannot promise to themselves to morrow.

O let us I beseech you by the tender mercies of Christ Jesus, as we tender
the good of our own souls, hear and know this for our selves as Eliphaz
said to Job: Hear this and know it for thy self, Job 5. 27.

He that knows not what he should know, is a beast among men, he that
knows no more then he must needs, is a man among beasts, but he that knows
all he may know, and that for himself and his spiritual advantage, is a god
among men. Let us study and strive to be such gods, and ever remember that we
must die like men.

Let us esteem of every present day, as of the day of our death, and make such
conscience of all our ways, words, and works, as if we were presently to give
an account of our life. Greg. in Moral.
Qui considerat qualiter erit in morte, pauidus and prouidus erit in
operatione: He that thinks always of dying, will be circumspect in his
doing. The meditation of death is a Christian man's Philosophy. O let us as
careful christians, be continually exercised in this study, and as cheerful
and faithful professors, be always busied in performing those righteous and
religious duties which we would do if we were dying: and because that death
in all places wayteth for us, let us expect it every hour, suspect it every
where, and be at all times prepared for it.

And now at this time especially let the dreadful spectacle of death before
our eyes, be as a shrill trumpet, sounding aloud that message of Isaiah to
Ezekiah in our ears, that it may sink deep into our hearts. Isa. 38. 1.
Set thy house in order, for thou must die, and shall not live: Dispose of thy
temporal affairs, leave not thy lands entangled, thy substance intested, to
be a cause of variance to thy posterity; make thy will, do it in time, whilst
thy thoughts are free, thine affections stayed, and thy reason not distracted
with fear, or senses disturbed with pains, so shall thy testament be testatio
mentis, a witness of thy mind. Whereas on the contrary, if thou put over the
disposing of thine estate to that troblesome time of sickness, when thine head
aketh, hand shakes, thy tongue faltreth, thine heart faints, and every part
is pained, it may justly be feared, that neither thy words or writing will so
express thy meaning, but that thou shall be easily drawn to make a will after
another mind rather then thine own.

Set therefore thine house in order now, that thy soul be not wearied then
with secular affairs, when it should be wholly busied in making it self ready
for God. Yea set thine heart in order also, and forthwith dispose of thy soul
to cast up her reckonings; turn thy self as Ezekiah did 2. Kin. 20. 2.
to the wall, that is, from the world to God. Silentium a mundo, est susurrus
cum deo: consider what thou have been, examine thy self what thou art,
premeditate what thou shall be. Cogita vnde venis and erubesce, etc. Think on
thy Bern.
naked nativity, and blush for shame; on this worlds wretchedness and misery,
etc. Sigh for grief, on deaths approaching tyranny, and tremble for fear, or
rather that thou may be freed from fear, grief, and shame: make soon thy
souls peace with God and the world, and by faithful repentance turn from the
worlds vanities, to Gods seat of mercy, and weep as 2. Kin. 20. 3.
Ezekiah did, bewail thy sins past, keep a narrow watch over thine heart
for the time to come. Sow in tears that thou may reap in joy, Psa. 126.
And lastly, (not to leave so good a pattern in any point vnfollowed) pray too,
as Ezekiah did, though thou can not in the same manner. Lord remember how I
have walked before thee in sincerity and truth, yet to the same effect, for
mercy, as David did. Psalm. 25. 7.
Lord remember not the sins of my youth. Lord for thy goodness sake remember
me. And as D. Ambr. in Psalm. 38.
Ambrose did on the 38. Psalm. Lord forgive me my faults here where I have
sinned, for else where I cannot be relieved, except I have my pardon here, it
is in vain to expect the restfull comfort of forgiveness hereafter. Now is
the acceptable time, as St. Paul speaks, 2. Cor. 6. 2.
now is the day of salvation. This world is for thy repentance, the other for
thy recompense. Chrysostom. in Heb. cap. 2. hom. 4.
Hic locus luctae, ille coronae. Hoc cunaeorum tempus est, illud coronarum, as
D. Chrysostom speaks. This is the time and place of combatting, that of
crowning, this of working, that of rewarding, this is for thy patience, that
for thy comfort.

Now God is helping to all them which repent, and forsake their evil ways, but
then he will be a severe examiner, judge, and revenger of all our wicked
works. This is our day, wherein the Gospel of peace and remission of sins is
preached, that is Gods day, wherein all that have received this grace in vain,
shall be punished. They that will not now receive good counsel at a cheap
rate, shall then buy too late repentance at a dear hand.

For the Angel has sworn by him that lives for ever, that time shall be no
more, Reu. 10. 6.
that is after this life, there shall be no more time for repentance, for
remission, for salvation.

Life and salvation is here either lost or won, as D. Cyprian affirms,
Cypr. contr. Demetr.
after this life no effect or working of satisfaction avails. To whom D.
Austin accords, Aug. Epist. 54 ad Macedon. Epist. ad Hesyc.
saying, There is no other place to correct our manners and conditions, but
only in this life: and again, as every man's last day does leave him, so Gods
day, (i.) the day of judgment shall find him. Every man shall sleep and rise
again with his own cause; as he dies so shall he be judged.

Wherefore now whilst thou live, set both thine house and heart in order,
prepare thy soul and make it ready for the Lord, repose not thine unprepared
self upon the vain stays of deceiving Popery, upon Masses, Trentals, Dirges,
Pilgrimages, Prayers, Pardons, and such like superstitious shows of piety,
fondly invented to relieve souls in, and release them out of fained Purgatory.

Believe me, believe me, for what I say, the truth proclameth, the word
confirms, and too woeful experience testifies, the presumptuous hope of
help in Purgatory, Purgatory confuted.
has sent many thousand deceived souls to hell. That I may say no more, I can
say no less of that Popish puddle, if I say the truth; but as the Apostle said
of an Idol; an Idol is 1. Cor. 8. 4.
nothing, so Purgatory is nothing, it is none of Gods creatures, it is none of
Gods ordinances, it was never in his counsel, and therefore can never stand
with his providence.

It was never known in the Church of Israel, or a doctrine Exodus 24. 8.
sprinkled upon that people, with the blood of the old covenant, by Moses who
was Nom. 12. 7.
faithful in Gods house, and delivered all he saw upon the Mount. Moses
prescribing all kind of sacrifices in the old law, makes no mention either of
sacrificing or praying for the dead, without which Purgatory cannot stand.

As for the New testament, Purgatory has no footing or foundation therein;
this teaches plainly and plentifully, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. Gal. 3. 13. Romans 8. 2.
that the blood of Christ alone purges and preserves us, ab omni culpa and
paena, from all sin and all punishment due unto the same. Good old Simeon
never dreamed of Purgatory when he said, Luke 2. 29.
Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, for there is little peace in
Purgatory by the Papists own positions.

It never came into Saint Paul's mind, when he said. Ephesians. 1. 23.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. It was never reueiled to
the Angel when he spoke from heaven saying, Reu. 14. 13.
Write from henceforth amodo. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for
they rest from their labors. There is no pain in bliss, no toil in rest, if
this happiness be amodo, even straight upon the dissolution, as Ambr. Lorin. in
act.
Nescit tarda molimina spiritus Dei gratia; then there is no danger by the way,
no delay in supposed Purgatory.

Neither Lazarus, nor the rich man were acquainted with it; for Luke 16.
the one was immediately carried into Abraham's bosom, the other cast into hell.
He which said to the good thief (who came in the nicke of opportunity to beg
grace, while grace was a dealing) Luk, 23. 43.
This day shall thou be with me (not in Purgatory, but) in Paradise, knew
only two ways, the strait way to heaven, the broad way to hell, and therefore
speaks to his sheep, Mat. 25.
Come ye blessed, to the goats, Go ye cursed. The third way, he which knew
all things did not know, for indeed there is no such way to know It is only an
opinion of papizing Paganes, or rather paganizing Papists; heathenish in
devise, hellish for practice, Romish for gain. It is most injurious to the
blood of Christ, which alone purges our sin, pleads our cause, purchases
our peace, and to be brief, it delaieth and destroieth soul saving
repentance; without which there is no remission of sin here, and with which
satisfaction for sin hereafter cannot stand.

For there comes nothing to the spirits of them that are dead, but according
to that which they wrought while they were alive. Bona opera sequuntur bonos, to
crown them, mala opera persequuntur Cypr.
malos, to torment them.

Wherefore (to return to my purpose again; and not to suffer Popish peevish
Purgatory, with which I met only by the way, to transport me farther out of
the way) mine humble and hearty request unto you all is this, that ye would
agree with yo^ (...)uersary quickly, i whilst ye are in the way, and that ye
would all labor Mat. 5. 25.
and endeavor to be reconciled unto the Lord while it is to day. k Work o man
thy righteousness Eccl. 14. 16.
before thy death, as the wiseman counsels. l Do what thine Eccl. 9. 10.
own hand finds to do with all thy power, as Solomon advises. m Do Gal. 6.
10.
good unto all whilst thou have time, as Saint Paul admonishes. And n Work
while it is to day, as our Ioh. 9. 4. ^ril. in Johan. ^. 6. c. 14.
Savior exhorts; for the night comes (i.) the darkness of death wherein
none can work or wipe away those death breeding stains which in the day of
his life he contracted, as Cyrill notes.

Make have then and delay not, set to the work, enter persently into a strict
course of religion, answerable to thy place and vocation, and be not
discouraged, though at first a religious straight conversation seem to thee an
uncomfortable companion, for blessed is that mortification which so estrangeth
us from the world, that it changes us into the similitude of Christ.

O deal faithfully with thine own soul, sift, search, examine, and ransacke
the same, to come to a true sight, sense, and unfeigned sorrow for all thy
sins, especially thy bosom beloved darling sins; extenuate them not as
Saul did, but aggrauate them as 1. Sam. 13. 12. Dan. 9. 5.
Daniel did, and all other thy transgressions, against thy self, in the
consistory of thine own conscience, by the multitude and contagiousnesse of
them, in that by them many have been infected, of whose repentance thou art
not assured, but that some of them being dead, may for any thing thou know
be damned, and others living may be in the like dangerous estate too, even for
those sins which in thy company, by thine example, or through thine occasion,
they committed.

O consider this, blush for shame, split for sorrow, fret for indignation, o at
the recounting hereof; 2. Cor. 7. 11.
for such evils are not only with the tears of weeping eyes, but with the
drops of a bleeding heart to be lamented. And that thy repentance ^incere
Repen^ance.
may not only be general in the lump, but personal and particular
according to every transgression of the law, article against thy self,
recapitulate thy sins, make up a catalogue of thy offenses. Item, for lying,
swearing, whoring, backbiting, sclandring: Item for plotting of mischief, for
vexing men with lawles suites in malice, for abusing Gods creatures in
drunkenness and gluttony, for abasing his Magistrates and resisting authority,
for profaning the Sabbath, neglecting the word preached, and despising the
ministry. Item for spending so many thousands to maintain thy pride, so many
hundreds to satisfy thy lust, so many score of pounds to please thy fancy, and
not a pound, no scarce a penny bestowed in Gods service, or on Gods servants to
right their wrongs, or relieve their wants. The total sum being the manifest
and manifold breach of all Gods commandments.

Bring all these particulars in an holy Pro. 28. 13.
confession before thy maker, Iam. 4. 10.
and cast thy self down in humble submission and hearty contrition before his
seat of mercy, earnestly begging pardon with Psalm. 51.
David, Ezr. 9.
Esrah, Neh. 13. 22.
Nehemiah, Dan. 9. 19.
Daniel, for them, resolving never again in the like wilfully to offend him,
but being jealous over thy self with a godly jealousy, and studious in all
things henceforth to please him, not only carefully performing those duties of
piety, appertaining to his immediate worship, which he has commanded, but also
in matters of less moment and consequence; in eating, drinking, recreating thy
self and conuersing with others, conscionably conforming thy self to those
rules of modesty, equity, and sobriety, which in his word he has prescribed,
that so upon thy sincere repentance and sound reformation, he may be
reconciled unto thee: and thou (desiring in heart, and indeauouring in life, to
become a new man) may obtain this inestimable favor of him, to have all
the former accounts and sinful bills of debt crossed here, for otherwise thou
shall never have thy quietus est hereafter.

To conclude this point with D. Austin. Age poenitentian dum Aug li. de mir.
^ac. scrip* ser. 36.
sanus es, sic si ages, dico tibi quod securus es, quia poenitentiam egisti eo
tempore quo peccare potuisti. (i.) Repent whilst thou art in health, for in so
doing thou art without danger of hurt, because thou have repented at what time
thou might have sinned. And because in the youngest and strongest, there is
no assured sign of safety and security; but in all of us both yongue and old,
many homebred tokens of death and dissolution, therefore the counsel and
watchword of our Master and Savior, is to be remembered. Mat. 24. 42. Mar. 13.
35.
Wake and watch, for you know not what hour your Master will come: either by
the first death, or the last judgment: ye know not that hour, therefore watch
every hour, ye know not that year, month, or day, wherein Simil.
death the Lords handmaid, with the broom of sickness or sorrow, will sweep
you away, (being as too many are, spider-like busied, in making nothing but
nets and cobwebs to catch the flies of honor and riches, which takes her to
her wings as an Eagle, and soon Prou. 23. 5.
flies away) therefore keep watch and ward over your souls, every day,
month, and year.

And as he which sits at a table, Simil.
furnished with many dainty services, amongst which one is poisoned, as he has
been secretly advertised, will (if he be wise) not hastily adventure on any,
because of the danger that lies hidden in that one, so let us be heedfull that
we rush not into sin, be it never so pleasant a service on any day, because
for any thing we know that may be the very day wherein death may overtake us
Matt. 26. 41.
Watch and pray least you enter into temption. Repent and amend least ye
Psalm. 2. 12.
perish in the way, and die in your transgressions.

Luke 16. 1.
as the Minister, of the common house the weal public as the Magistrate, of
his own private samily as every household governor, of the closet of his own
conscience as every particular christian man, and to every one of us, God has
committed the charge of his goods and gifts, either corporal, temporal, or
spiritual, to be employed as his talents for his advantage and glory, and our
fellowseruants benefit and good.

Therefore I beseech you, let us all in our several places be good and
gracious in our offices. For we know not when the Mar. 13. 35*
Master of the house will come, whether at even, or midnight, at the Cock
crowing, or the dawning of the day. We know not how soon we shall be summoned
to give an account of our stewardship.

And because being stewards, we are not masters but servants, therefore let us
not beat or abuse our fellow-seruants, Isa. 3. 15.
vex and molest our poor neighbors, but as fellow helpers let us labor, not
loyter in the Lords vineyard We are not hired for a day, as the Matt. 20.
Laborers in the Gospel, or for an year, as the Iud. 17.
Leuite was by Michah, or for seven or thrice seven, as Genesis 29.
Jacob was by Laban, but for all the days and years of our life: to do his
work, therefore let us discharge our duties diligently. And because we have
his gifts to dispose not as we list, but according to his good will and
pleasure: Let us take heed carefully that we play not the bad stewards, either
in getting goods wrongfully, as too many rent-racking Landlords do, or in
keeping them basely as too many churlish Note.
Nabals do, or in spending them wantonly and wastefully, as too many prodigal
profane gallants do; least in so doing, we be justly accused for our unjust
conversation to our Master, and be fearfully convicted of unrighteous dealing
by three sufficient witnesses or plaintiffes; the poor oppressed, Gods
creatures abused, and our own consciences wounded: as not long since a great
man of this Land was, by whom a poor ^ Barons wars
widow was exceedingly wronged and put from house and home, and constrained to
make an old Oak her best harbor, the conscience of which fact so affrighted
him, that when he should be most courageous he was most daunted, and in horror
of mind often exclaimed. O the widow under the Oak.

And as of late a lewd Canon of Paris was, who with the remembrance of his
adulterous and Idolatrous Gall. Hist.
life, being extremely terrified in his death bed, at several times spoke but
these three words, Accusatus sum, iudicatus, condemnatus. I am accused, judged,
condemned, and so expired.

O hear and fear this, all ye that desire rather to be feared then deserve
to be loved: in the midst of your ruling remember your reckoning, and by your
more diligent, charitable, and conscionable demeanor hereafter, prevent that
judgment which hangs over your heads, for your negligence and want of
conscience in your callings heretofore.

And let us all, even now begin, if not before, whether we be Ministers or
Magistrates, or persons of inferior place, to look to our charges diligently,
to attend on our offices faithfully, to discharge our stewardship carefully, to
examine our receipts and expenses daily, and accordingly to make up our perfect
reckonings and accounts, that when that great day of reckoning shall come, our
Lord and Master may say to every one of us: p It is well done good servant Mat.
25. 23.
and trusty, Thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler
over much, enter into thy Masters joy. And thus much be spoken of the first
part, and of the uses thereof; namely Mors est in olla, death is our lot, none
can avoid it.

Now of the second, and that more briefly, Spes est in vrna, there ^ecunda pars
^iz Spes est in ^rna. ^hrys. in 22. Math.
is hope in the grave, being dead we shall live again, none may deny it.
Toll spem resurrectionis (says golden mouthed Chrysostom) and resoluta est
omnis obseruantia pietatis: take away the hope of resurrection, and the
building of piety wants her foundation. For then Christ is not risen, and so
our preaching is in vain, and your faith is 1. Cor. 15.
vain, and of all others the best christians were most miserable, and of al
stories the Gospel were most fruitless and unprofitable.

But the Lords Herald Isaiah of all the Prophets most Evangelical, of all the
Evangelists most Prophetical (besides the stream of all holy antiquity
consenting thereunto) has plainly proclaimed it. Isa. 26. 19.
Thy dead men shall live, with my body shall they rise: and again, Peace shall
come to the righteous, Isa. 57. 2.
they shall rest in their beds, (that is) their graves, until the morning of
the resurrection. Post tenebras spero lucem, says Job. Sybilla Job 17.
prophesied hereof in this manner.

Tunc castus Cbristus ponet certamina iusta: Sybil.

Ornabitque probos, aeternaque praemia reddet.
The great Poet could say, (...) ^hocilid.
(...). We hope and know that we shall not for ever sit in darkness, or
sleep in the grave, but we shall come to the heavenly light, and live with
Christ, r through the power of God, in whose 2. Cor. 13. 4.
book all our members are written.

God has a threefold book. The first is his private book Enchiridion, or vade
mecum, in which only the names of the elect are written, whom he knows and
calls by their Exodus 32. 32.
names: whose ^sa. 43. 1.
names he will not put out of the book Reu. 3. 5.
of life, e libro praesentis iustitiae aut praedestinationis aeternae, as the
Schoolmen distinguish. The second is his book of accounts and black book,
blurde and blotted with the register of sin, wherein only the wicked are
written, according to that Dan. 7. The Dan. 7. 10.
judgment was set, and the books opened. The third is his universal
commonplace book, wherein both good and bad are recorded, according to that
of the Prophet, In thy book are all my members written: Psalm. 139.
so that albeit in death there be a dissolution of body and soul, yet in the
resurrection there shall be a restitution and reuniting of the same body (in
substance though altered in quality) to the same soul, that the joy of both
may be consummated: to which purpose, God is said to write all our members in
his book. Yea he keeps the very bones of his Saints Psalm. 34. and not a
hair of their heads Psalm. 34. 2* Luke 21. 18.
shall perish, Luke 21.

Hence it is, that the Prophet Daniel speaks so expressly. Many Dan. 12. 2.
that sleep in the dust, shall awake and rise again, some to everlasting
life, some to shame and perpetual contempt. Hence it is that our Savior
Christ speaks so plainly. Marvel not at this, for the Ioh. 5. 28. 29.
hour shall come, in which all that are in the gra^es, shall hear his voice,
and they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. To which
infallible truth Saint Paul bears witness. 2. Cor. 5. We must all appear
Cor. 5. 10.
before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive according to
the things which are done in his body, whether good or evil. Whereunto, that
of the beloved Disciple Saint John, is very agreeable, Revel. 20. where the
majesty ^eu. 20. 11. 12
of Gods throne is described, the singularity of the Judge is declared, the
universality of all both great and small which must stand before him is
manifested, and the equity of proceeding in judgment excellently showed by the
books opened, and the sentencing of every man's cause according to his works.

Whence by the way we may Note.
note the difference between the act of justification, and the act of
judgment: for the act of justification wherein God makes us righteous which
were unjust, is only by Romans 3. 24.
faith (i.) by the apprehension, application, and appropriation of Christ's
merits and righteousness by a lively faith. But the act of judgment wherein
God declares those to be just which Mat. 25. 2. Cor. 5.
were justified in this life, is according to our works. God judges not
according to the root of faith which is hidden, but according to the fruits of
faith, namely, good works which are open and manifest, and the fittest means
to try every man's cause, and to discern who were by faith working in love,
Gal. 5. 6.
justified in this life.

Not to affect more testimonies of proof, in a point of christianity so
plain. This holy persuasion of the resurrection after death, and impression of
immortality, has ever possessed the hearts of Gods Saints and servants, and
has been as a nail of the Sanctuary to keep them from desperate distractions
in the errors of this life, and to set them forward to perfection and undaunted
constancy in the terrors of death.

Job, patient and just Job in the plea Job 19. 25.
of all his miseries with the single eye of faith, held fast by this hope, and
made it the issue of all his maladies: I know that my Redeemer lives, and I
shall live again, etc. this sentence of undoubted assurance is matter worth
the remembrance, and therefore Job sets a Preface unto it. O (says he) that
Job 19. 23. 24. 25.
my words were now written, and written not in loose papers, but in a book,
and not written only, but engraven, and that with an iron pen in lead, or in
stone, to endure not for a time only, but for ever, to the solace of all
distressed Saints. I know that my Redeemer lives, and though the worms
destroy my body, yet shall I see him in my flesh again with these mine eyes,
etc.

David, distressed David anchored on this hold, and indeed the surges of
sorrow had quite sunk his soul, when Saul 1. Sam. 19.
persecuted him, 2. Sam. 6.
Micholl derided him, 1. Sam. 22.
Doeg accused him, 2. Sam. 16.
Shemei rayled upon him, and 2. Sam. 18.
Absalon rebelled against him, but that he fixed his eyes on this cape of good
hope, and Psalm. 27. 13.
believed verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living.

Paul, blessed St. Paul was ravished with this heavenly hope, and
soule-solacing assurance of life after death, and therefore desires to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ Phil. 1. 23.
which is best of all.

St. Stephen, that bold champion for christianity, and faithful Proto-Martyr
Act. 7.
of Christ Jesus, when he was to be stoned, feeling this holy comfort in the
midst of heavy combats, opposuit furori patientia^, Lossius in Act.
mortis terrori vitae despicientiam, opposed his patience to his enemies fury,
the contempt of life to the terror of death, and having a sweet foretaste of
the ioies which body and foul should jointly enjoy in heaven, he with a
victorious grace despised all matter of torment and coffeehouse which his
adversaries malice could inflict upon them on earth.

Ignatius that holy Martyr in the Primitive Church, being fully furnished with
this assured hope of his bodies resurrection, went confidently unto a bloody
execution, saying, Frumentum Dei ego sum, etc. I am Gods corn, now shall I be
ground small by the teeth of wild beasts, to be made fine manchet for my Lords
table.

Babilas Bishop of Antioch, building on the same assurance, spoke comfortably
to his soul, when he was drawn to a cruel death. Return my soul unto thy
rest, for the Lord has been merciful unto thee.

This infallible expectation of a glorious resurrection, made Saint Paul to
conclude so triumphantly, Romans 8. I am persuaded that neither Romans 8. 38. 39.
life nor death, nor things present nor things to come, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God. And again, My departing is at hand, I have
fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, Henceforth is laid up for
me the crown of righteousness, which the righteous ludge shall give me at
that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also which love his appearing.

To which purpose he speaks thus in the name of all the faithful. Here we
have no continuing City, Heb. 13. 14.
but we look for one to come, and though we live on earth, yet our
conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, Phil. 3.
20. 21.
even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, that they may be
like his glorious body. So that a change shall come, and indeed we are all
desirous of some change, as not contented with our estate.

Adam would change to be as Genesis 3. 2. Sam. 15.
wise as his maker. Absolon would sit in his fathers seat, and of a subject be
a Sovereign. Solomon would have change of wives. The Israelites would change
Samuel 1. Sam. 8. 5.
the righteous Judge, for Saul a wicked King. The Sychemites Genesis 34 23.
would change their religion in hope of commodity; and too many amongst us,
would change the food of Angels and heavenly Manna, for the fleshpots of Egypt
in hope of more liberty. Yea the most have changed plain dealing into crafty
undermining, mercy into malice, single tongues and hearts into dubble, and a
great number like Proteus, can change themselves into all forms, like Polypus
into all colors, like courtly Aristippus into all fashions. Omnis Aristippum
decuit color and status and res.

But while we affect these alterations, not unlike to Glaucus his commutation
of gold for brass, Homer.
while we are thus occupied about these choppings and changings, we seem
seldom or never to remember; that great change whereof the Apostle speaks in
the place before mentioned, and whereunto Job here aims, saying, All the
days of mine appointed time will I wait till my changing shall come. Which
changing is not only an exchange of earth for heaven, of a prison for a
Palace, of an estate in sin and misery, for perfect holiness and glory in
respect of the foul; but a change also of a mortal life for an immortal, of
corruption for incorruption, in regard of the body.

For as there is a twofold death, the one of the soul being deprived of the
operation of Gods spirit, and separated from God by sin. The other of the
body, being 1. Tim. 5. 6.
destitute of the operation and working of the soul: So there is a twofold
resurrection; the one Twofold Resurrection.
spiritual of the soul, a peccato ad gratiam, from sin unto grace here; the
other corporal of the body, a sepulchro ad gloriam, from the grave unto glory
hereafter. Which great day of the general resurrection, the Angels desire to
see, the devils tremble to hear of, and other creatures sigh and groan for,
and man especially must look and long for, and cannot be without it; whether
we respect the manifold profits which come by it, or the wonderful
inconveniences which would arise from the want of it. For how can we, dwelling
on earth, have our conversation in heaven, if we do not look for the coming
of our Savior Phil* 3. 20. 21.
Christ? and how can we look for his coming except we believe the
resurrection? and how can we believe the resurrection, unless we acknowledge
that power by the which he is able to subdue all things unto himself?

Again, how do we acknowledge God to be God in almighty power, without the
faith of the resurrection? and how can we have the faith of the resurrection,
without the hope of a Savior? and how can we have the hope of a Savior,
without an heavenly conversation? so that the life of this conversation is
hope, by the which we expect the coming of a Savior, and the ground of this
hope is faith, by the which we are assured, that at his coming, he shall
change our vile bodies, and make them like to his glorious body. And the reason
of this faith beyond reason is his power, by which he is able to subdue all
things unto himself.

All these be linkes, so divinely hanging and depending each on other, in that
golden chain of the Apostle, that if we let slip one, we loose the comfortable
hold-fast of all; but good christians must not miss of any, but must be
forward in the course of godliness and a holy conversation, as not running at
uncertainty, or fighting as beating the air but following hard toward the 1.
Cor. 9 26.
mark; knowing that they are begotten by the immortal seed of the word, in
the bosom of the Church militant, to a lively hope of an inheritance for body
and soul together, immortal and undefiled in the Church triumphant. 1. Pet.
1. 4.


This hope as it gives us an edge that we should earnestly affect spiritual
things, so does it give us a back also to endure all things. For why do the
servants of God endure crosses so patiently? abstain from evil so carefully?
pursue the things that are good so cheerfully and constantly? but because they
look for a glorious resurrection, Reasons ratifying the Doctrine of the
Resurrection.
which is the full end of all Gods promises; when the wicked shall have their
full judgment, and the godly their full payment; complete inioyment of
inconceivable happiness.

2. Cor. 4. 10. Aristot. in Eth.
the Philosopher speaks, Bonis fit male, malis been, therefore it stands with
Gods justice, elsewhere to recompense every man according to that he has
done in his body 2. Cor. 5. 10.
either good or bad, and in that great day of resurrection, to make both bodies
and souls of penitent believers, or unrepentant sinners, joint partakers of
eternal weal 2. These. 1. 6. 7.
or woe.

Luke 1. 37.
is impossible) is able to effect it. For to examine what he can do, by what he
has done: could he create all things of nothing, and can he not work his
own will in his own creatures, and restore our bodies out of the 4. Elements,
to their former estate again? could he quicken us in the womb of our mother,
and can he not revive us out of the womb of our mother the earth? can he with
the dew of the morning and evening, give life to the seed that is under the
earth, and shall he not with the sound of the trumpet, and with all his power
give life to us? can we of a little sparkle kindle great flames, and cannot he
of our ashes though never so small raise our bodies? or can we fetch fire out
of the flint, and cannot he fetch us out of the earth?

Could Eliah and Elisha raise the widow of Sarepta and the Shunamites 1. King.
17 23. 2. Kin. 4 32. Act 9. 40. Act. 20. 10.
children? could Peter raise Tabitha, and Paul Eutichus, and cannot God their
Lord and ours, raise both them and us?

Yes, he can and will, and that in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. Qui
fecit idoneus est reficere, 1. Cor. 15. 52. Tertul. l. de res. car.
says Tertullian. Considera Authorem, and toll dubitationem, says St.
Austin. Consider the Author of this admirable work, and leave August. Greg
^om. 20. in Ez^k.
doubting or reasoning. Nam in rebus mirabiliter factis ratio facti est
potentia facientis.

Posita facultate (says The Soul was not made to live by it self but in the
body and rests not fully contented so long as it wants her organ and
companion.
Aristotle) ponatur and organum necesse est. (i.) Admit then the soul as most
Philosophers hold to be immortal, and then it must needs follow, that the
body as the organon or instrument thereof, should be reunited thereunto.
Again, Nulla res imperfecta est capax perfectae foelicitatis. (i.) it ought to
be joined to the body again, for the attaining of this perfection. Again,
Non est perpetuum, quod est contra naturam, (i.) Nothing is perpetual which is
contrary to nature, but it is contrary to the nature of man's soul to be
separate from the body, seeing it is the (...).
perfecting act thereof. Wherefore the soul cannot continually be separate
therefrom, but must necessarily resume the body again.



Christ our head suffered in body and soul for the redemption of Mat. 27. Act.
1.
both parts, he ascended in both, and is glorified in both, and so shall we his
members be. For though the union betwixt him and us be spiritual, yet our
bodies are called the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6. yea the temples of the holy
Ghost, that 1. Cor. 6. 15. 19.
since they are members of Christ, they might be restored unto their head, and
since in their corruption they are vouchsafed to be the temples of the holy
Ghost, they might put on incorruption, and as they be graced in this life, so
be glorified in the life to come.

What though in the mean while our bodies be scourged, tortured, and
tormented, as Christ's was? what though we be bought and sold, and cruelly
entreated as Joseph was? what though death swallow us up, as the Whale did
Jonah, and bind Ioh. 1. 17.
us hand and foot as the Philistines Judge. 16.
did Sampson, and seal up the Sepulcher upon us as the Jews did Mat* 27.
upon Christ? what though in death the spirit be loosed from the flesh, the
flesh separated from the bones, bones and flesh converted into rottennes,
rottennes into dust, dust resolved into the Elements, as Dr. Gregory in his
Morals reasons, and the scornful Atheist oftentimes Greg. in 19. Job. Ezekiel.
37.
obiecteth? yet as the Prophet Ezekiell in a vision prophesied over dry bones,
and they came together, and the flesh and sinews grew upon them, and life
entered into them, and they became fair and strong bodies. So and more then so,
shall it be at the last day, for the trumpet shall blow, and the graves shall
give up their dead, our bones shall be conjoined, our parts composed, our bodies
reedified, and we presented face to face, before our Savior.

The carnal man stands here at a mammering and maruelling how it can be done.
The Atheist stands mocking, as though it were impossible to be done. But I
answer them both as St. Gregory does 20. D. Greg. 20. Hom. in Ezekiel.
Hom. on Ezekiell. O ye maruellers and mockers at the resurrection, does this
seem strange, that God should raise and reform man out of the dust, who
causes out of the lest grain the greatest tree to grow? does this seem so
wondrous a matter and incredible? then mock on, and marvel likewise at the
Suns setting and rising, the Moons waxing and waining, the Seas ebbing and
flowing, the child's breeding in the womb of the mother, and the herbs fading
and reflorishing out of the womb of the earth, for such is the resurrection
from the dead, though not wrought by natural causes, yet by the same God of
nature, and by the same power by which these things are wrought: who doubtless
can as easily repair our bodies of somewhat in the resurrection, as he did
make all things of nothing at first in the creation of the world (...) Linus.
(...).

Do we not see how the Potter of a broken vessel turned to dust, makes
another in the same form at his pleasure? do we not know that the artificer,
out of the ashes of Fern, blows up the purest glass, and frames it in what
fashion he list? and do we not by daily experience find, that out of a little
kernel, which was neither hard, nor rough, nor green in show, nor good in
taste, nor sweet in smell, there arises and issues the hardness of the
Timber, the roughnes of the bark, the greenness of the leaves, the sweet
smell of the blossom, the good taste of the fruit?

And shall we not believe that out of the dust which is neither flesh, or
blood, or bone, our bodies consisting of them all, shall at the last day by the
power of the Almighty be repaired? shall we bind God to means, who works
what he will, as well against them, Dan. 3. and without them, 1. King. Dan. 3.
27. 1. King. 19. 8.
19. as with them, because his might is unmeasurable? shall we in a rash
presumption, assume to our selves to know how far possibility can reach, by
denying the resurrection impossible? shall we presumptuouslie intromit our
ouer-weening curiosity into the sacred bosom of Gods unsearchable
omnipotency? God forbid. Fides credat, etc. let faith believe the
resurrection; let not wit seek a reason for it, Ne aut non inuentum putetur
incredibile, aut repertum non credatur singular, least if in judgment it be
concealed we should think it incredible, or if in mercy it be reueiled, we
esteem it but ordinary and common.

And let us all in humility, submit our reason to that rule of Dr. Greg. in 9.
Job c. 11.
Gregory. In factis Dei qui ratione^ non videt, infirmitatem suam considerans
quare non videat, rationem videt. In the wonderful works of God, he that
sees not a reason for it, if he consider but his own infirmity, shall soon
see a reason why he does not see it. And let us account it ever a point of
greatest reason, to leave reasoning in things beyond reason, believing
steadfastly this article of our faith, the resurrection of our flesh, and in
assured expectation hereof, studying and striving earnestly to have our part
in the first resurrection, that the second death may have no power over us.
Reu. 20. 6.


As for those blasphemous-truthopposing Heretics, and Atheistical naturalists
and propha^e wretches, which so tie the power of God to second causes, and
allow themselves in so irreligious courses, that they grow doubtful, not only
of the resurrection of the body, but of the immortality of the soul, and live
not only without hope of heaven, but even without fear of hell, serving s^n so
slauishly pleasing the Devil so wretchedly, delighting in the world and their
lusts so brutishly, as if their minds were not only made of earth, but as
though their souls were made of flesh: I will here let them pass as
earemarkt slaves of Satan, with this note of horror and confusion, telling
them to the sealing up of their condemnation, that though the general
resurrection, seem to them now so strange and prodigious, that their purest
understanding sight is not sharp enough to kenne and perceive it; yet
assuredly the day will come, and it will be a dreadful direful day for them,
when their dullest deadest sense shall be quick enough to feel it, when they
shall see the world burning without them, feel the worm of conscience Anselm.
gnawing within them, behold an unappeasable Judge above them, beneath
soule-thirsty Satan ready to execute Gods Judgments upon them, on every side
the Saints accusing them, and so in an horrible amazement shall cry, but all in
vain, to the mountains to fall upon them, to the deepes to swallow them, to
the hills to hide them from the sight of him, whose eyes are of flaming fire,
before whom it is as intolerable to appear, as not to appear impossible for
them. persuasion should be the death of sin in us, and the remembrance that
there is dies and Deus vltionis, both a day and God of revenge, for his justice
inflexible, for his wisdom infallible, for his power irresistable, that there
is an eye which sees us, an ear which hears us, and a book whercin all our
words and works are written, according to which, sentence shall pass upon us
in the great day of resurrection.

The remembrance of these things I say, ought to strike sin in the blade,
break it in the head, and kill it to the heart: yea, the due meditation of the
reuniting of our bodies and souls together in that day, to be joint partakers
of heavenly happiness, must move us all to consecrate both our bodies and
souls as pure Nazarits to the service of God, in all holiness, sobriety, and
righteousness.

Belshazzar lost his Kingdom Dan. 5.
and life together, for profaning in a carousing iollity the vessels of Gods
temple; and shall we profane the temples of the holy Ghost our bodies and
souls, and put them to base uses, to be slaves to our lusts, drudges to the
world, feruants to Satan? God forbid.

Solomon when he had drawn out the thread of delight, and stretched Eccl. 2.
11.
the web of pleasures on the largest tenter of variety, says, that he found
nothing herein but vexation of spirit; doubtless this is the issue of all
worldly carnal pleasures. We are therefore to deal with them, as David did
with the water brought by his worthies, whereof he would not drink, but powered
it forth, saying, O Lord be it far from me that I should do 2. Sam. 23. 17.
this, Is not this the blood of these men which went in ieopardy of their lives
for it? are not these vain pleasures the very price of our fowls? far be it
therefore from us to touch them, or taste them, or to be carried away with the
allureme^ts of the^, least at length, we be fully, fearfully, and finally
tormented for them.

Remember (says Abraham to Luke 16. 25.
the rich Glutton) thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, but now thou
art tormented. Remember that thou did disport thy time in wanton daliance,
solace thy self in fond pastimes, fare deliciouslie every day, defending pride
to be a point of gentry, drunkenness good fellowship, wantonness a trick of
youth, At nunc cruciaris. But now thou which inclosedst all pleasures to thy
self in earth, take up thy rents, and have thy full payment of pains in
hell.

So true it is that intolerable torments there are ordained, as the wages of
fleshly pleasures here: yea the more the pleasures, the greater the torments;
for the Lord does proportion his judgments, according to the measure of men's
vanities. So much as she lived in pleasure, so much give ye to her torment
Reu. 18. 7.
and sorrow. O that those which are led with sensuality would consider of this
wages of unrighteousness 2. Pet. 2. 13.
which they are to receive: O that all which follow wantonness even with
greedines, would remember that whilst they live they are dead, 1. Tim. 5. 6.
and though they think themselves in Dothan, yet if they had grace to lift up
their eyes, they should perceive themselves to be in the midst of sinful
Samaria, and though 1. King. 6.
in the worlds judgment they seem with Capernaum to be lifted up to heaven,
yet behold they are in the very confines of Hell

O turn you; turn you, for why Ezekiel. 33. 11. Romans 6. 12.
will you die, says the Prophet. Let not sin reign any more in your mortal
bodies, but if you have stricken hands with it heretofore, shake hands with
it now for a farewell. Moriantur ante te vitia, says Seneca. Sen. Epist. 12*
Bernar. in Sen^
Morere says Bernard, antequam moreris, sic quando moreris non morieris. Die
unto sin before thou die, so shall thou live when thou art dead. As God
said to Moses, Ascend vt moriaris, so say I to thee o man, morere vt Deuteronomy. 32.
49.
ascendas, Die to thy earthly desires, mortify thy fleshly lusts, that thou
may ascend, and mount toward heaven in an holy life.

As Lot forsook Sodom looking Genesis 19.
to Zoar his sanctuary; so let us all fly from this world in affection, and
meditate on our heavenly being, and strive for perfection; forgetting Phil. 3.
13. 14.
what is behind, and following hard toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Amarescat mundus dulcescat Berit.
Christus. Let the world be bitter, that Christ may be sweet unto us, and let
no gaude of earthly glory, or blaze of worldly beuty, withdraw our love from
him, who when we were his enemies so loved us, that Romans 5. 10.
he voluntarily endured inconceivable torments in body and soul unto death, to
procure for our bodies and souls the inheritance of eternal life.

Arise and depart, for here is not your rest. Mich. 2. This is the Prophets
watchword to the Jews, Mich. 2. 10.
and it will stand us in good stead if we mark it well, and that we may
mark it well once I will rehearse it often. Arise and depart etc. Arise,
sleep not in security, depart, abide not in iniquity, for here is not your
rest; in heaven alone is true tranquillity.

For as the Dove sent out of the Arc, found no rest for her feet, Genesis 8. 9.
whilst she flickered on the floods but was restles, until she returned to the
Arc again. So our souls sent from heaven, find no restfull footing on the
glassie Sea. of this Reu. 15. 2.
world, until they return to the true Noah and our saving rest Christ Jesus
again. Arise then and fly from the world, that Christ may come to live in thy
heart by grace, depart, prepare to die, and go out of the world, that thou
may come to live in heaven with Christ in glory.

As Jacob said to Laban, this long have I served thee and looked to thine
affairs, and now it is time to look to my self, and to travel for Genesis 30.
30.
mine own house: So say thou to this Laban-like world, this many years have I
served thee, seeking the profits and pleasures of a transitory life: Now, now
it is high time to make provision for my souls health, and to labor that mine
infinite debts toward God, in regard of mine innumerable sins, may by
repentance be discharged, and my Title to an heavenly inheritance by faith in
Christ's merits and newnes of life, be maintained and justified.

Arise, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life. Some lie in
their sins as children in their Ephesians. 5. 14.
swathling clothes, and so sin of infirmity; some as sick men in their
beds, and sin of obstinacy; some as dead men in their graves, and sin
desperately; to all these in the name of Christ (who raised three from the
dead, Iairus daughter, Mat. 9. Luke 7. Ioh. 11.
the widow of Naims son, and Lazarus, to show that no degree of death in
sin is incurable, when he comes to heal) is my commission directed. Arise,
cast off the works of darkness, put on the armor of light, depart, not
without some fruit of this Doctrine of the resurrection. Even at this instant
covenant with thine own soul to rise from dead works to serve hence-forward
the living God; not God and Mammon too, not God and thy belly too, but the
living God alone, walking before him in sincerity and truth, with an upright
heart, as good old Ezekiah, 2. Kin. 20. 2. Chro. 34.
and godly young Josiah did.

To this purpose, first rowse thy self o yongue man, whatsoever thou art,
shake off the fetters of folly, suffer not the bud of thy youth to be blasted
in the very sprouting, the Sun to be darkened in the very rising; give not
thy wine to the world, keeping the lees for the Lord; give not thy prime days
to the Devil, reserving the dog-daies for God. Let not Lady Dalila dandle thee
on her Judge. 16.
knee, till she have shaued all thy strength and goodness from thee; give thy
youthful pleasures a bill of divorce, for their baggage dealing, never to have
more familiarity with them; discharge thy sin betime, least in thine age thou
bear the reproach of thy youth, and be forced to cry without comfort or
remedy, O vtinam. Remember that of Ambrose. Momentaneum Ambrose.
est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat; a Sea of torture, for a drop of
pleasure.

And thou o man of age and gravity, of what calling and degree soever thou be,
be prudent and provident, as it beseems thy years, thy place, thy office,
thy state, embrace Eliphaz his exhortation. Job 12. 21.
Acquaint thy self with God, make thy peace with him, there by shall thou have
prosperity. Job 22. Wisdom (says Solomon) is the gray Sap. 4.
hair, and an undefiled life is the old age. Let these, o let these, wisdom
and an undefiled life meet together in thee, and kiss each other; look
narrowly to thy ways, least either in the greatness of thy power thou forget
God, or in the abundance of thy pleasures remember not thy self.

Be not like Nabuchadnezar, who in the ruff of his pride remembered not who had
made him till God had mard him, neither acknowleged who set his ioints
together, till God had rent his Kingdom asunder. But let my counsel be
acceptable to thee o man (whether Knight, Justice, Gentleman, or all in one)
and let me boldly say to thee as Daniel did to him. Break Dan. 4. 24.
off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the
poor. Lo let there be an healing of thine errors. Lo, thou have erred and
gone astray by thy pride and luxury, return, return by the holy way of
temperance and humility. Thou have through covetousness and malice sown in
hardness of heart, O return by the way of mercifulnes and charity, least thou
reap in horror of conscience: Return, return, o Shulamite, as Cant. 6. 12.
Christ speaks to his Spouse, return, return, that we may behold thee, that
we may see as well a sight of thy good works, as hear a sound of thy good
words, that we may behold the fruits of amendment in thee: place not the anchor
of thine eternal wealth and woe, on so ticklesome a point as thy repentance at
last cast.

Repent, amend, defer not from time to time, least God in whose hands are the
moments of time, cut thee off from all time, and send thee to pains eternal
without time, for abusing the singular benefit of time in this world: make not
thy deathbed to smart by thy wilful adiournings of thy repentance. In the
midst of thy ruling, remember thy reckoning, and suffer now whilst it is to
day, the seeds of godliness to be sown more and more in the field of thy
repentant heart, that whenever the night of death comes, thou may reap
and receive the plentiful crop of a joyful harvest: furnish thy soul with
grace, and inure it to a sweet conversation with God in thy life, so shall the
offering of thy deathbed be acceptable, and thou may boldly make God the
guardian thereof in thy death.

And now at length to come to Tertia Part. Viaticum in via.
my last part, and to shut it up in a word, being desirous to recompense the
largenes of my former discourse with the brief touch of that which follows;
let me (Right Worshipful and beloved in Jesus Christ) entreat you all, both
old and young, which have heard and seen this day, the black colors of
death, and the glorious ensigns of the resurrection displayed, to make the due
and daily meditation of both useful and profitable unto you, that your
practices in this life may hence forward be more commendable, and your passage
out of this life when God shall call you, be blessed and comfortable.

Let me (I say) entreat you all in a serious consideration of the speedy
approach of death, sure in the end, unsure in the time, and bitter when it
comes, and of the certain appearance of us al before the judgment seat of
Christ, to render an account of our doings, in that day of resurrection; to
watch all the days of your life, and with holy Job in my text, to wait till
your changing shall come. Your change may come at a sudden, therefore be
always provided, and provide not so much by corporal physic as the manner of
most is, to put off death, that it may not so soon happen unto you as by soul
saving physic, repentance, faith, obedience, cleernes of conscience, and
comforts of Gods word, and confidence in his sweet promises, to cut off the
sting and malignity of death, that whenever it comes it may not hurt you.

This, this is viaticu^ in via, provision in the way to bring us in safety to
the iourneies end of everlasting felicity. O run with alacrity this race of
piety, set before you, Gratia praeparandus animus, men's D. Ambros. li. 1. off
c. 38.
stabilienda ad constantiam, says St. Ambrose, for expedition in this journey
pray for grace, practice constancy. Seek earnestly for the things that are
above, live after the laws of the new Jerusalem which is above; your Burgeship
is in heaven, be not then earthly minded, but heavenly affected; labor to get
more and more assurance of the forgiveness of your sins, and to feel in
your souls the power of Christ's death in dying unto sin, and the virtue of
his resurrection in rising to newnes of life. And that you may out of the court
of Requests, the more easily obtain for all your transgressions an assured
pardon and indulgence; put somewhat every day into the court of Gods Exchequer,
in hope of recompense or remembrance, that, with good Nehemiah you may Neh. 13.
22.
say, Lord remember me according to this, and pardon me after thy great
mercies. Let the counsel of our Savior be precious. Lay up treasure Matt. 6.
14.
for your selves in heaven, send your virtuous actions (the best monuments of a
Christian) thither before you. Be zealous of good works, studious of piety,
abundant in the deeds of charity, for the witness and inward testimony of a
well-deeded life, when all other comforts leave you, will relieve and comfort
you in death, and accompany you to heaven, and present it self with you before
God.

By these fruits of a lively faith, Ezekiel. 9.
as his own marks, God will know and acknowledge us to be his, and for these
his own gifts which are our best merits, he will reward us, and this reward,
is a life, and such a life as is eternal; is a crown, and Romans 6. 23. 1. Pet.
5. 4. Heb. 12. 28. 1. Pet. 1. 4. 2. Pet. 3.
such a crown as is the crown of glory; is a kingdom, and such a kingdom as
cannot be shaken; is an inheritance, and such an inheritance as is immortal
and undefiled. For the obtaining of which life, crown, kingdom, inheritance,
what manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? how ought
we in respect of these great and gracious promises, to give all diligence, to
join to 2. Pet. 1. 5.
our faith virtue, to our virtue patience, tempera^ce, brotherly kindness, and
all other ornaments of a sanctified life?

These, these are, Viaticum in Bern.
mundo, the saurus in coelo. Provision for spiritual comfort in this world,
for a celestial crown in that to come. O let us in this behalf be provident
and thriuing Christians, and whilst we are in health let us o let us out of the
large garden of Gods word, gather many sweet flowers to comfort us in the day
of sickness, to solace us in the hour of death. Let wisdom enter into our
hearts, and the knowledge of Prou. 2. 10.
the gospel delight now our souls, that the remembrance of such good lessons
as by diligent reading and reverent hearing we have learned, may then stand us
in stead, to confirm our faith, to strengthen our hope, and to make us
conquerors in that our last combat.

It has ever bin accounted, more noble and succesfull, to set upon an Note.
enemy in his own home, then to expect till he set upon us, whilst we make a
defensive war. This rule serves us very well for our last enemy death, with
which we must meet in the way through premeditation in our minds, before it
seize upon our bodies; premeditate we Romans 7. 24. Phil. 1. 23.
must with what limitations it is to be desired, in what respect it is to be
feared, and for what ends it is daily to be expected. Happy is that soul that
can send out the scouts of his thoughts before hand, to discover the power, the
peril, the profit of death, and blessed is he that can meditate thus with St.
Austin. August. med.
If my life may bring farther glory to thee, and good to thy Church, give life
sweet Jesus, give life; but if it cannot, send death sweet Jesus, send death but
in the darkness of death, thee to be mine everlasting light and life.

Doubtless our carelesenes and vnpreparatio^ is deaths advantage, whereas if we
would co^front him with courage, in our often, devout, and discreet
meditations, and consider how that those worthies of whom the world was not
worthy, have gone that way before us, how Heb. 11 38.
Christ has by his death sanctified it unto us, and perfumed the grave for us,
we shall find his force less fearful, and make death aduantageous unto us;
namely, a passage unto a better life, and the very gate to heavenly glory.

In a longing desire after which glory, the glimpse whereof made S. Peter cry
out, Bonum est esse hic, Mar. 9. 5.
It is good to be here. Let us all not only with Job wait for, but with St.
Paul wish for our changing, let us (setting our houses and hearts in order)
henceforward prepare for our departing, stand fast with our loins girt, and
staves in our hand, Exodus 12. Genesis 18. 1. King. 19. Mat. 25.
that we may pass over into the heavenly Canaan; with Abraham in the tent
door, with Elias in the caves mouth, with the wise Virgins having the light of
faith in our hearts, and the burning lamps of good works in our hands, let us
be ready to meet the bridegroom, and to follow the lamb wheresoever he goes.

It is recorded of Dr. Ierom, that wheresoever he was, and whatsoever ^^ vita
Hieron
he did, it seemed he heard the Archangel with the trumpet sounding. Surgite ad
iudicium, Arise unto judgment. I could wish this sound were always in our
ears, that it might sink deep into our hearts, and work in them a reverent
fear of God, and rouse us out of the sleep of sin, and make us prepared
willingly to leave this sinful and wretched world, which is such a pull-backe
from God, that Solomon judges him that is dead better then him that is alive,
for the more days we spend, the more ways we offend.

In regard whereof, happy were we if with St. Paul, and St. Paul's affection we
could say. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, and Phil. 1.
with Jacob and Jacobs resolution. O Lord I wait for thy salvation, and Genesis 40.
with old Simeon and Simeons devotion. Lord now let thou thy servant Luke 2.
depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation: I fear no sin, I
dread no death, I have longed enough, I have my love, I have seen enough, I
have my light, I have lived enough, I have my life. Lord now let thy servant
depart in peace.

Happy I say were we, if our hearts and mouths were full of these meditations,
I must die because I have sinned, I woudl die that I might sin no more, I must
die because I am the son of man, I would die that I might be the son of God, I
must die because I live with wicked men on earth, I would die that I might live
with righteous Saints in heaven. Happy, and thrice happy are they which are
thus religiously exercised, and christianly affected.

Happy then by the judgment of charity, is he (as for the judgment of
certainty, the Lord alone knows his) who in a comfortable christian manner was
thus resolved, and in the time of his sickness, unto his end piouslie devoted.
I mean this breathles deceased Knight, whose funerals we now celebrate. A man
well known to you all in the time of his life, best known, and in the best
sort to me, as he drew nearer to his death.

Whom (without offense I hope) I may call good King Ezekiahs knight; for as
Ezekiah being summoned by sickness, and the Prophets Isa. 38.
short sermon to prepare for his dissolution, turned presently to the wall,
prayed and wept: in the like manner according to that measure of grace which
God had given him, did this Knight demean himself, who soon upon his
visitation feeling his infirmity, and acknowledging his humane frailty turned
to the wall, that is from the world to God, to consecrate the short remainder
of his life to divine meditation, and humble and hearty prayer, praying often,
though not in the like manner as Ezekiah did, Lord remember how I have walked
before thee in sincerity and truth, yet to the same effect for mercy, Lord
remember not the sins of my youth, weeping also and shedding tears, and such
tears, as either were distilled from the bitter herbs of others affliction,
by the heat of compassion, or from the sweet flowers of Gods mercies, by the
flame of godly meditation, or from the evil weeds of his own sins, by the
fire of hearty contrition. Whose settled resolution to die as soon as he was
visited, whose strong vows and protestatio^s to become a new man, if he
recovered, whose patience in enduring the pains and grief wherewith he
daily languished, whose piety and devotion in begging pardon for his
transgressions which he freely confessed, whose charitable disposition in
forgiving all, and desiring to be forgiven of al whom he had any way offended,
whose constant perseverance in good motions and exhortations, in godly speeches
and meditations, as long as life and memory continued; as they deserve my just
commendation who was an often witness of it, so do they require your christian
imitation, that both in life and death you may be the better for it. I will not
study to speak any thing but truth in this business.

Concerning the former course of his life I will say nothing to it, but if any
other can justly except against it, I will say this to him, A little thereof is
now enough, and any thing at all is somewhat too much.

De mortuis nil nisi bonum. Virgil. Aeneid. 3.
Parce pias scelerare manus oh parce sepulto. For mine own part, as I dare not
blanch any man's faults, because it is contrary to my profession, so I hold it
now an unfit time to blab or blaze a dead man's follies, it is somewhat I think
beyond my commission. Charity under one virtue couers many blemishes, whereas
malice like a kite, feeding on nothing but carrion, under one vice couers many
excellencies: I will leave malice to those which love to dwell in the tents of
Meshek, and following the rule of charity, will pass from his former
conversation in the days of his health, to that which was much more
commendable and comfortable, his godly comportment and behavior in his sickness
until his death, and what I have seen and heard with these mine eyes and
ears, I will boldly testify, that at my first coming to him, which was a
fortnight before his death, I found him religiously disposed; and concerning
his end and passage out of this life well resolved, the apprehension of his
sins being so well tempered with a sweet application of Gods mercy, that he
seemed to me to go an even course betwixt feareles security and saithles
despair, the conscience of his manifold transgressions humbling him indeed,
and casting him down, but the consideration of Gods infinite mercies reviving
him, and lifting him up again.

To who^ after I had made known by private conference with him, what an
especial sign of Gods favor it was, to be so graciously invited by a
lingering sickness, as a long sermon, to come by the way of repentance unto him,
and hereupon had cheered him up against the terrors of death, and exhorted him
to deal faithfully with his own soul, in sorrowing yet more deeply, and
suing for a pardon more earnestly, for all the errors of his life, because God
did yet wait to Isa. 30 18.
show him more mercy, he heereunto made this ready answer.

I know and feel God to be merciful, and were he not exceeding merciful, I
were very miserable, for I have a long account to make; But (fetching a deep
sigh) I beseech God to bind all my sins in a bundle, and to cast them into the
bottom of the Sea, that they may never rise up in judgment against me; which
pithy prayer twice together he uttered, and that with so great vehemency, that
in some conflic^t of passion he brake forth into tears and wept bitterly:
which sign of go^dly sorrow appearing in him, I comforted, and counseled him
in the words of the Prophet, telling him that God would treasure up al true
repentant tears into his bottle: and if we did mourn Psalm. 56. 8.
over Christ Jesus, whom we have crucified by our sins, and open unto him a
fountain of tears, God would open unto us a fountain of Zach. 12. 10. Zach.
13. 1.
grace, to wash us from all our sins, which comfortable place of Scripture, he
as feelingly apprehended and applied to his soul in these words, O Lord open
this fountain to me, be gracious to me, forgive me, forgive me as I forgive
all the world: And so uttering partly of himself, and partly repeating after me
these and the like sentences, or short ciaculatory prayers. O Lord in thee
Psalm. 31. Psalm. 90.
is my trust, let me never be confounded: return Lord and be pacified toward
thy servant, comfort me as thou have afflicted me. Reveal thy grace and
glory to me, and in my greatest extremity, refresh me with the sweet taste of
thy mercy; my heart faints and strength fails, but in thy help is my only
hope, O Lord Psalm. 37. 26.
say to my soul I am thy salvation, etc. at length upon his entreatie, the
whole company there present joined together with me in a more solemn prayer
unto God for him, himself accompanying us very willingly and reverently, and in
this prayer behauing himself so passionately, with such wringing of his hands,
lifting up of his eyes, with such heavy sighs and groans of his heart,
expressing the feruency of his zeal and devotion, that the report here of may
seem incredible to many which knew his former life and conversation.

But I know what I speak, and I speak it not to praise the dead, for my
praises, preaching, or prayers, cannot profit him, neither to please any of his
friends living, for it is baseness of mind this way to pick thank of them, but
to the eternal praise of the unspeakable goodness of our everliving God; who
showed to this deceased knight so great mercy, as to give him so religious a
mind in so great weakness of body, and not only so, but blessed him likewise
with a very ready memory from the beginning to the end of his sickness; in such
sort that conferring diverse times with him about some particulars, concerning
sound repentance, and the assurance of Salvation, and the certain tokens of
our peace and reconciliation with God, and quoting many places of Scripture,
especially out of the 8. Rom 17. Ioh. and out of the 51. 73. and 91. Psalms to
strengthen his faith and affiance in Gods mercy through Christ's merits, to
confirm his hope in the assured expectation of a joyful resurrection, and to
set him forward in the holy way to a happy and better life to come: I must
confess to the glory of God, that he would many times meet me half ways in
the midst of the said sentences, and apply them to his soul with such feruency
and feeling as was much, I saw to his own comfort, but more (as I understand)
to his friends joy and admiration.

To be short, I come to his death, which was on St. Stephens day, he accounting
it an addition to his hoped for happiness, that he should go to heaven, when so
blessed a Martyr ascended, as by one of his dearest friends I was informed, for
this I speak upon the report of others, as also how that he spent the
beginning of this day in finishing his last will and testament, and in
performing kind and charitable offices, for his brethren, sisters, servants,
and other friends. The rest as a man sequestered from the world, he spent in
prayer, in meditation, and soliloquies, betwixt God and his soul, as if he had
learned of dying St. Ierom to say, O my Eusebius. in vita Hieron.
friends interrupt not my approaching joy, do not hinder me from yielding to
the earth that which is the earths: until about the evening coming to him
again, he rowsed himself, and glad of my presence conferred with me,
received counsel, comfort, and encouragement from me, being desirous that I,
with such also as were present, should once, yea again, and the third time
pray for him, feeling belike his time to be short, so that I found him every
way as religiously devoted, and christianly affected, and well resolved to die
as before; yea more, for as he held his life by many fallings and risings, by
many faintings and refreshings in greater affliction, so he had death in
greater affection, his soul drawing nearer to God, as his body to the grave;
so that about the end of the said Saint Stephens day, with S. Stephens
affection praying, and commending his soul to the custody of his Savior, he
peaceably ended his days, and gave up the ghost. Sic sic iuuat ire per astra.

To live says the Stoike in Seneca, is but to do as our base grooms and
beasts do, but to die wisely, constantly, comfortably, is a worthy matter.
Thus this knight to the judgment of man died and departed. Worshipfully (you
know) he was descended, but most honorably may I now say is he ascended, He is
not here. The garment which he wore of borrowed earth, he has left to be
restored to the earth again, and in the better part of himself he is gone,
his soul as I hope passing out of Adams body, into Abraham's bosom.

And now being gone, I forbid not his parents to wail for him, as David did
for Absolon, 2. Sam. 18. 2. Sam. 18. 33.
O my son Absolon, o Absolon my son my son. I forbid not his familiarest
friend, and greatest favorite to lament for him, as David for Jonathan. Woe is
me for thee my 2. Sam. 1. 26.
brother Jonathan, very kind have thou been unto me, etc. I forbid not his
wife and Lady with the Halcinoe in solitary places to resound her grief in
lamentable accents, for the loss of her mate. As for his children, brethren,
sisters, and kinsfolk, they may if they please for a time make lamentation for
him, like unto that mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, and they
that are of his Zach. 12. 11.
own rank Knights and Gentlemen, may if they list howl for him, according to
that of Zachary. Howl ye fur trees, for a cedar is Zach. 11. 2.
fallen, howl ye oaks of Bashan, for a defensed forest is cut down.

But my counsel unto all is this, Let not the Temple of God be over sad; o
temper your conceived grief for that which in him ye have lost, with a truly
apprehended joy of the happiness which he has found, and as the Apostle
advises, sorrow not without hope 1. These. 4. 13.
for him that is asleep, It is but a sleep which is mis-called death, his
grave is his bed, and he shall awake as sure as he lay down, yea more fresh
and glorious in the great day of resurrection. Wherefore if this cast any of
you down, that he is now gone from you: let this again lift you up, that you
must (God knows how soon) go to him, praeit non perit, praemittitur non
amittitur (says St. Cyprian in the Cypr.
like case) He is gone before, he is not lost Non dolendum igitur quod
decessit, sed gaudendum quod praecessit. Let us not therefore be sorry because
he is departed, but rather rejoice because he is exalted in the court of
heaven, where all that have lived in Gods fear, and dyed in his favor, are
arrived in safety. They are gone before, and follow after we must, and I hope
we shall, and I pray God we may.

Now the Lord Jesus grant us all grace, so to follow him, and his faithful
servants in holiness here, that we may reign with him and the Saints departed
in happiness hereafter, even in the new Jerusalem, where we shall be good and
not persecuted, rich and not robbed, Kings and not flattered, where we shall
be ravished with seeing, satisfied with enjoying, and secured for retaining of
inconceivable happiness, happy eternity and eternal glory. To the which
he bring us, that by his precious blood has bought us; to whom with the
Father the inexhaustible fountain of goodness, and the holy Ghost the
indivisible power of them both, we ascribe and desire to be ascribed, all
praise and power, might, majesty, and dominion now and foreuermore.

Amen, Amen.
Viuendo morimur, moriendo viuimus; Ipse
Qui been disponit, tempus vtrumque sapit.
FINIS.

