AVGHT CONSIDERATIONS TO MOVE AL MEN TO INQVIRE AND EMBRACE, WITH ANE EARNEST
AFFECTION, the verity of faith and religion, which only is ane, and which
only brings to salvation, amangs sa money contrarious sects, as pretends
to have ye same.

depiction of the crucifixion of a male figure or Jesus Christ with two other
crucified male figures or thieves, and two other figure with halos

CVM PRIVILEGIO. ANNO M.D.C.V.

AVGT CONSIDERATIONS TO MOVE AL MEN TO INQVIRE AND Embrace, with ane earnest
affection, the verity of faith and religion, which only is ane, and which
only brings to salvation, amangs sa money contrarious sects, as pretends
to have ye same.
FIRST, al men aught consider the great goodness of God, wha has created men
to be participa^t of his eternal glory, and requires na vvther thing of
them, but that they should merit ye same be his treu service, during the time
of their peregrination on earth: for this cause they ar justly debarred from
the end of their creation, and justly adiuged to the aeternal pains of hell,
wha imployeth nocht all the forces of their saul, to try and knau, what sort
of christians has the treu service of God; and vvhaefter kuanledge thairof,
imbraceth nocht the same, amangs sa money contrarious sects of religion, as in
this age praetendeth to have the verity thairof. What sal it profit a man
(says our saneour) if he conqueis all the world, S. Mat, 10. Verse. 20
and tyn his saul? what sal he guie in change for his saul? The sone of man sal
cum in the glory of his father, and sal than ra^der to every ane, according
to his works. This reuard is ather the aeternal glory of heauin, or the
perpetual pains of hell. In the glory of heauin stands menis aeternal
felicity, and in the pains of hell, consists ever lesting misery.

The second consideration is, that ye treu service of God is prescryued be treu
religion, and that this treu religion is only ane: Ephesians. 4 Verse. 4.
for (as S. Paul sayith) their is only ane God, ane faith, ane baptism: Of
this it is manifest, that amangs ane hundredth contrarious sects of religion,
every ane repugnant to the vvther, and exponing the bybil co^trariouslie,
after their auin private inventions, and every ane accusing the vvther of
heresy, and adulteringt the word of God, their is only ane treu religion
that leads to salvation: Thairfor al ye vvthers ar led blindlie in the way
of perdition, deceived throught ane falls praetext of the verity thairof, be
the craft of Satan, and of his supposts.

The third is, that the treu moyen to try and knau ye verity of religion is,
to learn it of the treu church of God, and nocht be their auin brains, nor be
ye doctrine of particular me^, wha reideth and exponeth the scriptures after,
their auin iugements, and be their particular inventions, or wha receaueth the
exposition of the scriptures invented be private men; for as S. Peter says: 2.
Pet. 1. Verl. 20.2.
No prophecy, or treu wnderstanding of the scripture, is maid be ane private
interpretation; that is to say be particular men, who has no publik charge be
lauful promotion in Christ's universal church; sik as was friar Martin Luther,
ane particular monk of the order of S. Augustine in germany, wha erected ane
neu sect be his particular exposition of the scriptures invented be his brane,
which was contrarious to the uniform exposition thairof, which the
universal church of God had teached in all ages before him. Siclyk his Disciple A
Ecolampadius was ane particular and private friar, in germany: And zuinglius
was ane particular paroche priest in zuric, who invented ane vvther
particular exposition of ye scriptures, repugnant to that of their master; and
sa he erected ane vvther neu sect of religion. Calvin lykuayis was ane
particular chanon in the town of Noion in France, and be his auin particular
exposition of the scriptures, established ane vvther sect of religion,
different from all the vvthers. Nocht only their, and sik vvyers particular
sects, erreth in matters of religion, follouing their auin private doctrine, and
particular exposition of the scriptures to their aeternal perdition; bot also,
al those wha leaving and despysing the uniform doctrine, and co^mu^
interpretation of the scriptures of christ's universal church, teached in all
ages their fyftein hundredth zeares by gane, praecipitateth them selfs hedlongs
in the way of heresy, to their aeternal perdition, if they persist in the
same, to the end of their lyfes. Seeing than, that the verity of religion can
nocht be learnit be the doctrine of private men, whainterpreteth the scriptures,
as S. Peter says, to their auin perdition: Thairfoir the only treu moyen to
knau, ye verity of religion is, to learn it of the treu church of God, to ye
which, Christ Jesus him self refers the decision, and determination of
controversies, saying to every ane; dic ecclesiae: S. Mat. 18. Verse. 17.
Tell or shau to the church; he pronunceth ane sentence agains the proud
contemners thairof; that we should estime them, as Pagans and Publicans, wha
heireth noch the woce of the church, and repugneth to the determination thairof
in matters of religion. This is thane ane infallible reul: to beliue; as ye
church beliueth, In sa doing we can na vvayis err, because the church of God
can na vvayis err, as is prouen be invincible raisons. First, because the
doctrine of the treu church of God is the doctrine of Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1
Verse. 22.3. S. Ih. 14. Verse. 10. S. I hone Verse. 13.
and of his halie spirit, for Christ is the head of the church of God, as S.
Paul witnesses: And Christ promised to assist ye same with his holy spirit,
wha should teach al verity their in perpetually wuto the end of the world.
Secundlie this church, vvhairof he is the head, 5. Luc. 1. Verse. 33. Dan. 2.
Verse. 44.
is his kingdom on earth? whith sal never have ane end, as the scripture
witnesses: Bot vvhair Christ regneth be verity, Satan can nocht regne their
in be heresy. And vvhair Christ teaches al verity be his holy spirit vvnto
the end of the vvarld, the spirit of error can nocht teach heresy their in at
onie time: Thairfor it is impossible that ye treu church of God, vvair of
Christ is ever the head, and the holy spirit the instructour in all ages, can
err in onie age to ye end of the vvarld. Thridlie S. 1. Tim. 3 Verse. 15,
Paul calls ye church, the pillar, and sure ground, or vphald of verity.
Mat. 16. Verse. 16.
Fourtlie our saueour affirms, that the zettis of hell can nocht preuail agans
his church: Thairfor Satan can nocht ouercum the church of Christ Jesus be
error. Seeing than, that the doctrine of the treu church, is the doctrine of
Christ, and of his holy spirit, in all ages vvnto the end of the vvarld:
Thairfor the treu church of God can nocht err in onie age, vvnto the end of ye
vvarld: for this cause, wha beliueth, Note.
as the church beliueth, can na wayis err; and consequently every ane wha
vvald be assured of the verity of religion, should learn ye same of the treu
church of God, vvhairof Christ Jesus is the head, and nocht of particular men,
who teached neu doctrine repugnant to that of Crists universal church in all
Aages to their days.

The fourt consideration is inferred of the former doctrine, that seeing the
treu church of God can na vvayis err, be raison of the perpetual assistance of
Christ Jesus thairto, and of his halie spirit: Note.
Thairfor every ane aught to try out most earneslie, wha amangs all the
professoures of the monifald contrarius forms of religion has ye treu church
of God, and adher thairto; for it is ye only shool, vvhair in they may learn
the verity of religion, that brings to salvation.

The fyft consideration is, that the treu church of God, which only is tached
be Christ, and his holy spirit, in all verity to the end of the vvarld, may be
evidently knauen, and decerned, from the malignant churches of deceatful
heretics, be tua manifest marks contened in this article of our creid: I.
beliue the holy catholic church. Sa the treu church of God, is yat only
euocation, and visible assemblee of thaise only amangs Christians, wha
serves, and adoreth, God in ane holy society, and feloship of his treu
vvorshipers, conjoined in unity of faith and religion, dispersed universally
throght al ye vvarld, vvhair ever Christ's holy name is treulie professed. Be
this qualities Christ's treu church is decerned from the viked particular
congregations of heretics, wha ar ever in sin, and ar contened within the
bounds of certane corners, and particular dens of christindome, and remaneth
only certan times throght hypocrisy for punitio^ of sins, that the constant
worshipers of God (as S. 1. Cor. 11 Verse. 19.
Paul says) may be manifested be trial of persecution, and decerned from
hypocrites for yis, and vvther causes S. Paul says, that it is necessar that
heresies should be.

The sext consideration is, concerning the first mark of Christ's treu church,
that it must be holy, and that in tua respctes first in respect of holiness of
life. Nixt in respect of holiness, of doctrine. The church of God is called
holy, because in it, their is treu remission of sins, and in no sect of
heretics: Their for S. August.
Augustine says, we may obtene salvation in the only treu church of Christ
Jesus; 2. Pet. 2. Verse. 21
and S. Peter calls the particular conuenticles of heretics, sects of
perdition. The holiness of Christ's treu church is proue^, in respect, that sum
of the members thairof, ar preserved from al spot of deidlie sin be ane
special grace and particular privilege of God, vvthers wha keiping unity of
faith, and falling in fynne, ar purged thairfra, and maid holy be the verteu
of christ's death and passion, applied to them, be his holy sacraments, This
mark conueneth na vvayis to onie of their neu sects of protestants; and in
particular it can nocht conuene to them of Caluins sect, as is plane be their
auin doctrine; for ye ministers of their sect teaches, and their adherent
auditoures beliueth assuredly, that it is impossible to be without deadly
sin in this life, or to keip the commandments of God: of this it folloueth
necessarlie, that they ar nocht of the church of God, which is holy, because
they al ar perpetual transgressoures of the commandments of God, and ever in
dendlie sin, during their lyftyme, as they confess them selfs: Their for be
their auin confession, they can nocht be in the estait of holiness of life, sa
lang as they live for wha ar in perpetual syn ne can never be holy; and
consequently, they can never enter in heauin; Note. Apoc. 21 Verse. 27.
for as the scripture vitnesseth; No unclean thing, or infected with sin and
unpurged thairfra can enter in heauin. Be the contrare, the Apostolik, and
Roman church is holy, because sum of the members thairof ar preserved from
sin, be ane special grace of God, as the virgin Marie, Luc. 1. Verse. 28.
to whom ye Angel Gabriel said: hail full of grace: This fulness of grace culd
nocht consist with onie spot of sin. Thairfor this glorious mother of God
was preserved from al spot of sin, be ane special grace of God, to be the
holy and sanctified tabernacle of his sone Christ Jesus; and thairfor he
sayith of her. Cant. 4. Verse. 7.
Tota pulchra es amica mea, and macula non est in te. Thou art al beutiful my
love, and their is nocht ane spot in the. We reid also, that S. Ihon the
Baptist, wha was the forrinner of christ was replenished with the holy spirit
even from his mothers womb; Luc. 1. Verse. 15.
as the same Angel of God declaired to his father Zacharias: Thairfor he was
preserved from sin from his mothers womb, that he micht be the holy
forrinner of his master Jesus Christ S. Luc also witnesses, Luc. 5. Verse. 6.
that S. Ihonis father, and mother called zacharias and Elizabeth, war both
just before God, and walked in all the commandments, and iustifications of the
lord without reproach: Of this it is manifest, that sum of the treu church ar
holy, in respect of holiness of life, because above the order of their corrupted
nature, they lived ane clein and holy life, and keipit all the commandments of
God. That vvthers of the Roman church ar maid holy be purgation from their
sins, it is prouen be manifest scripturs: Psalm. 50. Verse. 7.
First we are conceived, and borne in original sin; Ve ar clenged thairfra,
and restored to ane neu and holy life, be the sacrament of baptism. S. Paul
vitnesseth yis saying: Ephesians. 5 Verse. 20
Christ has given him self for his church clenging, her be the lauer of watter
in the word of life. This lauer of vvatter in the word, is baptism, which
this apostle in wther places, Tit 3. Verse. 20
calls the lauer of regeneration, because be the washing their of, we ar
regenerated, that is to say, borne agane, be ane spiritual birth to ane neu,
clein, and holy life, and maid sons of God be adoption, Ephesians. 2 Verse. 3.
wha be our first birth of our earthly mother war borne sons of Ire: for
this cause, Tit. 3. Verse. 5 1. Pet. 3. Verse. 21
S. Paul says, that God saves was be the lauer of regeneration. This effect
of baptism to purge vvs of original sin, and to restoire to ane holiness of
life, is teached and practiced in the Roman church, agains the heresy of their
nouateurs denying that baptism hath-onie verteu of Christ's death to vvash vvs
of our sins, and to save vvs, affirming that it is only ane singe and
representation of washing: Thairfor this holiness of life maid be baptism is
performed conform to the Roman church be purgatio^ of sins, and nocht after
Caluins doctrine.

As baptism makes vvs holy purging vvs of original sin: Sa the sacrament
of penitence, makes vvs holy, purging vvs of actual sin, in ye Roman
church, and it restores vvs to ane inherent and inuard justice, and to ane
sanctified life. This is prouen be S. Peter wha says to the paenitent Ieues,
wha assisted to the murder of Christ: Act. 2. Verse. 28.
Paenitentiam agite. Do penance, and be every ane of zou baptized in ye name
of Jesus Christ for remission of zour sins, and in ane vvther place he
says. Act. 3. Verse. 19.
Paenitemini and conuertimini, vt deleantur peccata vestra. That is to say: Do
penance, and be converted, that zour sins may be taken auay. The Caluinists
denying this taking auay of sins be baptism, and paenitence, has perverted
this scripture be their falls translation, for vvhair S. Peter says.
Paenitentiam agite, Do penance: they say: amend zour lyfes. Bot in the Roman
church be doing of penance, our sins ar taken auay, says S. Peter, and we
ar restored to ane inuard Justice, and holiness of life, be treu remission and
purgation from sins, and inuard sanctification. Thairfor the only Roman
church, is the only treu church of God, because it only is holy, in respect
of holiness of life.

The Roman church is holy also in respect of new of doctrine, because it can
never err in matters of faith and religion: for Christ Jesus regneth be verity
and justice their in to the end of the world, and teaches al verity be his
holy spirit, for be him, (as is al ready prouen) he instructs the lauful
Doctoures of his church in all ages to the end of the vvarld: Of this it is
manifest, that this first mark of the treu church of God, concerning holiness of
life, and of doctrine, conueneth to the only Roman church: Thairfor ye only
Roman church is ye treu church of God, and the only immaculat spouse of Christ
Jesus, seeing it only, is holy both in respect of life and of doctrine.

The seuent consideration is, concerning the second infallible mark of the treu
church of God, in sa far as it is called catholic, or universal: It is so
called for thrie notable respects; In sa far as it has universality of
times, of places, and of persons, S. Aug. de vnitate ecclesiae.
as S. Augustine confirms be man fest scriptures agains the heretics of his
age: and proves be ye same that the only Roman church is the treu church of
God, aga^s ye particular sects of ye donatists, of ye manichians, and of
vvther haeretiks of his age: And we prove also be the same scriptures, that
nather ye neu sects of the Lutherians, nor of ye Caluinists, nor of ye
Anabaptists, nor of vvther particular conuenticles, of vvther nouateurs can be
ye treu church of God, because their sects has nather universality of times,
nor of places, nor of persons: thairfor ye ministers of their neu sects has
erected, and manteneth sects, of perdition, as S. 2. Pet. 2. Verl. 2.
Peter calls al neu sects, repugnant to the ancient church of God. Their
exposition of ye scriptures is natheer of Christ, nor of his holy spirit,
seeing they ar nocht members of Christ's church, which has universality of
places, of times, and of persons as their subsequent scriptures testifies
planlie.

S. S. Aug.
Augustine proves be sindrie scriptures of ye neu and ald testament, that ye
treu church must have universality of places, and be spread amangs al nations.
Amangs sindrie vvther passages, he produces that solemnet promise that God,
maid to Abraham saying: Benedicentur in semine tuo, Genesis 22. Verse. 18.
omnes gontes terrae, quia obedisti voci meae, all the nations of ye world salbe
blissed in thy seid, because thou haist obeyed my woce. Genesis 26 Verl. 5.
And agane he said: Benedicentur in semine tuo omnes ge^ces terrae, eo quod
obedierit Abraham voci meae, and enstodierit praecepta and ma^data mea, and
ceremonias, legesque seruarit. All the nations of the earth salbe blissed in thy
seid because Abraham has obeyed my voce, and keiped my praeceptes, and
commandeme^tes, and has observed the ceremonies, and laues. Note heir, that
Abraham keiped the commandments, and deserved ane great reuard to him self,
and his posterity for the keiping thairof, the ministers denies the ane and
the vvther: Bot God heir testifies the co^trair. S. Paul. Gala. 3.
S. Paul exponeth this seid of Abraham to be Christ Jesus, wha is the sone of
Abraham on his blissed mothers syd, in whom al nations of the vvarld was
blissed because he redeemed them al, be his death and passion, and called them
to the treu service of God, in unity of his church, which is the greatest
blissing that the nations of the vvarld culd obtene: because that was the only
moyen to bring them to salvation. The church of God, before the cuming of
Christ, was in manifest amangs of the Ieues; Psalm. 81.
Thairfor ye prophet David said. Notus in Judea Deus, in Israel magnu^ nomen
eius. God is knaue^ in Iudeae, and his name is great in Israel. Bot Christ at
his cu^ing took auay ye parpel wall, which separated the Ieues from the
gentiles, wha war than Idolatres; he conjoined them both in unity of his
church be his treu faith; sa he maid ye church of God catholic, that is to say,
spread amangs al nations. The same learned father proves this be their words of
Christ saying to his Apostles: Luc. 24. Verse. 46
It behufit Christ to suffer, and rise ye third day from death, and paenitence
to be preached, and remission of sins in his name in all nations, be giving at
Jerusalem. He send his Apostles with pouer and authority to establish his
church ama^gs al nations, Mat. 28. Verse. 19.
saying to them go, and teath al nations, baptisand them in ye name of the
father, and of the sone, and of the holy spirit. And in ane vvther place he
says to them: Act. 1. Verse. 8.
ze salbe witnesses to me in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and Samaria, and wnto
ye end of ye world. They executed this charge, as the rayal Prophet spak of
them, saying. In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, and in fines orbis terrae
verba eorum: The sound of their woce passed out throght al ye earth, Psalm. 19.
and their words passed wnto the end of ye world. The same learned father
confirms this amplitud and greatness of Christ's church, be sindrie testimonies
of ye prophets, and psalms vvhairin ye spirit of God descryued ye greatness of
Christ's kingdom, which is his catholic church on earth. His father said to
him: Psalm. 2.
Postula a me, and dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tuam, and possessionem tuam
terminos terrae. Ask of me, and I sal give to ye, ye nations to be thy
heretage, and the ends of the world to be thy possession. Psalm. 17.
And in ane vvther place it is said of Christ. Dominabitur a mari vsque ad
mare; and a flumine vsque ad terminos or bis terrarum: He sal have dominion
from sea to sea; and from flude to the ends of the world, al kings sal adore
him, al ye trybes of ye earth salbe blissed in him, al nations sal magnify
him. In respect of this greatness of Christ's kingdom which is his church, Dan.
2.
Daniel calls him ane stone cutted out of ane montane, without ye hands of
men which groueth, and replenisheth ye earth. Be their scriptures, and money
vvthers S. Augustine concludes, yat ye treu church of God, mon be universal in
respect it is dispersed throght al ye vvarld: Of this universality he
infers, yat ye sect of ye Donatists was nocht ye treu church of God, because
it was nocht vniuersalie dispersed ama^gs al nations; for it exceded nocht ye
bon^ds of Africa, but was circu^scryued within provinces thairof. Be the
force of this invincible raison we conclud lykuayis agains the Caluinists,
that their sect is nocht the treu church of God, because it is nocht catholic or
universal; for it excedeth nocht the bounes of Europ, and is contened within
feu provinces thairof. Their is nocht ane kingdom in the vvarld, that ever
professed this caluinisme, but the present of Scotland: As for Ingland which
appeireth to aggrie cheiflie with it they differ in heads of religion: for
they of Ingland keip holy all the dayis of the conception, nativity,
circumcision, passion, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus Christ, and
celebrateth them with greater solemnity, nor they do common sundayis. They
solemnise also vvitsonday in memory that Christ Jesus send his holy spirit
that day to his Apostles, for their instructeur in ye euaugelical lau. They
keip also holy the dayis of Christ's blissed mother, and of his Apostles. Bot
the minesters of Scotland calls al their and vvther points superstition, and
idolatry, and the ministers of the clergy of Ingland calls their ministers
puritans. The Beshope of London has vvreatten books agans ye puritans: They of
Ingland has also their Beshopes, and Archiebishopes, as prelates, and
superiores: The common people does reverence them in that degrie, craving their
blissing on their knees; Bot their ministers dispyseth the gouername^t of the
church be Bishopes, and Archibeshopes; albeit the king (whom God moth save)
constraneth them now to acknauledge the authority of Bishopes, and
Archibishopes: Thairfor they of Ingland has nocht unity of faith with them
of Scotland. This was evident to al them who hanted ye churches of both ye
countreyis: Bot sense God has exalted our king to the coroune of Ingland, his
majesty at his entree in that country being received in their churches be
their bishopes adorned at their service, with surplices, stoles, four neuked
bonetes, and vvther orname^tes, which they have co^serued after the cumlie rite
of the Catholic and Roman church; his majesty approving that cumlie and decent
order observed in their praetended divine service, has rejected the co^fused
and laical order observed be the puritan ministers of Scotland in their
deformed churches: Thairfor his majesty has embraced ye form of Ingland: he
received their sacrament upon his knees, out of the hands of ane archibishop
adorned which his mitre, and vvther ornaments convenient to his dignity, before
ane covered altar, upon the which he laid his offrand with great reverence.
The puritans of Scotland called this manner of administration of hair sacrament,
ane Inglish mess. According to this order his majesty promised to reform the
puritan ministers of Scotland; So with time they must preach in surplices, and
four neuked bonets, which they preached their sourtie zeares bypast, to be the
mark of the beast, and sign of the great Antichrist. They do nou approve (at
the commandment of the keing) the authority of Bishopes and Archibishopes to
be lauful, and consonant to their Euangel; which they preached before this
time, was unlawful, and repugnant to their Euangel. Latonie man consider of
this contrariety, and mutation in chief heads of religion, of their Chamelio^
ministers, imports unity of religion, ather with their nightboures, or
amangs them selfs? preaching ane thing to be treu this zear, which they have
preached to be falls yir forty zears bypast. Of this it is certane, yat their
caluinian sect has nocht universality of places, and co^sequentlie, it is
nocht christ's universal church.

The Donatists ansuered, that Christ's church was vniuersel, and spread amangs
al nations be his Apostles. Bot thairefter it decayed, and was oppressed be
error, and superstition; and remained in that estait ever, vvhil God (is they
fenzied) raised Donatus (of whom they war called Donatistes) to reform the
vvarld, be preaching the verity of the gospel, which was extinguised before
his cuming. The Caluinian ministers vvseth ye same su^bterfuge, saying; that ye
universal church was oppressed be error, and distroyed, be Satan and the
Antichrist, mairmon ane thusand zeares, and the verity extinguised be
superstition and Idolatry, ever vvhil it plaised God (as they fenzie) to raise
vvp Ihon Calvin, to preach the verity of Christ's treu Euangel; Sa it plaiseth
them to style the darkness of their caluinian haeresies. S. Augustine refuted
the ansuer of the Donatists, shauing, that they supponed most falsely, that the
church of God was or culd be ouerthrauen be error before Donatus: Or in onie
age to the end of the vvarld: because the church of God, must be ay universal in
respect of universality of times: It must stand victorious in all ages agans al
ye enemies thairof, vvnto the end of the vvarld, as he proves be manifest
scriptures, which we have deducet heirto for, we prove be the same
scriptures, that their ministers supponeth most falsely the defection and
decaying of Christ's church from the verity of his worshipping, or the
oppression thairof be Satan and his supposts: Mat. 10.
for the zettis of hell can nocht praeuail agains Christ's church as he him
assurred ws.

The universality of times of the treu church, imports both a^tiquitie from
the Apostles days; and thairfor it is called Apostolik; and also it imports
perpetuity; that it being anis established, and planted be the Apostles, it
should never decay nor be ouercumed, and consequently it should remain visibilie
dispersed throght all the vvarld, and victorious in all ages agans all the enemies
thairof: This is prouen be Christ's infallible promise saying, that he has
builded so surly his church upon ane, strong and firm rok. Mat. 10.
Portae inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam. The zettis of hell sal nocht
praeuail agans her, wha is his immaculat spouse, and of whom he said. Osee.
2. Verse. 19.
Desponsaui eam mihi in aternum. I have handfast, and espoused her to me for
ever: Seeing the Caluinia^ ministers confesses, that their praetended church
was ouercumed be ye forces of satan, mair nor ane thusand zeares: Thairfor
their pretended church, is nocht ye treu church of God, of ye which Christ
Jesus assurreth vvs, that ye zettis of hell: That is to say, arrour, sin, and
superstition, which brings to hell, zea all the forces of Satan be
persecution sal nocht praeuail agans his church.

They ar constraned to fenzie ye decay of ye church, because when ye catholics
asks of them, in what pairt of the varld was their church before Calvin?
They can nocht shau onie nation or town in the varld, that professed or ever
hard word of sik ane religion, as they teach and profess. Thairfor they ar
constraned to say, that the church of God was suppressed, vvhil they came to
establish ye same. The Lutherians praetendeth the lyk, of their church, when
ye Catholics asks of them, vvhair their church was, before friar Martin
Luther? I hay affirm that the vvarld was ouercumed be error, before his
dayis, and that the word, which he preached, was the only verity of
Christ's Euangel: And that Calvin, wha invented ane neu doctrine of his auin
brane, contrair to his, was ane proud heretik, perverting the Euangel, of
Christ and his sacraments: for this cause the Lutherians called the
Caluinists, sacramentaries, because they perverted the sacraments, denying
specially, the real presence of Christ's body and blood in ye sacrament of the
altar, which ye Lutherians confesses. Be this ansuer of the ane, and the
vvther, it is manifest, that nather of them has the treu church, because they
confess, that the zettis of hell has praeuailed agans their pretended churches:
This ca^ nocht be said of Christ's treu church: for it is his kingdom on earth:
Dan. 2.
of ye which ye prophet Daniel said, that it should stand for ever, and
ouerthral al wther monarchies: And ye Prophet David said: Psalm. 144
Regnum tuum regnum omnium saeculorum, and dominatio tua in generatione, and
generationem: Thy regne is a regne of al ages, and thy dominion is in all
generation to generation. Mat. 28.
And Christ him self promised to be with his church to the end of the vvarld:
Iho. 14.
and yat in his visible absence he should assist the same with his holy spirit
to teach al verity thairin to ye vvarlds end.

The third quality of the treu church is, that it should be catholic, or
universal in respect of universality of persons, that as it stands in all
ages agans the forces of hell: sa it muist have perpetual succession of lauful
Pastoures, to instruct Christ's visibil flok, to govern ye same in peace and
unity of faith, vvnto the end of the vvarld. Ephe. 4. Verse. 11.12.
This is prouen be S. Paul saying: Christ has given to his church, sum
Pastoures and Doctoures, for the wark of the ministry, for the building of the
body of Christ; (which is visible church) whil we be al gathered in unity of
faith: Bot this gaddering of al christians in unity of faith, will be, maid
only at the latter day: Thairfor Christ's church, must have perpetual
succession of lauful pastoures, to teach his church, vvnto ye end of ye vvarld:
Bot their properties conueneth na vvayis to Caluins sect: for when we ask of
ye ministers thairof, wha war ye pastoures of their church before Calvin? And
wha teached fik doctrine and interpretation of ye scriptures as they do? seeing
they refuse to stand be ye interpretation of ye scriptures, given be al ye
ancient Doctoures, wha descended be lineal succession from Christ's Apostles
vvnto our age? They can nocht design onie lauful Pastors or Doctoures, with
whom they consent in unity of faith and religion in onie age before Calvin,
when we ask of them, to whom Calvin succeided? or wha gave him imposition
of hands? And what lauful prelat and superior send him with pouer and
authority to preach? without ye which pouer and authority, no man should be
estimed ane lauful Pastor? Romans 10 Verse. 15.
for as S. Paul says: hou can they preach, except they be sent? To this they
sing dum, because it is certan, that Calvin intruded him self in ye cathedral
seat of geneue, and chaised auay ye lauful Beshop thairof, be force of arms,
ma^tening sum factious people of that town in rebellion, agais their native
Prince. Their common subterfuge is, that he was called be ane extraordinar
vocation, immediately be God, to reform ye vvarld, as war ye Prophets in ye
auld lau. This ansuer is ane common substerfuge of al haeretiks, as ye ancient
Doctoures vviinesseth; Bot is nocht vvallable, for Christ has promised ane
perpetual succession of laufullie called Pastoures to his church: Thairfor this
extraordinar vocation has na place in Christ's church: Nether is their
necessity (as they praetend) of extraordinar Prophets for reformation of the
doctrine thairof, because I have prouen, that Christ's church can never err.
Mair over S. Paul affirms that the lauful Pastoures of Christ's, Heb. 5. Verse.
4.
church should be promoued, and called their to (tanquam Aaron) as was Aaron. Bot
ye scriptures testifies, that Aaron was called to ye dignity of the
Eccesiastical charge be ane ordinar vocation, and be ane lauful superior: Leu.
8.
for God commanded Moses to consecrat and anoint him, be ane external unction
in the dignity and office of ane priest. Thairfor al lauful Paustoures of
Christ's church, should be promoued to the Ecclesiastical ministry, be the
authority of their lauful Superioures, wha promoueth them be ane external
unction, and imposition of their hands: And wha sends them with pouer and
jurisdiction, to execut their charge in sik pairtes, as ar subject to their
authority: Bot nather Calvin nor the ministers of his sect, was promoued to ye
ministry be ane lauful superior: Thairfor they ar nocht lauful Pastoures of
Christ's treu church. Of such extraordinar teachers our saueour forspak should cum
in the latter days, Mat. 7. Verse. 15.
nocht send, but should intrud them selfs, climming over the dyk in Christ's
shipfald to deuor his slok, with ye bloody teeth of their heresies, being cled
with shipkynnes, that is to say, with the soft habit of the external words
of the scriptures, but taken in ane falls sense; Mat. 4.
as sath an alleged ye scriptures aga^s Christ. Thairfor Christ comma^deth to
be war with them, as thieves and throtcutters. So no man can have just excuse
of their auin perdition; being deceived be them, throght the praetext of the
verity seeing they commit them selfs to vulauful teachers, vvho^ Christ
comma^deth expreslie to escheu, as thieves and throtcutters. And because their
ministers has nocht in their praetended church universality of persons; for
they can nocht shau ane perpetual succession of lauful pastoures, descending
from the Apostles: Zea they ar schamed of their patriarch Calvin, teaching
contrarious doctrine to his: Thairfor they have nocht Christ's treu church,
which is universal, in respect of universality of persons: Nether have they
universality of places, or of times: Thairfor their co^uenticle, is nocht
Christ's catholic church.

The aught consideration is that wha has conjoined them selfs to this
particular sect of Calvin and of his ministers, ar in ye way of their
damnation: because they ar out of the treu church of Christ Jesus which is
holy, and universal; and consequently, they have nather Christ for their
head, nor his holy spirit for their instructeur. Of this it folloueth also,
that their ex position of the scriptures, is nather of Christ nor of his holy
spirit: Thairfor what they call verity, it is plane heresy: And what they
call licht, is very darkness, Sa they incur this curs of God, pronunced agans
sik falls Prophets: VVo be to zou wha calls darkness licht, Isay. 5.
and licht darkness. Be ye contrair, seeing ye Roman church is both holy, and
also catholic or universal, (as we have prouen be manifest sorptures:)
Thairfor the members thairof ar the members of Christ Jesus, and in the way of
their salvation; and having ye treu church; they have Christ Jesus for their
head; and his holy spirit for their instructeur: for this cause, wa beliueth,
as ye Roman church beliueth, and wha receaueth the exposition of the scriptures
thairof, concerning the doctrine of the sacraments: the invocation of santes,
purgatory, and al controuersed heads in matters of religiou, ar assured, that
they err nocht in their and vvther heads of their salvation; Because ye
doctrine of this church, is the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and of his halie
spirit. This is ye only treu reul to decerne verity of religion, that
brings to salvation, from the hypocrisy of errors and heresies of malignant
churches, that leads to perdition, from the which, God reduce al deceived
Christians, and bring them to ye motherlie besome of Christ's treu church,
which is decerned from the malignant churches of deceatful haeretiks, in sa
far as it is holy, Catholic, Apostolik, and Roman, out of the which their is
na salvation. For out of Christ Jesus their is no salvation: Bot wha ar out of
the treu church of God, which I have prouin to be holy, Catholic, Apostolik,
and Roman, ar out of Christ Jesus: Ergo out of the treu church of God, which
is holy, Catholic, Apostolik and Roman their is na salvation.

FINIS.

