A PLAIN EXPLANATION OF THE WHOLE REVELATION OF SAINT JOHN.

Very necessary and comfortable in these days of trouble and affliction in the
Church.

Penned by a faithful Preacher, now with God, for more private use, and now
published for the further benefit of the people of GOD.

There came a voice from heaven, saying: Come away from her, my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins; lest ye be partakers of her plagues, Reu. 18.
4.

Here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus,
Revel. 14. 12. Alas, alas, wat great City is in one hour come to desolation,
Revel. 18. 16. 17. The Beast, and the false Prophets, were alive cast into a
Lake of fire, etc. Revel. 19. 20. Printed at London by T. S. for Nathaniel
Newbery, 1622,

To the Christian Reader.
Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. Romans 15. 4.
And the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
Servants, Reu. 1. 1. was given and written for the comfort of the Church in her
latest and greatest troubles, and sharpest afflictions and persecutions;
wherein certes Gods love and care of his Church, is abundantly manifested. For
not any of the Primitive persecutions, or latter Antichristian Seducions, and
bloody Combustions, wherewith at this day the Church is turmoyled: But they are
foretold, with their Issue and Events in this Book; that so the chosen and
elect of God might not be carried to everlasting perdition, or overwhelmed with
sorrow and displeasure in their seeming inextricable temporary calamities.

Many Commentaries and Expositions of this Book have been published by very
Reverend and excellent learned men, no doubt to the great comfort of Gods
people; and therefore the less need there may be imagined to be of any more:
but, (besides that this is more brief and plain upon the whole Book then any
other; and so is more useful for the most, that have most use of it; if it
shall serve but as a watchword, even now to direct Gods people in their
perplexities, whether to have recourse for comfort and consolation, and so
incite them to a more diligent reading, and studious search of this holy
Revelation, it will be a sufficient apollogy for this publication; especially
at this time; when so many waver between hope and despair of the good
success, of the affairs of Christendom; which so nearely concern the
welfare of the Church, as that the Enemies begin to look big again; daily
expecting the ruin of it, as if the hope of Gods people were vain; or as if
by their wicked policy and power they made sure account to disappoint God of
his purpose, and decreed destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist; not
considering that the more they extend their malicious practices against the
desolate Woman, the more and greater woes are due unto them, and the more
horrible judgments shall come upon them, and that happily by means of those
weaklings whom they now so much scorn and trample upon. For, upon whom have
they gaped, at whom have they hissed, but at the holy ones, and the anointed
of God? Well, I say no more, but that God is wonderful in all his works, and
so will declare himself in the destruction of those his enemies; and in the
deliverance of his faithful ones out of the hands, and from the rage of the
Dragon, and his Instruments; the Beast, and the false Prophet, with all their
Locusts and Frogs; let them cast abroad never so great floods of deceits and
persecutions to ouerwhelme the Church, and to extirpate true Religion; only it
behooues the professors of truth, in this expectation to arm themselves with
faith and patience, and to exercise themselves in obedience to Gods holy
Commandments; and then they may rest assured of the accomplishment (in Gods
good time) of all the promises expressed in this Book.

Wherein to help us, the Author (a man of excellent gifts) long since
travailed; and now by the providence of God, are his labors in this kind
published for our comfort. I pray God that we may be directed to make good use
both of the holly Revelation it self; and of his labor in the Explanation of
it.

Farewell.
A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR EXPLANATION of the whole Revelation of Saint JOHN.
APOCALYPSE, CAP. 1. The Revelation of JESUS CHRIST, which God gave unto him, to
show unto his Servants things which must shortly be done, which he sent, and
showed by his Angel unto his servant JOHN, etc.
AS the Prophet Daniel, in his time was raised up of the Lord as an instrument
to reveal to the Church of God in those days, the difficulties to come unto
the Church of the Jews, that thereby the Church might be armed against those
troubles, as also to comfort them in the good issue thereof. So here the
Apostle is stirred up as an Instrument of the same, unto the Church of the
Christians, which he does by the prophecy contained in this Book.

In the beginning of this Book is first set down the excellency of the
Prophecy herein contained, and the instrument of the delivery of it; which is,
the Angel, and of the penning of it, which is John himself.

The excellency of the Book is set down by the diverse commendations, to the
inflaming of the minds of the hearers to a diligent observation of the matter
contained in it.

First, in that it is called a Revelation, he notes, that it is such a thing,
as that the wit of no man or Angel can attain unto it without the special
manifestation of God.

Secondly, it is that which God gives, and therefore must be a most excellent
thing; and further, as it is Gods gift, so it was given by God the Father to
Christ, to give unto his servants; namely, as he was Mediator, and in that
regard only it was revealed to him: for, as he was God, he was equal to his
Father in knowledge; now God the Father would give nothing to Christ, but that
which was most excellent.

Thirdly, it is commended in regard of the matter to be revealed, to wit, that
which was to come shortly or quickly, namely, in a short time, before the end
of the world, both in regard that they should begin out of hand, and especially
in regard of God, for though in regard of us it should seem to be long, yet it
is short unto God.

The instrument by whom God declares it to John, is said to be the Angel, to
wit, the Angel of the covenant; which is Christ the Son of God, which is
here said to be Alpha and Omega, which is also a further commendation of the
Book.

Another argument of commendation is, that it was given to John, a notable
Minister, Apostle, and Witness of the Mystery of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
to whom all the Scriptures are directed.

Another reason of the excellency of it, is drawn from the effects of it, to
wit, that the knowledge of this should make them blessed which did hear it,
and keep the things herein contained.

Further, it is commended in regard of the time wherein it was delivered to
John, to wit, when he was exiled, for the Gospel sake, into the I Will of
Pathmos, which argues that it was a notable thing, seeing it was to be a
matter of great comfort to him in such a distress: And more particularly, that
it is said to be revealed on the Lords day; wherein God uses to deliver more
excellent things, concerning his will and counsel, then at other times: And as
the Sabbath gives commendations, and credit, and authority unto the
Revelation, so this Revelation also gives authority to the Sabbath.

And first, John begins with a Salutation, that it might draw attention, and
be the more accepted of the hearers. In the salutation, he wishes Grace and
peace from the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

The Father is set out to be He that was, is, and shall be, that is,
everlasting. The holy Ghost is set down next, by the name of seven Spirits, as
having relation unto the seven Churches, making as it were a conformity of the
Spirit with those seven Churches hereafter mentioned, wherein his Mystery most
especially lay.

The cause wherefore he did choose seven Churches and no other number, it is*
for the number of perfection, for seven is a perfect number: and therefore he
says, the holy Ghost is as seven Spirits, to pour out his grace effectually
in all the Churches, because he is as effectual in all, as in one, for his
strength is not divided. And by seven Churches he also understands all the
rest.

Next the holy Ghost, is set down the Son of God: The reason why the second
Person is set after, is, first because the Scripture is wont to set that in the
last place, which it uses to entreat longest of, now therefore the Apostle
Saint John being here principally to speak of our Savior Christ, sets him
in the last place.

In the Salutation, he wishes grace unto the Churches, with the fruit thereof,
which is peace, which are set down by their end, to wit, that God might be
glorified.

Christ is here described by his offices; first, in that he is called the
faithful Witness, signifying that he is a Prophet to testify the truth to
his people.

Secondly, he is described by his Priesthood, in that he is called the first
begotten of the dead; showing thereby, that he was offered up in sacrifice for
his Church, and was risen from the dead.

Thirdly, by his kingdom, in that he is called Prince of the Kings of the
earth: that is, he to whom all power belongs, and to whom all Princes are
subject, as of whom they receive their Scepters.

Afterward the Apostle shows that he did not set down this Revelation by
himself, but by the calling of Christ; and therefore brings in the author of
his calling, which was Christ, whom he sets down by his coming in the
clouds; which he says, shall be so glorious, that every one shall see him: and
that this authority may be more effectual, he brings in Christ, speaking in
his own person, saying, I am Alpha and Omega.

And lastly, the Apostle brings in himself, describing himself to be a
Brother, that is, a member of Christ, and one that waited for deliverance by
him. And again, that he was a Labourer in the Church, and therefore was
persecuted for the Truths-sake, for which cause he was now driven into the
Isle of Pathmos: And here he says, he was ravished in the spirit, and heard
a voice as of a Trumpet: In that he says he was ravished in the spirit, he
signifies that his mind was withdrawn from all worldly cogitations, and was
addicted and bent unto those holy meditations which it pleased the Lord to
minister unto him. Where we see that he withheld himself from all other
things, to the end he might better attend upon all good occasions, to learn
any thing concerning the will of God.

Which teaches us in holy exercises, especially which concern the will of
God, to separate our selves from any thing that may hinder us, or withdraw our
minds from the same; and more principally ought the Ministers so to do, when
they are to be occupied in the study of the word of God, and in delivering the
will of God unto the people.

And he looked to see the Voice: Not that the voice could be seen, but he
looked from whence it should come, and who should speak it. Then he shows
what he saw (which is the preparation of the two Chapters following:) that
which he saw was seven Candlestickes, which note the seven Churches; for the
Candlestickes are of Gold, signifying the glory and purity of them; so that
we see that albeit the Church in the world seems to be contemptible, yet
with God it is most precious.

Afterward the Apostle does notably describe Him, whom he saw; and first, by
his apparel, in that he had a long Garment; noting, that he was a great
Councellor: for, amongst the Jews, Counselors used to wear such manner of
Garments. This notes, that Christ is infinitely wise, and therefore able to
give counsel to his Church.

Secondly, his paps girded, noting, that as he is wise so he is ready to help
his servants speedily with his counsel. A similitude taken from the custom of
those Countries of the East, who when they would make have in doing any thing,
they would gird up their Clothes to their breasts, lest they should be any
hinderance unto them, that they might more speedily do that they went about,

His head white; declaritg his gravity, as gray hairs are signs of age.

His eyes flaming; that is, piercing and entering into the hearts of men, laying
open, and seeing all things whatsoever, though never so secret.

His feet Brass; showing his power and majesty, as being able to tread his
enemies, and all that is contrary to his will, or that opposes it self to
him, in pieces under his feet.

After follow his effects; and first, by his voice, which is said to be like
the sound of many waters, setting down thereby the majesty of his voice;
noting, how terrible Christ is to his enemies: Then he is said to have seven
Stars in his hand, which signifies the Ministers, who are the lights of the
Church: And whereas they are said to be in his hand, it notes, that the
Ministers of the Word, are in the custody of Christ, being vpheld, maintained,
and governed by him.

Out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; Which is his Gospel: And
whereas it is said to have two edges, it declares the double virtue of the
word of God, which either cutteth and heals unto life, or wounds to death.

His face shining as the Sun; either setting forth the fullness of his
Majesty, or else his enlightening of the earth with the light of the Gospel,
like as the Sun with his beams.

Afterward, John says, that he fell down at the sight hereof; which he did
partly in reverence, and partly in fear: But the Lord raises him up, and
vpholdeth him, bidding him not to fear. And in a word, interprets all the
mystery, and sets down briefly the sum of the whole Book following,
which was then to be revealed unto him: namely, that it was either of things
present, or of things to come.

The things present, were those which were then done, though John knew not of
them: which are contained in the three first Chapters of the Book.

The things to come, are those which afterward should be done unto the end of
the world: and do follow in the rest of the Book.

Apoc. Cap. 2. v. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write, These
things says he that holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks
in the mids of the seven golden Candlestickes, etc.
THe Prophet having set down the division of his Book, which is, into two
parts, concerning things present, and things to come. He now comes to the
first; namely, concerning those things that were then done: where, first he
sets down the Epistles which Christ sends to the Churches. In the Epistles, we
are to consider those things that are common to them all, and those things that
are proper to every one.

Angel; that is, to the Minister, as being principal in the Church: Yet so as
that it belongs also to the whole Church, as appears by the Exhortation in
the end of every Epistle, Let him that has ears hear, etc.



to move them with care, by threatenings, in the four latter, he more expressly
sets down their reward: and thereupon he sets down this exhortation unto
attention, Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the
Churches.

To come to the Epistles particularly: In the first he writes to the Church of
Ephesus. Christ describes himself by that, by which he is set down, Chap. 1.
13. 16. namely, to be he which has the seven Stars in his hand: noting,
that all good things whatsoever are in the Ministers, they come from him, and
the praise thereof is due unto him. And secondly, in that he walks in the
midst of the Candlestickes, he notes, that he sees all their doings, and
therefore he knows their works and their labors. And here he commends in
them, first, their Patience, then their Impatience; the latter he handles
first, as is the manner of the Scripture; namely, that they could not forbear
those that fained themselves to be Apostles, and yet were not, and therefore
they proved them and tried, and found them to be liars: Secondly, their
Patience, that they had borne much affliction, and many troubles for the truths
sake, and did still bear in the maintenance thereof, and were not weary, which
is required in true patience.

And having commended the good in them, he comes to the reproof; where he
teaches those that are to reprehend others, that they set down in the first
place, the things that are praiseworthy in the parties to be reprehended, and
then to set down the reproof: Which condemns those which use to rell the
faults, leaving out the remembrance of the good; but the holy Ghost here
contrariwise, does nominate and commend their virtues, that the better they
might be are the reproof of their vices.

Verse 4. The reproof is, that he says, they had fallen from their first
love: Where he reprehendeth their want of zeal; showing that the feruencie of
their love which first they had, was now decayed and cooled, therefore he
exhorts them to a change, first, in their judgment, that they should reform
it, which appears in that he says Verse 5. Remember.

Then in their will and affections in that he bids them repent.

Lastly, in their actions, in that he commands them to do their first
works: So that he requires of them a good and full reformation of all things
that were amiss, both inwardly and outwardly. And he shows further, if they
will not be reformed, according as he exhorts them, that he will remove
their Candlestickes, that is, either cast them into banishment, and suffer them
to be led into captivity, or remove his Gospel from them. And lest they should
be too much discouraged and cast down by this severe and sharp reprehension,
he does after mollify the reproof by praising them again.

Verse 6. And he says, that they have this good thing, that they hate the
sin of the Nicolaitans, which he also hated, to wit, both spiritual and
corporal fornication. And lastly, he shuts up the Epistle, adding a
promise, if they return and overcome, they shall eat of the tree of life;
that is, be partakers of Christ, who was represented and figured by the tree of
life in Paradise, of whom, whosoever eats, shall never die, Ioh. 6.

Verse 8. The next is the Epistle to the Church of Smirna, and amongst them he
finds nothing but matter of commendation.

Verse 9. And here first he praises them for their patient suffering of
afflictions; through which, they were become poor, yet so as that by the
blessing of God, that poverty was turned to their further spiritual riches.

After, he comes to show wherein their affliction consisted, and was more
grievous unto them, namely, in that they had such among them, which professed
themselves Jews, that is, children of God, that is, Christians, but yet were
not, but would maintain the ceremonies of the Law, and prefer them before
the substance of the Gospel, and would mingle the ceremonies of the Law with
the Gospel.

Verse 10. And because they were afraid of future evils, he fore-telleth them
of such troubles which should befall them, that they might be the better
prepared against them, and the more comforted in them. And he tells them
that some of them should be cast into prison, and that they should have
tribulation, that is, grievous afflictions and persecution, ten days, that is,
ten years; every day being counted for a year, according as that phrase is
used and expounded in Daniel, as afterward it came to pass, from half the
reign of Traian, to the time of Adrian, for which space the Church suffered
extreme persecution.

And howsoever their Persecutors might seem to do it in the service of God,
yet he shows them that it should be the only hand of the Devil, and through
his malice, and therefore they should not be discouraged, but should rather be
comforted; for, seeing the Devil was against them, God was therefore with them
on their side, to defend them and take their part. And to the end they might be
the more confirmed hereof, he comfort them with an argument drawn from the
hope of their Resurrection; that howsoever here in this life they should be
persecuted, and should suffer, even until death, yet they perseuering unto the
end, should not be hurt at all with the latter death. And for this cause also
he uses, in the Title, an argument drawn from his own person, in that he is
first and last, and therefore able to deliver them: As also, that he was dead
and is alive; and therefore howsoever they might suffer temporary death, yet
they should rise again as he did, and live with him eternally.

Verse 12. After follows the Epistle to the Church of Pergamus, where he
finds some good things which he commends: namely, their constancy in
professing of religion, and their patience; which he commends by two
circumstances, both in regard of the place, and of the time wherein they lived.

Verse 13. Concerning the place, it was there where the Devil erected his
throne, that is, where he seemed at his pleasure to reign, as Prince in his
Subjects: Nevertheless, they were constant and kept their profession of the
Gospel.

For the time, it was when the faithful man Antipas was put to death: that is,
in such a time wherein persecution was very hot against the Children of God,
and yet notwithstanding they started not from their profession.

Verse 14. Yet for all this, he has certain things against them, which he
reprehendeth: namely, that they permitted certain false Prophets amongst them,
and did not withstand them, as the Church of Ephesus did, but suffered them to
teach dangerous doctrine of Balaam, which taught and maintained bodily whordome
and fornication, whereby the people were brought to Idolatry, of which sort
were those amongst them which held the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, to wit,
that spiritual and bodily whoredom.

The reformation whereof he exhorts them to, in bidding them repent; and this
he does by these reasons; to wit, first, if they would repent, they should be
partakers of the hid, that is, spiritual Manna, in the wilderness, which was
hidden in the Arc in a pot.

By Manna is meant (as Josh. 6.) the grace, righteousness, and holiness of
Christ, imputed unto us, and that Justification by him which came down from
heaven, which none know, but those which have it. Secondly, another reason,
that he that did overcome, he would give him a white stone: Which phrase of
speech is a similitude taken from the manner of the Gentiles, (as in times past
the Prophets used to take borrowed speeches from the custom of the Jews, in
the Law,) because now the Church was communicated with the Gentiles, the
Gospel being now spread among them. This custom was especially amongst the
Grecians; The manner of it was, that when any one was accused of some criminal
matter, he was straightway put to his trial; if he were found clear, he
had a white stone given him, if otherwise he was found guilty, and was to be
condemned, he had given him a black stone, or some other color: So that now
in that it is said, that he which overcomes, should have a white stone given
him, he means that he shall have nothing laid to his charge, but shall be
freed from all his sins.

Verse 18. Lastly, he comes to the Church of Thyatira, where he finds many
good things, which he commends, as their love, (contrary to the Church of
Ephesus) and the fruits thereof; their serviceableness, their faith also, and
their patience, and their works, to have been more at the last, then at the
first.

Verse 20. Yet he has somewhat against them, to wit, that they suffered
Iezabel (albeit they themselves maintained her not) whether one of that name,
or such a one as Iazabel was, it is uncertain; yet such a one as calling her
self a Prophetess, did seduce the people with her whordomes and Idolatries,
and therefore he charge the Church, because they did let her alone: for it is
not enough for the Church of God to do well themselves, and to refrain from
those that are euill-doers in the same, but if it lie in them, the Church of
God is to refrain others from those evils, and to punish the offenders so
far as they may.

Verse 22. Now therefore the Lord says, that he will execute judgment upon
her, by casting her into a Bed, that is, laying a most grievous and heavy
affliction upon her, and not only upon her, but upon all that committed
fornication with her; that is, which were partakers with her in her sins of
whoredom and idolatry: namely, those that were her vpholders and maintainers.
And not only on them, but this judgment should also be manifested upon her
Children; by Children, meaning either her Scholars which learn of her, or her
posterity, and then he says he will kill, that is, clean root them out of
the earth. And howsoever they would pretend great Mysteries and Revelations, as
to be guided by the spirit of Prophecy, (as the Anabaptists in our times also
do) and to have Revelations, yet seeing their manners and actions are filthy,
abominable, and detestable, therefore the Lord will execute judgment upon
them. And he will do it upon the transgressors themselves, but as for the
Church, albeit they had thus suffered them, yet he would not punish them after
this sort, but he would hereby (namely by the punishment inflicted on the
evil doers) be content to call them to repentance for that sin of theirs in
suffering them.

Verse 26. Lastly, he says, to those that overcome he will give authority:
first, to be Kings over the Gentiles, and to bear rule over the wicked, and to
subdue them, being joined with Christ in his Kingdom. And secondly, he would
make them partakers of his glory, in making them Priests unto God, which he
sets down by the morning Star, which Starie, as it comes next to the
Sun, so it is next unto it most glorious, signifying that the righteous
should come near unto Christ, and be even joined with him in his glory, at his
glorious coming.

Apoc. Cap. 3. l. And write unto the Angel of the Church which is at Sardis,
These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven
Stars, I know thy works: for thou have a name that thou live, but thou art
dead, etc.
OF the things that were already done, there remains only that which is
contained in this Chapter. Where; first, he writes to the fifth Church, to wit,
the Church of Sardis, where he gets authority by using the same title which
he did to the Church of Ephesus, and adds another, to wit, that it is he
which has also the seven Spirits: whereby he notes the fullness, and
exceeding measure of his spirit, and the abundance of his power and grace, by
the which he does also uphold and govern the Stars, that is, the Ministers
of his Church. This Church he commends not at all, as he did before commend
the other Churches; but rather begins with reprehension, saying, that they
had a name that they were alive, but indeed they were dead, Verse 1. that is,
they seemed to have that, which in truth they had not.

And first he exhorterh the Angel of Sardis to look unto himself, in that
he bids him awake, and be not secure and careless; and then to look unto
others committed to his charge: And therefore it is that Paul exhorts Timothy
to take heed unto himself; that so he being reformed himself, may be more
fit to look to those who are committed to him. For those that were committed
to his charge, he bids the Angel to strengthen those things that were ready
to dye, that is, to recover that which was almost lost, and that betime, lest
it dye altogether; a note, that as yet they were not clean dead, whereby he
mollifieth the speech which went before: For he had said before to the Angel
of Sardis, that he was stark dead, meaning, in regard of that they would be,
if they reformed not themselves betime: After, he wills him to remember,
that is, consider diligently what gifts he had received, and that he should
use them well: namely, thereby he should instruct the Church, and that he
repeat, for otherwise, he will come against them suddenly, as a thief in the
night, at unawares, when he should be unprepared; and so his destruction should
be most fearful: Yet (says he) I have a few names (as Acts. 1. 15.) that
is, a few persons, which had not defiled their Garments, that is, which were
found faithful, and had not been infected nor defiled with those sins which
reigned in that Church for whose sake he yet spared them, and favored them as
he would have Sodom, if there had been but ten righteous found therein:
And these (says he) shall go with me in white, and be clothed in white
array, that is, be covered with his righteousness, and be partakers of his
honor; for, white is a token of honor; and that they shall not have their
names put out of the book of life, that is, should be crowned with
immortality.

Lastly, to those that overcome, which confessed his name before men, he
promises that he would confess their name before his Father, and before his
holy Angels; Where he gives us to understand what was the chief sin of that
Church, to wit, that they were afraid to make so full a confession of Christ
before men, as they should have done: For, as it seems, they would profess
Christianity indeed, yet so, as that they would not displease any by it, nor
incur any danger for the same: Therefore he promises to him that
overcomes, that he will confess him before God, in his Kingdom.

Next he comes to the Church of Philadelphia; where he describes himself by
his offices: First, he sets down himself to be holy, alluding to the
holiness of the Priesthood in the Law, upon whose head was written, Holiness
to the Lord: which was a Exodus 39. 30.
Type and Figure of Christ, he being holy himself, yea, the holiness of his
Father: By this word, holy, is noted unto us the Priesthood of Christ, whereby
we are made holy: He is called true, having regard to his Prophetical office,
whereby he teaches his people the truth of his will.

Thirdly, in that he is said to have the keys of David, and that he opens,
and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens: it notes unto us his
kingdom; and upon this title the rest of the Epistles runs, which he
prosecuteth, in that he had declared himself to be King indeed herein; namely,
in that he says he had set open a door for his Gospel among them, so that
none should shut it; signifying, that when God will bring the truth to light,
and will have it to prevail, none shall be able to resist it: And (says he)
albeit they were weak, and had but little strength, yet they should not be
discouraged at it, or at the greatness or multitude of their enemies, (which
he understands by the Sinagogues of Satan) but seeing they had yet kept this
door of the word open, they should therefore the rather hold it open more
constantly and courageously, and he would help them the more by his power,
and maintain them therein: yea, he says that if they will thus continue, he
will open the door of the Gospel so far, as that he will make the most
grievous enemies, which called themselves Jews, that is, the Children of God
and professors of Christ, which yet were not so, as those that joined their Law
and the Gospel, he would even make them to come and fall down at the feet of
the Ministers, and worship before them. Not that here is any thing whereupon
the Papists can ground that men are to be worshipped; for he does not say that
they should worship the Angel, but they should worship God at the feet of the
Minister, to wit, as Scholars, to understand at his mouth the will of God: As
Paul is said to be brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, that is, to be
instructed of him as his Scholar: And the Disciples in the Acts are said to
stand at the feet of the Apostles, that is, to attend to their doctrine, and
to learn of them the will of God. Lastly, he promises to those that strive
and overcome, that they shall be like Pillars in Gods Temple, to wit, notable
Instruments in the Church of God; and namely, such as should both be most firm
and stable, as that they should never be removed from the profession of the
Gospel; and also such as should be beautiful ornaments in the house of God,
as Pillars wrought with curious works used to be in great houses; and
especially in the Temple of Jerusalem; for it was an usual thing to grave
their Pillars, for the beautifying of them, with names and other fine works,
and therefore he alludeth to that same custom, says, that he will grave upon
them the name of his father, that is, to be his Children: and the name of the
City of God, that is, the Church of God, the new Jerusalem, the people newly
regenerate; and that he would write upon them his name, that is, make them to
be partakers of his righteousness and glory.

In the last place he writes to the Church of Laodidicea, where he also gives
himself titles as before, describing himself by his offices; first, he calls
himself, Amen, namely, he in whom all the promises of God are, yea, and Amen;
that is, are fully accomplished: whereby he notes his Kingdom, because by it,
he brings to pass whatsoever has been said before. His prophetical
office, in that he is called the faithful and true Witness; namely, he which
faithfully testifies the truth to his people.

His Priesthood, in that he is the beginning of the Creatures of God:
signifying the second creation, which is regeneration: And not (as it is in one
place, Colos. 1.) the work of the Godhead in fashioning of all the Creatures,
as it is there meant; but here it is rather to be understood of his work of
redemption, as he is Mediator.

That which he reprehendeth in them is this, namely, that they are neither hot
nor cold; that is, they halt between two Religions, swimming as it were
between two waters: and this he sets out to be a very desperate case, and
therefore says he, I would for thine own sake thou werest either hot or
cold, for, because thou art neither, but only lukewarm, it shall come to
thee as uses to befall the lukewarm water in a man's stomach, which will not
abide, but must be spued out, even so says he, because thou art neither hot
nor cold, it will come to pass that I shall even spue thee out of my mouth;
that is, I shall utterly abandon thee out of my favor, and cast thee clean
from me, so that I shall have nothing to do with thee any more. Then to
declare unto them the grieuousnesse of this sin of theirs, he tells them
the cause of that their luke-warmenesse in religion, to wit, because says he,
thou say thou art rich, that is, thou think thy self to be perfect and
in good estate, but indeed thou art poor, naked, destitute of all grace and
have nothing at all; yea, thou art blind, and can not see thy want, and
therefore thou art so much the more miserable, and thy case more dangerous and
desperate. And therefore says he, I advise thee to look to thy self quickly,
and to address thy wants: And he tells the means how they may do it,
namely, come (says he) and buy of me gold, etc. But may some say, how can
the Church buy any thing of Christ, seeing she has nothing at all, but is
altogether poor and destitute? The Prophet Esaias answers, come and buy, but
he adds for nothing. And therefore our Savior says here, come and buy of me
gold, that is, only if thou will, come and enrich thy self with the riches of
my graces, come and buy white apparel, that is, cloth thee with my
Righteousness, and so cover thy shame, and get a Collirium, an Ointment to
anoint thy blind eyes, that thou may see better, and know more perfectly
what a grievous case thou art in, and what a fault thou have committed. Like
unto this Church is the estate of many that profess the Gospel among us, who
think they are well, and that they have great knowledge, whereas indeed they
have nothing at all, as their lives do testify.

Lastly, that they should not take in evil part this his sharp reprehension,
he says, as many as he loves he rebukes and chasteneth; and therefore they
should take his reproof in good part, and be brought to repentance by it; for
it was a manifest token of his love and fatherly kindness toward them, if
they would profit by it. And he bids them also be zealous; where he notes
another cause of their former sin to be want of zeal, which he wishes them
to reform. And he says, though he be a King, yea, the King of Kings; yet he
stands at the door and knocks, that is, calls them to repentance, and
promises, if they will let him in, that is, turn from their sin, and yield
to his will, he will come unto them and Sup with them; signifying, what
exceeding joy and comfort they should receive by him; yea, they should be made
partakers of the joys of heaven: where he alludeth to the comfort that friends
have one of another, when they meet together at their Dinners, Suppers, and
Feasts; which thing if it be comfortable to men, much more comfort shall it
minister unto us, to be partakers of the company of Christ Jesus himself, in
his heavenly banquet. A second benefit he notes, in that those that do thus
receive him, and overcome, shall not only receive comfort, but glory also and
honor in his Kingdom, and that he will set them upon his Throne, and they
should reign with his Father in his Kingdom.

Apoc. Cap. 4. 1. After this I looked, and behold, a door was open in heaven,
and the first voice which I heard, was as it were of a Trumpet talking with me,
saying, Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be done
hereafter, etc.
HItherto we have heard of the first part of the Revelation, concerning the
things that were then done: Now it remains to speak of the things to come,
which is given us to understand in the beginning of this Chapter, in that it is
said, I will show thee things which must be done hereafter. And first, here are
set forth those things, generally, which are afterward to come unto the whole
world, and this is from this Chapter, to the beginning of the tenth Chapter:
Afterward, the things that befall particularly to the Church of God, from the
tenth Chapter to the end of the Book: According as Daniel in his Prophecy did
first manifest unto the Church the things which should befall unto the
Monarchs, and then unto the Church it self also. The which judgments it
pleases the Lord to reveal unto his Church, because they being in the world,
though they be not of the world, as our Savior Christ speaks, are yet
interessed in those outward troubles which come upon the world. First, then it
is said there was a door open in heaven: Which teaches us, that unless God
open a door unto us, all things are hid in his Counsel, and shut up, so that
none can see into them, and especially those things which concern the
salvation of Man.

Again, it is said, he heard another voice like a Trumpet, which was to waken
him better; for, albeit he was wakened before, yet he was not sufficiently
wakened and stirred up to behold the things afterward to be delivered. The like
we see in Daniel and Ezechiel; to show that we had need of new calling on, and
new attention, of new stirring up and preparation whenever we are to learn
any new thing out of the word of God, even as John had a new preparation,
because of this new matter to be revealed; for new things require new
attention. After he was bidden to come up: Which teaches us, that unless we
be lifted up above our selves, by Gods power, to the beholding of heavenly
things, and of those things especially which belong to our salvation, we can
have no power to understand them. And whereas he is here bidden to come up,
and not before in the other place; it shows us that the matters following,
which were afterward to come to pass, are more difficult, and have the more
need with greater diligence to be observed, and that we are with more care to
labor for the understanding of them, then of those things that were before.

And whereas he is said to be ravished in the spirit, it means, that he was
as it were cast asleep, and in a trance, and his senses being withheld from
all manner of objects which might hinder him, having for a time set aside all
worldly things and cogitations, to the end all the powers of his soul might be
lifted up, and be more intent, and that so he might hearken more diligently to
those things that were ready to be told him.

Which teaches us, when we go about holy and heavenly matters, we must be
as it were in a new world, and we must separate our selves from all worldly
things, and worldly cogitations, though otherwise at other times lawful; and
addict and address our selves wholly to those holy things of our God.

Then he comes to the vision it self. Where first is set down the
preparation and preface of that which is to come, contained in this, and in the
next Chapter.

In the preface is described and set forth unto us the person of God the
Father, and that diversely: first, by a Throne, and one sitting thereon;
comparing him in likeness to a Jasper and Sardy Stone, that is, very glorious
to behold, and of most exceeding valor; not describing him by any form or
portraicture, but by the glory which those most precious Jewels that can be,
do represent. This glory is declared by the reflection, which was so great,
that it made all that was round about the Throne to be like a Rainbow, that is,
glorious and excellent: for as the brightness of the Sun causes those
notable colors which we see in the Rainbow, so the glory of God makes all
round about him glorious.

After he is described by his Assistants, to wit, four and twenty Elders,
that is, the Church of God; the chief whereof are in the Scripture, twelve
Patriarchs in the old Testament, and the twelve Apostles in the New, under
which number all the rest are comprehended.

These are said to have white Robes and Crowns, and to sit upon Thrones, in
form of Kings; for all these are things belonging properly unto Princes;
signifying, that in Christ we are all Kings, being made partakers of his
Kingdom.

Afterward, God is described by the effects which proceeded from the Throne, to
wit, thunders and lightnings, and voices, and their immediate cause; in that
they came from the seven Lamps, which are the seven spirits of God, namely,
the holy Ghost, whereby God does all things that he does. This teaches, that
seeing the thunders, lightenings, etc. come from the Throne of God, that
therefore nothing can come by chance or fortune, as men vainly suppose, but
only by the direction and counsel of God, and from him who is the Ruler and
Disposer of all things in the world.

By lightnings, thunders, and voices, seems to be meant the judgments and
anger of God, to be executed on the wicked, which do follow in the next
Chapters, viz. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. for it is not unmeet that in these the judgments
should be set forth, seeing they are the fearful works of God.

And here God the Father is described to be a Judge, and to fit like a Judge,
as being Judge of all the world, as he is called, Genesis 18. 25. Then he is
described by four Beasts in the mids of the Throne, and round about, to wit,
the chief Angels of God, waiting for to execute Gods will at all times: And as
Sargeants attend on their Judge, so are they, being always ready to receive
any commandment he enioyneth them. So also our Savior Christ in John, is said
to wait still on the will of his Father; namely, as he is Mediator. In that
these are said to be four, it is not to be thought that there were no more in
number, but he understands by four, a competent and sufficient number, able
to execute any thing which God will have fulfilled in all the world, in the
East, West, South, and North.

These Beasts are also described to be full of eyes, signifying their
providence and singular direction they go withal.

Then they are severally described; the first of them is like a Lion, declaring
their courage; the second, like an Ox, signifying their strength; the third,
like a Man, noting their wisdom; the fourth, like an Eagle, showing their
swiftness and speediness in doing Gods will. Their six wings expresses
their readiness to go to all places: their wings full of eyes, show that they
go not at all adventures.

These were about the Throne.

Under it was a Sea of Crystal, whereby seems to be meant the earthly
creatures, and all things in this present world, compared to a Sea, because of
the inconstancy of them, likened to Crystal, because God sees clearly into
them, and through them; for as one may see easily into Glass, and Crystal,
so these are evidently seen and discerned of God, as being continually in his
sight and presence, having been made by him, and being governed by him. After,
the four Beasts are said to fall down and praise him day and night, for all
his Power, Glory, and Majesty, and especially as it seems, for those
thunders, that is, for those judgments to be executed on the world,
acknowledging that they were just and right. And albeit they were sealed up as
appears in the next Chapter, yet by these thunderclaps of Gods anger, they
could understand that there were judgments to come. The like is in Esaias, the
sixth Chapter, where the Angels also glorify God for his judgments. And
albeit it may seem to man to be a very hard and grievous thing, that God
should harden the hearts of the people, to the end he may more fully express
his judgments on them, yet nevertheless the Angels cease not to magnify him
for the same: and so they do here in this place.

And not only they, but the Elders and the Church and Children of God, do also
ioyn with the Angels to praise the Lord, as for all other his works in his
Creatures, so also for his judgments; and they do pronounce that God is
worthy to have glory in his judgments, as unto whom alone all fullness of
Honor, Glory, and Power does belong; and therefore they themselves fall down,
and cast their Crowns before him, acknowledging thereby, that all their glory
is due unto the Lord, and is his, as having received it by him alone, and that
they themselves are altogether unworthy of any such dignity.

Apoc. Cap. 5. 1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne,
a Book written within, and on the backside, sealed with seven Seals, etc.
IN the former Chapter is set forth the person of God the Father in his
Majesty, as principal, from whom all things come. Here in this Chapter is set
down God the Son, the second Person, who is Mediator and mean between God
and man, of the manifestation of these judgments to follow. Which teaches us,
that through Christ's intercession alone, all good knowledge comes to Gods
children. First, in that John says, he saw a Book in the right hand of him
that sat on the Throne, that is, of God the Father; by his right hand is meant
his Strength, Power, and Force, whereby he so keeps it, that no power
whatsoever can win it, or wrest it out of his hand, nor can be partaker of
it, unless he himself will give it. This Book is written within and
without, signifying, that the multitude of the plagues which were to come on
the world, were so many, that the Book could not contain them: The subject of
these plagues, upon whom they should be executed, is the world, according as
the Psalmist speaks, Lord pour out thy wrath upon the Gentiles.

In that it is sealed, it notes that it is separate from all men and Angels,
so that none could attain to the knowledge of it, but God himself According
to that which the Apostle speaks; who has been his Councellor? Romans 11. 34.
that is, who has been partaker of Gods counsel? In the Gospel of Saint
John, Christ answers, The Son has revealed it, which came out of the
bosom of his Father.

After, he hears the voice of a strong Angel, which says, Who can open the
Book? Who is worthy to do it? Which shows, that the Angels themselves stoop
to look into these judgments, that is, have an earnest desire to behold the
things of the Church, and the mysteries of God concerning the same, as the
Apostle Peter says.

In that there was none found that could open the Book, no not so much as
look upon it. It shows that none can have so much as the least measure of
knowledge thereof. Then John wept, for that none was found worthy: It teaches
us, that when we see our ignorance of those things which concern us, we are
to weep and be grieved at the same, especially in those things which concern
our salvation.

After, it is said, one of the Elders comforted him, bidding him not to weep,
for the Lion of the Tribe of Judah had performed this; so called, by reason of
his courage, through which he had overcome all lets, which might hinder the
reading of it, namely sin, and this he had taken away by his death, and so
had obtained this favor at Gods hand for us.

The root of David: That is, the cause and creator of David, and the begetter
of his faith, in regard of his Godhead, as in other places he is called the
seed of David, in regard of his manhood, which proceeded of the lineage of
David.

After, he is represented in another form, that is to say, of a Lamb that had
been slain, as it seems bloody, which appeared in the midst of the Throne;
And he is said to have seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven
spirits, that is, the holy Ghost, which is his spirit, proceeding from him: By
his eyes, meaning his infinite knowledge, whereby he sees into all things; By
his seven horns is signified his infinite power. And he comes to his
Father, and takes the Book of his Father (to open it, and to unloose the
seals) who would give it to none else.

Then follows the effect of this his taking the Book, to wit, a Song of
thanksgiving: First of the chief and principal Angels, who say, that the
Lamb only is worthy to receive this honor, as to have the Book, and to open
it. And as the four Beasts, being principal of the Angels, and the
Archangels, begin, so also the Elders, which were the principal of the Church,
do join with them in praising Christ; And after, as the chief of the Angels,
and of the Saints, begin, so the rest of the Angels follow, even thousand
thousands, viz. all the other Angels.

And in their Song, they praise the Lamb, attributing to him all Power and
Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, which are causes; and then the effects
thereof, Honor, and Glory, and Praise, that all these belong unto him. Then
follows the praise and thanksgiving of the rest of the Church, and of all
the Creatures, which praise, first, God the Father for vouchsafing to give the
Book unto his Son, and secondly, God the Son for obtaining it at his fathers
hands: Lastly, the chief Angels, the four and twenty Elders, are brought in,
saying Amen to the thanksgiving of the inferior Angels, and of the rest of
the Creatures: As they began the Chapter, so they as it were make an end, and
answer to the rest in praises, showing us that they never cease continually to
sound forth the praises of God.

Apoc. Cap. 6. 1 After, I beheld when the Lamb had opened one of the seals,
and I heard one of the four beasts say, as it were the noise of thunder, Come
and see.
Having heard before in the former Chapters of the preparation, to the
declaring of the things to come, he now speaks of the things themselves that
were to follow; and he speaks of them, as of great Mysteries.

And first, it seems in this Chapter is showed to the Apostle, rather a
warning, what things are to befall, then any declaration of the befalling of
those Judgments; as the execution of the things themselves set down in the
eight and ninth Chapters do manifestly declare: And also it appears, because
in the seventh Chapter, (as it is familiar with the Scripture) before the
things do come, he shows matter of comfort to the Children of God, to
prepare and arm them against those judgments to be executed.

So here in this Chapter is contained a denunciation of the judgments to come
to pass on the wicked, unless there were speedy repentance; as in the next
Chapter, a consolation, to arm and strengthen the godly, in that they should
not be touched nor hurt with these judgments. And then last of all follows
in the eight and ninth Chapters, the declaration of the very execution of the
judgments themselves. In that he says, he heard one of the four Beasts
speaking to him as it were with the noise of a thunder, it shows, that though
it were in the same vision, yet he is feign to be raised up by this mighty
voice of the Angel; so that one stirring up was not sufficient. Which teaches
us, that in the same Sermon we are often to be raised up, if not by the Angel,
that is, by the Minister, yet by our selves: We are as it were to renew our
attention to receive instruction, reproof, correction, or any other thing
which the Lord would have us to know.

Come and see: that is, attend diligently and carefully, with greater
attention: Not only exhorting him to continuance, but also to hear more
fruitfully and profitably.

After that the first Seal is opened by the Lamb Christ, the Apostle Saint
John says, he saw a white horse, and a man sitting thereon: In that he is said
to sit on a white horse, and to have a Crown given him, it notes victory: By
the Man is understood, the Ministers of the Son of God, Christ Jesus, sent
forth to declare the judgments of God to come upon the wicked for the neglect
of the word.

And whereas it is said for victory, it signifies that the judgments which
they threatened, should have event, unless they repented speedily. The Bow
which he has, signifies the easiness of the victory, to wit, noting that the
Lord will overcome a far off, because men with a Bow use to strike a far off
their enemies without any labor; even so would the Lord do in the execution
of his judgments.

In the opening of the second Seal, there appears a red Horse, which
together with the sword that was given him that sat thereon, signifies the
great bloodshed that should come on the world by fighting of one nation with
another, or of nations within themselves, as often times it comes to pass.

Then the third Seal is opened, whereupon appears a black Horse, which
notes great famine to come upon the earth, because that famine uses to make
men look black, as the holy Ghost interprets, and declares it afterward,
namely, when he says that the man that sat on that Horse had Balances in his
hand; noting, that they should not eat and drink as much as they listed, but
they should have their meat and drink given by measure, as it comes to
pass in the time of dearth.

A measure of Wheat. The word used in the original, signifies such a measure
as contains the eight part of a Strike of Corn; the price is said here,
should be a penny, to wit, of Roman money, being between four and five pence
with us, which then was the stipend of a days labor; signifying, that a man
should be constrained to bestow that in bread alone, which should serve him and
his household both for bread, and all other kind of sustenance; noting thereby
the grieuousnesse of the dearth.

Whereas it is said, that they should not hurt the Wine, or Oil: It signifies
that it should be as dear as the bread should be; and therefore he
counsels them to take heed that they use it not ill* either by mispending
it wastfully, or else selling it ouer-deare; and therefore would not have them
to set too great a price of it, thereby to oppress the poor buyers, but that
they should sell as they might, noting thereby a dearth of all other things as
well as of bread.

After, is set forth the opening of the fourth Seal, where there comes a pale
Horse, noting Death, which is he that sits upon him, and this shall befall to
the wicked: And Hell is said to follow him (not Purgatory as the Papists
dream) signifying that Hell accompanies the death of the wicked, to wit,
those that disobey Gods commandments. And this death comes not only by the
means of famine alone, and the sword alone, as in the former Seals has
appeared, but by them joined together, and other means joined with them, as
namely, the evil Beasts. Which teaches us (as we may also see in the
fourteenth of Ezechiel) that when particular afflictions profit us Ezech. 14.
13. 15. 17. 19. 21.
nothing at all, and when by particular judgments we cannot be brought to
repentance; then the Lord must needs send manifold judgments; yea, he will
join them all together (as in that place of Ezechiel) and he will add more
unto them, as here he adds the wild beasts unto the famine and sword.

Afterward follows the fifth Seal, where there is no mention of any voice
calling unto him to stir him up as before, for no doubt the Apostle was well
prepared to hear whatsoever. And here it seems, the Apostle renders a
reason of the judgments to come, namely, that it was by reason of the cry of
the souls of the Saints which were slain for the truth, on the face of the
earth: And these he says are under the hollow of the Altar, which Heb. 13. is
interpreted to be Christ, and therefore they are in the custody of Christ.

These Souls cry for vengeance, saying, How long Lord, holy and true? etc.
Which teaches us what is the exercise of the souls departed, being slain for
the truth, to wit, they cry for vengeance and judgment, not that they do it
for desire of revenge for their own deaths, nor having any regard to
themselves, and the injuries they have received, as our corrupt nature, being
unregenerate, uses: But as their own words declare, it is for the glory of
God; which appears in that they call him Lord, which is, as if they should
say, as thou art Lord over all, so show thy self to be, and be not Lorded by
them, but manifest thy self to have power over all, and show thy self one
that will repay their rebellion against thee. In that they say, holy and true:
they desire that herein he will express himself to be holy and true in doing
that which is right concerning revenge against the wicked, as having promised
revenge.

In that they say how long! This they do in regard of the care, not only of
themselves, but that they have of the oppressed children of God on earth. Not
that there is any such care that hinders their felicity, but only a desire of
the help and deliverance of those on earth, as also of the consummation of
their felicity. This does not confirm that opinion of the Papists, that the
Saints in heaven* do know the particular estate of men on the earth; but this
only they have remaining of that general knowledge of the will of God which
they had even before their dissolution, which they loose not thereby, yet they
see no further into men's actions; then by that knowledge they did before.

Now these are bidden to stay till their fellow servants should be
accomplished, that is, till the number of the Elect be fulfilled and
accomplished, and then should their glory be perfected.

Lastly, it is spoken of the sixth Seal: therein are contained terrible things
of Earthquakes, the rolling of the heavens, the falling of the Stars like
Figs from the Fig Trees when they are full ripe, the Sun darkened, etc.

This shows the execution of the vengeance of God on the wicked at the
prayers of the Saints departed. So that we see that the children of God did
not take it as a full execution of judgment, until the last day, when the
Sun should thus be changed, etc. And then by reason of the wrath of the
Lamb, the wicked should be glad to hide themselves from the sight of God and
the Lamb, and desire the mountains to fall upon them: where the Lord teaches
us, that at the cry of the Children of God, all this should be executed on the
wicked.

Apoc. Cap. 7. 1. And after that, I saw four Angels stand on the four corners
of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the winds should not
blow on the earth, neither on the Sea, neither on any tree, etc.
Between the declaration and manner of the execution of the judgments to come
on the world, as a snare to betrap them, here is this story interlaced,
containing the argument of the mercies of God in saving the Godly, as before in
the former Chapter were set down the arguments of his judgment and justice on
the wicked.

First, John says that he saw four Angels holding the four winds. They are
named four, in regard of the four winds that they have in charge to keep;
yet so to be meant as before of the four Beasts, to wit, a competent number
for that work.

And these Angels having received their charge, put themselves in array, for
execution of that they had in hand: And they are said to have the winds in
their hand; that is, in their power and government. So that albeit the winds
be a very subtle Creature, yet the Angels appointed to that end, have them in
their hand and power to withdraw them from doing any hurt, to restrain them
from blowing on the earth on men, or on the trees themselves, signifying, that
there should not be the least wind at all, no not so much as would shake a
little sprigge of a Tree, which of all things will soonest be moved by the
winds: Which notes unto us, what a great stroke and authority the Angels have
over the vnder-creatures. Then there was another Angel, to wit, of another
manner, namely, not created, but he which was the Angel of the covenant,
being another in regard of his natures, both of his manhood, as also of his
Godhead.

And whereas he is said to come from the rising of the Sun, the most probable
interpretations seem to be these; that either the returning again of the Lord
toward the Sanctuary, from whence he was flitted for the sins of the people
(as appears in Ezechiel;) Ezech. 11. 23.
Or else here is also set forth the declaration of his Majesty, that albeit
the same be a most glorious creature, yet Christ coming from it could not be
shadowed, or his glory any whit diminished by the brightness of the Sun.

Again, in that he has the Sealt to seal the Elect, it sets down his
office, that he only, as he alone, knows the heart, and who are elected,
and none else, neither man nor Angel; so he alone Seals and Marketh the
children of God to his Kingdom.

And further, the Angels of judgment are commanded not to execute judgment
upon any, until the Children of God were Sealed, (the like we have in
Ezechiel 9.) having as it seems, relation to the deliverance out of Egypt,
where it was commanded that there should be a mark set on the Doore-posts of
the Children of Israel, which when the Angel that was to strike the first
borne of the Egyptians should see, he should pass by, and not smite them: even
so here the Children of God are marked, that when the Angels should go forth
to execute judgment, they should see and evidently discern the mark on them,
as evidently as if it were on their Foreheads, whereby they should be warned to
take heed that they did not annoy them with the judgments which were to be
laid upon the earth.

After, it is set forth, who are thus Sealed and Marked, that they might be
delivered from this destruction to come upon the earth: And these are either
Jews or Gentiles. And first of the Jews, the number is set down to be a
hundred and four and forty thousand. The Gentiles are said to be without
number.

Which gives us to understand, that albeit this be not the perfect and full
number of the Jews which were to be saved, yet that their number was such, as
that it might be attained unto, and numbered by men. But the Gentiles, howsoever
with God their number was well enough known, yet they are said to be so many,
as that they could not be numbered by men. According as God promised Abraham
touching his seed, that they should be as many as the stars of heaven, and
as the sands of the Sea in multitude.

In the particular numbering, the Tribe of Judah is set first, because of him,
Christ the promised Messiah came.

Secondly, we observe that the Tribe of Dan is here left out (not as the
Papists dream, because that Antichrist should come from thence,) but it is
partly because it is not an usual custom of the Scriptures in the numbering of
the Tribes, to set down twelve Tribes only as a fit number: But a greater
reason seems to be, because (as it is in the Book of the Judges) the Danites
did withdraw themselves from the service of God, and from the other Tribes, and
joined themselves with the Gentiles, which Jacob also makes mention of in his
Prophecy; And therefore in the Chronicles there is no mention made of Dan, but
he is left out, as one that disabled himself of that favor to be accounted
in the number of the Church of God.

Here, having spoken of the Jews, which could be numbered, and of the Gentiles
that they were without number; he comes to the execution of their marking;
whereby they should be kept from the judgments to be laid on the earth, and
that so they might be reserved unto the Kingdom of God.

They are first described, to stand before the Throne of God, that is, in his
sight, there to minister unto the Lord, and to execute his will in his service;
and it is the custom of the Scriptures so to speak: and therefore the
Ministers of the word are said to stand before the sight of God, that is, to
minister unto God; so also Daniel is said to stand before the King, that is, to
minister unto him.

In that they are said to have upon them white robes, it notes the royal
estate they shall be in, in the kingdom of God.

The Palms in their hands, signify their victory over all their troubles, and
over all their enemies and Persecutors.

After all this is set down a thanksgiving, which they give unto God, whereby
the Saints acknowledge that salvation belongs only unto God in delivering
them from wicked men, and from all their miseries; wherein they confess that
in themselves there is no difference between them and other men, but that it
was the only good will and favor, and mercy of God, whereby he had chosen
them, and vouchsafed them this honor.

To this the Angels answer, and say Amen, signifying also their consent
thereunto, that it is truly performed: and they themselves reply with another
song unto God for the deliverance of his people, and they further give all
Praise, Glory, Wisdom, Honor, Thanks unto God, which are effects of his
power.

Lastly, those that were Sealed, are more manifestly set forth by a Dialogue
between one of the Elders and John, where the Elder is said to ask John
first, What be these that are thus arrayed in white? and secondly, from whence
they came? which he does not because he himself was ignorant thereof, but to
stir up John the more to the consideration of them. And he himself answers
to both the questions: To the last he answers first, according to the manner
of the Scriptures, to wit, These are they (says he) that are come out of
great tribulation and afflictions; and he says that these afflictions had not
made their robes so white, that is, had not brought them to that honor they
were in, but it was the blood of the Lamb that brought them to it, and their
robes were thus white, because they were dipped in the blood of the Lamb.

Then he answers to the other question, viz. who they be, namely, Those that
stand always before the Throne; that is, in the presence of God, to serve him
with praises for evermore, being such, as are delivered from all evils, and
from all tears, that is, all sorrows and grief shall be taken away; and they
shall be led to the sweet waters, and tender grass, and continually delivered
and preserved from all perils.

Apoc. Cap. 8. 1. And when he had opened the seventh Seal, there was silence
in heaven about half an hour.
THe Apostle S. John does recontinue his purpose begun in the fifth Chapter,
being omitted in the sixth and seventh Chapters; for these two Chapters were
put in for the comfort of Gods children, and to preserve them against the
troubles afterward to befall. Now he comes to the opening of the seventh
Seal, whereat there was silence in heaven for the space of half an hour:
signifying, that all the Saints and Angels were amazed at the opening of it,
marueiling at the Judgments which followed it, more then at the other wonders
which before were received, albeit they also were very marvelous. The like
speech is used in Job, for when his friends coming to visit him, saw what a
miserable case he was in, they were so appalled thereat, that they could not
speak to him for three days. This is to set forth unto us the wonderfulnesse
of the judgments contained in the opening of the seventh Seal.

After this, is a preparation unto the Judgment to come, unto the sixth Verse,
where it is said, that Trumpets are given to the seven Angels; that is, to a
perfect and competent number, fit for such a work, and for the executing of
that service over all the world.

Then he speaks of another Angel, viz. another in nature, as being both God
and man; another in office, as being the Angel of the everlasting Covenant:
And he is said to stand before the Altar, that is, in his office of Mediation
between his Father and his Church. And therefore it is after said, that to him
was given sweet Odors, that is, there was in him things acceptable to God, to
wit, his perfect obedience, wherein was an acceptable receiving and perfuming
of the prayers of the Saints unto God. So that we see, that God accepts of
our prayers at the hands of Christ, which at ours he will not.

By the Censor in his hand, he alludeth to the custom of the Priests in the
ceremonial Law.

In that he takes coals from the Altar, and casts them on the earth, it
signifies the denouncing of his judgments against the wicked on the face of
the earth; showing that as he is the means of mercy unto the Godly, so he is
the executioner of the judgment on the wicked: At the greatness of which his
judgments, there were Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings, and Earthquakes.
Afterward follows the execution of the judgments, whereof four Trumpets of
judgments are sounded in this Chapter, performed by the four first Angels.
The first Angel blows his Trumpet, and then it is said there was hayle, and
fire, mingled with blood, and these did destroy the trees, and every green
thing.

By this he seems to allude unto that in the ninth of Exodus, where it is
said, that in one of the Plagues of Exodus 9. 24.
Egypt, was Hail mingled with Fire, the like is here mentioned; but in this
place there is an addition of blood; noting, that all should be consumed,
namely, that there should not only be a destruction of the trees and green
things, but of the men also, which came to pass even among the Egyptians, for
those that were in the fields were consumed by the tempest. After, in the
second place, it is said that the second Angel did blow his Trumpet;
whereupon, there was a mountain burning with fire cast into the Sea, being set
on fire by the wrath and anger of God, signifying the judgments to be executed
on the Earth, and then upon the Sea: Seeming to allude to that place in the
Psalm, where the Prophet says, that though the Psalm 46. 2.
Mountains should fall into the midst of the Sea, yet I will not be removed:
And this judgment should be executed upon the Sea, on the Fishes, and also
upon the Ships, so that not only the Earth, but even the Sea should have
judgments executed upon them.

At the blast of the third Trumpet, it is said, that a star fell from heaven
into the third part of the fresh waters and Rivers, signifying Gods judgments
upon them also, whereupon the third part of men died. The name of this Star
is Worme-wood, from the effect, to wit, the bitterness which it should cause
in the fresh waters.

Where we see, albeit the certainty of the time is not known, nor any set
time wherein this shall be effected, yet the Lord does sometimes poison and
infect the Air, sometimes the Earth, and sometimes the Sea and Waters; whereby
infection arises to man, and hereby it is said that the third part of men
should dye: that is, the lives of many men should be shortened. And these all
seem literally to be understood, saving that the Mountain and the Star
which fell into the waters, do signify that the heavens should be so
infected, that they also by their infectious disposition should corrupt and
infect the waters, and thereby cause death to men.

The fourth Angel having blown his Trumpet, it is said that the third part of
the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars was darkened, which seems to be
meant of the spiritual darkness should be upon the Earth: For hitherto the
Plagues that have been set down, have been corporal, to wit, either
pertaining to the things of the nourishment of the bodies of men, or upon the
bodies themselves: those that follow in the rest of this and the next Chapter,
seem to be understood of the spiritual Plagues of the soul, that the light
thereof, in the midst of men, should very much be darkened: for I cannot see
how those words concerning the darkening of the Sun and Moon, and the
Stars, can literally be understood, but rather by some Allegory, because in
the next Chapter, verse 2. it is spoken of the darkness of the Sun, that it
was altogether darkened, noting the deprivation of all the light and knowledge
of the soul. And therefore this is to be understood of the darkness of the
mind, through want of knowledge, by taking away of the truth in part, as
appears by the histories; for since that Popery came in by means of
Antichrist, Satan had wonderfully darkened the light of the Gospel; yea even
before Antichrist was at his full height.

Then he sets down, that he saw an Angel flying through the midst of
heaven, which cried with a loud voice, Woe, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the
earth; for the plagues which were to come: for albeit those that were before
were grievous, and especially of the darkening of their understandings; yet
these that were to ensue should be far more grievous and terrible. And
therefore we should be stirred up to a more diligent observation and
consideration of them.

Apoc. Cap. 9. 1. And the fifth Angel blew the Tumpet, and I saw a star which
was fallen from heaven unto the earth, and to him was given the key of the
bottomless pit.
THe former judgments in the Chapter going before, are especially, concerning
the things which appertain to men; these which here follow, concern the
persons of the men themselves.

And first; after the blowing of the first Trumpet, it is said there was a
Star fallen from heaven: By Stars is meant (as the holy Ghost interprets in
the first Chapter) the Ministers of the Word, who unless they be vpholden by
the hand of God, they fall from their holiness of life, and integrity, wherein
they should live.

To this Star is given power over the keys of the depth, that is, of Hell;
signifying, that to the Bishops of Rome this power was given, who before were
sometimes as clear stars and shining lights in the Church of God, even in
the time of the Apostles, and long after, being persecuted for the truth; yea,
many of them being martired: but at the length, by ambition, they fell from
God, and became exceeding evil. And unto them the Lord gave this power (not as
they say, and arrogate to themselves, to do what they list in heaven and hell)
but so much only over hell as is granted them, as namely, in that from thence
they drew out, by the procurement of Satan, many wretched and abominable
things, to the great offense, fall, and overthrow of many.

To him was given power to draw out smoke from hell, as from a Furnace, so
that the Sun was darkened thereby; great darkness is caused over all the
earth: As before, in the former Chapter in part, the third part of heaven being
only darkened; so now it is in whole and altogether darkened. And this notes
that great blindness and ignorance which should come upon all the earth by
that man of Rome.

Out of this smoke, there came Locusts; signifying, that by reason of this
ignorance, there should arise in the world many Deceivers, of diverse sorts,
which should be sent amongst men for the punishment of the sins of the earth,
which should deceive them and lead them into errors; as namely, the Monks,
the Friars, and such like vermin, as it has since come to pass, which could
not have so greatly prevailed, neither have had such credit, except there had
been so great ignorance.

They are set down and expressed by Locusts, in regard of the great number and
multitude of them, coming together by troops, as appears by their practice;
wheresoever they be, or have been, for they use to live in great companies
together, which is yet contrary to the profession of Monks; whose names are
given them of solitariness, as we have seen in this Land, in their Abbeys,
Friars, etc.

They had power given them: Showing, that by reason of the sins of men, God
in his righteous judgment gives them power to hurt and deceive. And yet hereby
comfort may arise unto the children of God, that they can hurt no more then God
enioynes them, for they have power only to hurt Men; the Corn, the Wine, and
the Fruits of the earth they cannot hurt.

Which shows, that in the time of Popery, there should be plenty of all
those, nothing hurt of the green things, as of the herbs, the grass, the
corn, etc. Which confuteth that which is commonly alleged of the Papists, who
count their worship to be good, because in the time of Massing (as they call
it) all things were cheap, and there was so great plenty of all outward
things: And indeed by this it appears that it must needs be so, for otherwise
they could not have been such as Saint John speaks of here. Again, in that
they hurt men, it is only of those that have not received the Mark of God in
their foreheads: And again, this hurt is not in regard of their lives, by
taking away their lives, but this hurt they did them was in their Conscience,
by reason of terror, for they were stung by them as with Scorpions, in that
they took away from them the knowledge of God, leaving in them the sting of an
evil Conscience.

Their power being thus limited, he after comes to describe the fashion of
these Scorpions, to wit: First, that they were as Horses prepared to battle;
signifying, that they were altogether ready, prompt, and fit for all manner of
mischiefs they listed, according as God used them in his just judgment.

Secondly, They had Crowns; signifying that they should conquer and prevail,
and prosper in that they were sent for, and which they went about.

Thirdly, They had faces like men; noting, that they should be crafty and
subtle, to bring their deceits and delusions to pass, and that they should be
apt to abuse men, and lead them into error.

Fourthly, Their hair like women's; showing their effeminatenesse, in regard of
their faces, the shearing of their beards, and their long hair on their heads,
and especially their effeminate and filthy manners, in that they were womanish,
filthy, and unclean, having no manly manners any ways.

Fifthly, Their teeth like Lions; signifying, their greediness and cruelty.

The time of their continuance to sting, is five months; that is, (according
to the account in the second Chapter, and as Daniel also expounds it, whom
John Chap. 2. 10.
also follows in this numbering) is for the space of an hundredth and fifty
years, every day in the month being counted for a year: Which is thought to
be in the time of Hildebrand, called Gregory the seventh, which was to begin
when Satan was let loose, after that a thousand years after Christ was run
out, and which beginning then, ended in the time of Gregory the ninth, in
whose time they had gotten the authority of the Sword, which the blast of the
sixth Angel sets forth, and which the blast of the fourth Angel shows they
would not have during the hundred and fifty years, otherwise called five
months.

They were harnised with habergions, as of iron; noting, that by their
privileges and prerogatives they were so defenced, that none could almost
touch them, by any occasions; as the Bishop must have about sixty witnesses
against him, to accuse him, otherwise he is not to be convinced; the Priests
must also have a great number of Accusers, and they must not be judged by any
Maiestrate of the Temporality, but by one of the Clergy.

The noise of their wings like the noise of Charriots: signifying their great
pomp, which appears by their sumptuousness in riding with many Horses, and
troops of men attending on them, which make a great noise and rushing
wheresoever they come, so as every one may hear and behold them; contrary to
the practice of our Savior Christ, who is said not to have been heard in the
streets.

This is the first Woe, the two other woes are to come.

The other Trumpet follows to be blown.

And first, to declare the certainty of it, he says, there came a Voice from
the corner of the Altar which was in the holy place, which commanded that they
should loose the four Angels: by four, is meant a sufficient and competent
number (as before we have heard) to execute Gods judgments. And these are
said to be bound in the River Euphrates, which was that River that runs
through Babylon, where the people of Israel were held in captivity. And it is
used to set forth that spiritual captivity of the Church of God, whereby the
Whore of Babylon keeps in bondage both their souls and also their bodies.

Now, these four Angels, the Executers and Ministers of Gods fearful
judgments, were prepared to go at an hour, at a day, at a month, at a
year; noting their readiness and promptness to execute any judgment that
God sets them about; yea, though they should be sent forth for a whole year
long, they would be willing to do it, declaring that they did it without
weariness.

Their effects be far otherwise then the former, for they have authority to
kill the bodies of men.

This seems to be in the time of Gregory the ninth, when the Church of Rome
had gotten the Kings and Princes of the world, and the Emperors to assist
them, and to take their part; and therefore now those that would not worship
the Beast, and yield to their spiritual Whoredom and Idolatry, should be
killed and put to death by the wicked Magistrates, whereas before they had not
power to hurt the Bodies, but only to sting the Consciences of men.

These are described to have heads like Lions; noting, that they were fierce
and cruel. Their Tails like Serpents; signifying their craft. Which shows,
that the Church of Rome should promote her Kingdom both by violence and also
by their craft and subtilty.

Lastly, is set down a conclusion, wherein is showed, that for all these
fearful judgments, the people of the earth (whereas they should have feared
and have been bettered by these judgments, and learned to turn unto God by
repentance) yet they continued unrepentant in their Idolatries, Murders,
Witchcrafts, and all other their abominable wickednesses.

Apoc. Cap. 10. 1. And I saw another mighty Angel come down from heaven,
clothed with a Cloud, and the Rainbow upon his head, and his face was as the
Sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, etc.
We have heard after the Preface of this Book, the division of it into those
things already executed, and which were after to be executed. Those which were
to come, are either touching the judgment of God upon the world, or those
things which more especially did concern the Church. Hitherto we have heard of
the world; now, the things that more especially belong to the Church, do
follow; to the which in this Chapter is (as before) a Preface, wherein the holy
Ghost prepares and fitteth the Apostle Saint John, and in him all us, to the
diligent hearing and observing of all those things which concern the Church.
The whole drift of this Vision is to give credit to the history following; and
this credit is drawn, first, from the Author of the prophecy, which is
Christ; and secondly from the Instrument, to wit, John. In the first part, that
the thing it self might be the better esteemed, the credit drawn from the
Author is set forth by the glory and excellency of him.

In the second part, John is set forth by what means he came to this
Prophecy, and from whom he received it, to wit, that he had it by
commandment from God the Father, and from God the Son, who commanded him to
publish this history, which after is set down in this Book.

For the first part, he says, first, he saw another Angel, to wit, (as we
have heard before) our Savior Christ being of another nature, of other
offices, and of another glory then any other Angel, as being the Angel of the
Covenant, that is, he in whose hand the Covenant is established betwixt God
and his Church.

This Angel is said to come down from heaven, viz. not that Christ came down
bodily, for the Scriptures say evidently, that the heavens must hold him till
the restoring of all things, that is, till the end of the world; but here it
was only represented unto John in a vision: For in that we say that Christ is
in heaven, it is not that we tie or lincke him there (as the Papists charge
and slander us wrongfully:) for we hold that as there is in the heavens
infinite room for him to execute his will; so he has the heaven as an
incomprehensible place, and is not tied and kept in as it were like a Prisoner,
but is at his own pleasure to do what he will himself: And this which we
say, is proved out of the word of God, in the Acts, Acts. 1.
where we are taught, that he must stay there till the latter day. So that this
sight was only a representation of the mind, wherein it was given to see
Christ thus.

Strong; a proper title unto the Lord, to be the strong God, signifying that
he was the mighty God, and therefore this Angel is of another nature, then
the other Angels.

Clad with a Cloud: that is, to set out the glory of our Savior Christ; even
so in the last day he shall come attended upon, and compassed with the clouds.

A Rainbow about his head: the Rainbow about his head, seems to express
and to note unto us, the gracious countenance of our Savior Christ toward his
Church, for the Rainbow in the Scripture is a sign of the favor of God (as
it is in Genesis) namely, in that he will never drown the world again. Or
Chap. 4. 3.
else to the further setting forth of his Glory and Majesty; for as before in
the fourth Chapter, we have heard, that God the Father is described to have
had a Rainbow about his Throne, whereby the glory of the first Person in the
Trinity was represented; so that may be here noted of Christ, in that he is
said to have a Rainbow about his head, and therefore Christ is of equal glory
with his Father.

His face as the Sun: whereby his further glory is set forth in his excellent
and al-seeing providence, in that as the Sun beholds all the earth, so he
at one instant, and with one eye, as it were, sees all things on the face of
the earth.

He had in his hand a little Book open: In this Book Chap. 5. 1.
is contained those things which were to follow, and to come upon the Church it
self. As in the fifth Chapter we have heard of a Book in the hand of God the
Father, which contains the judgments which were generally to fall upon the
whole world. The difference between this Book and that other, is very plain;
for first, we have heard, that is said to be a Book, noting that it was of a
greater volume; this is said to be a little Book, namely, of a lesser volume.
Again, in that it is said to be in the hand of God the Father, this is in the
hand of God the Son. The reason is, for that there is a more universal
government of the world by God the Father, considered by himself alone, then
between Christ and the World, as he is joined with the office of Mediation,
which concerns the Church. And again, there is a more simple and immediate
government of Christ in his Church, then of the Father. Another difference is
this, in that it is said this Book is open, the other was shut; which shows
us, that through Christ only, these things are made manifest unto us, for,
without his mediation, all things in the will of God are hid and shut up from
us, that we cannot know them: For as the Deity of God is considered in the
three Persons, we can have no participation of any good thing from the same,
but as Christ is the Mediator between God and us, all things which concern us
are opened unto us; yea, the knowledge of all things we are to know: and
therefore if he come between us and God, then the things of our God shall be
opened and revealed unto us.

His feet like two pillars of fire; this is to show his strength and power. The
pillars declare his steadiness; fire signifies piercing, and therefore where
his power sets, there it cleaves hard. Whereby is set down the
incomparable virtue and power of Christ. And whereas one foot is set on the
Sea, and the other on the Land, it sets forth unto us his full authority
over all, and that he is in all places in regard of his Godhead.

This does not prove the being of Christ's natural body in many places at once,
for he did not set his feet of his natural body at this time on the Land and
Sea, neither can it be in diverse places, for then it leeses the nature of a
body.

The right foot on the Sea: This is said after the use of the Scripture, by his
right foot, meaning a greater measure of his strength, that seeing the Sea is a
most unruly and raging creature, he sets his right foot upon it; noting unto
us, that Christ as he rules all, so even those things more especially which
are most unruly, and that which needs most power, he uses most to the
subduing and governing of it.

This is to teach us not to fear at the great rage of the troubles that are in
the world, but to know according as they are more grievous, and as they do
increase, so the Lord will ad more help and increase his strength the more, to
the asswaging of them, and when the earth begins to turmoile, then will he
set his left foot on it, and when the Sea begins to rage, then will he set
his right foot upon it. And as in general, so in particular troubles we are to
receive notable comfort, for if more grievous sorrows and afflictions do
assail us, yet the Lord, having his right foot on them all, shall be quiet
and still with us again.

After, he is described by his voice; whereby he declares his terriblenesse,
that howsoever otherwise he was described to be like a Man, yet because man's
voice was too weak to express the force of it, he compares it to the voice
of a Lion, to strike the more terror and fear into our hearts. According as it
is said, If the Lion roar, shall not the Beasts of the field tremble? How much
more when Christ speaks, and thunders out his judgments, shall not we which
are filly Lambs (nay, not so much in respect of Christ as Lambs to the Lion) be
afraid? and if our Savior Christ show forth the tokens of his wrath against
sinners, by denouncing and threatening judgments against them, should not we
tremble and be terrified for our sins?

After that he had thus extended his voice, S. John says, he heard the voices
of seven thunders, and those not such as were confused, but there was a
discerneable and plain speech in the voice of the thunders. Now Saint John (as
he was before commanded) being ready to write the things which were spoken by
the thunders, is notwithstanding bidden to Seal them up; that is, to keep
them close, as being matters of secrecy, for God of his good will was content
to show them, and make them known to him, for his particular comfort, which he
will not have be revealed unto others.

Herein we see how God disposes of his word, viz. some he reuealeth unto his
Servants, some he keeps hid in his own everlasting counsel.

To teach us, that seeing God has kept many things of his to himself, which
he has not revealed unto us; that therefore we should not despair in our
troubles, but seeing he has reserved secret to his own counsel, even many
things which concern the special good of his Church, and the singular comfort
of his children, we are therefore rather to be stirred up by prayer, to come
unto him to entreat him that he would govern all things to the good of his
Church.

Again, that is here further to be considered which John speaks elsewhere,
that we are not able, by reason of our carelessness and dullness of
understanding, to attain in any measure to the true knowledge of the meaning
of this Book; how much less if greater matters had been written down? nay,
rather we would have been quite driven back from it: And therefore this is
to teach us to be diligent in the searching out of those things he has already
set down, leaving to meddle (as many foolishly and madly do) with those
things that God has hidden in his secret will; And seeing we are so backward,
slack, and dull in the seeking out of those things which we have, we should
have been much more careless of them if all the other had been set down.

After, it follows what our Savior Christ said, to wit, that he swore,
wherein is set down, first the manner of taking his oath, and then the oath it
self: The manner of the oath of our Savior Christ is; first, in his gesture,
in that he lift up his hands to heaven, which was the manner of taking an oath
in those times; and therefore he is here after this sort represented: Then is
set down the Person by whom he swears, viz. by God, described by his own
nature, that he lives for evermore; and of his effects, viz. of creation of
heaven, earth, and all things therein.

His oath it self is this, that after those things which were to be done under
the seventh Trumpet, and the seventh Seal were fulfilled, there should be
time no more, that is, there should not be distinction of time by the day and
year, as we use now to count, according to the course of the Sun and of the
Heavens: This is done, first, for the declaring unto us the assurance of the
end of the things of the world: And further, for the comfort of the children of
God against those troubles which were to be endured by them; for that speedily
there should be an end of their troubles when that time should end.

In that he says the Mysteries of God declared by his Servants and Prophets
were finished, he renders a reason why God stays and comes not speedily to
end the world, to wit, as for the fulfilling of the number of the Elect, so
also for the accomplishment of his word by his Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers. Peter renders, in that he says, The Lord is patient toward us,
that none should perish 2 Pet. 3. 9.
whom he would have to be saved: so that we see it is by Gods great patience,
because he would have none lost which belonged unto him, but would have them
to have the means of knowledge and repentance, and therefore till all that
belong to Gods election be called, there should be no end of the world.

John, is not yet fulfilled, for one jot or title of the word of God shall not
fall.

After the description of Christ, he comes to the calling of himself, that it
might be more surely sealed and confirmed to us, and that so we might be more
assured of the certainty of his Prophecy. And to this his calling, there
comes a double authority, to wit, of God the Father, which was before
described in the fourth Chapter, and he is here brought in, bidding John to
go to the Angel, and to take the Book at him.

Whereby we have to understand, that the Ministers are taught to have authority
and warrant from God, and out of the word of God, for all those things they
do, especially which concern the matters and holy things of God.

This then John does, for he presently goes to take the Book; and when he
comes to the Angel, he also bids him take the Book, having thereby a
double warrant, not only of the Father, but even of the Son also.

The Angel bids him eat it up: meaning, that he should settle it as it were
in his belly, and even let it settle into the very bottom of his heart, and
namely, that he should rightly conceive it, and that he should have a full
capacity and perfect comprehension of the things herein contained, by having a
sound knowledge of the things to be revealed, and, therefore, that he should
with diligence observe and mark them. The like thing we have in Ezechiel, who
Ezech. 3. 23.
is also bidden to eat a Book, given him by an Angel: But whereas it is here
said, it should be bitter in his belly, and sweet in his mouth; one of these
only is set down in Ezechiel, namely, the sweetness of it in his mouth.

Hereby the Lord seems to set forth that this Prophecy, as it was bitter to
the Apostle, who was the Minister of it, in regard of the judgments therein
contained; so it should be also sweet unto him to deliver it, as it is
expounded in the words following in the next Verse, whereas he must Prophecy
again among People and Nations, etc. signifying, that he should not be able
to hold it in his belly, that is, to keep it in, but have a care and delight
also to publish it, and to deliver it faithfully, and in that regard it should
be sweet unto his mouth; for, howsoever the things themselves were sad and
heavy and unsavory to deliver, yet in regard that God bids him to speak it, he
must take delight to do the will of God in the delivery thereof.

Here is set out the duty of the Ministers in this case, that howsoever the
denouncing of the judgments of God against the people be very grievous and
sorrowful unto them, yet they are not to spare to deliver them faithfully,
bouldly, and cheerfully, if the Lord command them: And indeed it is requisite,
that they should feel the calamities and miseries of others, and therefore
should be grieved at Gods judgments against others, as the Apostle says, Who
is offended, and I burn not? Even so should the Children of God have
compassion and a fellow-feeling of the miseries of their Brethren, but the
Ministers especially; because as all, so especially the Ministers are
oftentimes interessed in the same troubles.

Apoc. (...) Then was given me a (...) unto a Rod, and the Angel stood by,
saying, Rise and mete the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship
therein, etc.
We have heard in the former Chapter, the preparation to the Prophecy,
concerning the things that should befall unto the Church. Now he comes to the
Prophecy it self.

And first he says, there was given to him a Reed, and with it, he was
bidden to measure the Temple: Whereas, we are first to consider, that by this
speech (borrowed from the fortieth of Ezechiel) the Lord sets down a
determination to set forth and to measure out his Church: For as Arch-builders,
first in building have a draught in their heads and after draw it out, and
measure the place where they build, and then have inferior builders to finish
it; even so the Lord does both in that place of Ezechiel, as also here: For
there the Lord after the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple, when he
would have it restored again, shows unto the Prophet the measuring of it;
signifying that the Temple should be re-edified, and that the people should
worship again in the same. And in like manner in this place, whereas now
indeed Jerusalem, and that Temple which was in it, were ready to be destroyed
and overthrown; the Lord notwithstanding bids the Apostle to take a strait and
smooth Reed like unto a Rod, to wit, fit for that purpose, and to measure the
Temple therewithal. Noting, that albeit Jerusalem should be laid waste, yet
(...) gather to himself a Church, and that by (...). And whereas he bids him
measure it with (...), he means that he should understand and comprehend the
right and full way whereby the Church of God should be builded. This teachth us
that unless God prescribe and give unto the Ministers, the order and manner of
building his Church, they are not of themselves to undertake the building of
the same. And again, unless he put the measure, which he appoints (that is
his Word) into their hands, they cannot, neither ought they in any case to
begin, and therefore not to undergo that function, unless they be called of
the Lord. And further being called they must build with that measure and means
only which God appoints and sets down. He bids him to measure the
Temple, the Altar, and the Worshippers, but to let alone the outward Court, and
to cast it out.

Where the Lord alludeth to the building of the Ceremonial Temple, in the
building of the Church after Christ, in the Gospel. For first there was the
outward Court, being the greater part which should be cast out, and then the
Temple, the inner place where the people were, and the Altar, and the holy
place, and the holiest of all, which were very small in comparison of the
others: So likewise in the Church, the smaller number should be referred, the
greater number should fall away.

So that here he is bidden to take measure of the Temple, and not only of it,
but of the worshippers which were in it, to wit, of the members of the Church
of God: Which teaches that the Ministers are not only to regard the Church in
general; but also to have a care of the good of every particular person in the
Church.

By the altar, is meant all the means serving to the furthering of the service
and worship of God: whereof a special regard is also to be had in the
building of the Church.

In that the great Court is not measured, but east out to be trodden of wicked
and profane men, and the Temple only, and that which was in the midst of it
left, being but a very little in comparison of the outmost Court, it notes the
narrow room the Church should be comprehended in, and the small number to be
gathered in regard of those which should be cast out; For, the Temple and the
Altar, in regard of the great Court, were as it were the Center in regard of a
great Circle. Which teaches us how great a number should be bandoned from God,
and from the service of God, and how few and small a number saved.

Whereas the Apostle is bidden only to meddle with the Temple, and not with
the outward Court, but to cast it out: This agrees first with that doctrine of
Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 12. Where he says, What have we to do with those that are
without? We are to have respect to those that are within. So that here we are
to observe this point, that the Ministers are first and principally to attend
upon those diligently and carefully which are committed to their charge, and to
endeavor and exercise themselves only in those things which God has enjoined
them. Secondly, concerning those things whereof they have received no charge
from God, they are not in any case to meddle in them, nor to deal at all with
them. Which condemns the sin which now adays is usual, when they will take
upon them those offices which God has not appointed them, and which they are
not able to perform.

The outward Court is to be cast out, to be trodden under foot of the Gentiles,
for the space of forty two months, whereof we have heard the meaning, both as
it is used by John, and expounded by Daniel, viz. to be one thousand two
hundred and sixty years, for a day is referred to a year; a week of days is
seven years: so that hereby it appears, that the time of this great havoc
of the Church was to continue one thousand two hundred and sixty years: Which
as by account that falls out, appears to begin after the assention of our
Savior Christ, when the Apostles began to preach, and counting from that time,
it shall appear by the miserable times that befell afterward unto the Church
of God, in that space, namely, when the beasts that rose up out of the earth,
set upon the people and Church of God, and persecuted and oppressed them
grievously.

Here also in regard of the small number to be reserved, we may easily
understand how vain a thing the Papists brag of, when they brag of their
generallity and multitude, for we see here that the great Court, that is, the
multitude only, is cast out to the wicked and profane men, and the Temple
with the worshipers only, and the Altar, noting a small number, is reserved.

Again, in regard of the circumstance of time: in that it is said, that the
wicked should prevail for the space of one thousand two hundred and sixty
years: we are to observe against them, that whereas they object against us,
and say, that this new Gospel of ours began in the time of Luther, or
Wickliffe, we answer that it appears manifestly out of this place, that
there should be a marvelous contempt of the Word from the Apostles time,
until these one thousand two hundred and sixty years were expired.

Now for the further declaration of this, it is said, the Lord raised up two
witnesses in these years, between the Apostles time, and the time expressed,
to preach the Gospel.

By the number of two, may be meant (not to prejudice better expositions) the
small number of faithful witnesses, yet such a number as should be able to
prove any cause, sufficient for the testifying of any truth, or overthrowing
any falsehood, and though they seemed to be but two, that is, a few in number,
yet they should be able enough for that purpose, and sufficient to convince
them of their wickedness, and to bear witness of the truth.

In sackcloth; meaning that they should be heavy, sorrowful, and grieved at
the troubles, strife, and hard-dealing which they should have at the hands of
the wicked, which would not yield unto the truth: lamenting also for that they
had no better success of their Ministry: and further by reason of the pride
of Antichrist, when as they did behold how many even of those which should have
been the stars of the Church, and faithful Ministers, did strive and heave
for pre-eminence without any care of Gods Church, as it was in the days of
Gregory the 7. and Gregory the 9.

These are the two Olive trees, and the two Candlestickes; A speech borrowed
from the Prophet zachary, where it is said, that being returned from
captivity, the Lord gave them Ministers, which as O lives should Minister Oil
for the light of the Church: Even so in the wretched and cursed days, albeit
the Church of God waxed fewer and fewer, yet there should be some Olive trees
to give Olives, that is, some Ministers to preach peace unto the children of
God, the Olive being a sign of peace, as also to drop in Oil (as Zachary
says) into the Candlesticks, alluding to the use of the Candlesticks in the
Temple, which having Oil put in them, did give light in the Temple, burning
before the Lord continually: even so he says, that even in those dark times,
there should notwithstanding be some which should be able to give light unto
the Church, by the Ministry of the Gospel.

Afterward it is said that these two Prophets, that is, this little number of
Ministers, should have fire go out of their mouths, whereby they should
devour all their enemies: Which shows unto us the power of the Word of God,
which is like a fire, by the light whereof, the godly should be enlightened, by
the heat whereof, the wicked should be consumed, so that since they would not be
enlightened by it to their salvation, it should send them to the darkness of hell,
to their deeper condemnation. So that here we see the Word has a contrary
effect, in regard of the godly and the wicked. And therefore it is compared in
the first Chapter, to a two edged Sword, which on the one side cutteth and
heals to life, and on the other side, wounds and kills to death:
According as the Apostle says in the Epistle to the Corinthians, We are the
savor of God unto your salvation that believe, unto others unto condemnation.

By this devouring then of their enemies; is meant the destroying and
conuincing of those that would not yield unto their preaching, to their further
destruction, and deeper condemnation. Where we see, that the Prophet here
sets forth, that howsoever the Ministers of God should have great strife in
those days, and grievous enemies, yet they should not prevail against the
truth.

These should have power to shut the heavens, to make the heavens brass, that
it should not rain in the days of their Prophecy, to restrain the fruit of
the earth, to turn the waters into blood, etc.

Where he alludeth, partly to the Ministry of Elias, at whose prayer, the
earth was barren, and there 1 Kings 17.
was no rain for the space of three years. And partly to the Ministry of
Moses, who brought blood in all the land Exodus 7. 17.
of Egypt, by turning the water into blood: signifying, that where the
Ministry of the word, in the denouncing of judgments was contemned, there the
Lord would send Plagues and Pestilence, and Floods, and such like upon them.

In that which remains of the sixth Plague, there is first set forth, that the
two Prophets, these two Olives and Vines should make an end of their Ministry,
and the Beast should overcome them. Before it was said, that at their pleasure,
and at their own liking, they overcame others, and restrained the dew of
heaven, and did execute and bring to pass whatsoever they had to do, by the
direction, by the word and will of God: Here now it is said, that after the
accomplishing of their work, and finishing of their testimony, the Beast
overcomes them.

To teach us, that the Lord does so maintain his Ministers and servants, that
until they have finished and accomplished the work of their Ministry, which
he has appointed them to execute, they shall not be hurt by Satan or any of
his Ministers, or wicked Instruments.

Which may be a singular comfort to the Ministers and children of God, that
howsoever they be hated of many men in the world, yet they shall have no power
to hurt them, till the time God has limited them be expired. And here we are
also to consider, that in regard of their Ministry, these two Prophets did
overcome; but in regard of their lives only they are overcome; herein had
their enemies leave to hurt them, they were able to do nothing else unto them.

The time of this, appears by limitation of this one thousand two hundred and
sixty years, to befall about the days of Boniface the eight, who was a
wretched and cruel persecuter of the Saints of God; for by the account of the
history it self, it falls justly on the one thousand two hundred and sixty
year after Christ; the very year of that Beast, Boniface, who after he had
killed the Saints of God, would not suffer their bodies to be buried; which
thing, the history particularly witnesses, making mention, that the bodies
also of the Saints were carried about the City of Rome in triumph, and might
not be suffered to be buried.

After, it is said that the wicked ones, in the token of their joy, make great
feasts, and sent presents one to another; which manner of speech seems to be
taken from the Book of Hester, wherein commandment is given, that for their
victory and deliverance, a Feast should be celebrated for ever. And of this
also the history makes mention, that in regard of their joy and gladness for
the destruction and death of Gods Servants and faithful Martyrs, there was a
Feast of Iubily celebrated, which afterward they continued; wherein also as
much as in them lay, they did annihilate the coming of Christ, who gave an end
of all these ceremonies.

And this is said to be done in the great City, spiritually called Sodom and
Egypt, where the Lord was crucified, whereby the Apostle most plainly
describes Rome, as being the greatest City then in the world, there being none
at that time for fame and greatness to be compared to it.

In that it is called Sodom and Egypt, it is spiritually (as he says) to be
understood: It is called Sodom, in regard of the filthiness and abominations
therein; by reason of their Sodomitrie, their whoredoms, and abominable
uncleanness of men with men, and all manner of all other such like
wretchednesses. Egypt, in regard of the persecutions of Gods Children, alluding
to the persecutions whereby the Egyptians kept the Children of Israel in
bondage. The place where Christ was Crucified, to wit, Jerusalem, so called and
attributed to Rome, in that Rome brags of it self, as Jerusalem did, to be the
most excellent professor of Christ's religion; the only Sion, the Church, and
beloved of the Lord; albeit indeed it be nothing less; nay, it is rather hated
of God, as Jerusalem was, crucifying the Lord Jesus: So that these things do
notably agree with Rome, the great City, that Sodomiticall persecuting Church,
yet pretending to be the true Church of God.

After, it is said, that their bodies lying three days and an half, that is,
three years and a half unburied, that is, a mocking-stocke, and
triumphed-ouer by the wicked, they are then raised up by the Lord, to wit, not
those that were slain, but others in their spirit. As John is said to be
Elias, because he came in the spirit of Elias, as it is said, to wit, with the
same boldness and zeal that Elias did.

They are taken into heaven: that is, separate themselves from the rest of the
Sons of men, which were wicked and worshipped the Beast, going into such
places where they might serve the Lord.

Then follows immediately, a fearful Earthquake, by which, the great City
was shaken, and the tenth part of it overthrown.

The second Woe being past, the third insueth, which follows after the blast
of the next Agell.

The last Angel blew the Trumpet, which shall be fulfilled at the dissolution
of the world in the latter day, when all shall be raised from the dead, when
all the Kingdoms of the world are committed into the hands of Christ, and then
shall be the accomplishment of his Kingdom, when he shall give reward unto
his servants the Prophets, to his Saints, and to all that fear his name, and
shall render destruction unto his enemies; and then shall he give up his power
unto his father, and God shall be all in all. And after this, there shall be
time no more: Then we shall have Sun no more, that is, we shall have no need
of the Sun, the time shall not be distinguished by it, we shall not be
directed by the light of it, for God himself shall be our Sun, God shall be
our light for evermore.

Apoc. Cap. 12. l. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven: A woman
clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon her head a
crown of twelve Stars, etc.
HEre in this Chapter is set down a description of the Church, of which it is
said, there was a great sign: noting the great estimation that God has of his
Church; which his great estimation of it, is set forth, in that she is said to
be clothed with the Sun, which is the most glorious creature, declaring and
expressing her exceeding glory in the sight of God.

She had the Moon under her feet: signifying her rule and authority over all
the things below that are subject to change, in that she only has received of
God power to subdue them, and she does of right possess them; the wicked are
usurpers.

Upon her head she had a Crown of twelve Stars: showing her Queenely
Majesty, she being the Spouse of Christ, as also her victory over all her
enemies.

It is said, she traveled: her travel is meant of the Church of the Jews;
of whom this is testified in the Evangelists, the 9. of the Acts of the
Apostles, how great resistance there was against our Savior Christ, against
the Apostles and the rest, what great and grievous persecutions they then
sustained for the Gospell-sake, in the beginning of the primitive Church,
because they went about to beget, to bring, and to draw Children unto God out
of the seed of Abraham.

Afterward, another great wonder is seen, to wit, a great Dragon; namely, the
Devil, compared to a Dragon, and called the great Dragon, because of his great
strength, and exceeding fierceness; for such is the strenght of a Dragon, as
that he is able to gripe with an Elephant.

He is described to have seven heads and ten horns; by seven heads noting
his great wisdom, knowledge, and understanding of things; as also it
signifies his wit, and subtlety to resist the Church, and to make more
mischief against the seven Churches, that is, all the Churches of God: And
his ten horns signifies his will and power to do much hurt to them.

His Crowns signify his victory, in prevailing against the world, to wit,
over those whom God has not ordained to save, whose names are not written in
the Book of life, and for this cause he is called the Prince of the world,
because he has the greater part of the world under his obedience.

What his tail he overthrows many Stars; noting, that there are many like
unto Stars in outward show, being graced with notable gifts, and being as it
were lifted up to heaven by the knowledge they had, and the notable profession
they made of God, having some feeling also, being yet not Sealed, are by the
tail of the Dragon, that is, by small power and light temptations, pulled
back from the same, and fall from the faith.

After, he says, He stood before the Woman; noting, that he sets himself
very fiercely and sharply against the woman, that is, the Church and Children
of God, whose names were written in the Book of life: And therefore he is
said to wait on the woman, first, to hinder her that she should not bring
forth, and then to devour them at the least when they were brought forth, that
is, when they have been called, and made profession of the truth, and are made
members of Christ by faith; even then is he ready most strongly to assault
them, to overthrow, if it were possible, the foundation of their faith. Where
he compares the Devil to an envious Midwife, opposing him to a good
Midwife; for as she is careful to help the woman in travel, and to save the
Child; so the Devil contrariwise is ready to hinder and hurt the Church, and
to destroy her seed.

Whereas the Church is said to bring forth a Man-child; it is first meant of
Christ, and then of his members and servants in the beginning of the Church,
whom now he has joined unto him in his kingdom, but principally it is to be
understood of Christ, that valiant one, who albeit he was stung on the Cross
by the Serpent, yet even thereby he overcame, and after was taken up to
heaven, and had victory, triumphing over the devil, over sin, and over all
his enemies, and the enemies of the Church.

Then it is said, there was a battle in heaven; by heaven, he means the
militant Church of God, under the Gospel, which is the part of Gods kingdom,
for the kingdom of God which is begun even in earth. The principal in this
battle is first Michael, to wit, Christ, and with him his Angels; namely, the
godly Saints, with the good Angels on the one side, and on the other side, the
Dragon with his Angels; namely, the wicked spirits and wicked men. But the
godly overcome the Dragon and his Angels: the means whereby they overcome, is
through the blood of the Lamb, which is their principal armor; being such,
as that albeit they themselves were killed, notwithstanding by reason hereof,
they were made conquerours, and were now received into the kingdom of heaven,
and Satan is thrown out of the kingdom. Which thing when Satan saw, as
namely, that now he had lost all his advantage, as it were, and that he could
have naught to do with them any more, they being now triumphing in the
kingdom of God, he waxes mad as it were, and rages against the earth more
fiercely then before.

And hereupon, the Elders, and the rest of Gods Children in heaven are brought
in, rejoicing at this victory, and saying, peace in the heaven; that is, to the
Children of God, that were then delivered, but woe to the earth; that is, to
the inhabitants of the earth, because that they should have much to do, and
suffer great trouble, for seeing Satan by the constant enduring of those that
had given their lives in the defense of the truth, perceived that he had got
such a foil, he therefore rages against those that remain, and for this
cause it is said, woe to them on the earth; not that they should perish, but
only should be greatly afflicted through the malice of Satan and his
instruments.

Now then it is said, that he persecuted the woman; that is, the Church: in
persecuting the Church, she has a place appointed her in the Wilderness,
whither she flies for one thousand two hundred and sixty days, the time we
have heard before to have been during the space of the hard dealing with the
two Prophets, wherein they prophesied which we showed to contain so many
years.

By this flight of the woman into the Wilderness for one thousand two hundred
and sixty days, set down in the sixth verse, and the persecution whereby the
Dragon pursued her that space, is meant those persecutions in general which
followed against the whole Church during the continuance of those years, which
in the next verses he sets down particularly and severally.

And first he sets down the particular persecution of the Church of the
Jews in the thirteenth and fourteenth verses, and then of the Gentiles, in the
seventeenth Verse. For the Church of the Jews, the persecution thereof is
expressed in that it is said, that he persecuted her that brought forth the
man-child, but the Lord delivered her from being devoured of the Dragon.

In that it is said, she being thus pursued, has for her deliverance, wings
given her to fly away into a Desert for two times, a time, and half a time;
it notably describes that strange deliverance of the Children of God which
were in Jerusalem, before the overthrow of it, who (as the story witnesses)
being warned by the voice of God from heaven, did withdraw themselves for a
time into a City called Pella beyond Jordan, in the Wilderness, where they did
continue for the space of three years and a half, until Jerusalem were
destroyed.

Whereas the Dragon is said to cast out waters against the Church, it notes
the great multitudes of people, for so it is often used in the Scriptures, (as
also afterterwards) Cap. 17. 1. 15.
which afterward the Devil raised up to devour and consume the Church of
Christ in the infancy of it. But in that the earth is said to help the woman,
it notes, that howsoever the Lord suffers the Devil to raise and stir up
many enemies and adversaries against his Church, yet also he has his means
for the deliverance of his children by the overthrow of their enemies,
destroying them in the midst of their fury, and casting them into their
graves.

And lastly, the Dragon having done the worst he could against the Church of
the Jews, against Christ himself, his Apostles and Disciples, he follows
and proceeds with mortal envy and indignation to pursue their seed, that
is, the Church of the Gentiles, who were called by their ministry, and are
also of the seed of Abraham, though not according to the flesh.

Apoc. Cap. 13. 1. And I saw a Beast rise out of the Sea, having seven heads,
and ten horns, and upon his horns were ten crowns, and upon his heads
the name of blasphemy, etc.
THe Prophet having spoken before, that the seed of the woman, to wit, the
Church of the Gentiles was persecuted of the Dragon: he now declares the
manner and means of the persecutions and the troubles which befall the Church.
The isntrumental cause is here set out to be the Beast, which is the Emperor
of Rome, who is set forth by him, coming out of the Sea; whereby is meant the
great storms, troubles, and tempests that the Beast should raise up: By which
tempests, are expressed and meant the great tumults which should arise both
between the wicked themselves, as it came to pass in the Empire of Rome, for
they had amongst themselves many and long wars, and grievous troubles and
dissentions, as appears in the histories; as also it notes the troubles and
afflictions, which the Church should receive by them, for the Church must needs
be partaker of this misery (though peradventure it be not immediately always
tended against them) yet they living under the Empire where these troubles were
principally, could not but needs also feel the smart thereof. Afterward the
troubles are also immediately directed against the godly themselves,
particularly by the sword, by fire, and by sore persecutions, which are
declared to arise and come from the Beast.

A Beast, so he is termed, being here described and represented under the
form of a Beast, because of the furiousness and madness of the Empire of
Rome, and the Emperors; signifying that there was nothing almost of humanity in
him, but that he was even estranged from all courtesies of men.

Secondly, he is more particularly noted, what manner of Beast he was like
unto, to wit, he was like a Leopard; noting his marvelous swiftness and
readiness to do mischief to the Church, and to destroy it; as also showing
his cruelty toward the people of God.

The Paws of a Bear; noting his rauenousnesse, as being ready, so, able to
catch, to apprehend and lay hold of the things he desired.

The mouth of a Lion; showing that he was cruel and strong to devour and to
destroy.

He had the power of the Dragon given him; that is, of the Devil, signifying
the greatness of his cruelty, for (as it is in the twentieth Chapter) the
Lord that he might save his people, being now in their cradle, from being
overrun and devoured of Satan, had first shut up the Devil into the
bottomless pit, that he might not practice that he would against the Church,
which thing the Devil perceiving, and seeing himself thus shut up, that as it
were in his own person, he could not as he desired be employed in the
devouring of the Church at his pleasure, he casts as much of his own power as
he can upon an other, to wit, upon the Roman Emperor, who was as it were, his
deputy, to the end he might do that injury he could, in prosecuting the Christ.

Seven heads; signifying his exceeding wisdom and policy to do hurt,
which should be very great, according to his authority, whereby he ruled over
the whole world. His horns signify his power to do that hurt: And his
Crowns signify that great effect which that great wit and power of his should
take, in prevailing against men, to wit, that he should vanquish and overcome
in his mischiefs: Notwithstanding there is great difference between his
Crowns and the Dragons, for the Dragon had them on his heads; that is, the
Devil has this power of himself properly to do hurt, exercising it as from
himself: the Beast has them upon his horns, that is, the Emperor does not
exercise his authority and power against the Church immediately from himself,
but does borrow his power from the Dragon. Which is spoken after the custom
and manner of those Kings and Princes, which having absolute authority, wear
their Crowns on their bare heads, those that be Viceroyes, and have an
absolute authority, wear Coronets indeed but on their Caps, as it is used in
foreign Countries, and as it was the practice in those days.

After, he is said to have the name of Blasphemy, declaring, that the
Emperors should be such as should blaspheme God, in calling themselves Gods,
and taking the worship of God unto themselves, as Caligula and others most
wretchedly and blasphemously did, like to Alexander the great in the Monarchy
of the Grecians, which did arrogate this title to himself, to be called God.

In that he says, he had upon his head the name of blasphemy written; he
opposes to that contrary custom of the Priest, who had written upon his head,
honor to the Lord; so contrariwise, this Beast had written on his head
blasphemy against God. And he did not only blaspheme the name of God, but
also his Tabernacle, that is, did speak evil of the Church of God, and
contemned it. And whereas it is said, he blasphemed those that dwell in heaven;
it notes, that not only in general he did speak evil of Gods Church, but
he did even malign the particular persons which make profession of the truth
of God, as appears in the histories.

After, this Beast is said to have a wound in one of his heads; that is,
thought to be accomplished in the time of Nero, who was the last of the chief
Emperors of that race, which was wounded, being even cut off by their evil
and wicked living, and especially by the cruelty of Nero, insomuch that they
thought their Empire was like to come to confusion; which indeed had come to
pass, if it had not been vpheld and maintained by the discreet counsel of
those that followed, which were more wise, politic, and subtle then the
other, notwithstanding they were wicked men: So that by these it was restored
again, yea, though it were even almost past hope; yet it was suddenly revived,
and that in such sort, that all men wondered at it; and hereby they attained
such credit as they did, for it was marvelous in the judgment of men, that a
Kingdom so near the fall, was so soon and so strongly fortified, whereupon
they are moved to worship the Beast, and to say, who is like the Beast?

And these that wondered, are drawn away to follow the Beast; which are
described to be those which were living in that time, whose names were not
written in the Book of life of the Lamb, which was slain, which Book is
from the beginning of the world: not that it is here meant of Christ, to be
slain from the beginning, for that cannot be so directly gathered out of this
place.

These things thus described, he warns them of the issue, and first he
moves attention; If any man (says he) has an ear to hear, let him hear;
willing them thereby, to take heed to that which is spoken, and which after he
is to speak, to the terror of the wicked, and the comfort and good of the
Saints, and of the godly. And he says, if any lead into captivity, he shall
be led into captivity, etc. to show, that what measure they have meted to
others, the same should be measured to them, and as they have dealt with
others, so they should be dealt withal themselves.

And in this point (says he) stands the faith and patience of the Saints;
faith, to believe that God will bring this judgment on the wicked; their
patience, in that upon this assurance of this justice of God upon the wicked,
they should patiently bear those corrections and troubles which shall befall
them, and patiently also wait for the accomplishment of those judgments of God
upon their oppressors.

And thus far of the judgments which the Church of the Gentiles should
suffer by the cruelty of the Roman Empire.

Afterward follow the troubles that befall the Church, by the Bishop of Rome,
who is hereby noted and set forth unto us: namely, in that it is said, there
appeared another Beast like a Lamb; signifying, that howsoever this other
Beast of Rome be most brutish and void of humanity and virtue: And this is to
be understood of the Pope, for he professes himself to be the servant of
servants, but in deed and practice he makes himself Lord of Lords, and this
is not only to be understood of one in that seat, but of all that succeed him,
and that take his part, and which are of his Hierarchy.

His effects do follow, to wit, first that he spoke like a Dragon; noting,
that the chief mischief which should come to the Church by him, should be by
his teaching and instructing them in that false doctrine which he should
receive from the Dragon, which shows that he is a false and lying Prophet, as
receiving his office and doctrine from the father of lies, which is the Devil.
In that he caused the earth to worship the first Beast, is meant, that
subjection which he did pretend to the Empire in outward show, and so far
forth only as his profit would serve, albeit indeed he does exalt himself
above the Emperors.

And he did all that the first Beast could do before his face, signifying,
that he makes but a jest and mock at the Roman Empire; for toward the end,
the Roman Empire should fall before him and decay; so that albeit in show they
would pretend to give subjection to it, yet the Emperor had only the name and
title of authority to be called Lord, which we see indeed is, and was, but of
small reckoning; for the Pope seemed rather to be Lord to himself, as we see
in the Histories, that the Emperors took many reproaches and abuses of the
Pope; yea, the Pope did tread on the neck of the Emperors, usurping that
saying of the Psalmist, Thou shall tread on the Ader and the Aspe, etc. yea,
the Pope and those that were under him, did as it were make an Anatomy of the
Empire, for as the Anatomists do first take away their flesh and then join
the bones and the other parts of the body together, and so make him like a man
again, even so did the Pope deal with the Empire.

This Beast also made an Image in favor of the first Beast; to which he put a
spirit, and the dead image did speak: As it has appeared to have been done
by them, that the Devil sometimes did speak in their images, to the illuding
of the wicked: sometimes by other deceits and illusions to beguile the simple.

He also brought fire from heaven; alluding as it were, to the two good
Prophets before, who are said to have caused fire to come down from heaven,
which is verrified of this false Prophet; who did and does for the confirming
of their false doctrine, work many counterfeit and fained miracles in the
world.

And lastly it is said, he should so prevail in the world, that none should
traffic, but such as should have the mark of the Beast; which seems to be
the signing in the forehead at their Sacrament of confirmation, which the
Papists do so esteem of, as that they prefer it before the Lords Sacrament:
or else they should have the name of the Beast, which is thought to be their
confession which they make to their Bishops and Priests.

The singlest thing is the number of the Beast, wherein is the special
wisdom of Popery, and it is said to be the number of a man; that is, he must
be a learned man among them that must come to the knowledge of it. Of which,
diverse are of diverse opinions; as namely, that it signifies (...) latinus, but
that is too Caballisticall, the meaning whereof being not as certainly yet
attained unto, though very probably guessed at by many, is to be pretermitted.

Apoc. Cap. 14. 1. Then I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with
him an hundredth, forty and four thousand, having his fathers Name written in
their foreheads, etc.
THe Prophet having declared the fearful judgments to be executed on the
earth by the man of Rome, he does here arm Gods Children by the promises of
mercy in the preservation of them.

First, then to give credence to that which was to be spoken, here is set forth
the description of Christ, and his Church militant.

Christ is here compared to a Lamb, both because of his meekness and
humility, and especially by reason of his suffering, and his offering of
himself to death upon the Cross for us.

He is said to stand; signifying his readiness to help his Church. As
Stephen, Acts 7. saw Christ stand at the right hand of God: not that Christ
does always stand in heaven, but it notes out unto us his pronenesse and
willingness to do good to his, and to revenge their adversaries.

In mount Sion; that is, his Church, to wit, the heavenly Jerusalem, to the
good and help of his Church, to deliver them from their enemies.

Then is set down his train, in the same number that is spoken of in the
seventh Chapter, viz. one thousand four hundred and forty, signifying the
great number of Gods Children on the face of the earth in that time; yet not so
great, but that it might be told. And this same number of the Gentiles in
these times of persecution, is noted to be as many as of the Jews, that were
sealed up to life everlasting.

And therefore it is a certain thing that the number of Gods children in the
time of persecution is but small, in regard as at other times, for then they
are without number, as it is said in that seventh Chapter.

These are described by their effects, to wit, that they had a song, and their
voice is said to be like the voice of many waters; that is, was a very great
voice, and made a great sound, yet so comfortable, as if it were the voice of
harpers; which shows the notable harmony and mellodious voice of the Children
of God, and their unity and consent in the praises of God.

A new song; that is, passing the capacity of man's invention, as being only
the work of Gods spirit, and only given them by the work of their
regeneration; for they only* that are regenerate can sing new songs,
acceptable to God, so that no other man whatsoever, though never so wise, never
so witty, never so cunning in Music, can sing pleasantly unto God, unless
they have the spirit of regeneration.

Virgins; that is, those that were kept undefiled from spiritual fornication,
and corporal uncleanness, which had no guile in their mouth, and were
unblameable in the sight of God; not that they were altogether without guile
and sin, but that they were accepted as righteous in Christ, that as Christ
was without spot, so were they, as having the righteousness of the Lamb
imputed unto them, and their sins to him.

Afterward, to draw credit to the Prophecy, he says, he sees another Angel
fly through the midst of heaven, evidently, with the everlasting Gospel;
signifying, that after that, in that one thousand two hundred and sixty, the
Gospel should not be clean hidden, but that there should be an Angel, to
wit, some Ministers that should fore-warne them to take heed of the Beast, and
not to be defiled with his uncleanness.

After, another Angel follows, which foretells the destruction of Babylon;
saying, Babylon is fallen; which notes, that even in those times there should
be such, which by the Ministry of the word should denounce the overthrow and
ruin of Babell, that is, of Rome, that howsoever it seemed strong and
immovable in the sight of the world, yet it should fall and come to
destruction: and it is twice repeated, to show the certainty of it.

A third Angel denounces the judgments of God against the worshippers of the
Beast, and of his image, to wit, those that did yield themselves to the
Idolatry of the Beast.

These three messages are done by diverse kinds of Messengers and Ministers;
showing that the gifts of God are diverse in his Ministers; as namely, some of
exhortation, some of denouncing judgments against the ungodly; of which sort
this last is. In that he says they should drink of the Wine of the wrath of
God; it signifies (as he expounds it) that they shall be tormented with Fire
and Brimstone, they shall be burned in hell, and that even before the holy
Angels, and before the Lamb, signifying the certainty of that judgment in
hell, as also that it should be such, that it might easily be discerned, and
was evident to be seen of the Lamb, and of the Angels. The time of this is
said to be for evermore, not for a short space, or for a definite time; but it
should be without ceasing and without end.

After, he comes to declare to the Church of God, the comforts that should
come to them by describing their estate in this world, and in the world to
come; and then shows the execution of the judgments upon the ungodly.

For the Children of God, it is said, that in this life there belongs unto
them patience, and faith, which their faith brings forth obedience to Gods
commandments, and causes their patience to continue.

After this life it is said, there should come rest from their labors, and
their good things should follow them; that is, their afflictions, persecutions,
their patience and holiness of life should not stay behind them, but should
follow them; that is, they should have them recompensed to the utmost in heaven.

Concerning the wicked, their judgments follow.

First, it is said, there comes an Angel out of a Cloud in white; signifying
his zeal which he had in Gods glory, in the execution of his judgments.

He is a created Angel, not the Angel of the Covenant, as appears in that
he is said to be like a man; and also for that he is commanded by another,
which was the Son of God: And he is commanded to put in his sharp Sickle,
(which is the word of God, being the power of God unto destruction to all those
that believe not) into the world, because the time is come, for (says he) the
harvest is ripe, and the corn, (that is, the world) is dry. Where the world is
compared to dry Corn, for as Corn when it is dry, is then ready for the
Sickle; so when the wicked are come to their full ripeness in sin, they are
then ready to be cut off by the Sickle of Gods vengeance: And as dry sticks
are fit for the fire, even so they that are dried and dead in their sins, are
fit matter for Gods judgments to burn to destruction; which notes the
fearful judgment to be executed on the ungodly for worshipping the Beast.

Another judgment follows, more fearful, albeit in show it be like the
former, and that is of the other Angel that has a sickle, wherewith he is
bidden to cut the Grapes down: He is not bidden to cut them with a little
knife (as is the use of pruning the Grapes) but with a Sickle; noting a more
fierce destruction. And when he had cut them, he is bidden, he should press
them in the Vine-presse of Gods wrath: A similitude taken from the use of
those, who when they have gathered their Grapes, cast them into the Vinepresse
to be trodden and pressed out, even so should they be trodden down, and
crushed with the judgment and wrath of God: And this must be done hand by
hand, and one Cluster by another; which signifies a more notable judgment: In
reaping Corn, men use to gather many together, but these Grapes must be
gathered one by one; showing the fierceness of this judgment to be exalted
upon every one of them particularly.

Trodden out of the City; that is, among the wicked, out of the Church, alluding
to the custom in those Countries, where they had their (...) presses to tread
their Grapes without the City: And here he alludeth also to the execution of
offenders, which uses to be done without the City: so this judgment should be
done without the Church. Noting, that this only was to be executed upon the
ungodly contemners.

The greatness of this judgment is aggrauated, in that the blood should be in
such abundance, and so deep, that a man riding in it, it should reach to the
bridles of the Horses, for the distance of one thousand and six hundred
furlongs, which is about three hundred of our miles, or more: Noting, the
exceeding great wrath of God upon those offenders, and the fearful judgment
which they should suffer.

Apoc. Cap. 15. 1. And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marueilus,
seven Angels having the seven last plagues: for by them is fulfilled the
wrath of God, etc.
THere having been set before in the former Chapters, as well the favor to
Gods Children, as judgments against the contemners of the Gospel, he
proceeds here in the declaration of the same.

And first of the judgments against the Beast and his worshippers in the first
Verse, the executioners whereof are in that Verse said to be seven Angels, to
wit, a perfect number to perform that work; they are said to have the seven
last plagues; that is, authority and power was given them to execute that full
number of judgments which remained to be poured on the earth.

And having spoken of the Ministers of Gods judgments, he speaks also of the
furniture and armory of the judgments of God; which he has as it were in
store against them.

And he calls it a Sea mingled with fire; alluding to the Lauary of the
Priests in the Temple, whereto he seems to compare this, which was called a
Sea in regard of the greatness of it.

And it is called a Sea of Crystal, or a glassie Sea, because it might be
thoroughly looked into, and evidently discerned of the Children of God through
Christ. In the Sea is fire, which is the wrath and curse of God, the matter of
Gods fierce indignation, and the judgments which should be taken out of this
Lauer of Gods wrath, for as in the Lauer, in the time of the Law, there was
water to wash the Priests, and to make them clean; noting the cleanenesse and
uprightness that should be in the Priests, and which all that should be
Priests unto God should receive from Christ; even so in this Lauer and Sea of
Gods wrath, fire is said to be; noting, that from hence should come matter of
judgment to consume and destroy the enemies of God.

After, it is said, that the Children of God which had gotten the victory over
their enemies, did stand by this Sea; namely, to see and behold these fearful
judgments of God against the wicked; and thereupon, to wit, on this occasion
are stirred up to praise the Lord, and they sing the Song of Moses and of the
Lamb; namely, a Song of thanksgiving for their deliverance by the Lamb,
saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, etc. as if they should say, who is
it that would not magnify so mighty a King, so holy and so just a God, who
for the glory of his name, and the revenge of his Saints, has such a treasury
of judgments against his enemies, which now in Christ he had made manifest
unto them?

After, it is said, that these seven Angels come out of the Temple; that is,
out of the presence of God, declaring that they come by the authority and
commandment of God, and therefore that their embassage was certainly and
necessarily to be accomplished. And they are clothed with white; signifying
their integrity and uprightness, showing that there was nothing which they
executed unjustly or wrongfully, but that it was right and just, howsoever it
might appear unto the sons of men.

They were girded; that is, prompt, sit, and ready to execute their message,
whereunto they were appointed, for (as the custom was in those days) those
that had their clothes girded up to them, were fitter for any work or
business they went about.

To these Angels are given Vials; signifying, that as these inferior Angels
are innocent and holy spirits uprightly performing that which is enjoined them,
and as they are ready thereunto, so they do nothing without the special
calling or commandment of God, and without a particular Ordinance from God,
for their charge and function is laid upon them either immediately from God
himself, or else by the Archangels and those which are the chief Angels.

Further, it is said, that the Temple was filled with smoke, that none could
enter in until the seven Plagues of the seven Angels were accomplished: The
glory of God so filled that place, that the Angels themselves could not enter
into it; for by this smoke is meant the fullness of Gods presence, and the
full and perfect glory and majesty of the same, as was in the Temple in the
time of the Law, when that it was first finished, the glory of the Lord so
filled the Temple with a smoke, that none were able to abide therein; noting,
that he was well pleased with the building of it: even so here the Angels being
sent forth to execute, the presence of God was so exceeding glorious, that the
Angels could not be able to return thither, till they had finished and
fulfilled the judgments which they were sent forth to do: noting also that
this execution of these judgments of God, was acceptable unto him; as also
that they were irreuocable, and altogether inauoideable.

Apoc. Cap. 16. 1. And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the
seven Angels, Go your ways, and pour out the seven Vials of the wrath of
God upon the earth, etc.
IN the setting forth of the judgments of God upon the Beast and his
worshippers, we have heard in the former Chapter, that mention was made of the
Ministers and Executioners of these judgments, as also of the matter of the
same. In this Chapter follows the Execution of the Ministry of these seven
Angels.

And first it is said by the Apostle, that he heard a voice out of the Temple,
to the seven Angels, which gave special authority unto them, commanding them
to pour out their Vials.

That they came forth of the Temple; it notes their full authority and
strength to do that work they were called unto, and also that the judgments
which they executed were irreuocable.

And whereas the Vials being given them before, yet they would not pour them
out before they were commanded; more particularly it shows the great and
singular obedience of the Angels. One would have thought, that having the Vials
once given them,, they should presently have proceeded to execution, but they
would not, till they had special commandment. Teaching us not to do any
thing without special authority, commission, and commandment from God.

Even as a sword, being committed into the hand of a Soldier by the Captain
general, he is not to smite before he be commanded to fight, and before the
Trumpet be sounded to battle; so though a man have excellent graces given
him, yet he is not to execute any function, especially publicly, before he
receive a particular warrant and calling from God thereunto. Sampson, though
he had strength given him that he was able to have defended the Israelites,
and revenged them of their enemies, yet he could not take upon him the
government of the people, before the Lord had called him unto it: In like
manner, the Ministers of the word, albeit they have never so notable gifts of
Knowledge, Utterance, etc. yet they are not in any case to intrude themselves
into the Ministry, unless they have a particular calling from the Lord.

These Angels are bidden first in general to cast their Vials upon the earth;
that is, on the whole frame of all the Heaven, Earth, Sea, and all in them, in
the execution: yet some are more specially commanded to be poured on the earth,
because these judgments are intended against the wicked on the earth.

The first Angel is said to have poured his Vial upon the earth; whereupon
there fell an exceeding great sore of Biles on them that had the mark of the
Beast, and which worshipped his Image. The Plagues of this Chapter have great
agreement with the Plagues set down in the eight and ninth Chapters, they
being like in the matter of the plagues, so also in the number: the difference
is, that these were headed with more fierce tokens of Gods wrath, and with a
more heavy indignation, because those were executed on all the earth; not on
the Persons only, these on the Persons, and that on the principal offenders
only, namely, on the worshippers of the Beast.

So that here we see the Lord executes his judgments by degrees; first by
Biles, not killing them, but vexing them outwardly, if happily thereby they
might be brought to repentance.

The second Angel poured his Vial on the Sea, whereupon the color of it was
turned, so that it looked like black blood of death: So that God proceeded in
judgment, they not profiting, he now goes on forward to punish with death.

The third Angel poured his Vial on the fresh waters; to declare that God
left notes of his wrath on all the creatures of the world: so that the earth
and waters themselves being thus judged, did bear witness of their sins
against them.

On these two latter executions, the Angels of the Waters take occasion to
acknowledge and confess that Gods judgments against the wicked, are true, and
holy, and just, as after follows. For as they had shed the blood of Gods
Saints, so their blood also was shed, and they are feign (as the Egyptians did,
to whom they were alluded) to drink of the blood of the Rivers, for so (say
they) are they worthy; as before, having taken delight in the blood of the
Saints.

Another Angel, that is, the third Angel which was in the Sanctuary, does
approve that which the other two had confessed; for their office was over the
Waters: noting, that the Angels of God have their particular places of
government, wherein they execute their functions enjoined them of God. And lest
the wicked should seem to think that God was too sharp and severe in
judgment against them, therefore not only the Angels of the Waters, that is,
of the fresh and salt waters, do acknowledge, that the sins of those wicked
men had deserved this and more; and therefore the judgment was just, insomuch
as that they might see their very sins in the same, as it were in capital
letters: but even also that other Angel, out of the Sanctuary, does affirm,
that which these two had said, and acknowledges Gods righteous judgment
herein.

The fourth Angel casts his Vial on the Sun; noting, that the judgment was
not only on the earth, but in the heaven, by the distemperature thereof,
through the intemperate weather, as namely, the extreme heat which should
proceed from it, which should scorch the earth, and the men that were in it,
whereon should come dearth, famine, etc.

And here the Evangelist notes, that these worshippers of the Beast, whether
they had received the mark of the Beast upon the foreheads, that is, were open
professors of the worship of the Beast, or received it in their hands, that is,
were private favorers of the Beast and his Idolatries, namely, whether they
did openly or privately or any way yield to the Idolatry of the Beast of Rome;
yet they repented not: signifying, that whereas as yet, Gods judgments were in
his hand to remove them if they repented, or to double them if they did not
repent: They notwithstanding for all these degrees of Plagues, do still
continue obstinate; yea, they proceed to blaspheme God, so far are they from
repenting and glorifying God. And hitherto it seems God began with the common
people; for as in his Plagues, he uses to begin first with his Church, then
with the wicked; so in the wicked he begins first with the lower and inferior
sort, and then follows with the more grievous and principal offenders.

The fifth Angel poures out his Vial on the seat of the Beast; which is to be
understood of the Church of Rome; whereupon follows darkness, to wit,
anguish, and trouble, and pain: which appeared in that they are said to bite
their tongues, as the malignant and envious persons use to do, who being
troubled or crossed any way, will for anguish vex themselves more.

The sixth Angel poures out his Vial on the River Euphrates; viz. that defense
wherewith this spiritual Babylon is environed and compassed about; for by
Babylon is understood Rome; for as in Babylon the children of Israel were kept
both in spiritual and bodly servitude; so by the sins and Idolatries of the
Church of Rome, it has been showed that the Church of God should be tormented
with spiritual bondage. And this River Euphrates was a river which compassed
and defended Babylon from their enemies: and therefore by Euphrates here seems
to be meant, the fort, strenght, and munition of the City and Church of Rome.
Whereas then he pours his Vial upon Euphrates, whereby it was dried up; it
notes that the strength and fort of Rome was hereby greatly abated, and as it
were taken away.

The reason of this is rendered, namely, that their might be way made for the
Kings of the East, who should come for the aid and relief of this Beast of
Rome; for whereas by this Judgment, and by these Plagues, they should have
turned unto repentance, yet they would not, but in their distress would make
rather all friends they could to be at one with the Kings of the earth, and use
all means of reconciling themselves unto them; and joining to themselves the
Kings which were from far, making them their defendants and maintainers.

And whereas it is said, that from the Dragon, that is, from Satan; from the
Beast, that is, from the Empire; from the Prophet, that is, from that man of
Rome, the Pope, are sent forth three spirits: It notes, that when they should
see themselves thus destitute, made naked, and deprived of their defenses and
safeguards which they had before, there should be a certain number of false
Prophets raised up by the Pope and his adherents, which should stir up and
solicit the Kings to join to the Church of Rome. These Prophets are compared
to Frogs, partly because of their loud voice, and of that great noise which
they should make, and whereby they should be continually crying in the ears of
the Princes; which thing we see effected by the Monks, Friars, and the rest
of those cursed Prophets, who are always persuading those whom they would have
to join themselves unto them, by these arguments; by defending their holy
Father the Pope; of helping their holy Mother the Church, etc. thereby stirring
them up against Christ and his servants. Partly also these false Prophets are
compared to frogs, by reason of their great multitudes, wherein they come.

And here Christ comfort and vpholdeth his Servants, and warns them to
take heed to themselves, that howsoever the Beast, with his Prophets, thus
proceeded, and made themselves strong, by joining to them the Princes of the
earth; yet he says, he will come upon them as a Thief; namely, at unawares
to them. And therefore he admonishes the Children of God to watch; and keep
upon them their clothes and their armor, lest he coming in the night,
should find them naked, both to their shame, and to their destruction, they
being naked to his judgments: alluding to a Soldier, who being naked and
without Armor, when the enemy comes must needs be slain.

And as they gather the Kings for their assistance; so he also gathers great
companies together, and the place he gathers them to, is Harmageddon;
signifying the mountain of destruction, which was the place where Josiah was
slain, and a great overthrow was given to the Israelites by the King of Egypt;
which fearful and grievous overthrow, the wicked bragged at, and used to
object it against the people of God, which here he seems to aim at: as if
he should say, that they should brag no more against the Church of God,
because they had so sore an overthrow at that time, for which, there was so
great a lamentation, as it is said, that there was never the like heard; for
even as that place, was a place of destruction to them, so this should be to
these enemies of God.

The seventh Angel poures his Vial on the Air, then there is said to come a
voice from the Temple, which was the voice of God: the effects whereof were
wonderful; for it is said, that there followed in heaven, most fearful
thunders, lightnings, and voices, in the earth a great Earthquake; whereby the
earth trembled and shaked, which is said to be so fearful a one, as never was
before. Which notes the fearful majesty and terror of God against his
enemies, and his mighty power whereby he is able to scatter and to destroy
them. The words which the Voice uttered, are these; It is done: to wit, the
consummation of the victory of Christ over his enemies, the parts whereof are
expressed, some in the words following, to the end of this Chapter, and the
rest follow in the other Chapters.

Then in the next words, it is said, that the victory of Christ is in part
wrought by the Earthquake, the effects whereof are, first, that the great City
was shaken, to wit, Rome; called the great City, by way of excellency, in that
it was counted the greatest in the world, being the greatest in account, in
fame, and estimation: according to our usual custom, who call the most famous
and chief City, by the name of The City.

And it is not only shaken, and many Houses thrown down, but also it is
divided into three parts; that is, their power is scattered, the City being
divided and rent into many pieces by the Earthquake: and not only this City,
but many Cities of other Nations, and the Isles also, to wit, other Countries
are hereby overthrown, and the Mountains were not found, which uses to come
to pass in great Earthquakes, their power likewise and strength being taken
away.

Afterward it is said, that there fell great Haile-stones like Talents upon
men: and these come, when by the Earth quake they were terrified and scared out
of their doors: for when they were dislodged of their Houses and all refuge,
then the Lord poured out his judgments on them, to break their heads, the
denouncing whereof before could not break their hearts: such was the Hail
which fell on the Egyptians, that whosoever were without the doors, should be
killed therewith: but here the Lord deals more severely, for first he drives
them out of their Houses from all refuge, and then poures the Hayle stones upon
them: the effect hereof in them is, that they blasphemed God by reason of the
greatness of the Hayle.

Apoc. Cap. 17. 1. Then there came one of the seven Angels, which had the
seven Vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come: I will show thee the
damnation of the great Whore that sits upon many waters, etc.
OF the things that were revealed in the last Vial, that which follows is a
part. We have already heard of the sum of Christ's judgments on the City,
and the men thereof. Now the Prophet proceeds to declare the contents which
further ensue of that Vial.

First he says, that an Angel (which was one of them that poured out the
Vial) came to tell John what should befall the Harlot. Which teaches us, that
the self same Angels that are Executioners of Gods judgments upon the wicked,
are also Ministers of Gods mercy for the comfort of his Children.

He expounds the judgment of the Harlot, which is the Whore of Rome; who is
called a Harlot, in regard of her abominations and whoredoms, especially
spiritual, in her Idolatries, as also bodily in her beastly fornication: that
City being the very puddle and sink of all filthiness and uncleanness.

She is called the great Harlot, because all the Kings of the earth should go
a whoring to her, especially by committing spiritual fornication, which is
Idolatry. And all the people also of their Nations, and all the inhabitants of
the earth should also take part in her filthy abominations: and therefore She
must needs be a notable Strumpet, with whom all the Princes of the world, with
their people and subjects must commit adultery, uncleanness, and all kind of
villainy.

In that John was carried again by the spirit into the Wilderness; is meant,
that albeit he had received all these things (which were revealed to him
before) by the spirit, yet for the further assurance of the things now to be
delivered, he says, that he is carried again in the spirit; that is, he is
lift up by a more singular hand of God, that he might the more notably
understand and attend, by the special direction of Gods spirit, to the things
now to be revealed.

And he says, he saw a woman sit upon a Beast.

By the woman is meant the City of Rome, the Beast signifies, first the
Emperors only which were civil gouerners: and secondly, the Pope, which took
upon him both civil and ecclesiastical government: so that upon this Beast
she is said to fit; and therefore whereas he says, he sees the Harlot sitting
on the Beast, it is meant, that the honor of the City and Church of Rome was
to be maintained and vpheld by the Emperors, the governors civil, and by the
Pope, which had both Civil and Ecclesiastical authority, for both these are
in this place set down to be but one Beast.

The Beast is said to be colored like Scarlet; signifying, either he was
advanced to great honor, or else nothing his cruelty in murdering the
Saints: but this thing afterward, Saint John more notably sets down, in
that the Whore her self is said to be red with the blood of the Saints;
noting, that as this was her Livery, so the chiefest color wherein this Church
and this Beast delights, is Scarlet, as appears by their usage; for they
use to wear this, that they might be known to be bloody and cruel.

It is further said, that this Beast is full of names of blasphemy; it is
meant, that whereas before it was said, that the first Beast had a name of
blasphemy, that is, was very cruel and very blasphemous, when he first rose
out of the Sea, which was verified by the example of Caligula and others, that
took on them the honor of God; yet this does far exceed him, for he is
full of the names of blasphemy, viz. blasphemous throughout, signifying an
high degree of blasphemy.

He speaks also of the Harlot her self, whom he says to be arrayed in
Purple and Scarlet; signifying, that she was clad royally, purple being a most
costly and Princely apparel; her Scarlet bedecked with gold, precious stones
and Pearls; note the exceeding great riches of that Church of Rome.

Then follows that which she did, viz. She had a cup of Gold in her hand,
but within full of abominations, and filthy whoredoms and fornications;
noting, that without she had a gorgeous show, and was beautiful to behold, but
within full of al uncleanness, as our Savior Christ said of the Pharisees,
that they cleanse the out side of the cup, but are all filthy within; which we
see in the Church of Rome; that without they have most fair shows to look
to, but look into them, and into their actions, there is nothing but
uncleanness.

She had in her forehead a name written, a Mystery; signifying, that the
chief thing she professes, is a Mystery, namely, that she has the
Mysteries and secrets of God; yea, she professes that all knowledge and
understanding of Gods will is shut up only in her breasts, as in a closet: and
therefore (say they) the Pope can change the Articles of the faith; yea, that
he can alter the Scriptures, and make them no Scriptures, and that he can make
the Evangelists to be no Evangelists, and those that are not, to be.

She is called great Babylon, because of the resemblance of that Babylon in the
East, to this in the West, principally in regard of her great cruelty against
Gods Children.

The Mother of Harlots; that is, the chief Harlot of all, setting out her
abominable fornications, both spiritual and bodily.

After, in that she is said to be drunk with the blood of the Saints; is set
forth her cruelty and barbarousnesse against the witnesses of Gods truth, in
that she is defiled, bespotted, and embrued with the blood of the Saints: As
Christ is said to come out of Edom, colored with the blood of his enemies;
noting thereby the revenge he should take of the Edomites; even so the Whore of
Babylon is dyed with the blood of Gods children; yea, she is said to be drunk
with their blood, as with drink; showing, that she makes no more account of
shedding the blood of the servants of God, then the drunken man makes of
pouring in drink, or the fishes water.

John wonders at her; to wit, not after that sort which those do which follow
after, whose names were not written in the Book of life; but he wonders after
another manner; namely, at the strangeness of the thing, and at the
strangeness of her abominations. But the Angel asks him, wherefore
marueilest thou at it? I will (says he) tell thee the mystery, viz. the
meaning of the Harlot, and of the Beast. And taking in hand to handle and
declare the mystery of them both, he begins (after the manner and custom of
the Hebrews) with that which he named last, viz. the Beast, and says, that
he was, and is not: It is said he is not, which has been declared by the wound
he received, accomplished in the time of Nero: after whose time, the manner of
government, in regard of the family which then ruled, was no more, all that
family being worn out, and therefore the government was ceased; and yet
notwithstanding should rise again out of the depth, out of the bottomless
pit, viz. out of hell, by the subtlety and policy of Satan and his crafty
instruments: and should go to destruction, that is, should for all this
suddenly be destroyed, and not have a continual government. And it is said,
that at the Beast all should wonder, not as John did, but with an admiration of
it, the reason is, because it was, and is not, and yet is; that is, albeit it
should have so many changes and alterations, in that the Emperors should be so
often put down and slain (as appears by the histories) and others raised
up, nevertheless, the government should continue still; wherefore the men of
the world, not knowing Gods providence in the ordering of these things, should
hereby be drawn with admiration of the Beast to cleave unto it, considering
that albeit he had received so many wounds and so great pushes, as it were, to
destroy him and overthrow him, and yet did continue and was able to stand, and
thinking that it was by his own power, they should therefore say, who is like
to the Beast? So that we see that this Empire which is here understood by the
Beast, was the same, but in other families, as is said before.

Then it is said, here is the mind that has wisdom; that is, here is matter
wherein those that are wise should occupy their wits and understandings.

After, he declares what the seven heads are, to wit, seven hills; namely,
that place where the City of Rome is situated, and amongst all writers, both
Latin and Greek, which speak of it, it is called the City of the seven hills,
and none but it, is so named in any, either old or new, Latin or Greek
Author. And therefore howsoever the Papists would post it over to
Constantinople, where the Turk is, as having thirty hills, yet that was of no
account in the days when this was written: Again, that was never governor of
the world as this is called, and as it was in those days.

The seven heads have another exposition given them by the Angel, to be
seven Kings, that is, seven Governors and Emperors of the City, whereof it
is said, five are fallen, that is, were dead: one was then, that is, Domitian,
who at that time had banished John into Pathmos; and he that was to come, was
the next after Domitian, and he should endure but a small time: and therefore
those that lived in those days might easily see the truth of it. And this
therefore set forth thus, that men proving and seeing this to be true, might
give the more credit to the rest.

And the Beast that was and is not (that is, is not of the same sort as he was,
being now changed by another family) is the eight, to wit, in number, which was
the seventh also, for he was admitted by the seventh, while the seventh was
alive; for the other being alive, this eight in his days was chosen Emperor,
and was joined in government with him, as was the custom of Kings, when that
Kingdoms were doubtful, the Kings took their Successors, whom they would to
have reign next in their room, and would in their own life establish them in
their Kingdoms, as did David with Solomon, who while he yet lived, settled his
Son in the Kingdom, taking him as it were, and joining him in society with
him, and setting him by him as it were on the Throne.

Having thus expounded the seven heads, he comes to tell what is meant by the
ten Horns; which are said to be ten Kings, which had not as yet received
their power; which should join with the Beast, to wit, should not reign there
where the Beast did, but should only lay their power and authority with his,
but while he had the civil authority alone in the rule of the Emperor, as
also afterward when the Pope arising, should join the spiritual jurisdiction
with the temporal government; and these ten Kings it is said should join
with this Civil and Ecclesiastical Beast.

By these ten, it is no great matter whether we understand a certain or
uncertain number, but it seems rather to note an uncertain number:
Howsoever it were, true it is, that these, the Beast should join with him to
take his part, to wit, they should give their power to him, to ride and run
at his pleasure. And these fight against the Lamb, who should overcome them by
the power of his word: for he must needs, being King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and therefore cannot but break those Horns that set themselves against
him; for they receive of him, and hold but of license their Kingdoms from him.

The Waters are plainly expounded by the Angel, to be the great multitudes of
people, and diverse Countries that should be subject to that City and Church of
Rome.

Further, he declares, that as there was a time that the Kings of the earth
should join themselves with the Beast to maintain it; so time should come,
that those Kings and Governors as they had suffered themselves to be as it
were trodden on by the Beast, and to be subject to the Whore, so they should
fight against the Beast, and against her, and most bitterly venture themselves
in fight against her; yea, they shall eat her flesh, that is, be in mortal
hatred with her to consume her, and should burn the Harlot; that is, destroy
her utterly, and so punish her as a Harlot; for burning was the usual death
for a Harlot.

Lastly, in that he says the woman is the great City that had dominion over
the Kingdoms of the earth; he shows plainly that it is the City of Rome,
seeing there was no such great Monarch as that since the time of John, but
only Rome, and She was even then the chief City in the world.

Apoc. Cap. 18. 1. And after these things, I saw another Angel come down from
heaven, having great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory,
etc.
THe Prophet having entered into the description of the City of Rome, as of the
spiritual Babylon, does on that occasion dispute what shall be done of her:
for notwithstanding, the destruction of the Beast should come before, and the
overthrow of the City should follow, yet the overthrow of the City is handled
in the first place, and of the Beast is set after, unto the end that he might
more fully set down the destruction and notable ruin of the same.

And first he declares the destruction of the City, and that it may have the
more authority, the Angel that describes it, is said to come from heaven;
declaring the certainety thereof, namely, in that this message came from
heaven, even from God himself, and therefore the City of Rome should
certainly be destroyed, and razed utterly from the face of the earth.

And this authority is more fully set forth, in that the Angel is described to
have come with such glory, that the earth was enlightened therewith; and
therefore that should be a most evident and undoubted matter: which also
appears in the mightiness of his voice.

He says, it is fallen, and the second time, it is fallen; which repetition
he uses, first to raise up men from their drowsinesse, which cannot at the
first conceive of Gods judgments, nor consider them as they ought, and
therefore they must have diverse repetitions of the same thing concerning the
justice of Gods judgments. Secondly, to show the certainty of it, as before,
Chap. 14. 8. According as Joseph interprets Pharaohs dreams of the seven
lean Kine, which did devour the seven fat; and the seven thin ears of
Wheat, that did consume the seauenfull; that they both did signify one thing,
and that the dream was therefore doubled to show that that which was signified
thereby, should certainly come and that speedily: Even so the repetition of the
denouncing of these judgments, is for this cause, namely, as to waken the
drowsinesse of man, so to show the certainty and speediness of the judgments
to be executed.

Then is set forth the state of this Babylon, the City of Rome, in that it is
said, it should become an Habitation of Devils, and of unclean Birds;
signifying the great desolation of it, according as it is the use of the
Prophets, who to express the exceeding desolations of any place, say that
those Birds which fly most far from all resort of men, as the Shrike-Owle,
and the Pelican, etc. should continue there.

To Devils; noting that those places that have bin abused to the dishonor of
God, are given by Gods just judgment, to be not only desolate, but even
haunted of Devils themselves, as we see often times it comes to pass in
Abbyes, and such like superstitious houses.

The cause is set down, to wit, by reason of the persecution of the Saints,
and her pride, who vaunted* of her riches and good estate, saying, that she
was Queen, and should never be Widow; that is, should never be desolate, but
should always have her lovers and maintainers to take her part.

And a principal cause is this, that she had played the Harlot through her
Idolatry with the Princes of the earth. Then he sets down the marks of
her destruction, both which go before, and which come after.

Before: that God would give his children that were there warning before,
whereby they might know of it, that so they might come forth, lest they* should
fall in that great destruction, as before we heard he did to the Saints in
Jerusalem, by giving them warning to avoid from thence, which they did, flying
into the City of Pella in the wilderness.

The marks following the destruction, generally, the lamentation of the
friends of the City of Rome, and principally the Kings of the earth, when they
shall see the smoke of her, mount up to heaven; by smoke, is meant the
continual remembrance of that destruction: for albeit, after it is said by the
Angel that threw the stone into the Sea, that it should never be remembered any
more; he means not that it should be clean forgotten to have been, but
only so forgotten as it should never have place again, by which it might be
remembered; like as it came to pass in Sodom, howbeit the memory thereof should
otherwise be perpetual.

Afterward is reported more particularly the lamentation of the Merchants,
which had served for the pleasure of her, by Land and by Sea: The Merchants by
land which had served her with sine meats, purple, silk, gold, silver,
precious stones, etc. for their Vestiments; namely, for the apparel of their
Priests, Prelates, Cardinals, etc. (which used to be most gorgeous and costly.)
And they should also bring to her, souls of men, that is, bond-slaues: meeting
with that which should come to pass and be performed of the Church of Rome, as
we see experience of. Then the Merchants by Sea, the Ship-masters, and Ship-men
also make their lamentation over her.

For the more certainty of this destruction of the City, there is brought in an
Angel, taking a great stone, and casting it into the bottom of the Sea,
saying, that in like manner Babylon that great City should be thrown down
with violence, and should be found no more; noting that it should be so utterly
destroyed, that it should never be recovered, neither should it be built any
more, neither should the light of a Candle be seen in it, neither the voice of
a Bridegroom heard therein; signifying that it should not be again inhabited
of any, because she had deceived all nations, and because in her was found the
blood of the Saints and Prophets.

Apoc. Cap. 19. 1. And after these things I heard a great voice of a great
multitude in heaven, saying Hallelu-iah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and
power be to the Lord our God, etc.
THe Apostle having spoken of the destruction of the City of Rome, noted by the
name of an Harlot: he now comes to set forth the destruction of the Beast, and
of the false Prophet; which are the ungodly Emperors, and the Popes,
succeeding in that power, having gotten not only civil jurisdiction, but
Ecclesiastical power also joined therewith.

And first of al before he handles that, he brings in all the children and
servants of God, praising and magnifying God for the notable works he had
showed upon the earth. And herein especially do the Angels and Saints of God
in heaven, and the Saints in earth, magnify and praise the Lord, namely, for
the judgment and destruction of the Whore, which is the City of Rome. The
causes of her destruction are set down, to be, first, because she had made all
the Kings of the earth and their people to go a whoring after her filthy
abominations. And secondly for that she had murdered the Saints of God.

After that they had sung this song of thanksgiving for that mercy received in
the destruction of the City of Rome, the Lord calls them, and cites them as
it were by a voice from the Throne, to a further thanksgiving for the mercies
to come, in the destruction of the Beast, and of the false Prophet, and for
particular benefits which the Church it self was to be partaker of: and
therefore he does call all the servants of the Lord by name as it were, which
did fear the Lord, both small and great to praise the Lord.

Then he shows how this voice was obeyed, in that he says, there was a voice
as of a great multitude, and like the voice of many waters, and like the noise
of a thunder; which signify both the consent and zeal, and earnestness of
the Saints in praising God. Which teaches us, that we are so to believe, and
be assured of Gods promises and mercies to come, as that we do praise him for
them, as for those which we have received, and as if we had received them
already.

The mercies for which they praise God are two, first, the marriage of the
Church to the Lamb, because the Church in this life, being made the Spouse of
Christ, yet separated in part from him, shall at length enjoy and have the full
fruition of Christ, and of his glorious presence.

And also for that she is arrayed with pure fine linen; noting either the
righteousness of Christ wherewith she is clothed, or else that sanctification
which being in part begun in this life in Gods children, shall be perfected in
Gods kingdom when that spiritual marriage of Christ with his Spouse shall be
celebrated.

And further it is showed, that such is the happiness of the Church of God in
this marriage, that not only the Bride and the Bridegroom, shall be partakers
of his happiness (as usually comes to pass in our marriage feasts, the
married persons only, not the guests being counted happy) but also those are
blessed and happy, that are bidden to this feast, for by the Bride, is to be
understood in general, the Church universal, by the persons called, is meant
the particular persons in the Church.

Another cause of thanksgiving for the things to come, is in regard of the
judgment upon the wicked, and the execution thereof. And first he says, to
execute this, he sees Christ coming with his army, he being the chief; for
as the Beast gathers his armies against Christ, so in like manner, he brings
his host against them to destroy them: And he is described by his properties,
namely, first, in that he sits on a white Horse; noting, that he was a
Judge, alluding to the manner of Judges in those times, (as we see in the Book
of Judges) that in token of honor, they did use to ride on white Asses.

The sword which went out of his mouth; signifies, that he would slay them
only by his will.

The Crowns on his head; note that his will should prevail against his
enemies, and that he will have the victory.

His eyes as a flame of fire; signifying his infinite knowledge of all things
that were done, and his piercing sight into all the coasts and secrets of his
enemies, so that they could hide nothing from him. With his feet he should
tread and press down all his enemies in the Vine-presse of Gods wrath.

Then, as by his properties, so also he is described by his nature, in that his
name is called The word of God. By his office, in that he is the King of Kings.

His Garments dipped in blood; noting the sharp revenge he will take upon his
enemies in their destruction.

Further, he is set down by his company and train that followed him, to wit,
the Angels and Saints, who are said to ride also on white Horses, signifying
that they were conquerours over all their enemies by Christ.

An Angel in the Sun; to wit, which was able to order the Sun, by causing
it to give light unto the servants of Christ, and withdrawing the light
thereof, and to deprive the enemies of the use of it, by casting darkness
upon them, so as they could not see one another, much less to fight against
him; which signifies and sets forth the glory and power of Christ, that
seeing one of his Angels was able to do this, how much more wonderful was his
power, both in himself, and in all the rest of his Angels, to destroy those
his enemies?

This Angel makes a proclamation of defiance against them before the battle,
as it is the usual custom in wars: And here he does not, (as in wars
Princes use to do to their foreign enemies) by proclaiming open war
against them, to warn and challenge them unto fight, for he needs not,
neither will he, seeing they are not forreiners, but his subjects, and rebels
against him, being King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: But in stead of sending
embassage or a Herald of Arms unto them, in scorn of them, he makes
proclamation unto the Birds, and bids them come to eat of the flesh of his
enemies. And here he shows the certainty and surety of his victory, in that
before the battle he calls the Birds to devour, as if they were already slain.

Christ being thus described, as he is in himself, and also by his retinue
and attendants, after follows the event and execution of the judgments.

And first, in that it is said, the Beast, and the false Prophet (which went
out from the Beast) were taken; it notes, that Christ as it were in a rage,
seems to lay hold on those his principal enemies, the Beast and the false
Prophet, taking them, in contempt as it were, by the necks, even as a strong
man in his fury, in scorn takes his weak enemy (with whom he disdaineth to
fight) by the Collar of the neck, and casts him away; even so Christ
violently takes them and casts them quick into a Lake of fire and brimstone.

The remnant are slain with the sword; to wit, the Kings and the People,
noting the difference of their judgment, from the judgment of the Beast, and
the Prophet; not that they were not also to be condemned, as well as these, but
it is only to show, that their condemnation should not be so terrible as the
condemnation of the Beast, and the false Prophet: for as it is in earthly
judgments, according to the heinousness and greatness of the fact, such is
the grieuousnesse of the punishment, the more heinous offenders being to be
burnt to death, those that are less grievous offenders, to be slain with the
sword, or with some less violent death: even so it shall be in this judgment
of Christ, the Beast and false Prophet being chief offenders and ringleaders
in this rebellion, shall have a more terrible judgment, and deeper
condemnation.

Which teaches us, that according to the degrees of sin, so shall be the
degrees of punishment to the wicked in hell.

In the midst of the Chapter, there is set down an accident which befell John,
which he here inserteth for the comfort and instruction of Gods Children;
which is, that John, though an excellent man, yet by the glory of the Angel,
and the excellency of the things by him showed, was so amazed and overtaken,
that he fell down to worship the Angel; which shows the great weakness
of men, and their pronenesse to Idolatry, for seeing that John who was so
excellent a servant of God, did thus forget himself, much more others* which
are not endued with such graces. The Angel (as a faithful servant of God)
refuses that honor, and forbids him, saying, that he himself was his
fellow-Seruant, and therefore not to be worshipped. But (says he) worship
God; noting, that all worship belongs to God alone.

Apoc. Cap. 20. 1. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key
of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, etc.
IN this Chapter, there is set forth unto us, two victories that God and our
Savior Christ have against the Dragon, the first and the last. Then is set
forth the latter judgment that shall be in the day of the Lord, the great day,
the day as it were of the great assize. That which is contained in the first
part of the Chapter, is somewhat displaced, belonging to the end of the twelfth
Chapter, but reserved to this place, that there might be a better declaration
of the story of the Dragon. To the better understanding of this, we are to
remember that which was before in the 12. Chapter, where it is said, that the
Dragon persecuted the Woman: which notes (as we have heard) that great
persecution which befell the Church of the Jews, that ancient Church of God.
For when as the Dragon saw that he was cast from heaven, and that the woman had
wings given her to fly from him into the Wilderness, and now he could not
have his will against her; he after that, rages exceedingly against the seed
of the woman, to wit, the Catholic Church of the Gentiles, for the Church of
the Gentiles being begotten by the preaching and doctrine of the Apostles, are
called their seed. And hereupon it is said, that he is feign to be bound, after
that he began thus to rage, which was about six and thirty years after
Christ, being the time that Jerusalem was overthrown, about that time was the
Devil taken, for having pursued the Church of the Jews, and having set
himself fiercely against the Church of the Gentiles, God even then seazes upon
him by an elect Angel; for the good Angels of light are not only so strong as
he by creation, but also by the power of God, commanding them to do it, they
are made able to deal with the Devil, to chain him, and to do with him
whatsoever it pleases the Lord to enjoin them.

It is then said, that this good Angel comes and binds him with a great
chain; to wit, not with a material Chain; for the Devil, being a spirit,
cannot be bound with any such Chain, but speaking to our capacity, he notes
by the Chain, that the Devil was tied strongly and safely. And he is cast
into the bottomless pit; namely, Hell, where the Devil and his Angels shall
be thrown for evermore. And he sealed the door; that is, he made him sure, as
we see in the Scripture, the custom of those times, that when they would
keep any in fast hold, they would set a Seal on the door, that so it might
be seen whether any came to the parties closed up: as namely, when Christ was
buried, the Tomb wherein he lay was sealed up: noting, that he was so surely
sealed, and so fast tied up, as that no strength, power, or policy of his
whatsoever, was able to loose or deliver him. The space he was shut up in
hell, was a thousand years. The reason of his shutting up is, that he should
not devour the Church of the Gentiles, nor have his will in hurting the
nations, which were called to the knowledge of the truth, at that time in the
beginning of the Church: for seeing he began so fiercely to storm and rage,
he would have devoured and consumed the Church, if he had not been
restrained. So that we see in this restraint of his, howsoever he had still
power to do hurt, and to deceive, yet he could not do it in his own person,
and therefore not so dangerously, nor so vehemently, as otherwise he would,
neither yet so craftily, effectually, and mightily as he did before; and yet
notwithstanding he did it as maliciously as then he could, but this was only
by his deputy the Beast. After, it is said, that when those thousand years
are ended, he must be loosed; which howsoever it was a heavy prophecy, and a
great threat of God, and grievous to the Church, that the Devil should be
loosed, yet it is somewhat lessened, in that it is said, it should be but for a
little season.

An effect of this binding and shutting up of Satan, is set down, namely, in
that there were Thrones, that is (as he expounds it afterward) that life, and
that glory which the Children of God had, namely, to live and reign with
Christ, which is not meant of the life to come, but only understood of that
life of God which consists in godliness, righteousness, and true holiness;
of those honors, and that credit which the Children of God should have: who
are described what they are, namely, those that should suffer for the Gospel,
for the witness of Jesus, which had not worshipped the Beast, neither received
the mark of the Beast; to wit, professed service to the Beast, either
publicly or privately, and these are they that lived the life of God. Where
we see that God provided for his Church in the beginning, lest it should be
ouercharged and overthrown at the first: and therefore howsoever they, even
then, by the malice of the Devils substitutes, sustained great troubles and
afflictions, yet God moderates them so, as they might notwithstanding be able
to stand, suffering them to have no greater troubles, then he vouchsafes them
strength, and gives them means of standing, to wit, by withdrawing the power
and force of Satan from pursuing them: for according to their strength, so God
sends trial to his Children.

The rest which were dead in those thousand years, having not the first
resurrection, are said to have fallen, though they were not in so dangerous
days, as afterward ensued when the Devil was loosed: And these are said, that
they shall not live, to wit, unto Christ, to become Christ's, during the
thousand years, until the thousand years were ended, that is, never: for if
they were not Christ's, living holily and uprightly before Christ, in Satan's
binding and imprisonment, which were milder and more easy times; much less
would they be his afterward, to walk faithfully and purely in more dangerous
times of persecution and trouble. And this is said to be the first
resurrection; namely, when men are renewed by the spirit of God, and so walk
in newness and holiness of life, and in a faithful and constant profession
of the truth of God. And those are blessed that have part in the first
resurrection, for they shall be made partakers of the second resurrection, and
the second death shall have nothing to do with them, but they shall be Priests
of God, and of Christ, to offer sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving unto him:
And these shall reign with him a thousand years, that is, for evermore; for
those that once taste of the favor of God, so that they are seasoned with it,
shall never leese it: according as our Savior Christ in the Gospel of Saint
John says, He that drinks of the water of life, shall never thirst again.

After, it is spoken of the Devils loosing, for he should not always be shut
up in the place of condemnation, but being loosed, is suffered to range again,
to do what hurt he could; which notwithstanding God does in great wisdom
and care over his Church, so as howsoever he sends more afflictions to them
by Satan's liberty, then before, yet he will give them greater strength then
before: for as in the thousand years before, God having given his servants
less store of strength, he mittigateth also the means of their tribulations,
by binding the Devil, the chief worker of mischief against them. So now
Satan being let loose, and their troubles thereby augmented, he also
increases grace and strength in them to undergo them.

The effects of Satan's loosing follow; as namely, that he went about every
corner of the earth, to deceive, and to do mischief; according as Saint Peter
says, that Satan goes about like a roaring enemy, seeking whom he may
devour. And he called together, Gog and Magog, and infinite numbers, as many
as the sands of the Sea, which filled the face of the earth, to battle against
the Church of God. Here by Gog and Magog, he alludeth only to a place in
Ezechiel, not interpreting Ezech. 38
it; Gog was a Country in Asia the less, whose first King was called Gog,
whereupon the Country took that name; in heathen writers he is called Giges,
not differing from the letters in Hebrew. Magog was a name given to the
Syrians: both these were near unto the Jews, whose enmity (as Daniel
records) was most vehement against the people of God: whereupon the Jews
called their most bitter and spightfull enemies, by the names of Gog, and
Magog. So that here is not meant (as some do imagine) any particular Country
of Germany, England, etc. saying, that as the Gospel came out of the East into
the West, so it shall return out of the West into the East, and then (say
they) these West Countries falling from the truth, shall set themselves against
the Church, which thing can have no allowance at all from hence: But here only
is meant, those most bitter enemies of the Church, which being stirred up by
Satan, shall come with all might and malice that can be, and shall fight
against the Church, compassing about it to destroy it.

But it is said, the Church shall have victory, and that by Christ, for fire,
that is, the wrath of God, shall come down from heaven and consume them.

After, he says, that the Devil is taken, for having spoken before of the
Whore, of the Beast, and of the false Prophet; he now shows what shall be
done to the Devil, who was last to be destroyed; and it is said, that he was
cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, there to be tormented with the Beast,
and the false Prophet for evermore.

The second part of the Chapter, is of the description of the last judgment:
where first it is said, there was a white Throne; which of what matter it shall
be, no man knows, yet seeing Christ is man as well as God, he shall have no
doubt, a royal and real place, wherein he shall sit most evidently.

His glory is further expressed, in that the heavens and the earth shall fly
away from before his face, and shall pass away, and shall burn with fire. 2
Pet. 3.


Then shall the dead be raised up, and all, both great and small, shall be
summoned before God.

The Books were opened; that is, the Books of every man's conscience shall be
laid open and disclosed; wherein is nothing but guiltiness of conscience to
condemn every one.

Notwithstanding, there is another Book open, which is the Book of life; to
wit, the Book of Predestination, which every one shall be judged by, as he is
elect or reprobate: yet so, as that election and reprobation do not take away
works, for it is said, they shall be justified or condemned according to their
works; for they that are elected to life, are also elected to sanctification;
the reprobate contrariwise.

The just have reward, not for their good works sake, but according to their
good works wrought; and that not before their calling, conversion, and
regeneration, but which afterward were done in faith, and this only for his
own mercy and promise sake in Christ.

The wicked are condemned, according to their works, and for their works
sake, their name being not found in the Book of life.

Lastly, it is said, that death and hell were cast into the lake, that is, were
swallowed up in immortality, there being now no more danger of death and hell.

Apoc. Cap. 21. 1* And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth: for the first
heaven, and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea, etc.
We have heard heretofore of the straits of the Church militant, being in
warfare in this present world, subject to many troubles and persecutions: yet
being defended and protected by God, was not overcome by any of them. Now
follows the state of the Church triumphant after this world.

And first, here Saint John sets forth the state of all the world, then of the
Church: Even as Moses in the Book of Genesis describes first the beginning and
creation of the whole world, and then sets down the condition and state of the
Church.

The state of the world is declared in the first verse, in that it is said,
there was a new heaven and a new earth; that is, the heavens being partly
corrupted and darkened by sin, and having lost somewhat of their glory they
had before, shall not only have that former, but a better glory then the
first: so likewise should the earth, and the sea also; for in that it is said,
the Sea shall be no more, it is not to be understood, that it should not
afterward be, but that it should not then be the same that now it is; namely,
raging, tempestuous, and disturbed, as now we see it to be; but it should be
still and quiet, the waters and the fishes remaining still, yet without
roaring, swelling, and that distemperature which now it has.

As for the Church, it is described generally in the first seven Verses;
particularly in the rest of the Chapter; as also in some of the next.

In general, he compares the Church to a brave Spouse, prepared and trimmed
for a King; Christ being her Husband, signifying the glory and beauty of the
Church of God: for as in the days of the solemnizing of marriage, Brides use
to go beyond their ordinary custom and kind of apparel, so the Church is
now decked and beautified with full and perfect glory.

Secondly, it is compared to a City coming down from heaven, that is, a
beautiful City, having all her honor, glory, and good frame of building, not
from her self, but from God: not as the Cities which are builded by men, but
as one that is builded by God himself: for as earthly Cities builded by men,
receive their title from them; so this City being built by God, has her name
also from God: Neither is here meant ( in that it comes down from heaven) that
it should be in earth, but only that it is altogether heavenly.

Afterward, the state and blessedness of it is set forth, in that God shall
dwell in it continually, as the Scripture testifies, that he shall more fully
remain and dwell with them then before: for as it is said in the Scripture,
that in this life he will Dine and Sup with them, so now it is said, he shall
abide with them for evermore.

Then is set forth what they shall have by the dwelling of God with them;
namely, all happiness; first, in that they shall drink of the Well of life;
that is, should receive all pleasure, and al comfortable, good, and desirable
things. Secondly, God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; that is, all
things naught, grievous, corrupt, and painful, shall be taken from them.

And albeit to flesh and blood this may seem a strange thing, and altogether
impossible and incredible, in regard of these miseries we now are in, and of
our sinfulness and wretchedness, yet to take away that infidelity of ours, it
is said, that God himself speaks it, and bids John write, that all things
shall be new; for he will make all things new, howsoever now they be
troublesome and old.

And in that he bids John, for the further comfort of the Church of God, to
write, that all old things are done, and that new things are come, and in that
he says, that to him that thirsts, he will give of the water of life, and
that he which overcomes, shall inherit all things; yet he so says it, that
none shall have it without holiness of life; for as for those that were
fearful, unbelieving, abominable adulterers, idolaters, etc. they should be
cast out of the Kingdom. And therefore he teaches, that none should presume
of this mercy of God which live wickedly and profanely, but those only
should enjoy it, which should live holily and uprightly.

More particularly, he describes the Church in the ninth Verse, where first
having noted it in general (as before) that it shall be as a Spouse, and as a
City: he secondly in particular, pursues the City more at large.

And first he sets down the situation of this City (it being a notable
commendation for a City to be well situated) and this City he says, is situate
upon an hill; that is, both in a fair and pleasant, as also in a strong place,
according as Cities so situate use to be, noting hereby, the excellent
situation of it, both in regard of the pleasantness, as also of the strength
of it.

Then he describes it first in the essential parts of it, and then by the
properties and qualities, the privileges, and good things, belonging thereunto.

For the essential parts of them, he mentions to be, the Walls, the Gates, the
Streets, the foundations of the City, and of the Wall.

And of them he sets forth the matter. form.

The matter is said to be gold, precious stones, etc. to wit, the most precious
things that can be.

The form, that they are most glittering, beautiful, shining, christall-like,
and lastly in most excellent order.

In the matter of the Church, there are set down the Children of God
particularly, for as in general the Church is set down by a City, so by these
particulars, are meant the Children of God particularly, they being called in
the Scriptures, the stones of Gods house, and of Gods City. By these earthly
things, (according to our weak capacity, by reason of our ignorance) he sets
down their excellency, that by these things that are better known unto us,
we may as by steares come to the view of the heavenly glory, and therefore by
these matters which are most excellent on earth, he sets forth that
heavenly beauty.

The form of the City, is foure-square; noting, a most excellent form: To the
measuring whereof, the Angel is said to have a golden Reed; where he takes a
similitude from cunning Artificers, who to lay every part even, have their
lines and squares, signifying, that here every thing is in perfect order.

In that the measure is said to be the measure of a man, that is, of an Angel,
it means that it was the measure of this Angel that appeared to John in
likeness of a man.

It had twelve Gates, and on the Gates the names of the twelve Tribes of the
children of Israel written: By the twelve Tribes, are understood all the
Children of God, which are the Israel of God, the seed of Abraham according to
the spirit.

Their names written on the Gates, which are on every side of the City; do
note thus much, namely, that as a City has Gates on every side, to the end,
that people may have recourse unto it, from all coasts round about, so the
Church of God is said to have twelve Gates round about, with the names of the
twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel in them, to signify that all the
Children of God should come unto it, out of every part of the world.

Having spoken of the City, and of the particular parts thereof, he comes to
speak of the privileges, and first he says, they have no need of any Temple,
for God shall be their Temple; that is, God shall be all in all in the Church,
without means of the outward exercises of religion, as of the Sacraments, the
Ministry of the word.

Secondly, there is no need of the Sun and of the Moon, because the glory
of God shall give it light; in regard whereof, the Sun shall have no light,
in regard of that light, nor any other light; for God being infinitely more
light, shall inlighten them. Hereby signifying both by the Sun and the
Temple, that both ciuilly and ecclesiastically God should be all in all,
without any outward means of government.

The glory and honor of the Nations shall be brought unto it; that is, they
shall have glory and joy, in regard of the Nations coming thither, to wit,
they should not only have joy* in Gods presence, which was principal, but
also in regard of the presence one of another, in that the people of God in all
Nations shall come thither.

The Gates shall not be shut in the day, for night there is none: In that there
is no night, he means that there is no alteration of joy, but there is light
altogether.

In that there is continual day; he notes that there is all comfort for
evermore, for the day is comfortable.

Again, the Gates not shut; signifying, that there should be no fear of
danger now, nor terror of enemies, but all peace, safety, and security.

Lastly, it is said, no unclean thing shall be there; that is, holiness
only, and those things that are holy shall be there perpetually, because those
only that are written in the Book of life should be there.

Apoc. Cap. 22. 1. And he showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of GOD, and of the Lamb, etc.
IN this Chapter are set forth to us, first the residue of the effects of Gods
presence, and of the presence of our Savior Christ toward the Church in the
world to come, partly set forth in the former, partly in the beginning of this
Chapter, containing the comforts they should receive thereby, to wit, that they
should be thoroughly and perfectly blessed, not only with necessary things, but
with all manner of delights and pleasure, and with much glory and honor.

And first it is said, there was a River which ran throughout the midst of
it; signifying first the pleasantness of the City: for as that City is notably
situated which stands so as that it has a River running through it, to carry
away the filthiness and uncleanness from it, so this City is so placed, as
that it is void of all noysomnesse and uncleanness. And also it is said to
have a River going through it, in regard of those Countries which used to
drink of the water of the River; which if it were near, was an excellent
commodity, which notwithstanding, was often times far off from the City; but
here it is not so, for this River is near at hand, being a river of fresh
water; yea, of water of life: and they need not to go out of the City to
fetch it; as did the Samaritan Woman, it being even at the doors.

In the mids of the Street, and on both sides of the River, was the tree of
life; which signifies our Savior Christ, who is called the Tree of life, in
regard of those most excellent and lively graces, which as most comfortable
fruits, he brings forth, and ministers unto his Church. And as by the River
was set down their drinks, so also by the Tree of life, is expressed their
meat; not that there shall be in the Kingdom of heaven any corporal meat or
drink, but only noting a sufficiency and fullness of all good things, which
there Gods Children should have. In that the Tree of life brings forth fruit
every month, ( to wit, twelve times in the year) and it brings forth also
several kinds of fruit, it notes all measure and kinds of delight, being
not only plentiful, but also full of all variety. Even as men use to do,
which making a feast, will not content themselves with one sort of meat, but
will labor to have what variety they can, of most dainty meats, that it may
bring more delight unto the guests: so here it is noted, that in Christ there
should be all sufficiency and variety of pleasures and delights. Saint John
here chooses to set forth the joys of heaven by fruits, rather then by Oxen
and Fatlings, (as our Savior Christ expresses it Matthew 22.) because our
Savior has regard to usual marriages of Kings and Princes, who use against
their Marriage-feasts, to kill great store of Beeues and such like provision:
the holy Ghost here in this place, has relation to that first kind of living
in the beginning, in man's innocence, when he only lived of the fruits of the
earth,

The leaves of it are to heal the sores: signifying, that there could be no
sickness there, seeing they had health at their doors, and that of the same
tree whereof they had their meat.

They had no need of light; because God himself and Christ, was their light;
which does add to that felicity: for as darkness in hell aggrauates the
misery of the wicked; so contrariwise, the fullness of light the godly shall
have, does augment their happiness, and more, in that that light shall exceed
the light of the Sun.

And further, to shut up their joy, he says, one singular and notable comfort
and felicity to Gods Children, is to serve and worship God, for howsoever now,
by reason of our corrupt nature, it seems a burden and a trouble to worship
God, yet then it shall be one of our chiefest joys.

They stand in Gods presence; that is, have most excellent privileges of Gods
savor, and be principal servants unto God, as those are in most honor with
Princes, which are said to stand in their presence, and attend upon them in
their Courts. As Daniel is said to stand in the presence of the King: so these
shall stand in the Courts of God, and have the full fruition of his comfortable
presence; and therefore on the contrary side, the ungodly are herein accursed
(2. Thessalonians. 1. 9) in that they are shut from the presence of God, to
wit, his gracious presence, for otherwise, all things whatsoever are in his
presence.

Lastly, they shall reign and rule for evermore, being joined with Christ, the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Thus much of their comforts in the Kingdom of God: Now follows the close of
the Book, to give more credit to it, and to stir up others to look more
diligently into it, and to regard to meditate, and practice it more carefully.

Here then is set down first the testimony of the Angel; then of John;
lastly, of Christ himself.

Of the Angel, who says, that all these things are faithful and true: which
he proves by the efficient cause, which is God, by the instrument to deliver
it to John, which was himself, being sent of God, and by the time, which is,
that they shall shortly come to pass. And therefore heaven and earth shall
sooner pass, then one of these shall fall to the ground.

By the testimony of John, which says, that it was he which saw and heard
these things; and therefore could testify of them: whereupon he takes
occasion to repeat his former fall, for says he, such were the strangeness of
these things, that when I saw them, I fell down and worshipped the Angel;
where he confesses his grievous fault in worshipping the creature in stead of
the Creator, for which, he is reprehended of the Angel, for drawing this
vision to a wrong end, and making a contrary use of the same, namely by
worshipping him which was a Minister of God, to wit, an Angel, who was his
fellow Servant, and therefore not to be worshipped, and having reprehended him
for the abuse, he teaches him the right use and end of the same; namely,
first, that he should hereby be stirred up to worship God: and secondly, to
manifest and testify it to others: And therefore he bids him not to seal
the words of this Prophecy; noting, that he should show and manifest it to
the Church of God: To the end, that first they might keep and practice the
things therein contained.

Secondly, that they might understand the certainty of the things therein
contained: wherein he meets with an objection that might be made. For (might
some say) if they must come certainly, why then should men trouble themselves
about it, in studying for the knowledge of the understanding of that Book,
especially seeing it is so hard and darkely spoken? and that many would abuse
the things of this Prophecy, and wrest them to another end then the Apostle
meant them, being given in a style so unwonted; as Peter 2. Paul's sayings are
said to be hard. But the Angel answers, that it must not be sealed up, but
published. And howsoever it may be, some may take occasion to be wicked and
careless by it, yet Saint John says, it makes no matter for that, for though
the wicked stumble at it, yet it is given for the comfort of the righteous, and
for the Children of Gods sake, and they shall profit, and be bettered by it,
and made more just, by taking heed of these judgments herein contained. And
for the wicked, he said, if any will be evil, let him be evil still. And
last of all, he says, that though it should not make either for the
furthering of the wicked in their wickedness, or to further the godly in their
godliness; yet it is to be left unsealed for the glory of God, to manifest him
to be true, and his word true, when all these things shall come to pass.

Then is Christ himself brought in, speaking, saying, Behold, I come quickly,
etc. In which words of our Savior, he confirms also to us the truth of this
Prophecy, and the testimony of the Angel, his titles whereby he is
described, are spoken of before.

Lastly, he shuts up the Book with an execration against the wicked, and a
promise of blessing toward the godly: And because John was the last writer of
the Scriptures and word of God, it may well be referred unto the whole new
Testament, and the old. And he says: Whosoever does add or take away, let
him be accursed. For Saint John, seeing wicked men labor to corrupt the
writings of the Apostles, and holy men of God, by adding, detracting, and
changing, as is the common practice in other writings of men of fame, he does
therefore meet with that corruption, and adds this curse unto them, that
either add any thing unto it, or diminish any thing here-from. But some will
object, seeing Gods word cannot be corrupted, wherefore then does he go about
to forbid the corrupting of it?

It is answered, howsoever the word of God cannot in any point be corrupted,
yet God would also have the means used whereby he would have the same
preserved, by setting down the threatenings of curse to the corrupters of it,
and promises of blessing to the keepers and preseruers of it.

FINIS.

