A SERMON PREACHED BEfore His Majesty at White Hall, On Tuesday the 25. of
December being Christmas day,

By the Bishop of Elie His Majesty's Almoner. ANNO 1610.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

A SERMON PREACHED BEfore His Majesty at Whitehall, on Christmas day last, etc.
LVKE 2. verse. 10.11. The Angel said unto them: Be not afraid, for behold, I
bring you good tidings, of great joy, which shall be to all people.

That, there is borne, unto you, this day, a Savior, which is Christ, the
Lord, in the City of David.


THere is a Word in this Text, and it is Hodie, by virtue whereof, this day may
seem to challenge a special property in this Text, and this Text in this day.
Christ was borne, is true any day: but, this day Christ was borne, never, but
to day only. For, of no day in the year can it be said, Hodie natus, but of
this. By which word, the Holy Ghost may seem to have marked it out, and made
it the peculiar Text of the day.

Then, it will not be amiss, Hebr. 3.13.
Donec cognominatur hodie, (as the Apostle speaks) while it is called, to
Day, to hear it. To morrow the word Hodie will be lost: This day, and not any
day else, it is in season. Let us then hear it this Day, which, we can hear
no day besides.

IT is then The first report, the very first news, that came (as this day) o^
that, which makes this day, so high a Feast; The Birth of CHRIST.

1 Dixit Angelus.
It came by an Angel; then: No man was meet to be the messenger of it. And look
how it came then, so it should come still; and none but an Angel bring it: as,
more fit for the tongues of Angels, then of men. Yet since, God has allowed
sinful men, to be the Reporter of it at the second hand; and the news, neue^
the worse for that: Good news is good new^^ and welcome, by any, though the
person be but even a foul Leper that brings it. 2. Reg. 7.9.
Yet, that the meannesse of the messenger offend us not, ever we are to
remember this; Be the party who he will, that brings it, the news of Christ
Birth, is a message (...) a^ Ang^^*

2 Dixit illis.
This had been news, for the best Prince (...) the Earth. That these Illis
^ere, these pa^ties, were Shepherds, that this Message came to them, needs
not seem strange: It found none else (at the time) to come to: The Angel was
glad to find any to tell it to; even to tell it the first he could meet
withal: None were then awake, none in case to receive it, but a sort of poor
shepherds; and to them he told it.

Yet, it fell not out amiss, that shepherds they were; the news fitted them
well: It well agreed, to tell shepherds of the yeaning of a strange Lamb: such
a Lamb, as should take away the sins of the world: such a Lamb, Ioh. 1.29
as they might send to the Ruler of the world for a present. Mitte Agnum
Dominatoriterrae: Esays Lamb. Esaias 16.1
Or (if ye will) to tell shepherds of the birth of a Shepherd, Ezekiels
Shepherd: Eze. 34.23
Ecce suscitabo vobis Pastorem; Behold, I will raise you a Shepherd: the 1.
Pet. 5.4.
chief shepherd, the Heb. 13.20.
great shepherd, and the Ioh. 10.11
good shepherd that gave his life for his flock. And so, it was not unfit
news, for the Persons to whom it came.

3 Dixit, Euangelizo.
For the Manner: the Angel delivers it Euangelizando, Churchwise, (and that was
a sign, this place (...) exchange for this new (...) Churchwise (I say) for
he does it by a Sermon, here at this verse: and then, by a Hymn or Antheme
after, at the 14. verse. A Sermon: the Angel himself ^^lles it so, Euangelizo
vobis, I come to Euangelize, to preach you a Gospel: that first. And presently
after he had done his Sermon, there is the Hymn, Gloria in excelsis, taken up
by the Queere of heaven. An Angel makes the one: A multitude of Angels sing the
other. The whole Service of this day, the Sermon, the Antheme, by Angels all.

4 Euangelizo gaudium magnum.
Now the End of both Sermon and Antheme, and of the Angels, in publishing it,
and of the shepherds, and us, in hearing it, is gaudium, loy, for the Benefit,
and Honor; gaudium magnum great Joy, for the great Benefit, and great Honor,
vouchsafed our nature, and us, this day* Joy, is in the Text, and if joy be in
the Time, it is no harm: We keep the Text, if we hold the Time with joy, For
so the Angel does warra^^ us to hold it.

The division.
Of this Angelical, or Evangelical message or (as not I, but the Angel calls
it) Sermon these two verses I have read, are a part. Whereof, Ecce, exciting
them (...) hear it, by magnifying (...) ^^ssage, as we^^ worth their hearing.
Be not afraid, (...) I bring you good Tidings, of great Joy, which sh^^^ be,
to all people. The latter, is the very message (...) self, That, there is
borne, unto you, this day, a Savior, which is Christ, the Lord, in the City of
David.

In the former, are these points. 1. Fear not, ill news, I bring you.) 2.
Nay, it is good news. 3. Good, for it is news of Joy. 4. Joy, and that no
ordinary, but great Joy. 5. Not to some few, but to the whole people. 6. And
not toti populo to all one people, but omni populo, to all people whatsoever.
7. And them, not for the present, but Quod erit omni populo, that is, and so
shall be, to all, as long as there shall be any people, upon earth.
And, by virtue of this [Quod erit,] ^o^s, here, this day. Ecce, Behold, such
is the news I bring.

2 The Message it self.
In the latter, the message it self. The sum whereof is, the Birth of a
Child, A Child is borne. Three things are proposed of Him. 1. This Child is
a Savior. 2. A Savior which is Christ, 3. Christ the Lord, Christus Dominus.
1 The names.

For euerv Savior is not Christ, nor every Christ, Christus Dominus, Christ
the Lord, or the Lord Christ. He, is all three.

2 The Circumstances
Then have we besides, three circumstances, of the Persons, Time, and Place. 1.
The Persons for whom all this is: twice repeated; 1 The Persons.
Euangelizo vobis in the first verse, Natus vobis in the second. But this, I
make some doubt of; whether it be a circumstance or no; I rather hold it a
principal part of the Substance, as, the very word of conueyance, whereby it
passes to us. And sure, there is no Joy either in Euangelizo, the Message: or
Natus, the Birth, without it, without Vobis. But, if the Message, and the Birth
it self both, be ours; then it is gaudium magnum indeed. Specially, 2 The Time.
if we add 2. the Time when, not many days hence, but even this very day. And
3. the Place where, 3 The Place.
that it is in no remote Region far hence, but in the City of David, even
here hard by.

And then lastly in a word; what our parts are to perform, 3 Our duty
reciprocal.
to these two parts, this days Message, and this days Birth of our Savior,
Christ, the Lord.

Be not afraid.
They were afraid.
Here is a stop, that the Message cannot proceed: For the sight of the
Messenger, has almost marred the hearing of the Message. The parties, to whom
it comes, be in such fear, as they be not in case to receive it. They were
afraid, and that sore afraid (as is said in the verse before) at the sight of
the Angel, that came with the news.

So were others.
And this was not the case of these poor men only; others, and other manner of
people were so, as well as they. This Gospel of S. Luke is scarce begun; we
are yet but a little way in the second Chapter; and we have already, three
Noli timere's in it: and all, as here, at the coming of an Angel. Fear not
Zachary, afraid. Fear not Mary, afraid. And now, Fear not these here. That
it seems to be general, fear, at an Angels appearing.

What was it? It was not the fear of an evil Conscience: They were about no
harm. Of what not.
Zachary was at Church at his Office: The blessed Virgin (I doubt not)
blessedly employed: These here, doing their duty; watching over their flocks
by night: yet feared all. Of what
What should the matter be? It is a plain sign, our nature is fallen from her
original: Heaven, and we, are not in the terms we should be: not the best of
us all.

Why of the Angel.
Angels are the Messengers of Heaven: Messengers ever come with tidings; but
whether good or bad, we cannot tell. Here comes an Angel with news from
Heaven: what news he brings, we know not, and therefore we fear, because we
know not. Which shows, all is not well between Heaven and us; that upon every
coming of an Angel, we promise our selves no better news from thence; but
still are afraid of the messages and messengers that come from that place.

Be not afraid.
That the message then may proceed, this fear must be removed. In a troubled
water, no face will well be seen: nor by a troubled mind, no message received,
till it be settled. To settle them then for it; no other way, no other word to
begin with, but Nolite timere, fear not, and that is ever the Angels
beginning. Such is our infirmity, ever he must begin with these two words,
Noli timere, fear not, and so he does seven times in this Gospel.

1 For no ill tidings.
But fear will not be cast out with a couple of words, till they see some
reason to quiet them. And no better reason, then to show, they have no reason
to fear: for fear is the expectation of evil, and there is no evil toward
them: and so they have no reason to fear; quod trepidauerunt timore vbi non
erat timor, Psalm. 53.5.
As if he should say; Angels have come with weeping news, as Iud. 2.5. If I
were such an one, if I came with sad tidings, ye had reason, ye might fear.
But now, your terror grows out of error. You are mistaken in me, I am no
such Angel; I am Angelus Euangelizans, an Angel with a Gospel, one that comes
with no bad news. Fear not then. There is no evil toward.

2. But good tidings.
No evil: and that were enough for fear not. But here is a further matter, not
only privative, I bring no ill, but positue, I bring you good news. And good
news is Nolite timere, and somewhat besides, (that is) Fear not, but, Be of
good cheer. They be two degrees plainly, though one be inferred of the other.
Fear no ill, there is none to fear; there is no ill, nay there is good
toward. For good news is good; in that, it represents the good it self to
us, before it come. It is but words: true. But such words made Jacob revive
again, Genesis 45.17.
when he was more then half dead, even the good news of Joseph's welfare. If
I might but hear good tidings (says David when his bones were broken) it
would make me well again: Psalm. 51.8.
That, Pro. 13.17.
Solomon said well, A good messenger is a good medicine.

Specially this here, which is so good, as it carries away the name from the
rest, to be called the Gospel, or, the glad tidings, as if none so glad, nay
none glad at all without it: It is (says the Apostle) odor suauitatis, 2. Cor.
2.15. Prou. 16.24.
a comfortable sweet savor. It is (says the wise man) dulcedo animae and
sanitas ossium, the sweetness of the soul, the very health of the bones. It
is such (says the Prophet) as the lips are precious, Esaias 51 7.
and the feet beautiful, of them that bring it, that a Savior is borne, Col.
1.20.
as by whom, things in heaven and things in earth, men and Angel (which were in
fear one of another) are set at peace, 1. John 14.18.
and love: and Love casts out fear, gives the true Noli timere.

3 Tidings of joy.
Good news of joy: For, of good news, there are more sorts then one. Good
news it had been, if it had been but, Euangelizo vobis spem. News of good
hope: that had been vnough, for nolite timere. This is more, it is of joy. I
wot well, Romans 12.12. ioh. 16.24. gal. 4.4.
there is a Joy in hope, spe gaudentes, says the Apostle: But that joy is not
full, till the fullness of time come. Nor it is not perfect, for it is allayed
somewhat, with an unpleasing mixture, which is spes differtur, and that (as the
wise man says) affligit animam Hope deferred afflicts the soul. Prou. 13.12.
Gaudium spei is nothing to gaudium rei: the hope defuturo, of a thing to come
hereafter, nothing to the actual fruition, of a thing present.

And indeed, till this days news, it was ever Euangelium spei: ever, in the
future tense, before. Even the very last before this, to the blessed Virgin
Ecce concipies, Thou shall conceive, Luke 1.31
shall. So it was yet to come. This, the first in the present tense, Not is to
be borne, is to be sent, is to come, but, Natus est, Missus est, Venit, is
borne, is sent, is come. Hodie, even to day, takes no time. In the City of
David, not far hence, but even hard by. This is Euangelizo gaudium: This is
joy indeed.

4 Of great joy.
But even in Joy, there be diverse degrees: All are not of one size: Some there
are lesser; some (as this here) gaudium magnum. The fire is, as the suell is;
and the Joy is, as the matter is. There is not like joy to a shepherd, when
his Ewe brings him a lamb, as when his wife brings him a son; (yet that of a
lamb, is a Joy, such as it is:) But then if that son should prove to be
Princeps Pastorum, the chief shepherd in all the land, that were somewhat
more: But then, if he should prove to be a Cyrus or a David, a Prince, then
certeinely it were another manner joy, gaudium magnum indeed. As the matter is,
so is the Joy. If great the Benefit, great the Person, then great the Joy. And
here the Benefit is great, none greater, as much as the saving of us all, as
much as all our lives and souls are worth; therefore great. And the Person
great, none so great, (it is the LORD himself) therefore primae magnitudinis,
great even as He is. Indeed so great it is, that the Prophet bids us plainly,
remember no more former things, Esaias 45.18
nor regard matters of old: This passes them all, the joy of it puts them all
down: so that none of them shall once be mentioned with it. Therefore well
said the Angel, Euangelizo gaudium magnum.

5 Joy to the people.
And great, it may be intensiue, in the parties themselves: yet not great
extensiue, nor extend it self to many, not be gaudium magnum populo. Yes, even
that way also it is great; it is public joy, it is joy to the people. And,
well fare that Joy where it is merry with all. It is added purposely, this,
that they might not mistake, when he said, Euangelizo vobis, he brought them
good news; That though he brought it them, yet not them only, it was not
appropriate to them, it was common to others: They had their parts in it, but
so should others have no less then they. And every good Shepherd, will like
it the better for that, will be progrege, and still prefer the joy of the
whole flock.

In other joys, it falls out as Esaias tells, Multiply the Nation, and ye
shall not increase their joy: Esaias 9.3.
for, that which one winnes, another looses: But, this Joy, the Joy of Puer
natus est nobis, in it, they shall all rejoice before thee as men make merry in
harvest, and be joyful as men that divide the spoil. In Harvest, And a good
Harvest all the Country is the better for. At a spoil, wherein every one has
his share. That is gaudium populi, And such is this. Well figured in the place
of his Birth; an Inn, which is domus populi, open to all passengers that will
take it up; Iuris publici, wherein every one has right. Yea, and the most
common part of the Inn. For, though they sort themselves, and have every one
their several Chambers: in the stable all have interest, that is common. And
as the place public, Luke 2.7
so is the Benefit, and so is the Joy public of his Birth: Christmas joy
right, All fare the better for this day. Salus populi is the best, and so is
gaudium populi too, and every good mind, will like it so much the better, that
All the people have their part in it.

6 Joy to all people.
And this were much, toti populo, to a whole people, if it were but one: But it
is omni populo (say Theophylact and Beda) that is to All people, which is a
larger extent by far. And if ye speak of great joy, this is great indeed,
for it is universal, it is as great as the world is great: when not the Jew
only but the Gentile, nor the Gentile but the Jew, not one people but All, keep
a feast. And at this word, omni populo, nec v^x hominem sonat, It is not man
that speaks now, whose goodness commonly, when it is at the greatest,
extends no further, but to one Nation: But with God, it is never great, till
it come to omni populo. It is but a small thing (says He by Esaias) to raise
the Tribes of Jacob, Esaias 49.6
or to restore the decays of Israel: I will give thee a Light to the Gentiles,
and a Salvation to the end of the world.

As we said of the June, even now, the place of his Birth: So say we here, of
the time of it. It is well set down by S. Luke, Luke 1.1
to have been at the Description of the whole world, for that was a meet time
for the Savior of the whole world to be borne: Psalm. 110.3
The dew of whose Birth is of the womb of the morning, (the Psalmist in
passion of joy misplacing his words,) the meaning is, his birth from the womb,
is as the morning dew, which waters and refreshes the face of the whole
earth: Not Gedeons fleece alone, Judge. 6.37.
but the whole earth; Not one part, not the Jews only: No partition now, but
Ephesians. 2.14.
vtraque vnum one of two: nay, one of all: 1.10.
all recapitulate in himself, and from him as a Center, lines of joy drawn to
all, and every part of the Circle.

And we may not pass by Quod erit, which shall be; which not only is, but
shall be. 7. To all people that shall be.
For by this word, We hold; It is our best tenure. Not only to All that then
were, (then had we been out) but that were, or ever should be, to the worlds
end. Omni populo, all people, is the latitude or extent: Quod erit, that shall
be, is the longitude or continuance of the joy, Quod erit, that it shall be a
feast of joy, so long as any people shall be, to hold a feast on the face of
the earth. In a word, That same Euangelium aeternum, that S. John saw in the
Angels hand, we now, Apoc. 14.6.
hear from the Angels mouth, to be preached to every Nation, kindred, tongue
and people, that be, or shall be, while the world endures.

2 Joy that shall be.
So, if we read Quod erit, with omni populo. But some read gaudium with quod
erit, gaudium quod erit, and make a note of that, The joy, quod erit, that is
and shall be. For commonly, all our earthly joy, is gaudium quod est, and non
erit, that is, for the present, but continues not; is, but shall not be,
Eccle. 7.8.
like the blaze of a brush fag got, all of a flame and out again suddenly, in
a moment. Gaudium quod erit, the joy that so is, as it shall be still, is
grounded upon the joy of this Day, Christ and his Birth. Without which, our
joy, is as the joy of men in prison, metrie for a while, but within a while
sentence of death to pass upon them. Prou. 14.13.
Without which, extrema gaudij luctus occupat, the end of all our mirth, will
be but mourning. All joy else is, but shall not be within a while: At leastwise
erit, quando non erit. Ioh. 16.22.
A time shall be, when it shall not be; Sed gaudium meum, nemo tollet a vobis; But
my joy, mine, grounded on me, none shall ever take from you; not sickness,
not death it self. Others it shall, this it shall not; but, now ye shall this
Day, and evermore ye shall rejoice in the holy comfort of it.

And this is the magnifying of the message. 1. No evil news, Fear not, 2.
Nay good, Be of good cheer. 3. Good news of joy. 4. Of great joy. 5. Public
joy, toti populo. 6 Universal joy omni populo. 7. Joy to all, that are or
shall be;
And again joy, which now is, and shall be so for ever.

Now, upon all these he sets an Ecce, and well he may; And, that is never
set by the Holy Ghost, but super res magnae entitatis, upon matters of great
moment. But upon this Hill, upon the top of it, that has so many ascent's, a
Beacon would do well. For look how many Ecce's in the Scriptures, so many
Beacons; And between them, as between these, ye shall observe a good
correspondence still. This Ecce here to the last Cap. 1.31.
Ecce concipies of the Blessed Virgin, That to Esay's Esaias 7.14.
Ecce concipiet Virgo, That to Dauid's Psalm. 132.11.
Ecce de fructu ventris tui, That to Abraham's Genesis 22.18.
Ecce in semine tuo; and so up, till ye come to 3.15.
Semen mulieris: There they first begin, and take light one from an other, till
they come to this Ecce natus est hodie, the Ecce of all Ecce's the last and
highest of them all. And as a Beacon serves to call and stir up men to have
regard: so is this here to excite them (and in them, us all) with good
attention to hear, and to heed these so great good tidings. And indeed, who is
not excited with it? whose eye is not turned to behold this Ecce? whose ear
stands not attent, to hear this Euangelizo? whose heart does not muse,
Chap. 1.29
what manner of message this should be?

2 That there is borne.
THis it is then, Quod natus est. The birth of a Child: that there is one borne
this Day, the cause of all this joy.

There is joy at every birth. Sorrow in the travail (says our Savior) but
after the delivery the anguish is no more remembered, for joy that a man is
borne into the world.

But the greater he is that is borne, and the more beneficial his birth, the
greater ado is made. And among men, because there are none greater then
Princes, and great things are looked for at their hands, their birth's are ever
used to be kept with great triumph. Gene. 40.20. Mar. 6.21.
Pharaos in the Old, Herod's in the New, both their Natus est's, days of
feasting.

Now of him that is borne here, Matthew. 12.24.
it may truly be said, Ecce mayor hic. Behold a greater is borne here. One
whose birth is good news, even from the poorest shepherd, to the richest
Prince upon the earth.

Who is it? Three things are said of this child by the Angel. 1. He is a
Savior. 2. Which is Christ. 3. Christ the Lord.
Three of his Titles; well and orderly inferred one of another by good
consequence. We cannot miss one of them, they be necessary all. Our method on
earth is to begin with great: In heaven they begin with the good first.

A Savior.
First then a Savior, that is his name: Jesus, Soter; and in that name his
benefit, Salus, Saving health or Salvation. Such a name as the great Orator
himself says of it, Soter, In Ver. 4.
Hoc quantum est? Ita magnum est, vt latino vno verbo exprimi non possit. This
name Savior is so great, as no one word can express the force of it.

But we are not so much to regard the Ecce, how great it is, as Gaudium, what
joy is in it; that is the point we are to speak to. And for that; men may
talk what they will, but sure there is no joy in the world to the joy of a man
saved: no joy so great, no news so welcome, as to one ready to perish, in case
of a lost man, to hear of one, that will save him. In danger of perishing, by
sickness, to hear of one will make him well again: By sentence of the Law,
of one with a pardon to save his life: By enemies, of one that will rescue, and
set him in safety. Tell any of these, assure them but of a Savior, it is the
best news he ever heard in his life. There is joy in the name of a Savior.
And even this way, this child is a Savior too. Potest hoc facere, sed hoc non
est opus eius. This he can do, but this is not his work: a further matter
there is, a greater salvation He came for. And it may be, we need not any of
these, we are not presently sick, in no fear of the Law, in no danger of
enemies. And it may be, if we were, we fancy to our selves to be relieved
some other way. But, that which he came for, that saving we need all, and
none but He can help us to it. We have therefore all cause to be glad for
the birth of this Savior.

I know not how, but when we hear of saving, or mention of a Savior,
presently our mind is carried to the saving of our skin, of our temporal
state, of our bodily life, and further saving we think not of. But, there is
another life, not to be forgotten, and greater the dangers; and the
destruction there, more to be feared then of this here, and it would be well,
sometimes we were remembered of it. Besides our skin and flesh; a soul we
have, and it is our better part by far, that also has need of a Savior,
that has her destruction, out of which: that has her destroyer, from which
she would be saved, and those would be thought on. Indeed our chief thought
and care would be for that, how to escape the wrath, how to be saved from the
destruction to come, whither our sins will certainly bring us.

Sin it is, will destroy us all. And (to speak of a Savior) there is no
person on earth has so much need of a Savior, as has a sinner: nothing so
dangerous, so deadly unto us, as is the sin in our bosom, nothing from which
we have so much need to be saved, whatsoever account we make of it. From it,
comes upon us all the evil of this life: and from it, all the evil of the
life to come; in comparison whereof, these here are not worth the speaking of.
Above all then, we need a Savior; for our souls; and from our sins, and
from the everlasting destruction, which sin will bring upon us in the other
life, not far from us, not from him of us, that thinks it farthest of.

Then, if it be good tidings to hear of a Savior, where it is but a matter
of the loss of earth, or of this life here: how then, when it comes to the
loss of Heaven; to the danger of Hell, when our soul is at the stake, and the
well doing or undoing of it for ever? He that could save our souls, from that
destroyer, were not the birth of such a one good news trow? Is not such a
Savior worth the hearkening after? Is he not? It is then because we have not
that sense of our souls, and the dangers of them that we have of our bodies:
nor that fear of our ghostly enemies, nor that lively apprehension of the
eternal torments of that place, and how near we are to it, (nothing being
betwixt us and it, but this poor puff of breath which is in our nostrils:)
Our carnal part is quick and sensible, our spiritual is dead and dull. We
have not the feeling of our sins, that we have of our sickness: if we
had, we would hear this news with greater cheerfulness, and hold this day
of the birth of such a Savior, with joy indeed. We cannot conceive it yet,
this destruction is not near enough to affect us. But in nouissimo
intelligetis plane, Ier. 30.24.
in the end when the destroyer shall come, and we shall find the want of a
Savior, we shall plainly understand this, and value this benefit, and the joy
of it as we ought, and find there is no joy in the earth to the joy of a
Savior.

There is borne a Savior, is the first. The Angel adds further, 2 Which is
Christ.
A Savior, which is Christ. For many Saviors had been borne, many had God
sent them, that at diverse times had set them free from diverse dangers of their
enemies, Moses from the Egyptians, Joshua from the Canaanites, Gideon from the
Madianites, Iepthe from the Ammonites, Samson from the Philistims. And in deed,
the whole story of the Bible is nothing else but a Calender of Saviors, that
God from time to time still stirred them up.

But these all were but petty Saviors, there was one yet behind, that was
worth them all. One that should save his people from their sins: Matt. 1.21.
Save, not their bodies for a time, but their souls for ever, which none of
those Saviors could do. One therefore much spoken of, wished for and waited
for, a Savior which was Christ: when he came they looked for great matters,
as said the Woman at the well side: Ioh. 4.25.
For he was the most famous and greatest Savior of all. And this is He, A
Savior, which is Christ. He of whom all the Promises made mention, and He
the performance of them all: of whom all the Types under the Law were shadows,
and He the substance of them all: Of whom all the Prophesies ran, and He
the fulfilling of them all: He, of whom all those inferior Saviors were the
figures and forerunners, and He the accomplishment of all that in them was
wanting. This is He: Jacobs Genesis 49.10.
Shilo, Esayes Esa. 7.14.
Emmanuel, Ieremies Iere. 23.5.
Branch, Daniels Dan. 9.25.
Messiah, Zacharies Zach. 6.12. chap. 1.^ 78
Oriens ab alto, Aggeis Agge 2.8.
Defideratus cunct^^ Gentibus. The Desire of all the nations then; and now the
joy of all Nations: a Savior, which is Christ.

And what is meant by this term Christ? A Savior anointed, or (as in another
place it is said, more agreeable to our phrase of speaking) a Savior sealed,
Ioh. 6.27.
a Savior under Gods Great seal, That is, not as those other were, saviors
raised up of a sudden, upon some occasion; to serve the turn for the present,
and never heard of till they came: but a Savior in Gods fore counsel
resolved on, and given forth, from the beginning, promised and foretold, and
now signed and sent, with absolute Commission and fullness of power, to be the
perfect and complete Savior of all.

And to be it, ex Officio: His office, his very profession, to be one, that all
may have right to repair unto him, and find it at his hands. Not a Savior
incidently, as it fell out: but one ex professo, Anointed to that end, and by
virtue o^ his Anointing appointed, set forth, and sent into the world to
exercise this function of a Savior: not for a time, but for ever, not to the
Jews as did the rest, but eue^ to all the ends of the earth. So runs his Bil,
Matt. 11.28.
Venite ad me omnes. Come all: and Ioh. 6.37.
Qui ad me venerit non eijciam for as, of them that come to me, I will cast none
out. 1. Tim. 4.11.
Seruator omnium hominum, the Savior of all men (and as the Samaritanes said
of him, Ioh. 4.42.
Seruator mundi, The Savior of the world,) of Samaritanes, Jews, Gentiles: of
Kings, of Shepherds and all.

And there is yet more particularitie in this word Christ: Three offices did
God from the beginning erect to save his people by, and that by three acts.
The very heathen took notice of them, Purgare, Illuminare, Perficere. Priests,
to purge or expiate: Prophets, to illuminate or direct them; Kings, to set all
right, and to keep all right, in that perfection, which this world admits.
And all these three had their several Anointings. Aaron the Priest, Leuit.
8.12. Elisa the Prophet, 1. Reg. 19.16. Saul the king. 1. Sam. 10.1. In the
Savior which is Christ; his will was all should meet, that nothing in him
might want to the perfecting of this work. That He might be a perfect Savior
of all, He was all. A Priest after the order of Melchisedek, Ps. 110.4. A
Prophet, to be heard when Moses should hold his peace, Deuteronomy. 18.18. A King to
save his people, whose name should be Iehoua iustitia nostra, Iere. 23.6.
David's Priest, Moses Prophet, Ieremies King.

And these formerly had met double, two of them in some other; Melchisedek,
King and Priest; Samuel, Priest and Prophet; David, Prophet and King. Never all
three, but in him alone, and so no perfect Christ but He: but He all, and so
perfect. By his Priesthood, to purge, expiate, and save us from our sins, 1.
Ioh. 2.2.
being a propitiation to God for them: By his prophecy to illuminate and save
us from the by-pathes of error, guiding our feet in the way of peace. By his
Kingdom, protecting and conducting us through the miseries of this life, Chap.
1.79.
til He perfect us eternally by himself in the joys of his heavenly kingdom.
Rightly then, a Savior which is Christ.

Now, as in the name Savior there was, so is there likewise joy in this Name
Christ, and that many ways. First, that we shall hang no more in expectation,
We shall be no longer, Vincti spei, Hopes prisoners. He that should come, is
come. Zach. 9.12.
The promised Savior, The Savior, which is Christ, is now borne, and when
spes becomes res, then our joy is full. 2. That now, there is a Saving Office
erected, one Anointed to that end, a professed Savior, to whom all may
resort. We shall not be to seek, there is a Name given under Heaven, Act.
4.12.
whereby we may be sure of salvation, the name of Christ. 3. That to this our
saving, we have the joint consent and good will of all parties; in this Name
Christ. Christ (that is) he Anointed, what person is He? The Son, the second
Person. Anointed, by whom? By the Father: Quem vnxisti, Acts 4.27. the first
Person. Anointed, with what? With the holy Ghost, Acts 10.38. the third Person.
So a concurrence of all Persons in this Name; all willing and well pleased,
with the work of our Salvation. 4. If we would be saved, we would be saved,
unction, by oil, not by vinegar. Et vnguentum effusum nomen eius. Cant. 1.2.
And his Name is Christ, one that saves by anointing. 5. And if by Oil,
(there be hot Oils) with a gentle lenitiue Oil. And the Oil which he uses,
wherewith he is anointed, is, the Oil of gladness. Gladness therefore must
needs go with this name. Which Oil of gladness is not for Himself, but for
us: not for His use, but for ours. So he says himself, in his first Sermon at
Nazareth, upon his Text out of Esaias. 61.2. The anointing (this Oil of
gladness) was upon him to bestow it upon us: and of us; upon them especially,
that through a wounded conscience, were troubled with the spirit of heaviness,
to turn their heaviness into joy. Glad then; that He is come: that by his
office is to save: and come with the good liking of all: to save us by Oil:
and that the oil of gladness.

3 Christ the Lord.
And yet to make our joy more full, the Angel adds the third. A Savior, which
is Christ, Christ the Lord. For neither is this all. He is not Christ only.
We must not stay there. For the Name Christ will agree, has been and may be
imparted to others besides. Many a King in Scripture, has had the honor to
carry the Name of Christ, but with a difference. The King, Christus Domini, the
Lords Christ: He, Christus Dominus, the Lord Christ, or Christ the Lord. Heb.
7.4.
Consider then how great this Child is, whose Anointed, Kings themselves are.
For if they be Christi Domini, the Lords Anointed, His they are, for He is the
Lord. The Lord absolute, without any addition; ye may put to it what ye will,
Lord of men and Angels, Lord of heaven and earth, and all the Hosts of them.
Dominus Christorum, and Dominus Dominorum, Lord paramount over all,

But, why the Lord? Because this name of Christ will sort with men. Nay, as He
is Christ (that is Anointed) He is man only. It is His name as man, for God
cannot be Anointed. But He that should save us would be more then man, and so
more then Christ. Indeed, Christ cannot save us. He that must save us must
be the Lord. Heb. 7.28.
For such a Savior it behooves us to have, as might not begin the work of
our Salvation, and leave it in the midst, but go through with it, and make
an end too; which the former Saviors could not do. Formerly, ever their
complaint was, that their Saviors, their Christ's died still, and left them to
seek: their Kings, and Priests, and Prophets dropped away still; Heb. 7.23.24.
for they were not suffered to endure by reason of death. But this Savior,
this Christ, because he is the Lord, endures for ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood, Kingdom, and Prophecy, and so is able perfectly to save them that
come to God by him. This is one reason, why, hither we must come at the last,
to Christ the Lord, and till we be at it, we be not where we should. Else our
Saviors will die, and leave us destitute.

But the main reason is set down by Esaias, Esaias 43.11
Egosum, Egosum, (says God himself) and praeter me, non est seruator. It is
I, I that am the Savior, I am, and besides me, there is no Savior. None
indeed, no true Savior, but the Lord. All other are short, Vana salus hominis,
says the Psalm, man's salvation is vain, any salvation is vain, if it be
not the Lords. 1. Those Christ's, that were not the Lord, could save but the
body, and not one of them quicken his own soul: Christ that is the Lord, can
save souls and bodies, his own and others both. 2. Those Christ's that were
not the Lord, could save but from carnal enemies, with arms of flesh: He
from our ghostly enemies, even spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places, from
Abaddon the great destroyer, of the bottomless pit. 3. They, that were not the
Lord, could save but from worldly calamities, could but prune and take off the
twigs (as it were:) He from sin it self, and so plucketh it up by the roots.
4. They, that were not the Lord, put it off but for a time, and after it came
again, Temporal only. He for ever, once for all: and is become Author of
eternal salvation, Heb. 5.9.
to all that depend on him. And mark that word [eternall:] For none but the
Lord can work eternal salvation. 5. They all had need of a Savior
themselves, and, of this Savior; He needs none, receives of none, imparts to
all; as being not a Savior only, but Salus ipsa in abstracto, Salvation it
self, (as Simeon calls him, Verse 30. Ioh. 1.
) of whose fullness we all receive.
To save may agree to man. To be salvation, can agree to none but to Christ the
Lord. To begin, and to end: to save soul and body, from bodily and ghostly
enemies: from sin the root, and misery the branches: for a time, and for
ever; to be a Savior, and to be Salvation it self, Christ the Lord is all
this, and can do all this. Now then we are right, and never till now A
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

But the Name Lord, goes yet further: not only to save us, and set us free
from danger, to deliver us from evil: but to state us in as good and better
condition, then we forfeited by our fall, or else though we were saved, we
should not save by the match. To make us then sauers, and not sauers alone, but
gainers, and that great gainers by our salvation, he does further impart also
the estate annexed of this last title, even whatsoever he is Lord of himself.
And he is Lord of life says S. Peter. Acts. 3.15. Life then he imparts. And he
is Lord of Glory says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 2.8. Glory then he imparts. And he is
Lord of Joy. Intra in gaudium Domi^^ Enter into the joy of the Lord. Matthew.
25.21. (...) then He imparts. Life, and Glory, and Joy and makes us Lords of
them, and of whatsoever is within the Name, and title of Lord. For having
thereto a double right, by Inheritant* as the Son, Hebr. 1.2. And by purchase
as a Redeemer (for therefore he died, and rose again that he might be Lord
of all, Romans 14.9.) contenting himself with the former, He (...) well pleased
to set over the latter to us, and admit us with himself into his estate of
joint purchase of heaven, or whatsoever he is owner of, that, in right of it,
we may enter into the life, glory, and joy, of our Lord, and so be saved and
be sauers, and more then sauers, every way. This also, is in the word Lord:
this benefit further we have by it.

And now, if we will put together, Natus and Seruator, Seruator and Christus,
Christ^^ and Dominus, Dominus and Natus: Borne and Savior, Savior and Christ,
Christ and the Lord, the Lord and Borne: take them which way ye will in
combination, any of the four, then have we his two natures in one person. I^
Seruator his Godhead: None but God is a Savior. I^ Christus his Manhood* God
cannot be A^i^^ed, Man may. In Dominus his divine again; the Lord from heaven.
In Natus his humane nature, directly, borne of a woman. Both ever carefully
joined, and to be joined together. When S. Matthew had begun his Gospel thus.
Matthew. 1.1.
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, one nature,
His humanity: S. Mark was careful to begin his thus; The beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God, the other nature, His divinity. Mark.
1.1.
But S. John, he ioynes them, Ioh. 1.14.
verbum caro factum est, the Word became flesh. Verbum the Word, there is
Dominus; and Caro the Flesh, that is, Natus.

And even this very conjunction is a new joy. For that such an one, that the
Lord would condescend to be borne, (besides the benefit,) there is also matter
of Honor. Even that He, so great a person, would become such as we are,
would so esteem our Nature, as to take it upon him. This certainly is a great
dignity and exaltation of our Nature, and it is matter of new joy: that He
would so highly value it, as to assume, associate, and unite it into one
person, with the Son of God. By this, we see, why a Savior: why Christ: why
the Lord. A Savior, his name of benefit, whereby he is to deliver (...)
Christ, his name of Office, whereby he is bound to undertake it. The Lord, his
Name of power, whereby he is able to effect it. We see also why Man, and why
God First, So it should be, for of right none was to make satisfaction for man,
but man. And in very deed none was able to give satisfaction to God, but God.
So that being to satisfy God for man, He was to be God and man. Secondly, So
we would wish it our selves: If we would be saved, we would be saved by one of
our own nature, not by any stranger. He is borne, and so one of our own
nature. Again, if we would be saved, we would be saved, by no inferior, but
by the best: He is the Lord, and so the very best of all. And so, our desire is
satisfied every way.

This blessed Birth of this Savior which (...) Christ the Lord, thus furnished
in every point, to save us thoroughly, body and soul, from s^nne the
destruction, and Satan the destroyer of both, and that, both here, and for
ever; this blessed, and thrice blessed Birth, is the substance of this days
solemnity, of the Angels message, and of our joy.

The Circumstance of the Persons to whom.
ANd now, to the Circumstances: and first of the persons vobis, I bring you good
tidings; That to you is borne, etc.

We find not any word through all, but there is joy in it: and yet all is
suspended, till we come to this one word [vobis,] this makes up all. This word
therefore we shall do well ever to look for, and when we find it, to make
much of it. Nothing passes without it; it is the word of application. But for
it, all the rest are loose, this girds it on, this fastens it to us, and makes
it ours. But for it, we are but in their case, Mat. 8.29.
Quid nobis and tibi? What have we to do with thee? This Savior Christ the
Lord, in this good time and fit place, Quid ad nos? What are we the better?
Omni populo, is somewhat too general, and the hundredth part of them, shall not
be benefited by him. We would hear it in more particularity. Why, vobis, for
you it is, Borne for you: yea, now ye say somewhat.

Euangelizo vobis, and Natus vobis.
And twice it is repeated for failing, in either verse once. Euangelizo vobis,
and natus vobis, that ye may know the message is yours and the birth is yours:
therefore, the message is sent to you, because the birth concerns you. But
yours they be, both.

The use we have of it.
May we then be bold to change the person, and utter it in the first, which he
does in the second, and say nobis? We may sure, ^uer natus es^ nobis, Esaias 9.6.
Esaias has said it before us. And thereby, lies a mystery; The Angels they say,
Vobis, The Prophets were men, men say, Nobis. Bid the Angel say, Nobis, he
cannot, neither sing nor say it: Heb. 2.16.
Angelis he cannot, to Angels, Nusquam Angelos: Verse 14.
but Hominibus unto men, he can and does. And this is a special high
prerogative, that which the Angels can neither sing nor say, we can do both.

If then he be borne to us, it is to some end. Esaias tells us what it is, when
he expounds Natus, by Datus, Borne to us, by Given us. Borne, to be bestowed
upon us. And if given us, besto^ed upon us, then he is ours. Ours as a
Savior, ours as Christ, ours as the Lord. Ours His Benefit, His Office, His
Power: His Benefit to save us, His Office to undertake us, His Power to assure
us. Ours, His salvation, as Jesus, His anointing, as Christ, His Dominion, as
the Lord. And if He be ours, then all His are ours. Omnia eius nostra sunt.
His Birth ours, Luke 15.31
and if His Birth, all that follow His Birth, ours too.

Now then, seeing He and they be ours, will it not be well done, to make our
entry, to take seisin of him and them, and dispose them to our best benefit?
And how can we do that better? Then, as God has offered Him to us, this day
that he was borne for us: so we reciprocally this day that He is borne, offer
Him again to God, as the best pleasing Oblation that we can offer him. To
day, as in the Temple alive, for our morning oblation: And when the time
comes of his death, offer Him as on the Cross, slain for our evening
Sacrifice. So shall we as Bernard wishes us, vti nostro, in vtilitatem
nostram and de Saluatore salutem operari. Employ, or make use of him for our
best behoof: draw his proper extract from Him, and work salvation out of
this our Savior.

Now, a word only, what is to be done on our parts, and that respectively to
these two points, what we are to return to them, what to this Message, and
what to this Birth.

Our duty reciprocal.
To the Message Euangelizo vobis, this we are to return, this is due to a
message, to hear it. And, that we do, and that is all; we come to the Sermon,
we hear it, and little we do besides. But we hear it but heavily, with a
faint affection (God knows:) we hear it not as an Ecce, as matter of high
admiration: we hear it not as gaudium magnum, with that alacrity, and
cheerfulness we should. We hear is not as nobis, as i^ it nearly touched us,
but as a matter that little concerned us, it skilled not much, whither we
heard it or no. Many meaner things affect us more but this should be the
ioyfullest hearing that we ever heard.

2. To receive him.
And shall we not likewise perform some duty to Natus est? yes even to that
also. And not hear of Him, and let Him alone: hear his tidings, and let
Himself go.

He was borne for us, and given us, Natus nobis, and Donatus nobis (both go
together in the Prophet.) To a gift the duty that belongs properly, is to
receive it. If He be Natus nobis, and Donatus Nobis, I trust we will take
order he be Acceptus a nobis. If borne us, and giu^^ us, it is our part then,
we can do no less then receive Him. We euacuate the gift, disgrace both the
giver and it, if we vouchsafe not to accept of it.

How is that? How shall we receive Him! who shall give Him us? That shall one,
that will say unto us within a while, Heb. 10.10
Accipite, Take, This is my Body, by the offering whereof ye are sanctisid
Take, this is my Blood, by the shedding whereof ye are saved. Both, in the holy
Mysteries or dayned by God, as pledges to assure us, and as Conduit Pipes to
conueigh into us, this and all other the benefits, that come by this our
Savior.

Verily, upon his memorable days, (of which this is the first) we are bound to
do some thing in memory, or remembrance of him. What is that? Will ye know
what it is? Hoc facite, Do this in remembrance of me.

Something would be thought on, to return him for all his benefits, and this
day for this first, the fountain of all the rest; His Birth: Some ^hanks would
be rendered Him for it. And how can we do that better, then as we are taught by
^im, that studied the point of Quid retribuam, and resolved it thus; no way so
well, as by Acci^iam Calicem: I will take the cup of salvation, Psa. 116.12
and so do it: So, with it taken into our hands, (...) thanks to the name of
the Lord. And when ^etter then to day? Hodie as we are here dire^^ed. What
better day then on this day? the ^ery day he was bestowed on us. To defer
(...), no longer, then he did us. He deferred not (...) at all, but as soon as
he was borne, sent us lord the same instant: and shall we defer him to hear
of us an other time; and not be as ready on our part to receive him instantly,
as he (...) on his, to bestow himself, even presently, (...) soon as He was
borne? Sure somewhat wou^^ be done more then ordinary, this day of (...)
birth, the day it self is more then ordinary.

And let this move us. If ever there be (...) day of salvation, Ecce hic est
dies salutis, Behold this is it, when a Savior is borne unto us. If e^^^ an
accepted time, Eccetempus acceptum. Behold now it is, this is that time. The
birth day ha^ ever been a time accepted. Genesis 40.21
Then, one Ki^^ sorgaue the trespass of his Servant, and re^^ued him to Grace.
An other, being pleas^^ was ready in his bounty to have given aw^^ the one
halse of his kingdom. Our Savior Christ Our Lord, Mar. 6.23.
on his birth day will be no worse th^^ they. His bounty then, no less then
theirs.

Let us then make this so accepted a time i^ self, twice acceptable, by our
accepting: whi^^ He will acceptably take at our hands. Le^^ honor this day,
with our receiving: which (...) has honored by his first giving: Yielding h^^
evermore, (but this day, the day of it, chief^^^ our unfeigned hearty
thanksgiung for this good news; for this so great a gift; both of th^^ this
day vouchsafed us: in Him and for Him, who was himself the gift, our Savior,
Christ, the Lord. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three Persons,
one immortal, euerlining, invisible, only wise GOD; be all Honor Glory,
Blessing, Praise, and Thanksgiving, this day and for ever.


