Fasciculus Florum. OR A HANDFVLL OF FLOWERS, Gathered out of the several
Books of the Right Honorable Sir Edward Coke Knight and one of the Kings
Majesty's most Honorable Councillors of Estate. Per THO: ASH, Graijens.

Issint que lenuious ne voile moy reprouer sans cause.
Ieo voile que le courteous moy corrigee sil y ad cause.
AT LONDON Printed by G. ELD. 1618.

blazon or coat of arms featuring two black chevrons with fleurs-de-lis at
their apexes, below a bird with a serpent's tail perched on a knight's helmet,
the whole thing surrounded by feathers

To the Reader.
Traveling over the Coast and Country of Cokea, and finding the same (gentle
Reader) furnished with sundry sorts of commodities, as old Trees of full
grouth, Old Books
fit for each man's building: and stored with younger of a later grouth, New
reports
sit for plantation of any ground: as also garnished with sweet smelling
Flowers of all sorts, Latin sentences.
delightful to the eye to behold, and very pleasing to the senses for scent
and savor: I have employed my self, during the time I stayed there, to
transport from thence, for the good of my native Country here, some of the
said commodidies: and (for the present) have brought over with me a few of the
said flowers, being but of light burden, and of no great encombrance: having
likewise laden for the time to come a vessel of greater burden, with the
better and more rich commodities of the said Country, A General Table to all
his Books.
the old timber Trees, and younger Plants, which I earnestly expect should
ariue here about the Feast of the Anunciation of the Virgin Mary, or shortly
after, if God give good success, and send a happy and prosperous wind: And in
the mean time (hoping the best) I here present unto thee these Flowers, bound
up in Fasciculos Florum, which thou shall find to be not of the nature and
kind of our English Garden Flowers, which grow, increase, and flourish at the
Spring of the year, but fade and fall away in Autumn or before, but these are
of that quality and kind, that they continue the same per totum annum, and
will with their odoriferous smell feed and fill thy senses with delight and
contentment every way: absque vllo temporis interuallo and the more often thou
shall smell unto them, the more and better thou will like, and delight in them
sine fastidio.

Vale and fruere. T. A.

Again to the Reader.
KNow (gentle Reader) that the vitiating and false printing of this Book,
through the negligence and oversight of the Printer and his Corrector, has
brought to me double pains, and travail, the wel-willing Author. Wherefore
having now reuised the same, I have not only corrected the; faults therein
committed, but also increased it with sentences drawn from the Epistles of the
Books, in the former edition omitted, and withal translated the whole work
into our vulgar tongue: So that the same being now perfect (for the Latin)
need not blush, or be ashamed to appear before the best learned Scholar in
the University: So the benefit thereof may redound to the vulgar sort and less
learned of the Commonaltie. Accept now therefore (I pray thee) the same with no
less liking and grace, then if he had showed himself at the first with this
his better face: and although the saying be good, and to be approved, Non
facias malum, vt inde veniat bonum. Thou shall not do evil that good may come
thereof: yet since this ill doing of the Printer and his Corrector has brought
a double benefit and good unto thee, the Reader: I pray thee on his behalf, to
bear with his fault, and make the same the lesser.

T A.

The Country Cokea, does yield thee these Flowers:
Thy senses to feed, and refresh at all hours.

TO THE CAPTIOVS AND MALIcious Detractors.
WHether it comes to pass for want of wit, or proceeds from froward Fortune,
I cannot tell: but this I know by woeful experience, through the whole course
of my life, that my hap has been always hard, in most things that I have
taken in hand, or at any time enterprised: wherefore I am now justly
occasioned, to commit to writing in perpetuam rei memoriam, the saying of the
Philosopher, which heretofore in words, has been with me always most
familiar, Nihil agere semper infaelicis est optimum. Otherwise how could it be
that in this my poor Epistle my simple and plain meaning should be so
mistaken? and my dutiful and always most faithful service toward my Patron,
and Maecaenas, should be so traduced and slaundered? When, as the eyes of
servants have waited upon their Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden have
looked unto the hands of her Mistress; even so have I waighted upon him in
simplicity and singlenes of heart: which may well appear by those my labors
past and extant, as also by my pains taken in and about the general Table to
all his books, in my unfortunate Epistle promised, and shortly likewise in
Print to be published: But what should I think, or what might I say? but that
their mistaking of this my good and plain meaning proceeds from two sorts of
people, either from them which of ignorance cannot, or from another sort, who
out of their malicious heart (which are the worser sort, Nam quod scire debes
et non vis, Non pro ignorantia, sed pro contemptu haberi debet,) will not
understand a speech allegorically delivered. I may justly cry out, O tempora! o
mores! for that which in former times in others has been tolerated, in this
captious age is turned into a contrary sense, sound fault with all, and
reproved. For (besides holy writ, which is with allegorical speeches repleat
and filled) let me be bold, to put you in mind of one president elsewhere
borrowed, instead of many. You may read in the book of Martyrs fol. 2013. of
one writing unto that worthy professor and Preacher of the Gospel in those
days, Master Philpot, uses these allegorical speeches: Oh good Master
Philpot, which art a principal Pot indeed, filled with most precious licour:
Oh Pot most happy, of the highest Potter or dayned to honor, etc. Oh Pot,
thrice happy in whom, etc. Which speech in those times was not only by the
best learned well approved, but by the Reverend man Master Fox in his Book of
Acts and Monuments, to everlasting memory left, and recommended. Wherefore to
stop your malignant mouths, and stay your detracting tongues, be not angry
with me, since you cannot away with speeches allegorical; if I retort upon you
a speech prouerbiall. You seem to resemble those which will be, aliorum medici
ipsi vlcerib^s scatentes: Plutarch. And finally, to give full satisfaction to
all others (besides your selves) of my single and plain meaning in that my
Epistle thus mistaken: I protest before God, I am, and always have been far
from any intent, either directly, or obliquely to scandalize that Right
Honorable and well deserving Knight. And let me be bold to tell you, that are
possessed with a malignant heart toward him, or think amiss of me; That he
for his part, may be compared to the Camamile, the more it is trampled upon,
the better and sweeter sent and savor it sends forth to the cheering of the
senses. So the more you envy his virtues, the more will they flourish unto the
worlds end, and neither you nor I, if we all were so minded, could demolish or
diminish the least jot of his worth. And as for my self I am an Ash, so
deeply rooted in the soil of sincerity and plain meaning, that I fear not
your Aquilonian biasts: for albeit they may peradventure shake my leaves, yet
they shall not be able to pierce my bark, much less loosen the tree at the
root. Non metuo pulicis stimulos, fucique susurros. And thus I leave you
abruptly, because you have dealt with me somewhat discourteously, and yet in
hope that you will stay your further slander, I bid you farewell.

T. A.

Ad Authorem libri inscripti, Fasciculus Florum, ex libris Edwardi Coke,
militis, etc.
Anagram. Thomas Ash. Hasta, mos.

MOs, been moratus morem et geris omnibus hasta,
Hosts hastatus vincis et ipse malos.
Et victos vinctos reddis, verumque Anagrama
Fit, quod virtutem, vim tibi inesse refert.
Quaeris quos hosts vincis? respondeo, vincis
Libri queis docti non placuere Coki.
Dumque Coki ex Florum redolente^ Colligis hort^,
Fasciculum, Momos tu maleolere facis
Sic omen nomen, rerumque not amina rerum
Nomina, suntque tibi nomen and omen idem.
I. I. Cantab.

Fasciculus Florum, Ex Libris prenobilis Edwardi Coke militis, etc. aedit.
inter alia.
A
A Vel ab est dictio significatiua primi termini a quo, sicut dictio, (vsque)
termini ad quem; et A vel ab accipitur exclusive. Libra 5. 2 part. 94.

A or ab, is a word signifying the time, or term from whence, as the word
(vsque until) of time or term, to whom, or to what, and A or ab, are taken
exclusiuely.

Absit quod licitum sit, matri nocere filio qui in vtere suo est. Libro. 3. 62.

God forbid, that it should be lawful that the mother should hurt the son in
her womb.

Abundans cautela non nocet. Libro.

A clause abounding, noe hurt does bring.

Accessorium sequitur suum principale, Lib. 4. 44. Iusti. institut. fol. 116.

The accessory does always weight upon the Principal.

Academiae Cantabrigiae and Oxoniae sunt Athenae nostrae nobilissimae, regni
soles; occuli, et anima regini; vnde religio, humanitas, and doctrina, in omnes
regni parts vberrime diffunduntur. Lib. 8. 116.

The Universities of Cambridge and Oxford are our most worthy Athens: the
splendour of our Kingdom, the very eyes and souls of the Kingdom, from whence
religion, humanity, and doctrine into all parts of the realm do^ flow most
plentifully.

Actio, estius prosiquendi in iuditio quod alicuidebetur lib 8 151, lib. 10 51.

An action is the right of prosecuting in judgment, of a thing which to any
one is owing.

Acta exteriora indicant interiora secreta. lib. 8 146

The outward actions declare the inward intentions.

Actiones proscandalis sunt rarissimae. lib. 4. 15

Actions for words of slander ar^ most rare.

Actori incumbit onus probandi. lib. 4. 71.

The weight of proving rests on the party complaining.

Ac veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio. saeuitq. animis ignobile vulgas,
Iamque faces et arma volant, furor arma ministrat. lib. 4. 13. vide. D
As in a multitude when once there does arise,
Sedition: and people rude wax cruel in their mind,
Then fire and sword does fly, and fury weapons straight does find.
Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, inra adaptantur. lib. 5. 2. part. 127. lib.
6. 77 lib. 7 28. Call.

Unto such things which happen most often, the laws are apted and applied.

Ad impossibilia lex non cogit. lib. 5. 2 part. 75. libro 9. 73: vide L lex
non, etc.

To things impossible the law compels no man.

Ad libitum Regis sonuit sententia legis. lib. 2. Epist.

Malum.

Unto the pleasure of the King,
The sentence of the law does ring.
An ill thing.

Ad Leges vero in methodum, atq* ordinem dirigendas, tria requiruntur* (1)
iudicium ad cas cognoscendas. (2) ars ad disponendas. (3) denique diligentia,
ad complectendas singulas, ne quid omittatur. lib. 4 Epistola vide I in
condendis, etc.

To bring the laws into a methood and order, three things are required (1)
judgment to know them, (2) Art to dispose them, (3) Lastly, diligence to omit
none of them. See I. Making of laws, etc.

Ad penitentiam properat, cito qui ludicat. lib. 9, 13. Cato, fo, 47

He runs headlong to repentance; who hastily pronounces sentence. Cato:

Ad proximum antecedens fiat relatio, nisi impediatur sententia. lib. 2. 71.
lib. 5. 2. part. 122.

Relation ought to be made to the next antecedent: unless to the sentence
happen an impediment.

And questionem facti non respondent Iudices, nec ad questionem iuris
respondent iuratores. lib. 8, 155. lib. 9. 13. lib. 11. 10. vide. lit. Q.

Unto a question of fact the judges are not to make answer, nor to a
question of law, are the iuroures. see Q.

Ad Officium iusticiariorum spectat, vnicuiq. coram eis placitanti iustitiam
exhibere. Lib. 4 Epist. 10 in fr^ntifpicio Libri. 2. cap. 39.

It belongs to the office of the Justices, to every one before them
complaining to deliver justice.

Affectus punitur, licet not sequatur effectus. Lib. 9 57 v^de littera P

The affection is punished, although the effect follows not. see P

Alien^gina est alienae gentis, s^u alienae ligeantiae, qui etiam dicitur,
peregrinus, alienus, exorticus, extran^us, etc. Extraneus est subditus qui
extra t^rtam Regis natus est. Lib. 7 16. Call.

A stranger bor^e is of another nation or legiance: who is likewise said to be
a Pilgrim, an alien, a foraignor a stranger, etc. and a stranger is a subject
who is borne out of the land of the King. Call.

Aliquis non debet esse Iudex in propria causa: immo iniquum est, aliquem sui
rei esse iudicem. Lib. 8. 118. vide litera. I iniquam, etc.

No man ought to be judge in his cause: yea it is a partial or unequal thing,
that any one should be judge in his own matter. see I. iniquum.

Alterna petitio non est audienda. lib. 5. 2. part* 40

A wavering or inconstant request or petition is not to be listened unto.

Ambigua responsio contra proferentem est accipienda. Lib. 10. 59.

A doubtful answer is to be most strongly taken against the preferrour
thereof.

Amicus Plato, amicus Socretes, sed magis amica veritas. lib. 8. 83: lib. 10 40.

Plato is my friend, Socrates is my friend, but more friend then both, is the
truth.

Amentes dicuntur qui, etc. quod vide litera D.

Mad men are said to be they, etc. whereof etc. See D

Annale nec debitum, iudex ne separet ipsum. lib. 8. 52

An anuity or a det, the judge ought not to separate.

Animalia fera, si facta sint mansueta, et ex consuetudine eunt et redeunt,
volant et reuolant, vt sunt Cerui, Cygni, Peuonei, Columbi, etc. eousq. nostra
sunt, et it a inteligantur, quamdiu habuerunt animum reuertendi. li. 7. 16.
Bracton. lib. 1. ca. 12 fol. 8. just. just. tit. 1. lib. 2. fol. 80. vide.
littera. S.

Wild beasts if they be made tame, and of custom go fourth, and return,
fly out, and fly back again, as are Hearts, Swannes, Peacocks, and Pigeons,
etc. so long they are ours, and so they are to be understood to be, so long as
they retain a mind of retourning.

Antiquis legibus, and cibis recentioribus vtendum est. lib. 4. Epistola.
Perian.

Old laws and new meats are to be used and embraced. Perian.

Antiquius multo est ius nostrum, quam fertur, quamque vlla sint cuiuscunq.
tandem Romani Imperatoris leges aut constitutiones imperiases. lib. 3. Epistola
vide ibidem valde bonum. lib. 8.

The Laws of England are of much more antiquity, then they are reported to be,
and more then any of the constitutions, or laws Imperial of the Roman
Emperors.

Antiquae and precellentes Angliae leges suntavita jura and antiquissima,
optimaque haereditas que Ciues huius regni habent; perillas etenim non solum
hereditate et bonis in pace, and tranquilitate, sed etiam vita et patria
charissima secure gaudent. lib. 5 Epist.

The ancient and most excellent laws of England are the birthright, and most
ancient and best inheritance that the subjects of this realm have: for by
them he enjoys not only his inheritance, and goods in peace, and quietness,
but his life, and his dear country in saftie.

Appellatione fundi omne aedificium, and omnis ager continetur. lib. 4. 87.
Just. institut. vide littera. F

Under the name or appellation, ground, every building and every field, is
contained. See F

Apices iuris non sunt iura. lib. 4. 46. lib. 6. 65. lib. 8. 56. vide littera S

Tittles and small things of law are not laws. See S. Call.

Aptarionus veribus debet, nec plus occuparj, quam cuj sufficere possum^s. Lib.
2. frontispicio libri Seneca.

The burden ought to be apted or fitted to our strength, and more ought not to
be taken upon us, then our strength will sustain or bear. Seneca.

Ars omnis habet principia and postulata: altiora ne quesieris et principia
porbant non probantur; li. 3. 40 vide. C. et P.

Every Art has principles, and expostulations, seek not higher things and
Principles prove, and are not proved. See C and P.

Argumentum a diuisione est fortissimum, lib. 6. 60.

An argument drawn from a deuiston, in law is of greatest strength.

Diuisio ea est per quam aperimus quid conueniat quod in controuersia sit vel
per quem exponimus, quibus de rebus dicturi sumus. Cicero ad Heren, and Calap.
dictione diuisio.

A division is that by the which we declare what is convenient or fitting that
which is in question, or by which we expound of what matters we are to treat.
Cicero, lib. 1. ad Herennium and Calap.

A Sententia interloculoria non appellatur in iure civilly lib. 11. 40.

There lies no appeal upon a sentence interlocutoria in the ciuell law.

Sententia interlocutoria vocatur, qui non definit controuersiam, s^d aliquid
obiter, ad causam pertinens d^cernit. vide Calap. ad verbum interlocutoria.

A sentence interlocutory is that which does not determine a controversy: but
handles a matter (thereunto belonging) by the way.

Assensus tollit errorem. lib, 5. 2. part. 36. and 40. lib. 2. 62. and 64 lib.
8. 58. and 59. vide li^era C.

The consent of the parties, taken away all error. See C

A verbis ad verbera peruentum est, Lib. 4. 15.

From words men grow to blows.

A verbis legis non est recedendum. lib. 5: 2. part. 118.

We ought not to go from the letter of the law.

Auditionem, lectionem, congressus, etc. quod vide litera. L and M. lib. 1.
Epistola.

Hearing, reading, conference, and^ whereof. see L and M.

Aut hac in nostros fabricata est machina muros.
Aut aliquis latet error, equo ne credit Teucri. lib. 3 Epist
This Engine fine, thus framed is,
Our stately wales to overthrow,
Or else some other thing amiss.
O Trojans give no faith thereto.
B
BAstardus dicitur a Graeco verb bassaris, id est Meretrix aut concubina. quia
procreatur ex Meretrice, sieve concubina. li. 8. 102.

A Bastard is derived from the Greek word (Bassa^s) that is to say a whore or
a concubine, because he is begotten of an Harlot, or a Concubine.

Beatius est dare quam accipere. lib. 9. 57. vide S.

It is a more blessed thing to give, then to take.

Benedicta est expositio, quando res redimitur a destructione. lib. 4. 26.

Blessed is that exposition, which keeps or delivers a matter from
destruction.

Benignae faciendae sunt interpretationes chartarum: propter simplicitatem
laicorum, vt res magis valeat, quam pereat. lib. 5. 2. part 55. vide V.

Favorable interpretations of deeds or Charters ought to be made, because of
the simplicity of the lay people, that the matter may rather stand a foot,
then quail.

Benignior sententia in verbis generaiibus, seu dubijs est praeferenda Lib. 4*
15.

The more favorable sentence ought to be preferred in general or doubtful
matters.

Bis idem exigi bona fides non patitur: et in satisfactionibus non permittitur
amplius fieri, quam semel factum est Lib. 9. 53 Just institut. ex digestis fol.
80. et de regulis iuris. Sexto fol. 117.

Good faith or good dealing does not suffer that a thing be twice exacted, and
in satisfactions, it is not sufferable, that a thing once done be done any
more, out of the Digests, and out of the rules of the Law.

Boni iudicis est lites derimere, ne lis exlite Oriatur and expedit
Reipublicae, vt sit finis litium propter communem omnium vtilitatem. Lib. 4.
15. et Lib. 5. 2. part. 31. and 73. vide E. and I.

It is she part of a good Judge to cut off strifes, that one strife rise not
from another: and it is very profitable to a common wealth that there be an
end of controversies, for the common good of all, Letter E. and I.

Bonus iudex nihil ex arbitrio faciat, nec proposito domesticae voluntatis, sed
iuxta leges and iura pronunciat. Lib. 7. 27 Call.

Let a good Judge do nothing out of his own will, nor of a purpose of his
domestical desire, but let him give sentence according to Law and right.

Bonum defendentis ex integra causa malum ex quo^ibet defectu. Lib. 11. 68.

The good of the defendant from just and honest cause, is become naught from
every defect.

Bonum est benefacere Sabbato. lib. 9. 6^.

It is a good thing to do well on the Sabb^th day.

Bonus Rex nihil differt a bono patre, and patria dicitur a patre, quia habet
communem partem, qui est pater patriae Lib. 7. 13. Call. vide litera R. and I.

A good King differs nothing from a good father, and the Country is derived
of or from a father, because it has a common father, which is father of the
country. Letter R. and I.

C
CAsus fortuitus non est sperandus, and nemo tenetur deuinare. Lib. 4. 28. and
66. Lib. 10. 55. vide litera N.

A case depending upon fortune is not to be hoped for, or trusted unto, and no
man can divine.

Casus omissus, and obliuioni datus, dispositioni iuris communis relinquitur.
lib. 5. 4. Lib. 5. 2. part. 37.

A case omitted and forgotten is left to the dispose of the Common law.

Causa et origo est materia negotij, Lib. 1. 99.

The cause and original is the matter or substance of any business.

Causa vaga and incerta non est rationabilis. Lib. 5. 2: part: 57.

A wandering and uncertain cause is not reasonable.

Cessa^te statu primitiuo, cessat deriuatus. Lib. 8. 34.

The state primitive ceasing the deriuatiue cease also.

Charters sont apell muniments, a muniendo, quia muniunt and defendunt
hereditatem. etc. Lib. 9. 17. Lib. 8. 153.

Charters or deeds are called muniments, a muniendo of defending, because they
fortify and defend the inheritance.

Circuitus est euitandus, and boni iudicis est lites derimere, ne lis ex lite
oriatur. Lib* 5. 2. part 31. and 73. vid^ litera B. and E.

Circuity of action is to be avoided, and it is the part of a good Judge to
cut off controversies, lest one controversy spring out of another. See B. and
E.

Circumvertunt vis and iniuria quem* que: atque vnde exorta est, in eum
plerumque reuertit. Lib. 7. Epist.

Force and Injury beguileth every man: and for the most part, it retur^neth or
retorteth from whence it first came.

Clam delinquens, magis punitu^ quam palam, Lib. 8. 127.

He that offends closely, is more to be punished, then he that offendet^
openly.

Clausula generalis non refertur a^ expressa. Lib. 4. 8. Lib. 8. 154.

A clause general is not to be referred to things expressed.

Clausulae inconsuetae semper inducun^ suspitionem. Lib. 3. 81. vide litera P.

Clauses unaccustomed are much t^ be suspected. See P.

Comites dicuntur a comitando, qui^ comitantur Regem. Comites a comi* tatu,
sieve a societate, nomen sumpserunt. Qui etiam dici possunt Consules: Reges enim
tales sibi associant, ad consulendum. Lib. 7. 34. Lib. 9. 49.

Countes or Earls, are derived or said of accompanying: because they accompany
the King. Countes or Earls have taken their name from accompanying, or
society. Who also may be called Counselors, for Kings do associate such to
them, to take counsel.

Compendia in multis quidem scientijs, Authoribus ipsis profuerunt, verum alijs
non mediocriter obfuerunt. Illud enim absolute statuo, maiorum librorum
studiosam and methodicam perdectionem, certam viam ac rationem esse ad
constantem perfectamque iu^isprudentiam assequendam: Interim compendijs,
tanquam Indicibus vtendum censeo: Libris vero ipsis innitendum ac fidendum: Nec
enim prudentis arbitror sectare Riuulos, vbi Fontes ipsos petere liceat. Et
sane constat tumultuariam compendiorum lectionem, confusum iudicium and
interruptam a^ perturbatam clocutionem causare Lib. 4. Epistola.

Abridgements (truly) in many professions, have greatly profited the Authors
themselves, but have brought no small prejudice to others: For this I
absolutely determine, that the advised and orderly reading over of the books
of our elders at large, is the certain^ and right way to the enduring and
perfect knowledge of the Law obtaining and I think Abridgements are to be vse^
as Tables, and that we ought to rel^ and trust to the books at large: for I
hold it not the part of a wise man t^ follow the little rivers, when he man
easily approach to the fountains themselves. And certain it is that the t^
multuarie or hasty reading of Abridg^ments without aduisement, do^ cause a
confused judgment, and broken and troubled kind of deliver or utterance.

Compendiaria res improbitas, virt^ longa. Lib. 11. in frontispicio libri.

Lewdnes is a thing compendious, but virtue is large and spacious.

Compendia sunt dispendia. Lib. 11. in frontispicio libri.

A parcimonious gaining, is a loosing.

Concesso aliquo, etiam id concessum videri, sine quo illud consistere non
potest Iusti. institut. lib. 1. fol. 21. vide litera Q.

When any one thing is granted, that also seems to be granted without the
which the former cannot well consist, See Q.

Conatus quid sit, non definitur in iure. Lib. 6. 42.

An intent, what it is, is not defined in the law.

Concordia paruae res crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur. Lib. 9 79.

By unity and concord small things do increase and grow, by discord the
greatest things come to decay and overthrow

Cognomen maiorum est ex sanguine tractum: hoc intrinsicus est. Agnomen
extrinsicus, ab euentu, lib. 6. 65. Calap. ad verbum Nomen.

The Surname (Cognomen) is drawn or derived from the blood or family of our
ancestors: and this is intrinsecall, or inherent. The Surname (Agnomen) is
borrowed from without, from chance or fortune.

Chescun art ad principia et postulata, altiora ne quaesieris, and principia
probant, et non probantur, lib. 3. 40. vide litera P.

Every Art has principles and expostulations. Ye may not seek any higher
Matter: and Principles do prove, and are not proved. See P.

Condemnare insontem, and dimittere reum, iniquum est, lib. 4. 13.

To condemn the innocent, and let the offender go free, is a thing unjust and
great iniquity.

Condicio beneficialis, quae statum construit, benign secundum verborum
intentionem interpretanda est: odiosum autem, quae statum destruit, stricte
secundum verborum proprietatem est accipienda, lib. 8. 90.

A condition beneficial, which makes or builds up an estate, is to be
construed sauourably, according to the meaning of the words: but that is odious
which destroys an estate, and is to be taken strictly, after the propriety of
the words.

Confessus in iudicio, pro iudicato habetur, and quodam modo sua sententia
damnatur, lib. 11. 30.

He that confesses being brought into judgment, is holden adjudged: and in a
certain manner, by his own sentence or mouth condemned.

Confirmat vsum qui tollit abusum, lib. 10. 39.

He establishes an use, who takes away the abuse.

Conscientia dicitur a con and scio, quasi scire cum Deo, lib. 1. 100.

Conscience is co^pounded of con, with, and seio to know, as it were to know
with God.

Consensus tollit errorem. Lib. 2. 62. and 64. Lib. 5. 2. part 36, and 40. Lib.
8. 58 and 59 vide A.

Consent of the party, takes away all error if any be. See A.

Consensus, non concubitus facit matrimonium, and consentire non possunt ante
annos nubiles scilicet. 14. Li. 6. 22. and 40. Justin. institut. ex digestis
fol. 100. vide. N.

The consent of the parties, not the lying together of their bodies makes a
marriage, and consent they cannot before the years nuptial. viz. 14.

Consentientes and agentes pari poena plectentur. Lib. 5. 2. part 80.

They that consent and the agent, are to be punished both alike.

Consuetudo loci est semper obseruanda Libro 4. 23. and 21. and 28. Libro 6.
67. Libro 7. 5. Call Lib. 10. 140. vide Q. and S.

The usage and custom of the place we ought to observe and embrace. See Q.
and S.

Consuetudo est altera lex. Lib. 4. 21. and 38.

Custom is another law.

Consuetudo vincit comunem legem. Lib. 4. 21.

Custom overcomes or maistereth the common law.

Consuetudo licet sit magnae authoritatis, nunquam tamen praeiudicat veritati
manifestae. Lib. 4. 18. Lib. 6. 6. vide L.

Custom, although it be of great authority, yet it never brings prejudice to
the manifest verity. See L.

Consuetudo optimus legum interpres. Libro 2. 81. Libro 10. 70. vide litera. O

Custom is the best interpreter of Laws.

Consuetudo alicuius patriae vel loci, non est alleganda in ijs, quae de iure
communi omnibus conceduntur. Lib. 11. 85. vide I.

The custom of any place or Country is not to be alleged in things which of
common right to all men ar^ granted and allowed. See I.

Consuetudines and leges antiquae celeberimae istius Insulae, si caeteris,
omnibus non exceluissent, fieri profecto no^ possit, quin ex tot victoribus
dominis^ cum penes singulis esset, sieve Romani sieve Saxones, sieve Dani, sieve
Normani praecipuae vero Romani, qui de iur^ civilly merito gloriantur eas
immutassent. Lib. 2. Epist. Lib. 3. Lib. 6. Epist. libr. 8. Epist. vide L.

If the ancient most famous laws of this Island had not excelled all others, it
could not have been, but of s^ many Conquerors and Lords, (when the same was
under them) either Romans, or Saxons, or Danes, or Nor man's, specially the
Romans (wh^ justly boasted of their Civil Laws) would have altered and
changed them Fortescue in his commendations of the laws of England. See L.

Contemporanda expositio est fortissima. lib. 10. 70.

A construction or exposition of the same time is most strong.

Contra negantem principia non est disputandum. Lib. 10. 40. vide litera N.

There is no disputing against him that will deny principles. See N.

Copia laudatoris nunquam sufficient, quia nunquam deficiet materia laudis lib.
8: 116: vide N.

The store or plenty of praisers shall never be sufficient, because matter of
praising shall never be wanting or deficient. See N.

Corona est quasi cor ornans, cuius ornamenta sunt miserecordia et iustitia.
lib. 7: 11: Call. vide O.

A Crown is as it were a Heart adorning and beautifying, whose ornaments are
Justice and Mercy.

Coronam dicimus legis iudicium esse, propterea quod certis est vinculis
complicata, quibus vita nostra veluti ligata coercetur. lib. 7. fol. 11. Call.

We say that a Crown is the very judgment of the law, because it is linked
together in certain bonds, wherewith our life (as it were bound) is restrained.

Corona Regis est facere iusticiam, et iudicium, et tenere pacem; sine quibus
Corona consistere non potest, nec tenere. Huiusmodi autem iura sieve
iurisdictiones ad personas, vel tenementa transfer non poterunt, nec a
priuata persona possideri, nec vsus, nec executio iuris, nisi hoc datum fuit ei
desuper, sicut iurisdictio delegata delegari non poterit, quin ordinaria
remaneat cum ipso Rege. Lib: 7: fol. 11: Call: Bracton lib. 2. cap. 24. fol. 55.
and 56. vide S^ and R.

It is the Crown of a King to do justice and judgment, and to keep peace,
without the which a Crown cannot consist nor hold: for these kind of rights or
jurisdictions, cannot be transferred to persons or tenements, nor possessed by
any private person, nor the use or the jurisdiction of the Law, unless the
same be given to him from above, as execution bequeathed cannot be committed
over, but ordinarily it remains with the King himself. See S: and R.

Corruscat Princeps radijs Regis patris sui, and censetur vna persona cum ipso
rege lib. 8. fol 28.

The Prince does glister or shine by the beams of the King his father, and is
reckoned or esteemed to be one person with the King himself.

Crassa and supina negligentia. lib 4 fo: 10

Gross and carlesse negligence.

Cerbro in deliberationibus iudicia maturescunt, sed in accelerato processu
nunquam, lib 8, Epist: fortes. fol. 68. ca. 53.

Oftentimes by deliberations judgments grow ripe and mature, but in an hasty
proceeding never.

Cui licet quod maius est, non debet quod minus est, non licere? lib. 4: 33.
lib. 5. 7: lib: 9: 48. Just. instit. fol: 98. ex digestis, and ex ^egulis
iuris* fol: 116.

To whom it is lawful as to the greater, ought it not be lawful as to the
lesser?

Cui pater est populus, pater est sibi nullus: and omnis
Cui Pater est populus, non habet ipse patrem. lib. 6. 65. Fortesc. Cap. 40.
To whom the people father is,
to him is father none and all.
To whom the people father is,
to him is father none at all.
Cuilibet in sua art perito credendum est. Lib. 4: 20: lib. 5. 7. 7. 19: Call:
vide O.

To every one learned in his Art, we ought to give faith from our heart see O.

Cuius est dare cius est disponere. lib. 2. 71. li. 7. 6.

He that has power to give, has power to dispose.

Cuicunque aliquis quid concedit, ^oncedere videtur et id, sine quo res ipsa
esse non potest. Lib. 5: 2: part 12: and 47: lib: 11. 52. vide Q.

To whomsoever any one any thing does grant, he is said to grant even that
also without the which that other cannot consist or be. See Q

Cum ius aequabile ab vno viro homines non consequerentur inuentae sunt leges
Lib. 7. 13. Call. Cicero Offic. lib. 2. fol. 96. Arist. Pol. lib. 3. fol. 107.
and 119.

When equal justice at one man's hand could not be had, then were laws
invented and made.

Curia domini regis non debet deficere conquerentibus in Iusticia perquirenda.
Li. 7. fol. 4. Li. 9. 88. West. 2. c. 24.

The Kings Court ought not to be deficient or slack toward Plaintiffes
seeking justice.

Cum aliquid impeditur propter vnum, eo remoto, tollitur impedimentum. Lib. 5.
2. part 77. vide E and I.

When any thing is hindered by means of another thing, that being removed,
taken away is the letting, See E. and I.

Custos, statum haeredis in custodia su^ existentis, meliorem non deteriorem
facere potest, lib. 7. 7.

A Guardian, the state of an heir in his custody being, may better the same*
not make it worse.

D
DAmnum dicitur a demendo, or rather, a damptione, cum diminutioneres deterior
fit, lib. 10. 116.

Damage or loss, is said a demendo, or rather, a damptione: when by diminution
a thing is made worse and of less price then it is worth.

Demens est, qui non cogitat quid agit aut loquitur, (de) est particula
priuatiua Amens qui p^orsus insanit. Amentes dicunter quia natura experti
rationis, solu^ sensuum munus exe quuntur. Amens ab ( A) quae est particula
priuatiua, and mente id est consilio et animo. Lib. 4: 1 28 vide F and S

A mad man is he, that thinks or knows not what he does, or what he
says. (De) is a particle privative: A man out of his wit is he, who is
altogether foolish, or beside himself. Amentes, men out of their minds are
said, because by nature being void of reason, they only execute the gift of
the senses. Amens, one out of his mind, is said, of (A) which is a particle
privative, and mente the mind, that is, counsel and understanding, See Calap.
in verbis Amens and Demens and Letters F. I. S.

De gratia speciali, certa scientia and mero motu, talis clausula non valet, in
his, in quibus praesumitur Principem esse ignorantem. lib. 1. 53.

Of special grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, such a clause does not
avail in things, wherein it is presumed the King to be ignorant.

De bonis defuncti tres debet esse dispositio: (1) necessitatis, vt funeralia:
(2) vtilitatis, que chescun serra pay in tiel praecedenc: come doiet estre (3)
voluntatis, come legacies. li. 8. 136. vid. ^.

Of the goods of the dead there ought to be a threefold disposing: (1) of
necessity, as funerals: (2) of profit, that every one be paid in such
precedence as ought to he: (3) of the mind or will, as lega^ies. See T.

De nomine proprio non est curandum, dum in substantia non erretur, quia nomina
sunt mutabilia, res autem immobiles. Lib. 6. 6. ^

There is no great care to be had of the proper name, so there be not errou^ or
mistaking in the substance of the matter, because names are mutable, but things
are unremovable or firm.

De non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est ratio. lib. 4. 47. and 55.
li. 55.

Of things not appearing, and things not being, there is the like and same
reason.

Discendit ius quasi ponderosum, quod cadens deorsum recta linea vel
transuersali, and nunquam reascendit ea via, qua discendit, post mortem
antecessorum. lib. 3. 40. Bract. lib. 2. cap. 29. fol. 63.

Kight of inheritance does descend as an heavy or weighty thing, which falling
downward in the right line, or line collateral, never reascendeth the same
way, by the which it did descend, after the death of our ancestors. See H. and
Q.

Deus non agit bis in idipsum, lib. 4. 43. lib. 8. 118. vide litera N.

God does not punish one thing twice, See N.

Dicitur Seditio, quasi seorsim itio magni populi, quando itur ad manus, Virgil.

Ac velnti magno in populo cum saep^ co^rta est
Seditio: saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus.
Iam que faces et arma volant furor arma ministrat. lib. 4. 13. vide litera A.
and S. and Calap. verb. Seditio.
Sedition is said, as it were a departing of one from another of a great people
or multitude, when they go to battle, or handy strokes. Virgil.

As in a multitude, when once there does arise
Sedition: and people rude grow cruel in their mind.
Then fire and sword does fly,
And fury weapons straight does find. See A and S. and Calap. verbo Seditio.
Dicta est fellonia quia fieri debet fellio animo, lib. 4. 124. vide F.

It is therefore called felony, because it ought to be done with a
feloniousmind.

Difficile est, vt vnus homo vicem duorum sustineat. lib. 4. 118.

It is a hard thing to undergo, that one man should sustain, the room of two.

Discendi modus est, dum te nescire videbis.
Disce sed assidue, sed vt sapias. lib. 7. Epist. ibid. in fine.
There is a measure still to learn, until thou see;
Thou art not ignorant in any thing:
Diligently apply thy mind to learning then.
That wisdom unto thee thy study bring.
Distinguenda sunt tempora, and concordabis leges. lib. 9. 16.

The times being distinguished: the laws will be reconciled.

Dispositio quando referri potest ad duas res, ita, quod secundum relationem
vnam vitiatur, and secundum aliam vtilis est: tunc facienda est relatio ad
illam, vt valeat dispositio. Et ita semper fiat relatio et valeat dispositio.
lib. 6. 76. vide. Q.

When the disposition may be referred to two things, so that after one
relation, the matter is vitiat, and become naught; and according to another
relation good and profitable: then relation ought to be made to that whereby
the disposition may be available, and so let the relation be always had, that
the disp^sition may not prove bad. See Q.

Dispensatio mali prohibiti est de iure domino regi concessa propter
impossibilitatem praeuidendi de omnibus particularibus: Et dispensatio est mali
prohibiti, prouida relaxatio, vtilitate seu necessitate pensata. lib. 11. 88.

The dispensation with an evil prehibited of common right, is granted or
allowed to the King, because of an impossibility in foreseeing of every
particular thing: and a dispensation is a prouideut releasing of an evil
prohibited with profit or necessity, recompensed or requited.

Domus sua cuique est tutissimum refugium. lib. 5. part. 2. 91. lib. 11. 82.

A man's own house, to every one is a most safe refuge.

Dolosus versatur in generalibus vel vniuersalibus. lib. 2. 34. lib. 3. 81.

He that means caftely, is exercised, or occupies himself in generals, or
universalities.

Dolus circuitu non tollitur. lib. 11. 74

Crafty dealing is not taken away or deminished by circuity or shifting.

Dolus and fraus nemini patrocinari debent. lib. 3. 78.

Craft and deceit in no man ought to be patronized or borne out.

Dona clandestina sunt semper suspitiosa. lib. 3. 81

Clandestine or secret gifts are always suspicious.

Duo sunt instrumenta ad omnes res aut confirmandas, aut pugnandas: ratio, and
authoritas. lib. 8. 16. lib. 10. 27.

There are two instruments or means unto the confirming or overthrowing of all
things: reason, and authority.

Dulcia defecta modulatur carmina lingu^,
Cantator cygnns funeris ipse sui, etc. lib. 7. 17.
Sweet notes and tunes the Swan does make,
When lose he must his breath,
With joy he does his life forsake,
And sings unto his death.
Dulce lumen est, et delectabile occulis videre Solemn. Eccles. lib. 9. 58.

The light is pleasant, and it is a joyful thing to behold the Sun with the
eyes.

Duplex, et reciprocum est ligamen inter regem and subditum; quia sicu^
subditus tenetur ad obedientiam, ita Rex tenetur ad protectionem: merito igitur
legiantia dicitur a ligando, quia in se continet duplex ligamen, lib. 7. 5.
vide. L

Double, and reciprocal is the bond between the King and subject: for as much
as the subject is bound to obedience, so is the King to protection: worthily
therefore is allegiance said, a ligando, of binding, because it contains in it
self a double bond or tie. See L.

Dum proprietas verborum attenditur, saepenumero sensus verita^is amittitur.
lib. 7. 27. lib. 9. 110. vide. S. and P.

Whilst the property of the words is ^ttended unto, often times the truth we
let go. See S. and P.

E.
ETatinus rationandum, etc, quod vide. R. and V.

So far it is to be reasoned, etc. See R. and V.

Ea veritatis est natura, vt quamuis plurimi oppugnant, ipsa tamen demum
vincat, and vt palma afflorescat: ad rempus fo^sitan vi quadam praematur, sed
nullo tempore vlla ratione opprimatur. lib. 5. Epist. vide. D.

Such is the nature of truth, that although many do impugn or set against it,
yet in the end she overcomes, and does flourish like a Palm tree: for a
time, (peradventure) with force she may be pressed, but in no time, with any
reasoning oppressed. See P.

Eadem lex est, vbi eadem ratio, lib. 6. ^^. lib. 7. 7. vide R.

Like law, like reason. See R.

Emergit actio remoto impedimento. lib. 5. part. 2. 76. vide C and R.

The let removed an action is re^ted. See C and R.

Erroris and falsitatis ea est natura, ^nemine repugnante sensim per se
dilabantur et euanescunt. lib. 5. Epistola.

Such is the nature of error, an^ falsity, that although no man resist by
little and little they fall away an^ vanish.

Error (cui ignorantia gemella est indiuidua) in progressu adeo infinite s^
multiplicat, tam prodigiosas and noua^ Chimaeras procreat, tanta and tam
multiplici incertitudine fluctuat, et eiusmod^ venenum ex virulento ignorantiae
halitu imbibit: vt singulos quibus aliquid^ sui venenati halitus infundit,
pestifer^ contagione inficeat, seu contaminet. lib. 5. Epist. vide N. F. L.
vide plus ^bidem.

Error (to whom ignorance is ^ twinne inseparable) in going forward, does so
infinitely multiply, and increase* does bring forth such mosterous and new
Chimaraes, floateth in such and so many incertainties, and sucketh down such
poison, from the contagious breath of ignorance, as all such into whom she
infuseth any of her poisoned breath, she dangerously infecteth or intoxicates.

Chimaera monstrum dicitur, tria habens capita; vnum Leonis, aliud Chimaerae,
aliud Draconis, quorum capita ignem emittunt vide Calap. verbo Chimaera.

Chimaera a Monster having 3. heads 1. of a Lion, 2 of a Chimaera, 3. of a
Dragon whose heads blow out fire. Calap. in the word Chimera.

E^dem modo quo quid constituitur, dissoluitur. Lib. 4. 118. lib. 6. 53. lib.
9. 79.

By the same ways or means that any thing is established, by the same it is
dissolved or destroyed.

Est ipsorum Legislatorum, tanquam viua vox, etc. lib. 10. 101. vide. I. and R.

It is of lawmakers, as it were the living or lively voice, etc. See I. and R.

Euentus est qui ^x causa sequitur, and dicitur Euentus, quia ex causis euenit*
lib. 9. 81.

The event of a thing is that which follows from a cause, and it is said to
be an event, because it comes from a cause.

Ex antecedentibus et consequentibus fiat optima interpretatio. Lib. 2. 71.

From antecedence, and from consequence, things going before, and things
following after, is made the best interpretation.

Excusatur quis quod casmeum non apposuerit, vt si in toto tempore litigij fuit
vltra mare, quacunque occasion. lib. 8. 101.

Any one is excused, that he has not made his claim, as if during all the
time that the matter was litigious, he were beyond the seas by any occasion.

Erubescit Lex, filios castigare parents. lib. 8. 116.

The Law blusheth, or is ashamed, that the parents by their sons should ^e
chastised.

Erudimini qui iudicatis terram, ^eruite Domino in timore, et exultate ei ^um
tremore apprehendite disciplinam, ^e quando irascatur Dominus, et periatis ^e
iusta via. lib. 4. Epistola. Psalm 2. verse. 10. 11. 12.

Be wise ye that are Judges of the earth: serve the Lord in fear: and rejoice
unto him with reverence, attain unto learning, lest at any time the Lord be
angry, and ye perish from the right way.

Errorem ex animo solidis argumentis extorquere, intellectus est acerrimi,
animi integri, virisque probis, sobrijs, and sanis non est insolens. Li. 5.
Epistola.

Upon just ground to rectify an error in a man's own conscience or mind, is a
work of a clear understanding, and of a reformed will, and frequent with such
as be good men, and have sober and settled wits.

Exceptio semper vltimo ponenda est. lib. 9. 53. Regist. fol. 1.

An exception (sz. in writs, or conu^ances or, etc.) are always to be ^^ in
the last place.

Exilium est patriae priuatio natalis, s^ li mutatio, legum natiuarum amissio
l^ 7. 20. li. 9. 73. vide Calap. verbo exi^um.

Exile is a privation of ones Co^try, a changing of his native soil, loosing
of his own country laws.

Ex leproso parente, leprosus gene^tur filius. lib. 3. 41.

Of a leprous father or parent is b^gotten a leaprous son.

Expedit Reipublicae vt sit finis litiu^ propter communem omnium vtilitate Lib.
5. part. 2. 31. and 73. Lib. 6. 7. and ^ lib. 8. 37. lib. 9 79. vide B. and I.

It is necessary to a common-weal^ that there should be an end of
contr^uersies for the general profit or go^ of all. See B. and I.

Executorum tria sunt genera. and^ quod vide litera T.

There are three sorts of Executors. etc. See T.

Expediuntur securius negotia pluribus commiss^, et plus vident occuli, quam
occulus, and vna persona non potest supplere vicem duarum. Libro 4. 49.

Businesses committed to many, are dispatched more quietly or more safely, and
more sees many eyes then one eye, and one person cannot supply or fill the
room of two.

Expositio quae ex visceribus causae nascitur, est aptissima et fortissima.
lib. 10. 24.

The exposition that is made out of the bowels of a cause, is most apt and of
greatest strength.

Epositione instrumentorum mala gramatica, quoad fieri potest, vitanda est.
lib. 6. 39. vide M. and F. vide Calap. Gram.

In the exposition or construction of instruments, or writings, swaruing from
Grammar rules is to be shunned or avoided as much as may be. See N. and F.

Expressum cessare sacit tacitum. lib. 5. part 2. 97. lib. 7. 40. lib. 11. 24.

A matter or thing expressed, causes that to cease, or be of none effect that
is concealed.

Expressio eorum quae tacit in sunt, nihil operatur, and expressa non prosunt,
quae non expressa proderunt. lib. 4. 73. lib. 5. 2. part. 11. lib. 8. 56. and
145. lib. 9. 26. lib. 10. 39. lib. 11. 55.

The expressing of those things which secretly or closely are employed, works
nothing: and things expressed, profit nothing, which not expressed, would yet
out spring.

Expurgatio vulgatis (scilicet Ordalium) prohibetur, quia fabricante diabolo
est inuenta, cum sit contra preceptum Domini, Non tentabis Dominum Deum tuum.
lib. 9 32. vide inde Sintagniat iuris vniuersi, li. 48. c. 15. fo. 796.

The vulgar purgation (meaning the trial named Ordalium) is forbidden because
it was invented by working of the Devil, whereas it is against the
commandment of the Lord, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Holinsh. Cron.
in his description of Britain: page 177 and 178. Lamb. in his explication of
words Ordal. Manhood in his Forest law. fol. 5.

Extortio est crimen, quando quis color officij extorquet, quod non est
debitum, vel quod est supra debitum, velante tempus quod est debitum: and dicta
est crimen expilationis, and concussionis. Lib. 10. 102.

Extortion is a fault, when one does extort or wring from another by color of
an office, that which is not due, or that which is more then the due, or before
the time that it is due: and it is said a fault of pilling, or crushing.

Extraneus est^ subditus, qui extra terram, id est, potestatem Regis natus est.
lib. 7. 16. vide A. vide Calap. verbo Extraneus.

A Stranger or Forraigner is a subject who is borne out of the land, that is
the power or jurisdiction of the King. See A. See Calap. in the word Extraneus.

Extra territorium ius dicenti non paretur impune. lib. 10. 77.

He that obeys one, speaking law beyond his limit and precinct, shall no^
go without punishment.

F
FActum non dicitur quod non perseuerat. Lib. 5. part 2. 96.

That Is not to be said done, which has not continuance for time t^ come.

Falsa gramatica non vitiat concessionem. Lib. 6. 39. lib. 9. 48. vide M* et E.

False Grammar rules, or false l^ time does not vitiat or make a grant ^ none
effect. See E. and M.

Falsa Orthographia non vitiat concessionem. Lib. 9. 48. vide E. and M. et
supra. fastidiosi quidam sunt. etc. vide Q.

The false writing of sentences does not vitiat, or make a grant of none
effect. See Q.

Fatetur facinus qui iudicium fugit: li. 5. part. 2. 109. lib. 11. 60.

He confesses the fact, who to judgment turns his back.

Fatuus proprie dicitur a faudo, quia fatur quod puer primo fatur, id est, quia
inepta loquitur. lib. 4. 128. vide litera D. et S. vide Calap. verbo fatuus et
ineptus.

Fatuus, a fool, is derived a fando, of speaking foolishly, because he
speaks as a child at the first speaks, that is to say, childishly, unaptly,
foolishly. See D. and S. See Calap. in the word fatuus and ineptus.

Fellonia dicta, quia fieri debet fellio animo. lib. 4. 124. vide litera D.
dicta, etc.

Felony so called, because it ought to be done with a fellonious mind. See D.

Foelices merito perhibentur arts, siquidem primo, qui eas profitentur, summa
cura ac religione in id incumberent, vt possent plenam persectamque earum
cognitionem adipisci: deinde si in eas nullus censoriam authoritatem, absque
iudicio and doctrina censoriae in se assumeretur lib. 2. Epistola.

Happy were Arts if their professors would contend, and have a conscience to be
learned in them, and if none but the learned would take upon them, to give
judgment of them.

Fiat autem iniuria, cum quis pugno percussus fuit, verberatus vulneribus, seu
fustibus caesus: and etiam cum ei conuitium dictum fuerit, vel de co factum
carmen infamosum. lib. 9. 60. vide Calap. verbo iniuria.

Injury or wrong is done, when a man is stricken with the fist, beaten with
wounds, or beaten with staves or clubs; and also when reproach shall be cast
in his teeth, or when an infamous libell shall be made of him. See Calap. in
the word iniuria.

Fictio legis inique operatur alicuius damnum vel iniuriam. lib. 3. 36. vide
litera I:

The fiction of Law does unjustly work a damage, or injury to any man. See I:

Fieri non debuit, sed factum valuit: lib. 5: part 2: 38:

A thing ought not to be done, but being once done, it stands in force. Applied
to fines unduly levied.

Filius in vtero matris, est pars viscerum Marris: lib. 7: 8: vide H:

The son in the womb of his mother, is a part of the bowels of his mother.
See H.

Finis quam rationabilis debet esse, non definitur: sed omnibus circumstantijs
respectis, pendit ex iusticiorum discretione. Li: 11: 44:

A fine or amercement which shall be said reasonable, is not defined or set
down: but all circumstances waighed, it depends upon the discretion of the
Justices.

Finis rei attendenda est, and fines mandatorum Domini regis per rescripta sua
diligenter sunt obseruandae: Li: 5: part 2: 87: Finis coro^at opus lib: 9: 85:

The end of any matter is to be attended unto or regarded: and the end of the
Kings commandment by his writs are to be diligently kept and observed. The end
is the crown of a work.

Fuit haec sapientia quondam, Publica priuatis secernere, Sacra profanis: Li:
11: 73:

In formertimes this was for greatest wisdom taken:
Well to discern twixt sacred things to public use
Bequeath: and such as were to private use profane.
Fortior et potentior est dispositio legis quam hominis: li: 6: 38: 64: and 69:
li: 8: 152: li: 10: 67: and 80:

Stronger and of more force and power is the disposition of Law then of man.

Forma non obseruata, infertur adnullatia facti vel actus: lib: 5: 4:

The form not observed, the act (meaning the act of Parliament) is of no force
but anihilate.

Frequentibus argumentis, and collationibus latens veritas apperitur, cum sub
eisdem verbis saepe lateat muitiplex intellectus. li: 7. in frontispicio li.

Through often Arguments and conferring things together, the hidden truth is
opened: when oftentimes under the same words a manifold understanding lies
hid. In the frontispice of the book.

Fraus et ius nunquam cohabitant. lib. 10. 45.

Deceit, or fraud, and right never cohabite, or dwell together.

Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. lib. 8. 167.

It is but a vain thing to use many words, or long circumstance, when few
words, or short means will serve.

Frustra expectatur euentus, cuius effectus nullus sequitur. lib. 5. 15.

It is in vain the event to expect, whereof there follows none effect.

Frustra feruntur leges, nisi subditis et obedientibus. Libro. 7. 13. Call.

Laws in vain are made, but to subjects, and those that to obey, have learned
the trade.

Frustra feruntur leges, nisi severe puniantur contemptores lib. 4. Epistola.

In vain are laws or^aind unless the contemners of them be severely punished.

Fucatus error nuda veritate in multis est probabilior, et saepenumero
rationibus vincit veritatem error, lib. 2. 72. vide. lit. E. and V. and lib. 3.
Epist.

Painted error is more probable in many things, then naked truth, and
oftentimes in reasoning, error overcomes the truth. See E. and V.

-- Fugere pudor, rectumque, fidesque,
In quorum subiere locum fraudesque dolusque.
Insidiaeque et vis et amor sceleratus habendi. lib. 3. 80.
-- Shamfastnesse, goodness and faith are all fled.
Fraud, desceit, guile, force, greedy desire, are come in their stead.
Fugiens morbum incidi in medicum, lib. 8. 117. vide I. and M.

Whilst he seeks the sickness to shun,
He falls upon the Physician. See I. and M.
Furiosus, stipulari non potest, nec aliquid negotium agere, quia non
intelligit quid agit. lib. 4. 126. vide D.

A mad man cannot bargain, nor do any thing well,
Because what he does he cannot tell. See D.
Fundi appellatione omne adificium et omnis ager continetur. lib. 4. 87. Just,
institut: de verborum significatione fol. 19. vide A.

Under the name, or appellation o^ ground,
Every building and field is contained and found. See A.
G
-- Gaudet regno Troianus Acestes, Indicitque forum, et patribus dat iur:
vocatis. lib. 7. 13. Call. vide lit. H. hoc Pria. certatem, etc,

-- Of Kingdom his, Acestes takes great joy,
Courts he erects, and laws he sets, to people of new Troy.
Generale nihil ponit. lib. 2. 33.

A general speech determines of nothing.

Generale nihil certum implicat. Lib. 2. 33. Lib. 8. 98.

A general speech implies no thing certain.

Generalis regula generaliter est inintelligenda. Libro 6. 64

A general rule is to be taken or understood generally.

Generale dictum, est generaliter intelligendum. Libro. 8. 116.

A general speech is generally to be understood.

Generalis clausula non porrigitur ad ea quae specialiter sunt conprehensa.
lib. 8. 118. and 154 vide litera Q. simile.

A general clause does not reach to things specially mentioned. See Q. the
like.

Generale tantum valet in omnibus, quantum singular in singulis. lib. 11. 54.

A general speech is as much in generality as a particularity in particulars.

Gramatica falsa non vitiat, etc. Li. 6. 39. Lib. 8. 48. vide E F and M.

False Latin does not vitiat. etc. See M.

Grauius est diuinam, quam temporalem laedere maiestatem. Lib. 11. 29.

It is a more heavy thing to green the divine majesty: then to offend the
temporal authority.

H
1 HAbitatio hominis (2) delect^tio inhabitantis, (3) necessit^ luminis, (4)
salubritas aeris in measo^ sont desire. Lib. 9. 58. vide I.

1) Habitation of man (2) delight of the inhabitant, (3) necessary use of light
(4) wholesomnesse of the air, are four things in a dwelling desired. See I.

Haud unquam neque concio, nos nequ^ curia dictis
Audiuit pugnari animo sed semper eodem.
Et sentire eadem, atque eadem discer^ere vellet. lib. 10. 77.
No man did ever hear, that we did disagree,
In public place, or court in words, but with one mind:
Selfsame things to think, you shall us always see,
And e^e to judge, and right discern^ you shall us find.
Haec ita in promptu sunt* vt res pro^tione non egeat. Lib. 4. 15.

These things are so in readiness, that ^oo^e is altogether needless.

Haec fuit illius candida aetatis fides, and ^mplicitas, quae pauculis lineis
omnia fi^i firmamenta posuerunt, lib. 6. 43.

This was the fair faith and simpli^tie of former times, that they establi^ed
all things in a few lines.

Haeres dicitur ab haereditate: and non ^aereditas ab haerede. lib. 3. 89. lib.
8. 54. ^ide P.

An heir is said of an inheritance: and not the inheritance of an heir. See
P. propter, etc.

Haereditas est successio in vniuersum ^us, quod defunctus antecessor habuit,
^x quacunque causa acquisitionis, vel successionis: et alibi affinitatis iure
nul^a successio permittitur. lib. 7. 10. Bract. ^ib. 2. cap. 29. fol. 62. Just.
Institut. ex ^igestis. fol. 87. and de verborum signifi^at. 4^.

The inheritance is a succession into the whole right of the auncestour b^ing
dead: which he had by any mean^ of acquisition, or his own getting, ^ of
succession. And elsewhere it is sai^ that in Law no succession of affinity
permitted.

Haeres est alter ipse, and filius est p^patris. lib. 3. 13. vide litera F.

An heir is another the same: an^ son part of his father. See F.

Haeres est, aut iure proprietatis, a^ iure representationis. lib. 3. 41.

An Heir is of the Law of propriet^ or by the Law of representation.

Haereditas quaelibet naturaliter a^ haeredes haereditabiliter descendit: n^^
quam autem naturaliter ascendit. l. 3. ^ vide litera H. and Q. Gland. lib. 7.
cap* ^ fol. 44. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 29. Brit^ fol. 119.

Every inheritance does descend ^ the heirs hereditarily: but never ^cendeth
naturally.

Hesterni sumus, et ignoramus, et vi^ nostra sicut vmbra super terram. lib. 7. ^

We are but as yesterday, and our life is as it were a shadow upon earth, so
soon passes it away.

Historia est testis temporum, lux veritatis, and nuncius vetustatis, lib. 1.
Epist. lib. 8. Epist.

History is the witness of times, the light of the truth, and messenger of
antiquity.

Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum iura vocatis more daret populis, lib. 7. 13.

This was of Priams triumph chief, and glory his full great,
When people his together called, laws he to them did set. Virgil.
Hosts sunt, qui nobis, vel quibus nos bellum decernimus: caeteri proditores
and praedones sunt, lib. 7. 24. vide Calap. in verbo Hostis.

They are enemies, who to us, or we to them make war: others are traitors and
robbers.

Hoc Deus in sacris Scripturis iubet, hoc lex Naturae dictat, vt quilibet
subditus obediat superiori, lib. 7. 12.

This does God in sacred Scriptures command, and the law of Nature often
speak, that every subject should be obedient to his superior.

I
ID certum est, quod certum reddi potest, libro 4. 66. libro 5. 2. part 5 and
6. libro 9. 30. and 47.

That is a thing certain, which may be made certain.

Ideota, sieve Ideotes, est un greek parol, et properment signific. un private
home: que and ascun. public office. Apud Latinos, accipitur pur illiterate et
imperit^. Apud Iurisperitos, non compos mentis. Apud Anglos in commonparlance.
Natural fool, Libro 4. 128. vide Calap. ad verbam Ideota.

Ideota, or Ideotes, being a Greek word, properly signifies a private man, or
he that bears no public office: with the Latins it is taken for a man
unlearned or illiterate: with the Lawiers, a man not well in his wits: with the
English men, in common speech, a natural fool.

Id perfectum est, quod ex omnibus suis partibus constat: and nihil perfectu^
est, dum aliquid restat agendum. Lib. 9. 9. vide P

That thing is perfect which is firm in all parts: and nothing is said perfect
so long as some thing remains to be done. See P.

Id Rex potest, quod de iure potest. Lib. 9. 123. vide R

That thing the King may do, which of right he may do. See R

Ignorantia est duplex, facti, and iuris; and rursum ignorantia facti est
duplex, lectionis and linguae. Lib. 2. 3.

Ignorance is two fould, of fact and of law: and again, ignorance of fact is
two fould, of reading and of language.

Ignorantia gemella indiuidua erroris. quod vide littera E

Ignorance is an inseparable twinne of error. See E

Ignoratia facti excusat. Libr^ 2. 3. and 26. lib. 1. 45. lib. 3. 65. lib. 4.
82. and 18. lib. 5. 2. part 113. lib. 8. 92. vide infra impotentia* Et lit V
Just. Institut. fol. 118. de regulis iuris.

Ignorance of the deed excuses a man.

Ignorantia iuris non excusat. Lib. 1. 177. Lib. 6. 54. Lib. 2. 3. and 26.
Just. Insti.

Ignorance of the Law excuses not.

Ignorantia iudicis est plerunque calamitas innocentis. Lib. 4. Epistola.

The ignorance of the Judge is often times the calamity or misery of the
innocent.

Ignoramus multa, quae nobis non laterent, si veterum lectio fuit nobis
familiaris. Lib. 10. 73. and Epistola. ibidem vid^ litera M

We are ignorant in many things, which would not lie hidden from us, if the
reading of old writers were familier with us. See M.

Ille numerus and sensus abreuiation^^ accipiendus est: vt concessio non sit
inanis. lib. 9. 18.

That number and sense of abbreuiatio^s is to be received, that the grant be
not vain or void.

Impedire est pedem imponere, and impedimentum est quo quis impeditur, vt non
perficiat, quod ad se pe^tinet. li. 9. 51.

To let, or hinder, is to set foot in or upon, and an impediment is that
whereby any one is let or hindered, that he may not bring to pass, that which
belongs to him.

Impedimento remoto, emergit actio. vide Libr^. 5. 2. part. 77. vide litera C
and E.

The let being removed, the action is revived.

Imperitia est maxima Mechanichorum poena, and quilibet quaerit in qualibet
art peritos. Lib. 11. 54.

Want of skill is the greatest punishment of handy crafts men, and every man
seeks after those that are skillful in their Art or Trade.

Impotentia excusat legem. Libr^. 1. 98. lib. 4. 11. Lib. 5. 2. part. 22. Lib.
6. 21. and 68. Lib. 8. 172. Lib. 9. 73. Lib. 10. 139. and Lib. 8. 101. vide
suprae ignorant.

Impotency or weakness of body or mind, excuses the law, or dispenses with
the law.

Impunitas continuum affectu^ tribuit delinquendi, and minatur innocents, qui
parcit nocentibus. Lib. 4 45. vide infra. inter est Rei.

Impunity, or want of punishing, does minister a continual, or daily
affection, or will of offending, and he threatens to hurt the innocent, who
spares the offendant.

Inclusio vnius, est exclusio alterius. lib. 11. 59.

The including of one thing, is the exclusion of another thing.

Iudex animj sermo. lib. 5. 2. part. 118.

Speech is the Index of the mind.

In condendis legibus, sex sunt quae inrer alia veniunt praecipue consideranda:
ac primum, quidem ipsius in, qua feruntur (...), forma, quando alia ratio sit
vbi regimen est Monarchicum, alia vbj Aristocraticum, vbj Democraticum alia:
Aristo. de polit. lib. 2. fol. 48. lib. 3. fol. 91. 96. and 98. 113. and 115.
121. and 122. Alterum vero est, legum municipalium quae nationi illi propriae
sunt, in singulis suis generalibus certa cognitio; quando quidem periculosa
magis sit harum quam illarum legum sieve antiquatio, sieve innouatio, sieve
denique immutatio. Tertium est, vt verum sensum atque sententia^ illarum legum
quae tum obtinent, nec non quovsque leges superiores causa controuersae
prospexerint teneamus. Quartum, vt rations periculi aut damni, si quid in illo
casu reipublicae acciderit, respectu temporis, loci, personarum, aut vndicunque
alias, experientia assequamur. Quintum diligens cautio est, vt remedium aptum
at que commodum sic adhibeatur, ne dum aliquibus malis praeteritis mederi
cupimus, futura alia long periculotiora excitemus. Vltimum est, legum
ferundaru^ medium, quod totum in magnae illius et supraemae sane curiae
authoritate Parleamenti positum est. libro 4. Epist. Ad leges vero superiores
in methodum atque ordinem digerendas, tria requiruntur: (1) iudicium, ad eas
cognoscendas: (2) Ars, ad disponendas: denique, deligentia, ad complectendas
singulas, nequae omittatur. ibidem.

In making of laws, six things amongst many other, do principally fall into
consideration, (1) under what form of Common wealth the lawmakers be governed;
for one consideration is requisite, where the government is Monarchical: (2) to
know the several kinds of the municipall laws of his own proper nation, for
the innovation or change of some laws is most dangerous, and less peril in
the alteration of the others: (3) to understand what the true sense and
sentence of the law then standing is, and how far forth, former laws have
made provision in the case that falls into question: (4) by experience to
apprehend what have bin the causes of the danger, or hinderance that has
fallen out in that particular to the common wealth; either in respect of time,
place, person or otherwise: (5) to for^see that a proportionable remedy be
applied so, as that for curing of some defects past, there be not a stirring of
more dangerous effects in future: (6) the mean, and that only is by
authority of the high Court of Parleament. lib. 4. Epist. For the digesting of
former laws into method and order, three things are requifite: judgment to
know them, Art to dispose them and diligence to compr^hend every one of them,
that none be omi^ted there*

In disiunctiuis sufficit alterum esse verum. lib. 10. 59.

In disiuntiues, it is sufficient that one of them be true.

In aequali iure potior est conditio possidentis. lib. 4. 90.

In equality of Law, better is the condition of him, that is in possession.

In his quae de iure communi omnibus conceduntur, Consuetudo alicuius patriae,
vel loci non est alleganda. lib. 11. 85. vide C.

In things, which by the Common law to all men are granted or allowed, the
custom of any country or place is not to be alleged. See C.

Infida labilisque est memoria. lib. 1. Epist. lib. 7. Epistola. vide M, and N.
and O.

Unfaithful is memory, not to be trusted, and slippery. See M. and N.

In deliberationibus iudicia crebro maturescunt, in accelerato processu
nunquam. Fortescue: Cap. 53. lib. 8. Epistola. vide littera C.

In deliberations, judgments grow ripe and mature: but in hasty proceeding,
never. See C.

In multis quidem scientijs compendia authoribus ipsis profuerunt, verum alijs
non mediocriter obfuerunt. lib. 4. Epist: vide. C. plus inde.

In many knowledges, abridgements have greatly profited the Authors but they
have brought no small prejudice to others. See C. more at large.

In aedificijs, lapis male positus non est remouendus. lib. 11. 69.

There is no removing, of a stone not well laid in a building.

In factio quod se habet ad bonum et malum, magis de bono quam de malo
presumendum est. lib. 10. 56. vide litera O. odiosa, etc.

In any thing that has in it both good and bad: more respect of the good then
to the evil, is to be had. See O.

In fictione iuris semper subsistit aequitas, et lexfingit vbi subsistit
aequitas. lib. 10. 40. and 90. lib. 11. 51. vide litera F and S and L.

In a fiction of Law, equity has always a being, and the Law faineth, where
equity remains. See F L and S.

Infinitum iure reprobatur. lib. 6. 45. lib. 7. 45. Lib. 8. 168.

An endless proceeding in law, is reproved, or not liked.

In iuuine theologo conscientiae detrimentum, in iuuine Laegista bursa
detrimentum, in iuuine medico Coemeterij incrementum. Lib. 8. 117. vide litera
F and M.

In a young man a Divine, follows hurt to the Conscience, in a young man a
Lawier, loss or damage to the purse: in a young man a Physician, a fat
Churchyard.

Iniquum est aliquem sui rei esse iudicem. Lib. 8. 118. vide A.

It is an unjust, or inequal thing, that any one should be judge in his own
cause. See A.

Innouationes periculocissimae quod, vide letera Q. quod a sapientissimis, etc,
litera L. legis figend^ and L S. si quis ciuis, etc, and M.

Innouations are dangerous, whereof. See Q. that which of wise men. etc. See
L. making of laws and changing of them is dangerous. L. S. If any Citizen,
etc. and M.

In iustum est nisi tota lege inspecta vna eius particula proposita iudicare
vel respondere. Lib. 8. 117.

It is an unjust thing to judge or answer to any one particular propounded,
unless the whole law be looked into and considered.

In un meason font desire, 4. chooses 1. habitatio hominis, 2. delectatio
inhabitantis: 3. necessitas luminis 4. salubritas ae^is. Lib. 9. 58 vide H.

In an house are desired 4. things, 1 habitation of a man 2. the delight of the
dweller, 3. the necessary use of light, 4. the holsomenesse of the air. See H.

In omnibus sere minori ae^a^i, and vxori sub potestate viri succurr(...). Lib.
9. 84. Just. institut. ex digestis fol. 86.

In all things for the most part there is favor showed to those within age,
and the woman married.

In presentia maioris cessat potestas minoris. Lib. 10. 73. Lib. 9. 118.

In the presence of the greater, does cease the authority of the lesser.

In rebus manifestis errat qui authoritates legum allegat, quia perspicua vera
non sunt probanda. Libro. 5. 2. part. 67.

In things that are manifest and plain, there is a fault committed, when the
authorities of law are alleged, because things perspicuous true, are not to
be proved.

Interest Reipublicae ne maleficia remaneant impunita, quia impunitas semper ad
deteriora inuitat. Libro. 5. 2. part. 109. Lib. 4. 45. vide supra impunitas.

It is auailable to a commonwealth, that impunity be not added to ill doing:
because impunity does always stir up to commit worser things.

Interest Reipublicae ne quis sua re male vtatur. lib. 6. 37.

It is to a common wealth available and profiting, that no man do use amiss
that is his own thing.

Interest Reipublicae quod sit finis litium propter communem omnium vtilitatem.
li 4. 15. lib. 5. 2. part 73. lib. 69. and 45. lib. 8. 37. lib. 9. 79. lib. 11.
69. vide E. and B.

It is profitable to a Commonwealth that there be an end of controversies, for
the general profit of all. See B. and E.

Interpretari and concordare leges legibus, est optimus interpretandi modus.
lib. 8. 169. vide S. Sic interpretari, etc.

To expound and to bring Laws to agree together, it is of expounding the best
manner.

Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt vt iure regantur. lib. 2. 25. Lib. 3. 32. lib. 5.
2. part 100. lib. 9. 123.

The Laws themselves desirous are.
From equity to have their square.
Ipsorum Legislatorum tanquam viua vox est, rebus, non verbis legem imponimus.
lib. 10. 101. vide litera R.

It is as it were the living voice of the Lawmakers; we set a law not to
words but to matters. See R.

Iudex est lex loquens. Li. 7. 4.

The Judge is a Law speaking.

Iudex bonus nihil ex arbitrio suo faciat, nec proposito domesticae voluntatis,
sed iuxta leges, and iura pronunciet: lib. 7: 27. Call. vide B.

A good Judge may do nothing after his own fantasy, nor according to a
purpose of his own domestical affection: but according to the laws and
right, pronounce a sentence. See B.

Iudicandum est legibus non exemplis: Li. 4. 33.

Things ought to be judged by Laws and not by examples.

Iudicis officium est, vt res ita rerum tempora quaerere, quaesito tempore
tutus eris. lib. 10. 82. and 127.

As it is the office of a Judge to seek out the things themselves, so the
times of things; the time once found, thou shall be safe and on a sure ground.

Iudicium non de suo Iudice datum, nullius momenti est: Just. institut: ex
digestis. fol. 85. 11. Lib. 10. 76.

A judgment given, not by his proper Judge, is of no weight or moment.

Iudicia posteriora, sunt in lege fortiora: lib. 8. 97.

The later judgments in law, are of greater force and strength.

Iudices videte quid facietis etc. quod vide litera V. and E. Erudimini, etc.

Judges have a care what you do, etc. whereof See V.

Iudicium est iuris dictum. etc. Lib. 4. Epist. li. 9. 13. lib. 10. 42. vide
litera. M. N. and V.

Judgment is iuris dictum the saying or speaking of the law. See M. N. and V.

Iurare in propria causa est in hoc seculo saepenumero praecipitium Diaboli ad
destruendas miserorum animas ad infernum. lib. 4. 95.

A man to swear in his own cause, is in this world oftentimes a headlong
casting down into Hell the souls of wretched men there to be destroyed.

Iurare per Deum actus Religionis est, quo Deus testis adhibetur, tanquam is
qui sit omnium rerum maximus, etc. lib. 4. 95.

To swear by God is an action of Religion, wherein God is called as a
witness, who of all things is the greatest, etc.

Iura naturalia sunt immutabilia, lib. 7. 13. and 25. vide L.

The Laws of Nature are immutable, or without change. Whereof See L.

Iurisdictio est potestas de publico introducta cum necessitate iurisdicendi.
Libro. 10. 73. vide Calap. verbo iurisdictio.

Jurisdiction is a power by public decree, brought in of a necessity of law
speaking.

Iurisprudentia legis communis Angliae est scientia socialis and copiosa. lib
7. 28.

The knowledge of the law of England, is a knowledge sociable, and copious or
plentiful.

Ius and fraus nunquam cohabitant: lib. 10. 45.

Right and fraud never dwell together.

Ius natural est, quod apud omnes homines eandem habet potestatem: lib: 7: 12:
Aristo: Fortesc. fol. 19. cap. 16.

That is the law of Nature, which has the like power amongst all men.

Iustitia est suum cuique tribuere. lib: 9. 111, Fortesc. cap. 23. fol. 26.

That is justice to yield to every one that which is his own.

Iustitia omnium virtutum Princeps est, tuta et fida comes humanae vitae, ea
enim imperia, regna, populi, civitates reguntur: quae si e medio tollatur, nec
constare possit hominum societas: lib. 3. in frontispitio libri. Isodorus.

Justice is the chief of all virtues: a sure and faithful companion of man's
life: for by it Empires, Kingdoms, People, and Cities are governed: which if
it should be taken from among us, the society of men could not consist or have
being.

Ius testamentorum pertinet ad Ordiarium. lib. 5. 9. lib. 9. 39. and 38. vide
libera O. olim.

Right Testamentary belongs to the Ordinary.

Iusticia in se virtutes continet omnes. lib. 3. in frontis^. lib.

Justice in her self contains all other virtues.

Iusticia non nouit Patrem, matrem, neque fratrem: personam non accipit, sed
Deum imitatur. Libro 10. in frontisp. lib.

Justice knows not father, mother, nor brother: She accepts or respects no
man's person, but follows God alone.

Iustum non est, aliquem antenatum mortuum facere bastardum; qui toto tempore
suo pro legitimo habebatur. lib. 8. 110.

It is no right or justice, to make any one a Bastard borne before wedlock,
being dead: who for lawful by all his life time was reckoned.

Iustus vt palma florebit, and sicut Cederus Libani multiplicabitur. li: 2.
Epist. Psalm. 92. verse. 11.

The just shall flourish like a Palm tree, and spread abroad as the Cedars of
Libanus.

L
LAbor labori laborem addit: lib. 7. Epistola. vide. V. vnda, etc.

Labor adds labor to labor. See V.

Labor inutilis stultus. vide L.

Labor unprofitable is foolish. See letter L.

Laudaturq. domus longos qui prospicit agros. lib. 9. 58.

And to that House all praises yields.
Which has large prospects to the fields.
Laudatoris copia nunquam sufficient, quia nunquam deficiet materia laudis. lib.
8. 116. vide lit. C.

The plenty of praisers shall never be sufficient, because matter of praise
shall never be deficient. See C.

Languor prolixus grauat medicum. etc. vide S.

A long sickness, etc. See S.

Lectione, non verba sed veritas amanda, saepe autem reperitur simplicitas
veridicta, and falsitas composita: quae hominem suis errorribus allicit, and
per linguae ornamentum laqueos dulces aspergit: and doctrina in multis est,
quibus deest oration. Lib. 3. Epistola. vide E.

In reading, not words but truth is to beloved: yea, oftentimes simplicity is
found telling the truth, when falsity is decked up and trimmed: who does allure
the hearts of men by her errors: and by the eloquence of the tongue does spread
sweet snares: and there is in many learning, in whom the gift of fine speech
is wanting. See E.

Lectio certa prodest, varia delectat, qui quo destinauit peruenire vult, vnam
sequatur viam, non per multas vagetur: non ire istud, sed errare est. Libro. 2.
in frontispicio Libri. Seneca.

A reading certain brings profit, variety delights, he that desires to
come to the place he purposed, let him follow one way, not wander in many: for
that is not to go foreward, but rather to err.

Lectionem, auditionem, congressus, meditationem, recordationem, omnia haec and
singula fateor ad legum nostrarum cognitionem requiri, vtpote quae ex tot,
tamque infinitis prope particularibus consistit: verum ordinata in scribendi
obseruatio and methodus, etiam caeteris omnibus est magis necessaria: est enim
lectio sine auditione preter taediu^ obscura, sine lectione auditio lubrica and
incerta, neutra sine congressu neque cum congressu vtraque absque meditatione,
and recordatione, neque omnia haec sine iusta, et ordinata obseruatione ac
methodo tempestiuos fructus proferunt lib. 1 Epist. vide V. and initium inde vt
non assentior.

Reading, hearing, conference, meditatation, and recordation are necessary (I
confess) to the knowledge of the Law, because it consists upon so many and
almost infinite particulers: but an orderly observation in writing is most
requisite of them all, for reading without ^hearing is (besides irksomenesse)
dark, and hearing without reading is slippery and uncertain, neither of them
without conference, nor both of them with conference without meditation and
recordation, neither all those together without due and orderly observation,
bring forth seasonable fruit.

Leges Angliae sunt tripertitae, Ius commune, Consuetudines, ac Decreta
comitiorum. Libro 4. Epistola Fortescue Cap. 8. fol. 12. cap. 15. fol. 19.

The Common Laws of England consist of 3. parts: (1) Common Law, (2) Customs,
(3) Acts of Parliament.

Leges Angliae communes ex omnibus legibus humanis and aequissimae illae sunt,
certissimaeque, and integritatis maximae, minimae que morae, vtilissimae,
denique facillimaeque obseruatae. Lib. 2. Epist. vide litera N. nulla est
margareta. etc.

The Common Laws of England are of all humane laws the most equal, and most
certain, of greatest antiquity, and of least delay most profitable, and most
easy to be kept and observed. See N. There is no Jewel in the world, etc.

Legis scientia est suauissima vsus eius in administranda iustitia vtilissima.
lib. 1. Legibus condendis, etc. vide litera, I.

The knowledge of the Law is pleasant, and the use or practice thereof to the
administration of justice most profitable. Whereof see I. In making of Laws,
etc.

Leges et consuetudines Angliae si, etc. Lib. 2. Epist. lib. 3. Epist. lib. 6.
Epist. Fortesc. cap. 17. fol. 20. vide C.

The Laws and customs of England, if they, etc. Whereof see C. at large.

Leges antiquae Angliae, etc. quod vide A. Antiquae Leges, etc. Libro. 4. Epist.

The ancient laws of England, etc. Whereof see A.

Leges naturae perfectissimae sunt, and immutabiles, humani vero iuris conditio
semper in infinitum decurrit, and nihil est in eo quod perpetuo stare possit,
leges humanae nascuntur, vinunt, and moriuntur. Libro 7. 25. Call. vide litera I.

The Laws of Nature are most perfect and immutable: the condition of humane
laws grow into an infiniteness: and there is nothing in them permanent or
stable, humane laws are bred, they live, and they die, Call. See I.

Leges figendi et refigendi consuetudo periculosissima est. lib. 4. Epist. vide
Q. and S. Si quis Ciuis, etc. Aristot. p^l^. lib. 2. fol. 59. and 60.

The custom of making, and undoing of laws is most dangerous. See Q. and S.

Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant. lib. 1. 25. li. 8. 137. lib.
11. 59. vide. P.

The latter laws do repeal the former being contrary. See P.

Legum iusta obseruatio, vt in genere omnes absque vlla limitatione, aut
exceptione respicit, ita praecipue Principes, Nobiles, Iudices, et Magistratus:
quorum fidej et ^utelae earum debita Administratio, (quam vitam atque animam
legum vere dixeris) commititur, ac demandatur: quando illi respectu ordinis, et
loci quem obtinent, long eminentores* atque conspicuj prae alijs existunt. Hic
ergo tria necessaria requiruntur, iudicium, authoritas, et voluntas. Iudi^ium
aut res, aut personas respicit: (1) quid factu rectu^, iustumque, quid ita
malum ac declinandum: (2) quibus praemia merito debentur, quibus etiam penae,
ac vt in vtrisque quanti^as et qualitas obserutur. Authoritas ad bonos tuendos,
malos puniendos: (3) voluntas prompta, atque expedita ad sinceram ac debitam
legum executionem. Quoniam vero multi aduersarij, et presertim duo hosts
aperti huic iustae ac promptae voluntati semper insidiantur, duplici armatura
grauj et defensiua opus est. (1) integ^itas aduersus sex hosts latentes,
videlicet, dona, affectiones, rogationes, iras, praecipitationem, and morasam
cunctationem: (2) fortitudine and constantia, contra terrorem malitiae, et
timorem periculj, qui duo hosts sunt aperti acerrimique. Videte iudices quid
faciatis. etc. quod vide lit. V. lib. 4.

The due observation of the laws does generally without any limitation or
exception concern all: but principally Princes, Nobles, Judges, and
Magistrates, to whose custody and charge the due execution (the very life) and
soul of the laws) is committed: for that they inrespect of their places, are
more emynent and conspicuous then other men; wherein three things are
necessarily required. (1) Understanding: (2) Authority: (3) Will. Understanding
concerns things and persons that is, (1) what is right, and just to be done,
and what ill, and to be avoided: (2 what persons for merit are to be rewarded,
and what for offenses are to be punished, and in both regard and punishment to
observe quality and quantity: Authority to protect the good, and to chastise
the ill: Will prompt and ready, duly, sincerly, and truly to execute the Law.
But for as much as many adversaries, and two open enemies do continually lie in
wait, to assault this good and ready will, it must of necessity have two
defensive armors of proof. (1) Integrity, against these six secret
adversaries, gifts, affections, entreaty, anger, precipitation, and morosa
cunctatio, peevish delay: (2) Fortitude and constancy against the terror of
malice, and fear of danger, two open and violent enemies. Have a care ye
judges what ye do, etc. Wherefore see V.

Lex est certa ratio e mente diuina manans, quae recta suadet prohibetque
contraria. Li. 1. in frontesp.

Law is a reason certain, flowing from a divine mind, which right things
persuades, and prohibiteth the contrary.

Lex est sanctio sancta, iubens honesta, prohibens contraria. lib. 1. 131.
Fortes. cap. 3. fol. 4. cap. 39. fol. 47. Cicero delegibus lib. 1. fol. 319.

Law is an holy ordinance, commanding holy things, and forbidding the contrary.

Lex est commune praeceptum virorum prudentium consultum delictorum, quae
sponte vel ignorantia contrahuntur communis rei publicae sponsio. Lib. 2. in
frontes. lib. Bract. lib. 1. fol. 2.

Law is a common precept, a decree of wise men, a general agreement of a
Commonweal, which is drawn together either of a free will, or ignorance.
Papiman Bract.

Lex dicitur a ligando, quia obligat: vel dicitur a legendo, quia public
legatur lib. 2. in frontes. lib. Isodorus.

Law is said a ligando, of binding, because it binds: or a legendo, because
it is openly read.

Lex Angliae non patitur absurdum, lib. 9. 22.

The law of England cannot abide an absurd thing.

Lex non requirit verificari, quod apparet curiae. vide lit. Q. lib. 9. 54.

The law does not require that that be auerred, which to the Court appears.
See Q.

Lex tibi quod iustum est, Iudicis ore refert. lib. 10. in frontisp. lib.

Law unto thee that is just and right,
By mouth of Judge, does it recite.
Lex non distinguit, sed omnia membra diuidentia, inuenienda sunt et probanda
per legem ipsam. lib. 7. 5. vide V.

Law does distinguish, but all members or parts deuding are to be proved and
found out by the law it self. See P. where the law does not. etc.

Lex fingit vbi subsistit aequitas. lib. 10. 9. and 40. lib. 11. 51. vide. I.
F. and S.

The law faineth, where equity subsisteth See F. I. S.

Lex neminem cogit ad impossibilia. lib. 5. 2. part. 75. lib. 9. 73.

The law does not compel, or constrain any man to things impossible.

Lex neminem cogit ad vana seu inutilia peraganda lib. 5. 2. part. 21.

The law does not enforce any man to do things that are vain and fruitless.

Lex non praecipit inutilia, quia inutilis labor ftultus. li. 5. 2. part 98*

The law does not command fruitless things, because fruitless labor is
foolish and idle.

Lex non fauet delicatorum votis. lib. 9. 58.

The law does not f^uour, or bear with the desires of those that are dainty,
or delicate.

Lex scripta si cessat, id custodire oportet quod moribus, et consuetudine
inductum est, and si qua in re hoc deficerit, tunc id quod proximum et
consequens ej est, et si id non appareat, tunc ius quo vrbs Romana vtatur
seruari oportet. lib. 7. 18. 19. Cal^p.

Where the law written does fail, we ought to observe that which is brought in,
and approved by manners and custom; and if in any part that shall fail, then
that is nearest and most agreeable to the same; and if that shall not appear,
then we ought to observe that Law which the City of Rome does use. See Call.

Lex multa proficientia, et perficientia paucis comprehendit. li. 10. 34.

The Law does comprehend in few words, many things profiting, and perfecting.

Legis minister non tenetur in executione officij fugere, aut retro cedere. Li:
9. 68.

The officer of the Law in the execution of his office, is not bound to fly, or
go back.

Licet consuetudo sit magnae authoritatis, nunquam tamen praeiudicat manefestae
veritati. lib. 4. 18. and Li. 6. 6.

Although custom be of great authority, yet it does never bring prejudice to a
manifest verity. See C.
Like Apothecaries Boxes. Quorum titulj pollicentur remedia sed pixides ipsa
venena continent. lib. 7. Epist.
Like Apothecaries boxes, whose titles do promise remedies, but the boxes
themselves are full of venime. See Q.
Ligeantia est vinculum fidei. lib. 7. 4. Call:

Legiance is the bond of faith. Se^. Call.

Ligeantia est quasi legis essentia. lib. 7. 4. Call.

Legeance is as it were, the essence of the law.

Ligeantia est ligamentum quasi ligatio mentium, quia sicut ligamentum est
connexio articulorum and iuncturarum. etc. lib. 7. 4. Call.

Legeance is a band or tie, as it were the binding of minds together: because
as ligamentum, is a connextion or knitting of the arteries and joints, etc. Call.

Ligeantia naturalis millis claustris coercetur nullis maetis refraenatur
nullis finibus premitur. li: 7. 10. Call.

Legiance natural is not restrained by any shuttings: it is not refrained or
kept back by any lymit or marks: it is not kept in with any bonds. See Call.

Ligeantia localis est ligeantia insima, and minima, and maxima incerta* lib.
7. 6. Local allegiance is the lowest or basest allegiance, and it is the least
and most uncertain. Call.

Ligeantia est quadruplex, naturalis, absoluta, pura, et indefinita. lib. 7. 5.

Allegiance is fourefould, natural, absolute, pure, and indefinite. Call.

Locus si saluare potuisset, Satan de caelo pro sua inobedientia non
cecidisset: Adam in Paradiso non cecidisset: Lot in monte non cecidisset, sed
potius in Sodom. Lib. 7. 24. vide S.

If place could have saved, Satan for his inobedience had not fallen from
Heaven, Adam in Paradise had not fallen, Lot in the mountain had not fallen,
but rather in Sodom. Call. See letter S.

Loquendum vt vulgus, sentiendum vt docti. lib. 7. 11. Libro. 4. 46.

We ought to speak as the common people, but we ought to think as learned
men. Call.

Longissimum vitae hominum est centum anni. Lib. 20. 50.

The longest life of man, is an hundred years.

M
MAledicta expositio quae corrumpit textum. lib. 2. 24. lib. 4. 35. lib. 8. 56.
and 154.

It is an ill exposition, that to a text brings dostruction.

Maleficia non debent remanere impunita, quia impunitas communem affectum
tribuit delinquendi, and minatur innocents, qui parcit nocentibus. Lib. 4. 45.
vide I.

Evil doings ought not to go unpunished, because impunity ministers a
continual or daily affection of offending, and he threateneth the innocent,
who spares the delinquent. See I.

Maleficijs hominum, est obuiandum. Lib. 4. 15.

The evil doings of men, ought to be met withal.

Malu^, quo co^munius eo peius. li. 4. 109.

An evil thing, the more common, the worser.

Mala Gramatica non vitiat instrumenta. Lib. 6. 39. Lib. 8. 48. vide. E and F.

False Latin, does not vitiat or make writings or instruments to be void and
naught. See E. and F.

Malorum imitatio exemplum plerunque superat, bonorum vero consectatio, nimis
manca exemplar saepissime non attingit. Lib. 10. Epistola.

The imitation of things that be evil, does for the most part exceed the
example, but the following after good things, does most commonly come short of
the president.

Manifesta probatione non indigent. Libro. 7. 40.

Plain things need no proof.

Maris and faeminae coniunctio est de iure naturae. lib. 7. 13. Arist. lib. 1.
2. Poli. Cicero. de offi. fol. 10. and de amicit. 26.

The conjunction of man and woman are of the law of nature.

Matrimonium subsequens tollit peccatum praecedens lib. 6. 65.

Marriage following, takes away the sin preceding.

Matrimonium subsequens legitimos facit quoad Sacerdotium, non quoad
successionem, propter consuetudinem regni quae se habet in contrarium. Lib. 8.
101. Merton. cap. 9. Fortes. cap. 39. and 40 fol. 47. and 51.

Matrimony following makes men lawful or ligitimate, as touching Preisthood:
but not touching sucession, because of the custom of the realm which is to
the contrary.

Maturiora sunt vota mulierum, quam virorum lib. 6. 71.

The desires of women are more ripe, then of men.

Medicina est duplex, remouens, et promouens, remouens morbum, promouens ad
salutem. Lib. 8. 116, and 117. vide F. et I.

Medicine is twofould, removing, and going forward: removing the disease, and
going forward toward health. See F. and I

Medicum oportet esse Philosophum, vbi enim Philosophus desinit, medicus
incipit. Lib. 8. 117.

It is necessary, that a Physician be a Philosopher, for where ye Philosopher
ends, there the Physician begins.

Meditationem, etc. quod vide lit. L. lectionem.

Meditation, recordationem, etc. See letter L.

Melius est iudicare secundum leges, and literas, quam ex propria sententia,
and scientia. libro 4. Epistola.

It is a better thing to judge after the law, and letters written, then from a
man's proper sentence or science.

Melius est omnia pati, quam malo consentire. lib. 5. 2. part. 30.

It is better to suffer all evils, then to consent unto evil.

Melius est petere fontes, quam sectariuolos. lib. 4 Epistola. lib. 8. 116.
lib. 10. 41. and 118. vide S.

It is better to go to the fountains themselves, then to follow after the
small rivers. See S.

Misera est seruitus, vbi ius est vagum. Lib. 6. 42.

It is a miserable bondage, or slauory: when the law is wandering, or
uncertain.

Memoriae nihil est adeo aut insitum, aut infixum animo, quin interuallo
temporis obscurari, sensimque sine sensu deleri possit. lib. 1. Epist. vide V.
and I.

Nothing is or can be so fixed in mind, or fastened in memory, but in short
time it may be loosoned, and by little and little quite lost, or blotted out.
See I. and V.

Minatur innocents qui parcit nocentibus. li. 4. 45. vide I. Impunitas
continuum affectum. etc.

He threatens the innocent, who spares the nocent. See I. Impunity does breed
a continual affection. etc.

Modus and conuentio vincunt legem. Lib. 2. 73. lib. 7. 28.

Measure or form, and covenant do overcome or master the Law,

Mors in olla. lib. 7. Epist.

Death is in the pot.

Monopolium dicitur (...) quod est cum vnus solus aliquod genus mercaturae
vniuersum emit, precium ad suum libitu^ statuens. lib. 11. 68. vide Call. Vero.
Monopolium.

Monopoly is said of (...) that is, when one alone does buy the whole kind of a
merchandise, and thereof only at his own will and pleasure does set price.
See Call.

Mos retinendus est fidelissime vetustatis: quae preter consuetudinem et more^
maiorum fiunt, neque placent neque recta videntur: and frequentia actus multum
operatur. lib. 4. 78. et ibid in Epistola. vide litera. Q.

The custom or fashion of old antiquity is most faithfully or firmly to be
observed: such things as are done contrary to the custom and fashion of our
forefathers neither do please, neither seem to be right, and frequency of an
act works much.

Mortuus est pater, and quasi non est mortuus, quia reliquit similem sibi. Lib.
3. 12.

The father is dead, and as it were not dead: since he has left another like
himself in his stead.

-- Motos praestat componere fluctus. lib. 10 Epistola.

It is a matter of great good, to still the raging of the flood.

Mulier 3. habet significationes, (1) sub nomine mulieris continetur quaelibet
femina, (2) proprie continetur mulier, quae Virgo non est: (3) appellatione
mulieris continetur vxor. lib. 8. 103. vide. Calap vbi mulier.

The word mulier woman, has three significations, (1) under the name of woman
is contained every feminine: (2) properly she is said a woman which not a
virgin: (3) under the appellation of a woman is contained, wife. See Calap.

Mulier nobilis si nupserit ignobili desinit esse nobilis. lib. 4. 118. and
lib. 6. 53. and 54. vide Q.

A gentlewoman of nobility, if she mary a man of lower birth, she loses her
degree. See Q.

Multa conceduntur per obliquum, quae non conceduntur de directo. lib. 6. 47.

Many things are admitted upon the bye, which are not granted directly.

Multa renascentur, quae nunc cecidere, cadentque.
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, lib. 10. 133.
Many words revived shall be,
which now are fallen to ground:
And many now of great account,
again no where be found.
Multa ignoramus quae nos non laterent, si veterum lectio suit nobis
familiaris. Libro. 10. 73. and Epistola ibidem.

We are ignorant of many things which would not be hid from us, if the reading
of old Authors were familiar with us.

Multitudo err^ntium, non parit errori patrocinium. Li. 4. 94.

The number of them that go on erring, does not defense to error bring.

Multo vtilius ^st pauca effundere idonea, quam multis iuutilibus homines
grauare. Libr. 4. 20.

It is much better to speak a few words fitting, then with many improfitable
to men burden to bring.

Mutua debet esse domini and fidelitatis connexio, ita quod quantu^ debet
domino ex homagio, tantum illi debet Dominus ex Dominio, praeter solam
reuerentiam. Libr^ 7. 4. Call.

The connection of the Lord and the Tenants fealty ought to be mutual, so
that how much he owes to the Lord from his homage, so much the Lord owes him
from his power or dominion, reverence only excepted.

N
NAturalia and vera artificialia sunt infinita, nullus terminus falso, error
immensus. lib. 5. Epistola.

Things natural and truly artificial are finite, and have their end, there is
no limit to falsehood or untroth, error is unmeasurable.

Necessitas facit licitum quod alias licitum non est, and necessitas inducit
priuilegium quod iure priuatur lib. 10. 61.

Necessity makes lawful that which otherwise was not lawful: and necessity
brings in a privilege which by the law is deprived.

Necessitas saepe numero vincit communem legem, and quod necessarium est,
licitum est. Li. 5. 2. part 40.

Necessity oftentimes does overcome the common Law: and that which is
necessary, is lawful.

Negligentia crassa and supina. lib. 4. 10.

Negligence gross and careless.

Negligentia semper habet comitem infortunium. Lib. 8. 133.

Negligence has always for her companion missortune or ill luck.

Nemo oportet esse sapien^iorem legibus: Lib. 6. in frontispicio Libri: lib. 7.
vide O.

No man ought to be wiser then the Laws.

Nemo debet bis vexari vel puniri pro vno delicto, Deus ipse non agit bis in id
ipsum. lib. 4 43. lib. 8. 118. lib. 11. 54. vide D.

No man ought to be vexed or punished twice for one fault, God does not deal
twice against one, and the same thing.

Nemo debet bis vexari, si constat curiae quod sit provna and eadem causa: lib.
5. 2. part 61.

No man ought to be vexed or grieved twice, if it may appear to the Court,
that it is for one and the same cause.

Nemo potest plus iuris ad alium transfer quam ipse habet, and quod per me
non possum, nec per alium Lib. 4 24. lib. 5. 2: part. 113. lib. 6. 57: and 68.
and Lib. 8. 63. Just. institut exdigestis fol. 95.

No man can transfer or give over to another more right then he himself
has: and that which I cannot do by my self, I cannot by another.

Nemo potest aliquam partem recte intelligere, antequam totum iterum atque
iterum perlegerit lib. 3. 59.

No man can rightly any part well understand; before he has read the whole
over again and again.

Nemo prohibetur plures negotiationes sieve arts exercere. Lib. 11. 54.

No man is forbidden to use, and exercise many arts, or trades.

Nemo presumitur esse immemor sua aeternae salutis, and maxim in articulo
mortis. Lib. 6. 76.

It is to be presumed that no man is unmindful of his eternal salvation, and
especially at the time of his death.

Nemo tenetur deuinare. lib. 4. 28. and lib. 10. 55.

No man is bound to divine, or foretell.

Nihil aliud potest Rex in terris, cum sit Dei vicarius and minister, quam quod
de iure potest: Itaque cum sit author iuris (potestas iuris sua est) and non
iniuriae, non debet inde iniuriarium nasci occasio, vnde iura nascuntur. lib.
11. 73.

The King can do nothing upon earth when he is the Vicar and Minister of God,
then that which of right he may do: also when he is the Author of right: (for
the power of Law is his) and not of wrong or injury, occasion of injuries ought
not to spring, from whence the laws do grow or have their being.

Nihil tam conueniens est naturali aequitati, quam voluntatem Domini, volentis
suam rem in aliam transfer, ratam haberi. lib. 1. 100. Lib. 6. 64. Just.
Insti. lib. 2. fol. 93.

There is nothing more agreeable to natural equity, then to make firm or
ratify the will of the Lord, willing to transfer his substance over to
another.

Nihil tam conueniens est naturali aequitati, quam vnumquodq. dissolui eo
ligamine, quo ligatum est. lib. 2. 53. Lib. 4. 57. lib. 5. 26. Li. 6. 43. Just.
institut. ex digestis. fol. 97.

There is nothing more agreeable to natural equity, then every thing to be
dissolved by that band or tie, by the which it was first bound or coupled.

Nihil in lege intolerabilius est quam eandem rem diuerso iure censeri. Lib. 4.
93.

There is nothing in the Law more intolerable, then the same thing to be
valued or prysed with diverse Law, or several opinions.

Nihil est adeo memoriae infitum, aut infixum animo, quin interuallo temporis
obscurari, sensimq. sine sensu deleri possit. lib. 1. Epistola lib. 7. Epist.
vid^ littera I. and M. and O.

Nothing is or can be so fixed inminde, or fastened in memory, but in short
time it may be loosened out of the one, and by little and little quite lost
out of the other.

Nihil facit error nominis cum corpori constat. lib. 6. 65. lib. 11. 21.

It makes no matter for the error, or mistaking of the name when in substance
it stands.

Nihil plane est, quod de legibus dici, aut scribi potest, quod Capita de
ijsdem, videlicet, condendis, corrigendis, dirigendis, exponendis, addiscendis,
and obseruandis nequeant reduci. Lib. 4. Epistola. vide litera I. in condendis
etc. ibidem valde bonum.

There is nothing that can be said or written of Laws, but may be reduced
to one of these heads: making, correcting, digesting, expounding, learning, or
observing. See letter I. in making laws, etc. there at large.

Nihil simul natum seu inuentum, et perfectum lib. 10. 142.

Nothing together or at once borne, or invented, is perfect.

Nimia altercatione veritas amittitur. Lib. 10. Epist. vide V. Veritas, etc.

With too much brauling the truth is lost. See V.

Nimia subtilitas in iure reprobatur. Li. 4. 5. and 41. Li. 5. 2. part 121.
vide S.

Too much subtily in Law is reproved. See S.

Nomen est quasi notamen. Libro 11. 20.

Name is said Notamen, or as it were Nomen, of Nosco, to know, because notitiam
sacit, it gives notice, or makes known.

Nomen non sufficit, si res non sit de iure aut de facto* lib. 4. 107.

The name of a thing is not sufficient, if the matter or substance be not of
Law, or of fact.

Nomina sunt notae rerum. lib. 11. 20.

Names are the notes, or marks of things.

Nomen dicitur a Noscendo, quia notitiam facit. lib. 6. 65.

Nomen, name, is said a noscendo, of knowing, because it gives notice or
makes known.

Non aduersatur diuersitas regnorum, sed regnantium, non patriarum, sed patrum
patriarum, non coronarum, sed Coronatorum, non legum municipalium, sed Regum
maiestatum. Libro 7. 14.

The diversity of Kingdoms are not contrary, but of them that reign, not of
the countries, but of the fathers of the countries, not of the Crown, but of
them that are crowned, or wear the Crown, not of the municipall Laws, or
Laws of the same Country, but of the Majesty of the Kings.

Non aliunde floret respublica, quam si legum vigeat authoritas lib. 6. in
frontispicio Libri.

Not by any other means does the Common wealth flourish, then if the authority
of the Laws be in strength.

Non descipitur qui s^ scit decipi. Lib. 5. 2. part 60. vide. Q.

He is not deceived, that knows himself to be deceived.

Non diffinitur in iure quid sit conatus lib. 6. 42. Non debet Princeps, etc.
vide P.

It is not defined in Law, what a going about, or endeavoring is. See P.

Non est disputandum contra principia negantem. li. 10. 40. vide C

There is no disputing against him that will deny principles.

Non est recedendum a communi obseruantia: and minime mutanda sunt, quae certam
interpretationem habuerunt. lib. 2. 74. vide C.

We ought not to go back or depart from common observation: and those things
are not to be changed, which have had a certain interpretation. See C.

Non dispensator sed dissipator, non speculator, sed spiculator, Applied to a
Parson of a Church, non residant. lib. 11. 70.

Not a good steward or dispensor, but a waster, not a watchman or espiall, but
as one that wounds with a Iauelin, applied to a Parson of a Church non
resident, but suffering dilapidations.

Non facias malum vt inde veniat bonum. lib. 5. 2. part 30. lib. 11. 74.

Thou shall not do evil that good may come thereof.

Non in legendo, sed in intelligendo leges consistunt. lib. 8. 167.

Laws consist not in reading, but in understanding.

Non mutuo pulicis stimulos, fucique. susurros. lib. 7. Epistola.

I neither fear the Fleas stinging.
Nor the stinglesse Droane his buzzing.
Non solum paena, sed patientia acquirit nomen persecutionis, and gloriam
victoriae. lib. 4. Epist.

Not only the pain, but patience deserves the name of persecution, and of
victory the glory.

Non officit conatus, nisi sequatur effectus. lib. 6. 42. lib. 11. 98.

It hurts not what one indeauoreth, unless the effect follows.

Non obseruata forma, infertur ad nullatio actus lib. 5. 4.

The form not observed, the act is annihilated.

Non potest alienigina esse corpori* qui non est capiti: non gregi, qui non est
regi. lib. 7. 25. Call.

He cannot be a stranger borne to the body, who is not to the head; nor to
the people, that is not to the King.

Non quantum vis, sed quantum capis hauriendum est. Quo plus recipit animus,
hoc se magis laxat, per parts peruenitur ad totum, aptari onus viribus debet,
non plus occupari quam cui sufficere possumus. lib. 2. in frontisp. libri. vide
P. lib. 6. Epist.

So much is to be drawn out, not so much as thou will, but so much as may
suffice thy want: the more the mind of man receives, the more it loses or
lets go, by parts we must come to the whole: and the burden must be
fitted to the strength of the bearer, neither should we gripe more then we can
hold.

Non refert an quis assensum suum probet verbis, an rebus ipsis, an factis.
lib. 10: 52. and 144.

It makes no matter whether a man give his consent by words, or by the things
themselves, or facts.

Non refert quid in aequipollentibus fiat. lib: 5. 2. part: 122

It makes no matter so it be done by words aequipollent, or equal value.

Non refert quam multos sed quam bonos habeas, libros multitudo librorum onerat
non instruit, and satius est paucis authoribus te tradere, quam errare per
multos. lib. 2. in frontisp. libri. Seneca.

It makes no matter how many books thou have, but how good: multitude of
books do rather burden then instruct, and it is far better to acquaint thy
self* with a few Authors, then to err or wander through many.

Non temere credere est neru us sapientiae. lib. 5. 2: part 114.

Not hastily to believe, is of wisdom the sinew.

Notitia dicitur a noscendo. Libro 6: 26.

Notice is said of knowledge.

Notitia non debet claudicare. lib. 6. 29.

Notice ought not to halt.

Non valet impedimentum quod de iure non sortitur effectum, and quod contra
legem fit, pro imperfecto habetur. li. 4: 31: Just: institut: de reg: inris
fol. 119. vide Q.

The let or impediment avails not, which from the law his effect takes not:
and that is done contrary to law, is not worth a straw.

Non valet felonis generatio, nec ad paternam nec ad maternam hereditatem: si
autem ante feloniam, generationem fecerit, talis generatio succedi in
hereditatem patris vel matris, a quo non fuerit fellonia perpetrata. Libro 3.
41.

The generation of a Fellon shall not be able to inherit the inheritance,
neither of the fathers side nor of the mothers: but if the generation be
before a felony committed, such a generation shall succeed in the inheritance
of the father or of the mother; of whom the felony was not committed.

Non verba sed veritas amanda est in lectione: saepe autem, etc. Lib. 3. Epist.
quod vide L.

Not words but truth is to be beloved in reading: but oftentimes etc. See L.

Nouum iudicium non dat ius nouum, sed declarat antiquum, quia iudicium est
iuris dictum, and per iudicium ius est nouiter reuelatum, quod diu fuit
velatum. li. 10. 42.

A new indgement does not give, or make a new Law, but declare the old: for
judgment is iuris dictum the saying or speaking of the Law, and by a
judgment, the Law is newly revealed, that of long time has been covered.

Nulla est vsque gentium margarita doctrinae aequi parabilis: nulla doctrina
Principi simul ac populo legum scientia praestantior: nullae leges humanae ita
cognitu necessariae, omni hominum conditioni, ad omnes causas and iudicia de
fortunis, possessionibus vita denique ipsa atque communes leges. Libro, 2.
Epist.

There is no Jewel in the world comparable to learning, no learning so
excellent, both for Prince and subject, as knowledge of the Laws: no knowledge
of humane Laws, so necessary for all estates, and for all causes, concerning
goods, lands, or life, as the common Laws of England.

Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. lib. 6. 49. lib. 7: 28.

No prescription of time runs against the King.

Nullum iniquum est in lege praesumendum. Libro 4. 72.

It is to be presumed that there is no unjust thing in the Law.

Nullus debet agere actionem de dolo, vbi alia actio subest. Lib. 4. 92. vide
V. Vbi cessat etc.

No man ought to use an action for a deceit: where there is an other action.
See V. Where an ordinary action, etc.

Nullum simile est idem. Lib. 4. 18.

Nothing that is like is the same.

Nullum simile quatuor pedibus currit. lib. 7. 3.

No like thing runs upon four feet.

Numero Deus impari gaudet: lib. 4. Epist.

God delights in an odd number.

Nummus est mensura rerum commutandarum, and res per pecuniam aestimantur, and
non pecunia per res and pecuniae obediunt omnia: Lib. 9. 79. vide P. and R.

Money is the measure of enterchanging of things: and things are valued by money,
and not money by things, and all things are obedient to money, See P. and R.

Nunc pluit, and toto nunc Jupiter aethere fulget. lib. 9. 54.

It raines, and black throughout is all the sky.
And Jupiter his lightenings does let fly.
Nunqam sufficient copia laudatoris, quia nunquam deficiet materia laudis li. 8.
116 vide C.

Plenty of praisors shall never be sufficient, because matter of praise shall
be never wanting, or deficient. See C.

Nuptias non concubitus, sed consensus facit, Li. 6. 22. and 40. Just.
institut. ex digestis fol. 100.

Consent of the parties not coupling of their bodies makes a marriage. See C.

O
O Bedientia est legis essentia. Lib 11. 100.

Obedience is of Law the very essence.

Obuentio dicitur ab obueniendo. lib. 11. 16. vide Calap. verbo Obuentio.

Obuention is said ab obueniendo, and signifies rents profits, revenues, etc.

Obtemporandum est consuetudini rationabili tanquam legi. lib. 4. 38. vide C.

We ought to obey a reasonable custom, as a Law. See C.

Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. Lib. 5. 2. part 53.

The wicked to offend themselves refrain.

And from the same are scard, for fear of pain.

Odimus Accipitrem quia semper viuit in Armis. lib. 7. 16.

We Birds that live, the Hawk do hate and fear.
Since weapons he to hurt does always bear.
Odiosa et inhonesta non sunt in lege praesumenda, and in facto quod se habet
ad bonum, et malum, magis de bono quam de malo praesumenda est. lib. 10. 56.
vide I.

Hateful and dishonest things are not to be presumed to be in the Law, and in a
deed, when there is in it, both good and ill, it is more to be presumed of the
good then of the evil. See I.

Olim Rex Angliae erat conciliorum Ecclesiasticorum praeses, vindex temeritatis
Romanae, propugnator religionis, nec vllam habebant Episcopi authoritatem,
praeter eam, quam a Rege acceptum referebant, ius testamenti probandi non
habebant, administrationis potestatem cuique delegare non poterant. vide lit. R.

In ancient time the King of England was President or chief ruler of
Ecclesiastical councels, a revenger of the Romish rashness: a defendour of
religion; neither had the Bishops any power or authority, but that which they
received from the King: they had not the right of proving of Wills: they could
not bequeath the power of administration to any one.

Olim quod in vsus pios ad diuini cultus augmentum and caetera opera pietatis,
etc. quod vide litera Q. Quod olim in vsus, etc. Lib. 11. 73.

In time past that which was given to good use, toward the increase of holy
worship, etc. Whereof see letter Q.

Omne maius continet et in se minus. lib. 2. 67. lib. 4. 46. lib. 5. 15. lib.
6. 43.

Every greater contains in it the lesser.

Omne grave fertur deorsum. li. 3. 40. vide litera H. Haereditas.

Every heavy thing is carried downward. See H. Haereditas, etc.

Omne testamentu^ morte consummatum est, et voluntas est ambulatoria vsque ad
extremum vitae exitum. lib. 3. 29. and 34 lib. 4. 61. lib. 6. 76.

Every testament or last will is established by death: and the will of man is
wandering or ambulatory until the last point of life.

Omnes prudentes illa admittere solent, qui probantur ijs, qui in sua art been
versati sunt. lib. 7. 19. Call. vide C. and P

All wisemen are wont to admit or allow those things which are proved to them,
by them that are well learned in their Art. Call. See C. and P.

Omnes ars habet principia et, etc. vide litera. C. and P.

Every art has principles and things expostulate, etc. See C. and P.

Omnis ratihabitio retrotrahitur, et mandato Equiparatur. lib. 9. 106. vide
Petrum Peckim. de regulis iuris fol. 64. Just instit de regulis iuris fol. 121.

Every ratihabition or ratification looks back, and is all one as if a man
had given commandment at the first. See Petrum Peck.

Omnia habere in memoria and in nullo peccare deuinum est potius quam humanum.
lib. 9. Epistol. in fine vide M. et N. and infra.

To have all things in memory, and in nothing to do amiss: it is rather a
thing Divine then humane. See letter M. and N.

Omnia quae mouent ad mortem, sunt deo danda lib. 5. 2. part. 110.

All things that move unto death, or whereby insueth, are deodands.

Omnia Castor emit sic fit, vt omnia vendat. li. 11. 86. vide M. Monopolia, etc.

Castor the Merchant buyeth up all,
So none but he sell any thing shall. See M. Monopolium, etc.
Omnia delicta in aperto, sunt leuiora. lib. 8. 127.

All faults or offenses, which are committed openly, are made less thereby.

Omnia habere in memoria and in nullo penitus errare, potius est Deitatis quam
humanitatis. lib. 9. 16.

To have all things in memory, and in nothing to go awry, is rather the power
of a Godhead, then of humanity.

Omnis priuatio prosupponit habitum. Lib. 10. 86.

Every privation or change does presuppose an habit or essence.

Omnia tempus habent, and habet sua tempora tempus. Libro 10. 82

All things are subject unto time: and time it self, has eke his times.

Oportet Medicum esse Philosophum vbi enim Philosophus desinit, medicus
incipit. Lib. 8. 117. vide litera M.

It behooves that a Physician be a Philosopher: for where the Philosopher
ends, there the Physician begins. See M.

Oportet quod certa res deducatur in iudicium. Lib. 5. 2. part 35. and 38.

The thing must be certain that is brought into iudgemnt. Bracton.

Oportet quod certae personae, certae terrae, etc. and certi status
comprehenduntur in declaratione vsum. Lib. 9. 9.

It is necessary, that the persons certain, the lands, etc. certain, and the
state certain be set down in the declaration of uses.

Optimus interpretandi modus est, sic leges interpretari, vt leges legibus
concordant. lib. 8. 169. vide litera I. et S.

It is the best manner of expounding, so to enterpret the laws, that the laws
may agree one with another. See I. and sic intepretari.

Optimus legum interpres consuetudo lib. 2. 81. lib. 10. 70. vide C.

The best expounder of laws is custom. See C.

Optima regula est, qua nulla est verior aut firmior in iure: neminem esse
opportet sapientiorem legibus: vide lib. 7. 3. Lib. 6. in frontespici^ libri,
vide litera N.

It is an excellent rule, then the which there is none more true, or stronger,
in law: no man ought to be wiser then the Law. Call. See N.

Optima interpretatrix est, omnibus eiusdem inspectis, ipsum Statutum: and
iniustum est, nisi tota lege inspecta, vna aliqua eius perticula proposita,
iudicare, vel respondere. Lib. 8. 117.

A statute it self is the best expounder of all parts thereof being looked
into; and it is a thing unjust, any one part particular thereof propounded, to
judge thereof or answer thereto, unless the whole law be thoroughly perused.

Ordine naturae, totum praefertur vniculque parti. Lib. 3. 41. vide littera P.

By the order of nature, the whole is preferred before every part. See P.

Ornamenta Coronae, sunt miserecordia and iustitia. lib. 7. 11. vide littera C

The ornaments of a crown are mercy, and justice. Call. See C.

P
PActa priuata iuri publici derogare non possunt.

Private contracts or agreeance cannot annihilate the law.

Panis pauperum, vel egentium, vita pauperum, and qui cos defraudet, vir
sanguinis est. Lib. 4. 106. Lib. 8. 131.

The bread of the poor and needy, is their life: and he that defraudeth them
thereof, is the man of blood.

Parleamentum est Curia quae si veritatem spectes, est antiquissima, si
dignitatem, est honoratissima, si iurisdictionem, est capacissima. li. 9.
Epistola vide littera S. Statuta, etc.

Parleament is a Court, which if thou regard the truth, is most ancient, if
the dignity, it is most honorable, if the jurisdiction, it is most large and
capable. See S. Statutes.

Parochia est locus, in quo degit populus alicuius ecclesiae. Lib. 5. 2. part
67. vide Calap. verbo parochia.

A Parish is a place, in which the people of any Church does live. Calap.

Part quacunque integrante, sublata tollitur totum. lib. 3. 41. Aristotle.

The increasing part of any thing, being removed: the whole is destroyed.

Parum differunt, quae re concordant: lib. 5. 2. part 4. lib. 10. 101.

They little differ, that agree in matter.

Patria dicitur a patre, quia habet comunem patrem, qui est pater patriae, lib.
7. 13. vide B. Call.

Patria, a country is said of a father, because it has a father common, which
is father of the country. See B. and R.

Peccatum peccato addit, qui culpae quam facit, patrocinia defensionis
adiungit. lib. 5 2. part 49.

He adds offense to offense, who adoyneth a patronage of defense, to a fault
he has committed.

Pecuniae obediunt omnia, and nummus est mensura rerum commutandamum, and res
per pecuniam aestimantur, and non pecunia per res. Lib. 9. 79. vide M.

All things are obedient unto money; and money is the measure of exchanging
things, and things have their prise from money, and not money from things. See N.

Pereat vnus, ne pereant omnes, vide Lib. 4. 124.

Let one perish, that all perish not.

Per parts peruenitur ad totum. lib. 2. in frontispicio lib.

By parts we come or attain to the whole.

Perfectum est id, quod ex omnibus suis partibus constat, and nihil est
perfectum, dum aliquid restat agendum. Lib. 9. 9. vide I.

That thing is perfect which confisleth upon all his parts: and nothing is
perfect, so long as any thing remains to be done. See letter I.

Periculosum estimo quod bonorum virorum non comprobatur exemplo. lib. 7.
Epist. vide Q.

I think that thing dangerous, which is not approved with the examples of
good men. See Q.

Plerunque dum proprietas verborum attenditur sensus veritatis amittitur. Lib.
7. 27. Call. lib. 9. 110. vide D. S. and V.

For the most part, whilst the property of words is attended unto, the sense of
the truth is let go. Call. See D. S. and V.

Plura beneficia quibus animarum cura submissa est, non sine graui Ecclesiarum
damno ab vno obteneri possunt: cum vnus inpluribus ecclesijs rite officia
persoluere, aut rebus earum necessariam curam impendere nequeat. lib. 4. 79.
vide litera S. Securius, etc. and R. Res ipsa loquitur, etc.

Many benefices to which cure of souls is belonging, cannot without great
prejudice to the Churches, by one man be possessed: when the duties in many
Churches cannot by one be performed, or by one a necessary care in their
businesses, be employed. See letter. S.

Plus peccat author, quam actor.

More offends the Author then the actor.

Plus vident occuli, quam occulus, and vna persona non potest supplere vicem
duarum. Lib. 4. 46. vide S.

Many eyes see more then one, and one person cannot supply the place, or steed
of two.

Possessio est pedis positio. lib. 3. 52.

Possession is the setting the foot,

Possessio deriuatur a pos and sedeo. vide S. Seisina ibidem. lib. 6 57.

Possession is derived of pos, and sedeo, to sit still.

Posteriores leges priores contrarias abrogant. lib. 1. 26. lib. 8. 137. lib.
11. 62. vide L.

The later laws do repeal the former being contrary. See L.

Potentia est duplex: remota, et propinqua, et vana est illa potentia quae
nunquam venit in actum. Lib. 2. 51.

Power or possibility is twofold: removed, or a far off, and at hand, and
vain is that power which never comes into act.

Praebenda dicitur a praebendo, quia praeberet auxilium Episcopo. Lib. 3. 75.

A Prebendary is said of praebendo, of giving, because he should give counsel
to the Bishop.

Pro legittimatione puerorum semper presumitur, and filiatio non potest
probari. lib. 5. 2. part 98. vide S.

The segitimation of children is always presumed; and childhood cannot be
proved. See S.

Principia probant, and non probantur. lib. 3. 40 vide C. Fortesc. cap. 8.

Principles prove, they are not proved. See C.

Princeps non debet far legum suarum ludibrium. Lib. 4. Epistola.

The King ought not to suffer a mockery of his Laws.

Processus deriuatur a procedendo ab originali vsque ad finem. Libro 8. 157.

A Process is derived a procedendo, of going forward from the beginning to the
ending.

Probatio charitatis, exibitio operis. Lib. 10. Epistola.

The exhibition of the work, is the proof of the charity.

Prohibetur ne quis faciat in suo, quod nocere potest in alieno, and sic vtere
tuo: vt alienum non laedas. libro 9. 59. vide S.

It is prohibited, that any man should do in that that is his own, that thing
which may hurt or offend another: and so use thine own, that thou hurt not a
Stranger. See S.

Propinquius excludit remotum, and remotus remotiorem. lib. 3. 41. Bracton ^li.
2. cap. 30. fol. 64.

That which is nearest, excludes that which is remote, and that which is
remote, that which is more remote.

Proijcit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba. lib. 3. Epist.

He casseth forth his glorious word abroad.
And with his lofty Phrases does us load.
Priuilegia quae re vera sunt in preiudicium Reipublicae, magis tamen speciosa
frontispicia, and boni publici praetextum habent, quam bonae and legales
concessiones, sed praetextu liciti, non debet amitti illicitum. Lib. 11. 88.
monopolia.

Privileges which (in very truth) are to the prejudice or hurt of a common
wealth, have yet a more fair frontispice, and a pretext of a common good, then
good and lawful grants: but an unlawful thing ought not to be admitted under
the pretense of a thing lawful. Monopolies.

Propter ius sanguinis duplicatum tam ex part patris quam ex part matris,
dicitur hoeraes propinquior soror, quam fratre de alia vxore vide lib. 3. 41,
vide Fortesc. cap. 5. 8. Bracton lib. 2 cap. 30. fol. 65.

For the bloods sake being double, as well of the fathers side as of the
mothers, the Sister is said to be nearer Heir then the Brother of another
wife.

Protectio trahit subiectionem, and subiecto protectionem. Libro. 7. 5. Call.

Protection draws subjection, and subjection protection.

Prouiso est prouidere praesentia and futura et non praeterita. lib. 2. 72.

Provision is to foresee present and future things, and not those that are
gone and past.

Prudenter facit, qui precepto legis obtemperet. Lib. 5. 2. part 49.

He does wisely, who obeys the precept of the Law.

Prudentes omnes illa admittere solent quae probantur ijs qui in sua art been
versati sunt. lib. 7. 19. Call. vide C. and O.

All wise men are wont to admit and allow those things which are approved to
them that are well seen in their Art. See C and O.

Pueri sunt de sanguine parentum, sed pater and matter non sunt de sanguine
puerorum lib. 3. 40.

Children are of the blood of their parents: but the Father and the Mother are
not of the blood of the Children.

Punitur affectus licet non sequatur effectus, Lib. 9. 57. vide A.

The affection is punished, although no effect follows. See A.

Q
QVando aliquis aliquid concedit, concedere videtur and id sine quo resipsa
esse non potest Libro 5. 2. part 12. and 47. Libro 11. 52. Just. institut. lib.
1. fol. 21.

When any one does any thing grant, he seems to grant that also, without the
which the principal cannot stand.

Quando aliquid mandatur, mandatur et omne, per quod peruenitur ad illud. lib.
5. 2. part 115.

When any thing is commanded, yea all is commanded, whereby we^ may come or
attain to the thing commanded.

Quando aliquid prohibetur, prohibetur and illud, per quod peruenitur ad illud.
lib. 9. 57. Just institut. de regulis iuris. fol. 117.

When any thing is prohibited, that also is forbidden by the which we come unto
that.

Quando charta continet generalem clausulum, posteaque descendit ad verba
specialia quae clausulae generali sunt consentanea, interpretanda est charta
secundum specialia li: 4: 81. lib: 8: 154. vide G.

When a deed or Charter does contain a general clause, and afterward
discendeth unto words special, which are agreeable to the clause general: the
deed is to be construed according to the special words.

Quando dispositio referri potest ad duas res, ita quod secundum relationem
vnam, vitiatur, and secundum aliam vtilis est, tunc facienda est relatio ad
illam vt valeat dispositio: et ita semper fiat relatio, vt valeat dispositio.
lib. 6. 76. vide R.

When the disposition may be referred to two things, so that according to one
relation it is made naught, and after another it is good and profitable: then
the reference, ought to be to that that it may be in force, and so let the
relation be always had and made, that the disposition may prevail and be in
strength. See R.

Quando diuersi desiderantur actus ad aliquam statum perficiendum, plus
respicit lex actum originalem, quia cuiuscunque rei potissima pars est
principium: Libro 10. 49.

When diverse acts are required to the perfecting of an estate, the law looks
unto the act original, because of every thing the beginning is of greatest
force or strength.

Quando duo iura concurrunt in vna persona aequum est ac si essent in diuersis.
Lib: 4: 118. Libro 7. 2: and 14: Call.

When two rights concur or meet together in one person, it is all one as if
they were in several.

Quando ius domini Regis et subditi insimul concurrunt, ius Regis preferri
debet Lib. 9. 129.

When the right of the King and of a subject concur or meet together, the
right of the King ought to be preferred.

Quando mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili, definit esse nobilis. Lib. 4. 118.
lib. 6. 53. and 54. vide M.

When a Gentlewoman of Nobility marries with one of inferior birth, she
loses her degree. See M.

Quando plus fit quam fieri debet, videtur etiam illud fieri, quod faciendum
est and in maiori summa continetur minor lib. 5. 2. part 115. Lib. 8. 85.

When more is done then ought to be done, even that seems to be done which
ought to be done: and in the greater is contained always the lesser.

Quando verba statuti sunt specialia, ratio autem generalis, generalitet
statutum est intelligendum. Libro 10. 101.

When the words of a Satute are special, but the reason general, the Statute
is to be understood generally,

Quanto magis violentus motus, (qui contra naturam fit) appropinquat ad suum
finem, tanto debiliores and ^ardiores, sun^ eius motus: sed naturales motus,
quanto magis appropinquat ad suum finem, tanto fortiores and velociores sunt
eius motus Li. 7. 14. By how much more a violent motion, (which is against
nature) approaches nearer to his end, so much the weaker and slower are his
motions: but a natural motion, the more near it draws to his end, the more
stronger and swifter are his motions.

Quae ad vnum finem locuta sunt, non debent ad alium detorqueri. lib. 4. 14.

Words which are spoken to one end, ought not to be wrested to another,

Quae incontinenti fiunt, in esse videntur. lib. 2. 71. lib. 8. 77.

Those things which are done in an instant, seem to be in esse, in a being.

Quae in parts diuidi nequeant, solida^, a singulis praestantur. Libro 6. 1.

Massy and solid things which cannot be divided into parts, by every singular
person must be performed.

Quae praeter consue^udinem and morem maiorum fiunt, nec placent, nec recta
videntur. Lib. 4. Epist. vide C. and S.

Those things that are done besides, or contrary to custom, and fashion of our
forefathers, neither please nor seem to be right or well done. See C. and S.

Quaelibet haereditas naturaliter quidem ad haeredes haereditabiliter
descendit, nunquam autem ascendit. Lib. 3. 41. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 29. fol.
62. and 63. Glanuile cap 1. fol. 44. vide litera H.

Every inheritance naturally discendeth hereditarily: but it never ascends
naturally. See D. and H.

Quemadmodum plaerunque in Pharmacopolarum vasculis videre est, quorum tituli
pollicentur remedia, sed pixides ipsae venenum continent. lib. 7. Epistola.
vide L.

As it is for the most seen in Apothecaries vessels. See L.

Quemadmodum ad questione facti quod non respondent Iudices: ita ad questionem
iuris non respondent iuratores. li. 8. 155. li. 9. 13. li: 11. 10. vide A.

As unto a question of fact the Judges are not to answer, so unto a question of
Law, an answer to give are not the Jurors See A.

Queritur vt crescunt tot magna volumina legis?
In promptu causa, est cressit in orb dolus. Lib. 3. 82.
There Is great complaint, the books of Law,
In hugenes grow so great:
The reason ready is at hand,
In world grows more deceit.
Quaedam tacita habentur pro expressis. Lib. 7. 40. vide E. Expressio, etc.

Certain things concealed are taken for expressed. See E.

Qui abiurat regnum amittit regnum, sed non Regem: amittit patriam, sed non
patrem patriae. Lib. 7. 9. Call.

He that abiureth a Kingdom loses a Kingdom, but not his King: he loses
his Country, but not the father of his Country.

Quicunque aliquid statuerit, part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit,
haud aequus fuerit. Libro, 6. 52. lib. 11. 99.

Whosoever shall decree any thing, the one party not heard although he do
decree aright, yet he shall be scarce just, or equal.

Qui destruit medium destruit finem lib. 10. 51.

He that destroys the middle part, destroys the end.

Quidam sunt fastidiosi, etc. lib. 2. Epist. vide S.

There are some disdainefull persons. See S.

Qui haeret in litera, haeret in cortice. lib. 5. 2. pa^^ 4. lib. 11. 34.

He that stays upon the dead letter sticks upon the bark or rind.

Qui iussu Iudicis aliquid fecerit, non videtur dolo malo fecisse, quia parere
necesse est. Just. institut. ex digest. fol. 99 li. 10. 70. 76.

He that does any thing by the commandment of the Judge, he seems not to
have done any thing of guile or deceit, because he needs must obey.

Quilibe t^ potest renunciare iuri pro se introducto. lib. 10: 101.

Every man may renounce or refuse a Law made or brought for him.

Qui male agit odit lucem lib. 8: 127: lib. 9: 66

He that evil does, hates or shunneth the light.

Qui non cadunt in constantem virum vani timores aestimandi sunt. lib. 7: 27:
Call.

They are to be esteemed vain and idle fears, which fall not upon a constant
man.

Qui non libere veritatem pronunciat, proditor veritatis est. Libro 11. 83.

He that does not freely pronounce the truth, is a traitor to the truth.

Qui omne dicit, nihil excludit. lib. 11: 64.

He that speaks all, excludes nothing.

Qui prior est tempore potior est iure. Libro 4: 90. Iustini. institut. fol.
122.

He that is foremost in time is the stronger in Law.

Qui rationem in omnibus quaerit rationem subuertit. lib. 2: 75.

He that seeks a reason in all things, subuerteth reason.

Qui semel actionem renunciauit, amplius repetere non potest. Libro 8. 59.

He that once has renounced or refused an Action, cannot begin again.

Qui sentit commodum sentire debet et onus and econtra. Lib. 1: 99. lib. 5. 2.
part 24: and 100. Lib: 7. 39. Just. institut. fol. 122.

He that feels the profit ought also to bear the burden, and contr^riwise.

Quod ab initio non valet, in tractu temporis non conualeseit, and quae malo
sunt inchoata principio vix est vt bono peragantur exitu. lib. 4. 90. li: 2.
55. et lib. 8. 13^ Just. institut. ex digest. lib: 2: fol: 136. et 103. et 107.
et fol 119.

That which in the beginning has no strength, in length of time shall not grow
strong: and those things which have an evil beginning it hardly comes to
pass that they have any good ending.

Quod alias bonum and iustum est, si per vim vel fraudem petatur, malum, and
iniustum efficitur. lib. 3. 78.

That which otherwise is good and just, if by force or fraud it be required or
sought, is become evil and unjust.

Quod alias licitum non est, necessitas facit licitum, and necessitas inducit
priu^legium, quod iure priuatur lib: 10: 61: vide litera N. Justin: institut.
fol: 114. Bract: lib: 4: cap: 6: fol. 247.

That which otherwise is not lawful, necessity makes lawful: and necessity

brings in a privilege, which depriueth the Law See N.

Quod constat clare, non debet verificare. Lib. 9* 55 vide L

That which appears plainly, we need not auerr or verify. See L.

Quod contra legem fit, pro infecto habetur. li. 3: 74: li: 4: 31: vide litera
N.

That which against Law is wrought.
Is reckoned to go for naught.
Quod in natura videmus infinitam rerum distinctionem, ab vnitate aliqua
proue^ire, vt ab eadem radice multos flores, ab eodem font plures riuulos, and
in humuno corpore, ab eodem cord multas arterias, ex vno iecore multas venas,
neruos omnes ex vno cerebro: ita procul dubio, L^x orta est ex mente diuina, at
que vnitas haec consensus plane admirabili^ in tanta rerum d^uersitate, non
nisi a Deo bonarum legum constitutionum authore ac font dimanauit. Lib. 3
Epistola.

As in nature we see the infini^e distinction of things proceed from some
unity, as many flowers from one root, many rivers from one fountain, many
arteries in the body of Man from the heart, many veins from one Liver, and
many finews from one brain: so without question, the Law is sprung up from a
divine mind. and this admirable unity, and consent in such diversity of things
proceeds from God, the fountain, and Author of all good laws, and
constitutions.

Quoad fieri potest, quam plurima legibus ipsis definiantur, quam paucissima
vero iudicis arbitrio relinquantur. lib. 7. Epistola in fine.

As much as may be, let most things be defined by the law themselves, and v^ry
few things left to the will of the judge.

Quod non decipitur qui scit se decipi. Lib 5. 2. part 60 vide N.

That he is not deceived, who knows himself to be deceived. See N.

Quod non valet in principal, in accessorio, seu consequenti non valebit, and
quod non valet in magis propin quo, non valebit in magis remoto. Lib. 8. 78.

That which in the principal avails not, in the accessory, or consequent
will not avail, and that which avails not in a thing more nigh, will
notauaile in the thing farther off.

Quod nostrum est, sine facto, sine defectu nostro amitti seu in alium
transferri non potest. lib. 8. 92.

That which is ours, without an act, or without our defect, cannot be lost, or
transfered over to another.

Quod quisque norit in hoc se exerceat. lib. 7. 19. lib. 8. 130. li. 11. 10.

Let every man exercise himself, in that which he knows, or has skill of.

Quod remedio disticuitur, ipsa re valet si culpa absit. lib. 6. 68. vide C. E.
and I. simile.

That thing which is destitute of remedy, in the matter it self does avail,
if the let or fault be away. See C. and I.

Quod restringendi causa additur in casu regis, si falsum sit vitiat chartam.
Lib. 10. 110.

That which is added in the Kings case, by way of restraining; if it be false
or untrue, it overthrows the writing.

Quod scire debes and non vis, non pro ignorantia, sed pro contemptu haberi
debet. lib. 5. Epist.

That which thou ought to know, and wilt not, ought not to be reckoned for
ignorance, but for mere contempt.

Quod tacit intelligitur, deesse non videtur. lib. 4. 22.

That which is closely or secretly understood in any thing: seems, not to be
wanting.

Quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra verba
expressa fienda est. lib. 7. 24. vide V.

So often as in the words, there is no ambiguity or doubt had: there no
exposition against the express words ought to be made. See V.

R
RAtio legis est anima legis, and mutata legis ratione, mutatur et lex. Lib. 7.
7. lib. 6. 50. vide E. simile.

The reason of the Law is the soul of the Law, and the reason of the Law being
changed, the Law is changed. See E.

Rationandum est eatenus donec veritas inueniatur, vbi inuenta est veritas ibi
figendum iudicium. lib. 10. Epistola vide V. Veritas.

So far it is to be reasoned, until the truth be found: when the truth is
once found, there we ought to fix our judgment sound. See V.

Rebus non verbis legem imponimus. Li. 10. 101. vide l. ips^rum legis.

We set a law to matters, not to words. See I.

Reddere nihil aliud est, quam acceptum restituere: seu reddere est, quasi
retrodare, and redditus dicitur a redeundo quia retroit. lib. 10. 128. vide
Calap verbis redeo and reddo.

To render, is nothing else but to restore a thing received: or to render, is
as it were to give back again, and a rent is said a redeundo of returning
back, because it goes backward.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. lib. 4. Epistola.

Unto the example of the King, the world does frame in every thing.

Reges sacri oleo vuncti, sunt spiritualis iurisdictionis capaces. Lib. 5. 16.
Call.

Kings anointed with holy oil, are capable of spiritual jurisdiction.

Regis Corona est facere iustitiam, and iudicium, and tenere pacem: sine quibus
Corona consistere non potest, nec tenere, etc. quod vide littere C lib. 7. 11.
Call.

It is the Crown of a King to do justice, and judgment, and to hold peace:
without the which, a Crown cannot stand or hold, etc. See C.

Relatio semper ita fiat, vt valeat dispositio, and quando ad ^uas res referri
potest dispositio, ita quod secundum vnam vitiatur, and secundum aliam vtil^s
est, tunc facienda est relatio ad illa n vt valeat dispositio. lib. 6. 76. vide
Q.

The relation ought to be made so, that the disposition may be available: and
when the dispsition may be referred unto two things, so that after once it be
vitiated or made naught, and according to another profitable, then ought the
relation to be made, to that whereby the disposition may be in force and
strength. See Q.

Remoto impedimento emergit actio. lib. 5. 2. part 64. vide E. and I.

The impediment removed, the action is reuined. See E. and I.

Reprobata pecunia liberet solutionem li. 9. 79.

The money being refused, the payment discharged.

Reputatio vulgaris opinio vbi non est veritas, et vulgaris opinio est duplex.
fiz. vulgaris opinio orta inter graves and discretos, quae multum veritatis
habet and opinio tantum orta inter leaves and vulgares homines absque specie
veritatis. Lib. 4. 106. and 107. vide litera V.

Reputation is, a vulgar opinion where there is no truth: and common opinion is
twofold, vz. A vulgar opinion raised amongst grave and discreet men, which has
a countenance of truth: and an opinion raised amongst light and vulgar people,
without any show of truth. See V.

Rerum progressus ostendunt multa, quae in initio praecaueri, seu prouideri non
possunt. li. 6. 40.

The going forward in things, do declare or show many things, which in the
beginning could not be foreseen, or provided for.

Res dominatur in principaliori part. Li. 5. 2. part: 47.

A matter does sway or bear rule in the more principal part.

Res inter alios actae nemini nocere debent, sed prodesse possunt. lib. 6. 1.
and 51.

Things done amongst others, ought to bring prejudice to no man: but they may
bring profit.

Res ipsa loquitur: plura beneficia, potissimum quibus animarum cura submissa
est, non sine graui Ecclesiarum damno ab vno obtineri, cum vnus in pluribus
ecclesijs rite officia persoluere, aut rebus earum necessariam curam impendere
nequeat. lib. 4. 79. vide P. et S.

The matter it self speaks: many benefices especially those to whom cure of
souls is belonging, cannot without great loss or hurt to the Churches, be by
one man obtained: when as one cannot in many Churches perform the duties
rightly, or to their matters or businesses bestow a care necessary. See P. and
S.

Res per pecuniam aestimatur and non pecunia per res. lib. 9. 79. vide littera
N. et P.

Things have their value, or esteem from money, and not money from things. See
N. and P.

Res profecto stulta est, nequitiae modus, lib. 11. 86. Rex Anglia olim, etc.
vide O.

A measure, or mean of naughtiness, is verily a thing foolish and witless.
See O.

Rex ad tutelam legis, corporum, et bonorum erectus est. lib. 7. 5. Call.
fortes. cap. 13. fol. 16. vide Calap. verbo tutela.

The King is set up to be a defense of the law, of the bodies, and of the goods.

Rex caput est and salus Reipublicae, and a Capite bona valetudo transit in
omneis. lib. 4. 124.

The King is the head and health of a common weal: and from the head issues
health into all.

Rex est parsona mixta, medicus regni, pater patriae, and sponsus regni, qui
per annulum est espouse al Realm a son Coronation. lib. 2. 44. lib. 5. 28.
Eccles. iurisdict. Lib. 11. 70. Bract. lib. 3. cap. 9. fol. 107.

The King is a mixed person, the Physician of the common wealth: the father of
the country, and the spouse of the Kingdom, who by a ring is married to the
realm at his Coronation.

Rex Ethiopum interrogatus quid optimum? respondebat, lucem: quis enim natura
duce tenebras non abhorresset? lib. 9. 58.

A King of the Ethiopians being asked, what was the best thing? answered, the
light, for who (nature the guide) does not abhor darkness?

Rex hoc solum non potest facere, quod non potest unjust agere. li. 11 72. and
74.

This only thing, the King cannot do, that he cannot unjust agere, do
iniustly.

Rex nihil aliud potest, in terris cum sit Dei minister et vicarius, quam quod
de iure potest. Itaque potestas iuris sua est, non inuriae, et cum sit author
iuris, non debet inde iniuriarum nasci occasio vnde iura nascuntur. lib. 11.
74. vide N. Bra. li. 1. cap. 8. fol. 5. and lib. 3. cap. 9. fol. 07.

The King can do no other thing, being Gods Minister and Vicar upon earth;
then that which of right or law, he may do, also the power of right, and not
of injury is his; and fith he is the author of law and right, there ought not
occasion of injury to spring from thence, from whence the laws do grow.

Rex ipse non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo et lege, quia lex facit Regem,
attribuat igitur Rex legi, quod Lex attribuit ei, videlicet dominationem and
imperium, non est enim Rex vbi, dominatur voluntas and non lex. lib. 4.
Epistola Bract. lib. 1. cap. 5. fol. 5.

The King ought not to be under man, but under God and the Law, because the Law
makes a King. Let the King therefore give to the Law that which the Law gives
unto him, to wit, domination and empire: for he is not a King, where will
swayeth, and not the Law.

Rex seperare debet (cum sit Dei vicarius in terra) ius ab iniuria equum ab
iniquo, vt omnes sibi subiecti honest viuant, and quod nullus alium laedat,
and quod vnicuique quod suum fuerit recta contributione red datur. lib. 7. 11.
vide S. Bract. lib: 3. cap. 9. fol. 107.

The King (since he is Gods Vicar upon earth) ought to separate right from
wrong, and that is just from that which is unjust, that all men subject unto
him, may live honestly, and that no one hurt another, and that to every one
that which is his may be rendered with a right contribution. See S.

Rex semper praesumitur attendere ardua regni pro bono publico omnium. lib. 5.
2. part. 56.

It is always presumed, that the King does attend the weighty and hard things
of the kingdom, for the public good of all.

S.
SAtius est fontes petere quam sectari riuulos. li. 4. Episto. lib. 8. 116.
Lib. 10. 41. and 118. vide litera M. and lib. 10. Epistola.

It is better to seek to the Fountains them selves, then to follow after the
small rivers. See M.

Sacrilegus est, and omnium praedonum cupiditatem et scelera superat, qui
aliquid deremit done al service dell Dieu. Lib. 4. 106.

He is a Church rober, and he goes beyond the desires and wickedness of all
robbers, who polleth away any thing that is given to the service of God.

Salus populi suprema lex. lib. 10: 139:

The health or well fare of the people, is the chiefest Law.

Sanguis Martirum est semen Ecclesiae lib. 2: 44

The blood of the Martiers, is the seed of the Church.

Sapiens incipit a fine, and quod primum est in intention, vltimum est in
executione: lib. 8: 53: lib. 10: 25: and 127

A wise man begins at the end of a thing: and that which is first in the
intention, is last in execution.

Saepenumero vbi proprietas verboru^ attenditur, sensus veritatis amittitur.
lib. 3. Epistola Lib. 7. 27. li. 9. 110. vide littera D. and P.

Oftentimes when we attend of words the propriety, we lose the sense of the
verity. See D. and P.

Scientia sciolorum est mixta ignorantia. lib. 4. Epist. lib. 8. 159.

The knowledge or skill of Smatterours is a mixed ignorance.

Secundario sperare de aliqua retributione ad voluntatem eius qui mutuatus, est
hoc non est vitiosum. Li. 5. 2. part 70. vide V. Vsura.

Afterward to hope for any retribution at the will of him that borrowed, is not
vicious or evil. See V,

Securius expediuntur negotia commissa pluribus: et plus vident occuli quam
occulus, and vna persona non potest supplere vicem duarum. lib. 4. 46. vide P.

More safely are the businesses dispatched, which are committed unto many: and
more see two eyes then one: and again, one person cannot supply the room of
two See P.

Sed motos praestat componere fluctus, lib. 10. Epistola,

It is a matter of great good, to still the raging of the flood.

Seditio dicitur quasi seorsim itio magni populj, quando itur ad manus come le
Poet dit.

Sedition is said, as it were a going apart of a great people: when they go to
arms, as the Poet says.

Ac veluti mago in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio: saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus.
Iamque faces et arma volant, furor arma ministrat. Virgi. lib. 4. 13. vide
littera A. and D.
As in a multitude when once there does arise
Sedition: and people rude wax cruel in their minds.
Then fire and sword does fly and fury weapons finds. See A and D.
Seisina deriuatur a sedendo, car, tancque home ad seisin tout son labor est
dolor and vexation del spirit, mes quant il ad seisin, il poit sedere et
acquiescere. Lib: 6: 57. vide P: Possessio, etc.

Seisin is derived a Sedendo of sitting, for until a man has Seisin, all his
labor is dolor and vexation of spirit, but when he has Seifin he may rest
and be at quiet. See P.

Semper in fictione iuris subsistet aequitas. Lib. 10. 40. and 90. Lib. 11. 51.
vide I.

Always under a fiction of Law, there is equity subsisting. See I.

Semper presumitur pro legittimatione puerorum, and filiatio non potest
probari. lib. 5. 2. part 98. vide P.

There is always a presumption had for the legittimation of Children, and the
lawful making or begetting of Children cannot be proved. See P.

Sensus verborum duplex mitis and asper: et verba semper accipienda in mitiore
sensu. li: 4. 13. 20.

The sense and meaning of words is two-fould: gentle and sharp, and words are
to be taken in the more gentle sense.

Sensus verborum est anima legis. lib. 5. 2. part 2. vide V.

The sense or meaning of the words is the very soul of the Law. See V.

Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est, and sermones semper
accipiendi sunt, secundum subiectam materiam. lib. 4. 13. and 14. vide V.

The sense of the words are to be taken from the cause, or occasion of
speaking: and speeches are always to be taken according to the subject of the
matter. See V.

Sententia contra Matrimonium nunquam transit in rem iudicatam. Lib. 7. 43.

A Sentence against Matrimony, never goes to a judgment.

Seperare debet Rex (cum sit Dei vicarius and minister in terra) ius ab
iniuria, aequum ab iniquo; vt omnes sibi subiecti honest viuant, et quod
nullus alium laedat, and quod vnicuique quod suum fuerit recta contributione
reddatur. lib. 7. 11. Call. Bracton lib. 3. cap. 9 fol. 107. vide R.

The King (forasmuch as he is Gods Vicar and Minister upon earth) ought to
separate right from wrong, that is just from that which is unjust, so that all
that are his Subjects may live honestly, and none hurt another, and that to
every one, that which is his own may be with right contribution rendered.

Saepe autem reperitur simplicitas veridicta, and falsitas composita, quae
hominem suis erroribus allicit, and per linguae ornamentum laqueos dulces
aspergit: and doctrina in multis est, quibus deest oration. li. 3. Epist. vide
E. Error etc. and Lectione, etc. Isodorus.

Oftentimes simplicity is found speaking the truth, and falsity decked, or
trimmed up, who with her errors does allure the minds of men, and by means of
the help or ornament of the tongue does spread sweet snares, and there is in
many learning, in whom there is wanting the gift of eloquent speaking. See E.
and L.

Sermo relata ad personam, intelligi debet de condition personae. lib. 4. 16.

Speech being referred to a Person, ought to be understood of the condition of
the person.

Si assuetis mederi possis, noua non sunt tentanda. Lib. 10. 142.

If thou may be cured by medicines accustomed: new helps are not to be
assayed.

Sicut beatius est, ita maius est dare, quam accipere* lib. 6. 57. vide litera.
B.

As it is a more blessed, s^ is it a greater thing to give then to take. See B.

Sicut languor prolixus grauat medicum, ita relatio prolixa grauat lectorem.
lib. 7. Epist.

As a long languishing is gri^u^us to the Physician, s^ is a long narration
tedious to the Reader.

Sicut vnda gignit vndam, sic labor vnus alium tanquam Gemellam aliquem videtur
esse assecutum Lib. 7. Epistola. vide V.

As water brings out water, so one labor brings on another. etc. See V.

Si te lactauerint peccatores, and dixerint, veni nobiscum, vt insidiamur
sanguini, abscondamus tendiculas contra insontem frustra, etc. omnem preciosam
substantiam reperiemus, and implebimus domus nostras spolijs, etc. fili mi, ne
ambules cum ijs etc pedes enim eorum ad malum currunt and festinant vt
effundant sanguinem. Lib. 9. 57. Pro. cap. 1. verse. 10: 11: 12.

If sinners shall entice thee, and say come with us, that we may lay wait for
blood, and we will lay snares for the innocent without, etc. We shall find all
precious riches, and shall fill our houses with spoil, etc. My son, walk not
with them etc. Their feet run unto evil, and they make have that they may shed
blood.

Si cessar lex scripta, id custodire oportet, quod moribus et cousuetudine
inductum est, and si qua in re, hoc defecerit, tuncid quod proximum and
consequens est ei, and si id non appareat, tunc ius quo vrbs Romana vtitur
seruare oportet. Lib. 7. 19.

If the Law written do cease, we must observe that which is allowed in
manners and custom: and if in any thing this shall be defective, then that
which is nearest and most agreeable to that, and if that do not appear, then
that which the City of Rome uses we ought to observe and keep.

Sic interpretare and concordare leges legibus est optimus interpretandi modus.
Lib. 8: 169: vide I.

S^ to expound and agree laws with laws, is the best manner of expounding.
See I.

Si desit obedientia, non adiuuat locus. Lib. 7: 24: Call.

If obedience be away, the place avails not.

Si locus saluare potuisset, Satan de coelo pro sua inobedientia non
cecidisset: Adam a Paradiso non cecidisset: Lot in monte non cecidisset, sed
potius in Sodom lib. 7: 24. vide L.

If the place could have saved, Satan through his inobedience had not fallen
from Heaven: Adam had not fallen from Paradise: Lot had not fallen in the
Mountain, but rather in Sodom.

Sic vtere tuo, vt alienum non laedas. lib. 9: 59.

So use that is thy proper thing,
To other hurt thou do not bring.
Silent leges inter Arma. Lib. 9. Epistola.

When war and weapons sway at will:
The Laws are silent, and full still.
Sine imperio, nec domus vlla, nec Ciuitas, nec gens, nec hominum vniuersum
genus stare, nec ipse denique mundus potest, Tull. lib. 2. in frontispicio
libri: lib. 7: 13.

Without government neither house, or City, or people, or the whole kind of
men, and lastly, no nor the world it self can stand.

Simplex est veritatis sermo, etc. li: 10. in Epist. vide V. Veritas.

The speech of truth is simple and plain: for her place being between the
heart and the head does participate of them both: of the head for judgment, of
the heart for simplicity. See V.

Simplicitas est legibus amica, and nimia subtilitas in lege reprobatur lib: 4.
5: and 41: Libro. 5: 2: part 121: vide A. apices iuris, etc.

Simplicity of plain dealing is a friend to the Law: and too much subtilty in
the Law is reproved. See A.

Si quis Ciuis nouum quid and in auditum inuenerit, illud ad decennium in suis
aedibus inuentor exerceat, hoc fine, vt si vtile probetur inuentum, aucthori
prosit, si vero malum, ipsi soli, non Reipublicae noceat, Plato Lib. 4: Epist.
vide C: and Q.

If any Citizen shall invent any new thing, the deviser thereof should
exercise the same in his own house by the space of ten years: to this end,
that if the invention prove profitable, it should profit the Author, and if
naught, it should hurt only him, and not the commonwealth. See C. and Q.

Solus Deus facit Haeredes: non homo. lib. 7. 14.

God alone makes heirs, and not man.

Solum Rex hoc facere non potest, quod non potest unjust agere. Lib. 11. 72.
vide R.

This thing only the King cannot do, he cannot do unjustly. See R.

Stabitur presumptioni donec probetur in contrarium. Lib. 4. 71. lib. 5. 7.
lib. 6. 73.

Presumption prevails, until the contrary be proved.

Statue tibi quot horis legas, non ad laborem, sed ad delectationem: Libro 2.
in frontisp. libri.

Tax thy self at so many hours for reading, that thou may do it rather
with delight, then with toil.

Statutum est omnibus semel mori. lib. 3. 21. lib. 10 50.

It is appointed to all men once to dye.

Statuta Angliae non principis voluntate, sed totius regni assensu conduntur,
quo populi laesuram illa efficere nequeunt, vel non eorum commodum procurare:
prudentia enim et sapientia ipsa esse referta, putandum est dum non vnius, ^ut
centum solum consultorum virorum prudentia, sed plusquam trecentorum electorum
hominum, quali numero olim Senatus Romanorum regebantur, edita sunt. Lib. 11.
14. and 63. fortesc, cap. 18. fol. 21.

The Statutes of England are made not by the will of the Prince, but by the
assent of the whole Realine, that the same should not hurt the people, or not
procure their good, for it is to be thought, that the same are replenished
with wisdom and understanding, whilst they are made and published, not by the
wisdom of one alone, or of an hundred of wise counselors, but of more then
three hundred chosen men, by which number the Senate of Rome of ancient time
was governed.

Stultus dicitur a stupore, quia stultus est, qui propter stuporem mouetur,
leuius est esse stultum, quam fatuum, imprudens, improuidus, ignorans mali and
boni. Libro 4. 128. vide D. and F. and Call. de verb stultus et stupor.

A fool is said a stupore of insensibleness, because he is a fool, who is
moved or stirred up for lack of sense, and it is a lighter or lesser thing to
be a fool then an idiot: not wise, improuident, ignorant of good and evil.
See D. and F.

Summa ratio est, quae pro Religione facit. lib. 5. 2 part 14. Lib. 11. 70.

That is the highest and chief reason, that makes for Religion.

Summa charitas est facere iustitiam singulis, and omni tempore quando necesse
fuerit. lib. 11. 70.

It is the chiefest charity to do justice to every one, and at all times when
it is needful.

Summa petit scopuli siccaque in rupe resedit. Li. 6. 58.

To highest top of all the rock, he does aspire:
And to the Cliffe that is dry, he does himself retire.
Sunt quidam sastidiosi, qui nescio quo malo effectu oderunt Arts, antequam
pernouerunt. Lib. 2. Epistola.

There are certain disdainful persons which hate Arts, (I know not with what
evil affection) before they thoroughly know them.

T
TAlis interpretatio semper fienda est, vt euitetur absurdum, and inconueniens,
ne iudicium sit illusorium. lib. 1. 51. 52.

Such an interpretation ought always to be made, that absurdity and
inconueniencie be avoided, least the judgment become ridiculous.

Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis. lib. 6. 78.

Times and seasons changed be,
And changed in the same are we.
Tempus edax rerum lib. 3. 21.

Time is the consumer of all things.

Tempus est veritatis and institiae sancta adire penitralia lib. 10. Epistola.

There is a time to enter into the holy, inner, or more secret parts of the
house of truth and justice.

Terra dicitur a terrendo, quia vomere teretur. lib. 4. 37.

Terra, the earth, is said a terendo of rending or tearing, because it is torn
up with coulter of the plough.

The saurus Regis est pacis vincusum, and bellorum nerui. lib. 3. 12.

The treasure of the King is the bond of peace, and sinews of warring.

Titulus est iusta causa possedendi, quod nostrum est, et dicitur titulus a
tuendo, quia per illum possessor defendit terram, and plerumque constat ex
munimentis, quae muniunt et tuentur causam Li. 8. 153. vide C. Chartae. etc.

A title is a just cause of possessing that which is ours, and it is said a
title, a tuendo of defending, because thereby the possessor or owner does
defend the land, and for the most part it consists of muniments, which do
fortify and defend the cause. See C.

Testamentorum ius ad Ordinarium pertinet, etc. lib. 5. 9. lib. 9. 36. and 38.
vide I. Ius, etc. and O. Olim, etc.

The right of the Testaments belong to the Ordinary. See I and O.

Traditio loqui facit chartam. Lib. 5. 2. part 1.

Delivery of a deed or charter makes it speak.

Tractent fabrilia fabri. Lib. 3. Epistola.

Let the hammer-Smith meddle with his Smithes works.

Tria genera sunt Executorum. (1) a lege constitutus, and ideo dicitur
legitimus, vt Episcopus: (2) a Testatore constitutus, and ideo dicitur
Testamentarius, vt executor: (3) ab Episcopo constitutus, and idio dicitur
natiuus, vt administrator: lib. 8. 135.

There are three kinds of Executors, (1) appointed by the Law, and therefore is
said lawful, or legitimate, as the Bishop: (2) from the Testator appointed,
and therefore is said Testamentary, as the Executor (3) appointed, by the
Bishop, and therefore is said dative, as an Administrator.

Tria sequuntur defamatorem famosum: (1) prauitatis incrementum: (2) bursae
decrementum: (3) conscientiae detrimentum. lib. 5. 2 part 126.

Three things follow or attend a Libellour: (1) increase of lewdness, (2)
euacuation of purse or beggary (3) shipwreck of Conscience.

Trina debet esse dispositio de bonis defuncti: (1) necessitatis, vt funeralia:
(2) vtilitatis, que chescun serra pay in tiel precedencie come doit estre: (3)
voluntatis, come legacies: etc. li. 10. 136.

There ought to be a threefold disposition of the goods of the dead: (1) of
necessity, as funerals: (2) of profit, that every one be paid in order as they
ought: (3) of Legacies, etc.

Turpis est pars quae cum toto non conuenit, Lib. 10. 109.

It is an il favored part that agrees not with the whole.

V
VAna est illa potentia quae nunquam venit in actum. lib. 2. 51.

Vain and idle is that power or possibility, which never fails into act.

Vani timores sunt aestimandi, qui non cadunt in constantem virum. Libro, 7.
27. Call.

They are to be reckoned vain and idle fears, which do not fall unto a man
of constancy.

Vbi cessat remedium ordinarium, ibi decurritur ad extraordinarium, and nunquam
decurritur ad extraordinarium, vbi valet ordinarium. lib. 4. 92.

Where the ordinary remedy cease, there to the extraordinary a man runs; and
there is no running out to the extraordinary, where he may prevail by the
ordinary.

Vbi est maius periculum, ibi cautius est agendum. lib. 9. 32.

Where we see more danger lie,
We ought to be the more wary.
Vbi eadem est ratio, ibi idem ius, and de similibus idem est iudicium. lib. 7,
18. Call. vide E. and R. similia.

Where there is the same reason, there is the same law, and of things alike,
there is the like judgment. See letter E. and R.

Vbi in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra verba expressa
fienda est. Lib. 7. 24. vide Q.

Where in the words there is no ambiguity or doubt there no exposition is to be
against the express words. See Q.

Vbi lex non distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus: and certe lex non
distinguit, sed omnia membra diuidentia sunt inuenienda and probanda per legem
ipsam. Lib. 7. 5. Call.

Where the Law does not distinguish, neither ought we to distinguish: and
certainly the law does not distinguish, but where all parts dividing are to be
found out, and proved by the law it self.

Vbi inuenta est veritas, ibi figendum est iudicium. Lib. 10. Epist. vide
litera E. R. and insra.

When the truth is once found, there we ought to fix our judgment sound. See
E. and R.

Veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio: saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus.
Iamque faces and arma volant furor arma ministrat. lib. 4. 13. vide A. and D.
As in a people great, when once their does arise
Sedition and people rude grow cruel in their minds,
Then fire and sword does fly, and fury Weapons quickly finds. See A. and D.
Vbi proprietas verborum attenditur, sensus veritatis saepenumero amittitur.
Lib. 7. 27. Call. Lib. 9. 110.

When regard is had to the words propriety: often times is lost, the sense of
the verity.

Vbi factum nullum ibi fortia nulla, and vbi non est principalis non potest
esse accessorius. Lib. 4. 43.

Where there is no fact, there is no force: and where there is no principal,
there is no accessory.

Vbi aliquid generaliter conceditur in est haec exceptio sinon aliquid fit
contra ius fasque. lib. 11. 78.

When any thing is granted generally, therein is implied this exception, if it
be not against right and justice.

Vbi quis delinquit ibi punietur. Lib. 6. 47.

In what place one offends, there let him be punished.

Venden^ eandem rem duobus, falsarius est. lib. 1. 45.

A man selling the self same thing to two, is a forgerer, or a false dealer.

Venit tanquam in arena. lib. 3. 79.

He stands as it were on the sands.

Verba accipienda sunt cum effectu. lib. 4. 51. lib. 8. 91. and 94. and infra.

Words are always to be taken with effect.

Verba aequiuoca et in dubio posita, intelliguntur in digniori et potentiori
sensu. lib. 6. 20.

Words equiuocating and put or spoken doubtfully, are to be understood in the
worthier, and more higher sense.

Verba intentioni non econtra debent inseruire: et verba debent intelligi, vt
aliquid operentur. lib. 8. 94.

Words ought to wait upon the intention and meaning, and not contrariwise: and
words ought so to be understood, that something may be wrought by them.

Verba ligunt homines, taurorum cornua funes,
Cornu bos capitur, voce ligatur homo. lib. 10 101.
Man's words do bargains bind, and cords
The horns of Bulls fast wraps,
The Ox is taken by his horns,
Man's voice him often intraps.
Verba posteriora propter certitudinem addita, ad priora quae certitudine^
indigent sunt referenda. Lib. 8. 119.

The latter words for certainty added, are to the former which want certainty
to be referred.

Verborum sensus est anima legis, lib. 5. 2. part 2. vide S.

The sense of the words, are the soul, or life of the law. See S.

Verborum sensus est duplex sz: mitis and asper, and verba semper accipienda
sunt in mitiore sensu. lib. 4 13. and 20. vide S.

The sense of words are two fould: gentle, and sharp: and words are always to
be taken in the milder sense. See S.

Verborum sensus ex causa dicendi accipiendus est, and sermones semper
accipiendi sunt secundum subiectam materiam. Libro 4. 13. and 14. Lib. 6. 63.
vide, litera S.

The sense of words are to be taken and construed from the cause of speaking:
and speech is always to be taken according to the subject of the matter. See S.

Veredictum dictum est veritatis. lib. 4. 47.

A verdit is dictum veritatis, the word of truth.

Veritas abscondi erubescit, nihil enim magis metuit quam non proferri in
publicum, vult se in luce collocari, and quis illam occulat occultetue, quam
omnium occulis expositum esse, est aequissimum? lib. 10. Epistola. infra. prox
sequent.

The truth blusheth to be hid, or covered: she fears nothing so much as not
to be brought forth into public show; her desire is to be set forth in the
open light, and who will cover or hide her, who to be exposed to all men's sight
is a thing most equal and right?

Veritas nihil veretur nisi abscondi. lib. 9. 20. supra prox. preced.

Truth is afraid of nothing but to be hid and concealed.

Veritatis ea est natura, vt quamvis plurimi oppugnent, ipsa tamen demum
vincat, and vt palma efflorescat: ad tempus forsitan vi quadam praematur, sed
nullo tempore vlla ratione opprimatur. lib. 5. Epist. vide E.

The nature of Truth is such that although many do oppugn or set against her,
she nevertheless at the last overcomes, and as a Palm tree florisheth;
peradventure she may for a time be pressed, but never with any reasoning be
oppressed. See E.

Veritas sustentari and oppugnari nisi ipsa veritate minime potest, and ea est
eius nutura, and constantia, vt nullo tempore nulla part sibi a se dissentiat
mangonio and phaleris exornari odit, comitesque secum ducit, simplicitatem,
vnitatem, and pacem tandem. Lib. 5. Epist. and vide supra and infra.

Truth cannot be supported or defended by any thing, but by truth her self,
and is of that constitution and constancy, as she cannot at any time, or in
any part, or point be disagreeable to her self; she hates all bombasting,
and s^fistication, and brings Certainty, Simplicity, Unity, and Peace at the
last.

Veritas per se placet, honesta per se decent, falsa fucis, turpia phaleris
indigent. lib. 5. Epist. vide E. Error, etc.

Truth of her self is pleasing, honest things by her self becomes her:
false things have need of foistings, and filthy or foul things of ornaments
and couerings. See E.

Veritatis sermo simplex est. Lib. 10. Epist. vide S.

The speech of Truth is simple and plain. See S.

Via trita est tutissima lib. 10. 142.

The common, or well worn way, is the safest.

Videte iudices quid faciatis, non enim hominis exercetis iudicium, sed domini
and quodcunque iudicaueritis, in vos redundabit. Deus est iustus, fortis, and
patiens, talem decet esse omnem iudicem, Iustum sine respectu quod suum est
cuique dando, ideoque iudicia sic dicuntur, quasi iuris dicta, ( vide, I
iudic.) (2) fortem contra maliciam and periculum, nam neque timida probitas,
neque improba fortitudo reipublicae est vtilis, (3) patie^tem, vt sincere and
ex pura conscientia iustitiam administret, licet inde despicatus, opprobrio,
forte etiam ludibrio habitus, nam non solum paena, sed patientia acquirit nomen
persecutionis, and gloriam victoriae. Lib. 4. Epist. Cron. Lib. 2. cap. 19.

Take heed, ye judges, what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of
man, but of the Lord: and whatsoever ye shall judge shall redounde or fall
upon your selves. God is just, strong, and patient, such a one should every
judge be: Just, without respect, giving to every man that which is his own,
and therefore Judgments are so called, as it were the sayings of the Law,
(vide letter I. iudicium, (2) Strong against malice, and danger: for neither a
fearful honesty, or integrity, neither a lewd fortitude is to the Common
wealth profitable: (3) Patient, that he may admynister justice sincerely, and
out of a pure conscience although for the same he be despised, despighted, or
disgraced: not only the pain, but patience gets the name of persecution,
and the glory of the victory.

Vigilantibus non dormientibus iura subueniunt. lib. 2. 26. lib. 4. 10. and 82.

The Laws do help them that are watchful, and waking, and not the fleepie
and negligent.

Viperma expositio est: quae corrodit viscera textus. Lib. 10. 105. lib. 11.
34. Calap. verbo Viper.

It is a Serpentine exposition which knaweth out the bowels of the text.

Vir bonus est quis? qui consulta patrum, qui leges, iuraque seruat. Lib. 3. 86.

Who is a good man? he that keeps the decrees of the fathers, and the laws.

Vna persona non potest supplere vicem duarum, lib. 4. 46. vide S. and E.

One person alone, cannot supply the room of two. See E. and S.

Vnda gignit vndam. lib. 7. Epist. vide L. Labor.

One water draws on another. See L:

Vno absurdo dato, infinita sequuntur, lib. 1. 102.

One absurdity granted, infinite do follow.

Vnus in pluribus ecclesijs rite officia persoluere, aut rebus earum
necessariam curam impendere ne queant, lib. 4. 78. vide R. and S.

One person cannot well perform the duties in many Churches: or bestow a
necessary care upon the matters belonging unto them. See R. and S.

Vsuria dicitur ab vsu, and aere, quasi vsuera, id est, vsus aeris, and vsara
est commodum certum quod propter vsum rei mutuatae accipitur. Lib. 5. 2. part
70.

Usury is said ab vsu, et aere, of use and mettle or copper, as it were the use
of mettle, and usury is a profit certain, which is received for the use of a
thing lent and borrowed.

Volatilium (quae sunt ferae naturae) alia sunt regalia, alia communia, and
aquatilium, alia sunt regalia, alia communia, lib. 7. 16.

Of flying fowls, (which are of a wild nature) some are belonging to the
King, others common to all; and of fowls of the rivers, some belong to the
King others are common.

Voluntas reputatur pro facto. lib. 11. 98

The will or mind is reckoned for the fact, or deed.

Vtile per inutile ne vitiatur. lib. 3. 10. Just. institut. fol. 122.

That which is good and profitable, is not by that which is unprofitable made
worse, or become vitiate.

Vt veritas inueniatur rationandum est, vbi inuenta est, ibi figendum iudicium.
Lib. 10. Epistola.

That the Truth may be found out we are to hold and maintain argument: but
that once found, we are there to settle our judgment.

Vt iugulant homines surgunt de nocre latrones. lib. 7. 6.

In darkest nights, thieves often do rise,
And kill good men to have a prise.
Vt paena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perueniat Lib. 4. 124.

That punishment on few may fall.
And fear thereby come upon all.
Vt legatus est quasi extra legem positus, and caput gerit lupinum. li. 7. 14.
Call. fits. not. bre. fo. 161. Bra. li. 3. trac. 2. c. 11.

A man that is outlawed, is as it were from the Law exiled: and bears about
with him a Wolves head.

Vt res magis valear quam pereat, lib. 1. 45. li. 2. 72. and 73. li: 3. 28. 29.
35. and 36. Lib. 5. 2. part 8. et 55. Lib. 1. 76. and 77. lib. 6. 76. 6. lib.
7. 24. lib: 10. Epistola.

That a matter may avail, then by any means quail.

Vt in natura videmus infinitam rerum distinctionem, ab vnitate aliqua
prouenire, vt ab eadem radice mulros flores, ab eodem font plures riuulos, and
in humano corpore ab eodem cord multas arterias, ex vno ie core multas venas,
neruos omnes ab vno cerebto: ita procul dubio, Lex orta est ex mente diuina,
atque vnitas haec, consensus plane admirabilis in tanta rerum diuersitate, nisi
a Deo bonarum legum, and constitutionum Authore ac font dimanauit. lib: 3.
Epist.

As in nature we see the infinite distinction of things proceed from some
unity, as many flowers from one root, many rivers from one Fountain, many
arteries in the body of man from one heart, many veins from one liver, and
many sinews from the brain: so without question, the law is derived from a
mind divine, and this admirable unity, and consent in such diuirsity of
things, proceeds from God, the fountain and founder of all good laws and
constitutions.

Vt non assentior ijs qui memoriam habent pro aerario, quod frustrat quando
depositum requirent vrgenti necessitate: ita neque illos probo, qui musaea
vagis and incertis relationibus suffarciunt quibus cito in errorum labirinthum
volentes and vltro inducentur. lib. 1. Epistola. vide L. plus inde lectio, etc.

As I allow not of those that make memory their storehouse, for at their
greatest need they will want of their store. So I like not of those that stuff
their Studies with wandering or maisterlesse reports, for they shall find them
too soon to lead them to error. See L.

Vulgaris opinio duplex est, sz. opinio vulgaris orta inter graves and
discretos, and quae vultum veritatis habet: and opinio tantum orta inter leaves,
and vulgares homines, absque specie veritatis. lib. 4. 107. vide R. Reputation,
etc.

Vulgar opinion is twofold: a vulgar opinion raised amongst grave and discreet
men, and which has a show or countenance of a truth: and an opinion only
raised amongst light and vulgar persons, without any face of a truth. See R.
Reputation.

Vulgaris expurgatio ( spoken of the trial called Ordalium) prohibetur, quia
fabricante Diabolo, est inuenta, cum sit contra preceptum Domini, non tentabis
Dominum Deum tuum. Lib. 9. 33. vide Sintaginat. iuris ciuilis. lib. 48. Cap.
15. fol. 796. Holl. Lams. Manhood.

The vulgar expurgation (spoken of the trial called Ordalium) is utterly
forbidden, because it was devised and found by the work of the Devil, when If
is directly against the commandment of the Lord: Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God. Holinshed Chronicle in his description of Britain. page 177. and
178. Lambert in the explication of words, at the word Ordalium, and Manhoods
forest Law. fol. 5.

FINIS.

