THE INSTITVTION OF A CHRISTEN MAN, CONTAINING the Exposition or
Interpretation of the commune Creed, of the seven Sacraments, of the.x.
commandementes, and of the Pater noster, and the Aue Maria, Iustyfication and
Purgatory.

printer's device of Thomas Berthelet, a compartment featuring cherubs, pygmies
and other mythical creatures climbing vines, carrying a litter, banging a drum,
etc., a figure wearing a laurel wreath above (not in McKerrow)

TO THE MOST HIGH AND most excellent prince, our most gracious, and most
redouted Souerayn lord and king HENRY the.VIII. by the grace of god king of
England and of France, defendour of the faith, lord of Irelande, and supreme
heed in earth immediately under Christ of the Church of England, Thomas
archbysshop of Canturbury, Edward archebysshoppe of York, and all other the
bysshoppes, prelates, and Archedeacons of this your realm, wysshe all grace,
peace, and felicity from almighty god the father our lord Jesus Christ.
PLEASES IT YOUR most royal majesty to understand, that where as of your
most godly disposition and tender zeal, which is impressed in your most noble
heart, toward thaduancement of goddis glory, and the right institution and
education of your people, in the knowledge of Christis true religyon, your
hyghnes commanded us now of late, to assemble our selfs together, and upon
the diligent search and pervsing of holy scripture, to set forth a plain and
sincere doctrine, concerning the hole sum of al those things, which
appertain unto the profession of a christen man, that by the same al errors,
doutes, superstitions, and abuses, might be suppressed, removed, and utterly
taken away, to the honor of almighty god, and to the perfyte establyshing of
your said subjects in good unity and concord, and perfect quyetenes both in
their sowles and bodies. We consydering the godly effect and intent of this
your highness most virtuous and gracious commandment, do not only rejoice and
give thanks unto almighty god with all our hearts, that it has plesed him to
send such a king to reign over us, which so ernestly minds to set forth
among his subjects the light of holy scripture, which alone shows men the
right pathe to come to god, to se him, to know him, to love him, to serve
him, and so to serve him, as he most desires: but have also according to our
most bounden duties, endeavored our selfs, with all our wit, lernyng, and
power, to satisfy your highness said desired most godly purpose. And thereupon
calling to our remembrance how the hole pithe and sum of all those things,
which be at great length contained in the hole canon of the Bible, and be of
necessity required to the attayning of everlasting life: was sufficiently,
exactly, and therewith shortly and compendiously comprehended in the.xii.
Articles of the common Creed, called thapostels Creed, in the.vii. sacraments
of the church, in the ten commandementes, and in the prayer of our lord,
called the Pater noster. And considering therefore, that if your highness people
were perfitely instructed and learned in the right knowledge and understanding of
the same, they should not only be hable easily to perceive and understand, and
also to learn by heart and bear away the hole effect and substance of al those
things, which do appertain and be necessary for a christen man either to
believe, or to do, but also that al occasions might thereby be remouid, which by
any color or visage have caused any of them to fall or to be offended: we have
after long and mature consultation, had among us, compiled a certain
treatise, wherein we have employed our hole study, and have therein truly and
purely set forth and declared in our mother tongue, the very sense and
meaning, and the very right use virtue and efficacy of all the said four
parts. And forasmoche as Faith, is that syngular gift of god, whereby our
hearts, that is to say, our natural reason and judgment (obscured and almost
extincted by original and actual sins) is lyghtened, purified, and made
hable to know and discern, what things be in deed acceptable, and what be
displeasant in the sight of god. and for because also that faith is the very
fountain and chief ground of our religion, and of all goodness and virtues
exercysed in the same, and is the first gate, whereby we enter, and be received
and admytted, not only into the familye or householde of our lord god, but
also into the knowledge of his majesty and deity, and of his inestimable
power, wisdom, rightuousenes, mercy, and goodness: We have first of all
begone with the Creed, and have declared by way of a paraphrasis, that is a
kind, mere, and true exposition of the right understanding of every article of
the same. And afterward we have entreated of the institution, the virtue, and
right use of the seven sacraments. And thirdly we have declared the ten
commandementes, and what is contained in every one of them. And fourthly we
have showed the interpretation of the Pater noster, whereunto we have also added
the declaration of the Aue Maria. And to the intent we would omytte nothing,
contained in the book of Articles, devised and set forth this last year, by
your highness like commandment: We have also added in the end of this tretise,
the article of Justification, and the article of Purgatory, as they be in the
said book expressid. And thus having determined our sentence in all things
contained in the said treatise, according to the very true meaning of
scripture, we do offer the same here with unto your most excellent majesty,
most humbly besechinge the same to permytte and suffer it, in case it shall be
so thought mete to your most excellent wisdom to be printed, and so with your
supreme power set forth: and commanded to be by us and all other your
subjects of the clergy of this your most noble realm, as well relygious as
other, taught to your highness people, without the which power and license of
your majesty, we knoweledge and confess, that we have none auctorytie either
to assemble our selfs together for any pretense or purpose, or to publysshe
any thing, that might be by us agreed on and compiled. And albeit most drade
and benign souerain lord, we do affirm by our lerninges, with one assent,
that the said treatise is in all points so concorda^t and agreeable to holy
scripture, as we trust your majesty shall receive the same, as a thing most
sincerely and purely handled to the glory of god, your graces honor, the
unity of your people, the which things your highness we may well se and
perceive, does chiefly in the same desire: Yet we do most humbly submyt it to
the most excellent wisdom and exact judgment of your majesty, to be
recognized, ouersene, and corrected, if your grace shall find any word or
sentence in it mete to be changed, qualified, or further expounded, for the
plain setting forth of your highness most virtuous desire and purpose in that
behalf. Whereunto we shall in that case conform our selfs, as to our most
bounden duties to god and to your highness apperteineth.

Your hyghnes most humble subjects and daily bedesmen. Thomas Cantuarien.
Ioannes London. Stephanus winton. Ioannes Exon. Ioannes Lincoln. Ioannes
Bathonien. Rolandus Couen. et Lich. Thomas Elien. Nicolaus Sarum. Ioannes
Bangor. Edouardus Hereforden. Hugo wigornien. Ioannes Roffen. Ricardus
Cicestren. Guilielmus Norwicen. Guilielmus Meneuen. Robertus Assauen. Robertus
Landauen. Edouardus Eborum. Cuthbertus Dunelmen. Robertus Carliolen. Ricardus
wolman Archidiaconus Sudbur. Gulielmus knight Arch. Richemond. Ioannes Bell
Arch. Gloucestr. Edmundus ^^^er Arch. Laicestr. Gulielmus Skippe Arch. Dorsett.
Nicolaus Heeth Arch. Stafford. Cuthbertus Marshal Arch. Notingham. Ricardus
Curren Arch. Oxon. Gulielmus Cliffe, Galfridus Downs, Robertus Okyng,
Radulphus Bradford, Ricardus Smith, Simon Matthew, Ioannes Pryn, Gulielmus
Buckmaster, Gulielmus May, Nicolaus wotton, Ricardus Coxe, Ioannes Edmundes,
Thomas Robertson, Ioannes Baker, Thomas Baret, Ioannes Hase, Ioannes Tyson
Sacrae theologiae, iuris ecclesiastici et Ciuilis professores.


This book called the Institution of a christen man conteyneth four special
parts whereof
The first part conteyneth the exposition of the Creed, called thapostelles
Creed. The second part conteyneth the Exposition or declaration of the seven
sacraments. The third part conteyneth the exposition of the ten
commandments. The fourth part conteyneth the exposition of the Pater
noster and the Aue, with the articles of Iustifycation, and Purgatory.
The creed called thapostels Creed.
1 I BELEVE in god the father, and that he is almighty, and creator of heaven
and earth. 2 AND I believe in Jesus Christ, and that he is his only begotten
son, and our lord. 3 AND that he was conceived by the holy ghost, and borne
of the virgyn Mary. 4 AND suffered passion for our redemption under a certain
Judge, whose name was Pontius Pilatus, and so was crucified, deed, and buried. 5
AND that he descended into hell, and rose again the third day from death to
life. 6 AND that he ascended afterward up into heaven / and sytteth there upon
the right hand of almighty god his father. 7 AND that he shall come from thens
at Domisday to judge the quycke and dead. 8 AND I believe in the holy gooste. 9
AND I believe that there is one holy Catholyque and universal church. 10 AND I
believe that there is in the same Church communion of saints and remyssyon of
sins. 11 AND I believe that at Domisday al ye people of the world that ever
was or ever shall be unto that day, shall then arise again in the self same
flesh and body, which they had while they lived here in earth. 12 AND I
believe that al thelecte people of god shall have and enjoy everlasting life
for their reward.
The sense and interpretacyon of the first Article.
IN My heart I believe assuredly, and steadfastly with my mouth I profess and
knowledge, that there is but one very god, and three persons in trinity, the
father, the son, and the holy ghost, and that these three persons be not three
goddis, but all one god, all of one nature, and of one substance, and all of
one everlasting essence or being, and al like and equal in might, power,
wisdom, knowledge, ryghtwysenes and all other things belongyng unto the
deity. And that beside or without this god, there is no other god.

And I believe also and profess that god the father, which to the first
person in Trinity, is not only the god, the lord, and the father of heaven
and earth, and all things contained therein by creation and governance: but
also that he is the father of his only begotten son, the second person in
Trinity, and that he did bygette him of his own substance by eternal
generation, that is to say, by generation that never had beginning.

And I believe also, and profess that all and synguler the words and sayings
of this god the father (be they laws, precepts, promyses, prophycyes, or
thretenynges) and all that ever was spoken of him, or by him in the hole body
and canon of the new and the old testament, is most certainly true, and of
such infallyble verytie and truth, that the same can not be altered, or
conuelled by any contrary opinion, power, or auctorytie. And I promise and
profess that I do and woll not only hope, and look surely, and without all
doubt to atteyne and enjoy all those things, which god promyseth in holy
scripture unto thelecte chylderne of god: but also that I do and woll fear
left those punyshementes and afflyctions, which god in holy scripture
threteneth to cast upon those persons, which do transgress his will and
commandments, shall fall upon me: if I shall not, like an obedient servant
and child, study to fulfylle and accomplish the same.

And I believe also, and profess that this god, and this father is almighty,
that is to say, that his power and might excels incomparably all the other
powers in heaven and earth. And that all other powers, which be in heaven, earth,
or hell, be nothing as of them self: but have all their might, force, and
strength of him only, and be all subject unto his power, and be ruled and
governed thereby, and can not resyste, or let the same.

And I believe also, and profess, that this almighty god, and almighty father
did at the beginning create, form, and make of naught heaven and earth, and
all things contained in this world, as well angels and man's soul, and al
other things inuysyble: as also all other vysyble creatures and that he did
give unto them all the power and might, which they have.

And I believe also and profess, that among his other creatures, he did create
and make me, and did give unto me this my soul, my life, my body, with all
the members that I have great and small and all the wit, reason knowledge and
understanding that I have, and finally all the other outward substance,
possessions, and things, that I have or can have in this world.

And I believe also, and profess, that he is my very god, my lord, and my
father, and that I am his servant and his own son, by adoption and grace,
and the right enherytor of his kyngedome, and that it proceeds and comes of
his mere goodness only without all my deserte, that I am in this life
preserved and kept from dangers and perils; And that I am susteygned,
nourysshed, fed, clothed, and that I have health, tranquyllytie, rest,
peace, or any other thing necessary for this corporal life. I knowledge also
and confess, that he suffers and causes the son, the moon, the sterres,
the day, the night, the air, the fire, the water, the land, the sea, the
fowls, the fyshes, the bestes, and all the fruits of the earth to serve me for
my profytte and my necessite.

And in like manner I confess and knowledge, that all bodily syckenes, and
adversity, which do fortune unto me in this world, be sent unto me by his
hand, and his visitation, and that he punysheth me not to distroy me; but
only to save me, and to reduce me again by penance unto the right way of his
laws, and his religion, and so thereby to prove me, and to exercise me in
patience, and other virtues, and also to signify unto me the great cure, and
fatherly love, and goodness, which he bears toward me. And therefore I woll
have none other god, but only this god, which by his almyghtie power has
created and made heaven and earth, and all things contained in the same.
Neither woll I glory, or put my trust and confidence in mine own power,
force, strength, riches, lernyng, science, wisdom, or any thing else, what so
ever I have, or shall have, and possess in this world. Neither woll I glory,
or put my confydence in any other man or creature of this world, be it in
heaven, hell, or in earth, nor in any craft of Magic, sorcerie, charms,
wytchecraftes, or any other false arts subtiled, and invented by the devil:
but I woll put my hole hope, my hole trust and confydence in god only, and in
him only woll I glory, and give all honor and glory unto him, and unto him
only, and unto his governance woll I commytte, and submytte my self, my
goods, and all that ever I have, without fearing or regarding the malice,
the craft, or power of the devil, or any of his members, which might enduce
me to the contrary. Neither woll I desire any sign to tempte god, but I woll
trust fermely and faithfully unto him. And although he shall send any
adversity unto me / or shall dyfferre and tarry his pleasure in granting
such request and petytion / as I shall make unto him: yet woll not I murmur
or grudge thereat, nor go about to prescribe or appoint unto him any end, any
time / any measure, or season: but I woll commytte all to his will, with a pure
and a steadfast faith, and woll pacyently abide the time, which unto him shall
be thought most expedient for me.

This faith I reteyne stedfastely engraued in my heart, and I promise by the
grace and help of god, never to swerve or declyne from the same, for any
argument, persuasyon, or authority, that may be objected: nor for any
worldly affection, or respect of pleasure, pain, persecution, or torment,
what so ever shall fortune unto me. From this trust and confidence woll I never
be brought, although all the men in the world should forsake me, and
persecute me. Neither woll I the less trust in god, for that I am a man of
great power force and auctorytie, endewed withal suffycyencies in this world,
ne yet because I want the possessions of this world, and am but wretched and
poor / rude and unlearned, and dispysed of all men, nor finally because I am a
wretched sinner. For sith this God is the almyghtye lord, and maker of all
things, and has all things under his hands and governance: what can I
lack that he can not give or do unto me, if it be his will so to do? And sith
he is my father. I am assured, that for the fatherlye love and pytie, which he
has and bears unto me, he woll not only care for me, but he woll be also
continually present with me by his grace and favor, and woll contynually
govern and direct me, aid and assyste me, and provide that, that shall be
best for me, and woll also forgive me all the sins that I ever committed or
have done, contrary to his commandment, so often as I shall by true, and
unfeigned penance return unto him with all my heart, and shall apply my hole
mind, purpose and endeavor, to amend my noughtie life, and to observe his
commandments.

The sense and interpretation of the second Article.
I BELEVE constantly in my heart, and with my mouth I do profess and knowledge,
that Jesus Christ is thonly begoten son of almighty god the father, and that
he was begoten of his godly nature, and substance eternally before the world
was made or formed, and that he is very god / equal with god the father, and
tholy ghost in substance, and all other things belonging unto the godheed.

And I believe likewise, yt this Ihesu Christ was eternally preordeyned, and
appointed by the decree of the hole Trinity, to be our lord, that is to say,
to be thonely redemer and Savior of mankind, and to reduce and bring the
same from under the dominion of the dyuell and sin, unto his only dominion,
kyngedome lordeshyppe, and governance.

And I believe likewise, that this Jesus Christ is true in all his words and
promyses, or rather that he is very truth it self. And that all things,
which be spoken of him, or by him in holy scripture, be certainly and
infallibly true.

And I believe also, and profess that Jesus Christ is not only Jesus, and lord
to all men that believe in him, but also that he is my Jesus, my god, and my
lord. For where as of my nature I was borne in sin, and in the indignation
and dyspleasure of god, and was the very child of wrath, condemned to
everlasting death, subject and thrall to the power of the dyuell and sin,
having all the pryncypall parts or portions of my soul, as my reason and
understanding and my free will, and all the other powers of my soul and body,
not only so destituted and depryued of the gifts of god, wherewith they were
first endewed, but also so blinded, corrupted, and poisoned with error,
ignorance, and carnal concupiscence, that neither my said powers could
exercise the natural function and office, for the which they were ordained by
god at the first creation, nor I by them could do or think any thing,
which might be acceptable to god, but was utterly dead to god, and all
godly things, and utterly unable and insuffycyente of mine own self to
observe the least part of goddis commandments, and utterly inclyned and
ready to run heedlynge into all kinds of sin and myschyefe, I believe I
say, that I being in this case, Jesus Christ, by sufferynge of most paynfull
and shameful death upon the Cross, and by shedynge of his most preciouse
blood, and by that gloryouse victory, which he had, when he descendynge into
hell, and there ouercommynge both the devil and death, rose again the
third day from death to life, and so ascended into heaven, has now pacyfyed
his fathers indignation toward me, and has reconcyled me again into his
favor, and that he has loosed and delivered me from the yoke and tyranny of
death, of the dyuell, and of sin, and has made me so free from them, that
they shall not finally hurt, or annoy me, and that he has powered out
plentyfully his holy spyryte and his graces upon me, specially faith, to
illumyne and direct my reasone and judgment, and charytie, to dyrecte my will
and affections toward god. Whereby I am so perfectly restored to the light and
knowledge of god, to the spyrytuall fear and dread of god, and unto the love
of him and mine neighbor, that with his grace I am now redye to obey, and
able to fulfill and accomplysshe his will and commandments. Besides all
this, he has brought and delivered me from darkness and blyndenes, to light,
from death to life, and from sin to Justice, and he has taken me into his
protection, and made me as his own peculyar possessyon, and he has planted
and grafted me into his own body, and made me a membre of the same, and he
has communicated and made me partycypant of his justice, his power, his life,
his felycytie, and of all his goods, so that now I may boldly say and believe,
as in deed I do perfytely believe, that by his passion, his death, his blood,
and his conquerynge of death, of sin, and of the dyuel, by his resurreccion
and ascension, he has made a sufficient expiation or propiciation toward
god, that is to say, a suffycyente satisfaction and recompense as well for my
origynal sin, as also for all the actual sins, that ever I have committed,
and that I am so clearly rydde from all the guylte of my said offenses, and
from the everlasting pain, due for the same, that neither sin, nor death,
nor hell, shall be able, or have any power, to hurt me or to let me, but that
after this transytorye life, I shall ascend in to heaven, there to raygne with
my Savior Christ perpetually in glory and felicytie.

All which things considered, I may worthyly call him my Ihesus, that is to
say, my savior: and my Christ, that is to say, mine anointed king and
priest, and my lord, that is to say, my redemer and governor. For he has
done and fulfilled the very office both of a priest and of a king, and of
a lord. Of a priest, in that he has offered up his blessed body and blood,
in the Altar of the Cross, for the satysfaction of my sins. And of a king
and lord, in that he has, like a most mighty conqueror, overcome and
utterly oppressed his enemies (which were also mine enemies) and has
spoiled them of the possessyon of mankind, which they wanne before by fraud
and deceyte, by lieng and blasphemy, and has brought us now into his
possession and dominion, to reygne over us in mercy and love, like a most
loving lord and governor.

Finally I believe assuredly, and also profess that this redemption and
iustyfication of mankind could not have been wrought / nor brought to pass
by any other means in the world, but by the means of this Jesus Christ
goddis only son, and that never man could yet / nor never shall be hable to
come unto god, the father, or to believe in him, or to attayn his favor by his
own wit or reason, or by his own science and learning, or by any his own
works, or by what so ever may be named in heaven or in earth, but by the
faith in the name and power of Jesus Christ and by the gifts and graces of
his holy spyryte. And therefore, sith he is my Jesus Christ, and my lord: I
woll put my hoole trust and confydence in him, and woll have the self same
faith and affyaunce in him in all points, which I have in god the father. And
I woll knowledge him for my only lord, and woll obey all his commandments
during my life, without any grutchynge. And I am sure, that while he is my
lord and governor, and I under his protection, neither sin, neither the
dyuell, nor yet death, nor hell / can do me any hurt.

The sense and interpretation of the third Article.
I Believe in my heart assuredly, and constantely do profess that when the time
was come, in the which it was before ordained, and appointed by, the decree of
the hoole Trinity, that mankind should be saved and redeemed: this Jesus
Christ, the second person in Trinity, and very god, descended from heaven
into earth, to take upon him the very habyte, form, and nature of man, and
in the same nature to work, to suffer, and fulfill all those things, which
were necessary for our redemption.

And I believe also, and profess that he so descendyng from heaven, did light
down into the womb of a most blessed virgin called Marie, and that he did
there take upon him our nature, and was conceived, begotten, and borne of her
very flesh, nature, and substance: and so did unite and conioyne together the
same nature of man, with his Godheed in one person, with such an indyssoluble
and inseparable knotte, and bond, that he being one person Jesus Christ, was
than and ever shall be in the same person, very persyte god, and very perfyte
man.

And I believe also, and profess that this most blessed virgin conceived this
her child Jesus Christ, without spotte, or blotte of sin, or carnal
concupyscence, and without any co^mixtion, or conjunction had between her and
any mortal man, or any other creature in heaven or earth. And that the holy
ghost, the third person in trinity, descendynge also from heaven, lighted
down in to this most blessed virgin, and there of her flesh and substance,
wrought this ineffable and incomprehensyble work of the Incarnation of this
child Jesus Christ.

And I believe also and profess, that this work and operation of the holy
ghost, was all holy, without any sin or impurite, and that it was done
without any violation, or detriment unto the virginity of that blessed virgin
saint Mary.

And I believe also, that this child Jesus Christ was not only thus conceived
without sin, but also that he was borne in like manner of his said most
blessed mother and that she both in the conception, and also in the birth, and
nativity of this her child, and ever after, retained still her virginity pure
and immaculate, and as clear without blotte as she was at the time, that she
was first borne.

And I believe, that this conception, and Nativity of our said savior, was
ordained to be thus pure, holy, and undefiled, to the intent that al fylthines
and malediction, wherewith the conception and birth of me, and of all other
men, that ever were sith Adam, or shall be, and all the filthiness and malice of
the sins of the hole world, as well origynal as actual, should thereby be
puryfyed, purged, and made clean.

The sense and interpretation of the fourth Article.
I Believe assuredly in my heart, and with my mouth I do profess, that this
Christ, very god and man, after he was thus conceived and borne of his blessed
mother, waxed and lived forth here in the world, until he came unto the age
of.xxxii. years and above, and that in all this time of his life, he suffered
and endured for our sakes, and for our welthe, much boiely afflyction, much
labor and trauaylle, much hungre, thirst, and poverty, much injury and
ignominy, and many other the myseries and infirmities, whereunto all mortal
men be subject.

And I believe, that although this our savior Jesus Christ passed over all the
hole course of his said life, even from his Natyuitie until his death, in
such perfyte obedience unto the laws of god and man, and in such perfyte
innocence of living, that neither any man in the world, nor the dyuell him
self, could ever find in him suspycion of any the least crime or offense
that might be devised: yet the blind ignorant Jews, replete with envy and
malice, and the very members of the dyuell, by whom they were provoked and
enduced there unto, labored contynually by all craft and means they could,
to dystroye him: and at length conspirynge to gether, and subornatynge false
witness, they took him, and after they had bet him, and spyt in his face, and
used all the vilany they could unto him, they bound and brought him before
one Pontius Pilatus, being then the chief judge in Jerusalem, under the
Emperor of Rome, and there they most falsely accused him, as a subuerter of
the laws of god, and as a person that seduced the people, and moved sedicion
among them, and as a traitor against the emperor of Rome.

And I believe that our savior Jesus Christ, being thus most falsely and
wrongfully accused, and brought before the said judge, was at length in
publyque and open judgment condemned by the sentence of the said judge, to
be nailed unto a cross, and to be hanged upon the same, to the intent he
should so suffer that kind of death, which among the Jews was ever most
abhorred, and detested, and accounted to be the most shameful and cursed of
all others.

And I believe that after this sentence, and judgment thus pronounced and given
contrary to all Justice, and equity: the Jews did take this innocent Jesus
Christ our savior, and first of all byndyng him fast to a pyller, and
pressyng with great violence a crown of thorn upon his heed, they did not
only most spitefully mock him, and scorn him, but they also most cruelly
scorged, tourmented, and afflicted him, and finally they crucified him, that is
to say, they nailed him through hands and feet unto a cross, and so hanged
him up upon the same, on a certain hill called Caluarie.

And I believe also and profess, that he hanged there upon the same cross
between two thieves, which were malefactors, until he was dead, and his
soul departed from his body. And that after he was thus dead, one Joseph ab
Aramathia, being one of Christis disciples, and certain other devout men and
women, which also believed in Christ, opteyned license of the said Judge, to
take down this blessed body of our savior Jesus Christ from the said
Cross. And that when they had so done, they wrapped and folded the same body
in a clean syndone, and so laid it and buried it in a new grave or sepulcher,
which the said Joseph had made of stone, wherein there was never man buried
before.

And I believe that our savior Jesus Christ, in all the time of his most bitter,
and greuouse passion, and in suffrynge this most vile and shameful death,
not only endured and sustained all the peynes and injuries, and all the
opprobries, and ignominies, which were done unto him therein most patiently,
without resystaunce, and like an innocent lamb not opening ones his mouth to
the contrary: but also that he did wyllyngly and gladly without force or
constrainte of any power, suffer this cross, and this kind of death, and his
soul also to depart from his body.

And I believe that by this passion and death of our savior Jesus Christ, not
only my corporal death is so destroyed, that it shall never have power to
hurt me, but rather it is made wholesome and profitable unto me, but also that
all my sins, and the sins also of all them, that do believe in him, and
follow him, be mortyfyed and deed, that is to say, all the guilte and offense
thereof, and also the damnation and pain due for the same, is clearly
extyncted, abolyshed, and washed away, so that the same shall not afterward be
imputed or inflycted unto me. And therefore woll I have this passion, and this
death in my daily remembrance. And I woll not only glory, and rejoice
contynually therein, and give all the thanks I can unto god for the same,
considering I have, and shall assuredly attain thereby my redemption, my
iustyfycation, my reconcilyation unto goddis favor, and life everlasting: but
I woll also endeavor my self to my possible power, and by the help of god, to
follow this my savior Jesus Christ, in the bearing of mine own cross,
according to the will and commandment of god, that is to say, I woll daily
labor and study, to mortyfie and kill my carnal affections, and to subdue them
unto the spyryte, and I woll patiently bear all the aduersyties, afflictions,
and punyshementes, that god shall send unto me in this world, and I woll in
my heart hate, abhor, and detest all sin, considering that the same was
ever so odiouse and dyspleasaunt unto god, that nothing in the world could
worthyly satysfie and content him for the same, but only the death and the
blood of his only and most dear beloved son Jesus Christ.

The sense and interpretation of the fyfth Article.
I Believe assuredly with my heart, and with my mouth I do profess, that this
our savior Jesus christ, after he was thus deed upon the cross, he descended
immedyatly in his soul down into hell, leaving his most blessed body here
in earth, and that at his coming thither, by the incomparable might and force
of his godheed, he entered into hell. And like as that mighty man, Luke. xi.
of whom saint Luke speaks, which, entryng into the house of an other
strong man, first overcame him, and bound him hand and foot, and
afterward spoylynge him of all his armure and strength, wherein he trusted,
took also away from him, all the goods and substance he had. Iud. xiiii.
and like as strong Sampson slew the mighty Lion, and took out of his mouth
the sweet honey: even so our savior Jesus Christ at his said enter into hell,
first he conquered and oppressed both the dyuell and hell, and also death it
self, whereunto al mankind was condemned, and so bound them fast, that is
to say, restrained the power and tyrrannye, which they had before, and
exercysed over all mankind, that they never had sithe that time, nor never
shall have any power finally to hurt or annoy any of them, that do faythefully
believe in Jesus Christ, and afterward he spoiled hell, and delivered, and
brought with him from thens, all the souls of those ryghtuouse and good men,
which from the fall of Adam died in the favor of god, and in the faith and
bylefe of this our savior Jesus Christ, which was then to come. And I believe
that by this descendynge of our savior Jesus Christ in to hell, not only his
elect people, which were holden there as captyues, were delivered from thens:
but also that the sentence and judgment of the malediction and of eternal
damnation (which god him self most rightfully pronounced upon Adam, and all
his posterity, and so consequently upon me) was clearly dissolved, satisfied,
released, and dyscharged, and that the dyuel and hell both have utterly lost,
and be depryued of all the right, claim, and interest, which they might have
pretended to have had in me by thauctoritie of that sentence, or by reason of
any sin that ever I had or have committed, be it original or actual. And
that the dyuel, with all his power, craft, subtilitie, and malice is now
subdued and made captyue not only unto me: but also unto all the other faithful
people, and right beleuers in Jesus Christ, that ever was or shall be sith the
time of Christis said descendynge in to hell. And that our savior Jesus
Christ, has also by this his passion, and this his descendynge in to hell,
paid my ransom, and has merited and deserved, that neither my soul,
neither the souls of any such, as be right beleuers in Christ, shall come
therein, or shall finally be encombered with any title or accusation, that the
dyuell can obiecte against us, or lay unto our charge.

And I believe that this our savior Jesus Christ, after he had thus in soul
conquered, and spoiled the dyuell and hell of all their force, power, and
tyranny, and made them subject unto me, and all true christen men, in like
case as they were unto Adam, before his fall: he returned again from hell,
like a most mighty king, and conqueror, in triumph and glory, and came unto
the sepulcher, where his blessed body lay buried, and so resumynge and taking
again the very same body upon him, the third day after his said death he
lived again, and so rose out of that sepulcher in his natural and perfyte
manhood, that is to say, in his soul, and in the self same body, which was
borne of the virgin Mary, and did hang upon the cross.

And I believe also, and profess that after he had so done, he lived in the
world by the space of.xl. days, in the which time he was conversant, and did
eat and drink, with his apostles, and his disciples, and preached unto them,
and auctorysed them to go forth into the world, to manifest and declare, that
he was the very Christ, the very Messiah, and the very god and man, which was
promised in scripture, to come and save, and to redeem all those that would
believe in him.

And I believe assuredly that by this descendynge of Christ into hell, and this
his resurrection again from death to life, Christ has meryted and deserved
for me and all true and faithful christen men, not only that our sowles
shall never come into hell: but also that we shall here in this life be
perfytely justified in the sight and acceptance of god, and shall have such
grace, might, and power given unto us by him, that we shall be made able thereby
to subdue, to mortyfie, and to extinguysshe our old Adam, and all our carnal
and fleshely concupiscences, in such sort, that sin shall never afterward
reign in our mortal bodies, but that we shall be holly delivered from the
kingdom of sin, and from spyrituall death, and shall be resuscytated and
regenerated into the new life of the spyryte and grace.

And where as I, and all other christen men should have been the most miserable
of all other creatures in the world, and should have dyed like heathens, and
pagans without all hope of everlasting life, or ofrysynge again after our
death: if Christ our heed and savior had not risen again to life after his
death, I believe and trust now assuredly, that by the virtue and efficacy of
this desendynge of Christ in to hell, and of his resurrection again from
death to life, not only our corporal death, and all the afflictions, which
we may sustain in this world, shall not annoy us, but shall rather turn
unto our profit, and be as entrees and occasyons of our greatter glory: but
also that we shall after our corporal death be preserved from the captivity
of hell, and shall be made parttakers of Christis resurrection, that is to say,
that we shall arise and live again in the self same bodies and sowles, that
we now have, and so shall utterly overcome death, in like manner as our heed,
and our savior Ihesu Christ has done before us, and shall finally live with
him immortally in joy, and felycitie.

The sense and interpretation of the.vi. Article.
I Believe assuredly, and constantly do profess, that this our savior Jesus
Christ, after he had perfitely accomplished and performed the hole mystery of
the redemption of mankind, by his incarnation, his birth, his passion, his
death, his burial, his dyscendynge into hell, and rysynge again from death
to life, and after he had been here in earth conuersaunt with his Apostles and
dyscyples by the space of xl. days after his said resurrection: the same
fortieth day, when he was among his said Apostelles, he in their sight
ascended up again in to heaven, in the very same his natural body, which was
borne of the blessed virgin his mother, and was crucified upon the cross. And
so did withdraw his corporal presence from the syghte of his apostels, and
from the sight of all other creatures here in earth, to the intent they should
from thensforthe eleuate and lift up their hole hearts, their minds, their
desires, and all their affections from erthely things, and from all carnal
and worldely cures, toward heaven and heavenly things, and so should prepare
their hearts, and make them selfs mete and apt to receive the holy gooste
and his spiritual gifts, which he would send down in to the world sone
after his said ascension.

And I believe in like manner that this our savior Jesus Christ, after he was
returned into heaven, being very god and very man in one person, all mighty
god his father did constitute and set him upon his right hand, Ephe. i.
and that ever sithe that time, he has so sytte, and so shall sytte eternally,
that is to say, almighty god his father, did communicate and give unto him
glory, honor, felicity, power, and everlasting monarchy, governance,
rule, and dominion over all the pryncipates, potestates, powers, dominations
and over all creatures, that can be named either in this world, or in the
world to come. And so ordained, that he should be king of all kings, and
lord of al lords, and that all things in heaven and earth should be cast
under his feet, and made subject unto him. And that he should be thonly heed
of the catholyque church, and that the same church should be the body under
that heed. And likewise as the heed always excels al the other members: so
Christ should excelle incomparably in honor, and dignity, all the members of
his said body the church, and that he should be thonly perfectyon and
consummation of the same.

And I believe also, and profess that this our savior Jesus Christ, being
thus constituted and set upon the right hand of his father, was and is also
constituted, to be not only the eternal king, the heed, the lord, and
gouernoure of his body, the catholyque church, but also to be the only
eternal priest and bishop of his said church, that is to say, to be the
only patron and advocate, and thonely mediator between god and mankind, and
the only intercessor for the sins of all them that ryghtfully believe in him.

And I believe that according thereunto, our savior Jesus Christ is of his own
goodness not only more ready always, than any other creature in the world is,
to help me by his mediacyon and intercession, but also that when so ever I do
invoke and call upon him, in right faith and hope, with full intent, and
purpose to amend, and return from my noughty life, he presents, and
exhibiteth unto the sight of his father his most blessed body, as it was
wounded, crucified, and offered up in sacrifyce for the redemption of mankind.
and so from time to time makes continual request and intercession unto god
his father for the remission of all my sins, and for my reconciliation unto
his favor, and finally does obtain, that god so reconciled, woll vouchsafe to
send down his holy spyrite, to dwell within my heart, there to rule, to
govern, and to sanctify me with all my thoughts and deeds, and to comfort,
and strength me with all spiritual gifts, necessary to the attaynynge of
everlasting life.

And therefore sith my heed and my savior Jesus Christ ascended up into heaven,
and sytteth there upon the right hand of his father, and makes there
continual intercession for me: I shall never from hens forth, by the grace of
god, seek nor set my felicity in any worldly thing, but shall always use the
creatures, and ordynaunces of this world, and all worldly things, as a
passynger, or a pylgrime uses the commodities of a strange country, wherein
he intends not to tarry but to pass forth, until he shall come unto his
own dwelling place. And I shall convert my hole cure, desire, and study from
these erthely pleasures, to the attaynynge of that heavenly, and everlasting
life, which is prepared and ordained for me. And being assured of so good, so
loving, and therewith so mighty a governor, mediator, and advocate in heaven
as Christ is, I woll by the help of his grace, from hens forth continue still,
and persevere under his kyngedome, his tuicion, and his governance, and so
being, I woll account my self safe, and sure in all manner adversities, and
against all manner adversaries and enmyes. And I woll never, by the help and
grace of god, seek other governor or mediator, nor all the displeasures,
injuries, or adversities in the world, nor all the malice, craft, and
subtilitie of the dyuell, nor all the multitude or burden of my sins, shall
cause me to distruste or despair of help at his hands, nor yet shall make me
afraid to prosecute this my said desire, and purpose, or cause me to desyst
from the same.

The sense and interpretation of the seventh Article.
I Believe assuredly, and constanly do profess that our savior Jesus Christ,
being thus ascended in to heaven, and set there on the right hand of almighty
god his father, shall at the last end of the world, which we call Domesday,
return ones again, and come from heaven, and appear unto all the people of
the world both quick and deed, in his perfyte manhood, and in the self same
body, wherein he ascended, to the inestimable comfort, and rejoice of the good,
and to the extreme terror and confusyon of the wicked.

And although our savior Jesus Christ, at his first aduent or coming into the
world (which was when he came to be incarnate) appeared in the habyte and form
of a very low servant, and of an abiecte person in all humblenes, poverty,
affliction, and myserie, and suffered him self to be iniustly judged, and
condemned to death by others, and although he has ever sith that time, and
ever shall until Domesday, use his mercy, and long patience, and suffrance
toward the wretched sinners of the world, inuitinge always; and calling
them from time to time to repentance: yet I believe assuredly that at his
second aduent or coming, he shall appear in the high and almighty power,
glory, and majesty of his kyngedome, and being accompanied with all the
orders of aungelles, waytinge upon him as his ministres, Matthew. xxv. Apoc. i.
he shall sytte openly in the clouds of the air, and shall judge all the
world quick and deed, and that straitely, according to truth and justice,
and according as he has promised and thretned to do by his holy word,
expressed in scripture, that is to say, according to every man's own works
and deeds done by him while he lived in the world, without sparyng, or
fauourynge, or showing of mercy, unto any, which have not deserved the same
in their life time.

And I believe assuredly that at this day, when Christ shall thus sytte in the
seat or throne of his judgment, all the people of the world quick and dead,
that is to say, as well al those which shall be found on life in the world,
at the day of this second aduent, or coming of Christ: as also al those
which ever sithe the creation of Adam, lived here in this world, and dyed
before that day, shall come and appear before the presence of Christ, in
their very bodies and sowles. And when they shall be so gathered, and assembled
together, our savior Jesus Christ shall pronounce the extreme or fynall
sentence and judgment of everlasting salvation upon all those persons, To.
ii.
which in their life time obeyed and conformed them self unto the will of
god, and exercysed the works of right belefe and charytie, and so persevering
in well doing, sought in their hearts and deeds the honor and glory of god
and life immortal. And contrary upon all those, which in their lyfetyme
were contentious, and did repugne against the will of god, and followed
injustice and iniquity, rather than truth and virtue, our savior Christ
shall than and there pronounce the sentence of everlasting punyshement and
dampnation.

And I believe that our savior Jesus Christ shall also than and there call a
part and make a perfyte separation or diuysyon between these two sorts of
people, that is to say, between the sheep and the gootes, the corn and the
chafe, the good and the bad, the blessed and the cursed, the members of his
body, and the members of the dyuell. And so setting the good and the blessed
upon his right hand, he shall clearly, and perfytely rydde, deliver, and
redeem them for ever, from the power, and malice of the wicked, and from all
pains and evil, and so take them all up with him into heaven, there to be
crowned and rewarded in body and soul, with honor, glory, and everlasting
joy and peace, which was prepared for them from the beginning of the world.
And contrary he shall set all the other, which shall be iuged to
everlasting pain and death, upon his left hand, and so shall send them
down into hell, there to be punysshed in body and soul eternally, with fire
that never shall have end, which was prepared from the beginning of the
world for the dyuell and his angels, and the cursed members of his body.

The sense and interpretation of the eight Article.
I Believe assuredly in my heart, and constantly do profess and knowledge that
the holy gooste is the third person in Trinity, and that he is very god and
lord, auctour and former of all things created, and that he proceeds both
from god the father, and from god the son, and is of the self same nature
and substance, and of the same everlasting essence or being, which the
father and the son be of, and that he is equal unto them both in
almightynes of power, and in the work of creation, and all other things
apperteynyng unto the deity or godheed, and that he is to be honored and
gloryfyed equally with them both.

And I believe that this holy spirit of god is of his nature all holy, or
rather holiness it self, that is to say, that he is the only gooste or
spirit, which with the father and the son ever was, and ever shall be the
only auctoure causer and worker of all holiness, puretie, and sanctimonie, and
of all the grace, comfort, and spiritual life, which is wrought and comes
into the hearts of all true christen men. In so much, that neither it is
possible, that the dyuell, or any of those evil spirits, which do possess
and reign in such persons, as be subject unto sin, can be expelled or put
out of them, but by the power of this finger of god, that is to say, of this
holy spirit, which is called in scripture, the finger of god, neither it is
possible, Mat. xii.
that the heart of any man, being ones corrupted, and made as profane by
sin, can be purged, purified, sanctified, or justified, without the special
work and operation of this holy spirit. neither it is possible for any man to
come unto the father by Christ, that is to say, to be reconciled into the
favor of god, and to be made and adopted into the nombre of his children, or
to obtain any part of that incomparable treasure, which our savior Jesus
Christ, by his nativity, his passion, his death, his resurrection, and his
ascension, has merited for mankind: oneles this holy spirit shall first
illumyne, and inspyre into his heart the right knowledge and faith of Christ,
with due contrition and penance for his sins, and shall also afterward
instruct him govern him, aid him, direct him, and endewe him with such
special gifts, and graces, as shall be requysite and necessary to that end
and purpose.

And I believe also assuredly that this holy spirit of god is of his own
nature full of all goodness and benignity, or rather that he is goodness it
self. Forasmoche as he is the only ghost or spirit, which with the father
by Christ instylleth, and infoundeth into the hearts of mortal men (after
they be ones purified from sin by faith, and delivered from the power of the
devil) diverse and manyfolde most noble and excellent gifts and graces, as
the gift of holy fear and dread of god, Timoris. Sapien. Intellectus
Concilii. Fortitudinis.
the gift of fervent love and charity toward god, and our neighbor, the
gift of spiritual wisdom and understanding, the gift of free will and
desire, and also of very fortitude and strength, to contempne this world, to
subdue and mortify all carnal concupiscence, and to walk in the ways of
god, the gift of perseverance to continue in the same, the gift of pity and
mercy, Pietas. Scientia.
of pacyence and benignity, of science and cunning, of prophecienge, of
curing and healynge, and of all other virtues necessary for christen men to
have, either for the attaynynge of their own salvation, or for the edifyenge,
and profit of their neighbors. All and synguler which gifts and graces I
knowledge, and profess that they proceed from this holy spirit, and that they
be given, conferred, and distributed unto us mortal men here in earth, at his
own godly will, arbitre, and dyspensation, and that no man can purchase or
obtain, ne yet receive reteyne or use any one of them, without the special
operation of this holy spiritie, And although he gives not, nor dyspenseth the
same equally and unto every man in like: yet he gives always some portion
thereof unto all persons, which be accepted in the sight of god, and that not
only freely, and without all their deseruinges, but also in such plenty, and
measure, as unto his godly knowledge is thought to be most benefyciall and
expedient.

And I believe that this holy spirit of god is of his own nature, autour of
charity and holy love, or rather that he is charity it self. First because
that he is that ineffable and incomprehensyble love or concord, wherewith the
father and the son be conjoined inseparably the one with the other. Second,
because he his the bond and knotte, wherewith our savior Jesus Christ, and his
most dear beloved espouse the church (which is also his very mystical body)
and al and singular the very members of the same church and body, be united,
knytte, and conjoined to gyther in such perfyte and everlasting love and
charity, that the same can not be dissolved or separated. Thyrdely, because he
his also the very bond and knotte, whereby all and every one of the members of
Christis said church and body, be united, coupled, and conjoined the one of
them with the other, in perfect mut all love and charity. For I believe
assuredly, that like as the members of our mortal bodies be, by the spiritual
operation and virtue of our souls, not only preserved holly together, in one
body, and be endewed with life, and power to exercise such natural functions,
and offices, as be deputed unto them, but also be contained in mutual
affection and desire each to help and conserve the other: Even so the members of
this mystical body of Christ be, by the only and special operation and
work of this holy spyrite, not only congregated, united, and incorporated in
to this one body of Christ, and so do consist, and endure holly, and perfitely
in the same body, every one in his own peculiar function: but also that they
be knitted, combined, and conglutinated all together, and every one of them
with other, in perfytte and indyssoluble love, and in the communion of all
their gifts, and graces, and of all other things, wherewith the one of them
may help, succor, or comfort the other.

And I bele e that this holy spirit of god is the spirit of troth, and the
autour of all holy scripture, contained in the hole canon of the Bible. And
that this spirit did not only inspire, and instruct all the holy
patriarchs, and prophets, with all the other members of the catholyke church,
that ever was from the begynynge of the world, in all the trouthes, and
verities that ever they did know, speak, or write: but also that the same
holy spirit did ones descend down from heaven, in the similitude and lykenes
of firye tongues, Act. ii.
and did ligthe down upon all thapostelles and dysciples of Christ, and
inspired them also with the knowledge of all truth, and replenyshed them with
all heavenly gifts and graces. And that from that day unto the worlds end, he
has been, and shall be continually present, and also chief president in the
catholyque church of Christ, that is to say, that he has, and shall
continually dwell in the hertes of all those people, which shall be the very
members of the same church, and shall teach, and reuele unto them the
secrets, and mysteries of all truth, which is necessary for them to know,
and that he shall also contynually from time to time rule them, direct them,
govern them, sanctyfie them, and give unto them remission of their sins, and
all spiritual comfort as well inwardly by faith, and other his secret
operations, as also outwardely by the open ministration, and efficacy of the
word of god, and of his holy sacraments, and that he shall endewe them with
all such spiritual graces, and gifts, as shall be necessary for them to
have, and so finally shall reward them with the gift of everlasting life,
and joy in heaven.

The sense and interpretation of the nynthe Article.
I Believe assuredly in my heart, and with my mouth I do profess, and knowledge
that there is, and has been ever from the beginning of the world, and so shall
endure, and continue for ever, one certain nombre, society, communion, or
company of the elect and faithful people of god, of which nombre our
savior Jesus Christ is the only heed and governor, and the members of the
same be all those holy saynctes, which be now in heaven, and also all the
faithful people of god, which be now on live, or that ever heretofore have
lived, or shall live here in this wordle, from the beginning, unto the end of
the same, and be ordained for their true faith, and obedience unto the will of
god, to be saved, and to enjoy everlasting life in heaven.

And I believe assuredly that this congregation, according as it is called in
scripture, Gala. iiii. Cant, vi. Hire. xiii. Romans viii i. Cor. iii. ii. Cor. vi
Ephe. v.
so it is in very deed the Cite of heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of all
thelecte people of god, the only dove, and the only beloved of god, in
perfect and everlasting charity, the holy catholyque church, the temple or
habytacle of god, the pure and undefiled espouse of Christ, the very mystical
body of Christ. Al and synguler which names, and appellations, and certain
such other rehearsed in holy scripture, I believe and profess that they be
most worthily attributed unto this holy church, or congregation. And like as
citizens assembled in one city do live there under commune laws, and in
commune society, and there do consult, study, and labor each man in his
room and office, and according unto his calling for their commonwealth, and
finally be made participant, or parttakers of all and syngular such benefits,
and commodities, as do arise unto them thereby: Even so I believe, that the
members of this holy catholic church, or congregation be collected, and
gathered together within the same church, as within one city or fold, and
that they be therein all united, and incorporated by the holy spirit of Christ
into one body, and that they do live there all in one faith, one hope, one
charity, and one perfyte unity, consent, and agreement, not only in the true
doctrine of Christ, but also in the right use and ministration of his
sacraments, and so living in this perfytte unity, sweet harmony, and
concord, I believe that they do labor contynually, every one in his vocation,
for the common welthe of this hole body, and of every part and membre of the
same. And that all the prayers, good works, and merits, yea and all the
gifts, graces, and goods, which be conferred, done, or wrought in or unto
this hole body, or any membre of the same, shall be applied unto every one of
them, and shall redounde communely unto the benefytte of them all.

And I believe that this hole congregation, is all holy, that is to say, that
this church, and all the parts, and members of the same, be so puryfied, and
mundified, as well by Christis most precyouse blood, as also by the godly
presence, governance, and assistence of his holy spirit (which dwells and
inhabiteth contynually, within the said congregation, and governs and
sanctifies the same) that neither the lepry of heresy, or false and perverse
doctrine, neither the fylthynes of sin, neither the gates of hell, shall be
hable finally to prevail against them, or to pull any of them out of the
hands, and possession of Christ. And although god does oftymes suffer not
only sin, error, and iniquity so to abound here in the world, and the
congregation of the wicked to exercise such tyranny, cruelty, and persecution
over this holy church, and the members of the same, that it might seem, the
said church to be utterly oppressed, and extinguished: but also suffers many
and sundry of the members of the same holy church to fall out from this body,
for a season, and to committee many greuouse, and horrible offenses, and crimes,
for the which they deserve to be precyded, and excluded, for a season, from
the communion of this holy church: yet I believe assuredly, that god woll never
utterly abiecte this holy church, nor any of the members thereof, but that the
same does, and shall perpetually continue, and endure here in this world, and
that god shall at all times, (yea when persecution is greattest and most
fervent) be present with his holy spirit in the same church, and preserve it
all holy, and undefiled, and shall keep, ratyfie, and hold sure all his
promyses, made unto the same church or congregation. And finally that all
such members, as be fallen out from the same by sin, shall at length rise
again by penance, and shall be restored and united again unto the same holy
body.

And I believe assuredly that in this holy church, and with the members of the
same (so long as they be mylytant and living here in earth) there have been
ever, and yet be, and ever shall be joined, and myngled to gyther an infinite
nombre of the evil and wicked people, Mat. xiii Mat. iii. Mat xiii. Mat. xxv
which all though they be in deed the very members of the congregation of the
wicked, and as the gospel calls them very weeds, and chafe, evil fyshe
and gootes, and shall finally be judged to everlasting dampnation: yet
forasmoche as they do live in the commune society, or company of those, which
be the very quycke and living members of Christis mystical body, and
outwardly do profess, receive, and consent with them, for a season, in the
doctrine of the gospel, and in the right using of the sacraments, yea and
often times be indewed with right excellent gifts of the holy gooste, they be
to be accounted, and reputed here in this world to be in the nombre of the
said very members of Christis mystical body, so long as they be not by
open sentence of excommunication precided, and excluded from the same. Not
because they be such members in very deed, but because the certain judgment
and knowledge of that their state is by gods ordinance hydden, and kept
secret from all men's knowledge, and shall not be reveled, until the time that
Christ him self shall come at the worlds end, and there shall manifest, and
declare his very kyngedome, and who be the very true members of his body, and
who be not.

And I believe that this holy church is catholyque, that is to say, that it can
not be coarcted or restrained within the limits or bonds of any one town,
city, province, region, or countreye: but that it is dispersed and spredde
universally through out all the hole world. In so much, that in what part
soever of the world, be it in Affrique, Asia, or Europe, there may be found
any nombre of people, of what sort, state, or condition so ever they be,
which do believe in done god the father creator of all things, and in one
lord Jesus Christ his son, and in one holy ghost, and do also profess, and
have all one faith, one hope, and one charity, according as is prescribed in
holy scripture, and do all consent in the true interpretation of the same
scripture, and in the right use of the sacraments of Christ: we may boldly
pronounce and say, that there is this holy church, the very espouse and body
of Christ, the very kingdom of Christ, and the very temple of god.

And I believe that these particular churches, in what place of the world so
ever they be congregated, be the very parts, porcions, or members of this
catholyque and universal church. And that between them there is in deed no
dyfference in superiority, preeminence, or authority, neither that any one of
them is heed or soueraygne over the other: but that they be all equal in
power, and dygnitie, and be all grounded, and builded upon one foundation, and
be all called unto like, and unto the same puretie, cleannes, honor, and
glory, and be all subject unto one god, one lord, one heed Jesus Christ, and
be all governed with one holy spirit. And therefore I do believe that the
church of Rome is not, The church of Rome.
nor can not worthyly be called the catholyque church, but only a partycular
membre thereof, and can not challenge or vendicate of right, and by the word of
god, to be heed of this universal church, or to have any superiority over
the other churches of Christ, which be in England, France, Espayne, or in any
other realm, but that they be all free from any subjection unto the said
church of Rome, or unto the mynyster or bishop of the same.

And I believe also that the said church of Rome, with all the other partycular
churches in the world, compacted and united together, do make and constitute
but one catholyque church or body. And that like as our savior Christ is one
person, and the only heed of his mystical body: so this hole catholyke
church, Christis mystical body, is but one body under this one heed
Christ. The unity of Christis church.
And that the unity of this one catholyque Church, is a mere spiritual
unity, consistynge in the points before rehearsed, that is to say, in the
unity of Christis faith, hope, and charity, and in the unity of the right
doctrine of Christ, and in the unity and vnyforme using of the sacraments
consonant unto the same doctrine. And therefore although the said partycular
churches, and the members of the same do much dyfferre, and be discrepant the
one from the other, not only in the dyuersite of nations and countries, and in
the dyuersitie, dygnitie, and excellencye of certain such gifts of the holy
ghost, as they be endewed with: but also in the diverse using, and observation
of such outward rytes, ceremonies, traditions, and ordynaunces, as be
instituted by their governors, and received, and approved among them: yet I
believe assuredly that the unity of this catholyque church, can not therefore,
or for that cause be any thing hurted, impeched, or infrynged in any point,
but that all the said churches do and shall continue still in the unity of
this catholyke church, not with standing any such dyuersytie, nor that any
of them ought to be reputed as a membre divided or precyded from the same for
any such cause of dyuersytie or dyfference used by them, or any of them in the
said points.

And I believe that all the particular churches in the world, which be members
of this catholyque church, may all be called apostolical churches, as well as
the church of Rome, or any other church, wherein the apostels them selfs were
sometime resydent. Forasmoche as they have received, and be all founded upon the
same faith, and doctrine, that the true apostels of Christ did teach and
profess.

And I believe and trust assuredly that I am one of the members of this
catholic church, and that god of his only mercy, has not only chosen and
called me thereunto by his holy spirit, and by thefficacie of his word and
sacraments, and has inserted and united me into this universal body or
flock, and has made me his son and inheritour of his kingdom: but also
that he shall of his like goodness, and by the operation of the holy ghost,
justify me here in this world, and finally glorify me in heaven. And therefore
I proteste and knowledge, that in my heart I abhor and deteste all heresies and
scismes, whereby the true interpretation and sense of scripture is or may be
perverted. And do promise by the help of god, to endure unto my lyfes end in
the right profession of the faith, and doctrine of the catholyque church.

The sense and interpretation of the tenthe Article.
I Believe assuredly in my heart, and with my mouth I profess, that between
and among all and synguler the saints, that is to say, the quycke and lyuinge
members of the catholyque church of Christ, which is his mistycall body,
there is a perfyte communion and particypation of all, and syngular the graces
of the holy ghost, and the spiritual goods and treasure, which do belong
unto the said hole body, or unto any part, or membre of the same. And like as
all the parts and members, which be living in the natural body of a man, do
naturally communicate and mynister each to other the use, commodity, and
benefit of all their forces, nutriment, and perfection (in somoche, that it
lies not in the power of any man, to say that the meat, which he puts in
at his own mouth, shall nouryshe one particular membre of his body, and not
an other, but that all and every one particularly shall receive of the said
nutriment, and of the virtue and benefit thereof, more or less, according to
that natural disposition, portion, and place, which it has within the same
body) Even so I believe, that what soever spirytuall gift, or treasure is given
by god unto any one part or membre of this mystical body of Christ, all
though the same be given particularly unto this membre, and not unto an other,
yet the fruit and merit thereof shall by reason of that incomprehensible union
and band of charity, which is between them, redounde necessaryly unto the
profit, edifieng, and increase in Christis body of all the other members
particularly: in so much, that there shall need no man's auctorite to dyspence
and distribute the same, or to apply it unto this member or that (like as the
bishop of Rome pretended to do by virtue of his pardons) but if the member, The
bishop of Romes pardons.
which shall receive this tresure, be a lyuinge membre in this mystical body,
and not putrified or cut of from the same, I believe assuredly, that he shall
be made participant of the said treasure, and shall have, and enjoy the fruit
and benefyte of the same, and that in such quantity, and measure, as for the
rate, proportion, and quality of the spiritual life, faith, and charity,
which he has in the same body, shall be expedient and necessary for him to
have.

And I believe that I being united, and corporated, as a living membre into
this catholyque church) as undoubtedly I trust that I am) not only Christ
him self being heed of this body, and the infinite treasure of all goodness,
and all the holy saints, and members of the same body, do and shall
necessarily help me, love me, pray for me, care for me, weye on my side,
comfort me, and assyste me, in all my necessities here in this world: but
also that I shall be made partaker of the fruit, benifite, and treasure of
Christis most blessed life, and his bitter passion, and of all the holy life,
passions, and patience, and of all the prayers and other good works of faith
and charity, which have been, or shall be done, or sustained by any, and every
one of all those faithful and rightuous people, which ever have been, or shall
be members of this catholic church.

And I believe that in this catholic church I and all the lively and quycke
members of the same, shall contynually and from time to time, so long as we
shall live here on earth, obtain remission and forgyuenes of all our sins,
as well original as actual, by the merits of Christis blood and his passion,
and by the virtue and efficacy of Christis sacraments, instituted by him for
that purpose, so often as we shall worthily receive the same.

And like as it is not in the power of any man to dispense, minister, or
distribute any part of that nutriment, which he receives in at his mouth
unto any membre, which either is mortified and deed in his body, or that is
cut of from the same: Even so I believe assuredly, that neither Christis blood,
nor his sacraments, nor any of the graces of the holy ghost, nor any good
work in the world, do or can any thing profit to remission and forgyuenes
of sin, or salvation unto any person, which is in very deed out of the
catholyque church, as long as he shall so stand, and continue out of the
same. For I believe assuredly, that out of this catholyque church, there
neither is, nor can be any such communion of saints, or remission of sins,
as is before rehearsed: but that like as all the people and beasts, which at
the time of Noes floude, were out of his arc of ship, Genes. vii
were all drowned and perished: even so all the people of the world, be they
Jews, Turques, Saracenes, or of any other nation, what so ever it be, which
either for their infidelity heresy, or scisme, or for their induratenes, and
obstinate persevering in mortal sin, be separated and divided from the
members of the said catholyque church, and so shall finally be found either
to be out of the same church, or else to be as deed members therein, shall
utterly perysshe, and be dampened for ever.

The sense and interpretation of the.xi. and xii. Article.
I Believe steadfastly in my heart, and with my mouth I do profess that at the
day of the general dome, or judgment, when Christ shall come, and sit to judge
both quick and dead; almighty god shall by the operacyon of his holy spyryte,
stire and raise up again, the very flesh and bodies of all men, women, and
chylderne, both good and badde, christened, and heathen, that ever lived here
in this world, from the beginning of the same, and dyed before that day. And
although the said flesh and bodies were deed before and buried, yea and
consumed by fire or water, or by any other means dystroyed: yet I believe, that
god shall, of his infynyte power, make them all at that day hole and parfyte
again, and so every man generally, shall resume and take again the very self
same body, and flesh, which they had, while they lived here on earth: and so
shall rise from death, and live again in the very self same body and soul,
which they had before.

And I believe that every man, being thus made perfect man in body, and soul,
shall at that day, appear before the high Judge, our savior Jesus Christ,
and there shall make a strayt account of his own propre works, and deeds,
such as he did, good or yuell, while he lived here in the world. And
according there unto shall be judged to receive both in body and soul to
gether, either everlasting joy and bliffe, or else everlasting pain and
woo. And I Believe, that I my self, shall the same day, rise again in this
very flesh and body, which I now have, and in none other: Even like as our
savior Ihesu Christ (of whose mystical body I am a portion or membre) did
arise from death to life, in the self same natural body, which he had, when
he was borne of his mother, and crucified upon the cross. And after that I
shall be so risen again from death to life, I believe that I, and all true
penitent sinners, that ever dyed, or shall dye in the faith of Christ, i. Cor.
xv.
shall than be perfytely sanctified, purified, and delivered from all contagion
of sin, and from all corruption, and mortality of the flesh, and shall have
everlasting life in glory, with god in his kyngedom, not for, by, nor through
the works of righteousness, which we shall have done (for all passions and
marterdomes, Titu^. iii.
that may be suffered in this world, Romans viii
be nothing comparable to the glory, which we shall then receive, and shall
be showed unto us) but by thonely grace, goodness, and mercy of god, and by and
for the redemption, which is in Christ Jesus, that is to say, for, and by his
most preciouse death, and most peynfull passion. Romans vii.
For I believe, that the guerdon, reward, and stypende of sin (wherewith we be
all manifold ways polluted, bespotted, and defiled) is death, yea and that
everlasting. And that it is by the only grace and mercy of god, that we,
repenting us of our sins, and beleuynge stedfastely in his promyses, shall
have euelastynge life, in Jesus Christ our lord. Amen

HERE FOLLOW CERTAIN NOTES and observations, necessary to be taught unto the
people, for the better inducynge of them unto the right understanding of the
foresaid Creed.
First it is to be noted, that all and synguler the.xii. Artycles, contained
in this Creed, be so necessary to be believed for man's salvation, that who so
ever being ones taught, wol not consta^tly believe them, or wol obstinatly
affirm the contrary of them, he or they can not be the very members of
Christ, and his espouse the church, but be very infydelles, or heretyques,
and members of the dyuell, with whom they shall perpetually be dampened.

Second it is to be noted, that all true christen men ought and must most
constantly believe, maynteyne, and defend all those things to be true, not
only which be comprehended in this Creed, and in the other two symboles or
Credes, whereof the one was made in the council of Nece, the other was made by
that holy man Athanasius: but also all other things, which be comprehended in
the hole body and canon of the Bible.

Thyrdely that al true christen men ought and must not only repute, take, and
hold all the same things, for the most holy, most sure, and most
certain, and infallible words of god, and such as neither ought, ne can be
altered or conuelled by any contrary opinion or authority: but also must
take, and interpretate all the same things, according to the self same
sentence and interpretation, which the words of scripture do purporte and
sygnyfye, and the holy approved doctors of the church, do entreat and
defend the same.

Fourthely that all true christen men ought and must utterly refuse and
condemn all those opinions, contrary to the said.xii. Artycles of our
Creed, which were of long time paste condemned in the four holy councelles,
that is to say, in the council of Nece, Constantinople, Ephesis, and
Calcidonense, and all other sith that time in any point consonant to the same.

The notes of the first Article.
In the first article of this Creed, two things be also specially to be noted,
The first is, that herin is declared the infinite goodness of god, toward
mankind, in that he created this hole world for man's sake only, and thereby
dystributed such part of his felicite unto man, as was convenient for him to
receive. The belefe and knowledge whereof is the first enter to know that god is
a spiritual and an invisible substance or nature, of infinite power and
eternal, without beginning or ending, and of incomprehensyble knowledge,
wysedom, goodness, justice, and mercy. etc. For surely that work of creation is
so marvelous, that nothing in the world, neither man, nor angel, could
perform or accomplish the same: but only such a substance or nature, as is
before rehearsed, which is god him self. By this belefe also, and knowledge, we
be stired to fere and dread god, and to love and praise god, with all our
hartis: considering that he did create us even like unto his own image and
similitude, and endewed us with all perfections, both in soul, and body,
which were necessary for us to have, and did put us in the most excellent
state of being, having all other creatures subject and obedient unto us.

And so by this Article, we be taught, not only what is the divine essence,
and being of god the father, what is his will, what is his power, and what is
his work and operation (the knowledge whereof distroyeth infinite errors and
heresies) but also what faith, love, dread, honor, laud, praise, and thanks
he requires, that all christen men should at all times, as well in prosperity,
as in adversity give unto him for the manifold and excellent gifts, which
they receive daily and howrely at his hands. And surely if all christen men,
would oftimes call this article to their remembrance, and would busily exercise
their meditations therein, and would unfeignedly, and with all their hearts,
profess the same: no doubt, but their hearts would wax warm, and would be
inflamed to love god, and would be prompt, redye, glad, and wyllyng to serve
him, and to fulfill his will and commandementes, to their possible powers, and
would take in good part, without grutchynge, or malygnynge all syckenesse, and
aduersyties, and what so ever state of life god sends unto them, and would
give him thanks and praise therefore, and would use all gods creatures, and
spend the gifts, which he has given unto them, to his honor and glory,
and finally they would abhor and deteste in their hearts all superstytion,
and ydolatrie, all charms, wytchecraftes, and sorceries, all blasphemy and
desperation, pride and arrogancy, all couetousenes and ambicion, all desire of
reuengynge, and malice, and all other vices, which reygne now in the world.
For surely who so ever believes inwardely, and with his heart, that god is his
father, and reputeth him as his son, and that the same god is of infynyte
might and power, of infynite knowledge and wysedom, of infinite mercy and
goodness, of infynite troth and justice, as he is in deed: no doubt that person
woll be very loathe, and a frayde to contrary, or resyst his will in any thing,
or to have any thing for his god, and his father, beside or without him, or to
love or prefer money, or any thing else in the world before him, or to put
affiaunce, trust, delectacion, or pleasure in any thing more than in him, or
beside him. Neither woll he gladly seek help at the dyuelles hands, by any
mean of wytchecraftes, or sorcerye, or any such other crafts invented by the
dyuell. Neither woll he commytte those things in the syghte of God, which he
is ashamed to commytte in the presence of men. Neither woll he murmr against
god, nor muse for that he sends to some one man health, chyldern, riches, and
other the felicities of this world, and unto him, or some other man, he
sends syckenes, poverty, and other aduersyties. Neither woll he despair of
remyssyon of his sins, and so go (peradventure) and murder him self: Neither
wolle he rejoice, defyte, or glory in his malice and evil living: but woll
ratherlyue in fear and dread of everlasting death, which is due unto all
them, which serving the dyuell, the world, and the flesh, lives in
security without fear and repentance. And finally to conclude, surely who so
ever believes in his heart, that god did create this hole world, and all
things that be therein, only for man's sake, and for his use, and commodity:
no doubt he could turn his eyes no where, but he should incontynently be
stirred and rauisshed in his heart, to honor, to praise, and to laud the
infynite goodness of almighty god, showed unto him, and all mankind, in that
party and should also be afraid to use the things created by god, otherwise
than unto his glory. But it is to be feared, least the most part of them,
which pronounce, and speak daily this Article with their mouth: do not believe
the same with their hearts, or if they do believe it, that their belefe is but
faint and a cold belefe. For we see, no doubt, the most part of christen
people live in marvelous darkness, and blyndenes, declarynge by their outward
factes and deeds, that they have no respect in the world to god, nor that
they knowledge him to be their creator, or at the least, they give unto him no
such fear and reverence, as is due unto a lord and maker, nor no such
honor and obedience, as is dew unto a father, Malac. i.
nor no such praise and thanks, as his sondrye benefytes and goodness toward
us do require. All which things no doubt proceed, for that we have not the
right and hearty feyth in god the father, which is required in this first
article of our Creed.

The second thing to be noted in this first article, is this manner of
speaking, I believe in God. For thereby no doubt is sygnifyed, that we must not
only believe steadfastly, that god is, and that he is true in all his words,
and promyses, and that he is omnipotent and creator of heaven and earth, and so
forth: but we must also with this believe goo into god by love, and adhere
only unto him, and that with all our heart and power, and so continue and
dwell still in him by love. It sygnyfyeth also that we must obey unto his
will, and express the same our obedience, as well in all our inward
thoughts, and affectyons, as also in all our outward acts and deeds, and
that we must abhor all tyranny, and vice, and wysshe or desire of god no
vain, or ungodly thing. It sygnyfieth also, that we must constantly and
boldly betake and commytte our selfs, and all ours holly unto god, and fyxe
all our hole hope, trust, and confidence in him, and quiet our selfs in him,
beleuynge perfytely, and assuredly, that he woll in deed, show no less
goodness, love, mercy, and favor unto us, than he promyseth by his word to
do, and knowing also for certain that we, and all the creatures in the
world, be conserved by his only goodness, and high prouydence, and that
without his special grace, we should not be able to continue on live the space
of one mynute of an hour.

This manner of belefe we ought to have in no creature of god be it never so
excellent, but in god only, and therefore in this creed, the said manner of
speaking is used only in the three Artycles, which concern the three persons
in Trinity, that is to say, the father, the son, and the holy ghost.

In the third Article it is to be noted, that the cause, The notes of the
third Article.
why it was ordained by god, that our savior Jesus Christ should be borne of a
virgin, and conceived by thonly operation of the holy gooste (whose work is
ever without all manner of sin) was, for that he was ordained and appointed by
god to come and deliver mankind from the captyuitie of the dyuell, and the
malediction, which man was in, and to redeem him clear from all sin,
death, and damnation, and to restore him again to the very blessing of god,
that is to say, to Justice, ryghtuousnes, health, life everlasting, and all
other the gifts and graces of the holy gooste. And for as much as it was
necessary that he, which should work this effect, should be him self al
blyssed, al innocent, all ryghtuouse, all void and pure from sin, and
utterly free and clear from the yocke and power of the dyuell: therefore was it
ordained by god, that this child Jesus Christ, should be so conceived and
borne, as was said before. For surely if Christ should have been otherwise
borne, or conceived, that is to say, of the seed of man and woman, and by
thacte of generation, which is done between them, he should have been borne in
like sin, in like fylthynes, and iniquity, as all other the children of men,
that ever was since Adam, or ever shall be be borne and conceived. But surely
neither was it convenient, neither the will of god, that Christ should by such
generation, contracte any spotte of sin, or should be subject to any part
of that malediction, which was inflycted unto Adam.

The notes of the.iiii. Article.
In the fourth Article it is to be noted, that the same does follow upon the
second and the third Articles. For surely the cause why Christ was thus made
man, and borne of his mother, was for that he should in the same nature of man,
not only be conuersaunt in the world with other people, and so partly by the
example of his most godly, and most innocent, and perfyte life, and partly
by his meruaylous works and miracles, and partly by the heavenly doctrine of
his gospel, should induce the world unto the right knowledge of the will of
god his father, and should declare unto them his infinite mercy, and goodness,
toward mankind: but also that he might in the same nature, which was
mortal, suffer death, and so offer up the same his corporal death and his
blood in sacrifice unto god his father, as the sufficient host, oblation, or
expiation, and as the very just price and valor, for the which god the
father should hold him self satisfied, for all our sins, and offenses, and
should remytte and forgive us the same, and receive us again into his grace
and favor. Which sacrifice and oblation, Christ could not have made by his
death and by his blood: if he should have continued still only god, and should
not have taken also this our nature of man upon him.

In the fourth Article it is also to be noted, that it is the the will of god
our father, that we his sons, and his children should in this world follow
our heed Christ in patience, and humilite, and that we should bear our own
cross, as Christ did his. And that we should also hate and abhor all sin,
knowing for surety, that who so ever does not in his heart hate, and abhor
sin, but rather accompteth the breach and violation of goddis commandment,
but as a light matter, and of small weight and importance: he estemeth not the
price and valor of this passion of Christ, according to the dignity and
worthynes thereof, but rather seems to consent, and as much as in him is, to
go about to cause Christ to be crucified again.

In the.v. article it is to be noted, The notes of the fyfth Article. To. x.
that therein is included and contained the grounds and foundations of the
greattest part of all the mysteries of our catholyque faith. In so much that
saint Paul says, that whosoever believes in his heart, that god the father
did resuscitate, and raise up his son Christ from death to life, he shall
be saved. And in an other place he says, that who soever believes not, i. Cor.
xv.
that Christ is risen from death to life, it is not possible his sins
should be remytted.

It is also to be noted in this Article, that the victory and conqueste, which
Christ had over death, hell, and the dyuell him self, with all their power
and tyranny, beside that it proceeded of the infinite mercy and goodness of god
toward us, it was also founded upon very Justice. For surely like as the
sin of man, and his disobedience, was the only mean and cause, wherefore god
ordained and suffered, that death, and the dyuel, should have and occupy such
dominion and tyrranny over all mankind, as they had: Even so was it contrary
to the will and ordinance of god, that death, hell, or the dyuell should have
or exercise any power or authority, where as no sin reigned. In so much
that if man had never sinned, he should never have dyed, but should have been
immortal, nor never should have descended into hell, but should ever have had
the superyoritie over the dyuell, death, and hell, and should have had them
always subdewed unto him. And therefore sithe the dyuell him self did
perfytely know, that our savior Jesus Christ, expressed in all his life
most exact, and most perfyte obedyence unto the laws, and will of god,
and so fulfilled and satysfyed the same in every point, to the uttermost,
that there could never be found vntrewthe, or deceyte in his mouth, nor any
spotte or blotte of fylthynesse or impuritie, in any part of all his living,
and yet that not withstanding (knowing him to be a very naturalle manne)
labored, procured, and caused the Jews to kylle this innocente Christ, and
to put him unto most sharp and bitter death, contrary to all equity and
Justice, and all to the intent that he might after his said death, have
Christ with him down into hell, as one of his captyues, and so there to
exercise his tyranny upon him, like as he had done over all other men,
from the beginning of the world, until that time: No doubt, but the dyuelle
in this doing, did extreme and manyfeste wrong, and utterly exceded the
lymyttes of the power given unto him. And therefore god considering this high
presumption and malice of the dyuelle, and this intolerable abuse of his said
power, did send his only begotten son down into hell, there to condemn
the dyuell of this extreme iniquytie, and to conquer, to spoil, To. viii.
and depryue him, not only of the possessyon of all the sowles of the
ryghtuouse men, which by his craft and subtylytie, he had before reduced
and brought under his domynyon: but also restrained him of the power, and
auctorytie, which he by death and hell, had over mankind. All which
things Christ did not by the might of his godly power only: but for and
upon this just and reasonable cause, given unto him on the behalf of the
dyuel, which for the causes aforesaid, most worthyly deserved to be served
so. The notes of the syxte Article.


In the.vi. Article three things be specially to be noted, and remembered.
First, that in the person of Jesus Christ, there was and is conjoined, and
united together inseparably both the nature of god, and the nature of man.

And that by reason of this indissoluble unity of these two natures, holy
scripture uses sometimes to attrybute and give unto the same person of
Christ those things, which do apperteygne unto his humanytie, although the
same can not be veryfyed in him, as towchynge his godheed. And therefore
althowghe Christ, as towchynge his godheed, was ever present in heaven, and
was ever equal in glory with his father: Yet forasmoche as concerning his
manhood he was never in heaven, nor did never sytte there endewed with such
power and glory before this his ascenscyon: therefore it is said trewely in
this Creed, that Christ ascended into heaven, and that almyghtye god the father
did, at his said coming thither, set him there upon his right hand.

Secondely, it is to be noted, that this ascension of Christ into heaven was
not only very necessary: but also much profitable for all true christen
men, and that for many causes: One is, for that Christ declared thereby very
manyfestely, that he was not only manne, but that he was also very god. And
therefore her follows in this Article, He sytteth on the right hand of his
father, not as inferior in godheed, but as equal unto him. An other is, for
that he has been ever sith that time our contynuall advocate and sollicitour
unto god his father, according to the saying of saint Paul, Hebr. iiii.
writing unto the Hebrews, where he says in this manner, Christ ascended into
heaven, to the intent he should ever appear, and ever be present in the sight of
god, as a mediator, and intercessor for us. And in an other place also he
faith, Jesus the son of god did penetrate and ascend above all the heuens
to be our great bishop. wherefore let us fermely and stedfastely believe, that we
have a great bishop in heaven, that is to say, a great, and a perpetual
medyatour and intercessour for us. And that the same our bishop is not only
of such infynyte might and power, that he is fully hable to save all them that
woll invoke and believe in god the father by him: but also that he having
perfyte knowledge of all the infyrmities of our flesh and mortality, and
having tasted by experience in his own body all the tentacions of the same
(sin only excepted) he woll also gladly and wyllyngely have pity and
compassion of us, and woll be always ready to save us. Wherefore let us put
our hole trust and confydence in him. And so let us boldly goo by prayer, and
invocation unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find
grace and favor, help, succor, and comfort in time of our need, and
necessity. And Sayncte John^ the Apostle also writes conformely here unto in
his first Epistle, where he says, I exhort and pray you good christen
people, i. Joan. ii
flee from sin, and sin no more. Not withstanding if any of you shall
fortune to commytte any deadely sin, yet let him consider and remember, that
Jesus Christ, which fulfilled al Justice for us, and by the sacrifienge, and
offering up of his preciouse blood, made due satisfaction, and propiciation
unto god his father, not only for all our sins, but also for the sins of
all the world: is now our continual and perpetual advocate, our patron and
defendour before the throne of his father, and makes contynuall intercession
and prayer for the remyssyon of all our sins.

An other cause is for that if Christ had not ascended, we should have lacked
all the graces and gifts of the holy ghost, which be necessary for the
passing of this transytorie life, to the pleasure of god, and to thatteynynge
of everlasting life in an other world, according to the saying of Christ,
spekyng unto his Apostles, Joan. vi.
in this manner, I tell you troth, it is expediente, and necessary for you,
that I shall ascend up into heaven. For surely if I should not ascend, the
holy ghost shall never come unto you: and contrary if I do ascend into heaven,
than woll I send him immedyately unto you. And when the said holy gooste
shall come, than shall he reprove, and condemn the world, and the dyuel for
their sin and iniquity, and he shall fully instruct and teach you all
truth. etc.

Thyrdely it is to be noted, that all though it be said in this Article, that
Christ is our only mediator and intercessour, yet thereby is not excluded the
intercession of the holy saints, which be now in heaven, or hereafter shall
be: neither yet the intercession of the mynysters of Christis church, or of
any the holy members of the same, which be living here in this world. But we
must know for certain, that all the members of Christis church, whether
they be departed this life, or yet living here in the world, be all knytte
and united together in perfytte charity, and each does care and pray for
other contynually unto almighty god, and that Christ being heed of the same
body, is advocate and intercessour for them all, like as it is more at large
declared in the tenthe Article of this Creed.

In the.vii. article it is to be noted, that like as the world had ones a
beginning, so shall it ones also have an endyng. The notes of the vii. Article.
And that upon the same extreme or last day of the world, Christ shall come
with glory, as the supreme and highest judge, and shall hold an universal or
general judgment, in the which all the people of the world, that ever was,
or ever shall be, shall appear before him, there to receive their fynall
sentence and judgment, some of everlasting salvation, and some of perpetual
dampnation.

It is also to be noted, that this article was for great consyderations added
immedyately, and conjoined unto the former Artycles, specially to the intent that
no man should in his life time presume upon the said benefytes of Christ, or
take occasyon of carnalle liberty or security, and so live without having
any fear to transgress, or regard to observe the commandments of god: but
rather that every good christen man should in every part of his life have a
contynuall remembrance, and respect unto that last day of judgment, and so
be in contynuall fear, to commyt any thing contrary to the will of god, for
the which he might deserve to have the sentence of everlasting dampnation
pronounced upon him. For this is certaynely true, that at that day every man
shall be called to make a strayt account of his life, and shall be than finally
judged even according to his own propre works, good or badde, done in his
life time. That is to say, if in his life time he did believe in his heart, and
profess with his mouth, the right belefe and faith of Christ, and
according unto the same faith did express in his outward works such
obedience unto the laws of god, as he requires: he shall be judged to have
everlasting life for his reward. And contrary, if in his life time he had
not this right faith, and belief in Christ, or having opportunity, did not
express this obedience, but transgressed the laws of god, and so dyed without
repentance, although he pretended and said, that he believed never so much,
and trusted in Christis benefyttes never so much, yet shall he be judged and
condemned to the everlasting peynes of hell.

In this Article it is further to be noted, that like as there is nothing more
certain unto us, than that we be all mortal, and shall ones dye, and yet no
man living knows the time, when he shall dye: Even so there is nothing more
certain, thanne that this day of judgment shall ones come, and yet the
hour and the time when it shall be, is hydden and kept secret from the
knowledge of all men and Angels, and is reseued to the only knowledge of god.
which thing proceeds of his only goodness toward us, and is done to
thyntente we should always here in our life time, fle from sin, and employe
al our hole study, and endeavor to walk in the ways of god, that is to say,
in such faith, hope, and charytie, as god requires of us, and so prepare our
self, and order our living toward god, that we may be in a redynesse at
all times, when so ever it shall please god to call and sommone us to appear
before him in the said general judgment, there by his mercy and goodness
to receive the crown and reward, which he promised unto all them that do
fear him, and love him, and walk in his ways.

It is also to be noted in this Article, Ma xxiiii Mar. xiii Luc. xvii.
that like as the lightening comes from heaven sodeynely unlooked fore, and in
one instaunte, or momente casts light over all: even so this second aduente
or coming of Christ, and his general judgment shall come suddenly, and at
such time as the greattest part of the people of the world shall fear or
look for nothing less than for that day. Truth it is, that god shall send
many great and euydente signs and tokens before the said coming of Christ,
to admonyshe and warn thereby his elect people of his said aduente or
coming: not withstanding the same signs shall not be so euydent, but that
the greattest part of the people of the world, shall take and repute them for
no such signs. But like as in the time of Noe, that holy Patriarch, Genes. vii
the people of the world, which then were, would not be induced to believe or
think, that god would ever send any such generalle flodde, to drown up
all the world, as the said Patriarch showed them of before, and so upon
trust thereof continued forth still after their old accustomed manner and
facyon, living in all fylthynesse and abomination, until the said floode
came in deed, and so oppressed them sodeynely, when they were in the mids of
all their belly joy, and drowned them all that ever was, except only the
said Patriarch, and seven others, which somewhat before the coming of the
said floude, entered into the ship, made for that purpose, and so saved their
lives: Even so at Domesdaye, and long before, the greattest part of the
people of the world shall little or nothing regard the said signs, which
god shall send as tokens before domysdaye, but shall rather mock them, and
attribute them unto other causes, and so building their faith and trust
thereupon, shall give them self holly unto carnal and bodily lusts, to
covetousness and fraud, to vaynglory and ambicion, and to all other the works
of the flesh, and so shall continue therein without repentance, or thinking
of the said last day, until the self same hour that Christ shall come him
self in person, and call them sodeinly, to come and appear before his
presence, to receive their judgment.

The notes of the viii. Article.
In the.viii. Article it is specially to be noted, that not with standing any
thing contained or mencyoned therein, yet we must constantely believe in the
second person in Trinity, according as it is declared in the former
Artycles in all points, that is to say, that our savior Jesus Christ has
meryted habundantly, and at the full, not only clean remyssyon of all our
sins, but also our parfytte redemption and delyueraunce from all the
captiuytie, and thraldom of our spiritual enemies, and also our perfyte
reconciliation unto the favor of god, and our perfytte justification and
salvation, and that his death and his blood is thonely and suffycient price,
and valor, and the just satisfaction for all the sins of the world. And
that he is the only mean and high way, whereby Christen men do and must
come unto the father, and that he is our only Advocate and patron in heaven,
by whom all the heavenly gifts of the holy ghost, and what so ever else is, or
can be necessary, or requisite to thatteynynge of everlasting life, is
conferred, and given unto us. And therefore where as in this.viii. Article our
sanctification, our justification, our incorporation in to the body of Christ,
our governance, and all the other gifts and graces, wherewith christen men be
endued, be attributed unto the work of this holy spirit, it is to be
understood. First, that like as Christ is the autour, the mean, and the
very high way to come unto god the father: so is this holy spirit the very
conductour, the guide, the dyrectoure, and the governor to bring us into the
same high way, and to mynyster unto us, not only alacrity and strength to
walk and run therein, but also perseverance to continue in the same, until
we shall come unto our iourneys end.

Second, that the peculiar office and operation of this holy spirit is to
reuele, and teach us the mysteryes of Christis blood and his passion, and
how he is our only lord, our savior, and redemer: and so to bring us into
the right knowledge of all these benefits, that Christ has done for us. For
surely, if this holy spirit should not by his work illumyne and light our
hearts, with the knowledge of this troth, all the merits and benefits of
Christ, should be perpetually hydden from our knowledge, and we should never
believe in Christ, but should be like Jews and Turks, which know not
Christ, and so we should never be made participant of Christis merits, nor
they should never be applied unto us.

Thyrdely, that it is also the peculiar function or office of this holy spirit
(after we be inspired, and perfytely instructed in the said knowledge) first
to purge and purify our hearts by this faith and knowledge, from the malice
and fylthynes of sin, and afterward to stir, inflame, and rauyshe our
hearts, and to make us able, gladly and thankfully to embrace and receive the
said benefytes, and so to keep them, to use them, and to dyspose them to our
own welthe, and to the edifienge and profit of our neighbors. And finally,
to comfort us, and to be unto us in manner as acertayne pledge, or an ernest
penny, to assure and warraunt us, by true and infalible tokens, that we be in
the favor of god, and his own children by grace and adoption, and the right
enheritours of heaven. And for asmoche as this holy spirit, being sent and
procedynge from the father and the son, to dwell and inhabyte in our hearts,
works in us all these effects holy scripture: does worthyly attrybute unto
him our sanctification, our iustyfycation, and all the other benefytes, which
Christ by his passion has meryted and deserved for us. Which nevertheless
be also the works of the hole Trynytie, and be not to be separated in any
wise, al though scripture commonly does attrybute them unto the holy gooste,
as it does attrybute power unto the father, and wisdom unto the son, which
never the less be commune unto all three.

The notes of the ix. Article
In the nynthe. Article many things be to be noted. First that this word
Church, in scripture is taken sometime generally for the hole congregation of
them that be chrystened, and profess Christis gospel: And sometime it is taken
for the catholyque congregation, or noumbre of them only, which be chosen,
called, and ordained to reygne with Christ in everlasting life.

Second it is to be noted, that the church in the first sygnyfycation is in
scripture compared sometime unto a field full of good corn and noughty weeds
myngled together, Mat. xiii. Act. xx. Mat. xxv Math. iii Luke. iii.
and somtymes unto a net full of good fyshe and badde, and somtymes unto a
flock of sheep and gootes gathered together in one fold, and somtymes unto the
threshyng flower of almighty god, ii. Tim. ii
wherein is contained corn and chafe both together, and sometimes unto a great
man's house, in the which be some vessels or instruments of gold, some of
silver, some of tree, some of earth, some to be had in honor and price, and
such as woll never be corrupted and putrifyed, and some to be had in contempt,
and to serve only for vile uses.

Thyrdly it is to be noted, that by these parables and certain such other
rehearsed in scripture, is sygnyfied that among them, which be chrystened, and
do profess Christis gospel, and live in the comune society and communion of
the sacraments of the church diverse be in deed the very quycke and living
members of Christis mystical body, and shall reygne everlastingly with him in
honor. And that the congregation or society of them is the very field, and
they be the very good corn or seed, which Christ him self did sow. And
diverse be in deed chafe, or stynkynge and naughty weeds, sown by the dyuell
noughty fyshes, stynkyng and baren gootes, vessels despised, or instruments
prepared to everlasting fire, that is to say, they be the very members of the
synagoge of the dyuell, and not the living members of Christis mystycall body.

By these parables also it is signyfied, that in this present life, these two
sorts of people, good and badde, be contynually myxted and myngled together in
the church, as it is taken in the first sygnyfication. And that the said
members of the synagoge of the dyuell, so long as they grow in the same
field, wherein the good corn grows, that is to say, so long as they do in
outward apparaunce profess the same faith of Christ, which the very members
of Christis church do profess, and do consent and agree with them outwardly
in the doctrine of the gospel, and in all other things apperteyning unto
Christis relygion: they must be accepted and reputed here in the world, for
the very members of Christ's mystical body, and that they ought not ne can be
desseuered from them, until the day of judgment. At which time the sheparde
shall deuyde the sheep from the gootes, and the mowers shall try and cleanse
the corn from the weeds and chafe, and so shall bring the corn into the
barn, and cast the chafe and the weeds into the fire, there to burn
perpetually.

Of the church also in this first manner of sygnyfycation scripture means,
where it says, Dani. ix. Matthew. xxiiii.
that abhomynatyon shall sytte in the holy place, and that there shall arise in
the church horrible errors, and false prophets, which shall work such
wonders, that the elect people of God, shall be almooste seduced with them.
For surely not only the wicked people, which be mingled with the good in the
church, as it is taken in this first manner of sygnyfcacyon, do and shall
commytte infynite errors and impieties, but also the good people, and such as
be the very members of Christ, do and shall err oftymes as men, and oftetymes
do and shall decline, for a season, from the right way.

Fourthely it is to be noted, that of the church, as it is taken in the
second manner of sygnyfycation, Hebr. xii. Apo. xii. ii. Cor vi. i. Tim iii.
Math. v. i. Petr. ii. Ephe. ii. Cant. vi. Cant. iiii. Gala. iiii. Ephe. v. i.
Tim iii. ii. Tim. ii
It is said in scripture, that she is the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of
god, the temple or habitacle of god, the house of god, builded upon a stone,
the only dove, the only beloved of god, the gardeyn mured round about, the
fountain enclosed, the well of lively water, the paradyse full of fruit, our
holy mother, the gloryouse espouse of Christ full of all beauty, with out
spotte or wryncle, the mystical body of Christ, the seat or pyller of
truth, the golden vessel in the noble man's house, which shall never
corrupt or putryfie. All which sentences, and diverse such other, spoken in
scripture of the church, be to be referred, and veryfyed of the church in the
second sygnyfication. And finally in this sygnyfication also the.ix. Article
of our Creed, is to be understood, For surely it is necessary for our
salvation, to believe that that church, or congregation, which conteyneth the
very quycke and living members of Chrystis mysticalle body, and which shall
reygne euerlastyngly with him in heaven, is all holy, and catholyque: and that
like as it has been ever in the world, and yet is, so it shall continue for
ever, and for ever is, and shall be unto the worlds end spyritually and
inwardely renewed, quyckened, governed, justified, and sanctified with the
presence, and spyrytuall assistence, and gracis of the holy ghost, and
inwardely shall be connected and united together in one godly consent in
charity, and in the true doctrine of Christ.

And for confyrmation hereof, it is also further to be noted and considered,
that it is not only very necessary for all true christen men, to learn and
know the certain notes and marks, whereby the very true church of Christ
is dyscerned from the church, or congregation of the wicked, which god
hates, and also what is the pryncypall cause, whereby they be made to be the
very quycke members of the church of Christ: but it is also one of the
greatest comfortes, that any christen man can have, to believe and trust for
certain, that there is such a congregation, which conteyneth the very
lively members of Christis mystycall body, and that he is a membre of the same
congregation. Specially considering the great and excellent promyses, which
Christ him self has made unto the said congregation, being his own
mystycall body, and his own most dear and tenderly beloved espouse.

And for these causes and consyderations, and such other, it is (no doubt) to
be thought, that this.ix. article was added and put into this creed, specially
and pryncypally to descriue and declare the church, as it is taken in the
said second manner of sygnyfycation.

Fyftely it is to be noted, that after the mind of certain interpretours of
scripture, the quycke and living members of the holy and catholyque church,
or congregatyon, be of two sorts, whereof the one part is al ready departed
this life in the state of grace, and is called the church tryumphant,
forasmoche as after their victory, they do or shall tryumphe in joy and
felicity in heaven. The other is all those true christen people, which do and
shall live here in this world, daily and contynually fighting in Christis
battle, and for Christis sake, against their spiritual enemies, the world,
the dyuell, and the flesh: and for that cause, is called the mylitant or
fighting church.

Syxtely it is to be noted, that althouge the lively members of this militaunt
church, be subject to the infirmities of their flesh, and fall ofttymes in
to error and sin, as was said before, yet they alweyes in scripture be
called holy, as well because they be sanctified in the blood of Christ, and
professynge in their baptysme to believe in god, and to forsake the dyuel and
all his works, they be consecrated and dedycated unto Christ: as also for
that they be from time to time purged by the word of god, and by faith, hope,
and charity, and by the exercise of other virtues, and finally shall be endewed
with such grace of the holy ghost, that they shall be clearly sanctified, and
puryfied from all fylthynes, and shall be made the gloryouse Espouse of
Christ, shynynge in all cleannes, without having any spotte, or wryncle, or
any other thing worthy to be reprehended.

The notes of the.x. Article.
In the tenthe Article it is to be noted that diverse interpretours of holy
scripture do dyuersely interpretate the first part thereof, that is to say,
communyon of Saynctes. For some of them do refer it unto the.ix. Article, and
do take it as a clause added to declare and explane what to sygnified by these
words, the Catholyke Church, and so they do conioyne this clause with that
that went before in this sense, I believe that this catholyque Church is the
communyon, that is to say, the multitude or the commynaltie, or the commune
welthe of Saynctes only, that is to say, of those which be under the
kingdom of Christ, and be governed and sanctified with his holy spyryte, and
be prepared to come to everlasting life. And some interpretours do deuyde the
said clause from the.ix. Article, and do conioyne it with the Article that
follows, that is to say, Remyssyon of sins. Now these doctors, which be
of this opinion, do also dyuersely expound the said clause of communyon of
Saynctes. For some of them do take it to sygnyfye the commune vtylytie and
profytte, which all the members of Christis body do receive by the commune
merytes, suffrages, and prayers of the hole Church. And some do expound and
take it for the communyon of the sacraments of the church, which be commune
unto all men, be they rich or pore, free or bond, young or old, if they be
contained with in the unity of this church. And some do take and expound it
to sygnyfye that unity, which is between Christ and all true christen men,
that is to say, between the heed and his mystical body. And for as much as
by the communion and participation of the sacrament of the Altar, we be
inserted in to the body of Christ, and so we be incorporated in Christ, and
Christ in us: therefore some interpretours do take, that by this clause is
sygnifyed, the Sacrament of the Altar. And some doctors do expound it to
sygnifye that treasour of the church, which is commune equally unto all the
members of the same. And those doctors, which be of this opynion, do
interpretate that treasoure to be nothing else, but the grace, that is to say,
the mercy, the goodness, and the favor of god in this world, and glory in
the world to come. They say also that this grace of god, is the commune
treasour of all the elect people of god, and that our poverty is so extreme,
that of our selfs, without this grace, we should be utterly nothing. They
say further, that the effect and virtue of this grace is, to make us hable to
rise from sin, and flee from sin, to work good works, to receive the
reward of everlasting glory, to have and reteyne the true sense and
understanding of holy scripture, and to endewe us with christen faith, hope,
and charity. Finally they say, that this grace works all those effects in
the elect people of god, by two special Instruments, which be, the word of
God and his sacraments. And for as much as both the word and the
Sacraments have all their effycacye by, and thoroughe the might and operation
of the holy gooste, and for as much also as this holy gooste, dwells and
abides only in the Catholyque church, and in the members of the same, and
works none of these effects out of the church, they think that by this
clause, Communion of Saynctes, is mente here the treasoure of the Church: And
that this treasoure is nothing else, but the holy gooste him self, and his
graces, whereby and by the word of god and his Sacraments we atteygne
remyssyon of sins, life, light, truth, justice, eternal peace, rest,
tranquillity, and health, so long as we be not dysseuered from the unity of
this catholyke church, but do remain therein as lively members of the same.

In this Article, it is also to be noted, that remyssyon of sins is the
fynall cause of all the hole history of Christ, and of all the works that
ever he did, or suffered for out sakes, and our redemption, and also the
specyalle fruit and profit, which true christen men do receive thereby. For
surely Christ became man, and was borne, crucyfyed, dead, and rose again to
life, and ascended to heaven, to the end and entente to merit and deserve for
us remyssyon of all our sins, for asmoche as hit was impossyble for us to
have obtained the same, by any other means. And the truth is, that we can
by no means be made partetakers of this merit of Christ, onelesse we shall
first fermely and stedfastely believe in Christ, and that he is the only
suffycyent auctoure, causer, and worker of remyssyon of al our sins. To the
atteynynge of which faith, it is also to be noted, that Christ has
instytuted, and ordained in the world, but only two means and instruments,
whereof the one is the mynystration of his word, and the other is the
administration of his sacraments instituted by him, so that it is not possible
to attain this faith, but by one or both of these two means, as shall be
here after declared

Here follows the second part of this treatise, containing the declaration
of the seven sacraments, and first of
The sacrament of Matrimonye.
AS touching the sacrament of Matrimony, we think it convenient that al
bishops and preachers shall instruct, and teach the people, committed unto
their spyrytuall charge, First how that almighty god, at the first creation
of man in paradyse, consyderyng of his infinite wisdom and goodness, how
necessary it was to couple and conioyne man and woman together in marriage, as
well for their mutual aid and comfort, and for the preservation and
continuance of mankind in laufull succession, as also that the same
generation might after the fall of man be exercysed perpetually unto the
worlds end without sin or offense toward god: did not only than and
there conioyne Adam and Eve together in marriage, and instytuted the said
sacrament of Matrimony, and consecrated and blessed it by his holy word: but
also descriued the virtue and effycacie of the said sacrament by the mouth
of Adam. Who being inspyred with the holy ghost, when he was by god conjoined
in marriage with Eve, spoke these words following: Genes. ii.
Lo now these bones and flesh of Eve my wife be formed and made of my bones
and flesh. And therefore every married man here after shall for his wyfes sake
utterly leave and forsake his father and mother, and shall adhere and cleue unto
his wife only, and the husband and the wife shall be.ii in one flesh, and in
one body.

By which words it is meant, that by the virtue and efficacy of Matrimony,
ryghtfully, and by the auctorytie of god contracted, the man and woman, which
were before two bodies, be now united and made to be one body during their
lives, so that the husband has no power of his own body to use the same as
him lust, and with whom him lyketh: but it is his wyfes, and with her only
he may use the act of matrimony. Nor the wife has any power of her own
body, to use it at her lust, or with whom her lyketh: but her body is her
husbands body, and with him only may she use thacte of matrimony. And
therefore the said two persons, so conjoined, may not be afterward divided
for any affection to father or mother, or for any erthly thing in the world:
but each must adhere and cleue to other, for as much as they be now two
persons in one flesh, and in one body.

Second, how that almighty god repeted and renewed again his said
institucion of matrimonye, and sanctified and blessed it with his holy word
immediately after Noes fludde. At which time, being all the people of the
world peryshed and dystroyed with the generalle deluge, (except the said
holy Patriarch Noe, his children, and their wives, which were than only by
goddis high providence and goodness toward mankind preserved and left on
live) God calling them out of the arc, said unto them these words: Grow
you forth now and increase by contynual generation, and be you multiplied in
contynual succession, and fulfill you the earth again with your sede laufully
procreated in matrimonye, according as I have instituted the same. This law
and commandment of matrimony thus repeted and given again by god unto Noe and
his children, although it was sufficient commandment and instruction unto
them and all their posterity how to use the same in all puretie, and
cleanness to goddis pleasure, and his good contentation: yet god perceiving
the natural inclination of man to malice and sin, did afterward further
explicate and establishe the same by his other laws written, where by god
prohibyted, Leui xviii et. xx.
that any matrimonye, should be made between the father and the daughter, the
mother and the son, the brother and the sister, and between diverse other
persons being in certain degrees of consanguynitie and affinity. which
laws of prohibicion in marriage, although they were not by express words of
god declared at the first institution of Matrimony, ne yet at this second
repetition of the same, made unto Noe: yet undoubtedly god had engraued and
enprynted the same laws in the heart of man at his first creation. And for as
much as in long contynuaunce and process of time, the naturalle light and
knowledge of man was almooste by sin and malice extincted, or at the least
so corrupted and obscured in the most part of men, that they could not
perceive and judge, what things were of their own nature noughtie and
detestable in the syghte of god, ne yet how far that natural honesty and
reverence, which we owe unto such persons, as be nere of blud or of nere
allyaunce unto us, was extended: god commanded his prophet Moses to
promulgate, and to declare by his word unto the people of Israel, the said
laws of prohibition of Matrimonye in certain degrees of consanguinitie and
affinity, which be specially mencyoned in the book of Leuiticus. And
commanded also Moses, Leu. xviii. et. xx.
to declare unto his said people, that not only they: but also all other the
people of the world, were as much, and as strayghtely bounden to the
contynuall observation of the same laws, as they were unto the other moral
laws of the ten commandments.

Thyrdly, that this conjunction between man and woman in Matrimonye, was
instytuted by god, to the intent thereby should be sygnyfyed and represented, or
rather prefygurated and prophesied before, not only the perfyte, and
indissoluble conjunction and union of the nature of god with the nature of man
(which was fulfilled, when the second person in Trinity descendinge from his
father, did take upon him the very form and substance of our nature, and so
those two natures were united and knytte together in one person) but also to
the intent there should thereby be sygnyfyed and represented the like conjunction
or society, in perfyte and indyssoluble love and charity, between Christ and
his Church, that is to say, the congregation of all christen people, which
be the very mystical body of Christ, and Christ the only heed of the same.
And this to be true sayncte Paul himself confirms in the.v. chapyter of
his epistle unto the Ephesians. Ephe. v.
In which place the Apostle minding to prove and persuade, that all women
being married, ought to love, to reverence, to honor, to obey, and to be
subject unto their husbands in all things, even as the church is subject
unto Christ, and like wise that all husbands ought, and be bound to love
their wives, even as they love their own selves, and their own bodies, and
even as Christ loves the church his espouse and his own body: He brings
in the first institution of Matrimony, as it was ordained by god in Paradyse,
and alleges the words of god, pronounced by our first father Adam, as they
be before rehearsed. Upon which words the apostell infers and says. This
conjunction of man and woman together in marriage, whereby they are knytted,
united, and made all one flesh and one body, is the sacrament, that is to
say, the figure, the sygnification, the mystery, or the prophecienge before
of that greatte and meruaylous conjunction, which is between Christ and his
church. For like as by the virtue and effycacye of this first institution of
Matrimony, the husband and the wife be made to be but one body, whereof the
husband is the heed: Even so the love and charytie of Christ, toward his
Espouse the Church, does knytte, unity, conglutynate, and make Christ and
his church to be but done body, whereof Christ is the very heed. By the
which words of Sayncte Paul it appears, not only, what is the virtue and
effycacie of Matrimonye, in the vnytynge and incorporatynge of two bodies in
one: but also that hit was instytuted by god, to sygnyfye this other
conjunction, which is between Christ and his Church. And that this
conjunction between Christ and the church, is the very self thing, which
was prophesied, sygnyfyed, and represented by the other conjunction of man and
woman in marriage. For though Sayncte Paul used in this place other arguments
and persuasyons, taken of the law of Nature, to induce married persons, the
one to love the other (saying, that men naturally do love and nourysshe
their own bodies, and their own flesh: and that it is against nature, that
a man should hate his own flesh) yet surely he thought, that this was the
reason of most effycacye, to persuade his said purpose, That is to say,
that all husbands and wives ought so to use them selfs, the one unto the
other, that their Matrymonye, and all their works and affections in the same,
might and should corresponde, and be conformable and like in all points unto
that most holy thing, which is sygnyfied and represented thereby, that is to
say, unto that spiritual conjunction, which is between Christ and his
espouse the church. And that therefore specyallye the man ought and is bound
to love his wife, and the wife to love and obey her husband in all things,
lest by doing the contrary, they should after and subuerte the institution
of God, and make the figure all unlike unto the thing that is sygnyfied thereby.

And so by these words and reasons of saint Paul it is evident, that
concerning the sacrament of Matrymonye, his sentence and doctrine was, that
the same was instituted by God at the first creation of man, to sygnifie that
inseparable conjunction and union, which is between Christ and his church.

Item we think it conuenyent, that all Bysshoppes and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed to their spiritual charge, that
although this Sacrament of Matrymonye be no new Sacrament instytuted in the
new Testamente, but instytuted by God, and consecrated by his word, and
dignyfied by his laws even from the beginning of the world, and before any
other of the sacraments were instituted in the new testament, as was said
before: yet the truth is, that Christ him self did also accept, approve,
and allow the said institution, as well by his word, as also by his sondrye
works and deeds, testyfyenge the same. Joan. ii.
In so much that being ones invited to come unto a certain marriage, made in
Cana a town of Galilee, Christ vouchesaued not only to come thither, and
there to honor the said marriage with his corporalle presence, and with the
presence also of his blessed mother, and his holy Apostles: but there he
began also by tournynge of water in to wine, first to work miracles, and to
manyfeste his glory unto the world. And afterward in one other place, when
the pharisees came unto Christ, and demanded of him, whether a man might
laufully be divorced from his wife for any cause, Mat. xiiii
Christ calling the said pharisees unto the remembrance of the first
institution of Matrimonye, as it was made at the first beginning, said unto
them, Remember you not you pharysees, how that god, which created all
things in the beginning did also form and create man and woman? And when he
had conjoined them together in marriage, he said unto them these words:
Propter hoc relinquet homo patrem et matrem, et adherebit vxori sue, et erunt
duo in carne vna? wherefore understand you, ye Phariseys, that sithe man and
woman conjoined in matrimonye, be by goddis ordinance but one flesh and gone
body, it is not possible, that they should afterward be separated or dyuorced
one from the other. And understand you also, that it is not laufull for any
man to separate, and to dyuyde those persons a sondre, which be by goddis
word, and his will and power, conjoined together. And when the Phariseys,
repliynge thereunto said, And why than did Moses command us to make a libell
of dyuorce against our wyfes, for what cause so ever we would, and so depart
and separate our selfs from them? Christ answered them again and said,
Moses, considering the induratenes and obstinacye of your hearts, was
content to permytte and suffer you so to do, for avoiding of greatter
myschefe and inconvenience, which might else have ensued thereof: All be it I
say unto you, that it was not so at the beginning, that is to say, It is
clean contrary to the godly institution, and natural order and laws of
Matrimony, as it was instituted by god at the beginnynge, that any man married
should dyuorce him self from his laufull wife. And therefore I say again unto
you, that who so ever does forsake his laufull wife, onelesse it be for
adultery committed by her, and does marye a another, I say, he commytteth
adultery in his so doing. And like wise, what woman so ever does forsake her
laufull husband, and marie an other, she also commytteth adultery. And the
man also that marieth her, offends in like manner. And the cause hereof is,
for that the bond of laufull marriage is of such sort, that it can not be
dyssolued, or broken, but by death only.

These words of Christ euidentely declare Christis sentence in the
approbation of the institution of Matrimony, made at the beginning of the
world: And that hit was Christis will and comamundemente, that all the people
of god should follow and conform their doings unto the laws of Matrimonye
than made, and should observe the same in such puretie and sanctimonie, as it
was first ordained, without separation or dyuorce, and that under the pain of
dampnation.

And here also two things specially be to be noted. The one is in yt Christ
says, whom god conioyneth, man can not separate. By the which words he
declares ye infinite benignite and goodness of god toward us, in that, that
he has not only conjoined our first progenitors Adam and Eve together in
marriage, whereby he gave unto us the original beginning of our procreation:
but that he does also ever sith that time contynually assiste man and woman,
and works with them in this conjunction of marriage, and as you would say, is
the very auctour, causer, and doer of all Matrimonies, which be laufully
contracted between man and woman. The other thing to be noted is, in that
Christ says here unto his dysciples, Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc: sed quibus
datum est, qui potest capere capiat. By the which words Christ seems to
exhort such as he shall endue with the grace and virtue of continence, whereby
they shall be hable to absteyne from the works of Matrimony, to contynewe
sole and unmarried.

Item we think it conueniente, that all bishops and preachers shall instruct
and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that the
sacrament of Matrimony does consyste of two parts, like as the other
sacraments do, that is to say, of an outward and a vysible sign, and of an
inward and an invisible grace. The outward sign is that outward contracte,
made by express words or other signs equivalent, declarynge the consent
between such persons, as may laufully and by thorder of goddis law, be
joined together in marriage, when the same persons do consent and promise
each to other, to company together continually, during their lives, without
separation, and to communicate each to other the use and office of their
bodies, and all other their faculties and substance. The spiritual and
invisible graces, which the elect people of god (as well in the time of the
law of nature, as in the time of Moses saw, and also in the time of the new
testamente,) did always, and yet do receive by virtue of this sacrament, be
diverse and sondrye. Whereof one is the dispensation, or grace of god, whereby the
act of procreation between man and woman, which is (as of it self. and of
his own nature) dampable, is sanctified by the word of god and this
saramente, that is to say, is made pure, clean, without spotte of sin,
Hebr. xiii.
and honorable, according to the saying of saint Paul, Honorabile coniugium
i^ omnibus, and thorus imaculatus. That is to say, the act of procreation
between man and woman in Matrimony is honorable, and acceptable before god,
and their bed is undefiled. And other is the grace, whereby the persons
conjoined in Matrimony do atteyne everlasting life, if they bring up their
children in the true faith and observance of Chrystis religion, according to
the words of saint Paul, where he says, i. Tim. ii.
The woman was seduced and blinded by the serpent, and so sinned deedly: but
she shall be saved by procreation and bryngyng forth of children, if the same
do persevere and continue in faith and love toward god, and in holiness, and in
temperance in their outward acts and deeds. And as this is spoken of the
woman, so it is also to be verified in the man, he doing likewise as is
required of the woman.

Finally we think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers, shall
diligentely and from time to time exhort and admonyshe the people, committed
unto their spiritual charge, to consider the three special benefits or
offices, which belong unto the sacrament of matrimony. And first of all to
consider the thing self, which is signified thereby, which (as was said
before) is the high, the mighty, and the incomprehensyle work of god, in the
conjunction of Christ and the church together, wroughte by him to our
syngular benefyte and everlasting salvation. And that therefore the man and wife
ought not only to live together in perfyte unity and concord: but also they
ought to love each other as their own bodies, and to use the same in all
cleannes, puretie, and honor, and not to defyle the same with the rages and
lusts of any beastely or fylthy concupiscence of the flesh, even as Christ
him self loved, and does love his espouse the church, and suffered all
afflictions and peynes to make her glorious, and void from all manner of spot
or wryncle of uncleanness. And in this part also it shall be well done, that
the bishops and preachers do repete often times, and lay before the eyes of
the people, as well the sayenges of saint Paul before rehearsed, as also the
godly exhortation, which he makes in his epistle unto the Thessaloniens, i.
The. iiii
where he writes in this manner. I pray you brethern and instantly desire you
for our lord Jesus Christis sake, that like as you have herd heretofore of us,
how and in what manner you should go forward and please god: so ye do proceed
in the same, and that after such sort and manner, that you may contynually
profit and increase therein. You remember, I doubt not, what precepts and
commandments I have given unto you in times paste, in the name of our lord
Jesus Christ. And now in like manner, and in his name also, I say again unto
you, that the will and commandment of god is, that you should sanctify your
selfs, that is to say, that you should absteyne from all manner of
fornication, and that every oone of you should use and keep the vesselle of
his body, in holiness and in honor, and not in desire of carnalle
concupyscence, like as the gentyles do, which know not god. And that no man
should craftily compass or cyrcumuent his brother in flesshly lusts. For
almighty god takes vengeance upon all such people, as do commytte any of
those things. Know you also, that god has not called us unto vnclenlynesse
and fylthynesse of life, but unto holiness and sanctimonye. And therefore I do
exhort you all, and in the name of god command you, to eschew all
fornication and adultery, all unclean desires, and carnal concupyscence, al
filthiness and vnpure living in flesshely lusts of the body. And I say
further, that who so ever despyseth and breketh these my commandments: does
not despise me, but he despysethe god, for they be his commandments, whose
spirit both you and I have received.

These words of sayncte Paul be necessary to be declared often times to the
people, to the intent they may the better know the will and commandment of
god, and also consydre and fear the great danger of gods wroth and
vengeance, dew unto such people, as do transgress the godly institution and
laws of this holy sacrament of matrimonye.

The second specyalle gift or benefyte to be considered in the said
sacrament, is the faith and mutual promise made between the husband and the
wife joined in laufulle Matrimonye. Whereby, and by virtue of the said
sacrament, the persons so laufully conjoined, be bound to conceive certain
trust and confidence, and certainly to believe, not only that their said state
and manner of living in wedlock (being the same vertuousely, and
religiousely, according to the law of god by them contracted and observed) is
honorable, acceptable, and meritorious before god: but also that the knotte
and bond of Matrimonye contracted between the said persons, is made thereby
to be indissoluble.

Troth it is, that if in any marriage it may appear, and be duly proved, that
there is such laufull impedimente, that the same might not at the beginning be
contracted by thorder of the laws of god and holy church: In that case the
church ought and may divorce the said persons so contracted, and declare that
such Matrimony is vnlaufulle, and the bond thereof to be of no strength or
efficacy, because it was never good from the beginning. Notwithstanding in
marriages laufully made, and according to the ordynance of Matrimonye
prescribed by god and holy Church, the bond thereof can by no means be
dissolved, during the lives of the parties, between whom such matrimonye is
contracted.

And in this part also the people be to be taught, that who so ever goethe
about to dysseuer him self from the bond of laufull marriage, he goes about
so much as in him lies, to divorce Christ from his church.

The third special gift or office to be considered and observed in Matrimonye,
is the good and virtuous education and bringing up of the chyldern begoten in
the same. Whereunto all married men and women ought to have a special regard,
Thobi. i.
and to follow therein the example of Thobie, which taught his son even from
his infancy, to love, to dread, and to fear god, and to fle and absteyne
from all manner of sin, even for goddis sake. For surely if the fathers and
mothers be neglygente in the good bringing up of their chylderne in their
youth, and so suffer them to fall into folyes and sin in defaute of dew
correction and chastisement of them for the same, no doubt they shall answer
unto god for it: i. Reg. iiii
as it appears by the great stroke and punyshement god, when he did suddenly
stryke Elie the priest unto death, because that he, knowing his children to do
amys, did not punyshe them therefore. And therefore let all parents employ
their dyligence, and busy cure to educate, and instruct their children by all
means in virtue and goodness, and to restreyne them from vices by convenient
dyscyplyne and castigation, Pro. xxiii
according to the saying of the wise man, Withdraw not the just dyscyplyne
from thy child. For if thou do so, he will fall into sondrye inconveniences,
and so finally shall be but lost and undone. Wherefore spare not to chastyse
thy child with the rod, and so doing, thou shall deliver his soul from
hell.

The Sacrament of Baptism.
AS touching the holy Sacrament of baptism, we think it convenient, that al
bishops and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge, that they ought and must of necessity believe
certainly all those things, which have been always by the hole consent of the
church approved, received, and used in the sacrament of baptysme. And first
that the sacrament of baptism was instituted and ordained by god in the new
testament, as a thing necessary for the attaynyng of everlasting life,
according to the saying of our sauyoure Jesus Christ, where he says, Joan.
iii.
that no man can enter into the kingdom of heaven, except he be borne again
of water and the holy gooste.

Item that it is offered unto al men, as well infantis, as such as have the use
of reason, that by baptism they shall have remyssyon of all their sins, the
grace and favor of god, and everlasting life, according to the saying of
Christ, who so ever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Mat. xvi.


Item that the promise of grace and everlasting life (which promise is
adjoined unto the sacrament of baptism) perteyneth not only unto such as
have the use of reason: but also to infantes, innocents and children, and that
they ought therefore and must needs be baptized, and that by the sacrament of
baptism, they do also obtain remyssyon of their sins, the grace and favor
of god, and be made thereby the very sons and children of god. In so much as
infantes and children dyeng in their infancy, shall undoubtedly be saved
thereby, and else not.

Item that infantes must needs be christened because they be borne in
original sin, which sin must needs be remytted, which can not be
done, but by the sacrament of baptism, whereby they receive the holy ghost,
which exercyseth his grace and efficacy in them, and cleanses and purifieth
them from sin, by his most secret virtue and operation.

Item that children or men ones baptized, ought never to be baptized again.

Item that all good christen men ought and must repute and take all the
Anabaptists, and the Pelagians opinions, which be contrary to the premysses,
and every other man's opinion, agreeable unto the said Anabaptists or the
pelagians opinions in that behalf, for detestable heresies, and utterly to be
condemned.

Item that men or children, which having the use of reason, and being not
christenid already, desire to be baptized, shall by virtue of that holy sacrament
obteyn the grace and remission of all their sins, if they shall come thereunto
not only perfitely and truly repentant and contrite of all their sins before
committed: but also perfytely and constantely confessing and beleuynge all the
artycles of our faith, according as is mentioned in the Creed, called the
apostles Creed, And finally if they shall also have firm credence and trust
in the promise of god, adjoined to the said sacrament, That is to say, that
in and by this said sacrament, which they shall receive, god the father
gives unto them for his son Jesus Christis sake, remyssion of all their
sins, and the grace of the holy gooste. Whereby they be newely regenerated and
made the very chylderne of god, according to the saying of saint John^, and
the apostle saint Peter, where they say, Matt. iii. Luc. iii. Act. ii.
Do you penance for your sins, and be each of you baptized in the name of
Jesus Christ, and you shall obtain remyssyon of your sins, and shall
receive the gift of the holy gooste. And according to the saying also of
saint Paul, Tit. iii.
where he says, God has not saved us for the works of Justice, which we
have done, but of his mercy by baptism, and renouation of the holy gooste,
whom he has powered out upon us most plentifully for the love of Jesus
Christ our savior, to the intent that we being justified by his grace,
should be made the inheritours of everlasting life, according to our hoope

The Sacrament of Confyrmation.
AS touching the sacrament of Confyrmation we think it conuenyente, that all
bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge, how thapostles in the beginning of Christis church,
although they did certainly know and believe, that all such, as had dewely
received the sacrament of Baptysme, were by virtue and efficacy thereof
perfytely regenerated in Christ, perfytely incorporated and made the very
members of his body, and had received full remyssion of their sins, and were
replenyshed with abundaunce and plentyfulnes of the graces and gifts of the
holy ghost: yet they used to go unto the people after they were baptized, and
so by their prayer and laying of their hands upon them, Act. viii. et. xix.
did give and confer unto them the holy ghost. And the said people did speak
diverse languages, and prophesied, to the intent that the conscyences not only of
them, that had received baptism, and professed Christ, should be thereby the
better ascertayned, confyrmed, and establysshed in Christis relygion, and so
more constantly profess the same: but also that the consciences of other,
which were out of the church, and unbelievers, should the sooner be reduced
thereby from their errors, and be brought in to the right believe of Christ and
his gospel.

Item how the holy fathers of the premitiue church, taking occasyon, and
foundyng them selfs upon the said acts and deeds of the Apostelles, and
considering also that such, as had ones received the gifts and benefytes of
the holy ghost by the sacrament of Baptism, might and oftentimes did in deed
by tentatio^, frayltie, or other wise by their own sin and malice lose and
fall from the same again: thought it very expedient to ordeyne, that al
christen people should after their baptism be presented to their bishops, to
the intent that by their prayers, and layinge of their hands upon them, and
consigninge of them with the holy Chrisme, they should be confyrmed, That is to
say, they should receive such gifts of the holy gooste, as whereby they
should not only be so corroborated and establyshed in the gifts and graces
before received in baptysme, that they should not lyghtely fall again from
the same, but should constantely reteyne them, and persevere therein, and should
also be made strong and hardy, as well to confess boldly and manfully their
faith before all the persecuters of the same, and to resist and fight against
their goostly enemies the world, the dyuell, and the flesh, as also to bear
the cross of Christ, that is, to suffer and sustain patiently all the
afflyctions and adversities of this world: but also that they should attain
encreace and haboundaunce of the other virtues and graces of the holy ghost.

Item we think it convenient, that al bishops and preachers shall instruct
and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that although
it be well done, that men do present their children unto the bishop, to
receive at his hands the sacrament of confyrmation when they be of so tender
age, as commonly they be wont to do: yet it is not to be thought, that there
is any such necessity of confyrmation of infantes, but that they being
baptized, and dyenge innocente before they be confyrmed, shall be assurd to
atteyne everlasting life and salvation by theffecte of the sacrament of
baptism before received.

The sacrament of Penance.
AS concerning the Sacrament of penance, we think it conueniente, that all
Bishops and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge, that they ought and must most constantly believe,
that the said sacrament was instituted by god in the new testament, as a
thing so necessary for man's salvation: that no man, which after his baptism
is fallen again, and has committed deedly sin, can without the same be
saved or attain everlasting life.

Item that like as such men, which after baptism do fall again into sin,
if they do not penance in this life, shall undoubtedly be damned: Even so
when so ever the same men shall convert them self from their noughty life,
and do such penance for the same, as Christ requires of them, they shall
without doubt attain remissyon of their sins, and shall be saved.

Item that the sacrament of perfyte penance, which Christ requires of such
manner persons, consysteth of three parts. Whereof the one is Contricion, the
other is Confession, and the third is the amendment of the former life, or
the new obedient reconsiliation unto the laws and will of god, that is to
say, exterior acts and works of charity, according as they be commanded
of god, which be called in scripture Fructus digni penitencia, The worthy
fruits of penance.

Furthermore as touching Contrition, Co^tritio^.
which is the first part, we think it conueniente, that all bysshoppes and
preachers, shall instruct the people, committed unto their spiritual charge,
that the said contrition consistethe in two special parts, which must
always be conjoined together, and can not be disseuered, That is to say, the
penitent and contrite man, must first knowledge the fylthines and
abomination of his own sin (unto which knowledge he is brought by herynge
and consyderinge of the will of God declared in his laws) and feelynge and
perceiving in his own conscience, that god is angry and displeased with him
for the same: he must also conceive not only great sorrow and inward shame,
that he has so grievously offended god, but also great fear of goddis
displeasure toward him, considering he has no works, or merytes of his
own, which he may wortily say before god, as sufficient satisfaction for his
sins. Which done, than afterward with this fear, shame, and sorrow must
needs succeed and be conjoined the second part, that is to wit, a certain
faith, trust, and confidence of the mercy and goodness of god, whereby the
penitente must conceive certain hope and faith, that god will forgive him
his sins, and repute him justified, and of the nombre of his elect children,
not for the worthynes of any merit or work done by the penitent, but for the
only merits of the blood and passion of our savior Jesus Christ.

Item that this certain faith and hope is gotten, and also confyrmed, and
made more strong, by the applyenge of Christis words and promyses of his
grace and favor contained in his gospel, and the sacraments instituted by
him in the new testament. And therefore to attain this certain faith, the
second part of penance is necessary, That is to say, Confession to a
priest, if it may be had, For the absolution given by the priest, was
instituted of Christ, to apply the promyses of goddis grace and favor to the
penytente.

Wherefore as touching Confession we think it conueniente, that all bysshoppes
and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto their
spiritual charge, that they ought and must certaynely believe, that the
words of absolution, pronounced by the priest, be spoken by the authority
given to him by Christ in the gospelle. And that they ought and must give no
less faith and credence to the same words of absolution, so pronounced by
the ministers of the church, than they would give unto the very words and
voice of god him self, if he should speak unto us out of heaven, Joan. xx.
Luc. x.
according to the saying of Christ, whose sins so ever you do forgive,
shall be forgyuen: whose sins so ever you do reteyne, shall be retained.
And again in an other place Christ says, Luc. x.
who so ever hereth you hereth me.

Item that the people may in no wise contemn this auricular confession, which
is made unto the mynysters of the church: but that they ought to repute the
same as a very expedient and necessary mean, whereby they may require and
ask this absolution at the priests hands, at such time as they shall find
their consciences grieved with mortal sin, and have occasion so to do, to
the intent they may thereby attayn certain comfort and consolation of their
consciences.

As touching the third part of penance, we think it conueniente, that all
bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge, that although Christ and his death be the
sufficient oblation, sacrifice, satisfaction, and recompense, for the which
god the father forgyueth and remytteth to all sinners not only their sins,
but also eternal pain due for the same: yet all men truly penitente,
contryte, and confessed must needs also bring forth the fruits of penance,
That is to say, prayer, fasting, and alms deed, with much mourning and
lamentyng for their sins before committed. And they must also make
restitution or satisfaction in will and deed to their neighbors, in such
things as they have done them wrong and injury in. And finally they must do
all other good works of mercy and charity, and express their obediente will
in the executynge and fulfyllynge of goddis commandment outwardely, when
time, power and occasion shall be ministered unto them, or else they shall
never be saved. For this is the express precepte and comaundemente of god,
Luc. iii. Romans viii
Do you the worthy fruits of penance. And sayncte Paul says, Like as in
times paste you have given and applied your selves, and all the members of
your bodies to all fylthy living and wyckednes, contynually encreasynge in the
same: In like manner you be now bound, and must give and apply your selfs
holly to justice, encreasynge contynually in puretye and cleannes of life. And
in an other place he says, i. Cor. ix.
I chastyse and subdue my carnal body, and thaffections of the same, and make
them obediente unto the spirit.

Item that these precepts and works of charity be necessary works to our
salvation, and god necessarily requires that every penitente man, shall
perform the same, when so ever time, power, and occasion shall be minystred
unto him so to do.

Item that by penance and such good works of the same, we shall not only
obtain everlasting life, but also we shall deserve remission or mitigation of
the present peynes and afflyctions, which we susteygne here in this world.
For saint Paul says, i. Cor. ii.
That if we would correct and take punyshement of our selves in this world,
we should not be so grievously corrected of god. Zach. i.
And god by his prophet Zachary says, Turn your selves unto me, and I
will turn again unto you. Esai. xxviii.
And the prophet Esai says, Break and deal thy bread unto the hungrye,
bring into thy house the poor man, and such as want harboroughe, when thou
see a naked man, give him clothes to cover him with, and refuse not to
succoure and help the poor and nedye, for he is thine own flesh. And if
thou wolte thus do, than shall thy light glyster out as bryghte as the son in
the morning, and thy health shall sooner arise unto the, and thy justice shall
go before thy face, and the glory of god shall gather the up, that thou shalt
not fall, and when so ever thou shalt call upon god, god shall here the, and
when so ever thou shalt cry unto god, god shall say, Lo here I am ready to
help the. Than shall thy light overcome all darkness, and thy darkness shall be
as bright as the son at noone days: and than god shall give unto the
contynuall rest, and shall fulfill thy soul with bryghtnes, and shall deliver
thy body from adversity, and than thou shalt be like a gardeyn, that most
plentyfully brings forth all kind of fruits, and like the well spring, that
never shall want water.

These things and such other, should be contynuallye taught and inculked
into the ears of all true christen people, to the intent to styre and provoke
them unto good works: and by the self same good works to exercise and
confyrme their faith and hope, and to ascertayne them that they shall for the
same good works, receive at goddis hand mitigation and remyssion of the
miseries, calamities, and greuouse punyshmentes, which god sends to men in
this world for their sins.

The Sacrament of the Altar.
AS touching the Sacrament of the Altar, we think it conueniente, that all
bishops and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spyrytualle charge, that they ought and must constantly believe, that
under the form and figure of bread and wine, which we there presentely do
see, and perceive by outward senses, is verayly, sustancially, and really
contained and comprehended the very self same body and blood of our savior
Jesus Christ, which was borne of the virgin Marie, and suffered upon the
Cross for our redemption. And that under the same form and figure of bread
and wine, the very self same body and bloudde of Christ is corporally,
really, and in the very same substance exhybyted, distributed, and received
unto and of all them, which receive the said sacrament. And that therefore
the said sacrament is to be used with all due reverence and honor, and that
every man ought first to prove and examyne him self, and relygyously to try
and search his own conscience, before he shall receive the same, according to
the saying of saint Paul, i. Cor. ii.
who so ever eats this body of Christ unworthily, or drinks of this blood
of Christ unworthily, shall be gyltie of the very body and blood of Christ.
Wherefore let every man first prove him self, and so let him eat of this
breadde, and drink of this drink. For who so ever cateth it, or drynketh it
unworthily, he eats and drynketh it to his own dampnation: because he
puts no dyfference between the very body of Christ, and other kinds of
meat.

The sacrament of Orders.
AS touching the sacrament of holy orders we think it conuenyent, that all
bishops and preachers, shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spyrytuall charge, First, how that Christ and his apostels did
institute and ordeyn in the new testament, that, besides the civil powers and
governance of kings and pryncis (which is called Potestas gladii the power of
the sword) there should also be continually in the church milytant certain
other mynysters or officers, which should have special power, authority, and
commission under Christ to preach and teach the word of god unto his
people. to dyspense and admynyster the sacraments of god unto them, and by the
same to confer and give the graces of the holy gooste, to consecrate the
blessed body of Christ in the sacrament of the altar. to loose and absoyle
from sin all persons, which be duly penitent and sorye for the same. to
bind and to excommunicate such as be gyltie in manyfeste crimes and sins,
and will not amend their defaultes. to order and consecrate others in the
same rome, order, and office, whereunto they be called, and admitted them self.
and finally to feed Christis people like good pastors and rectours (as the
apostelle calls them) with their wholesome doctrine. and by their contynual
exhortations, and admonitions to reduce them from sin and iniquity, so much
as in them lies, and to bring them unto the perfyte knowledge, the perfyte
love and dread of god, and unto the perfect charity of their neighbors.

Item that this office, this ministration, this power, and authority is no
tyrannycall power, having no certain laws or lymyttes, within the which it
ought to be contained, nor yet none absolute power: but it is a moderate power
subject, determined, and restrained unto those certain ends and lymyttes, for
the which the same was appointed by goddis ordinance. Which, as was said
before, is only to admynyster and dystrybute unto the members of Christis
mystical body spiritual and everlasting things, that is to say, the pure
and heavenly doctrine of Christis gospel, and the graces conferred in his
sacraments, and further to do and execute such other things apperteynynge
unto their office, as were before rehearsed. And therefore this said power and
administration is called in some places of scripture, Domum et gratia, a gift
and a grace, and in some places it is called, Claues sieve potestas clauium, yt
is to say the keys or the power of the keys. Whereby is sygnified a certain
limited office, restrained unto thexecution of a special fu^ction or
ministration, Romans i. i. Ti. iiii. Ephe. iiii
according to the saying of saint Paul in the first chapter of his epistle
to the Romans, and in the fourth chapyter of his first epistle unto Timothe,
and also in the fourth chapter of his epistle unto the Ephesians, where he
writes in this sentence. When Christ ascended in to heaven, he subdued and
vanquisshed very captivity her self, and led or made her thrall and
captive, and distributed and gave diverse heavenly gifts and graces unto men
here in earth. And among all he made some apostels, some priests, some
evangelists, some pastors and doctors, to the intent they should execute the
work and office of their administration, to the instauration, instruction, and
edifieng of the members of Christis misticalle body. And that they should also
not cease from the execution of their said office, until all the said
members were not only reduced and brought unto the unity of the faith, and
the knowledge of the son of god: but also that they were come unto a perfect
state and full age therein. That is to say, until they were so establyshed and
confirmed in the same, that they could no more afterward be wauerynge therein,
and be led or carried like children into any contrary doctrine or opinion by the
craft and subtyle persuasion of the false pastors and teachers, which go
about by craft to bring them into erronius opinions: but that they should
constantely follow the true doctrine of Christis gospel, growing and
encreasyng continually by charity unto a perfect membre of that body, whereof
Christ is the very heed. In whom if the hole body, that is to say, if every
part and membre be grown and come unto his perfect estate, (not al in like,
but every one according to the gift and quality, which is deputed unto it)
and so be compacted, united, and corporated together in the said body: no
doubt, but that the hole body, and every part thereof, shall thereby be made
the more perfect, and the more strong, by reasone of that natural love and
charity, which one membre so united in the body, has unto the other.

By these words it appears evidently, not only that saint Paul accounted and
nombred this said power and office of the pastors and doctors among the
propre and special gifts of the holy gooste: but also it appears, that the
same was a limited power and office ordained specially and only for the causes
and purposes before rehearsed.

Item that this power, office, and administration is necessary to be preserved
here in earth for three special and principal causes. First for that it is
the commandment of god it should so be, as it appears in sondrye places of
scripture. Second, for that god has instituted and ordained none other
ordinary mean or instrument, whereby he woll make us partakers of the
reconciliation, which is by Christ, and confer and give the graces of his
holy spirit unto us, and make us the right enheritours of everlasting life,
there to reign with him for ever in glory: but only his word and
sacraments. And therefore thoffyce, and power to minister the said word and
sacraments, may in no wise be suffered to peryshe, or to be abolysshed.
according to the saying of saint Paul, Romans x.
How can men invoke and call upon the name of him, in whom they believe not?
And how can men believe in him, of whom they never herd tell? And how should
men here tell of god, oneles there be some men to show and preach unto them
of him? And how shall men dare take upon them to preach and show of god,
oneles they be first sent with auctorytie and commyssion from god so to do?
And therefore it is said by the prophet Esai, Esa. lii. Naum. i.
Blessed be the feet of those preachers, which being auctorysed and sent by
god, do preche and show unto us the peace and benefytes, which we receive by
Christ.

Thirdely because the said power and office or function has annexed unto it,
assured promyses of excellent and inestymable things. For thereby is conferred
and given the holy ghost, with all his graces, And finally our justification
and everlasting life: Romans i.
according to the saying of saint Paul where he says, I am not asshamed of
the rowme and office, which I have given unto me by Christ, to preach his
gospel. For it is the power of god, that is to say, the elect organe or
instrumente ordained by god, and endued with such virtue and efficacy: that
it is able to give and mynyster effectually everlasting life unto all those,
that woll believe and obey the same.

Item that this office, this power, and auctorite, was committed and given by
Christ and his apostelles, unto certain persons only, that is to say, unto
priests or bishops, whom they did elect, call, and admytte thereunto, by
their prayer, and imposition of their hands.

Second we think it conuenyent, that all bishops and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
the sacrament of orders, may worthyly be called a sacrament, because it is a
holy rite or ceremonye instituted by Christ and his apostelles in the new
testament, and does consyste of two parts, like as the other sacraments of
the church do, that is to say, of a spiritual and an invisible grace, and
also of an outward and a visible sign. The invisible gift or grace conferred
in this sacrament, is nothing else, but the power, the office, and the
auctorytie before mencyoned. The visible and outward sign is the prayer and
imposition of the bysshoppes hands upon the person, which receives the said
gift or grace. And to the intent the church of Christ should never be
destituted of such mynisters, as should have and execute the said power of
the keys: it was also ordained and commanded by the apostels, that the same
sacrament should be applied and administered by the bishop from time to
time, unto such other persons as had the qualities necessaryly required there
unto. which said qualities the apostels did also very diligently descriue, as
it appears euidentlye in the.iii. i. Tim. iii Titum. i.
chapter of the first epistle of saynct Paul to Tymothe, and the first
chapter of his epistle unto Titus. And surely this is the hole virtue and
efficacy, and the cause also of the institution of this sacrament, as it is
founded in the new testament. For all be it the holy fathers of the church,
which succeeded the apstoles (minding to beautyfie and ornate the Church of
Christ with all those things, which were commendable in the temple of the
Jews) did deuyse, not only certain other ceremonies than be before rehearsed,
as tonsures, rasures, unctions, and such other obseruances, to be used in the
ministration of the said sacrament: but did also institute certain inferior
orders or degrees, as ianitours, lectours, exorcistes, accolites, and
subdeacons, and deputed to every one of those certain offices to execute in
the church (wherein they followed undoubtedly the example and rytes used in the
old testamente) yet the truth is, that in the new testamente there is no
mention made of any degrees or distinctions in ordres, but only of deacons or
ministers, and of priests or bishops. Nor there is any word spoken of any
other ceremony used in the conferring of this sacrament: but only of prayer
and the imposition of the bishops hands.

Thyrdely forasmoche as it is an old heresy of the Donatistes, condemned in
generalle counceylles, to think that the word of god and his sacraments
should lose and be of none efficacy, strength, or virtue, when they be
ministered by men of yuell, viciouse, and fylthy living: we think it
convenient, that all bishops and preachers, shall instruct and teach the
people, committed unto their spyrytuall charge, that according to the saying
of sayncte Gregory Nazianzene, Like as there is no dyfference between the
self same image or figure of any thing enprynted with a sygnette of gold,
and with a sygnette made of iron or wodde, or any other vyler matter: even so
the word and sacraments of god, mynystred by any evil and noughtie man, be
of the same self vigor, strength, and efficacy, as when they be minystred by
a man of excellent virtue and goodness. The cause and reason whereof is, for
that the priests and bysshoppes, all though in the execution of their office
and ministration they do use and exercise the power and auctorytie of god
committed unto them, and do supplye and represente his towme and place: yet
they be not the pryncipall, nor the sufficient or efficient causers or gyuers
of grace, or of any other spyrytuall gift, which proceeds, and is given of
god by his word and his sacraments. but god is the only princypall,
sufficient, and perfyte cause of all the efficacy of his word and
sacraments and by his only power, grace, and benefyte, it is, that we receive
the holy ghost and his gracis by thoffyce and ministration of the said
priests or bysshoppes. And the said priests or bysshoppes be but only as
his instruments or officers, to execute and minister with their hands and
tongues, the outewarde and corporal things, whereby god works and gives
grace according to his pacte and covenant, made with, and unto his espouse
the church. And this to be true Chrysostom affirms, Chrisosto Ho. lxxxv
super Ioa^.
in his.85. homely upon saint John^, where he says in this manner. what speak
I of priests? I say that neither angel nor arcangel can of his own power give
us any of those things, which be given unto us from god, but it is the
father, the son, and the holy gooste, which is the effectual cause of all
those things, The priest does only put to his hand and his tongue. And in
this point sayncte Ambrose also agrees with the said opinion of Chrysostom.
For in his book De dignitate sacerdotali, he says these words: The priest
lays his hands upon us, but it is god that gives the grace. The priest
lays upon us his besechynge hand: but god blessethe us with his mighty
hand. The bishop consecrateth an another bishop: but it is god that gives
the dygnitie. wherefore we must always think, and believe that the virtue and
efficacy of the word of god and his sacraments, consyste and depend in and
upon the commandment, ordinance, power, and authority of god only. And
that neither the merytes and worthynes of the ministers, (be they never of
such excellency) do give them their authority, strength, or efficacy:
neither yet the malice or corrupt living of them (be it never so yuell, onles
they be open blasphemors of the gospel, as the jews and the Turks be) can
frustrate or take away from the said word or sacraments their said power,
authority, Chrisosto Ho. lxxxv super Ioa^.
strength, or virtue. For as Chrysostom says in the said homely, If god made
not only an ass to speak, but also gave his benediction and blessing upon the
jews by Balaam that false and wicked prophet, and so wrought these spiritual
graces by such unclean and impure instruments, and that for the love only,
which he had unto the Jews, which never the less were great offenders
against god: no doubt but that god woll much rather send down unto us his
faithful people, the graces of his holy spirit, and wol work all other
things necessary for us by our priests and bishops, although they be never
so evil of their living.

Fourthely for asmoche as after the mind of certain doctors of the church
this hoole power and authority, belonging unto priests and bysshoppes, is
divided in two parts, whereof the one is called Potestas ordinis, and the other
is called, Potestas iurisdictionis. and for asmoche also as good consent and
agreement has always ben in the church, concerning the said first part,
and contrary, much controversy for this other part of jurisdiction: we
think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and
teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that the jurisdiction
committed unto priests and bysshoppes by thauctorite of gods law,
consists in three special points.

The first is to rebuke and reprehende sin, and to excommunicate the
manifest and obstinate sinners, that is to say, to separate, exclude, and
repelle from the communion and perception of the sacraments, and to reiecte
and cast out of the congregation and company of Christis people such persons,
as have manifestly committed mortal sin, and do obstinately persevere in the
same, and to absoyle and receive them again, when so ever they shall return
unto the church by condign penance. And forasmoche as such persons as do
committee manifest and open sin, do thereby offend not only god but also some
other of the multitude and congregation, which they be of: although the said
persons so offendynge publicly, do not obstinatly persevere in their sin so
committed, yet the priests and bishops, by thauctorite of their said
Jurisdiction, may in some cases, upon consyderation of the crime, and
quality of the person so offendynge, susspende and inhibite them for a time
from the receyuynge of the sacraments, to the intent the same may be, not
only a medicine to the offenders them selfs: but also an example and
satisfaction unto those persons, which were before with their said manifest
sins offended.

And in this part also two things be to be noted. The first is that all
punysshemente, which priests or bysshoppes may by thauctoritie of the
gospel inflicte or put to any person, is by word only, and not by any
violence or constraynte corporal. The second is, that all though priestis
and bysshoppes have the power and jurisdiction to excommunicate, as is
aforesaid: yet they be not bound so precisely by any commandment of god,
but that they ought and may attempre, moderate, or forbear the execution of
their said jurisdiction in that part at all times, when so ever they shall
perceive and think, that by doing the contrary they should not cure or help
thoffenders, or else give such occasion of further trouble and unquietness in
the church, that the peace and tranquillity thereof might thereby be impeched,
troubled, or otherwise interrupted, or broken.

The second point, wherein consysteth the iurysdyction, committed unto priests
and bysshoppes by thauctoritie of goddis law, is to approve and admytte such
persons, as (being nominated, elected, and presented unto them to exercise
thoffyce and rome of preaching the gospel, and of minystrynge the
sacraments, and to have the cure or iurysdiction over these certain people
within this parisshe, or within this diocese) shall be thought unto them mete
and worthy to exercise the same: and to reiecte and repelle from the said
rowme such as they shall judge to be unmeet therefore. And in this part we
must know and understand, that the said presentation and nomination is of
man's ordinance, and apperteyneth unto the founders and patrones, or other
persons, according to the laws and ordynaunces of men provided for the same.
As for an example, within this realm the presentation and nomination of the
bysshopryques appertains unto the kings of this realm, and of other lesser
cures and personages sum unto the kings hyghnes, some unto other noble men,
some unto bysshoppes, and some unto other persons, whom we call the patrones
of the benefyces, according as it is provided by the order of the laws and
ordynaunces of this realm. And unto the priests or bysshoppes belongs by
the authority of the gospel, to approve and confirm the person, which shall
be by the kings highness, or the other patrons so nominated, elected, and
presented unto them to have the cure of these certain people, within this
certain paryshe or diocese, or else to reject him, as was said before, from
the same, for his demerites or unworthiness. For surely the office of preaching
is the chief and most principal office, whereunto priests or bysshoppes be
called by thauctoritie of the gospel. and they be also called bysshoppes or
archebyshops, that is to say, superattendantes or overseers specially to
sygnifie, that it is their office to ouerse, to watch, and to look diligently
upon their flock. and to cause that Christis doctrine and his religion may be
truly and sincerely conserved, taught, and set forth among christen people,
according to the mere and pure truth of scripture. and that all erroniouse
and corrupt doctrine, and the teachers thereof may be rejected and corrected
accordyngely.

The third point wherein consistethe the jurisdiction committed unto priests
and bishops by the authority of goddis law, is to make and ordeyne certain
rules or canons, concerning holydays, fasting days, the manner and ceremonies
to be used in the ministration of the sacramentis, the manner of singing the
Psalms and spiritualle hymns, Ephe. v. Coll. iii.
(as fayncte Paul calls them) the diversity of degrees among the
ministers, and the form and manner of their ornaments, and finally concerning
such other rites ceremonies and obseruaunces, as do tend and conduce to the
preservation of quietness and decent order to be had, and used among the
people, when they shall be assembled together in the temple. For sith that
scripture commands, that all christen people, should at certain times
assemble them self, and conuene together in some public or open place, there
to invoke, and call upon the name of god, there to here his will and his
word by our preachers, thereto receive the Sacraments, there to give laud
and praise to god in psalmodie, in prayers, in medytations, and in redynge. and
finally with all humility and reverent order, to magnify, extol, and set
forth the honor of god with all our possible power. And for asmoche also as
great trouble, unquietness, and tumulte might arise among the multitude so
assembled, in case there were no certain rules, ordynaunces, and ceremonies
prescribed unto them, whereby they should be contained in quietness, and not
suffered to do every man after his own fashion or appetite: it belongs unto
the jurisdiction of priests or bysshoppes, to make certain rules or canons,
concerning all these things, and for the causes aforesaid. For like as in the
governance of a private family, or in the governance of a schole, it belongs
unto the good man, or ruler of that house, or the schole master to prescribe
the times, when his chylderne and servants shall work, when they shall rest,
when they shall learn, when they shall pray, and such other things: So in
the public and open temple or church, it apperteyneth also unto them, that
have the governance of the church, in those points to devise and prescribe
such necessary and convenient ceremonies and ordenaunces unto the people, for
the causes above rehearsed, as shall tend to their profit and increase in
Christis religion, and shall also tend to the honor of god, and good
tranquillity of the said people. For surely saynct Paul him self did
prescribe, i. Cor. xi.
and make such rules unto the Corinthians, and commanded also other bishops
to do the semblable. And the holy fathers of the church at the beginning,
before there were any christen princis, upon great and urgent considerations,
did ordeyne the celebratynge of the sunday, of Easter day, and certain other
feasts, and the fasting of lent, and also diverse other such ceremonies in
the church, whereof a great part is observed through all Christendom unto
this day. The contynualle observation whereof was always thought unto the holy
fathers very necessary: for asmoche as such traditions, and ceremonies be as
a certain necessary introduction, or learning expedient to induce and teach
the people reuerentely to use them self in their outward worshyppynge of god,
and be also (as you would say) certain peynted hystories, the often sight and
contemplation whereof, causes the people the better to remember the things
sygnified, and represented in the same.

For the better declaration of which three points, two things be to be noted,
First that although the hole Jurisdiction apperteynynge (as is before said)
unto priests and bishops, be committed unto them in general words (as it
appears by diverse places of scripture, and specially in the.xx. chapter of
thactes, where thapostle says: Act. xx.
Take dylygent head to your selfs, and to al your hole flock, among whom
the holy ghost has set, ordained, and made you bysshoppes, to rule, and
govern the church of god) Yet there is also a particular order, form, and
manner requisite to the due execution of the same according to the saying of
sayncte Paul, i. Co. xiiii
Look that all things be done in the church semely and in a decent order.
Now this particular manner and form is not expressly declared, determined,
or prescribed in scripture: but was, and is left to be declared from time to
time, and from age to age by certain positive rules and ordynaunces, to be
made by the ministers of the church, with the consent of the people, before
such time as princes were chrystened. and after they were christened, with
thauctoritie and consent of the said princis and their people. For like as
thauctoritie to preach and teach, and to adminyster the sacraments,
although it be committed unto priestis and bishops by express words of
scripture, yet there is no express mention concerning the particular
circumstances, convenient to be used in the execution of the same: Even so in
the power of jurisdiction, although the same be by general words in scripture
committed unto priests and bysshoppes, yet there is no particular mention,
what form, order, or process should be used in thexecution of any part
thereof. As for an example concerning the sentence of excommunication, although
the cognicion of crimes, for the which the said sentence is to be given, and
thexamination of the wytnes also necessary for the trial of the crimes, and
for the instruction of him, that shall give the said sentence, be committed by
general words of scripture unto priests and bysshoppes: yet there is no
mention made in scripture, how the parties offendyng, or the witness shall be
cited and called to appear before the priests or bysshoppes. nor there is no
mention made, what process or pain shall be used against them, in case any
of them shall disobeye the calling or sentence of the priest, or bishop.
nor finally there is any mention made of any other circumstaunce of time,
place, or person necessary to be used in the due execution of the said
sentence of excommunication. But all these things were afterward devised and
ordained by the church, and the mynysters of the same, and by the consent of
those people, which professed the name of Christ. And that this is of troth,
it appears by such ordinances, as sayncte Paul him self, and other
thapostles devised, and prescrybed to be observed in certain churches, as well
concerning the excommunicatynge of the Corinthian, 1 Cor. v. 1. Tim. i, 1.
Cor. xii. 1 Co. xiiii. 1 Co. xvi.
and diverse others, as also concerning, that men should pray bare heeded, that
women should keep silence, and not take upon them to teach in the church,
that two prophets or preachers should not speak at one time in the church,
but that one should give place to the other, that the alms of poor men should
be gathered, and how and by whom, after it was gathered, it should be
dystributed, with such other like things. And this thing also appears to be
true, by the canons and rules, devised and made by the bysshoppes and
councelles, concerning the premysses, during the time that the church was
subject to infidel pryncis, and before any pryncis were christened. During
all (...) and consecrate other bishops, the said fathers restrained the said
power, and reserved the same in such wise, that without the consent and
authority of the Metropolitan or archbysshop, no bishop should be consecrated
within any province. and likewise in other cases their powers were also
restrained for such causes, as were than thought unto them convenient. which
differences the said holy fathers thought necessary to enacte, and establishe
by their decrees and constitutions, not for that any such dyfferences were
prescribed or establyshed in the gospel, or mentioned in any canonical
writings of thapostels, or testified by any ecclesiastical writer within
thapostels time: but to thentent that thereby contention, strife, variance, and
scismes or division, should be avoided, and the church should be preserved in
good order, and concord.

And for the better confirmacion of this part, we think it also convenient,
that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall instruct and teach the people,
committed unto their spiritual charge, that Christ did by express words
prohybite, that none of his apostels, or any of their successors, should under
the pretense of the authority given unto them by Christ, take upon them
thauctoritie of the sword, that is to say, the authority of kings, or of any
ciuyle power in this world. yea or any authority to make laws or ordynances,
in causes appertayninge unto civil powers. Truth it is, that priests and
bishops may execute all such temporal power and jurisdiction, as is committed
unto them, by the ordinance and authority of kings or other civil powers,
and by the consent of the people (as officers and minysters under the said
kings and powers) so long as it shall please the said kings and people to
permit and suffer them so to use and execute the same. Not withstanding, if
any bishop, of what estate or dignity so ever he be, be he bishop of Rome,
or of any other city, province, or diocese, do presume, or take upon him
authority or jurisdiction, in causes or matters, which apperteigne unto
kings and the cyuyle powers, and their courts, and will maynteyne or think,
that he may so do by thauctoritie of Christ and his gospel, although the
kings and pryncis would not permytte and suffer him so to do: No doubt that
bishop is not worthy to be called a bishop, but rather a tyranne, and an
usurper of other men's rightes, contrary to the laws of god, and is worthy to
be reputed none otherwise, than he that gothe about to subuerte the kyngedome
of Christ. For the kyngedome of Christ in his church is a spiritual and not
a carnal kingdom of the world, that is to say, the very kyngedome, that
Christ by him self, or by his apostels and disciples sought here in this
world, was to bring all nations from the carnalle kyngedome of the prince of
darkness, unto the light of his spiritual kyngedome: and so to reign him
self in the hearts of people by grace, faith, hope, and charity. And
therefore, sith Christ did never seek nor exercise any worldly kyngedome or
domynion in this world, but rather refusing and fleing from the same, did
leave the said worldly governance of kingdoms, realms, and nations to be
governed by pryncis and potentatis (in like manner as he did find them) and
commanded also his apostels and disciples to do the semblable, as it was said
before: what so ever priest or bishop will arrogate or presume upon him any
such authority, and woll pretend the authority of the gospel for his
defense therein, he does nothing else, but in manner (as you would say) crowns
Christ again with a crown of thorn, and traduceth and brings him forth
again with his mantell of purpure upon his back, to be mocked and scorned of
the world, as the Jews did, to their own damnation.

More over, the truth is, that God constituted, and ordained thauctoritie of
christen kings and pryncis, to be the most high and supreme above all other
powers and offices in the regiment and governance of his people: And committed
unto them, as unto the chief heads of their common welthes, the cure and
ouersyght of all the people, which be within their realms and dominions,
without any exception. And unto them of right, and by gods commandment
belongs, not only to prohybite unlawful violence, to correct offenders by
corporal death, or other punishment, to conserve moral honesty among their
subjects, according to the laws of their realms, to defend Justice, and to
procure the public weal, and the commen peace and tranquillity in outward
and erthly things: but specially and princypally to defend the faith of
Christ and his relygion, to conserve and mainteyne the true doctrine of
Christ, and all such as be true preachers and fetters forth thereof, and to
abolyshe all abuses, heresies, and idolatries, which be brought in, by
heretics and yuell preachers, and to punyshe with corporal pains such as
of malice be occasioners of the same, and finally to over se, and cause that
the said priests and bishops do execute their said power, office, and
iurisdyction truly, faythefully, and according in all points as it was given
and committed unto them by Christ and his apostles. Which not withstanding we
may not think, that it does apperteyne unto thoffyce of kings and princes,
to preach and teach, to admynistre the sacraments, to absoyle, to
excommunicate, and such other things, belonging to thoffyce and
admynistration of bishops and prestes: but we must think and believe, that god
has constituted and made christen kings and princis, to be as the chief
heedes and ouerlokers over the said priests and bishops, to cause them to
administer their office and power committed unto them, purely, and syncerely
and in case they shall be neglygent in any part thereof, to cause them to
supplye and repair the same again. And god has also commanded the said
priests and bisshoppes, to obey with all humblenes and reverence, all the
laws made by the said princis, being not contrary to the laws of god, what
so ever they be: To. xiii.
and that not only propter iram, but also propter conscientiam. whereby it
appears well, that this pretended monarchy of the bishop of Rome is not
founded upon the gospel, but it is repugnant thereunto. And therefore it
apperteyneth unto Christen kings and princes, for the dyscharge of their
office and duty toward god, to endeavor them self, to refourme and reduce
the same again unto the old lymyttes and pristine state of that power and
jurisdiction, which was given unto them by Christ, and used in the primitive
church. For it is out of all doubt, that Christis faith was than most firm
and pure, and the scriptures of god were than best understood, and virtue did
than most habounde and excel. And therefore it must needs follow, that the
customs and ordynaunces than used and made, must needs be more conform and
agreeable unto the true doctrine of Christ, and more conducyng to the edifieng
and benefyte of the church of Christ, than any customs or laws used or made
sith that time. And therefore where as the kings most royal majesty,
considering of his most excellent wisdom, not only the notable decay of
Christis true and perfytte religion among us, but also the intolerable
thraldom, captivity, and bondage, with the infinite damages and preiudices,
which we and other his subjects continually sustained, by reason of that
long usurped and abused power, which the bishops of Rome were wont to
exercise here in this realm, has now of his most godly dysposition, and by
the consent of his nobles spiritual and temporal, and by thauctoritie of the
hole parlyament, determined, no longer to suffer the bishop of Rome to execute
any part of his jurisdiction here within this realm, but clearly to deliver
us from the same, and restore us again to our old liberty. Surely we have
great cause most joyfully and thankefully to embrace and accept the same,
considering that thereby no prejudice is done to goddis word or his
ordyaunces. For as we have showed and declared before, it was by princis and
men's ordynance and sufferances only, that the bishop of Rome exercysed any
such jurisdiction within this realm, and not by any authority given unto him
by Christ. And as for the bishop of Rome he can not pretend him self no
more to be grieved or iniuried therewith, than the kings Chancellor, or any
other his officers might worthily think, that the kings highness should do him
wrong, in case he should upon good causes remove him from his said rome and
office, and commytte it unto another. And as for us and other the kings
faithful subjects, we shall undoubtedly receive and have thereby synguler
welthe and commodity, as well spiritually to the edifienge of our souls, as
corporally, to thencreace of our substance and riches. The which, how much
was enpayred and decayed contynually from time to time, by the great exactions
of the bishops of Rome, and such treasure as went yearly out of this realm
to his cofers, for annates and exemptions, dyspensations, pardones, and such
other unprofitable things, or rather very trifles: we doubt not, but all men
endued with any wit and zeal to the welthe of this our country, do right
well perceive and understand.

The Sacrament of extreme unction.
AS touching the sacrament of extreme unction, we think it convenient, that
all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed
unto their spyrituall charge, First how that the.xii. Apostles being sent
out by Christ, and commanded to go two and two into the world to preach
his word, among other miracles, Mar. vi.
which they worughte by the power of god, they cured also, and restored many
sick men unto health, anoyntynge them with oil.

Second, that although it be not expressed in scripture, that the said
apostles had than any new commandment of Christ to annoynte such as they
healed with oil: yet for asmoche as the holy Apostle saint James, endued with
the holy spirit of Christ, prescrybed a certain rule or doctrine, and gave
in manner a commandment, that when so ever any person should fortune to fall
sick, he should call or send for the priests or auncientes of the church,
and cause them to pray over him, annoyntynge him with oil in the name of our
lord, and further added hereunto, as an assured promise, that by the said
prayer of the priests, and the sick person, made in right faith and
confydence in god, the sick man should be restored unto his health, and god
should set him on foot again, and if he were in sin, his sins should be
forgyuen him: it shall therefore be very necessary and expedient, that all
true christen people do use and observe this manner of annoylynge of sick
persons, with due reverence and honor, as it is prescribed by the holy
apostell saint James. Iaco. v.
That is to say, when so ever any person among us shall fall into any
dangerous syckenes, let him call the priests of the church, with other good
and auncyente christen people, and let them go unto the sick person, and
there, not only comfort him corporally, but also give him goostly
instructions, and exortations to lament and be sorry for his sins, to persevere
in the right faith of Christ and charity toward his neighbor, to bear
and sustain patiently the grefes and peynes of his malady for goddis sake,
reputing the same as the manifest token of the love and favor of god toward
him, to contemn the world, and to desire to reygne with Christ in heaven, and
such other things. which done, then let the priestis and the company there
assembled, and the sick man him self also (as his sickness will suffer him)
pray unto god with full hope and confidence, as well for the remyssion of his
sins, as for the recovery of his health, (if it shall so stand with goddis
pleasure) let the priests anoint the sick man, according to the teachinge of
saint James. and no doubt the fervent and faithful prayer of the priests,
and other persons before said, Iaco. v.
joined with the due contrition and faith of the sick person, shall obtain of
almighty god all things, which shall seem unto god necessary for the health
and comfort as well of the soul as of the bodily sickness of the said person.

Thyrdly, how that the holy fathers of the church, considering this place of
saint James, and the manner also of anoyntynge of sick men, used by the
apostels (as was aforesaid) thought it convenient to institute and ordeyn, that
this manner of anoyling of sick men, prescrybed by saint James, should be
observed contynually in the church of Christ, as a very godly and wholesome
medicine, or remedy to alleuiate and mitigate the diseases and maladies, as
well of the soul as of the body of christen men. And to the intent the same
should be had in more honor and veneration, the said holy fathers willed and
taught, that all christen men should repute and account the said manner of
anoylinge among the other sacraments of the church, for asmoche as it is a
visible sign of an invisible grace. Whereof the visible sign is the anoylynge
with oil in the name of god: which oil (for the natural propreties
belonginge unto the same) is a very convenient thing to signify and figure the
great mercy and grace of god, and the spiritual light, joy, comfort, and
gladness, which god powers out upon all faithful people, calling upon him,
by the inward unction of the holy ghost. And the grace conferred in this
sacrament, is the relief, and recovery of the disease and sickness, wherewith
the sick person is then diseased and troubled, and also the remission of his
sins, if he be then in sin. This grace we be assured to opteyne by the
virtue and efficacy of the faithful and fervent prayer, used in the
ministration of this sacrament of anoylynge, according to the saying of
saynct James before rehearsed, and also according to the sundry promises, made
by Christ unto the faithful prayer of his church, as when Christ says,
what soever ye shall ask and pray my father to give unto you in my name,
Matt. vii Ma. xi.
it shall be granted unto you. For the better understanding whereof, two
things be here specially to be noted: The first is that saint James calls
here the prayer to be used in the time of this inunction, the prayer of faith.
whereby he means, that this prayer ought to be made in that right faith,
trust, and confidence: which we ought to have in god to obtain the effect of
our petitions made in the ministration of this sacrament. and that it ought to
conteyne nothing, but that shall stand with the pleasure, the honor, and
glory of god. and that when we direct our prayers unto god for any bodili
health or relief, or for any other temporal commodity: we ought always to
tempre our said prayer with this condition, that is to say, if it shall so
stand with goddis will and his pleasure. And that we ought to say, as Christ
said in his prayer unto his father. Father if it shall plese the: I am content
to die and suffer this shameful and cruel death of the cross. Thy will be
fulfilled herein, Mat. xxv
let not my will and desire be followed, but let thy will and disposition be
fulfilled, whereunto I holly commyt myself.

The second thing to be noted is, that to the attainynge of the said grace,
conferred in this sacrament of extreme unction, it is expedient also, that the
sick person him self shall knowledge his offenses toward god and his
neighbor, and ask forgyuenes of them for the same. and likewise forgive all
them that have offended him in word or deed. and so being in parfyte love
and charity, to pray him self (as he may) with faithful heart and full hope
and confydence in god for the remyssyon of his sins, and restorynge unto his
bodyly health, if it shall so stand with gods pleasure. And therefore the
said apostle adds immediatlye unto this place these words following,
Confess your faltes and offenses, Iaco. v.
which ye have trespased one to an other, and be you ready and glad to
forgive the same for goddis sake, and to ask forgyuenes the one of the other,
and so being reconciled, pray each for other: and than you shall atteyne
perfyt health of all your infirmities, as well spiritual as corporal. For if you
be so affected in heart, and united and knitte the one to the other in perfect
charity: no doubt ye be justified, in the sight of god, and without doubt
your prayer shall be herd and accepted of god. For surely the prayer of the man
justified is of marvelous virtue and efficacy in the acceptance of god, as it
appears by the exaumple of Elias the prophet. who although he were but a
man, and subject to affections as other men be: iii. Re. xvii. Luce. iiii.
yet because he was a just man, when he prayed to god, that neither rain
nor dew should descend upon the land of Israel from heaven by the space of
three years and six months, god granted his prayer, and would not suffer that
any rain or dew should fall upon the said land by the said space. whereby
arose an extreme derthe and famyne among them of that country. And
afterward when the said Elias prayed again to god to send rain and moisture
upon the said sand: God likewise herd his prayer, and sent down rain
plentyfully upon the earth, and so the earth brought forth all kinds of
fruit again, in like manner as it was wont to do before, to the great
comfort of the peole.

Finally, we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed to their spiritual charge, First,
that no man ought to think, that by the receyuinge of this sacrament of
anoyling, the sick man's life shall be made shorter: but rather that the same
shall be prolonged thereby considering the same is instituted for recovery of
health both of the soul and body.

Second that it is an evil custom to dyfferre the adminystration of this
sacrament, unto such time, as the sick persons be brought by sickness unto
extreme peril and ieoperdie of life, and be in manner in despair to live any
longer.

Thirdely that it is laufull and expedient to admynister this said sacrament
unto every good christen man, in the manner and form before rehearsed: so often
and when so ever any great and perilous sickness, and malady shall fortune
unto them. For the troth is, that the holy fathers of the church did neither
call this sacrament, the extreme unction (that is to say, the last unction)
because it should be minystred last and after al other sacraments. neither
yet they did ordeine, that the same should be ministered only, when sick men
should be brought unto the extreme panges of death: but they did call it by the
said name of Extreme unction, because it is the last in respect of the other
inunctions, which be ministered before in the other sacraments of baptism and
confyrmation (In both which sacraments, christen men be also annoyled and
anointed.) And the truth is also, that the sacrament of the Altar, being
duly received, is the very spiritual food, and the very necessary
sustentation, comfort, and preservation of all christen men in all dangerous
passages and adventures. And therefore it is expedient, that the said sacrament
of the altar should be received after this annoylynge, done in the time of
sickness. For surely the receauinge of the body of our savior Jesus Christ,
is the very perfection, not only of this, but also of all the other
sacraments.

And, as unto the ordinance of the holy fathers, concerning the time, when this
sacrament of extreme unction should be ministered and received: it is out of all
doubt, that they wylled and ordained, that the same should be observed,
according to the institution of the apostle saint James. Which was, that it
should be ministered and received, so often and when so ever any man should
fortune to be sick of any dangerous syckenes. and also at such time as the
sick man him self were of perfyte remembrance, judgment, dyscrecion, and
knowledge, in such things as do apperteyne unto the profession and office of a
good christen man. For (as it was said before) saint James requires such
Judgment, such spiritual affections, and motions, and also such desire, and
devotion to be in the sick man: that he him self, in the time of his
anoyling, should not only heartily, faithfully, devoutly, and religiously praise
god, and thank god for his visitation, and punyshement: but also puttinge his
hole confidence and trust in god, and so committing him self holly into his
hands and mercy, should invoke and call upon him for the remission of his
sins, and recovery of his health, and finally should declare his charity,
in forgyuinge, and asking of forgyuenes for all offenses committed by him
against his neighbor, or by his neighbor against him.

Thus being declared the virtue and efficacy of all the seven sacraments, we
think it convenient, that al bishops and preachers shall instruct and teach
the people, committed to their spiritual charge, that although the
sacraments of Matrimonye, of Confirmation, of holy Orders, and of Extreme
vncton, have been of long time paste received, and approuid by the commune
consent of the catholic church, to have the name and dignity of
sacraments, as in deed they be well worthy to have (forasmoche as they be holy
and godly signs, whereby, and by the prayer of the minister, be not only
signyfied, and represented: but also given and conferred some certain and
specyal gifts of the holy ghost, necessary for christen men to have for one
godly purpose or other, like as it has been before declared) yet there is a
difference in dignity and necessity between them and the other three
sacraments, that is to say, the sacraments of Baptism, of Penance, and of
the Altar, and that for diverse causes. First because these the sacraments be
instituted of Christ to be as certain instruments or remedies necessary for
our salvation, and thatteynyng of everlasting life. Second, because they be
also commanded by Christ to be ministered and received in their outward
visible signs.

Thyrdly because they have annexed and co^ioyned unto their said visible
signs such spiritual graces, as whereby our sins be remytted and forgyuen:
and we be perfytely renewed, regenerated, purified, justified, and made the
very members of Christis mystical body, so often as we worthily, and duly
receive the same.

Here follows the third part of this treatise, containing the Exposition or
declaration of the ten Commandments.
The ten commandments.
1 THou shalt have none other goddis, but me. 2 Thou shalt not make to thy
self any graven thing, ne any similitude of any thing, that is in heaven
above, or in earth beneth, nor in the water under the earth, thou shalt not
bow down to them, ne worship them. 3 Thou shalt not take the name of thy
lord god in vain. 4 Remember that thou do sanctify, and keep holy thy
Sabbot day. 5 Honor thy father and mother. 6 Thou shalt not kylle. 7 Thou
shalt not commytte adultery. 8 Thou shalt not steal. 9 Thou shall not bear
false witness against thy neighbor. 01 Thou shalt not desire thy neighbors
house, his wife, his servant, his maid, his ox, his ass, ne any other
thing that is his.
The Exposition of the first commandment.
THe first commandment, like as it is first in order, so it is the most
chief, and princypall among all the other precepts. For in this first
commandment, god requires of us those things, in the which consysteth his
chief and principal worship and honor, that is to say, perfyte faith, sure
hope, and unfeigned love, and dread of god. And therefore as concerning this
commandment, we think it convenient, that all bishops and prechers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, First
that to have god, is not to have him, as we have other outewarde things, as
clothes upon our back, or treasure in our chestes, nor also to name him with
our mouth, or to worship him with knelynge, or such other gestures: But to
have him our god, is to conceive him in our hearts, to cleue fast and surely
unto him with heart and mind, to put all our trust and confidence in him,
to set all our thought and care upon him, and to hang holly of him, taking
him to be infinitely good and merciful unto us.

Second, that god commands us thus to do unto him only, and to no creature,
nor to no false and feigned god. For as a kind and loving man can not be
content, that his wife should take any other husband: so can not out most
kind, and most loving god, and creator be pleased, if we should forsake
him, and take any other feigned goddis. And surely he is more present with us,
and more ready to show us all kyndnes and goodness, than any creature is or can
be. And allredye of his gift we have all that we have, meat, drink, clothe,
reason, wit, understanding, dyscretion, and all good things, that we have,
perteynynge both to the soul and the body. And therefore he can not bear so
much ingratitude and unkindness at our hands, that we should forsake him, or
else fyxe our faith and trust in any other things besides him.

Thyrdely, that by this precepte god commands us, not only to trust thus
in him: but also to give him the hole love of our hearts above all worldly
things, yea and above our selfs. So that we may not love our selfs, nor any
other thing, but for him. according as Moses says in the book of
Deuteronomie, Thy lord god is one god, Deuteronomy. vi.
and thou shall love him with all thy heart, and with all thy life, and with all
thy mind, and with all thy strength and power. And this love must bring with
it a fear, that even for very pure love we ought to be much abashed, and
afraid, to break the least of his commandments: Like as the child the
more he loves his father, the more he is loathe and afraid to dysplease him in
any manner of case.

Fourthely, that all they offend against this commandment, which set
their hearts and minds upon any worldly thing above god. For what so ever we
love above god, so that we set our minds upon it, more than we do upon god, or
for it we woll offend god: truly that we make our god. For as sayncte Paul
says, Collo. iii. Philli. iii
The couetouse man makethe his goods, his god, and the gluttonous man makes
his belly his god. For the one sets his mind more upon his goods, the other
more upon his belly: than they do upon god, and for them they wolle not stycke
to offend god. and all these break this commaundemen.

Item that all they, which have more confidence in the creatures of god, than
in god: do also make the creatures of god, their god. And how grievously god
is offended therewith we find in the book of Paralipomenon, ii. Par. xvi.
where it is written, That when Aza king of Judah being sore constrained by
Baasa king of Israel, sent for help to Benadad king of Siria, and gave to
him great treasure, for to allure him to his aid: Our lord sent the prophet
Ananie to Aza the king of Judah, who said unto him in this manner, Because thou
have trusted in the king of Siria, and not in thy lord god: therefore those of
the king of Siria, are escaped from thy hands. were not they of Ethiopia and
Libia of far greater power, both in chariottes and horsemenne, and in nombre
or multitude, which was innumerable? And yet our lord, as long as thou
dyddest put thy trust in him: did yield them in to thy hands. The eyes of god
do behold all the world, and do give strength to them that trust in him
with all their heart. In which words it does appear, that it is laid to Aza
his chardge, that he did not believe in our lord, because he had more trust in
Benadad an hethen prince, than in our lord. It is noted also in the same
chapter, That where as Aza afterward had very great pain in his feet, he
sought not to our lord for remedy of his said disease: but trusted more in
the art and remedy of phisique. Whereby we may learn, that it is one great
part of parfyte belefe in our lord god, to put our trust and confidence most
pryncypally, and above al other, in him. Wherefore they that do otherwise,
transgress this commandment, and make to them other goddis.

Item that al they transgress this commandment, which either so much
presume upon the mercy of god, that they fear not his justice, and by reason
thereof do still continue in their sin: or else so much fear his justice,
that they have no trust in his mercy, and by reason thereof fall into
desperation. For both these ways they make him no god, taking from him
either justice or mercy, without which he can not be god. And so do they,
that by supersticion repute some days good, some dismale, or unfortunate: or
think it a thing unlucky to mete in a morning with certain kind of beastis,
or with men of certain professions. For such superstitious folk infame the
creatures of god.

Item that they be of the same sort, which by lottes, astrology, divination,
chatterynge of birds, phisiognomie, and lokynge of men's hands, or other
unlawful and supersticiouse crafts, take upon them certaynely to tell,
determyne, and judge before hand of men's acts and fortunes, which be to
come afterward. For what do they but make them selfs goddis in this behalf,
as the prophet Esaie says? Esaie, xli
Tell us before, what shall comme, and we shall say that you be goddis.

Item that all they, which by charms and wytchecraftes do use any prescribed
letters, signs, or charactes, words, blessings, rods, cristall stones,
sceptres, swords, measures, hanging of saint Iohn^s gospel, or any other
thing about their necks, or any other part of their bodies, or any other
such vain observation: trusting thereby to continue long life, to drive away
sycknes, or preserve them from sickness, fires, water, or any other peril,
other wise then phisique or surgerie does allow, do also offend against
this commandment.

But most grievously of all, and above all other they do offend against this
commandment, which profess Christ, and contrary to their profession, made
in their baptysme, do make secret pactes or couenantes with the dyuell, or do
use any manner coniuration, or raysyng up of dyuelles for treasure, or any other
thing hid or lost, or for any other manner of cause, what so ever it be. For
all such commytte so high offense and treason to god, that there can be no
greatter. For they yield the honor due unto god, to the dyuelle, goddis
ennemie. And not only all such as use charms, wytchecraftes, and
coniurations transgress this high and chief commandment: but also all
those, that seek and resort unto them for any council or remedy, according
to the saying of god when he said, Deutero. xviii.
Let no man ask council of them that use false diuinations, or such as take heed to dreams, or chatterynge of birds. Let there be no witch or enchaunter
among you, nor any that asks council of them, that have spiritis, nor of
southsayers, nor that seek the troth of them that be dead. for god abhors
all these things.

The exposition of the second commandment.
THe Second commandment Moses declarethe at good length in the book of
Deuteronomie, where, he speaks in this manner. In the day, when our lord
spoke to you in Oreb from the mids of the fire, Deuteronomy. iiii.
you herd the voice and the sound of his words, but you saw no form, or
similitude, least peradventure you should have been thereby deceived, and should
have made to your self an engraued similitude, or image of man or woman, or a
similitude of any manner beast upon earth, or of foul under heaven, or of any
beast that crepeth upon the earth, or of fysshes that tarry in the water under
the earth. and least peradventure, lyftynge up your eyes to heaven, and there
seeing the son, and the moon, and the sterres of heaven, you should by error
be deceived, and bow down to them, and worship them, which the lord has
created to serve all people under heaven.

By these words we be utterly forbidden to make or to have any symilitude or
image, to the intent to bow down to it, or to worship it. And therefore we
think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers, shall instruct and
teach the people, committed to their spiritual charge, First, that god in his
substance can not by any similitude or image be represented or expressed. For
no wit ne understanding can comprehend his substance. And that the
fathers of the church. considering the dulnes of man's wit, and partly
yeldynge to the custom of gentylitie (which before their coming unto the
faith of Christ had certain representations of their false goddis) suffered
the pycture or similitude of the father of heaven to be had and set up in
churches: not that he is any such thing, as we in that image do behold (for
he is no corporal ne bodyly substance) but only to put us in remembrance,
that there is a father in heaven, and that he is a distinct person from the
son, and the holy gooste. which thing never the les, if the common people
would dewely conceive of the heavenly father, without any bodyly representation:
it were more semely for christen people, to be without all such images of the
father, than to have any of them.

Second, that although all images, be they engraven, peynted, or wrought in
arrayse, or in any otherwise made, be so prohibited, that they may neither be
bowed down unto, ne worshipped (for asmoche as they be the works of man's
hand only (yet they be not so prohibited, but that they may be had and set
up in churches, so it be for none other purpose, but only to the intent, that
we) in beholdinge and lokyng upon them, as in certain books, and seeing
represented in them the manyfolde examples of virtues, which were in the
saynctes, represented by the said images) may the rather be provoked, kendled,
and styred, to yield thanks to our lord, and to praise him in his said
saynctes, and to remember and lamente our sins and offenses, and to pray god
that we may have grace to follow their goodness and holy living. As for an
example. The image of our saluyour, as an open book, hangs on the cross in
the rode, or is painted in clothes, walls, or wyndowes, to the intent that
beside thexamples of virtues, which we may learn at Christ: we may be also
many ways provoked to remember his peynefull and cruel passion, and also to
consydre our selfs, when we behold the said image, and to condemn and
abhor our sin, which was the cause of his so cruel death. and thereby to
profess, that we wol no more sin. And furthermore, consyderyng what high
charity was in him, that would dye for us his ennemies, and what great
dangiers we have escaped, and what high benefytes we receive by his redemption:
we may be provoked in all our dystresses and troubles, to run for comfort
unto him. All these lessons, with many mo, we may learn in this book of the
Roode, if we wol entierly and ernestly look upon it. And as the life of our
savior Christ is represented by this image: even so the lives of the holy
sanctes, which followed him, be represented unto us by their images. And
therefore the said images may well be set up in churches, to be as books for
unlearned people, to learn therein examples of humylytie, charity, patience,
temperance, contempt of the world, the flesh, and the devil, and to learn
example of all other virtues, and for the other causes above rehearsed. For
which causes only, images be to be set in the church, and not for any
honor to be done unto them. For although we use to sense the said images,
and to knele before them, and to offer unto them, and to kiss their feet, and
such other things: yet we must know and understand, that such things be
not, nor ought to be done to the images self, but only to god, and in his
honor, or in the honor of the holy saint or saints, which be represented
by the said images.

Thyrdely, we think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
against this commaundment did offend generally before the coming of Christ
all gentiles, and people that were not of the nation of Israel. For they
worshipped images and false goddis, sum one, sum another. Of the which
sort, there was a great nombre. For beside their common goddis, every
country, every city or town, every house and family had their propre
goddis. Whereof is much mencyon made in authors both christen and hethen. And
these gentyles though they had knowledge of a very god: yet as saint Paul
says, Roma. i.
they had idle and vayn fantasyes, which led them from the truth: and
where they counted them selfs wise, they were in deed very foles.

Item that against this co^mundement also offended the Jews many and sundry
times, and almooste continually. For not withstandyng that they professed the
knowledge and worshypping of the very true god, yet they fell to worshyppinge of
images, idols, and false goddis, as the holy scripture in many places makes
mention.

Finally we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
to set up images, as the hethen people and the Jews did, to bow to them,
and to worship them, is forbidden in this second commandment.

Item that all they do greatly err, which put difference between image and
image, trustyng more in one then in an other: as though one could help, or do
more than an other, when both do represent but one thing, and saving by way of
representation, neither of them is hable to work, or to do any thing. And
they also that be more redye with their substance to deck deed images
gorgiously and gloriously: than with the same to help poor christen people,
the quick and lively images of god. Which is the necessary work of
charity, commanded by god. And they also, that so dote in this behalf, that
they make vows, and go on pylgremages even to the images, and there do call
upon the same images for aid and help: fantasieng, that either the image wol
work, or else some other thing in the image, or god for the images sake. As
though god wrought by images carved, engraven, or peynted, brought ones into
churches, as he does work by other his creatures. In which things if any
person heretofore has, or yet does offend: all good and well learned men
have great cause to lament such error and rudenes, and to put their studies
and diligence for the reformation of the same.

The declaration of the third commandment.
AS touching the third commandment, we think it conueniente, yt all
bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spyritual charge, that in the said commandment god requires of us to
use his name with all honor and reverence.

Item that the right use of the name of god, and the outward honor of the
same, stands chiefly in these things following, that is to say, In the
constant confession of his name, in the right invocation of the same, in
gyuynge of due thanks unto god, as well in prosperytie as in adversity, and
in the preaching and teaching of his word. For Christ says, Mat. x.
He that openly confesses me before men: I shall confess him before my father
in heaven. and he that is a shamed of me, to confess my name before men: I woll
be ashamed of him before my father in heaven. In which words Christ techeth
us, not only to profess the name of god: but also boldly and constantly to
defend the same, and not to swarne from it, for any manner of persecution or
injury. We must also in all tribulation and necessity, and in all
temptations and assaults of the devil, invoke and call upon the name of
god. For god accompteth his name to be hallowed, magnified, and worshypped, when
we call upon him in our need. Call upon me (says he) in the time of trouble,
and I woll deliver the: and thou shall honor me. And again the wise man says,
Psalm. xlix Pro. xviii.
The name of god is the most strong tower, the rightuous man tu^neth to it, and
he shall be helped. Furthermore, we may not seek our own name, laud, and fame:
but utterly avoid and eschew the desire of all worldly honor, glory, and
praise, and must give all laud, praise, and thanks unto god for his
benefits. which be so many in nombre, and so great, that we ought never to
cesse from such lauds and thanks. Like as the prophet David admonysheth us
saying, Psalm. xlix i. Cor. x.
Offer unto god the sacrifice of laud and praise. And saint Paul commands
us, when so ever we eat, drink, or do any manner of business, to give honor,
praise, and thanks unto god. And we must also preach the word of god
truly, and purely, and set forth the name of god unto other, and reprove all
false and erroneous doctrine and heresies. For all though priests and bishops
only be specially called, and deputed as public mynisters of goddis word:
yet every christen man is bound particularly to teach his family, and such
as be under his governance within his house, when time and place requires.

Second, we think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
by this precepte we be commanded to use the name of god, unto all goodness and
troth: And contrarywyse we be forbid in the same, to use his name to any manner
of evil, as to lyenge, deceyuynge, or any untruth. And therefore against
this commandment they offend, that swear in vain. They swear in vain,
that swear without laufulle and just cause: for than they take the name of
god in vain, although the thing, which they swear, be true. And likewise
do all they, which for every light, and vain thing be ready to swear
unprovoked, or provoked of light cause. or that do glory in outtragiouse
oaths, or of custom do use to swear. or that do swear a falls oath, and be
forsworn wyttyngly. And such an oath is not only perjury, but also a kind
of blasphemy, and is high dishonor and injury to god: because that such
persons, as make such oothe do wyttyngely bring god for a false wytnes,
which is all truth, and hates all vntrewth. For if he could be false, he
were not god. And so such perjured men, asmoche as is in them, make god no
god. And if they believe, that he woll or can bear false wytnes, than above and
besides blasphemy, they run into heresy.

Item that they also do swear in vain, which swear any thing that is true,
or false, they being in doubt, whyther it be true or false: and do not before
well examyne and discuss, whither it be true or false. or that swear that
thing to be falls, which though in deed it be false, yet they think it to be
true. or that swear that thing to be true, which though in deed it be
true, yet they think it to be befalse.

Item that they also do take the name of god in vain, which swear to do that
thing, which they intended not to do or swear to forbear that, which they
intended not to forbear. or swear to do any thing, which to do is unlawful.
or swear to leave undone any thing, which to omit, or leave undone, is
unlawful. And such as so swear, to do things unlawful, not only offend
in such swearynge: but also they much more offend, if they perform the
thing that they do swear.

Item that they also break this commandment, which swear to do, or to
observe any thing, which to do and observe they know not, whether it be
laufull or unlawful. or that make any oath contrary to their laufull oothe or
promise made before: so long as their former oothe or promise stands in
strength.

Item that they also do take the name of god in vain, which by rewards, or
fair promyses: or by power, or fere, do enduce, or constrayne any man to be
perjured.

Item that they also take the name of god in vain, which abuse the holy name
of god to unlawful practyses, as to charms, enchauntementes, diuinations,
coniurations, or such like. And that priests and ministers of Christis
church, do also break this commandment: if in the administration of the
sacraments, they yield not the hole efficacy, virtue, and grace thereof to our
lord, as the very auctoure of the same: but ascribe the said efficacy virtue
and grace, or any part thereof to them self. or if any of them do use any of
the sacraments to any co^iurations, or any other strange practice, contrary to
that holy use, for the which they be ordained.

Item that they also break this commandment, which either by teaching or
preaching, or by pretense of holy living, do abuse this name to their own
vaynglorie, or any other ungodly purpose. And generally that all evil christen
men, which profess the name of Christ, and live not according to their
professyon, do also take the name of god in vain, in words confessing
Christ, and denyinge him in deeds. They also break this commandment, which
in trouble do not call upon the name of god, nor do thank him in all things
both sweet and sour, good and evil, well fare and evil fare. For god does
send us many troubles and adversities, because we should run to him, cry to
him for help, and call upon his holy name.

Thyrdly we think it conuenyent, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
(for asmoche as the gifts of health of body, health of soul, forgyuenes of
sins, the gift of grace, or life everlasting, and such other, be the
gifts of god, and can not be given but by god) who so ever makes invocation
to saynctes for these gifts, prayeng to them for any of the said gifts, or
such like, (which can not be given but by god only) yeldeth the glory of god
to his creature, Esai. xlii.
contrary to this commandment. For god says by his prophet, I woll not yield
my glory to any other. Therefore they that so pray to saynctes for these
gifts, as though they could give them, or be the gyuers of them: transgress
this commandment, yeldynge to a creature the honor of god. Never the less
to pray to saynctes to be intercessours with us, and for us to our lord for
our suites, which we make to him, and for such things as we can obtain of
none but of him, so that we make no invocation of them: is laufull and allowed
by the catholyque church.

And again because no temple, ne church, ne altar ought to be made but only
to god, (For to whom we make temple, church, or altar, to him (as saint
Austyne says) we may do sacrifice, and sacrifice we may do to none but to
god.) We think it conuenyent, that all bishops and prechers, shall instruct
and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that we abuse
our english, when we call the temples, churches, or altars by the name of any
saynct, as the church, or altar of our lady, the church or altar of saynct
Michaell, of saint Peter, of saint Paul, or such other. For we ought to
call them no otherwise, but the memories of our lady, of saynct Michaell,
saynct Peter, saynct Paul, and so of other saynctes: and the churches or
temples of god only, in which be the memorials of those saynctes. And
likewise must the altares be dedicated to our lord only, though it be for
the memoryall of any saynct. Not withstanding it is not necessary to alter
the commune speech, which is used, nor there is any error therein: so that
the sentence or meaning thereof be well and truly understood, that is to
say, that the said altares and churches be not dedicated to any sayncte, but
to god only, and of the saynctes but a memorial, to put us in remembrance of
them, that we may follow their example and living. And therefore if we mean,
as the words do importe, when we call them the churches or altares of
saynctes: we yield the honor of god from him to the saynctes, and break this
commandment. And like wise if we honor them, any otherwise than as the
friends of god, dwelling with him, and establysshed now in his glory
everlasting, and as examples, whom we must follow in holy life and
conversation. or if we yield unto saynctes the adoration and honor, which is
due unto god alone: We do (no doubt) break this commandment, and do wrong
unto our lord god.

The exposition of the fourth commandment.
AS touching the fourth commandment we think it conuenyent, that all
bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge. First that this word Sabbote is an hebrewe word,
and signyfieth in english rest. So that the Sabbot day is as much to say,
as the day of rest and quyetnes. And therefore there is a special and notable
difference between this commandment and the other.ix. For, as saint Austen
says, All the other.ix. commandments be moral commandementes, and belonged
not only to the Jews, and all the other people of the world, in the time of
the old testament: but also to all christen people in the new testament. But
this precepte of Sabbot, as concerning rest from bodyly labor the seventh
day, perteyned only unto the jews in the old testament, before the coming
of Christ: and not unto us christen people in the new testament. Nevertheless,
as concerning the spiritual rest (which is figured and signified by this
corporal rest) that is to say, rest from carnal works of the flesh, and
all manner of sin: this precepte remains still, and byndeth them, that
belong to Christ, and not for every.vii. day only, but for all days,
hours, and times. For at all times we be bound to rest from fulfyllynge of
our own carnal will and pleasure, from all sins, and evil desires, from
pride, disobedience, ire, hate, covetousness, and all such corrupt and carnal
appetites, and to committee our selves holly to god, that he may work in us
all things, that be to his will and pleasure. And this is the true Sabbotte or
rest of us, that be chrystened, when we rest from our own carnal wylles,
and be not led thereby: but be guyded always by god and his holy spirit. And
this is the thing that we pray for in the Pater noster, Wha^ we say, Father,
let thy kyngedome come unto us, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven,
Reign thou with us, Make thy will to be wrought in us, that from our own
corrupt will we may rest and cesse. And for this purpose, god has ordained,
that we should fast, watch, and labor: to the end that by these remedies we
might mortyfie and kill the evil and sensual desires of the flesh, and
attain this spyrytual rest, and quietness, which is sygnyfied and fygured in
this commandment.

Second we think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spyrytuall charge, that
besides this spyrytuall rest (which chiefly and pryncypally is required of
us) we be bound by this precepte, at certain times to cease from all bodyly
labor, and to give our minds entyerly and holly unto god. to here and learn
his word. to knowledge our own synfulnes unto god, and his great mercy, and
goodness unto us. to give thanks unto him for all his benefytes. to make
publyque and common prayer for all things needful. to receive the
sacraments. to visit the sick. to instruct every man his children, and
famylie in virtue and goodness, and such other like works. Which things
although all christen people be bound unto, by this commandment: yet the
Sabbot day, which is called the Satturdaye, is not now prescribed and
appointed thereto, as it was to the Jews: but instead of the Sabbot day,
succedeth the Sunday, and many other holy and feastefull days, which the
church has ordained from time to time. Which be called holy days, not
because one day is more acceptable to god, than an other, or of it self is
more holy than an other: but because the church has ordained, that upon those
days we should give our selves holly without any impedyment unto such holy
works, as be before expressed, where as upon other days we do apply our
selfs to bodyly labor, and be thereby much let from such holy and
spyrituall works.

And to the intent the ignorant people may be the more clearly instructed,
what holy and spiritual works they ought to do upon the holy day, we think
it co^uenyent, that al bishops and preachers shall exhort and teach the
people, commytte to their spiritull charge, to use them self in this manner
following: That is to say, At their first enter or coming into the church,
let them make account with them selfs, how they have bestowed the weke
paste, remembryng what evil minds and purposis they have had, what words
they have spoken, what things they have done, or left undone, to the dishonor
or displeasure of god, or to the hurt of their neighbor, or what example or
occasyon of evil they have given unto other. And when they have thus
recollected, and considered all these things in their minds: then let them
humbly knowledge their defautes unto god, and ask forgyuenes for the same, with
unfeigned purpose in their hearts, to convert and return from their noughty
lives, and to amend the same. And when they have so done, than let them
clearly, and purely in their hearts remytte and forgive all malice and
displeasure, which they beat to any creature. And after that, then let them
fall unto prayer, according to the commandment of Christ, where he says,
Math. v.
when you begin to pray, forgive what so ever displeasure you have against
any man. And when they be weary of prayer, then let them use redynge of the
word of god, or some other good and heavenly doctrine, so that they do it
quietely, without distourbance of other, that be in the church: or else let
them occupy their minds with some holsom and godly meditations, whereby they
may be the better. And they that can read, may be well occupied upon the holy
day, if they read unto other, suchche good works, which may be unto them instead of a sermon. For all things that edify man's soul in our lord god be
good and wholesome sermons.

And truly if men would occupy them selfs upon the holy days, and spend
the same days holly, after this form and manner, not only in the house of
god, but also in their own howses: they should thereby eschew much vice,
confound their ancient ennemy the devil, much edyfie both them selfs and
other, and finally obteigne much grace, and high reward of almighty god.

Thyrdly we think it convenient, that all bishops and prechers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge to have
special regard, that they be not over scrupulous, or rather superstitious in
absteynynge from bodily labor upon the holyday. For not withstanding all that
is before spoken, it is not meant, but that in time of necessity, we may upon
the holyday give our self to labor, as for sauinge of our corn and cattall,
when it is in danger, or lykely to be distroyed, if remedy be not had in time.
For this lesson our savior does teach us in the gospel. and we need to have
no scruple, ne grudge in consience, in such case of necessity, to labor on
the holidays: but rathre we should offend, if we should for scrupulositie
not save that god has sent for the sustenance, and relyefe of his people.

Finally we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, how
against this commandment generally do offend all they, which woll not
cease and rest from their own carnal wylles and pleasure, that god may
work in them after his pleasure and will.

Item al they, which having no laufull impediment, do not give them self
upon the holy day to here the word of god, to remember the benefytes of god,
to give thanks for the same, to pray, and to exercise such other holy
works, as be appointed for the same: but (as commonly is used) pass the time
either in idleness, in glottony, in riot, or in plays, or other vain and ydell
pastyme. For surely such keeping of the holy day is not according to thintente
and meaning of this commandment: but after the usage and custom of the
Jews. and does not please god: but does much more offend him, and provoke
his indignation, and wroth toward us. For as saint Austen says of the
Jews, they should be better occupied labourynge in their feldes, and to be at
the plough: than to be idle at home. And women should better bestow their
time in spynninge of wolle, than upon the sabot day to lose their time in
leapyng and daunsynge, and other idle, wanton lose time.

Item that all they do offend against this commandment, which do here the
word of god, and give not good head there unto, that they may understand it,
and learn it. or if they do learn it, yet they endeavor not them selfs to
remember it. or if they remember it, yet they study not to follow it.

Item that all they do break this commandment also, which in mass time do
occupye their minds with other matiers, and like unkind people remember not
the passion and death of Christ, nor give thanks unto him. Which things in
the mass time they ought specially to do, for the mass is ordained to be a
perpetual memory of the same. And like wise do all those, which in such
time as the commune prayers be made, or the word of god is taught, not only
them selfs do give none attendaunce thereto: but also by walking, talking and
other evil demeanor, let other that would well use them selfs. And like wise
do all they, which do not observe, but despise such laudable ceremonies of
the church, as set forth goddis honor, or apperteyne to good order to be
used in the church.

And therefore concerning such ceremonies of the church, we think it
conuenyent, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall instruct and teach the
people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that although the said
ceremonies have no power to remytte sin: yet they be very expediente things
to stir and cause us, to lift up our minds unto god, and to put us in
contynuall remembrance of those spiritual things, which be sygnyfied by
them: As sprinklyng of holy water does put us in remembrance of our baptysme,
and the blood of Christ, sprinkeled for our redemption upon the Cross.
Gyuynge of holy bread does put us in remembrance of the sacrament of the
Altar, which we ought to receive in right charity, and also that all
christen men be one body mystical of Christ, as the bread is made of many
graynes, and yet but one lofe. Bearing of candels on Candelmas day does put
us in remembrance of Christ the spiritual light, of whom Simeon did
prophecy, as is read in the church that day. Gyuynge of ashes on Ash
wenysday, does put us in remembrance, that every christen man, in the
beginning of lent and penance, should consydre, that he is but Ashes and
earth, and thereto shall return. Bearing of palms on palmesonday, does put
us in remembrance of the receyunge of Christ into Jerusalem a little before
his death, and that we must have the same desire to receive him into our
hearts. Crepynge to the cross, and humblynge our selfs to Christ on good
friday before the Cross, and there offering unto Christ before the same, and
kissing of it, puts us in remembrance of our redemption by Christ made
upon the cross. And so finally the setting up of the sepulture of Christ,
whose body after his death was buried. The halowynge of the Font, and other
like exorcismes and benedictions done by the ministers of Christis church, and
all other like laudable customs, rytes, and ceremonies, do put us in
remembrance of some spiritual thing. And that therefore they be not to be
contemned, and cast away: but be to be used and continued as things good and
laudable for the purposes abouesayde.

The declaration of the fifth commandment.
AS touching the fyfth commandment, we think it convenient, that all
bishops and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed to
their spiritual charge, First that by this word Father, is understood here,
not only the natural father and mother, which did carnally begette us, and
brought us up: but also the spiritual father, by whom we be spiritually
regenerated and nourisshed in Christ: and all other governors and rulers,
under whom we be nourisshed and brought up, or ordered and guyded. And all
though this commandment make express mention only of the children or
inferiors to their parents and superyours: yet in the same is also
understood and comprised the office and duty of the parents and superiors
again, unto their children and inferiors.

Second that by this word Honor, in this commandment, is not only meant a
reverence and lowlynesse in words and outward gesture, which children and
inferiors ought to exhibit unto their parents and superiors: but also a
prompte and a ready obedience to their laufull commandments, a regard to
their words, a forbearynge and sufferynge of them, an inward love and
veneration toward them, a reverent fear, and loothenes to dysplease or
offend them, and a good will and gladness to assyst them, aid them, succor
them, and help them with our counseyll, with our goods, and substance, and
by all other means to our possible power. This is the very honor and
duty, which not only the children do owe unto their parents: but also all
subjects and inferiors to their heads and rulers. And that children own
this duty unto their fathers: it appears in many places of scripture. In the
proverbs it is written, Pro. i.
Obey my son the chastisynge of thy father, and be not neglygent in thy
mothers commandementes. In the book of the Deuteronomi it is also written,
Deutero. xxvii.
Accursed be he that does not honor his father and his mother. And in the book
of the Leuiticus, Leuit. xix
it is said, Let every man stand in awe of his father and mother. And if any
man have a stubbourne, and a disobedient son, Leuit. xxi
which woll not here the voice of his father and mother, and for correction
would not amend and follow them: than shall his father and mother take him, and
bring him to the iuges of the city, and say, This our son is stubborn and
disobedient, and despyseth our monicions, and is a riottour and a dronkerde.
Then shall all the people stone him to death, and thou shall put away the
evil from the, that all Israel may here thereof, Exodi. xxi.
and be afraid. And in the book of Exodi, it is also written, He that strikes
his father or mother, he shall be put to death. And likewise he that curses
his father or his mother shall suffer death. And in the book of proverbs the
wise man also says, Prouer. xxviii.
He that steals any thing from his father or mother, is to be taken as a
murderer. And although that these great punysshementes of dysobedient children
by death, be not now in the new law in force and strength, but left to
the order of pryncis and governors, and their laws: yet it evidently
appears, how sore god is grieved, and dyspleased with such disobedience of
children toward their parents. For so much as in the old law, he did
appoynte thereunto so grievous punyshementes.

And as almighty god does thretten these punysshementes unto those children,
which do break this commandment: so he does promise great rewards, to
them that keep it. For he that honors his father (says the wise manne) his
sins shall be forgyuen him: Eccle. iii.
And he that honors his mother, is as one that gathers treasure. Who so
ever honors his father, shall have joy of his own children: and when he
makes his prayer to god, he shall be herd. He that honors his father,
shall have a long and a prosperous life. And as the children by this
commandment, be bound, to honor and obey their parents (according as is
before expressed) so it is implied in the same precept, that the parents
should norishe and godly bring up their children, that is to say, that they
must not only find them meat and drink in youth, and also set them forward in
lernyng, labor, or some other good exercise, that they may eschew idleness, and
have some craft, and occupation, or some other laufull mean to get their
living: but also they must learn and teache them to trust in god, to love
him, to fear him, to love their neighbor, to hate no man, to hurt no man, to
wish well to every man, and so much as they may to do good unto every man, not
to curse, not to swear, not to be riottous, but to be sobre and te^perate in all
thingis, not to be worldly, but to set their minds upon the love of god and
heavenly things, more than upon temporal things of his world, and generally
to do all that is good, and to eschew all that is evil. And this the parents
ought to do, not by cruel entreating of their children, whereby they might
discourage them, and provoke them to hate their parents: but by charitable
rebukynge, thretenynge, and reasonable chastisynge and correctynge of them, when
they do evil: and cheryshyng, maynteynynge, and commending them, when they do
well.

This office and duty of the parents toward their children is wytnessed in
many places of Scripture. First saint Paul writes thus, Fathers, Ephe. vi.
provoke not your children unto anger, but bring them up in the correction
and doctrine of god. And in Deutero. Almyghtye god faith, Deuteronomy. vi. Pro. xxix.
Teach my laws and co^mandementes to thy children. And the wise man says,
The rod of correction gives wisdom. The child that is left to his own
will, shall be confusion to his mother. And in an other place he says, Pro. xiii.
He that spares the rod, hates his son: and he that loves him, will se
him corrected. Pro. xxiii.
And in an other place he says, Se thou withdraw not from thy child
discipline and chastysynge. If thou stryke him with the rod, he shall not
dye, thou shalt stryke him with a rod, and shalt thereby deliver his soul
from hell. And on the other side it is written, The son untaught and
vnchastysed, Eccl. xxii i. Reg. iiii
is the confusyon of his father. And for this cause we find in the book of
kings how that our lord conceived high indignation against Helie the chief
priest, because he did not duly correct his two sons Ophni and Phinees,
when he knew that they did grievously offend god. And how in reuengyng of the
fathers negligence, and remysnesse in correctynge of his children: almighty god
took from Hely, and all his issue and householde for ever, the office of the
high priesthode, and how his two sons Ophni and Phinees were slain both
upon a day, and Helie their father brake his neck. This example of Helie is
necessary for fathers to emprinte in their hearts, that they may see their
children well taught and corrected: least they run into the great
indignation of almyghtye god, as Helie did, and not only in this world have
confusion, but also in the world to come, have dampnation for the mysorder of
their children through their defaute. And they must not think, that it is
enough to speak somewhat unto them, when they do amys (For so did Helie to his
sons, and yet our lord was not pleased, because he did not more sharply
correct them, and se them reformed) But when words woll not serve, the
fathers and mothers must put to correction, and by such discipline save their
souls, or else they shall answer to god for them. And truly they greatly
deserve the indignation of god, that, when they have received of him children,
do not bring them up to his service, but without regard what comes of them,
suffers them to ren to the service of the devil.

Thyrdely we think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
all christen men be bound to exhibit and do unto them, which under god be
their spiritual fathers and parents of their souls, the like and the self
same honor, i. Cor. iiii
which (as is aforesaid) children of duty do owe unto their natural
fathers.

Item that these spyrytuall fathers be appointed by god, Act. xx.
to mynister his sacraments unto them, to bring them up, and to feed them
with the word of god, and to teach them his gospelle and scripture: and by
the same to govern, Hebr. xiii
to conducte, and to lead them in the straight way to the father in heaven
everlasting.

Item that our savior Christ in the gospel makes mention as well of the
obedience, as also of the corporalle sustynaunce, Math. x. Luc. x.
which al christen people do owe unto their spiritual fathers. Of the
obedience he says, that who so ever receives you, receives me. And in an
other place he says, He that hereth you, hereth me. and he that despisethe
you, despysethe me. And in an other place he says, Math. xxiii. Hebr. xiii
what so ever they bydde you do, do it. And sayncte Paul says, Obey your
prelates, and give place unto them: for they have much charge and care for
your souls, as they, which must give an account therefore, that they may do
it, with joy and not with grief, that is to say, that they may gladly and
with much comfort do their cure and charge. when they do perceive, that the
people be obedient to their teaching: like as on the contrary wise they have
little joy or pleasure to do it, when they find the people disobedient and
repugnant.

And for the sustynaunce of their living, which is comprysed in this word
Honor (as before is declared) Christ says in the gospelle, The workman is
worthy his wages. Luc. x. i. Cor. ix
And saint Paul says, who goes on warrefare upon his own stipende? And who
planteth the vine, and eats no part of the fruicte? And who fedeth the
flock, and eats no part of the milk? And after follows. Even so has the
lord ordained, that they, which preach the gospel, should live of the
gospel. And therefore in an other place it is written, i. Tim. v.
Priests or auncientes that rule well: be worthy of double honor, specially
they that labor in the ministration of the word of god, and his doctrine. In
which place the apostell means by double honor, not only the reverence,
which is due unto the spyrytuall fathers (as is aforesaid) but also that all
christen people be bound to mynister, find and give unto their spyrytuall
fathers sufficiency of al things necessary and requysite, as well for their
sustinaunce and finding, as for the quyete and commodiouse exercysynge and
executynge of their said office.

Fourthly we think it convenient, that all bishops and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
this commandment also conteyneth the honor and obedience, which subjects
owe unto their princes, and also the office of princis toward their subjects.
Esai. xlix
For scripture takes princes to be, as it were, fathers and nouryces to their
subjects. And by scripture it appears, that it apperteyneth unto thoffyce of
princes, to se that the right religion and true doctrine of Christ may be
maynteyned and taught. and that their subjects may be well ruled and
governed by good and just laws. and to provide and care for them, that all
things necessary for them may be plentuouse. and that the people and
commune weal may increase. and to defend them from oppressyon and inuasyon
as well within the realm, as without. and to se that justice be ministered unto
them indifferently. and to here benignely al their complayntes. and to show
toward them (although they offend) fatherly pytie. And finally so to
correct them that be evil, that they had yet rather save them than lose them:
if it were not for respect of justice, and maintenance of peace and good order
in the commune weal. And therefore al their subjects must again on their
parties, and be bound by this commandment, not only to honor and obey
their said princes, according as subjects be bound to do, and to owe their
truth and fidelity unto them, as unto their natural lords: but they must
also love them: as children do love their fathers. yea they must more tender
the suertie of their princis person, and his estate, than their own: Even like
as the health of the heed is more to be tendered, tha^ the health of any other
membre.

And by this commandment also subjects be bound, not to withdraw their
said feaultie, trowthe, love, and obedyence toward their prince, for any
cause what so ever it be. Ne for any cause they may conspire against his
person, ne do any thing toward the hynderaunce, or hurt thereof, nor of his
astate.

And furthermore, by this commandment they be bound also to obey all the
laws, proclamations, precepts, and commandments, made by their princes and
governors: except they be against the commandments of god. And likewise
they be bound to obey all such as be in auctorytie under their prince, as
far as he woll have them obeyed. They must also give unto their prince aid,
help, and assistence, when so ever he shall require the same, either for
suertie, preservation, or mayntenaunce of his person and astate, or of the
realm, or for the defense of any of the same, ageynste all persons. And when
so ever subjects be called by their prince unto priuey council, or unto the
parlyament, which is the general council of this realm, than they be bound
to give unto their prince (as their learning, wisdom, or experyence can serve
them) the most faithful counsel they can, and such as may be to the honor
of god, to the honor and surety of his regal person and astate, and to the
general wealth of all his hole realm.

And further, if any subject shall know of any thing, which is or may be to
the annoyaunce or damage of his pryncis person or astate: he is bound by this
commandment to dysclose the same with all speed to the prince him self, or
to some of his counceyll. For it is the veraye law of nature, that every
membre shall employe him self to preserve and defend the heed. And surely
wisdom and policy woll the same. For of conspiracy and treason comes
never no goodness: but infinite hurt, damage, and peril to the common weal.
And that all subjects do owe unto their pryncis and governors such honor
and obedience (as is before said) it appears evidently in sundry places of
scripture: but specially in the Epistles of saynct Paul and saynct Peter. For
sayncte Paul says in this manner, Romans xiii
Every man must be obedient unto the high powers: for the powers be of god.
And therefore who so ever resists the powers, resysteth the ordinance of god.
And they that resyste, shall get to them selfs damnation. i. Pet. ii.
And saint Peter says, Obey unto all sorts of governors for goddis sake,
whether it be unto the king, as unto the chief heed, or unto rulers, as unto
them that be sent of god for to punysshe evil doers, and to cherysshe them
that do well. And shortly after it follows, Fear god, Honor thy king.

And there be many exaumples in scripture of the greatte vengeance of god,
that has fallen upon rebels, and such as have been disobedient unto their
pryncis: Number xvi
But one princypall example to be noted is of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron. Whom
for their rebellyon almighty god so punysshed, that When they and two hundred
and fyftye capitaynes mo, with other people, to a great nombre, were all to
gyther: the earth opened, and swalowed them down, with their houses, their
wyfes, and their children, and all their substance. And they went down quycke
in to hell, with all that they had.

Fyftely we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
this commandment does also conteyne ye honor and obedience, yt servants do
owe unto their masters. and the office and duty again of the masters unto
their servants.

Item that the honor and obedyence of the servants unto their masters, is
to love their master. to be reuerente and lowly unto him in all their words
and gesture. to suffer and forbear him. to be ready and with a good will,
without murmuration or grutchynge to obey all his lawful or reasonable
commandments. to fear him, and to be loathe to displease him. to be
faithful and true unto him. and to their power to procure and do that, which
is to their masters honesty and profyt, and that as well in their masters
absence, and out of his sight, as when he is present, and looks upon them
according to the words of sayncte Paul, Ephe. vi.
where he says, Servants be you obedyente unto your masters with fear and
tremblyng, with simple and plain hearts, as unto Christ, not serving only
in their sight, as pleasers of men, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will of god from the heart, and with good will, thynkyng that you serve god,
and not men. And be you sure, that of all your good service you shall receive
reward of god. Tit. ii.
And again to Titus he writes thus, Exhort the servants, to be obedyent
unto their masters, to please them well in all things, not to be patterers,
and praters against them, nor pyckers, or pryuey conueyers of their masters
goods: but to show all troth and faythfulnes. i. Pet. ii.
Saint Peter also byddeth servants to obey their masters with all fear,
not only if they be good and gentle but also though they be froward.

Item that the office and duty of the masters unto their servants is to
provide suffyciently for them of all things necessary. To se them instructed
in the laws of god, and that they observe the same. not to be over rygorouse
unto them. to correct them when they do amysse. and to commend and
cherysshe them when they do well. according to the saying of sayncte Paul,
You that be masters, Collo. iiii
do unto your servants that is right and reason, know that your selves have
also a master in heaven. And in an other place he says, Ephe. vi.
Be not rygorous unto your servants, for you have a master in heaven, that
regards all persons indifferently. Ecclesi. xxxiii.
And the wise man says, Meat, correction, and work is due unto the
servants, Set thy servant to labor, that he be not idell. For idelnes
brings much evil. Set him to work, for that belongs unto him. If he be
not obedyent, correct him.

Item that in this commandment is also employed, that children and young
folks should give due honor and reverence to old men, and to all such as
be their masters and tutours, to bring them up in learning and virtue, which
be in this behalf as fathers unto them: and so as fathers must be honored
and obeyed.

Finally we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that al
fathers ought diligently to consider, and remember, how much, and how
greuousely they do offend god, and of how many euylles they be the cause:
which either bring up their children in wantonness and ydelnes, and do not put
them forth in time to some faculty, exercise, or labor, whereby they may after
get their living, or occupy their life to the profit and commodity of the
common weal. or else do suffer their children in youth to be corrupted for
lack of good teaching, and bringing up in the true knowledge of god, and of
his will and commandments. or commytte in word or deed such things in the
presence of their children, whereof the young tender hearts of their said
children (which like a small twigge, is inclyneable every way, and by
fraylenes of youth is inclyned to evil) do take so evil example and
corruption of vices, and worldly affections, that hard it woll be for them
after to eschew the same.

The declaration of the syxte commandment.
AS touching the syxte commandment, we think it conuenyente, that all
bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spyrytuall charge, First that in this commandment is forbyden, not
only bodily killing, and all manner of violent layinge of hands upon any man,
as strikynge, cuttyng, woundynge, and all manner of bodily hurtynge by act and
deed: but also al malice, anger, hate, envy, dysdayne, and al other evil
affections of the heart, and also all sclaunder, backbytyng, chidyng, bannynge,
raylynge, scornyng, or mocking, and all other evil behavior of our tongue
against our neighbor. Which all be forbidden by this commandment. For they
be rotis and occasions of murder, or other bodyly hurt.

Item that the contrary of all these things be commanded by this commandment,
that is to say, that we should with our hartis love our neighbors. and with our
tongues speak well of them and to them. and in our acts and deeds do good unto
them, showing toward them in heart, word, and deed patience, mekenes, mercy,
and gentylnes, yea though they be our adversaries and enemies. And that this
is the true sense and meaning of this commandment: it appears by the
exposition of our savior Christ in the gospel, where he declares, Math. v.
That we should neither hurt any man in deed, nor speak of him or unto him
maliciously, or contemptuously, with our tongues, nor bear malice or anger in
our hartis: but that we should love them, Romans x.
that hate us, say well by them, that say evil by us, and do good to them
that do evil to us. And according to the same saying of Christ, saynct
John^ also says, That he, that hates his neighbor, is a manqueller.

Item that it is not forbidden by this commandment, i. Ioa^. iii.
but that all rulers and governors, as princes, Judges, fathers, masters, and
such other, may for the correction of them, which be under their
governance, use such manner of punysshemente, either by rebukefulle and sharp
words, or by bodyly chastysynge: as the laws of every realm do permytte. And
not only they may do thus: but also they be bound so to do, and offend
god, if they do it not, as is before declared in the fyfte commandment.

Item that all rulers must be ware and take heed, that in their corrections or
punysshementes they do not proceed upon any private malice of their hearts, or
dysplesure toward any man, or for any lucre, favor, or fear of any person:
but that they have their eye, and consyderation only upon the reformation, and
amendment of the person, whom they do correct, or else upon the good order
and quyetnes of the common weal. so that still there may remain in their
hearts charity and love, toward the person, whom they punysshe. And like as
the father loves his child, even when he beats him: even so a good judge,
when he gives sentence of death upon any gyltie person, although he show
outwardly cruelnes and rigor, yet inwardly he ought to love the person, and to
be sorry and heavy for his offenses, and for the death, which he him self by
the law does, and must needs condemn him unto.

Item that although inferior rulers or governors may correct and punysshe,
such as be under their governance: yet they may not punysshe by death,
mutilate, mayme, or imprison them, or use any corporal violence toward them,
other wise than is permytted by the high governor. that is to say, by the
prince and his laws, from whom all such authority does come. For no man may
kylle, or use such bodyly cohercion, but only pryncis, and they which have
authority from princis. Ne the said princes, ne any for them may do the
same: but by and according to the just order of their laws.

Item that no subjects may draw the sword (saving for laufull defense)
without their princis license. And that it is their duty to draw their
swerdes for the defense of their prince and the realm: when so ever the
prince shall command them so to do. And that for no cause, what so ever it
be, they may draw their swerdes against their prince, nor against any other,
without his consent or commandment, as is aforesaid. And although princis do
other wise, then they ought to do: yet god has assygned no iuges over them in
this world, but woll have the judgment of them reserved to him self, and woll
punysshe, when he sees his time. And for amendment of such princes, that do
otherwise thanne they should do: Prouer. i.
the people must pray to god (which has the hearts of pryncis in his
handis) that he may so turn their hartis unto him, that they may use the
sword, which he has given them, unto his pleasure.

Second we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and pleachers shall
diligently from time to time instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge, that ageynste this commandment offend all they,
which do kylle, mayme, or hurt any man, without just order of the law, or
gives counsel, aid, favor, provocation, or consent thereunto.

Item that all they, which may, if they wol, by their authority, or lawful
means deliver a man from wrongefull death, mutilation, hurt, or injury, and
woll not do it, but woll wynke thereat, and dissimule it: be transgressors of
this commandment.

Item that all judges, which seeing no sufficient matter or cause of death, or
that upon a light trial, without sufficient examination, and dyscussyon gives
sentence of death. or that, when the matter and cause of death is sufficient,
and the trial good, yet delyteth in the death of the person: be
transgressors of this commandment.

And like wise be al those, which in the causes of life and death, being
empanelled upon Enquestes, do lightly condemn, or endicte any person,
without sufficient evidence, examination, and discussyon, of the informations
given unto them. And more over all those, which either in such causes do give
false euydence, or information, or wyttyngely contrary to their own
conscience: or doubting of the troth of those informations, or without
sufficient examination, do promote, enforce, or maynteyne such euydences,
enformations or inditementes: do also break this commandment.

And like wise do all they, which wyllyngly do kyl them self for any manner of
cause. for so to do there can be no pretense of laufull cause, ne of just
order. And therefore he that so does: kylleth at ones both body and soul.

And finally al they, which be in hatrede and malice with their neighbors,
and either speak words of contempt, despyte, checkyng, cursynge, and such
other, or else publysshe their neighbors offenses, to their sclaunder, rather
than to their amendment. and generally all they that live in ire, malice,
envy, and murmuring at other men's welthe, or reioysyng at other men's trouble
or hurt, or such other like: they offend all against this precepte.

The declaration of the seventh commandment.
AS touching the seventh commandment we think it conueniente, that all
bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spirytuall charge, First that this word Adultery, does in this
commandment signify, not only the unlawful commixtion of a married man,
with any other woman, than his own wife, or else of a married woman with any
other manne, than her own husband: but also all manner of unlawful copulation
between man and woman, married or unmarried, and all manner of unlawful use of
those parts, which be ordained for generation, whither it be by adultery,
fornication, inceste, or any other mean, although it be in laufull matrimony.
For in laufull Matrimony a man may committee adulterye, and live unchaste even
with his own wife: if they do immeasurably serve their flesshely appetite and
lust. and of such the dyuell has power, Thobi. vi
as the Angel Raphael said unto Thobie, They that marie in such wise, that
they exclude god out of their minds, and give them selves to their own
carnal lusts, as it were a horse or a mule, which have no reason: upon
such persons the dyuell has power.

Item that all christen people ought hyghly to regard the observation of this
commandment, considering how much god is displeased, and what vengeance
he has always taken, and ever woll take for the transgression of the same.
For confirmation whereof, we think it conueniente, that all bishops and
preachers shall instruct and teach the people committed unto their spyrituall
charge, First, how that god in the time of Moses law commanded, that who
so ever committed adultery, should be stoned to death.

Item how Hemor king of Sichem, He. xxxiiii
and Sichem his son, with all the men of the City were slain, and their
wives and children were taken captive, and all their goods within the City
were robbed and spoiled: because the said Sichem lay with Dina the daughter
of Jacob, and defiled her.

Item how that almyghtye god, after the children of Israel had committed
adultery with the women of Moab and Madian, commanded first, Nu. xxv.
that the heedes and rulers of the people should be hanged, for that they
suffered the people so to offend god. And afterward commanded also every man
to slay his neighbor, that had so offended. In so much that there was
slain of that people the nombre of.xiiii. thousand. And many moshulde have been slain: had not Phinees the son of Eleazar, the high priest, turned the
indignation of god from the children of Israel. For this Phinees when he saw
Zamry chyefe of the tribe of Simeon in the presence of Moses, and all the
people go unto Cozby a troble man's daughter of the Madianites, to commytte
fornication with her: he arose from among all the multitude, and taking a
sword in his hand, went into the house, where they were, and thruste them
both through the bealyes. Whose fervent mind and zeal god did so much
allow, that he did therefore both cease from further punyshement of the
Israelites, and also granted to Phinees, and his succession for ever, the
dignity of the high pryeste.

Iudi. x.
Item how the tribe and stock of Beniamyn was so punysshed for the
mayntenaunce of certain persons of the City of Gabaa (which had, contrary to
this commandment, shamefully abused a certain man's wife) that of.xxv.
thousand and seven hundredth men of arms, there remained on live but six
hundredth.

Gene. xix.
Item how almyghtye god for the transgressyon of this commandment, caused
brymstone and fire to rain down from heaven upon all the country of Sodom
and Gomor: and so dystroyed the hole regyon both men and beasts, and all that
grew upon the earth, reserving only Loath, and his.iii. daughters. These
terryble examples, and many other like, almighty god did show in times paste:
to the intent we should have them in our contynuall remembrance, and so
should ever stand in awe and fear to offend god. For though he do not so
presentely punysshe us here in this world, as he did the persons before
rehearsed: yet his long patience, and forbearynge, is no allowance or
forgyuenes of our offenses, if we continue still in them, but a sore
accumulation, and heapyng together of gods wrath and indygnation ageynste
the day of judgment. At which time, instead of this temporal pain, Romans ii.
we shall receive everlasting pain: being as sayncte Poule says, excluded
from the everlasting kyngedome of heaven. and as Christ says in the
gospel, Mat. xxii et.xxv. et Luc. xiii.
and saynct John^ in the Apocalips, We shall be cast in to the brennyng lake
of hell, where is fire, brymstone, weeping, waylynge, and gnastynge of tethe
without end.

Second we think it conuenyent, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, how
that in this commandment, not only the vices before rehearsed, be forbidden
and prohibited: but also the virtues contrary to them be required and
commanded, That is to say, fydelytie, and true keeping of wedlock, in them
that be married, contynence in them, that be unmarried, and generally in all
parsons shamefastnes, and chastenes, not only of deeds, but of words and
manners, countenance and thoughts. And more over fasting, temperaunce,
watchynge, labor, and all laufull things that conduce and help to
chastity. And that therefore against this commandment offend all they,
which do take any syngle woman, or other man's wife. Math. v.
or that in their hearts do couete and desire for to have them. For as Christ
says, who so ever eyeth a womman, wysshynge to have her: has all redye
committed adulterye with her in his heart.

They also offend this commandment, that take in marriage, Leu. xviii et. xx.
or out of marriage any of their own kynred or affinity, within the degrees
forbidden by the laws of god.

They also offend against this commandment, which abuse them selfs, or
any other persons, against nature. or abuse their wives in the time of their
menstruall purgation.

They also that do nourissh, styre up, and provoke them selves, or any other to
carnal lusts and pleasures of the body, by uncleanly and wanton words, tales,
songs, syghtes, touchynges, gaye and wanton apparayle, and lasciuiouse
deckynge of them selfs, or any such other wanton behavior and entisement.
And also all those, which procure any such act, or that mynyster house,
license, or place thereto. And all counsaylours, helpers and consenters to the
same: do greuousely offend god, and do transgress this commandment.

Likewise al they that avoid not the causes hereof, so much as they
conveniently may, as surfettyng, sloth, idelnes, immoderate sleep, and
company of such (both men and women) as be unchaste and evil dysposed: be
gyltie of the transgression of this commandment.

The declaration of the eight commandment.
AS touching the eight commandment, we think it conuenyent, that all
bishops and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge, First, that under the name of Theft or stealing in
this commandment is understood all manner of unlawful taking away,
occupienge, or keeping of an other man's goods, whether it be by force,
extorcion, oppression, briberie, usury, simonie, unlawful cheuesaunce, or else
by falls byenge and selling, either by false weyghtes, or by false measure, or
by selling of a worse thing for a better, or a thing cou^terfaite for a
true, as gylte coper, for true gold, or glass for precious stones, and
generally all manner of fraud or deceyte.

Item that like as the vices before rehearsed be by this precepte forbidden,
even so, sundry virtues, contrary to the said vices be by the same
commanded. as to deal truly and plainly with our neighbors in all things.
to get our own goods truly. to spend them lyberally upon them that have
need. to feed the hungery. to give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked.
to harborowe the harborlesse. to comfort the sick. to visit the prisoners.
and finally to help our neigbours with our lernyng, good counceyll, and
exhortation, and by all other good means that we can.

Second we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
against this commandment offend all they, which by craft, or by violence,
upon see or land spoil, rob, or take away any other man's servant, or
child, land, or inheritance, horse, sheep, or catal, fysshe, foul, conyes,
ordere, money, jewels, apparayle, or any other thing, which is not his own.

And likewise offend they ageynste this commandment, which have goods
given to an use, and put them not to the same use: but keep them to their own
advantage. As masters of hospitalles, and falls executours, which convert the
goods given to the sustentation of the poor folks, and other good and
charitable uses, unto their own profit.

Item that all they, which receive rent or stipende for any office spiritual
or temporal, and yet do not their office belonging thereunto: be thieves, and
transgressors of this commandment.

Item that all they, which take wages or fee, pretendynge to deserve it, and
yet do not in deed. as laborers and hired servants, which loyter and do not
apply their busynes. and likewise advocates, proctours, atturneis,
councillors, in any of the laws, which sometime for litel pain take much
stipende, or in their defaute and negligence mar good causes, or do any
thing to the hynderance of spedye justice, for their own advantage: do
transgress this commandment.

Item that all they transgress this commandment, which bye any stolen
goods, knowing that they be stolen. or that bye things of them, that have no
authority to selle them, or alyenate them, if they know the same. And like
wise do they, that find things lost, and knowing the owner thereof, woll not
restore them, or woll not do their dylygence to know the owner.

They also, which defraude their hired servants of their due wages. and they
that borow any thing, or receive any thing delivered unto them upon trust:
and woll not restore the same again. and they that use false weyghtes or
measures, or deceitefull wares, or selle their own wares at unreasonable
price, far above the just valor. and they that engrosse and bye up any
kind of wares hole into their own hands: to the intent that they may make
a scarsenes thereof in other men's hands, and sell it again as they list. and
generally al couetouse men and brybers: which by any means unlawfully get,
or unmercifully keep from them that have need: be transgressors and breakers
of this commandment.

The declaration of the nynthe commandment.
AS concerning the nynthe commandment, we think it conuenyent, that all
bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto
their spiritual charge, First that by this commandment is forbidden all
manner of lyinge, sclaunderynge, bacbytynge, false reportynge, false accusynge,
yuell councellynge, and all manner of mysusyng of our tongue, to the hurt of
our neighbors, whether it be in their body and goods, or in their good name
and fame. Iaco. iii.
The apostle saynct James lykeneth the tongue of a man unto a bytte in a horse
mouth, which turns the hole horse every way, as pleases him, that sytteth
on the horse back. And he compares it also unto the helm of a ship: whereby
all the hole ship is ruled at the pleasure of him, that governs the helm.
And thyrdely he compares it unto a sparcle of fire, which (if it be suffered)
woll burn up a hole town or city. And surely al these comparysons be very
apt and mete. For the tongue of a man (no doubt) is the chief stay of all
the hole body, either to do much good, or else to do much hurt. The voice
of the tongue perceth the hearts of the herers, and causes them to conceive
of other men good or yuell opinion. it kendleth or quenches contention. it
dysposeth men to war or peace. and moves the herers sundry ways to goodness,
or vice. And like as the great ragyous flames, that go from house to house,
come but of one sparkle, which in the beginning might have been easyly
quenched, but by negligence and sufferaunce increases and waxes so great,
that no man can resyst it. And like as fire is a great commodity many ways
(if it be well and wisely used) and contrary an utter destruction, if it be
suffered, and no head taken thereunto: Even so of a man's tongue (although it
be but a very small membre of the body) yet there comes excedyng great
benefit, both to him self and others, if it be well and wisely governed. And
contrary wise, if no head be taken thereunto, but be suffered to run at large:
thanne it is not one syngle yuell alone, but a rote and occasyon, or rather an
heapynge together of all yuelles. And because that of the tongue comes so
much good, or so much yuell: therefore by this commandment is not only
forbid all yuell use of the tongue, to the hurt of our neighbors: but also in
the same is commanded all the good use of the tongue, to the benefit of our
said neighbors. As to be true and plain in our words. to be faithful in
couenauntes, bargaynes, and promyses. to testify the truth in all courts,
iugementes, and other places. to report well of them that be absent. to use
gentle words to them that be present. to give good council and exhortation
to all goodness. to dysswade from all yuell. and when we know any man to do
amysse, not to publisshe his fault to other men, to his hynderaunce and
sclaunder: but rather to admonysshe him pryuely between him and us, and to seek
his reformation. to speak well by our enemies. to pacify and set at one them
that be enemies. to excuse them, and to answer for them, that be unjustly
sclaundered. And generally in all other things, to use our tongues in truth
to the welthe of our neighbors.

Second we think it conuenyent, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
against this commandment offend all they, which by lyinge, and vtterynge of
false speech deceive and hurt any man. and such liars be the dyuels children.
For as saynct John^ says in his gospel, Ioa^. viii.
The dyuel is a liar, and the father of liars. And therefore bids saynct
Paul, that we should put away lying, Ephe. iiii
and speak truth every man to his neighbor.

Item that al they offend against this commandment, which be detracters,
backbyters, and sclaunderers, Eccle. x.
whom the wise man does lyken unto serpents, that privily byte or stinge men
behind, when they be not aware thereof. And surely such men (what so ever
they pretend) go not about to heal and amend them, that do amysse: but
rather to satysfye their own malice and sclaunderous tongues. For like as the
surgion, that woll heal a wound, does cover it and bind it, that it take no
open air: so if we intend the amendment of our neighbors fault, we must
not open it abroad to his hurt, but we must be sorry, and pray to god for him,
and so taking him unto us, we must pryuely counsel and exhort him. And no
doubt, this loving correction woll make him beware, and take heed that he
offend no more. But if we tell his defautes first to one, and after to an
another, and charge every one to keep counceyll, as though we had told it to no
mo: this is no amendment of his fault, but a declaration of our own, and a
reprehension of our selfs, in that we vttre forth unto other that thing,
which we our selves judge not to be uttered. And surely we condemn our
selfs therein. For we should first have kept it secret our selves, if we
would that an other man should not vttre the same. And therefore the wise man
says, Eccle. xix
If thou haste herd any thing against thy neighbor: let it dye within the,
and be sure it woll not burste the. And against backebiters speaks the
prophet David, Psalm. C.
who so ever privily sclaundereth his neighbor, him woll I destroy.

And they also offend this commandment, which gladly give ears, and be
ready to here such backbyters. For as saint Bernarde says, Like as the
backbiter carries the dyuell in his mouth: so the herer caryeth the dyuell in
his ear. For the detractour is not glad to tell, Pro. xxv.
but to him, that is glad to here. And the wise man says, That like as the
wind drives away the rain, even so does as hard, and a dysplesant
countenance drive away the tongue of the backebyters, and makes them
abashed.

They also break this commandment, which with flaterynge and double
tongues, go about to please such as be glad to here complayntes.

Judges also, which give sentence contrary to that, which they know to be
true. and they that in judgment do hyde and suppress the truth. and they
that make any false plees, to the delay and hynderaunce of justice, or any
other wise do stop justice. and inquestes, which upon light grounds, or
upon grou^des not well examyned, or dyscussed, give verdycte: be transgressors
and breakers of this commandment.

And above other they do transgress this commandment, which in preaching,
or other wise do teach or maynteyne any false or erroneous doctrine, contrary
to the word of god. or that do teach fables, or men's fantasies, and
imagynations: affirmynge them to be the word of god. For such be not false
witness of worldly matiers: but false witness of god.

The declaration of the tenthe commandment.
AS concerning the tenthe commandment, we think it convenient, that al
bishops and prechers shall instruct and teach the people, committed unto their
spiritual charge, First that where as in the other commandments before
rehearsed, be forbidden all words, deeds, and counceyll, which be against
goddis pleasure, and the love of our neighbors: In this last precepte be
forbidden the inward affections of our hertes. For in this last precepte is
forbydde al inward motion, desire, delight, inclination, and affection unto
evil. Which things be so roted and planted in all us the children of Adam,
even from the first hour of our birth, that although by the inspiration of
the holy gooste, and the grace of god, given unto us, we do entende never so
well, and would most gladly eschew al evil: yet there remains in us a
disposition, and redynes unto such things, as be contrary to the will and
commandment of god. In so much that if the grace of god did not help us, to
stay and resyste our own noughtynes, and delight unto sin: the same our
concupiscence and naughtynes should be so much, that we should run hedlynge
in to all myschyefe, and that at every light occasyon. our nature is so
corrupt, and we be so far from the perfyte obedience unto gods will,
which we had in the state of innocence, and yet still ought to have. And of
this corruption of our nature and redynes unto yuell complains saint Paul in
his epistle unto the Romans, Romans vii
where he declares at length, that the nature of man is so full of
concupiscence, and yuell affections: that no man does or can of him self
satisfy, or fulfill the law of god. And that the law condemns all men, as
transgressors. And that therefore every man for his saluatyon, must have refuge
unto the grace and mercy of god, obtained by our savior Jesus Christ. I know
(says saynct Paul) that in me, that is to say, in my flesh dwells no
goodness. For I have a good will, but I find not how to perform it. For I do
not that good thing, which I would: but I do that yuell, which I would not.
And if I do that I would not: then it is not I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me. Thus find I by the law that when I would do good, yuell is
present with me. for I delight in the law of god, as concerning mine inward
man: but I see an other law in the partis of my body, which rebelleth
contynually against the law of my mind, and subdueth me unto the law of
sin, which is in the parts of my body. O wretched man that I am: who shall
deliver me from this body of death? The grace of god by Jesus Christ.

By these words of saynct Paul it appears, what concupiscence, corruption,
and yuell rests contynually in the nature of man. by reason whereof though he
be never so well minded, yet he is stayed, let, and hyndered from the
perfyte accomplysshement of gods will and commandments.

Second we think it conuenyente, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
notwithstanding that this corruption and concupiscence be damnable in all
them, that be not baptized, although they never commytte any actual offense:
yet unto us that be renewed by baptysme in the right faith of Christ, it is
neither dampnable, nor yet culpable, if we by the spirit and grace of god
endeavor and apply our selves to withstand and resyst it, and do not give our
selves to live after the motions and desires thereof. And therefore saynct Paul
(upon the words before reherced) infers and says. To. viii.
That there is no dampnation now unto them that be in Christ Jesus, which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And anon after he says, If you
live after the flesh, you shall dye, but if by the spirit you mortify the
deeds of the body, you shall live.

Thyrdly we think it conueniente, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
like as in the fyfthe commandment under the name of father and mother, is
understand all superiors, And in the syxte commandment under the name of
killing, is understand all wrath and reuengynge, And in the seventh
commandment under the name of adultery is understand all unchaste living,
And in the.viii. commandment under the name of theft is understand all
deceytfull dealing with our neighbors, And in the.ix. commandment under the
name of false wytnes, is understand all mysvse of the tongue: So in this
last commandment under the name of desiring of an other man's wife and
goods, is understand all manner of yuell and unlawful desire of any thing.
And like as in this precepte is forbydde all yuell desires: Even so in the
same be commanded all good desires, good affections, good inclinations to
godly things, and the perfyte obedience of our hearts unto goddis will. Which
all though we shall not fully and absolutely atteyne unto, while we be in this
life: yet this commandment does bind us to enforce and endeavor our selves
thereunto by contynuall resystynge and fighting against the said corruption,
concupiscence, and evil desires. Forasmoche as they be the very root, and
spring, from whense does flow and grow all yuell deeds and viciouse
living. Mat. xv.
as Christ says in the gospel, From the heart springs all yuelle thoughts,
murder, adultery, fornication, theft, false witness, blasphemy. And the
same is showed daily by experience. For when a man desires an other man's
goods, if he can not have them: than he falls into envy, and grutcheth
against them, that have such goods, and desires evil toward them, and is
glad when they have loss or hurt. All which yuell affections proceed of
the said unlawful desire. i. Tim. vi
For as saynct Paul says, Such as be not content, but desire to be rich,
they fall into diverse temptations and snares of the diuelle, and in to many
noysom and unprofitable wisshes and desires, which drowneth men into perdicion
and destruction. For the rote of all evil is Cupidite or unlawful desire of
goods in this world. And such persons as have much followed this
covetousness, have erred from the faith, and wrapped them selfs in many
pangues and sorrows.

Fourthely we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
all manner of men be in such wise culpable of the transgression of this
commandment, that no man can justify him self in the sight of god. For god
looks through every man's heart, and fyndeth there in much corruption and
concupiscence, although in some more, some less, according as they have more
or less mortified their said flesshely and worldely concupiscence. And if
there were no more commandementes of god but this one: yet is there no man in
this world, but (if he diligently enserche his own heart, and confer it
with this commandment) he shall anon perceive, that he is many ways culpable
and guyltie before god, by transgressyon of this commandment, if god should
enter into strayte judgment with him, and deal with him according to justice
without mercy.

But among all other, they chiefly be transgressors of this commandment:
which by deliberation and full consent, cast their minds and studies to
accomplysshe the concupiscence and desire, which they have to obtain and
get an other man's wife, child, servant, house, land, corn, catall, or any
thing, or goods that be his.

And they also be transgressors of this commandment, which by envy be sorry
of their neighbors wealth and prosperetie: or be glad of their sorrow,
hynderaunce, or adversity. and also all they, which do not set their minds
and studies, to preserve, maynteyn, and defend unto their neighbors (as much
as lies in them) their wives, children, servants, howses, lands, goods,
and all that is theyrs. For (as before is declared) this commandment not only
forbyddeth us to desire from our neighbor any thing, which is his: but by
the same we be also commanded, gladdely to wysshe and woll unto him, that he
may quietely possess and enjoy all that god has sent him, be it never so
great habundaunce. And this mind we ought to bear unto every man by this
commandment, not only if they be our friends and lovers, but also if they be
our ennemies and adversaries.

Here follow certain notes necessary to be learned for the better
understanding of the ten commandments.
First it is to be noted, Exodus xix and. xx.
how that our lord not only delivered unto Moses, when he was in the
mount of Sina, two tables of stone, wherein these ten commandments were
written with goddis own finger, and not by Moises, ne any other creature: but
also how in the same place, and at the same time, god thretened to punisshe
all them grievously, and extremely, yea to the third and fourth generation,
which should transgress any of the said commandments and contrary, how
he promised to show mercy, and to give life everlasting to all them, that
should observe and keep the same. Which thing was afterward confyrmed by our
savior Christ. Luc. xviii
For when a certain great man asked him, what he should do to come unto the
life everlasting, Christ answered him and said, If thou wolte come unto the
kyngedome of heaven, keep the commandments.

Second it is to be noted, that all the works of mercy, and all good things,
which we be bound to do, and likewise all sins, which we be bound to
eschew and leave undone: be sufficiently contained and comprised in these two
tables. For where as our hole office and duty, as well to god as to our
neighbor, stands in heart, word, and deed, The first four precepts,
which be the precepts of the first table, conteyne our said hole duty
toward god. The six other precepts, which be precepts of the second
table, conteyne our hole duty toward our neighbor. For the first
commandment chiefly shows, how we ought to order our self unto god in
our hearts, by pure faith, hope, love, and dread. The second and fourth
shows, how we ought to order our selfs unto him in our outward acts and
deeds. The third shows, how we ought to order our selfs unto him in our
tongue and words. And likewise the.v. the.vi. the.vii. and.viii. do show,
how we should order our outward acts and deeds unto our neighbors. The.ix.
how we should order our words and tongues unto them. And the.x. how we
should be toward them in heart and mind.

Thyrdely it is to be noted, That for as much as out of a good heart, endewed
and replenysshed with the love of god and our neighbor, spryngeth forth all
good words and works: And out of an yuell heart, void of the love and dread
of god, and replenysshed with hate and malice toward our neighbor, spryngeth
forth all yuell words and works. according to the saying of our sauyoure in
the gospel, where he says, That a good man out of the good treasoure of his
heart brings forth all those things that be good: Mat. xi
and an yuell man out of the yuell treasure of his heart brings forth those
things that be yuell. Therefore our savior Christ reduces all these ten
commandments unto two commandments, belonging to the hatte, that is to
say to the love of god, and our neighbor. Mat. xxii
For where as the pharisees came unto Christ, and said, Master, which is the
greatest commandment of the law, our sauyoure answered them, and said, The
chief and the greatest commandment is, that thou shalt love thy lord god,
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. And the second,
like to this, is, that thou shalt love thy neighbor even as thy self. And
in these two commandments stands and consysteth all the hole law and the
prophets.

These be the words of Christ, wherein it is further to be noted, that to love
our lord god with all our heart, soul, and mind, is to set all our hole
mind and thought, to know him, to honor him to please him, and to love him
vnsaynedly above al other things in the world. For he is a ielous god, and
wol not be content, onles we yield unto him, our hole heart and love. And if we
shall set or fyxe any part of our heart or love upon the world, or the
flesh: no doubt god woll not be parttaker of our love. For he requires the
hole love of our hearts, and that we shall love nothing but him or for him,
and that so heartily, that (if case require) we shall not refuse to suffer any
bodyly punysshemente, nor yet death for his sake. And this love toward him
we do declare: when we set our minds to observe and fulfill his
commandments. For as Christ says in the gospel, Ion^. xiiii.
He that has my commandments, and keeps them, it is he that loves me. And
contrary, the love and charity of god and our neighbor (as sayncte Paul
says) is the fulfyllynge of all the hole law. Romans xiii
For no doubt if we love god above all things: thanne we love him more than
our selfs. And if we love him more than our self: than woll we follow in all
things his will, and not our own. And in like manner, if we love god above all
things: than do we love him above our neighbor, and so we woll for nothing
fulfill the will of our neighbor against his will. and as the love of god
above all things should so keep, direct, and guide us, that for no love or
pleasure to our self, or to our neighbor, we should wyllyngely transgress
the least part of any of the ten commandments: In like wise the hearty
and fervent love, that we should bear to our neighbor, as to our selfs,
should preserve and keep us, that we should not kylle him, nor commit
adultery with his wife, nor steal his goods, nor bear false wytnes against
him, nor by any means do, speak. or wyshe any manner of yuell unto him, but we
should with heart, tongue, and hands, wyshe, speak, and work all goodness
toward him, as sayncte Paul says, He that loves his neighbor, Romans xiii.
has fulfilled the law. For these commandments, Thou shalt not commytte
adulterye, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shalt not bear
false wytnes, Thou shalt not desire, and such other commandments be all
comprysed in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Mat. xxii
For if we love our neighbor as our self: tha^ must we use our self toward
hym' as we would that he should use him self toward us. that is to say, we
must do for him, as we of reason will, and desire that he should do for us, and
desire and wyshe toward him, as we of reason would that he should desire and
wish toward us. This is the law of nature, this is the law of the gospel.
And therefore let us keep these two commandments: and than we shall keep the
hole law. for as saynct Paul says, The fulfyllynge of the law is love and
charity.

Fourthly it is to be noted, that there be three consyderations, for the which
all true christen men ought to employ their labor and diligence to know
these ten commandments. The first consideration is, for that in these
commau^deme^tes god has sufficiently declared unto us his will and pleasure,
as well what he would have us to do, as what he would have us not to do. The
second consideration is, for that we may know hereby our infirmity, sin,
and damnation. For when we look ernestely upon these commandments of god,
and consider what thyngis god requires of us in them: we shall se our selves
as in a myrrour or glass, and shall easily perceive, how far we be from the
true and perfyt obseruyng of the same commandments. and so we shall perceive
our own defautes, our own myserie, noughtynes, Roma. iii.
and our own damnable estate, as saint Paul says, By the law of the
commandments we may know our sins. The third consideration is, for that
by these co^mandementes, we may also attain the knowledge of goddis mercy.
For when we perceive, that of our selfs we have no strenght, goodness, or liefe
eternal, but weakness, syynne, and everlasting death: than we may evidently
se, how much need we have of the mercy of god, and to have a savior and
redemer to pay a ransom for our sins and to deliver us from everlasting
captivity, damnation, and death, due unto us for the same. And therefore saint
Paul says, The law was our school master, conductour, and leader unto
Christ, Gala. iii.
that we might be justified by faith, that is to say, by goodis mercy, which
Christ obtained for us.

Fiftely it is to be noted, that although these laws and commandments of
god, teach us, what is good, and what we should do to please god: yet they
give not unto us strength and power to do the same: but all such strength
comes of god, by his singular grace, and gift. And therefore as almighty god
taught us by his prophet Moses, what we should do: so he taught us by his
son Jesus Christ, what we should ask. For as these ten commandments do
teach us, what is goddis will, so the Pater noster teaches us, that we should
daily and continually pray to the father of heaven, that it may please him, to
give us his help and grace, to do all his will, that is to say, to do all
that is good, and eschew that is yuell. For surely god commands us things,
which we, of our selfs can not do: because we might learn, what of him we
should ask. And therefore after the declaration of these ten commandments
in manner as is before expressed, we shall descend now unto the declaration of
the Pater noster.

Here follows the fourth part of this Treatise containing the exposition of
the Pater noster, and the Aue Maria.
The Pater noster divided into seven petitions.
1 Our father that art in heaven, thy name be hallowed. 2 Thy kyngedome come
unto us. 3 Thy will be done and fulfilled in earth, as it is in heaven. 4 Give
us, this day our daily bread. 5 And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive
them that trespass against us. 6 And lead us not in to temptation. 7 But
deliver us from the evil. Amen.
The sense and interpretation of the first Petition.
O God Almighty our most dear heavenly father, which of thine infinite
benevolence, and only mercy have taught, and commanded us, by thy only and
dear beloved son Jesus Christ, to believe constantely: that for his sake, thou
haste admytted us into the nombre of thy children, and made us the very
inherytours of thy kyngedome, (where as in deed thou myghtest, of justice and
good right, have utterly renounced and refused us for thy children, and have been a strayt and a grievous Judge against us sinners, for as much as we have so
often, and so abhomynably offended, and transgressed thy godly and most holy
will, and have given the so just occasyon of dyspleasure ageynste us) Lo here
we now thy children, having conceived in our hearts ferme and steadfast
trust of thy fatherly love toward us, and lamenting in our hearts to see,
how many ways thy godly name is dishonored and blasphemed here in this vale
of myserie. We most humbly, and even from the rote, and botome of our hearts
beseech and pray the, that thy name may be hallowed, honored, praised, and
glorified, among us here in this world. Make (we beseech the) that al
wytchecraftes, and false charms, may be utterly abolisshe among us. Cause all
coniurations, by the which Satan, or other creatures be enchaunted to cesse by
thy blessed name. Make that all false faith, by the which men either mystrust
the, or put their confydence in any other thing than in the: may be destroyed.
Make that all heresies and false doctrines may vanysshe away, and that thy
word may be trewely taught and set forth unto all the world and that all
infidels may receive the same, and be converted unto the right catholyke
faith. Make that we be not deceived by hypocrisy, or counterfaytyng of
truth, of righteousness, or of holiness. Make that no man swear in vain by thy
name, or abuse thy name to lie, or to deceive his neighbor. Keep us from
pride, and from the vain ambition and desire of worldely glory and fame. Keep
us from all envy, malice, covetousness, adultery, gloteny, slouthe, from
backbytynge, and sclaunderynge of our neighbors, and from all other yuell
and wicked thoughts, and deeds, whereby thy name may be dishonored and
blasphemed. Grant us that in all peryls and dangers we may run unto the, as
unto our only refuge, and call upon thy holy name. Grant, that in our good
words and works, we may only please and magnify the. Keep us from the most
dampnable sin of unkindness toward the. Grant, that we, which do already
profess thy right faith, may still continue in the same: and may declare
and express the same, as well in our outward conversation, as in professynge
the same with our mouth. Grant, that by our good life and our good works all
other may be moved to good: and that by our yuell works and sins no man may
take occasyon to sclaunder thy name, or diminisshe thy laud and praise. keep
us that we desire nothing, which should not return to the honor and praise
of thy name. And if we ask any such thing: hear not our folysshnes. Make
that our life be such, that we may be truly found thy children in deed, and
that we shall not in vain call the our father: but that in all things we may
study and seek for the honor and glory of thy name.

For the better and more ample declaratyon of this first petition, we think it
conuenyent, that al bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the
people, committed unto their spiritual charge, First, that our savior Jesus
Christ, was the auctour and maker of the Pater noster. And that therefore like
as he was of infinite wisdom and of infinite love and charytie toward us:
Even so all christen men ought to think and believe, that the same prayer is
the most excellent, and the most sufficient and most perfect of all others.
And surely so it is in very deed. For neither there is any thing in this
prayer superfluous, neither there wants any petition, suite, or request,
which may be necessary for our journey and passage in this world, or for our
furtheraunce to the attaynynge of the life and glory everlasting.

Psalm. ix. and Psalm. c. xvii. et Psalm c. xxxvii. et Pro. iii. and Sa. viii.
Mat. vii.


Second, that every good christen man may be assured to attain his
requests, made in this prayer, if he shall enforce him self, and apply his
hole heart, and will to the will and grace of him, unto whom this prayer is
made, and also if he shall utter and offer the said petitions inwardely with
his heart, and with such confidence and trust in god, as he requires. For
surely no prayer is thankful unto god, but that, which spryngeth from the
heart. And therefore the prophet David cries to our lord with all his heart.
And Moses is noted to cry out alowde, when he spoke no word with his mouth:
but he spoke alowde in his heart. Esai. xxix Mat. xv.
And our lord by his prophet notes, that some pray with their lyppes, and
in their heart mind nothing less than that, which they pray for. And
therefore who so ever entendeth by saying of this Pater noster, to attayn that
he desires in the same, he must first here him self, and understand what he
says, and so conioyne the word of his mouth with the same word in his heart,
and say, as the prophet David said, Psalm. lxx. et. Cxviii
The hymns and praysynges, which I shall yield to the good lord, shall issue
out from the inward lyppes of my heart, to the lyppes of my mouth: when I
shall sing lawdes and praises unto the.

Thyrdely, that all christen men ought to conceive great comfort, and joy in
that they be taught and commanded in this prayer, to take almighty god for
their father, and so to call him. If our soueraygne lord the king would say
to any of us, take me for your father, and so call me: what joy in heart,
what comfort, what confidence, would we conceive of so favorable and gracious
words? Much more than incomparably have we cause to rejoice, that the king
and prince of al princes shows unto us this grace and goodness, to make us his
children. And surely as the natural son may assuredly trust, that his father
wol do for him, al things that may be for his setting forth, and
auauncement: even so we may undoubtedly assure our selfs, that having
almighty god to our father, we shall lack nothing, neither in this world, nor
in the world to come, which may be profitable and expedyent for us toward
the everlasting enheritaunce, which our heavenly father has prepared for us.

Fourthely, that like as this word Father declares the great benevolence,
mercy, and love of god toward us: so it admonyssheth us again of our duty
toward him, and how we be bound to show again unto him our hole hearty
love, and our obedyence, and redynes to fulfill all his precepts, and
commandments with all gladness and humility. And therefore who so ever
presumethe to come to god with this prayer, and to call him Father, and yet
has not full entente and purpose to use him self in all things like a kind
and an obedyente son: he comes to him as Judas came to Christ with a
kiss, pretendynge to be his friend and his servant in calling him master,
and yet he was in deed a traitor to him, and a deadely ennemie. And for this
consyderation every christen manne, that entendeth to make this peayer, ought
inwardely and throughoutly to enserche and examyne him self. And if he find
in him self any notable crime, Luc. xv.
for the which he may be ashamed to call god his father, let him accuse him
self thereof to god, and recognyse his unworthiness, saying as the prodygall
son said: Father, I have offended the, I am not worthy to be called thy
son. And with intiere repentance, and with ferme purpose, and entente to
amend his noughty life, let him lift up his heart unto his celestial father,
And let him call for his grace of reconciliation: and then let him boldly
say this Pater noster.

Fyftly that in these words, Our father, is signified, that we ought to
believe, not only that almighty god is the commune father of all christen
people, and equally and indyfferently regards the rich and the poor, the
free and the bond, the lord and the subject, but also that all christen
people be Christis own brethren, and the very coenheritours and
compartioners with him in the kyngedome of heaven, and finally that al christen
men be brethren to gyther, and have all one father, which is god almyghtye.
And that therefore we ought not only to be of one spyryte toward our said
father, Ephe iiii.
and to employ and endeavor our selfs to the vttermoste to plese him, and to
keep his laws and commandments: but we ought also each to consent with
other in parfyte love and charity, and each to help and further other
toward our said inheritance in heaven, and finally in all our prayers to god
each to comprise other, and to pray for other. like as in this Pater noster we
be taught to say, Our father give us our bread, forgive us our sins,
suffer us not to fall in temptation, and deliver us from yuell.

Sixtely by these words, which art in heaven, we be taught that we ought to
have, not only an inward desire, and a great care and study to come to that
place, where our heavenly father is: but also an inward sorrow and grief, that
we be so long kept from the presence of our heavenly father, and be subject
here unto so manyfolde cures and thoughts, to so many troubles and misery,
and to so many, and so grievous perils and dangers of the world, of sin,
and of the dyuell. For like as a loving child is ever desirous to be where
his father is, and if his father shall depart to any place, he woll lamente
and be sorye, oneles he may go with him, and in his absence he woll morn, and
at his return he woll be joyful: even so ought we desire ever to be with
our heavenly father. And to se that our conversation be all withdrawn from
the world, the flesh, and the dyuell, and be set in heaven and heavenly
things, as sayncte Paul says. Ephe. iiii philip. iii
And we ought contynually to wayle, and lamente, because we be not with our
heavenly father, saying with the prophet, woeful am I, Psalm. cix.
that my dwelling upon the earth is so much prolonged.

The sense and interpretation of the second petition.
O God almighty, our most merciful father, we thy wretched children most
humbly beseech and pray the, help us by thy grace, not only that we may
attain and come to thy kyngedome in heaven after this mortal life: but also
that in this present life we may be delivered from the kyngedome and power of
the dyuell and sin. and that we may live under thy dominion and kingdom,
which is the kyngedome of innocence and grace. We confess and knowledge our
folly, our blyndenes, yea and our extreme unkindness toward the our most
merciful father, in that we have so wyllyngly and gladly forsaken the so
mighty and so gracious a king, and have given our selfs to serve the dyuell,
which has ever hated us, and like a most cruel and wicked tyranne has ever
vexed and troubled us, nor never goth about any other thing, but to dystroy
us: where as thou our merciful father haste created and made us, when we were
nothing: haste redeemed us, when we were damned, and haste ordained
everlasting life for us, when for our sins we should have been judged to
everlasting death. And therefore consyderyng now this our own madness and
ingratitude, and being weary of this miserable thraldom, and bondage, which we
sustain under this kingdom of the dyuell and sin, help us (we pray the)
most dear father, that we may escape from out of this most wretched thraldom
and captivity, and that we may be subject unto thy kingdom. Give us before
all things true and constant faith in the, and in thy son Jesus Christ, and
in the holy ghost. Give us pure love and charity toward the and al men. Keep
us from infidelity, desperation, and malice, which might be the cause of our
destruction. deliver us from dissensions, covetousness, lechery, and all yuell
desires and lusts of sin. Make the virtue of thy kyngedome so to come, and
to reygne within us, that al our heart, mind, and wits, with all our
strength inward and outward, may suffer them self to be ruled by the, to
serve the, to observe thy commandments and thy will, not them self, the
flesh, the world, or the dyuell. Make, that thy kyngedome ones in us
begone, may be daily increased, and go forward more and more. Suffer not the
subtle and secret hate or sloth, which we have to goodness, to rule so in
us: that it shall cause us to look back again, and to fall in to sin. Give
us a stable purpose and strength, not only to begin the life of innocencye
in thy kyngedome: but also to proceed ernestely in it, and to perform it.
Lyghten our eien, Psalm. xii.
lest we sleep or be werye in good life ones begone: and so suffer out
ennemie, to bring us again under his power. Grant, that we may continue in
goodness: and that after this kyngedome, which is begone in this life, we may
come unto thy heavenly kyngedome, which indureth ever.

For the better understanding of this second petition, we think it
conuenyent, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the
people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that this second peticion is
very necessary. For no doubt our ancient ennemy the dyuell, gothe about
contynually by all craft and means to deceive us, and to bring us under his
power and dominion. And surely so long as pride, or dysobedience reygneth in
us, so long as ire, envy, wrath, or covetousness reygneth in us, so long as
slouthe, glottony, lechery, or any kind of sin reigns in us: so long we
be under the dominion and kyngedome of the dyuell. For the dyuell (undoubtedly)
is king over all the children of pride, that is to say, over all them, that be
sinners, rebels, and disobedient unto god. And for asmoche as it is not in
our powers to deliver our selfs from under this tyranny of the dyuell, Osee.
xiii.
but only by goddis help (for our perdicion and undoing is of our selfs,
but our help and salvation is only of god, as faith the prophet Osee)
therefore it is very necessary for all true christen people, to make this
peticion incessantlye unto our heavenly father, and to beseech him, according to
this doctrine of Christ, that by his grace and help, we may escape the
dominion and power of the dyuell, and that we may be made subject unto his
heavenly kingdom.

The sense and interpretation of the third petition.
FAther, grant us we beseech the, that like as thy holy Angels and saynctes
in heaven, in whom thou reygnest perfytely and holy, do never cesse, ne shall
cesse to gloryfy the, and praise the, and to fulfill thy will and pleasure in
all things, and that most redyly and gladly, without any manner of grutchynge
or resystynge thereunto, knowing certaynely and clearly, that thy will is
always best: Even so we thy children here on earth may daily and contynually
praise the, by our holy conversation in good works, and good life, i. Petr. i.
and that we may from time to time so mortify our own carnal affections
and yuell desires, and so renounce and deny our own corrupt and sinful
appetite, and will, that we may be ever ready like loving children, humblye,
lowely, and obedyently to approve allow and accomplysshe thy will in all
things, and to submytte our self with all our heart unto the same. And to
knowledge, that what so ever is thy will, the same is most parfyte, most
just, most holy, and most expedyent for the welthe and health of our souls.
Give us true and stable patience, when our will is letten and broken. Grant
us, that when any man speaks or does any thing contrary to our will, that
therefore we be not out of patience, neither curse or murmr. Grant, that we
seek not vengeance against our adversaries, or them, which let our will: but
that we may say well of them, and do good to them. Endue us with thy grace,
that we may gladly suffer all dyseases, poverty, dyspysynges, persecutions,
and adversities, knowing that it is thy will, that we should crucify, and
mortify our wyls. Make us, that we impute not to the dyuell or yuell men, when
any adversity chances unto us: but that we may attribute all to thy godly
will, and give the thanks therefore, which doste ordeyne all such things for
our weal and benefyte. Give us grace, that when so ever it shall please the
to call us out of this transytorie life, we may be willing to dye, and that
for thy will, we may take our death gladly: so that by fear or infirmity, we
be not made dysobedient unto the. Make, that al our members, eyes, tongue,
heart, hand, and feet, be not suffered to follow their desires: but that all
may be used to thy will and pleasure. Give us grace, that we malycyousely
rejoice not in their troubles, which have resysted our will, or have hurted
us: nor that we be enuyously sorry, when they prospere, and have welfare. And
finally that we may be contented and pleased with all thing, that is thy will.

For the better understanding of this third petition we think it convenient,
that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall instruct and teach the people,
committed unto their spyrytuall charge, how that by the occasyon, and ever
sithe the dysobedyence and sin of our first father Adam: the will of man
has been so corrupted with original sin, that we be all utterly enclyned to
dysobeye the will and precepts of god, and so to love our selfs, and our own
wylles, that without a specyal grace and a synguler inspiration of god, we can
not hertely love neither god nor man, but in respect to our selfs, as we may
have benefytte and commodity by them.

Item that we have this corruption in our nature, and this inordynate love of
our selfs from Adam, as it were by enherytaunce: and that it goethe from one
to an other, from the fathers and mothers unto the children, as soon as they
be conceived within their mothers wombes. For as the children take of their
parents their original and natural qualities and conditions: even so they
receive with the same this orygynall corruption of nature, which comes by
original sin. And though the parents be never so clean purged and pardoned
of their original sin, by baptysme, and by the grace and mercy of god, and
be drawn up from the love of their selfs, and of these worldely things unto
the pure love of god: yet nevertheless the children of them be gotten, be
conceived and borne in original sin and corruption, loving the^ selfs
better than god or man. like as corn, though it be never so clean wynnowed
and purged from chafe, yet if it be sown, the young sede is full of chafe
again, until it be wynnowed and made clean: Even so be the children borne full
of chafe and corruption of original sin, until that by baptism in the
blood of our savior Jesus Christ they be washed and purged, as their parents
were.

Item that so long as we be in this mortal life, we shall never be so clean
purged from this concupiscence and this inordinate love of our self, and of
this world, and of worldly things and pleasures: but some rote woll ever
remain of this corrupt wede. Which (if the grace of god help us not, and we
also apply not al our forces to mortify and overcome the same) no doubt woll
so ouergrowe the hoole gardeyne of our heart, that there shall be left no
good herb therein, but it shall be so ouergrowen with the love of our self and
of this world, that the love of god and our neighbor shall contynually decay
from time to time, and at length it shall grow, not only to a negligence and a
small regarding: but also unto an vttter contempt both of god and of our
neighbor, and than we shall appertain holly unto the city of the dyuell. For
as saynct Augustine says, There be in this world two cities, the one builded
by god, in the which he reygneth as a most gracious lord and king: The
other is builded by the dyuel, wherein the dyuel reigns as a most mercylesse
and cruel tyranne. The city of god consists, and is inhabited of them,
which love god so much, that for to accomplish his will and commandments
they be content to refuse their own wylles and pleasures. The city of the
dyuell has inhabytantes all such as love them selfs so much, that (for to
have their own wylles and pleasures here in this world) they care not or
little regard the will, pleasure, and commandments of god. And therefore
surely we have greatte need contynually to pray (according to Christ's
doctrine in this third petition) for aid unto our heavenly father, that being
thus clothed and encombred with this corruptyble flesh here in this world
(which dulleth and draws down man's mind, as the wise man says) It may
please him to grant us the grace, that so long as we live here, we may
fulfylle his will in all things, and not our own, and so to have a dwelling
place in his city. And contrary, that the dyuelle may never have power to
take us, and to bring us unto his city and possessyon.

The sense and interpretation of the fourth Petition.
O Our heavenly father we beseech the, give us this day our daily breadde.
Give us meat, drink, and clothing for our bodies. Send us increase of
corn, fruit, and catayle. Give us health and strength, rest, and peace,
that we may lead a peasible and a quiet life in all godliness, and honesty
Grant us good success in all our busynes, and help in aduersytie and peril.
Grant us, we beseech the, all things convenient for our necessity in this
temporalle life. And to the^, to whom thou do vouchsafe to give more than
their own portion necessary for their vocation, and degree: give thy grace,
that they may be thy dylygent and true dyspensatours and stewardes, to
dystrybute that they have (over and above that is necessary, considering
their astate and degree) to them that have need of it. For so (good lord) thou
do provide for thy poor people, that have nothing: by the^ which have of
thy gift suffycyent to relieve them self and other. And give also thy grace
to us, that we have not to much solicitude and care for these transytorye and
unstable things: but that our hearts may be fyxed in things, which be
eternal, and in thy kyngedome, which is everlasting. And yet more over (good
lord) not only give us our necessaries: but also conserve that, thou do
give us, and cause that it may come to our use, and by us to the poor people,
for whom by us thou have provided. Give us grace, that we may be fed and
nourisshed with all the life of Christ, that is to say, both his words, and
works. And that they may be to us an effectual example and spectacle of al
virtues. Grant, that al they, that preach thy word, may profytably and godly
preach the, and thy son Jesus Christ through all the world. And that all we,
which here thy word preached, may so be fed therewith, that not only we may
outwardely receive the same: but also digest it within our hearts, and that it
may so work and feed every part of us, that it may appear in all the acts
and deeds of our life. Grant, that the holy sacrament of the Altar, which
is the bread of life, and the very flesh and blood of thy son Jesus
Christ, may be purely mynystred and dystrybuted to the comfort and benefyte
of all us thy people: and that we also may receive the same with a right faith
and perfyte charytie, at all times, when we ought to receive the same. and
specially against our death, and departing out of this world, so that we
may be than spiritually fed with the same to our salvation, and thereby enjoy
the life everlasting. Give us an inward hungre and thyrste to have thy word,
and the ryghtuous living, taught in the same. Grant this also merciful
father, that all false doctrines, contrary to thy word, which fedeth not but
poysoneth, and kylleth the soul, may be utterly extincte and cast away out of
thy Church, so that we may be fed as well with the true doctrine of thy
word, as with all other things necessary for us in this life.

For the better understanding of this fourth petition, we think it
convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the
people, committed unto their spiritual charge. First, how that our lord
teaches us not in this petition to ask any superfluous things, or things of
pleasure or delight, but only things sufficient. And therefore he byddeth us
only ask bread, wherein is not mente superfluous riches or great substance
or habundaunce of things above our estate and condycyon: but such things
only as be necessary and suffycyent for every man in his degree. And that this
is the meaning of this word, i. Tim. vi
saynct Paul declares at good length, where he says, we have brought
nothing in to this world, ne shall take any thing with us, wha^ we shall
depart hense. And therefore if we have meat and drink and clothe, that is to
say, things sufficient, we ought to hold our self content. For they, that
set their minds on riches, and woll have superfluities, more than needs, or
is expedient to their vocation: they fall into dangerous temptations, and into
the snares of the dyuell, and into many and unprofitable and noisome desires,
which drown men into perdicion, and everlasting damnation. for the spring
and rote of all euyls is such superfluous desire. Prou. iii.
The wise man also making his suite to our lord says, Give me neither
poverty ne excess, but only things sufficient for my living, left that
having to much I be provoked to deny god, and to forgette who is the lord:
and on the other side, lest that by poverty constrained, I fall unto theft,
and forswear the name of my god. These two wise men, the one of the old, and
the other of the new testamente, agree with the lesson of our savior, Both
ask bread, that is things necessary, and both refuse and renounce
superfluities, as things unprofitable, dangerous, and noisome.

Second, that in these words of our savior Jesus Christ, be reproved all
those persons, which eat not their own bread, but deuoureth other men's
bread. Of which sort be all those, which live of rauyn and spoils, of
theft, of extorcyon, of craft, and deceyte. Item all they, which neither
labor with their hands, nor otherwise apply their study, industry, and
dylygence to some thing, which is good and beneficial in the common weal,
and to the honor of god, but live in ease, rest, ydelnes, and wanton
pleasures, without doing or carynge for any such thing.

Item all they, which being called in this world, unto any room, office, or
authority, do abuse the same, and do not employ them self according to their
vocation.

Thyrdely that although we be bound by labor, or other laufull means to
provide for our selfs from time to time a suffycyent living: yet we must
surely believe, and trust, that our father in heaven prouydeth for us also, and
that all our own prouysyon, and industry is in vain, without his prouysyon.
For it is he that gives unto us, and takes from us, at his pleasure more or
less. Therefore not withstanding all our own labor, industrye, and
dylygence: yet we must thank him for all that we have. of him must we hang.
in him must we cast our hole hope and trust, that he shall send us
sufficient, and in no wise mystruste him. For if he provide sufficiently for
all fysshes and birds, and other creatures, which labor not for their
living as we do, how much more ought we, being his own children, and
also using all labor and diligence to get our lyuynges, to trust that our
father, which has all things in his disposition, will se unto us, that we
shall lack nothing necessary? And as the husband man tylleth and sows his
ground, wedeth it, and keeps it from destroyenge, and yet he prays to god
for thencrease, and puts all his trust in him to send him more or less at
his pleasure: Even so besides our own diligence, policy, labor, and
travail, we must also pray daily to god, to send us sufficient. and we must
take thankfully at his hands all that is sent. and be no further careful, but
put our hole confidence and trust in him. For our sauyoure Christ says in
the gospel, Matt, ix,
I say to you be not careful for your living, what you shall eat, ne what
clothes you shall wear. Is not life better than your meat, and your body
better than your clothing? Look upon the birds of the air, they sow not,
they reap not, they bring nothing into the barn: but your heavenly father
feadeth them. Be not you of more price then they? Look upon the lillies in the
fyelde, they labor not, they spynne not, and yet I tell you, that Solomon in
all his precious and royal apparel was not so clothed as one of them.
Therefore care you not for these things. Leave this care to them, that know
not god. Your heavenly father knows, that you have need of all these things.
but seek you first the kingdom of god, and his ryghtuousnes: and than god
shall cast all these things unto you.

These be the words of Christ, full of good and comfortable lessons, that we
should not care, ne set our hearts to much upon these worldly things: ne
care so much for to morrow, that we shall seem to mystruste our lord. And
that we should sequester this care from us, and seek for the kyngedome of
god, and employe our selfs holly, to the getting thereof: and than he makes a
comfortable promise, that we shall not lack things necessary for us. And
although our lord has so provided for some, that they have all ready
sufficient and plenty for many days or years: yet that not withstanding they
ought to make this petition to god, and say, Give us this day our daily
bread. For asmoche as their substance (though it be never so great) like as
it could not have been gotten without god had sent it: so it can not prospere
and continue, except god preserve it. For how many great rich men have we
known suddenly made pore, some by fire, some by water, some by theft, some by
exchete, and many other ways? Was not Job the one day, the rychest man that
was in all the Estlande: and the morrow after had utterly nothing? It is
therefore as needful to pray our lord to preserve that, he has given us: as
to pray him to give it. For if he give it, and do not preserve it: we shall
have no use of it.

Fourthely, that by this bread, which our sauyoure teaches us to ask in
this petytyon, is pryncypally mente the word of god, which is the spiritual
bread, that fedeth the soul. For as the body is nourysshed, brought up,
grows, and fedeth with bread and meat: so needs the soul even from our
youth to be nourisshed and brought up with the word of god, and to be fed
daily with it. And like as the body wol faynte and decay, if it be not from
time to time releued and refresshed with bodyly sustenaunce, even so the soul
waxes feeble and weak toward god, oneles the same be contynually cherysshed,
Mat. iiii.
refresshed, and kept up with the word of god, according to the saying of
Christ. A man lives not with meat only, but by every word that proceeds
from the mouth of god. And surely there is no other thing that can feed and
comfort the soul, but only this bread of the word of god. For if we have
adversity in this world, as poverty, sycknes, imprisonment, and such other
myseries, where should we seek for comfort, but at goddis words? if we think
our self so holy, that we be without sin, where should we find a glass to se
our sins in, but in the word of god? If we be so full of sins, that we be
like to fall in to desperation, where can we have comfort, and learn to
know the mercy of god, but only in gods word? Where shall we have armure
to fight against our three great ennemies, the world, the flesh, and the
dyuell, where shall we have strength and power to withstand them, but only
as Christ did in and by the word of god? And finally if we have any manner of
sickness or disease, in our sowles, what medicine or remedy can we have, but
only the word of god? So that the word of god is the very bread of the
soul. And therefore as well for this bread of the soul, as also for the
bread and daily sustenaunce of the body, our sauyoure Christ teaches us to
pray in this fourth petition.

The sense and interpretation of the fyfthe petition.
Our heavenly father, loo we wretched sinners, knowlegynge and confessing unto
the our most merciful father, the great and manyfolde sins, wherewith our
conscience is contynually combred, and having none other refuge, but unto thy
mercy, we most humbly beseech the, comfort our conscience both now and in
the hour of our death, which is now abashed and asshamed to look upon our
sin and iniquity, and than also shall be more asshamed and afraid,
remembrynge thy hard and strayte judgment, which shall than be at hand. Give
us thy peace in our hearts, that we to our comfort may look for thy judgment.
Enter not into judgment against us with the strayte extremity of thy justice.
Psalm. xxx.
for in thy sight no man shall be found innocente or ryghtuous, but manyfolde
ways to have sinned against the. Give us grace dear father, not to stycke,
stay, or ground our selfs in our own good works, or deservings: but to
give and submyt our selfs plainly and faithfully, to thine infynyte and
incomparable mercy. Help and comfort all men's conscience, which in point
of death, or in any such other temptation are vexed with desperation. Forgive
both them, and us, our offenses, comfort us, refresshe us, and be reconciled
unto us. Judge us not after the accusation of the dyuell, and our wretched
consciences, neither here the voice of our enemies, which accuse us day and
night before the. But like as we forgive them heartily which trespass against
us: Even so we beseech the forgive us the manyfolde sins, whereby from our
youth we have provoked thy dyspleasure, and wrath against us, and daily do
provoke it, by doing that is yuell, and omyttynge that is good. And so wasshe
our sins daily more and more, through the blood of thy son and our
sauyoure Jesus Christ. And for asmoche as it is al repugnant, and contrary unto
our frail and corrupt nature, to love them, which hate us, or to forgive
them (without reuengynge) which do hurt or offend us: give us (we beseech
the) this heavenly grace, and make thou our hearts so meke and gentle, that we
may gladly and unfeignedly forgive them, which have hated or hurted us in
word or in dead, and that we may behave our self unto all men, friends and
foes with such mercy, gentylnes, and kyndenes: as we would desire not only
that they, but also that thou, good lord, should use unto us. For we can not
other wise trust or look for any forgyuenes or remyssion of our trespasses at
thy hands: oneles we shall, according to thy commandment, forgive all them
that have trespassed in any wise against us.

For the better understanding of this fyfte Petition, we think it conuenyent,
that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall instruct and teach the people,
committed unto their spiritual charge, that no man ought to glory in him
self, as though he were innocent, and without sin: but rather that every
good christen man (without exception) ought to knowledge him self to be a
sinner, and that he has need to ask forgyuenes of god for his sins, and to
require him of his mercy. For doubtless he daily commytteth sin, which is
commanded daily to ask remyssyon of his sins. i. Joan. i.
And saint John^ says in his epistle, If we say, that we be without sin, we
deceive our selfs, and troth is not in us.

Second that god woll not forgive us our sins, but upon condition, that we
shall likewise forgive all them, which trespass against us: and that not in
tongue only, but also in our hearts. And that this is a certain sure law and
decree of god, Christ declares in sundry places of the gospel. Mat. vi.
For first by express words Christ says, If you forgive men their
offenses done ageynste you: your heavenly father woll forgive you your offenses.
And if you woll not forgive them that offend you: be you assured, your father
woll not forgive you your offenses. And in an other place, when Peter came to
our lord, Mat. xviii.
and demanded of him, how often he should forgive his brother, which had
offended him, and whether it were not sufficient to forgive him seven times?
Our lord answered him and said, I tell the Peter, that thou ought to
forgive him, not only seven times, but seventy times seven times, meaning
thereby, that from time to time, we must contynuallye forgive our brother, or
neighbor, although he trespass against us never so often. And Christ also
declares the same by a Parabole. Mat. xviii.
There was (says Christ) a king, which calling his servants unto an
account, and finding that one of them should owe unto him the sum of.x.M.
talentes: because he had it not to pay, commanded that the said dettoure, his
wife, and his children, and all that he had should be sold. But when this
dettour came unto the king, and prayed him on his knees, to have patience with
him, promising him to pay all: the king had pytie of him, and forgave him
the hole debt. It fortuned afterward, that this man, being thus acquitted, met
with an other of his fellows, that ought him but an hundred pence, and with
violence almoost strangled him, and said to him. Pay me my money. And the said
servant his fellow fell upon his knees, and prayde him to have patience,
promysyng to pay al. albe it he would not, but cast him into prison, until all
was paid. And when the rest of their fellows, seeing this cruelty, had told
the king thereof: the king forthwith sent for this cruel fellow, and said to
him, O wicked man, I forgave the thy hole det, at thy suite and request: It
should therefore have besemed the, to have showed like compassyon to thy fellow,
as I had showed to the. And the king being sore displeased with this
cruelty, committed him to tourmentours, that should roughly and straytly
handell him in prison, till he had paid the hole det. Upon this parabole
Christ infers, and says. Even so shall your heavenly father do with you, if
you woll not forgive every one of you his brother, even from the heart.

Thus it appears plainly, that if we woll be forgyuen, if we woll escape
everlasting damnation: we must heartily forgive those, which have trespassed
and offended against us. No man can offend us so much, as we offend god:
and yet he is always ready to forgive us. What ingratitude is it than, what
hardenes of heart, what cruelnes is in us, if we for his sake woll not forgive
one an another? There is none offense great, that man does to man: if it be
compared to our offenses against god. And therefore we may be well accounted to
have little respect and consyderation unto our own benefyte, if we wol not
remitte and forgive small fautes, done unto us, that we may have pardone and
forgyuenes of so many thousands of greatte offenses, which we have committed
against god. And if any peradventure wol think it to be a hard thing, to
suffer and forgive his ennemie, which in word and deed has done him many
dyspleasures: let him consider again, how many hard storms our savior
Christ suffered and abode for us. What were we when he gave his most precyouse
life and blood for us: but horrible sinners and his enemies? How mekely took
he for our sake all rebukes, mockes, byndyng, beatynge, crownynge with thorn,
and the most opprobrious death? Why do we boste us to be christen men, if we
care not for Christ, of whom we be so named, if we endeavor not our self to
take example at him? we be not worthy to have the name of the members: if we
follow not the heed. And if any wol say, that his ennemie is not worthy to be
forgyuen: let him consider, and think, that no more is he worthy to have
forgiveness of god. And by what equity or justice can we require, that god
should be merciful unto us, if we woll show no mercy, but extremytie unto
our neighbor and brother? Is it a great matter for one sinner to forgive an
other seeing that Christ forgave them that crucified him? And although thy
ennemie be not worthy to be forgyuen: yet we be worthy to forgive. And Christ
is worthy, that for his sake we should forgive. But surely it is above our
frail and corrupt nature, to love our ennemies, that do hate us, and to
forgive them that do hurt and offend us. Thus to do is a greatter grace tha^
can come of our selfs. Therefore our savior Christ teaches us to ask this
heavenly gift of our heavenly father, that we may forgive our ennemies, and that
he wol forgive us our trespasses, even so as we forgive them, that trespass
against us.

Thyrdly, that to forgive our brother his defaulte, is to pray to our lord,
that he woll forgive him, and woll not impute his offense to him: and to wysshe
to him the same grace and glory, that we desire unto our selfs, and in no
case to anoye him, but when occasyon shall come, to help him, as we be bound
to help our christen brother.

Fourthly, that none enemy can wysshe or desire more hurt unto us, than we
desire unto our own selfs, when we offer unto god this fyfthe petition: if we
woll not remyt and forgive our dyspleasure unto them, which offend us. For
what enemy was ever so malicious, or so far from all grace and humanity,
that would desire and daily pray to god, to send unto his enemy eternal
damnation, and that god should withdraw his mercy from him for ever? And
surely in this petition we ask continually these things of god, for our
selves, if we wol be mercyles toward our enemies, and will not forgive them
their trespasses. For none otherwise we do ask forgyuenes of god. but upon
this condition. that we shall forgive them, which trespass against us. And in
case we do not fulfill this condycyon: than we pray unto god, that he shall
never show mercy unto us, nor never forgive us our sins, but suffer us to
be dampened perpetually.

The sense and interpretation of the sixte Petition.
O Our heavenly father, lo we here thy most unworthy and miserable children,
feeling and considering the great and violente assaults, whereby not only
the dyuell and his wicked spirits, but also our own flesh and concupiscence
contynually do tempte and provoke us to break and violate thy most holy will
and commandments, and considering also our own ignorance, and fraylenes,
and how weak and unable we be to resyste so mighty and so crafty ennemies,
without thy heavenly grace, and help: we most humbly beseech the our most
dear father, help us, succoure us, and defend us in all temptations of the
dyuell, and of our own concupiscence, and suffer us not to be vanquisshed or
overthrown by them. Endue us so with thy grace, that we may withstand the
desires of the flesh. Make, that we may resyste and fight against all
temptation, which proceeds of superfluytie of meat and drink, sleep,
slouthe, or idleness. And that by temperance in diet, by fasting, watch, and
labor, we may be able to subdue the same, and be mete and apt to all good
works. Make that we may overcome the yuell desires of Lechery, with all
affections and instygacions thereof. Keep us, that the false subtilitie of this
world, and the vain intysementes of the same, bring us not to follow it. keep
us, that we be not drawn by the yuels and adversities of this world, to
impacience, auengemente, wrath, or such other vices. And that we may not to
much esteem the things, that belong to the world, nor inordynately love them:
but that we may renounce the same, according as we have promised in our
baptysme: And that we may continue in that same promise, going forward
therein daily more and more. Keep us from the intysementes of the dyuell, that
we consent not to any of his temptations or persuasio^s. Keep us, that he by no
suggestion bring us from the right faith, neither cause us to fall into
desperation, now, nor in the point of death. Put thy helping hand, heavenly
father, to them that fight and labor against these hard and manyfolde
temptations. Look most dear father upon us thy children, which, in this
most tempestuous and troublous see of this world, be tossed on every side
with the most peryllous waves of temptation, and be compassed about both
within and without with most dredefull and cruel ennemies. Defend us, we
beseech the of thy infinite goodness, and for thy son Jesus Christis sake, from
all these enemies and dangers: And give us thy grace and help, that they
never tempte us further, nor have greatter power over us, thanne we shall be
able to bear, resyste, and sustain. and that they may never overcome us, but
that we may ever have the over hand upon them.

For the more plain declaration of this syxte petition, we think it
conuenyent, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the
people, committed unto their spiritual charge, First that there be two manner
of temptations, whereof one comes and is sent unto us by god, who suffers
those, that be his, never to be without temptation, by one means or other,
for their probation and trial: albeit he so assysteth and aydeth them in all
such temptations, Ecclesi. xxvii.
that he turns all at the end unto their profytte and benefyte. For as the
wise man says, Like as the oven tries the potters vessel, so does temptation
of trouble try the ryghtuouse man. And with this manner of temptation, god
tempted sondrye wise our holy father Abraam. He tempted also Job with extreme
poverty, horrible sickness, and sodayn death of his children. And daily he
tempts and proves all his chosen and elect children, whom he loves. i.
Pet. v.
The other manner of temptation comes chiefly of the dyuell, which like a
furyous, and a wodde lion, runs and rages about perpetually, seeking how
he may devour us. And secondly it comes also of our own concupyscence,
which contynually inclines and stireth us unto all evil, as saint James says,
Jacob. i.
Every man is tempted, led, and intyced by his own concupiscence. This
concupiscence is an inclination, and pronitie, or redynes, and in manner a
violente dysposytyon of our own corrupt nature, to fall into all kind of
sins, which after the fall of Adam, all mankind has naturally grafted in
them: so that it is borne and grows, and shall dye with us, and not before.
There is no man so mortified, so sequestered from the world, ne so rauysshed in
spirit, in devotion, or in contemplation: but that this concupiscence is in
him. How be it, it reigns only in them, that yield unto it. It woll never
cesse, but one way or other it woll ever assault us. And if we do not fight
with it, and resist it contynually: it woll overcome us, and bring us into
bondage. So that between the dyuell, and this our concupiscence, all vice and
sins be engendered: like as between man and woman children be engendered.
According to the saying of saynct James, Jacob. i.
where he says: Concupiscence, when she does conceive, she brings forth
sin, and that of all sorts: that is to say, First acts and deeds, contrary
to the laws of god, and after that use and custom of the same deeds, and at
length blyndnes and contempt. For so the wise man says, Prouer. xviii.
The wicked man, when he comes to the bottom of sin, sets naught thereby:
but blinded with yuell custom, either thinks the sin, which he uses, to
be no sin, or else if he take it for sin, yet he cares not for it, but
either upon vain trust of the mercy of god, (which is in deed no right trust
but a very presumption) he wol continue still in purpose to sin, or else upon
vayn hope of long life, he wol prolonge, differ, and delay to do penance for
the same, until the last end of his life. And so often times prevented with
sudden death, dies without repentance. Wherefore considering how dangerous
it is to fall into sin, and how hard it is to arise: the chief and the
best way is to resyst with gods help the first suggestyon unto sin, and
not to suffer it to remain with us, but as soon as may be, to put it clean
out of our minds. For if we suffer it to have place in our hearts any while,
it is great peril, lest that consent and deed will follow shortly after.

Second that our sauyoure Jesus Christ teaches us not in this syxte petition,
to pray unto god our father, that we should be clearly without al temptation,
but that he wol not suffer us to be led into temptation, that is to say, when
we be tempted, that he suffer us not to be overcome therewith. For surely
temptations be profitable, if they do not overcome us. And therefore sayncte
Paul says, The true and faithful god wol not suffer us to be tempted above
that we may bear: but he woll turn temptation to our profit, i. Cor. i.
that we may sustain it and overcome it. And saint James says, Jacob. i.
Think that you have a great cause of joy, when you be troubled with diverse
temptations. For the tryinge of your faith brings patience, and patience
makes perfect work, so that you may be parfyte and sound, lacking nothing.
And almighty god also exhorts us, Apoca. ii.
and calls upon us to fight against temptations, saying, He that has the
victory against them, I shall give him to eat of the tree of life. Ibidem.
And again he says, He that overcomes them, shall not be hurt with the
second death. And sayncte Paul says, ii. Tim. ii
No man shall be crowned, except he fight, yea and that as he ought to fight,
that is to say, except he defend him self, and resist his ennemies at all
points to his power. Joan. xvi
And our saluiour gives us a good courage to fight in this battle, where he
says, Be of good comfort, for I have overcome the world, that is to say, I
have had the victory of all sins and temptations: And so shall you have, if
the defaulte be not in your selfs. for you fight with an adversary, which is
all ready vanquysshed and overcome.

The sense and interpretation of the seventh petition.
O Father, keep us from the danger of water and fire, from thonder,
lightening, and hayle keep us from hungre, and derth. keep us from war and
manslaughter. keep us from thy most greuouse strokes, the pestylence, and all
other dyseases. keep us from sodeyne death keep us from all yuelles and
perils of the body, if it be thy pleasure so to do. But most specially keep
us from sin, and all things that may displease the. deliver us from thy
straycte judgment, at our death, and at the last day of dome. Turn never
thy face from us most loving father. Look never away from us, least we turn
from the unto the world, the flesh, and the dyuell. Good lord grant unto
us all these our suetes and peticions, according to our humble request and
desire. Amen.

For the better understanding of this last petition, we think it convenient,
that all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people,
committed unto their spiritual charge, First that like as in the syxte
petition Christ taught us to desire of our heavenly father, that we should not
be overcome with temptation, ne brought into sin, so now in this seventh and
last petition he teaches us to pray him, that if by fraylenes we fall into
sin, he woll sone deliver us from it, not to let us continue in it, not to
let it take rote in us, not to suffer sin to reygne upon us: but to deliver
us, and make us free from it. This sin is the exceeding yuell, from the
which in this petition we desire to be delivered. And though in this petition
be also comprehended all yuelles in this world, as syckenes, poverty, derthe,
with other like aduersyties: yet chiefly it is to be understood of sin,
which only of it self is yuell, and ought ever without condition to be
eschewed. And as for other adversities, neither we can, ne ought to refuse,
when god shall send the^, neither we ought to pray for the eschewynge of them
otherwise, than with this condition, If gods pleasure so be.

Second, that nothing can be called proprely and of it self yuel, but only
sin. And that all other things, what so ever they be, be the works and
creatures of god: which neither made any thing yuell, nor can do any thing
that is yuell. Many things we suffer in this world, and take them for yuell:
but they be not yuell of them self. All afflictions, dyseases, punysshementes,
and turmentes of this body, all the trouble and anguysshes of the soul, all
the troubles of this world, and al adversities, be good and necessary
instruments of god for our salvation. For god him self (who can not say other
than troth) says, Those yt I love, I chastise. Apoca. iii Prou. iii. Hebr.
xii.
And again the apostle says, He receives none but whom he skurgeth. This is
the time of skurgynge, purgynge, and skowrynge: And the time to come is the
time of rest, ease, and bliss. And surely there is no better token, that we
be in the favor of god: than that he does skourge us, and tries, and fyneth
us like gold in the fire, whiles we be in this world. As contrary, there is
no more certain token of his indignation toward us: thanne to suffer us
still to live in prosperity, and to have all things after our will and
pleasure, and never to nyppe us or touch us with adversity. Therefore our
savior Christ Jesus (who knows what is best for us) teaches us not
cheifely to pray and desire to be delivered from worldely afflictions,
trouble, and adversity, which god sends abundantly, even to them whom he
best loves, and with whom he is best pleased: but the yuel, which we most
chiefly should pray to be delivered from, is sin, which of it self is so
yuell, that in no wise he can be pleased therewith. And because our hole study
and endeavor in this world. ought to be to please god: therefore our
contynuall prayer should be, that we might specially above all things be
preserved from sin, and eternal punysshement for the same.

The Aue Maria.
HAyle Mary full of grace, the lord is with the. Blessed art thou among
women. And blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

For the better understanding of this Aue, or salutation of the angel, we
think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers, shall instruct and
teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, First how that it
was decreed in the high consistory of the hole Trinity, that after the fall
of our first father Adam, by which mankind was so long in the great
indignation of god, and exyled out of heaven, the second person, the
everlasting son of the father everlasting, should take upon him the nature
of man, to redeem mankind from the power of the dyuel, and to reconcile the
same again to his lord god, Luce. i.
and that he should be so perfyte god, and also perfyte man. And for this
purpose, as saynct Luke in his gospel reports. In the syxte month after
sayncte Elisabeth was conceived with saynct John^ the Baptist, the angel
Gabriel was sent from god into a City of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a
virgin, which was despoused or ensuted to a man, whose name was Joseph, of the
house of David, and the virgins name was, Marie. And when this aungel came unto
this said virgin, he said these words, Hayle full of grace, the lord is
with the, blessed art thou among women.

And when the virgin, heryng these words was much troubled with them, and
mused with her self, what manner of salutation it should be, The aungel said to
her, Fear not Mary, be not abashed: for thou haste found favor and grace in
the sight of god. Lo thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and shalt bring forth
a son: and thou shalt call his name Jesus. he shall be great: and shall be
called the son of the highest, And the lord god shall give to him the sete
of David his father, and he shall reygne over the house of Jacob for ever, and
his kingdom shall have no end. Then said Mary to the angel, how can this
be done: for I know no man? And the aungel answering said unto her, The holy
ghost shall come from above into the, and the power of the highest shall
ouershadowe the, and therefore that holy thing, which shall be borne of the,
shall be called the son of god. And lo thy cosyne Elisabeth has also
conceived a son in her old age: and this is the syxte month sith she
conceived, which was called the barteyne woman. For there is nothing
impossyble to god. To this Mary answered, Lo I am the handemayde of our lord.
Be it done unto me as thou have spoken. And then forthwith upon the departure
of the angel, and being newely conceived with the most blessed child Jesus,
Mary went up into the mountains with speed into a city of Judah: and came to
the house of Zachary, and saluted Elisabeth. And as soon as Elisabeth hard the
salutation of Mary, the child spronge in her belly. And forthwith Elisabeth was
replenysshed with the holy ghost, and cried with a great voice, and said,
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruicte of thy womb. And
whereof comes this to me, that the mother of my lord comes to me? For lo as
soon as the voice of thy salutation was in my ears: the child in my womb
lepte for joy. And blessed art thou, that dyddest believe. For all things
that have been spoken to the from our lord, shall be performed.

Second, that the angel Gabryell, which spoke to the virgin, was an high
angel, and an high messanger. And truly it was convenient, that he should be
so. For he came with the highest message, that ever was sent, which was the
treat and leage of peace between god and man. And therefore the first word of
his salutation (that is to say, Hayle, or be joyful) was meruaylous convenient
for the same. for he came with the message of joy, And so said the other
angel, which at the birth of our sauyoure appeared to the shepardes. I show
to you (said he) great joy, that shall be to all the people. And surely
considering the effects, that ensewed upon this high message: al mankind had
great cause to joy. For man being in the indignation, and the displeasure of
god, was hereby reconciled. Manne being in the bonds of the dyuell, was
hereby delivered. Manne being exiled and banysshed out of heaven, was hereby
restored thither again. These be such matters of joy and comfort to us,
that there never was or shallbe, nor can be any like. But not only for this
purpose, he began with this high word of comfort: but also for that he
perceived, that the virgin being alone, would be much abashed and astonyed
at his meruaylous and sudden coming unto her. And therefore he thought it
expedient, first of al to utter the word of joy and comfort, which might
comfort and put away al fear from the blessed virgyn. And he calls not her
by her propre name: but gives her a new name, calling her full of grace.
This is now her new name. and this is the highest name, that can be in any
creature. For her son, the son of god, was content with this name, where
he is by the holy evangelist saynct John^ called also full of grace. And yet
she is not in this behalf equal with him. For that she is full of grace, she
has it of him. And how could it be otherwise, but that she must needs be
full of grace, that should conceive and bear him, that was the very plenitude
and fullness of grace, the lord of grace, by whom is all grace, and without
whom is no grace. Holy scripture calls also saint Stephyn full of grace: Act.
vi.
but he may not be compared with the blessed virgin, ne have co^munyon in this
name, Full of grace, equal with her, for she conceived and bare him, that is
the auctoure of all grace. and this is the singular grace by which she is
called, not only the mother of man, but also the mother of god.

Thyrdely, that by these words, The lord is with the, is declared the name,
which the angel gave to her, calling her full of grace: And they signify,
that she was full of goddis favor, and full of his grace. For surely our lord
is not with them that be not in grace: he can not tarry with them, that be
void of grace, and be in sin. For there is a separation and divorce between
the sinful soul and our lord, as the wise man says, Perverse thoughts make
a separation and divorce from god: Sapie. i.
much more perverse deeds.

Fourthely, that these words, Blessed art thou among women, was menie, that
there was never woman so blessed. And truly she may well be called so, most
blessed amongst all women: for she had great and high prerogatives, which
none other woman ever had, has, or shall have. Is not this an high
prerogative, that of all women she was chosen to be mother to the son of god?
And what excellent honor was she put to, when not withstanding the decree was
made of his nativity by the hole trinity: yet the thing was not done and
accomplysshed, without or before her consent was granted, for the which so
solemn a messanger was sent? And how high grace was this, that after the
defaulte made through the persuasion of the first woman our mother Eua (by
whom Adam was brought in to dysobedience) this blessed virgin was elect, to
be the instrument of our reparation, in that she was chosen to bear the
savior and redemer of the world? And is not this a wonderful prerogative, to
see a virgin to be a mother: and against the general sentence of the
malediction of Eua, to conceive and bring forth her child without sin? And
who can esteem, that meruaylous solace and comfort, which was in her heart,
when she enbraced that child, and nourysshed it with her pappes, and had
contynually company of such a son so many years together? Wherefore we may
worthyly say, that she is the most blessed of al other women. And to the
intent that all good christen men should repute and take her so: behold the
providence of god, that would by an another witness confirm the same. For even
the same words that the angel spoke, the blessed matron saint Elisabeth
spoke also. and where the angel made an end, there she began. The angel
made an end of his salutation with these words, Blessed art thou among
women. The blessed matrone began her salutation with the same words, declaryng
that she was enspired with the same spirit, that sent the aungel: and that
they were both ministers of the hole Trinity, the one from heaven, the other
in earth. And afterward she added these words and said, And blessed is the
fruict of thy womb. These be not the words of the angel: but of saynct
Elisabeth. For when the virgin Marie came to salute her, the said Elisabeth
being inspired with the holy ghost, and knowing that the virgin Marie was
conceived, spoke these words of the fruict, that the virgin should bring
forth. And here is also an other wonderful thing to be noted. for as it
appears in the gospel, the child in saint Elisabethes womb, that is to say
saynct John^, which yet had scant life, gave testimony to this fruict: that
this fruict should save him, and all the world, and as a prophet, he lepte
for joy in his mothers bealy. And although he could not yet speak: yet
never the less he declared by such signs and tokens, as he could: that
blessed was the fruict of that womb. This is the fruict, that the angel
spoke of, saying his name shall be Jesus, that is to say a Sauyoure: for he
shall save his people from their sins. And well he may be called the blessed
fruict, which has saved us, and given us life, contrary to the cursed
fruict, which Eve gave to Adam, by which we were dystroyed and brought to
death: but blessed is the fruict of this womb, which is the fruict of life
everlasting.

Fifthely we thynkh it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall
instruct and teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that
this Aue Maria is not proprely a prayer, as the pater noster is. For a prayer
proprely has words of petition, supplication, request and suite: but this Aue
Maria has no such. Never the less the church has used to adioyn it to the
end of the Pater noster, as an hymn, laud, and praise partly of our lord and
savior Jesus Christ for our redemption, and partly of the blessed virgin, for
her humble consent given and expressed to the angel at this salutation.
Lauds, praises, and thanks be in this Aue Maria principally given and yielded
to our lord, as to the auctour of our said redemption: but herewith also the
virgin lacks not her lauds, praise, and thanks for her excellent and
synguler virtues, and chiefly for that she humbly consented, according to the
saying of the holy matron saint Elisabeth, when she said unto this virgin,
Blessed art thou, that dyddest give trust and credence to the aungelles
words. for all things that have been spoken to the, shall be performed.

The article of Justification.
AS touching the order and cause of our Justification, we think it convenient,
that all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and teach the people,
committed unto their spiritual charge, that this word, Justification,
signifies remyssyon of our sins, and our acceptance or reconciliation into
the grace and favor of god, that is to say, our perfyte renouation in Christ.

Item that sinners attain this justification by contrition, and faith joined
with charity, after such sort and manner as is before mentioned and declared
in the sacrament of penance. Not as though our contrycyon or faith, or any
works procedynge thereof, can worthyly merit or deserve to attain the said
justification. For the only mercy and grace of the father, promised freely
unto us for his sons sake Jesus Christ, and the merytes of his blood and
passion, be the only suffycyent and worthy causes thereof. And yet that not
withstanding to the attaynynge of the same Justification, god requires to be
in us, not only inward contrycyon, perfect faith, and charity, certain
hope and confidence, with all other spiritual graces and mocions, which as was
said before, must necessarylye concur in remyssyon of our sins, that is
to say, our Justification: but also he requires and commands us, that
after we be justified, we must also have good works of charity and obedyence
toward god, in the observing and fulfyllynge outwardely of his laws and
commandments. For although acceptance to everlasting life be conjoined
with justification: yet our good works be necessaryly required to the
attaynynge of everlasting life. And we being justified, be necessaryly
bound, and it is our necessary duty, to do good works, according to the
saying of saynct Paul, we be bound, Romans viii
not to live according to the flesh, and to flesshely appetites: for if we
live so, we shall undoubtedly be damned. And contrary, if we woll mortify the
deeds of our flesh, and live according to the spirit, we shall be saved.
For who so ever be led by the spyryte of god, they be the children of god.
Matt. xix
And Christ says, If you woll come to heaven, keep the commandments. And
saynct Paul speaking of yuell works says, Gala. v.
Who so ever commytte sinful deeds, shall never come to heaven. Wherefore all
good christen people must understand and believe certaynely, that god
necessaryly requires of us to do good works commanded by him, and that not
only outward and ciuyle works, but also the inward spiritual motions and
graces of the holy ghost, that is to say, To dread and fear god. to love god.
to have ferme confidence and trust in god. to invoke and call upon god, to
have patience in all adversities. to hate sin. and to have certain purpose
and will not to sin again. and such other like motions and virtues. Matt. v.
For Christ says, we must not only do outward cyuyle good works, but we
must also have these foresaid inward spiritual mocyons, consentyng and
agreeable to the law of god.

The article of Purgatory.
FOr as much as due order of charity requires, and the book of Machabees,
and diverse ancient doctors plainly shown, that it is a very good and a
charytable deed to pray for sowles departed. And for as much also as such
usage has contynewed in the church so many years, even from the beginning,
we think it convenient, that all bysshoppes and preachers shall instruct and
teach the people, committed unto their spiritual charge, that no man ought to
be grieved with the contynuaunce of the same. and that it stands with the
very dew order of charity, that christen men should pray for the sowles
departed, and commyt them in our prayers to gods mercy. and also to cause
other to pray for them in masses and exequies. and to give alms to other to
pray for them, whereby they may be relyued and helped of some part of their
pain. But for as much as the place, where they be, the name thereof, and kind
of peynes there also be to us uncertain by Scripture, Therefore this with all
other things be to be remytted to almighty god, unto whose mercy it is mete
and conueniente for us to commend them, trusting that god accepts our
prayers for them, referrynge the rest holly to god, to whom is known their
estate and condition. Wherefore it is much necessary, that such abuses be
clearly put away, which under the name of purgatory, has been advanced:
as to make men believe, that through the bishop of Romes pardons souls might
clearly be delivered out of purgatory, and all the peynes of it: or the masses
said at Scala celi, or other where, in any place, or before any image, might
likewise deliver them from all their pain, and send them straight to heaven,
and other like abuses.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS. AN. M.D.XXXVII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


