The Rock of Religion. CHRIST, NOT PETER. As it was delivered in certain
Sermons upon Math. 16. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20. Summarily
contracted out of that which was more largely handled in the Parish of S.
Antholine by George Close the younger, one of the Readers there.

Other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ 1
Cor. 3. 11. LONDON, Printed by A. Mathewes for Matthew Law. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight, William Eyres, Doctor
of Physic, and others the Parishioners, and Christian minded Auditory of the
Parish of St. Antholine, Grace, Peace, and Salvation in our beloved and blessed
Savior JESUS CHRIST.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
AS the Beloved Apostle S. John, besides his general Epistle to the whole
Church, directed his two particular to two several Disciples, 2 John ver. 1, 2.
one a Noble, worthy, and Elect Lady; and an other to a faithful friend 3 Ioh.
ver. 1.
Gaius (a man very hospital, saluted by Paul as his Romans 16. 23
Host, and of the whole Church at Corinth, whom he had 1 Cor. 1. 14
baptized, and is dignified by Saint Luke, to have been Acts 19. 29.
Paul's companion in his travels and journey, and was taken prisoner with him at
Ephesus, in the tumult raised against him) both being great favorer of the
Ministers, and lovers of the Gospel; the Evangelical Apostle chiefly
rejoiced, that they prospered, and walked in the truth and verity of the
Gospel: so unto the painful Preachers of the Word, arises great joy, to see
the Faith and Love of the people of God, toward his Word, and Ministers, and
provoke them to express a reciprocal love to them, in seeking to advance
the truth of Religion, whereunto they find them so diligently, and dutifully
inclined.

Which consideration has moved me to publish these my poor Labors, and to
commend them to your Protection, that have heard, and can best witness what
has been sincerely labored therein. And though I fear not in these
dangerous times the malicious scandals of Adversaries, which will by
calumniations oppress the Truth; but was pressed by the love of some
Friends, (which are Lovers of the Truth) not to suppress what I had
publicly professed for the maintenance of the Truth; I was at last by their
Christian persuasions induced to commit to the Press these my poor
endeauours, wherein I have labored to express the truth in a Question so
much controuerted, and oppugned by the Adversaries of the Truth.

I confess it was a double spur unto me, to incite me to give you
contentation, when I considered your good likings to have this Doctrine in
these troublesome times of our Churches oppugnation to be publicly
professed, and maintained in the face of Gods enemies, which with their
blustering breath, would at one blast blow down both our Church and Common
wealth; and would have them wholly theirs, or none at all.

Herein on the contrary part you have in your good acceptations, and advancing
this Doctrine, greatly approved your care and zeal to the service of God, and
his true Church, as your love and loyalty to your King and Common wealth;
which by the opposite endeauours of our adversaries are fearfully shot at. My
purpose and proceedings herein have not reached in any absolute manner to
decide all the points of this our Controversy; and by all Authentical
Authors, and ancient Fathers of the Primitive church, or modern Writers to
discuss this Question (which many others of great learning and experience have
abundantly performed) but only in an ordinary Audience, and vulgar Exercise,
to prove out of the Canon of holy Scriptures, how faithfully our Doctrines are
thence derived and drawn out, for confirmation of what we hold, and
confutation of whatsoever our Adversaries have dreamed to the contrary.

For this indeed is the Touchstone of Truth, whereby all pure and counterfeit
metals are to be tried, and wherein as well the old, as the new Writers have
principally labored to bring all Controversies to be discussed. The whole
current of the Scriptures have no better, nor almost any other ground for their
confirmations, or confutations, in converting gainsayers to the Faith, and
conuincing Infidels and Heretics. The eloquence of Apollos was an ornament to
the Doctor; but the authority of the Scriptures was the Firmament of his
Doctrine; who is said to have mightily, and publicly confuted the Jews, Act.
18. 28.
proving by the Scriptures, That Jesus was the Christ. I shall therefore
entreat the Readers of this poor and plain Discourse (especially such as were
the Auditors of those Lectures) with the Bereans, to examine the truth of the
Doctrines according to the Marginall Quotations out of the Scriptures, which to
avoid prolixitie, I have there set down without such Amplifications, as
according to that time, and due exigence of that Exercise, I more at large
opened, and dilated. And so commending you to the Word of Gods grace, which is
able to build you further, with daily and hearty Prayers to God for the
increase of your Christian Faith in the knowledge of his will, and love of the
Truth, commit my self to the favorable acceptance of religious and judicious
minds, passing by the carping obloquy of critical Censurers.

Your Worships in the Lord, GEO: CLOSE Iun.

The Rock of Religion.
CHRIST, Not PETER.
MATH. 16. Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. Now when Jesus came into the coasts of
Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the
Son of man am?

And they said, Some say, John Baptist: and some, Elias: and others, Ieremias,
or one of the Prophets.

He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am?

Then Simon Peter answered, and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God.


THis sacred Sripture compriseth summarily the Doctrine of the most Catholic
Religion, contained in Peter's Confession, concerning the knowledge of Christ,
who is poynted out to be Ephesians. 1. 22.
the head and foundation of his Church, and us his members: and therein is also
showed with what Keys the Kingdom of Heaven is opened or shut unto us.

More particularly this holy History relates a Conference which our blessed
Savior had with Peter, and all the Apostles Mark. 8. 27.
upon the way as they traveled toward Cesarea Philippi, which sometime was
called Pannaeas; and it is distinguished thereby from an other Cesarea near
Joppe, formerly called Straton, which Herod the Great (this Philips father)
builded and fortified with a Castle in honor of Augustus Caesar, (by whom he
was advanced) and surnamed it Cesarea: This here mentioned, Philip the
Tetrarch of Jturia, imitating his fathers flattering example, as well in honor
of himself, as the then Roman Emperor Tyberius, builded and beautified, and
called it Cesarea Philippi: and afterward it was again enlarged by King
Agrippa, and by him called Neronia, in honor of Nero.

It is ancient and usual with worldly men, to endeavor to perpetuate their
memories, and eternize their Names by some glorious terrestrial Monuments on
earth: rather then to have them registered in Luke 10. 20.
the Book of Life in Heaven.

This gross ignorance and folly the Psalmist derideth and taxes: Psalm. 49 11.
That great rich men of the earth should think their habitations will continue
for ever, and call their Lands by their own names: they that are mortal and
both live and perish with the bruit beasts, seek in vain to make their names
immortal in stones and monuments of earth: Nay, they think so to fence
themselves against Gods decree and ordinance appointed for all flesh: and like
Nymrods Impes, build a Tower to secure them from Gods Judgments, Gene. 11. 4.
as well as to get themselves a name; as appears in their proud practice in
erecting their Babel, the monument of their confusion.

It is true that Almighty God permitted unto men some perpetuation of their
Names in earth by the succession of children to a thousand generations; but
when men became rebellious, and disobedient to his will, he cut that cord
asunder, and made their names soon perish out of the earth: which wicked
Absalom perceiving, would provide a remedy against Gods forbid; and failing of
posterity, ( Genesis 17. 7, 19 and 15. 2
the richest earthly blessing that God gives to his children) would yet live
in stones, and built a most stately Pillar (as he thought of everlasting
continuance) in the Kings Dale, and called it after his own name, 2 Samuel 18. 18
Absoloms Place: But the Justice and wisdom of God crossed Absoloms vain
humor, and turned his glory into shame: for being taken and slain in his
actual and unnatural rebellion against his father David, instead of an
honorable burial in his own Tomb (which he had so prepared) Verse 17.
he was cast into a pit in the Wood, and a great heap of stones (or rude
rubble) laid upon him, to keep the remembrance of his Treason for his shame to
all posterity.

Was not this the pride and punishment of Nebuchad-nezzar, who in vanity of
his mind vanting himself in his sumptuous buildings, said, Dan. 4. 27.
Is not this great Babel, that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? But how was he
shortly after turned out of his house into the fields to live amongst beasts?

Did not the Prophet Isaiah as plainly foretell the destiny of Shebna the
great Lord Treasurer, and Steward to Hezekiah; Isa. 22. 15.
who had hewn out his Sepulcher in an high place, and graven an habitation as
out of a rock, whereas God had determined to Ver. 16, 17, 18, 19.
send him into captivity, and to roll and toss him as a ball in a strange
country, where he should dye (perhaps without burial) and the Charets of his
glory shall be his shame.

Kain, though he had a son; yet fearing Gods vengeance, that his posterity
might fail, built a City, and called it Genesis 4. 11. to 18.
Henoch after his sonns name, knowing himself cursed of God, a fugitive and
vagabond in the earth. So as we see great men not seeking Gods glory, but
their own honors, yet fail of their wished ends, the mighty God thwarting
their purposes, and bringing their vain enterprises to nothing: and one proud
pompeling destroys an others proiects: Herod turns Straton into Cesarea,
Philip alters it in the next generation into Philippi; Agrippa will have it
Neronia; Shebna makes his Sepulcher in one Country, and is buried in an other,
and thus does vanity deceive it self in hunting after a shadow of glory, and
not seeking the glory that comes of God: for honor (as a shadow) flies
from him that follows it, and follows him that flies from it; and no man
can catch it, except he falls down upon it: Much more advised was Solomon
(of all kings the wisest) which first sought to honor God, and built a Temple
unto his name; and as David his father intended Psalm. 132. 4, 5.
to find out a Temple for the Lord, and an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob, and would have it the house of God, and Temple of the Lord: and yet
thereby they gained the greatest honor to themselves also: for 1 Samuel 2. 30
God honors them that honor him, and such as contemn him, he casts into
contempt: So as the Lord God is well pleased Exodus 34. 29.
to beautify Moses his servants face 2 Cor. 3. 7.
with some sparkles of his own glory: and the house which Solomon dedicated to
the honor of God, brought honor unto himself, that in the Scriptures it is
called promiscuously, Iere. 7. 4.
the Temple of the Lord: and Act. 3. 11.
Salomons Temple: but it was a just reproof of the Prophet Haggai, when the
captive Jews were reduced into their own Country and City of Jerusalem,
Hag. 1. 4.
in that they first went about to dwell in their own seiled houses, and the
house of the Lord lay wast and desolate.

1 Cor. 3. 16. 8. 6. 15. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Pet. 2 5.
living Temples for himself to dwell in upon earth, that we may for ever
dwell with him in heaven.

Augustine accounts it great folly for men that must dye, to build houses as
high as Eagles neasts, to their successors which must dye also: the rule of the
Gospel is certain, that Matt. 6. 33.
if we first seek the Kingdom of God, all other necessary things shall be
abundantly ministered unto us: yea, it was Gods liberal promise unto his
people, Deuteronomy. 28. 1. Josh. 24, 13.
that if they obeyed him, and continued steadfast in his covenant, they should
have houses (yea strong and walled Cities) which others had builded: it is
certain that an honorable name is gotten and established by righteousness:
Pro. 10. 7.
but the name of the wicked shall rotte. Bildad does truly affirm (how
untruly soever it was misapplied) to Job, that Job 18. 17.
the remembrance of the wicked hypocrites shall perish from the Earth, and he
shall have no name in the street: it was a just, though a bitter execration of
David; Psalm. 109. 15.
let the wicked be always before the Lord, that he may cut off their memorial
from the Earth: it were better to be forgotten then so remembered.

The Centurion in the Gospel Rule.
took a good course to get him a good name, and the favor of Christ; and the
people Luc. 7. 4. 5.
in building a Synagogue for the Jews, and exercise of Religion.

The woman of Canaan Matt. 15. ^7. 28.
for her humble patience and faith: the poor widow Luc. 21. 2. 3.
for her mites cast into the treasury: the Shunamite for her 2. Kings 4. 8. 10.
Hospitallitie, and building a chamber for the Prophet of God: Luc. 8. 2, 3
Ioanna the wife of Herod's Steward: Susanna, and others ministering to Christ's
necessity, have left honorable remembrances in the Gospel: and above many,
Mary Magdalen for her precious perfume powered on the head of Christ, washing
his feet with her tears, and wiping them with the hair of her head, is by
Christ himself made everlastingly famous, that Matt. 26. 7. 13.
her fact shall ever be remembered, wheresoever the Gospel of Christ shall be
preached in all the world.

Cesarea (adding unto it the names of there Patrons and Benefactors, for
testimonies and memorialls of their thankefullnesse toward those heathenish
Emperors, by whom they had so great aduancements) are to be preferred in
account, before many of our Christian favorites, which like Hest. 3, 1. 6.
Haman being exalted above many of their rank, are not only unthankful, but
work much damage to the Princes and Commonwealths, whence they have sucked
their riches and honorable preferments: these are not unaptly compared unto a
certain Bird, which, Catullus calls Caprimulgus, which uses in the night to
suck the vdders of Goats, and by her venomous biting does so mortify them,
that it makes the Goats become blind: this is the emblem of unthankful
Favorites, which bring grievous prejudice and damage to the Princes and
Countries whence they have sucked their plentiful nourishment, and so blind
them with their soothing flatteries, that they cannot see through their dark
conueiances, how they are damnified by them: and as the Iuye, which being at
first little and of tender limbs stays it self, and climeth up by the
strong Oaks supportation: but in the end so claspeth about and incloseth it,
that it sucketh away a great part of its nourishment, and works the decay
both of the body and branches. The Athenians (as Socrates reports in
Zenophon) would not permit any known ungrateful person to bear any rule in
their City, for that ingratitude is always joined with impudency, that
introduces all filthiness and inhumanitie: It is not therefore disliked, that
in token of thankfulness, any rare Monuments have been erected for memorialls
of Benefactors: and let this suffice to have been delivered touching the place
of this their conference: namely, the coasts of Cesarea Philippi.

Now unto the former there may not unfitly be annexed an other very obseruable
circumstance, noted by the Evangelist Saint Mark, who says this discourse so
happened Mark. 8. 27.
in or upon the way as they traveled: which not only denotes to us, what our
Savior and his Disciples practiced in observation of the law, but also what
all true Christians and Disciples ought to exercise in imitation of their Lord
and Master: namely,

Moses required such a studious regard of the Law of God, that he accounted it
not sufficient, that the people should have it in their hearts, and inward
Meditations, but also in their mouths and communications; Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
Thou shall (says he) talk of them as thou walk by the way, as well as
rehearse them to thy children and household for their instruction.

Comes facundus in via, pro vehiculo est: A pleasant Wagge is an easy wagon
upon the way: but the Scripture teaches otherwise: namely, that the holy
conferences of holy men are as 2 Kings 2. 11, 12.
Eliahs Charet, to carry them to heaven; so as it is not only profitable, but
safe for us every where to stir up and instruct our selves and others, at all
times, and in all places, where we know God to be present, and a beholder and
examiner of our actions: and if he should take account of all our idle words,
rash oaths, and obsceane communications, it might happily (or rather
unhappily) fall out with us, as it did with the vain glorious boaster Dan. 4.
26.
Nebuchad-nezzar, and Cap. 5. 2.
Belshazzar his graund-child and Successor, who not regarding to glorify God,
but themselves in their high estates, were debased, and marked out by a divine
Decree to shame and destruction: but on the contrary, Saint Luke has recorded
a blessed benefit of the holy conferences of holy men in their iourneyes, and
upon the way: Luke 24. 13, 14, 1^.
where two of the Disciples iourneying toward Emaus, reasoned of Christ's
resurrection, and found him present, and ready to associate himself unto them,
and to give them more full assurance of the matters which they disputed and
doubted of. And the honorable Eunuch of Queen Candaces, in his travel
homewards from Jerusalem, meditating of some points which he had there heard
and imperfectly learned, Act. 8. 28, etc.
the Spirit of God directed Philip unto him to resolve him in his doubts, and
to interpret the sacred Prophesies of Christ unto him.

Paul requires: Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentiously in
all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves, in Psalms and Hymns,
and spiritual songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord: and so
much be spoken concerning the circumstances of place and time; let us now
proceed to the matter of their conference, which begins in the end of the
thirteenth verse, in these words: He asked his Disciples saying, whom do men
say that I the Son of man am?

Our blessed Savior well Context.
knowing the ignorances and errors, as well of the people, as Priests of the
Jewish Nation: and being minded to inform, and confirm his Disciples in the
truth of that Doctrine (which was generally doubted of, and contradicted)
touching his Deity, which otherwise could not be a Savior, except he had
been Immanuel, God with us; the Son of God, as well as the Son of man,
himself first moves the question unto his Disciples, touching the opinion of
others; demanding of them, whom men said, that he the son of man was.

Hereunto the Disciples answered, some say John Baptist: Verse 1 4.
for so thought Herod, Mat. 14. 2 others supposed him to be Elias, mistaking
and misapplying that Prophecy of Malachy, that Mal. 4. 5.
Elijah must first come: Some deemed him to be Jeremiah, for the similitude
and manner of his preaching in such vehemency against the sins both of the
Princes, Priests, and people, threatening ruin not only unto them, but also to
the Temple, City, and Kingdom. Lastly, it was generally believed and spoken,
that he was at least a Prophet, Luke 9. 19.
or one of the old Prophets.

The ground of this error is that paradoxe held also by the Pythagoreans, of
(...), or transmigration of the soul out of one body into another, either
reasonable or brutish, which it first happens to meet withal after it is
departed; as Poets fained the soul of Philip (father to Alexander the Great)
entered into Bucephalus, Alexanders horse, whereby he became so victorious in
battle: but how it crept into the Jewish Church, is more doubtful, for it
seems the Priests and Levites, held such opinions when they sent to require
of John Baptist, to know what he was; If he Acts 3. 22. and 7. 37.
were not Elias, or the singular Prophet spoken of by Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16.
Moses and other Prophets, or the Christ? John 1. 19, 20, 21, etc.

Which gross Paradox is contrary to the Canon of the sacred Scriptures, or
orthodoxall Writers, and common reason: For every soul ( 1 Cor. 13. 38
as every seed) has his proper body: and being once departed from that body, 2 Samuel 12. 23
returns no more (except it be by miracle) into his own, much less into
another body. Elijah indeed prayed unto God, 1 Kin. 17. 21
that the soul of the dead son of the widow of Sarepta might return into
his body again, which was miraculously performed; as were also the several
souls of Acts 9. 40.
Dorcas raised by Peter; and Act. 209, 10.
Eutychus by Paul; the Luke 7. 15. John 11. 44. Math. 27. 52, 53.
Widows son at Naim and Lazarus, and others raised by Christ, whose souls
returned into their own bodies by divine miracle, and no other transmigration:
for the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and no torment shall
touch them: and it is noted in the Revelation, that the Souls of the Martyrs
slain for the testimony of Jesus, Apoc. 6. 9.
were in heaven under that Altar. Luke 16. 22.
Angels carried the soul of Lazarus into heaven, and cast the Gluttons into
hell: Eccles. 12. 7.
The body shall return unto the earth whence it was taken, and the Spirit to
God that gave it. So believed the Protomartyr Saint Stephen, when dying Act. 7.
59.
he commended his soul into the hands of God: yea, Luke 23. 46
Christ himself confirmed this Doctrine by his own example, as Psalm. 31. 5.
David his true type and figure had also done; else what a misery were it, if
good souls should enter into evil bodies (as that fantasy dreameth they may
do) and be again subject to new torments in their bodies in this world, and
to damnation in the world to come; and the same soul should be holy and
profane, reasonable and brutish, blessed and miserable, which were an
absurdity that can have no coherence with Reason, Scripture, or any sort of
learning.

But to pass over these dotages, as unworthy to be insisted upon thus long:
let us consider the purpose of our Savior in propounding this Question to his
Apostles, and Disciples: for it could not be that he doubted, or was ignorant
of any thing concerning himself; but well knowing the erroneous conceits of
the ignorant, and variable multitude, he draws his own followers into
examination, as well to draw from them a true confession of that truth,
wherein he had instructed them, as to correct the misconceiuings of the
multitude, which talked so vainly and variously of him, and so descends from
Quem dicunt, to quem dicitis?

But whom do ye say that I Verse 15.
am? As if he had said:

You that have been taught of God, and both seen, and heard the word and works
of God, express your faith, Whom do ye say that I am?

To this question Peter (one of the first and forwardest Disciples of Christ,
in the name of all the rest, makes a full and direct answer:

Verse 16.
Then Simon answered, and said, Thou art the Christ, the son of the living
God. Christ the anointed of God, which implies all his Offices of King,
Priest, and Prophet, the Son (not adopted by grace, as all the faithful are)
but begotten in unspeakable manner, and by nature the Son of God, the express
character, and image of God, the Heir of God, equal with the Father of
eternity, the Son of the living God, unlike the heathen progeny, which were
the children of the dead Gods, and offspring of Idols, and imaginary fictions.

The sum is: Our Savior Christ having first drawn from his Disciples a
confession of the peoples fantastical and erroneous misconceits, presses them
to lay down what he had truly taught, and they had learned of him, what he
was: which proceeded neither of ignorance, to learn of them what opinions were
held, nor of ambitious humor (as vain men commonly do) to make enquiry after
vulgar rumors, either to glory in the peoples praises, or to revenge their
calumniations; but that hearing their opinions, he might instruct them aright,
or otherwise to draw from them a confession of the truth: this for the context:
let us now come to the observations:

Verse 13.
He asked his Disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?
In that Christ does inquire what the world thought and spoke of him, we may
conclude, that

In some respects it is very lawful and commendable to inquire what opinion
the world has of us. There is I say a lawful and lawdable use to be made of
inquiring after men's reports of us.

Eccles. 7. 3.
which is more precious then the Apothecaries perfume, and sweet ointment,
though we ought rather to strive i to deserve 1 Prou. 22. 1.
well of others, then to hear well of our selves:

David did of Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. 10
It may be the Lord has stirred him up to rail and reproach thee.

Verse 14.
And they said, Some say, John Baptist: some Elias, etc. It is here very
obseruable, that the wrong opinions which were held of Christ, are not the
misdeemings or misreports of enemies, or persons evil affected, either toward
his person, or Doctrine, but such as had religious thoughts of him, and
esteemed him no less then a Prophet.

So as we may see what a cloud of darkness had overwhelmed all Judea at that
time, till Christ shined as a light from above, to illuminate their minds in
the understanding of their Prophesies which were read amongst them: and that as
malice had mufled the mouths of many, that they would not; so the veil of
ignorance had blinded the more and better part, that they could not see the
Sun which so clearly shined unto them as at noone day. Some we know were
enemies, Math. 26. 4.
and fought to kill him: some said, John 8. 48.
he was a Samaritan^ and had a Devil: some reproached him for a Math. 11. 19.
Glutton, a drinke^ of wine, and a friend unto Publicans and sinners: Yea, the
Ruler^ of the people accused him for ^ troubler of the State, seditious and an
enemy unto Casar: Some spoke more blasphemously, accounting him no better then
a Coniurer or a Witch, Math. 12. 24.
that cast out the weaker Devils, through Beelzchub the Prince of Devils. The
Disciples (I say) spoke not of these, but of the better sort of people, which
thought, and spoke honorably of Christ, and yet you see how these are divided,
some of one opinion, some of another, and not one of a right judgment.

Christians to doubt of, or to depart from the truth. It were ex^reame folly to
forsake the truth of God, and our profession of Religion, till all parties
disagreeing were reconciled: if Cor^elius and other Disciples had so ^ayd, and
so stayed, till all the Sects and Professors of the Jewish Religion had
consented in all points, they should have stayed long enough irrelegious.



Caluinists, others Lutherans, some Zwinglians, and others Hughgonites; yea,
they lay unto our charge feigned disagreements* without any difference, except
it be in this, that every one strives to come furthest from their Popery and
trumperies.

Christ's time? as here we see: and in the Apostles time, when one said, 1
Cor. 3. 4.
he held of Paul, another of Cephas, another of Apollos? And yet they did not
teach or hold any diversities of doctrines, Gal. 2. 11.
though Paul reproved Peter to his face for dissimulation in his course of
proceeding from true Religion. How were the Doctors of the Primitive Church
divided, the East against the West, about the matter of Leauened Bread, and the
celebration of Easter? In every Council almost alteration of Decrees, Creedes,
and Confessions, and yet none of them erring in any material points of Faith,
but beggarly Traditions, which the Romish Bishops chiefly contend for.

Scotus, and Thomas Aquinas differ about merit of Congruitie and Condignitie,
as also concerning Original sin in the Virgin Mary? How differ the
Canonistes, and the Schoolmen about Auricular Confession, these holding it to
be the Ordinance of God, they only the Tradition of men? How far does
Pigghyus differ from Cajetan; Thomas, from Lumbart; Scotus, from Thomas; Occam
from Scotus, Aliensis from Occam, the Nominalls from the Realls? What
differences shall we find amongst their Friars and Monks, some placing
holiness in eating Fish, others Herbs, some in a Linen garment, some in a
Woollen, some will be of the Order of Preaching, some of the disorder of
Begging Friars, some Shod, some Barefoot, some White, some Black, some Gray
Friars? What Orders of Augustines, Dominicans, Franciscans, Carmelites, and
Iacobines? Let them bethink themselves how they differ in the matter of that
high Mystery of the Sacrament of the Altar (as they call it) some think the
Body of Christ is naturally and really in the Sacrament, others deny it; some
say it may be eaten in the host by Ratts and Mice, and therefore dispute what
shall be done with them when they are taken: others are ashamed of that
absurdity, and as flatly deny it: Thus if the Papists duly considered the
differences amongst us, they shall find them fewer in number, and smaller in
quality, then are the differences amongst their own Popish professors at this
day. I confess, there may be, and have been always some differences in the
purest Churches, and the Lord will thereby have us tried, that the truth may be
the better known: Wheat and Darnell may grow both in one field, and so may
errors spring up together with the Gospel. Christ was the only sign of peace
and concord; yet when he came amongst the Jews, there were diversities of
opinions concerning him; for some said he was John Baptist, some Elias, etc. it
follows in the next verse:

He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Verse. 15.
The Context was laid down before; from whence many profitable instructions
arise to be considered of: as first, the difference that Christ makes, and is
generally to be made of the diversities of his Auditors, and their
distractions: for whatsoever the vulgar and multitude spoke of Christ, he
stays not upon them, but conuerteth his speech to the Apostles, which had
been always conversant with him, and trained up in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and Prophesies, and of them especially he requires a more settled
Judgment, and solid Account of knowledge: Luke 12. 48
For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom
men commit much, the more of him will they ask. And though there be many
Gods, and many Faiths in the world (as then there was) yet to us there is but
one true God, and one Faith, into which we are all baptized: the Rule therefore
is true and certain:

That every man's hope of Salvation consists in his own implicit, and not an
others implicit Faith: according to that of our Savior, Mark. 9. 50.
Have Salt in your selves: And as we may not think it safe or excusable for us
to err, or to do evil with a multitude; so neither can that Popish paradox
be any warrant unto us, that we should believe as the Church believes, except
we know the grounds of the Churches Belief: much less can a general conceit
of the common multitude (which is commonly full of fantasy and error, rather
then truth, and judgment) settle us in any peace of Conscience touching our
hope and salvation in and by Christ.

rather err in a general opinion which they have phantasied, then to seek
out what is the most certain and constant truth, which they should embrace for
their own benefit, health and salvation: we are most of us, therein too ready
to imitate Peter, which being required by Christ, to testify his loving him
more then others, (as he protested) by doing more duty then others; but he
asks, John. 21. 21. 22.
What John shall do? And so many think, they make a good Apology for themselves,
to maintain their errors, if they can avouch one Doctor, or Author, or the
generality of the people to hold such opinions: But Heb. 2. 4.
the Just shall live by his faith: that is, by his own faith. And the
Exorcists were rightly disgraced by the Devil which mocked their coniurations
in the name of Jesus, whom Paul preached: Acts. 19. 15. 16.
the evil Spirit knew Jesus to be the powerful Son of God, and Paul his
faithful Servant, and Minister: but what was that to them, which neither knew,
nor followed the Doctrine of Jesus and Paul; he easily prevailed against such
professors, and tare them in pieces.

Christ sounding in our ears: Whom say ye that I am? This Peter himself
observes, and afterward delivered it as a Rule to others, with which I will
conclude the point: 1. Pet. 3. 15.
Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of
the hope, that is in you.

Text. Whom do ye say that I am? Observe here: he does not say, Quem
creditis, but quem dicitis? Whom do ye believe, but Whom say ye that I am? Not
that faith is not required, but that it is not sufficient to believe, unless
they also confess Christ: and herein there is another Doctrine of Christ and
of his Apostles commended unto us, namely:

That what we have believed, we must also make confession thereof: According
to that of the Apostle: Romans 10. 10.
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, an^ with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation: Implying that the way to be saved, is to believe
with the heart, that we are saved only by Christ, and to confess the same
before the world.

was exemplified in Peter himself, Math. 26. 22, 33, 34, 70, 7^, 74.
who professed more love and zeal to Christ, then any other of his Disciples,
but in time of temptation his faint heart failed him, and he fell more
grievously then any other of the Christian Professors: and the offense was the
greater, because his Lord and Master had forewarned him, and the rest of his
Disciples, and given them special precepts and cautions, Math. 10. 32, 33.
beware of denying, or not confessing him before men, lest he should justly
deny them before his Father in heaven: which yet, not only Nicodemus, John 9.
22. and 12. 42.
and other faint-hearted Disciples did, lest they should be excommunicated for
the profession of Christ, Math. 26. 56.
but Peter and all the rest forsook him, when he went to his Passion, and was
conuented before the Rulers of the Jews and Gentiles.

thy faith by thy confession: and for thy better direction, note this
distinction: Confession of Christ is not only Verbal, but Real: for to
confess him with thy mouth, and to deny him in thy deeds, is the worst denial
of all; for it is a manifest abnegation of his power and goodness. Our blessed
Savior (the pattern of all humility) being sometimes demanded to confess
of himself what he was, whether the Messiah, or the Prophet, Act. 3. 24.
to whom all the Prophets from Samuel, to that time gave witness, he chose
rather to confess and witness himself to be Christ by his works, then by
his words; and therefore in the sight of such as were sent to inquire of him a
Confession what he was, he did many great works which no other but Christ could
do, agreeably to the Prophecy of Isaiah, Isai. 61. 1, etc.
Opening the eyes of the blind, the ears of the deaf, the mouths of the
dumb, and raising the dead: Math. 11. 2. 3 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Luc 7. 21. 22. John.
^. 3. 6.
and then concludes, that his works testify of him what he was: and they
that would not believe his words, should yet believe him for his works sake:
The testimony of the life, is stronger then of the lips, and works have
their eloquence in the silence of the tongue.

Christ, when they shall find many of inferior degrees of Learning, only
professing themselves Scholars and Learners, and not Masters and Teachers,
which yet in soundness of knowledge, and practice of piety, shall outstrip
and run before these Church-Rabbins: When John 3. 4, 4. 5, 10.
Nicodemus (a Doctor in Israel) is palpably blind in the doctrine of
Regeneration, which the sinful Canaanite, Marie Magdalen, and other silly
women, (the followers of Christ) John 7. 40.
both knew and practiced more then they: Act. 18. 25, 26
yea, Aquila and Priscilla (which were Tent-makers, and Mechanics) could
instruct the eloquent Preacher Apollos, to understand more perfectly the
Mysteries of Religion concerning Christ.

Now omitting many other observations which might be drawn out of this
Context, and the reasons which moved many not so freely to confess Christ, as
they ought. Let us look into that Confession, which Peter in the name of the
rest makes, who was not restrained with vulgar error, or fear, as those
which having Act. 13. 27.
the Prophets daily read amongst them, yet were blinded with wilful ignorance
in misapplying them; or stumbled at that stone of Authority and Greatness of
men, that they excused themselves thereby, saying, John 7. 48.
Does any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe on him? Or because they
held him of poor parentage or degree, ^ohn 6. 42 Math. 13 55.
Joseph the Carpenters son: John 7. 41.
or was of a base country of Galilee, whence is no mention made of any Prophet
to arise; and yet the Prophets figuratively point him out to be a Matt. 2. 23.
Nazarite. Peter not staying upon any of these Pharisaicall fantasies, or
vulgar reasons, confesses plainly, as he had been taught, and both heard
and seen the manifold and manifest Signs of his Messiahship.

Thou art (says he) the Son of the living God. verse. 16.
This Confession is very excellent: for Christ could not have been a Savior,
nor Mediator between God and man, except he had been God and man; the Son
of God, and the son of man, as the Prophet forenamed him Isai. 7. 14
Immanu-el, God with us; and. 9. 6.
and the Mighty God: and as the Angel informed the blessed Virgin Mother,
that he should be called Math. 1. 23.
Immanu-el, Luc. 1. 32. 35.
and the Son of the most High, and the Son of God. This is not Blasphemy,
as the Jewish Rulers charged him, and thought him therefore worthy of death,
Math. 26. 64. 65.
that being a man, he made himself the Son of God: and the Apostle truly
avouches, that therein Phil 2. 6, 7.
Christ committed no robbery, who being God by nature, equal to his Father,
humbled himself to be made man, and thereby his manhood was exalted, and he
became (...), a man-God; though the Popish error cannot hereby stand, that the
Virgin Mary was (...), a bearer, or mother of his Godhead, Luc. 1. 35.
Which was the work of the holy Ghost.

Thus Peter confessing him to be Christ, (that is the Messiah) the annoyted of
God, briefly implies and compriseth all his offices, of King, Priest and
Prophet: a King to conquer by his power, and rule by his providence: a Priest
to offer sacrifice of atonement for the sins of the people: and a Prophet,
to reveal the secret mysteries of God unto us: Psalm 2. 6. 8. and 24. 8.
a King, to subdue all his and our enemies (Satan, Sin and, Death) Hebr. 2.
17.
a Priest, yea an high Priest to reconcile us to God, and to mediate betwixt
God and us: and a Prophet, to teach Gods divine doctrine, which is a most holy
revelation, not only answerable unto, but excelling all the old prophesies
which were foulded up in much obscurity, in comparison of that great Light
which has shined unto us in the face of Doctor Fownes in his Trisagion. Master
Downeham in Model of Divinity.
Christ: Of which particular Offices, because learned Professors of our Church,
have amplyfied more at large, I more lightly pass over: only a word or two of
these words, wherein is noted that special relation of Christ unto God his
Father:

The Son of the living God. Verse. 16.
God is the Father of Christ (as God) by Generation, being Father by nature
unto the second Person, begetting him of his own Substance, before all time.
And here let us a little consider the wonderfulnesse of this generation,
manifested in three respects, wherein this generation differs from all others.

First, In all other generations the Father is first in being, and before the
Son: but in this generation there is an equality of time; for we have an
eternal Son of an eternal Father.

Object. If any shall object that saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 2. 7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; which may seem to imply a
begetting of the Son in Time. Answ. I answer, this day implies the certainety
of generation, not the time when he was begotten, which was from eternity,
though manifested to the world in time.

2. In this heavenly generation, the Father does communicate his whole nature,
and Essence, unto the Son, and yet retains the whole nature and Essence in
himself (which is a mystery very strange and admirable) and differing from all
other generations: for in all earthly generations, nature is divided; part
being communicated to the son, and part retained still in the Father.

Thirdly, An earthly father having a local body, and circumscribed, begets a
son extra se, forth of himself: but Almighty God being every where, and
filling every place, begets a Son intra se, within himself, not without,
because there is no place without him. And so much be spoken concerning this
so pregnant answer of Peter to the question of his Lord and Master, which so
summarily compriseth whatsoever is to be believed of Christ touching our
salvation. Let us now insist upon our Lord and Saviors approbation of his
Disciples confession, and profession of him.

And Jesus answered, and said to Verse 17.
him, Blessed art thou Simon, the son of Jonas: for flesh and blood has not
reueyled it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

Verse 18.
And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build
my Church; and the gates of Hell shall not overcome it, etc.

These words (I say) contain Christ's approbation of Peter's Confession, which
was not so honorable for Christ to hear, as it was blessed for Peter to
speak, who is therefore pronounced Blessed Peter, for his blessed profession:
blessed Simon, for hearing and obeying, (as the name imports) his blessed
Master, his blessed Gospel: and no doubt he was a man of good note even from
his memorable Parents, which the holy Gospel has registered, and Christ
vouchsafes to have recorded. Bar-Iona, the Son of Iona, or Ioanna, which
significantly imports, the Grace, Gift, or Mercy of the Lord; as in truth it
was Gods great grace, gift and mercy to give such religious Parents, a son,
such a Galat. 2. 9.
pillar of Religion in the house of God: and it is not without a Mystery that
Christ does thrice remember him at one time by that name, John 21. 15. 16, 17.
Simon Bar-Iona: the name of Simon was given him at his Circumcision; and
Bar-Iona for a name of distinction from others of that name, as also to
signify that his Parents were of good note and pedigree among the Jews; and
the name Peter is peculiarly given unto him by Christ, John 1. 42.
after he was called to be an Apostle: Cephas and Peter (signifying one thing,
1 Pet. 2. 5.
a Stone or a Rock) alludeth unto his confession of the chief Corner Stone,
and the Rock whereupon the Church is builded, Isai. 28. 16. Math. 21. 42. Psalm
118. 22.
which is Christ: So not Peter, but the faith of Peter and confession thereof
concerning Christ, procured him that blessing, and blessed name of Peter, a
Petra, of the Rock which he confessed; Not, which his carnal parents, nor
flesh and blood had revealed unto him, but his Father in heaven; which is
indeed a firm foundation to build the Church upon; which else might have
failed in Peter's fall, but was sure in Peter's faith in Christ: It is a firm
foundation, and a perfect assurance unto us of the continuance of Gods Church,
that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; whereas Satan prevailed
much and often against Peter's faithlessenes, and purchased him a black name of
Math. 16. 23
Satan given by Christ unto him, when he consulted with flesh and blood in
Divine matters; and was Math. 14. 31.
ready to sincke at the sight of a wave, and to Math. 26. 69, 70.
forswear his Master at the breath of a silly Damsel: so that (as I shall show
more at large hereafter) not upon Peter's constancy (which was nothing but
infirmity) but upon his confession (which had a firmitude of Faith in Christ)
was the Church to be founded, and Peter pronounced blessed; if Peter's
blessedness had been built upon himself, and the Church founded upon him, it
had been a sandy foundation, (as we see) Matt. 7. 26. 27.
When the storms arose, the winds blewe, and billows beat upon it; it soon
fell for want of sollid Faith; but believing, confessing and doing the works
of God: that is, hearing, believing, confessing, and persisting in the doctrine
of Christ, he is compared to a Rock; firm and immovable as mount Zion,
Psalm. 125. 1. 2.
which stands fast for ever, because God is in the midst of her, and known
in her Palaces as a sure refuge: against this Faith, neither the infirmities of
the flesh, the tyrannies of the the world, nor the gates of Hell shall be able
to prevail. So that from this gracious promise of Christ, the whole universal
Church (as well at Jerusalem, and Antioch, as at Rome,) yea every particular
member, has his stablishment and consolation, their assurances of deliverance
in all dangers, and the certainetie of their salvation: and this I conceive to
be the true and natural Interpretation, Context, and Logical resolution of
these words, Come we now to the points of observation.

Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona. Verse. 17.
Peter believes and confesses Christ, and Christ therefore pronounces him a
blessed man.

Faith and the heavenly knowledge of Jesus Christ makes a man truly blessed:
Prou. 3. 13. John 17. 3. John 20. 31. Ihon 11. 25.
Blessed is the man that finds knowledge, etc.

can be attained unto in this life, which is subject to so many mutabilities
and adversities, nor in any of the things of this world, which are transitory
and changeable as the world is: no man can find it in riches (for the rich man
perishes and all his substance) and often does Iam. 5. 1
howl and wcepe for the miseries that come upon him. Solomon saw them Eccles.
5. 12
reserved to the owners there of for their evil: and they are as impediments
and shakcles Mat. 19. 22, 23
to hinder us in our race to Gods Kingdom: Mark 14. 19.
they are full of deceitfulness to choke Gods word in us; and bring forth
many weeds of voluptuousness, Luke 16. 13 Math* 6. 24.
we cannot serve God and Mammon: So that voluptuousness, carnal Pleasures,
pride of life, Honor, and earthly prosperity can neither bring, nor continue
us in any happy or blessed estate. Psalm. 49. 20.
Man cannot abide in Honor, (says the holy Prophet) and it is in vain for
Saul to sin against God, 1 Samuel 15. 30.
and seek to be honored of his people. Nay, the Moral virtues of the
Heathens and unbelievers cannot give felicity to the Stoics; nor all these,
accumulated with health of body, Prudence, and Fortitude of the mind can
produce blessedness to the Peripateticks: Oh then, the Knowledge, Confession,
Profession* and Imitation of Christ, only sets us in this happiness of
Peter: by this Faith we are highly honored above all earthly honor; For
Galat. 3. 26.
by Faith we are made the Sons of God, 1 John 5. 1, 4
Conquerors (more then Alexander) of all the kingdoms of the world; and
coheires with Christ of the kingdom of God in heaven.

Jesus Christ, without which we are most wretched and miserable: no means of
happiness but by Christ; nor by Christ without faith on our part: but when by
faith we are come unto him, then want we nothing which belongs to true
blessedness: in a word, Faith is that Treasure, and rich Pearl, Math. 13. 46.
which a wise man would sell all his goods to buy: and if any should desire to
know how this precious treasure is to be gotten, the next doctrine that
comes in order to be considered, will direct him therein

For flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. Faith and the heavenly knowledge of Jesus Christ, are the peculiar
gifts of God, and such as by Nature no man can attain unto: In handling of
which point we will first prove the negative part, which is, that the natural
man cannot conceive or apprehend the mysteries of Salvation by Christ. And
secondly, it shall be declared, that God only by his Spirit does reveal them.

First, concerning the first; it is certain, that no man by his own wit, be
it never so sharp, nor by his own humane wisdom, be it never so profound,
can conceive, believe, or comprehend the Mysteries of the Gospel, as
witnesses the Apostle: The natural man (says he) 1 Cor. 2. 14.
perceives not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto
him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

Here by (natural man) is not meant only the carnal and sensual man,
swinishly wallowing in vanities and pleasures, but (as the best Interpreters
conceive it) even a man considered with the whole compass of the reasonable
souls possibility, a man endued with a sharp wit, a quick apprehension, a
strong mind, a piercing judgment, and faithful memory, enabled by Action,
Experience, and Observation with such an universal Wisdom, that it may be
fitted for notable Offices of Society, and intercourse in politic bodies; I
say, all these, and many more perfections may concur upon the soul, and yet
without supernatural illumination remains stark blind in the mysteries of
salvation, and cannot only not perceive the things of the Spirit of God, but
(which is an horrible and fearful curse) even esteem them foolishness. The
most learned Rabbis of the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, disputers of the
Law, were farthest from believing in Christ, neither could they understand the
mysteries of the Gospel: a natural man with all his wisdom and wits
perfection, cannot comprehend, how two natures should meet in one person; how
Christ which was the son of man, should be also the Son of God; how a
Virgin should be a Mother, and how a man must be borne again, before he can
enter into the Kingdom of God: these Mysteries made the old Doctor in Israel,
Nicodemus, to stagger in his reason, and ask, John 3. 9.
How can these things be? This divine Doctrine made the Philosophers,
Epicures, and Stoickes, disputing with Saint Paul at Athens, to account him a
babbler, and setter forth of strange news, Acts 17. 18
When he spoke to them of Jesus, and the Resurrection. The Doctrine of the
Cross of Christ was therefore a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Grecians, 1. Cor. 1. 21. for if he were a man (say they)
why do ye worship him; and if a God, how could he dye? Yea, the Capernaites
hearing him to speak of the eating of his flesh, John 6. 60.
fell from him, and went back, not knowing how these things could be, that he
should give them his flesh to eat, and thereby they should have eternal life:
but ^he words so carnally understood of them, were Spirit and Truth, as they
were delivered by him, which flesh and blood cannot comprehend: and wherefore
should this seem unreasonable, which is supernatural, when we see, there are
many things in the earth hard to find out? In many natural things we are at
our wits end; who knows the essence of his own soul, whence, when, and how
he received it? Solomon (so singular in wisdom) confesses Eccles. 8. 17.
that he could not find out the works that are wrought under the Sun; yea,
though he live many years, and have much experience, yet he cannot find
them out. And to be short, the greatest Philosophers wearied themselves in
study, and yet could not find out the reason of many things even in nature,
and before their eyes: whereupon the chiefest of them, contented themselves to
be called (...), and modestly refused to be called (...), the lovers of
wisdom, and not wise men: Now if these men that spent all their study and
contemplation in the works of Nature, came far short in the knowledge of
them; how much less can man's reason find out the things that are of God, and
supernatural? No doubtless, we must herein seek a guide to direct us, or
else we shall be as blind in our ignorance, as the Sodomites were in their
lusts, Gene. 19. 11.
groping after, but not able to find the doors of Lots house; Acts 8. 31.
How can I understand the Prophesies (says the Eunuch to Philip) except I have
a guide? And having thus proved the first and negative part of the
Proposition, we proceed to demonstrate and confirm the Affirmati^e part.

Wherein we will only subscribe to that Assertion of the just man Job: Job
3^. ^ James 1. 17 2 Cor. 3. 5.
Surely (says he) there is a spirit in a man, but the inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding.

Now before we come to the Application, it will not be amiss to annexe two
considerable circumstances; the one concerning the impulsive cause: the other
concerning the manner of this heavenly Revelation, which for the Readers
capacity shall be plainly laid down in two several Questions and Answers.



Math. 13. 11.
To you (says Christ to his Apostles) it is given to know the secrets of the
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.



Rom* 10. 17
Faith ordinarily comes by hearing of the word of God, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
which is the incorruptible seed of our Regeneration. Now it is not meant that
the Preaching of the Word has this fruit and effect, by any natural power or
virtue in the ^ound of the words, but by the ordinance and blessing of God, who
uses this as his ordinary means for our conversion unto himself: and as
Saint Paul speaks, By the foolishness of preaching, to save them that
believe. Neither is God tied by any necessity to this outward means, as
though Faith and other graces could not be wrought in any without that means,
but he reserueth this glory unto himself, to dea^e which way he please, and
in an extraordinary sort to convert and save some: as first in the decayed
estate of the Church, when there wants a settled form of Government, it
pleases him sometimes to bless the exercise of his Word, though it be but
read and talked of; as it is said, John 4. 39
That many of the Samaritans believed in Christ, upon conference with the
woman, which bare record of him. Secondly, we believe that God reueileth
himself in good manner, and measure, unto Infants, that are not come to the
years of discretion, and explicit faith, and also with such men as are borne
deaf, dumb, or natural Idiots, ^n whom yet the Spirit of God works
secretly, without this outward ordinary means of Preaching, and hearing the
Word; yet the truth is, and we must acknowledge it, that he has ordained the
preaching of his Word to be the ordinary means whereby he does reveal the
knowledge of his will unto us: by which means, Peter and the other Disciples
of Christ attained unto this knowledge above others, being continually
conversant with him, and hearing his word, and seeing his great works
performed before their eyes.

Jesus Christ, is not so easy a matter as men commonly account it, seeing it
is wrought in us by the Spirit of God, and no man has it, but by heavenly
revelation.

That if any man will 1 Cor. 3. 18.
seem to be wise in this world, let him be a fool, that he may be made
wise: as if he should say, Let him be a fool in himself, that he may be
made wise by Gods teaching: and renouncing all reason that flesh and blood
suggesteth; let us resort unto God by humble Prayer, and James 1. 5.
ask wisdom of him which gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man:
Let us pray with David, Psalm. 119.
Lord teach us thy Statutes; for without this teaching by the Spirit, all man's
preaching and hearing is in vain: let the Preachers be what they will for
learning, eloquence, and painfulnesse, as prompt in the Law of God as Ezra 7.
6.
Ezra, as mighty in the Scriptures as 1 Cor. 13. 1.
Paul, as eloquent as 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Apollos, as powerful as Acts 18. 24.
Peter, as holy in conversation as Luke 1. 6.
Zachary; let the peopeople hear never so devoutly, with as much reverence as
Mark. 6. 20.
Herod heard John, yet all avails not without the revelation of God, which
teaches wisdom secretly, as the Prophet speaks: or though they hear, a^
Acts 20. 7.
Eutychus did Paul, until midnight, and the matter be handled with such
dexterity, that al^ may wonder, as Luke 4. 22.
they did in the Synagogue, at the gracious words which proceeded out of the
mouth of Christ, yet if the Lord open not the heart, as he did of Acts 16. 14.
Lydia, and send a dew of blessing upon the seed, it were all lost labor: for
it cannot fructify without his grace, which is therefore called the Ephesians. 1.
17.
Spirit of wisdom and Revelation; and yet by the ministry of the word, which
is therefore called most aptly, the 2 Cor. 3. 6.
ministration of the spirit; let Paul plant, and Apollos water, 1 Cor. 3 6.
yet God and only God gives the increase. To conclude, let not Ministers be
puffed up with any high conceit of their gifts, though never so transcendent,
in comparison of others: for, 1 Cor. 4. 7.
what has any man, which he has not received? or what profits the sowing
of the ^est seed, in the best manner, ^xcept the d^aw come down from heaven
upon it: and also ^et the people surcease their fa^tious admirations of their
Tea^hers, 1 Co. 1. 12, 13
to hold of Paul, Peter, and Apollos, but let all hold of Christ, into whom we
are all ^aptized. In a word, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
let all Gods people have all Gods ^aithfull Ministers in singular ^euerence
for their works sake; and Gal. 2. 9.
let the Ministers give their ^ight hands of fellowship one to another, to
further Gods building: and if we see any fruit of our labors, or ye reap
comfort or good by our Ministry, and husbandry; let not the least part of Gods
glory cleave unto us, but let all the honor and praise be given to the Lord,
which so reuealeth his secrets unto us.

And I say also unto thee, that Verse 18.
thou art Peter. This name, Peter, (as was formerly noted in the context) is
derived from Petra, which signifies a Rock, and is given here to Simon, for
his faith, and confession of Christ, according to his promise: John 1. 42.
thou shall be called Cephas, or Peter.

Simon by believing, and apprehending Christ by faith, is now become a Peter,
that is a living stone in the house of God, as are all believers, founding
their faith on the Rock, or chief cornerstone (Christ:) so Saint Peter
himself has taught us, saying: 1 Pet. 2. 4. 5.
and ye coming unto Christ as to a living stone, are built as lively stones,
a living Temple unto God; and as all flesh is called Isai. 40. 6.
grass, in respect of the weakness and sudden vanishing thereof; so Christ
only is the Matt* 7. 24.
true Rock and 21. 42.
and chief corner stone, that abides on a sure foundation, immovable for
ever, and all that believe in him are made conformable stones, to be joined
unto ^im in this spiritual Temple, those building is of God.

Isaiah many hundred years before foretold of these Isai. 62. 2.
new names, new creatures, new heavens, and new earth; for the regenerate are
but as a renewed earth from the old earth of Adams corruption; So was it
revealed unto Saint John, by him which is a and o, saying, Reu. 3. 12.
him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and I will
write upon him my new name: God grant us the new name, this conversion, the
faith, Reu. 2. 17.
and this white stone and it this new name, which no m^ knows, but he that
receives it.

And upon this Rock I w^ Verse 18.
build my Church.

That is upon this true confession, whereby thou declarest the self to believe
that I am the Christ, the prophesied and promised Messiah, the Son of man and
the Son of the living God* upon this Rock, this Stone, thi^ corner*stone I
will build my Church, which teaches us;

That the Doctrine of faith i^ the foundation of the Church.

The Church of God Ephesians. ^, 20, 21.
is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Cornerstone, in whom all the building coupled
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord: to this accords the
testimony of Saint John, Reu. 21, 14
describing in his celestial vision, the new Jerusalem and holy City, in
which the twelve Apostles are noted to be the foundations of the Church, which
is understood of their Doctrines, and not of their persons; for as they were
men they dyed yet the Church failed not for want of foundations, and no other
could any man lay, than that which was laid by them and Christ himself; he was
the primary builder, and foundation, they secondary builders, but upon the same
foundation, and upon him alone.

Christ for us, and our salvation in and by him alone (as Peter here
confesses) we are not members united to him, nor parts of his true body Ephesians
1. 22. 23.
which is his Church.

Peter's blessedness: Epaminondas, a Captain, in an hot skirmish being
stricken down, sore wounded and taken up for dead, as soon as he came to
himself, first asked if his Target were safe, fearing and being loath his
enemies should get that: so let us look to the shield of our faith, least our
enemy the Devil which often wounds us, dispossess us of that Target; for
without it thou may be in the Church, but not of the Church, and extra
ecclesiam nulla salus, a desperate case, where all out of Noah's Arc perish,
and are drowned in Gods wrathful deluge.

Upon this Rock I will build my Church.

The Papists lay hold on this place, as thieves do on true men's goods,
endeavoring to prove hereby that Peter was chief of the Apostles, and the
head and foundation of the Church.

Peter alone, but to him and the other Apostles; for as Peter made this
confession in the name of all, so Christ made this protestation to him in the
name of all; and when he said, thou art Peter etc. he alludeth only unto his
name, importing that he should be a principal pillar in the Church; Reu. 21.
14. Ephesians. 2. 20.
as were also the rest of the Apostles, which had like calling, like graces,
like promises, and like prerogatives, and meant not that Peter should be the
Apostle of the Apostles, or have any primacie over the Church: Let the Reasons
be these:

Christ had hereby made Peter the chief of the Apostles, and the head and
foundation of the Church, the^ should the Church have had a weak, frail, and
ruinous foundation, and unfit to support so weighty a burden: for if we search
the Scriptures, we shall find that Peter was subject to many infirmities, and
had many, and more grievous falls, then any of the elect Apostles, and was
himself supported by Christ, the foundation and only Head of the Church: and
it seems, that the Holy Ghost foreseeing what these men would ascribe to
Peter, more then the allowance of Christ, has more particularly and at large
set forth in the Gospel Peter's infirmities in quality and number more then any
of the other Apostles; as if Almighty God foreknowing the superstitious
inclination of the Jews, and all men most apt and prone to Idolatry, would
prevent their over much aduauncing of holy men, (which are, and ought to be
Sainted only by God) that they should place them in Gods throne to be adored
as Gods, whom his Word of truth has deciphered to be weak and sinful men;
which mischief Peter himself in his life time found experience of, and with
all his might and power withstood this madness of the multitude, who having
seen the great miracle wrought by him upon the poor Creeple in Salomons
Porch, gazed upon him, and flocked about him (as if he had been a God) which
Peter perceiving, cast away that opinion with both hands, Acts 32, 7, 10, 11,
12, 13
both vilifying himself as a man full of infirmities, an^ magnifying the name
of Jesus by whose name and power the miracle was wrought, and no^ by his own
power and godliness, as the people supposed; and in like case, when the
Centurion Cornelius directed by an Angel in a vision to send to Ioppe for this
Apostle, and of him to hear words, whereby he and his household might attain
salvation, he by and by conceived such eminent opinion of Peter's worth and
worthynesse; that when he came unto him, he prostrated himself at Peter's
feet, and would have worshipped him; which excessive dignity offered to him,
being an indignity against God (whom he taught to be only adored) Acts 105,
6, 25, 26.
he pronounces himself to be but a man (that is an infirm creature,
servant to the mighty God) whose glory alone he would have preferred alone in
all things; and the like accident and course of proceeding happened unto Paul
and Barnabas, who likewise had cured a creeple at Lystra, in the word and name
of Jesus; but the idolatrous people would needs adore them for Gods, and styled
them, (and as they thought) enobled them with the titles of their Gods, calling
Barnabas, Jupiter, and Paul, Mercurius, and would have done sacrifice unto
them, till Paul mightily refused, and reproved their error, Acts 14. 8, 9,
10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16.
proclaiming themselves, men subject to infirmities (as the people were) and
magnifying God for the miracle wrought in the name of his Son Jesus, who is
only to be honored: so Almighty God himself well knowing the prone
disposition of the Jewish people to Idolatry, concealed from them the body of
Moses, Deu. 32 49, 50 and 34. 5, 6.
whom he had secretly buried in Mount Nebo, (much against the Devils proiects,
Jude 9.
who would have made an Idol of him;) but Michael, (even Christ our Prince)
resisted him in that impious project: So they made an Idol of the brazen
Serpent, (being but a figure of Christ) for that by that Sacrament Number. 21. 8,
9.
they were healed of the stingings of the fiery Serpents in the wilderness,
representing the spiritual healing of our sinful souls from the deadly
stings of that old Serpent Satan, by Christ nailed on the Cross, John 3. 14, 15
the most wise, holy, and heavenly Serpent (as himself has also interpreted
it) in so much that Hezekiah, to repress the idolatrous madness of the
multitude, which began to idolatrize to the Brazen Serpent, and to burn
incense to it, brake it in pieces, burnt it to powder, and made the people to
drink it, 2 Kings 18. 4.
and called it Nehushtan, an vnprositable piece of brass. But to come more
precisely to our present purpose; if our Romanists would believe the
Scriptures, or Peter himself, they shall find that neither Christ nor
himself had any purpose to build a primacy upon this infirm Rock, which in
very many particulars is noted a man full of passions and infirmities, more
then any other of the elect Apostles (as is aforesaid.)

First, what ignorant presumption was it to Math. 18. 21
prescribe forgiveness unto his offending brother but to seven times, when
his Master (the God of charity) requires endless charity in forgiueing of
offenses, Verse 22.
even seauenty times seven times, Luc. 17. 4
yea seven times a day.

Secondly, how carnal was his conceit in heavenly revelations, which would
have Christ Math. 17. 4 Luc. 9. 33
to build Tabernatles of rest and pleasure upon earth, forgetting the felicity
of the heavenly Paradise, which far exceeds in glory.

Thirdly, observe his no less temerity, Mat. 14. 28. 30
to desire to walk upon the waters, than timidity, when he began to sink,
having Christ's word for his warrant to come unto him as he had desired.

Fourthly, what rashness was it John 18. 10. 11.
to draw his Sword without warrant, and cut off Malcus his ear.

Fifthly, What a presumptuous Disciple was he, Mat. 16, 22. 23.
to teach his Master to avoid his Passion, for which he came into the world,
and merited the name of Satan, an adversary to man's salvation, in so
miscounsayling and rebuking of Christ, as apeareth in this very Chapter.

Sixthly, How sluggish was he, that could not watch one hour with his Lord and
Master, in the midest of his greatest temptation and Agony, Mat 26. 40.
and was by name specially taxed for it.

Seventhly, What curiosity was it in him, being required to follow Christ, John
21. 21, 22.
to enquire what John should do: but his greater faults and falls, are with
open eyes to be looked upon.

Eighthly, In his Mat 16, 33. 35. Mar. 14, 68. 71
thrice denying and forswearing of his Master, whom he had protested more love
unto then all the rest, and that if all others went back, yet he would never
forsake him, but would go to prison and dye with him.

Ninthly, And lastly, it is to be remembered as no small infirmity, how he
dissembled and went back in the course of the Gospel, when after Christ's
glorious assention which he had Acts 1. 9,
seen, and the receiving of the holy Ghost, Acts 2, 14.
which he had defended to be the act of God, promised by the Prophets* and
after he had a special vision, and a commandment to go to Cornolius and the
Gentiles, n and not to account them profane, which God has cleansed and
accepte^ and had preached the same Doctrine, that God was no accepte^ of
persons, Jews, or Gentiles; ye^ Gal. 2, 11, 12, 13. 14
colluded with them of the circumcision, and drew Barnab^ into the like
dissimulation, withdrawing them selves from the Gentiles in the sight of the
Jews, for which so offensive and dangerous dissimulation, Paul reproved him to
his face at Antioch, that famous Church, where first the professors of the
Gospel took that high and honorable title Acts 11. ^6
to be called Christians: so as this dissimulation in so famous a Church and
City of the Gentiles, where Peter had his residence (as the Romanists say)
five and twenty years, and was there Bishop, and so shortly after his vision
of preaching Christ unto the Gentiles, and the execution thereof at Gesarea so
successefully begun: what mischief and inconvenience might it have ^red, if
the chief Apostle (as ^hey pretend) should go about ^o uphold the partition
wall Col. 2, 14 Ephesians. 2, 14, 15 John 10, 16
which his Lord and Master had ^roken down, to make of Jews and Gentiles, one
flock under one Sheapheard, and this may suffice for my first argument, let us
consider a second.

John the beloved Apostle, John 13, 23
which leaned on his breast, Math. 17, 1
was conuersan^ with him at his transfiguration on the mountain, and always
one selected with Peter and James, to be special beholders of his great
works, John 1^* 26
and comnended to his Mothers care at the time of Christ's passion: but as
Christ is said to have loved John most, so Peter is said to have loved Christ
most; yet the Masters love may be intended to have most force to prefer his
favorite: but this sensual wisdom was so far from the practice of our
Savior, that he laid the foundation of all greatness in humility; he that
will be Lord of all, must be most serviceable to all; as the Master gave
example John 13, 5. 6. 15.
in washing his Apostles feet, which Peter then in an humble conceit of his
own unworthiness, and the worthynesse of his Master, would have refused, yet
his most unworthy usurping successors are not ashamed to have Princes kiss
their feet.

Peter's primacy, that they night have yielded their due obedience, Luke 22. 24.
26.
when they strove as well as he, who should be the greatest? whereupon the
Doctrine of our Savior was occasioned to prohibit such superiority and
heathenish Lord ship.

Peter, Gal 2 9.
and gave right hands of fellowship one to an other, to build the house of God:
Gal. 1. 1. 12.
all immediately called of God and equal in Office, for they were called to
preach the Gospel to all Nations, to this Office they were all appointed Mar.
3. 14
before and Mat. 28. 19,
after the resurrection; they all had like promises, and were participant of
the visible gifts of the holy Ghost

Peter was their Pastor, and a Bellar. de. romans pont. lib. 2
boue them all; and as they had authority over others, so had Peter over them.

Acts. 81 4.
When the Apostles sent him with John unto Samaria, they did not acknowledge
his superiority: for he that sends, is greater then he that is sent; and I
think it Canonical which Saint Paul says, 2 Cor. 11. 5.
That he was not inferior to the very chief Apostles, which had not been
religious humility, but comparatiue audacitie, and ambitious inhumanitie,
against so great a Superior, as the pretended Successors boast themselves to
be. Peter is said to be Mark. 3. 16. Math. 10. 2.
first in the rehearsal of the names of the Apostles, it is nothing material
to the point of Superiority in question; Matt. 4. 18, 19.
Andrew had as ancient a calling as he, though happily by birth his younger
brother, and named after him. This fallacy concludes a non causa, vt causa, one
of necessity and by order must first be named, and sometimes Galat. 2. 9.
James is named before Peter; let not the Jesuits think we can so easily
swallow down this Equivocation, and make no difference of being first in order
and number, and first in dignity and power: because Peter was first in order
and number, it follows not, that he was therefore first in power and
authority.

Let us now a little examine the tenure whereby they claim their universal
Popedom, and power in and over the Church, making themselves, (against Luke
22. 25, 26
Gods forbid, and 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3
Peter's) Lords over Gods heritage.

Peter, as Bishop of Rome, and thereupon inconsequently enough conclude, that
they being Bishops of Rome, and his Successors, have the same power and
holiness that Peter had.

Peter was Bishop of Rome, I fear it will hardly be ever proved; and the
consequent thereupon follows as absurdly, as if the Scribes and Pharisees,
which sat in Moses chair, and were in an extrauagant manner of election, and
succession drawn into Aarons Order of of Priesthood; yet they neither had the
religious piety of Moses and Aaron, nor kept the Ordinances of Gods Law
uncorrupted, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 1. 2. 32. Joshua 1. 7. Prou 30. 6. Apoc 22. 1-8,
19 Galat. 3. 15.
but declined both to the right hand, in adding their own Inu^^tions,
Traditions, and mis-interpretations; and to the left hand, in omitting what God
required, and in Simonaicall entrances into the High Priesthood by Heathenish
authority, and no approbation of God, in which two points our
Pseudo-Catholickes have in as gross if not more impious man^^r) faulted; for
they have ouerflowed and drowned Peter's ship, and the whole Church with their
new Inventions, and old Tradi^ions, Math. 5. 3. to 10. Mark. 7. 4. to 14
casting aside the Com^aundements of God, to inure and bring them into
practice; and to dispense with, and disa^ull the Laws and Ordinances of God,
forbidding Marriages, which God has allowed: and allowing such, which God has
forbidden.

But we require of them to An Argument to prove that Peter was no Bishop.
show us how Peter was, or by any lawful order could be Bishop of Rome, or
Antioch, or any other Bishopric: for his Ordination by Christ to be an
Apostle, debarreth him to accept of any other inferior calling: Timothy and
Titus, which were Bishops respectively of Ephesus, and Creta, might not assume
the Apostleship and enlarge their limits which Christ peculiarly gave to all
the Apostles, Matt. 28. 19
To go in all the world; neither would the Apostles straighten their power, Ab
orb ad vrbem, to give over 2 Cor. 11. 28
the care of all Churches, (which Paul had) to tie themselves to one City or
Province: it is a Rule not to be transgressed, that every man abide in that
Office whereunto he is called: and though it may fall out, that some by
painfulnesse and proficiency, may get a 1 Timothy 3. 13.
better degree of calling in the Church; yet to descend to an inferior degree
from an higher calling, is not allowed in any Church, nor Rome it self, except
such Popes and Antipopes as have been deposed for Heresies, Schisms, and
odious misdemeanors, and from the dignity of Apostles (which they arrogate)
fall to be Apostataes, to derogate from Christ's glory and their own. And this
may be sufficient to prove that Peter was no Bishop.

Arguments to prove that Peter was never Bishop of Rome.
But let us admit, that Peter was both an Apostle, and a Bishop, yet little can
the Bishop of Rome derive from him, being an Apostle over the Jews, as is
witnessed, that with the consent Did commit unto Gal. 2. 8, 9. Acts 15. 25.
Paul and Barnabas the charge of preaching the Gospel to the uncircumcision,
or the Gentiles, as to Peter was also committed the execution of his
Apostleship over the Circumcision, or the Jews; And when Peter would extend
the Ministry of his Apostleship to the Jews, he wrote his Epistles unto them,
1 Pet. 1. 1, 2
Being dispersed as strangers throughout Pontus, Galacia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithinia, but no where remembered his Patriarchall Seat at Rome.

Paul being so long in that City, and making mention Phil. 4. 21. Col. 47. to
15. Philem. 23, 24.
of many of his fellow laborers, commending them as his assistants in the
work of the Lord, has no note of any remembrance of Peter, who if he had
been in Rome would no doubt have been a principal assistant, except he had
with Tim 4. 10. 16.
Demas forsaken him, as he had done his Lord and Master at Jerusalem, which
were wickedness to surmise of him; who there as they affirm) lost his life
with Paul, under the Tyrant Nero, the then Emperor of Rome.

Paul (rather than Peter) their patron Acts 9. 5. and 22, 14. etc.
who was called to be an Apostle by Christ glorified, and who did especially
appoint him to preach Acts 19. 21.
and witness of him at Rome, Acts 23. 11. and who 1 Cor. 15. 10.
labored more abundantly then they all, for from Jerusalem to Illyricum, Romans
15, 19
he caused the Countries to abound with the Gospel of Christ; he saw Christ
after his resurrection, Acts 19. 11. 12.
and did as many and great miracles as any of the Apostles.

Peter is the man they stand upon, and to prove his Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib.
2. cap. 2
being at Rome, they produce a note of Salutations sent 1 Pet. 5. 13.
from the Church which is at Babylon, which they interpret and enforce to be
at Rome. And we believe there were true Professors of the Christian faith, both
at Babylon in Assyria, which Saint Peter remembers to send salutations to the
dispersed Jews their brethren, but also there was a Babylon in Egypt: but no
where do we read that Rome Bellar. confesses t^a^ by the whore is meant
Rome. B. de Antichristo lib. 3 cap 13
is Babylon literally, but my stically: for it happily resembles Babylon that
kept Gods people in bondage, Apoc. 18. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and is the Scarlet or purple colored who^e (which the Angel calls us to
come away from) making all Nations drunken with the cup of her fornications,
(as sometime there was an Idol, 2 King. 17. 30
called Succoth-Benoth, the tabernacle of Daughters, or habitation of Whores,
for every City served such an Idol as best pleased their fancies,) and this
was become an habitation of Devils, the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage
of every unclean and hateful bird, and God has remembered her iniquities,
which made her self drunk with the blood of his Saints: What advantage has
Cardinal Bellarmine gained by his mystical interpretation: in this sense we
allow Rome to be Babylon, the Pope the Scarlet Whore, Idolatry her
Fornications, and all Princes to have drunk the dregs thereof, and we expect
when she shall drink the Wine of Gods wrath for her abominations.

For conclusion, it remains for our Antagonists to prove, First, that Peter
had from Christ a superiority over his brethren, and fellow Apostles:
Secondly, and that he had also a power to subdelegate his Assigns and
Successors to have the same power: but if he had it not himself in his life
time, he could never communicate it being dead, to any Successors; and it
behooves them to bring forth his Will and Testament, if he has bequeathed it
unto them, least the Churches of Jerusalem and Antioch (where we know assuredly
he held long residence, and exercised his Apostle-ship) came in for their
interest, with equal (if not with more) reason.

And how much power he derived to his Successors, is another question to be
warily scanned, least if we grant one absurdity, it beget many. First, as
whether Saint John, and other Apostles suruiuing Peter, were under the
Successors controlement; and whether Linus, Cletus, and Anacletus, or any
Successor in the Sea of Rome, had equal power (as Peter by them is intended to
have had) and might claim a superiority o- over the suruiuing Apostles of
Christ, which implies a ridiculous and gross absurdity, that a Bishop or
Pastor should bear rule over an Apostle, which were in the first and highest
degree of Ecclesiastical Orders as Saint Paul witnesses, saying, God gave
unto his Church, Ephesians: 4. 11. 1: Cor: 12. 28.
first Apostles, that is, by the Romanistes own interpretation, Chiefest, for
so they argue, Peter was chief, because the Evangelist says, Mark: 3. 14. 16.
Math. 10. 2.
Christ chose his twelve Apostles, and first (that is to say chiefest) Peter;
whence we conclude, that after Peter's death, the Church wanted an Head, except
we allow Saint John (then living at Pathmos in banishment) to be the chiefest
man of the Church, and before Peter's Successors, because he was an Apostle,
which Peter's Successors were not. Antioch, for that Peter was martyred at Rome,
and not at Antioch, or Jerusalem; Christ pronounces desolation to Jerusalem,
for the blood of the Apostles shed so abundantly there, as hardly any could
escape or perish elsewhere out of Jerusalem, justly therefore called the bloody
city, where Manasses shed blood to maintain Idolatry in all the streets of
Jerusalem; which was a principal cause of that grievous destruction of the
Temple, and the City, and captivity of the Citizens, which shortly ensued
thereupon. And undoubtedly Rome may as properly be called the bloody City,
being first inauspiciously built upon the blood of brothers (Rhemus and
Romulus) and so continued the maintenance of their Idolatry in ten ensuing
persecutions by unspeakable blood-sheddings, and to this day their strongest
Arguments are fire and faggot, and other tyrannical Inquisitions, (of which
they make bold even already to whisper us in the ear) they may indeed boast
more of Peter's persecutions, then of any pontifical power, which he exercised
in Rome. But they will not easily be drawn to follow Peter, as he did Christ,
in suffering with him, Math 19. 27 Mark 10. 28. Luke 18. 28.
and forsaking all to follow him: nor can they truly affirm (as he did) Acts
3. 6.
that gold and silver they have none; (as a Pope said once to Thomas Aquinas)
who readily, wittily, and pithily replied, neither can you say truly (as Peter
did to the Creeple) Rise up and walk: For as the pontifical Prelates
increased in wealth, so they decreased in worth, and lost that power which
Peter had of working miracles; no, no, they neither preach as Peter, nor live
as Peter, nor are willing to dye as Peter, neither from him can they deduce any
of their pompous portlinesse, or papal practices. Acts 15. 6.
He called not Councels, but with the consent of the other Apostles; he
invested not Bishops, nor gave them Palls; he neither had Crown, nor Mytre,
Cope, nor Crosier; he granted no pardon for sins either past, or to come,
nor sent out his Leaden Bulls (or Aureas Bullas, glorious and golden braggs) to
bring in golden and silver bags, in exchange for that trash; he cited no
Bishops to appear before him, nor required them to take his Inuestitures and
Consecrations: we may find in all his Epistles, 1 Pet. 1. 7. and 2. 21. and
3. 16, 17 and 4. 13. and 5. 3, 6.
paternes of patience, humility, and obedience to Princes, but not a word of
his Decrees, Decretals, Extrauagants, and Canonical Constitutions; he lacked
his Cardinals, Auditors, Chancellors, Inquisitors, Notaries, and Prenotaries;
he never sat in the Laterane, to measure out the spaces of Purgatory, nor
impounded poor souls there for want of money, and released them at peculiar
rates and prises; none kissed his feet, nor swore to him homage, and Canonical
Obedience: he had no Coaches of Curtizans to fill his Courts, nor Bastards to
make Dukes in his Territories: In these things they have succeeded and exceeded
Caiphas, (a pretended Successor of Aaron) for pernicious Counsel, and false
Judgments, in condemning innocents, Math. 27. 24.
in Pilats Basin they would wash their hands, and then sit down in Peter's
Chair, and pronounce their bloody Sentences: we should think it some
resemblance of a Successor, if all, or any of them would feed the flock of
Christ, as he Ioh: 21. 15. 16. 17.
commanded and commended unto Peter's care; and Peter in like sort 1. Pet. 5. 2.
to all Pastors, otherwise their boasting of succession to Peter, is but like
the glorying of a Traitor, which has nothing to say in his Justification, but
that his father was a good Subject, and his Ancestors honest men, whose
condemnation is the more just, having so degenerated from the piety of their
predecessors.

Text. I will build my Church. Herein two notable points are presented to our
consideration:

First, of the Builder, Christ, I will build. Secondly, of the building, the
Church, my Church.
Indeed every one of these words are very significant, and emphaticall, and
afford profitable notes and worthy the pains both of my writing and your
reading.

I will build.

Christ is the only builder of his Church: though as in the building of
Salomons Temple there were many workmen and diverse degrees, yet 2 Samuel 7. 13
Solomon is only said by his wisdom to build the Temple, which 1 Kings 5, 5
and 6. 2.
prepared the materials, and gave direction for the work: even so Christ (the
true Solomon and builder of the true Temple) has ordained diverse Ministers and
workmen, but he appoints the materials, 1 Cor. 3. ^. to 13. and 12. 6.
Ephe. 4. 11, 12 Hebr. 3. 3, 4.
even his word and Gospel, which are the durable gold and silver, and not the
hay and stubble of men's traditions and inventions: there are three notable and
special figures and representations of the Church, propounded in the
Scriptures of the old Testament, in all which, the work and workmanship is
prescribed by God himself, whose divine wisdom (knowing what was in man)
would not leave any thing to his braine-sicke (if not braine-lesse) inventions,
namely

First, the Arc or Ship of Noah. Secondly, the Arc or Tabernacle of Moses.
Thirdly, the Temple of Solomon.
First, Touching the Arc of Noah, it was provided for the preservation of Gods
Family (which was the Church) in the posterity of Noah, by Gods appointment
only, vnforeseene by the Patriarch himself, and unthought of by the rest of
the world, which were justly destinated to destruction; yet the making of the
Arc is in all things prescribed by Almighty God, Genesis 6. 14, 15, 16.
the Timber of Pine Trees (gopher) the Rabbines pitching within and without,
the length, the breadth, and height, the windows, door; and several rooms
how to be framed and placed.

Secondly, the Arc or Tabernacle of Moses is appointed of God, who ordered the
work, and furnished the workmen with meet gifts for performance thereof;
Exodus 25. 10, etc. and 26. pertotum. and 31. 2. to 10.
the matter, the form, the instruments, the bars, the pinnes, the couerings,
the Snuffers, the Priests garments; and every thing set down at large Heb 8. 5.
by God himself, for the place of his dwelling among his people: for howsoever
he fills Heaven an Earth with his presence, yet his special residence is in
his Church, which is said to be Psalm. 132. 5. 13 14.
his habitation, where he will dwell for ever, and has a delight therein to
converse with men; there is his mercy seat, 1. Kin. 6. 13.
and thence he gives his Oracles, and manifests himself, and his will unto
the Church: and Moses is very diligent, in ^e ample description thereof, and
whatsoever appertained to ^he service of God therein, which was brought by
David, after he was settled in his King^ome, with great solemnity; ^ first to
the house of Obed-Edom u 2. Sam: 6.
(who was mightily blessed by Gods presence there) and afterward to his own
house in the City of David.

Thirdly, when Solomon would build a Temple, and instead of a wandering Arc, 1.
King. 5. 5. and 6. 2. 3.
would have a settled Seat for Gods habitation, and exercise of Religion; and
8. 4.
he brought the Arc and placed it (as a Sacrament of Gods presence) in his
Temple; which was an other illustrious and last figure of the Church of God; in
building whereof, what soever God himself prescribed, was most precisely
observed, both for the matter and form thereof; and with what magnificenses
and curiosity it was performed; how mystically every part was framed to
represent Christ's Church, and spiritual Temple, by a King of Peace, for a King
of Peace; and to direct to the Kingdom of Peace, is at large to be read in the
holy History, which is the most warrantable rule for us to proceed by; to
square out our Church governors and government, and all variation from it, is
an aberration from the truth, which is the chief pillar of Religion in the
house of God.

I will build says he, and the same is also 1 Cor. 3. 11.
the foundation of the building; and 10. 4.
the Rock, and 1 Pet. 2. 6, etc.
Cornerstone; as he Hebr. 9. 14.
was the Priest and oblation; the and 10. 8, 12.
sacrificer, and the sacrifice; so he is Ephesians. 1. 22, 23
the head of the Church (which is his mystical body) and in him we grow
together, and are joined to him to be the members of his body, and with him to
be made 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19.
a living and holy Temple for the habitation of God through the Spirit.

Apoc. 19. 13
to name the word of God, and is 1 Pet. 1. 25 Math. 24. 25.
of everlasting continuance, and endures for ever: though Moses was a most
excellent workman, in building the Typical Tabernacle, yet he was but a part
of Gods house, but Christ is the builder Hebr. 3. 3.
which has more honor then the building: and let the Spouse hearken and obey
the voice of her Bridegroom, and then we will obey her: the Apostles required
no greater obedience of the Churches, then 1 Cor. 11. 1.
to follow them as they followed Christ.

Build; the Church is compared to a building, the nature of which metaphor
shall the more plainly be expounded, by showing what resemblance ther^ is
between the Church of God and a house or building.

First the Metaphor of building denotateth unto us, the order which ought to
be in the Church for edification thereof; for it suffices not to heap up
stones and timber in a confused manner, but to hew, and square them out, to
compact them strongly together, and to frame it in comely order for the God of
order: and therefore the Apostle requires of teachers, 2. Tim 2. 15.
that they divide the word of God aright; for Gods vnder-builders are ever
noted for skillfull worke-men, endued with wisdom to pollish and perfect the
workmanship which they undertake; as was lively and figuratively represented
in the builders of the of the material Tabernacle and Temple, as namely Exodus
31. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 6.
Bezaleel, Aholiab, 1. King 7, 9, 13, 14.
Hiram, and such like skillful workmen.

Secondly, as Salomons Temple was John 2: 20
forty and six years in building, so Ephesians; 4, 11, 12.
the Church of God is not hastily raised up, but arises by degrees unto
perfection; and as we say in a common Proverb, Rome was not built in a day; so
he that believes, must not make haste to think he is a true member of Gods
Church by participation of Sacraments, but by profiting, and proceeding in the
knowledge of the Word of God: 2. Pet, 3. 18.
There is a growing in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ; and the
Prophet Ezekiel in a Vision describes the increasing of the graces of the
Church Ezekiel. 47 2. etc.
by a vision of waters, which first came to the ancles, then to the knees, etc.
and Christ himself implies so much in the Parable of the Mustardseed, which
being Math. 13. 31.
little at first, grows to a Tree, wherein Birds build their Neasts.

Thirdly, as in a building, the stones and timber must be hewn, squared, and
made fit to join (not only to the foundation) but one to another; so in Gods
Church, the members of Christ's body, are not only required to be united with
their Head, but knit together in unity amongst themselves, Ioh. 13. 34, 85 and
15. 12, 17 1 John 3. 23. and 4. 7, 12, 21.
He that loves God, must love his brother also, according to his
commandment; and these two be commonly (if not always) conjoined as twins
of one birth, Colloss. 1. 4 Philem. 5, verse. 1 These. 1. 3.
Faith toward God, and Love toward the Brethren.

3. Text. My Church.

By Church here is understood that Society and communion of Saints, 1 Cor. 12.
11 12, 27.
which are knit together by faith in Christ, and fellowship amongst themselves,
Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
by participation of Gods divine Word and Sacraments, which are the soul and
sinews of this body, and are quickened by his Spirit: Deuteronomy. 14. 2.
the voice and word of God, is the outward means whereby we are called and
gathered into an holy body, Exodus 19. 5, 6. Romans 4. 11.
and we receive the Sacraments, as Seals of the grace and covenant between
God and us, whereby he assures us, Deuteronomy. 26. 18, 19.
that he will be our God, and we thereby bind our selves to be his people,
and to live under his obedience and laws, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Luke 1. 75.
in holiness and righteousness, whereunto we are called: and Saint Paul
writing to the Romans, does not call them the Church, but elegantly, and
significantly implies them to be members of it, when he says, Romans 1. 6, 7.
They are the called of Jesus Christ, and called to be Saints: For that is The
Word and Sacraments are the infallible marks of the true Church.
the end of our vocation, that we being chosen and called out of the world by
the voice of Gods Word, should be an holy and precious people unto him.
Ecclesia is therefore derived from (...), to be chosen, or called out of one
Society into another, out of the kingdom of darkness into light; out of the
world, into the service of God: and are separated unto that end, that we might
no more serve sin in the lusts of our former ignorance, but by faith to
serve Christ as our Head, that has called us, as also to serve one another, as
mutual members of the same body: so the faithful of the Jews and Gentiles
being converted by the preaching of Peter and the other Apostles, Acts 13, 14
and 2. 38. to 42. Acts 5. 11, 12, 13
Became a Primitiu^ Church, lived together in one place, continued in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, in common prayers, in breaking of Bread: that
is, communicating Gods holy Sacraments; and this Saint Luke calls the Church,
saying, Acts 2. 41,
There was daily added to the Church such as should be saved.

These marks of the Church are evidently and every where described and set
forth in the Scriptures: but the marks of the Romish Church are not there to
be found. First, their pretended Antiquity cannot warrant the later Novelties
of their Churches inventions. Secondly, their Universality is too straightly
restrained, and pinned up within the limits of their City and Territories.
Thirdly, their Visibilitie fails, when it falls out, that Elijah cannot see
any face of a Church, but cries out, that 1. Kin. 19, 10. Romans 11, ^, 4.
he is left alone, when yet God had a great people known to himself,
howsoever invisible to the Prophet. Augustine, that learned Father, and worthy
Disputer, durst affirm against their Visibilitie of the Church, Quod aliquando
Ecclesia fuit in solo Abraham, etc. That sometimes the Church visible was only
in Abraham, Noah, Lot, Elijah, etc. Fourthly, and for that mark of Succession
of Bishops (no way grounded on the Scriptures) is as hardly to be proved,
otherwise then as Annas and Caiphas were Aarons successors, in a broken and
interrupted disorder, neither called, nor practicing Gods Religion (as Aaron)
but Simonists, Sectaries, profane hypocries, misinterpreters, corrupters of
Gods Word, and bloody murderers; as likewise have succeeded in Peter's pretended
Chair at Rome, Sadducees, Monothelites, Heretics, Sodomites, and such
disordered Chaire-masters, as poynteth them out rather to be the succeessors
of Simon Magus, for their Simonies, then of Simon Peter for his singleness and
sincerity: Let the Romanistes then return from their pontifical portlinesse
to the pattern of Peter's piety; let them surcease 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
to rule as Lords over Gods heritage, and feed the flock of Christ, of a
willing mind and not for filthy lucre, that we may find and acknowledge some
similitude of their succession in the Apostolical Chair, when we shall find
the Word of God there sounding out, and his Sacraments worthily and without
humane additions duly administered; otherwise if they miss these marks, we
shall be so far from acknowledging their Sea of Rome to be the Catholic, or
Universal Church, that we shall doubt whether they be any particular Church
of Christ, or members of that mystical body whereof he is the only Head: and
their false Prophet that teaches lies, shall be but the Isai 9, 15
tail (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks) which being out of conformity with the
body, is a deformity to the whole body, and striving to be another head with
Christ, produces a monstrous and misshapen body of the Church with two heads,
as indeed they carry (like Ianus) two faces under one hood, a show of
holiness in their mouths, but hollownesse and hypocrisy in their hearts, and
the woe denounced against the Pharisees and Hypocrites by Christ himself, shall
fall upon them for their merited portion; for they Matt. 23.
say and do not, lay heavy burdens on other men's shoulders, but will not
touch them with one of their fingers: do all things to be seen of men,
garnish their garments with representations of holiness; love the chiefest
seats in Synagogues and assemblies, and will be called and accounted the only
Rabbis, Doctors and Fathers of the Church, they take away the Key of
knowledge, and shut up the Kingdom of Heaven, (neither entering themselves nor
suffering those that would) devouring Widows houses under color of long
prayers; blind guides, and leaders of the blind professing blind ignorance for
the mother of their Devotion: strain at a gnat, and swallow down a Camel;
make more account of a fasting day, or holyday, than to commit murder of
Princes, and gross Idolatry; painted Sepulchers which have all things
outwardly beautiful; make clean Cups and Pottes, but inwardly are full of
briberie, excess, rottenness and corruption; garnishing the Tombs of the
Apostles and Martyrs, and have martyred many that would have imitated the
doctrine and doings of Christ and his Apostles: by these Emblemes Christ has
already decyphered them; by these Marks, we shall undoubtedly know them to
be the successors of the Pharisees: and indeed, if Peter now could see his
pretended successors; he might say as once Almighty God, in derision said of
Adam after his transgression, Gen 2. 22.
Behold how the man is become as one of us, or Simia, quam similis, turpissima
bestia, nobis, indeed but Iack-an-apes to a man: what should we multiply profes
in so plain a matter, to prove them Math 7. 15.
wolves in sheep clothing, making havoc of the flock, having Gal. 1. 8.
another Gospel than Paul or Peter taught, and therefore accursed, other
Mediators besides Christ, and above, to command him; and so much derogating and
abasing the dignity and authority of Christ 1. Tim. 2. 5. Heb. 12. 24. and 7
25. John 10. 7, 8,
our sole Mediator, Intercessor, and Savior, that plainly points and
painteth them out to be Antichrists.

2. Tim 2. 19.
the Lord knows who are his, faith in the heart, Acts 16. 14.
all such shall be saved whose hearts the Lord opened to believe the Gospel,
regeneration, and renewing by the holy Ghost unto sanctimony, righteousness,
love, sobriety, and all virtues; Romans 6. 5, 6, and 8. 2. to 15.
fashioned to the image of Christ and God, which was defaced by Adams
transgression and our own actual rebellion, making us dead in trespasses and
sins; but Colloss. 2. 22. and 2. 13. and ^. 9. 10. Gal. ^. 24 Ephesians. 2. 1. 2.
5. 12
by Christ through faith are renewed, made new men, new creatures, alive unto
God, adopted Children of God, receiving the Spirit of God as the pledge of our
adoption and inheritance: of these we cannot judge truly, because Hypocrites
have a maruailous resemblance to the children of God; Math. 7. 21 Luke 13. 25,
26
they prophecy, work Miracles, hear Gods word, fast, pray, profess, build
Synagogues, and perform many outward resplendent good works: so as Solomon
could not by any outward thing discern the Reprobate from the Elect; Eccles.
9. 2. 3.
it apeareth says he) that it comes alike to all, to him that sacrifices,
as to him that sacrifices not: Mich. 6, 7.
Hypocrites sacrificed thousands of Rams, and streams of Oil; yea they
offered the fruit of their bodies for the sin of their souls; and the
Pharisees Luk: 18. 11. etc.
can boast of many good works, when yet Math 21. 31
penitent Publicans, Harlots and sinners go into Heaven before them: Saint
Paul (as touching the Law) lived Phil: 3, 5, 6,
unblameably when as yet he was no member but a 1. Tim: 1. 13
Persecutor of the visible Church, till he was called and converted by the
voice of Christ; Rom 2. 17. 25 etc. 1. Cor 10. 1, ^, 5.
and he reasons strongly against them which boast themselves to be the
Church and people of God; because they have the outward tokens and Testimonies
of the Church: Gal. 4, 22, 23. 28 20, and 37. 9.
Abraham's seed, are the children of Promise (but in Isaac) not the carnal
progeny which persecute the Children borne of the spirit, Romans 2. 25, 26, etc.
outwardly Jews but in truth are not; their circumcision for want of faith
becomes vncircumcition; and the eating of the Pasouer with leauened hearts
did polute it, and brought the wrath of God upon them; as Acts 8. 13. 18 to 23.
Simon Magus was acursed after he had received the outward Sacrament of
baptism, and was full of the gall of bitterness, hypocrisy, and all
iniquity: 1. John 2. 19.
many are in the Church which are not of the Church; as Mat. 13. 27.
Tares and Wheat; Cap. 25. 32, 33.
Goats and Sheep; Cap. 13. 48. 49.
Fish good and bad, are drawn together into a visible Church out of the Sea of
this world; but the good shall be preserved, and the reffuse cast away and
rejected: foolish Virgins Matt. 25. 2. 3. 10, 11, 12, etc.
have no entaince, though they pretend to wait for the Bridegroomes coming,
but are not religiously prepared, as the wise, with oil in their lamps; Mat.
13. 30.
when the good wheat is gathered into the garner, the chafe shall be burned
with unquenchable fire; so our blessed Savior, as well in sundry pregnant
parables as declaratiue and plain propositions, Mat. 3. 9. 12. John 8. 39.
Gala. 3. 7 16. Cap. 4. 22. 28. Romans 4. 13, 14,
would drive us from this vain confidence, which the Jews had, in boasting
they were Abraham's seed, and rested upon the carnal ceremonies of the Law,
and the material Temple and Tabernacle; all which the blessed proto-Martyre
Saint Steven largely answers and confuteth, Act. 7. 2. 44 48
by an history call relation, showing unto the Jews, that the Temple, Law, and
Ceremonies, must give place to Christ.

stagger with Thomas, Ioh. 20. 25.
we see and feel such visible and sensible signs, Gal. 3, 3,
and having begun in the spirit, seek to end in the flesh; for it is too
apparent and palpable, that the Romish Religion and marks of their Church are
altogether outward and carnal, and wholly tend to delight and delude the
senses, and leave the soul without any spiritual edification: let us
therefore Ioh. 1. 45.
with Nathaniel seek the Messiah, and come to find him by the guiding of
Philip and the Apostles, which inuit us to come and see, whom? even him of
whom Moses and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, and if he make a
question, if any good come out of Nazareth; or as the Pharisees affirmed, that
Ioh. 7. 41, 42,
out of Galile arises no Prophet, yet the Scriptures express the contrary in
both, for Mat. 2, 23, Isay: 9. 1, 2, Luke 1. 26.
he shall be called a Nazarite, and not only Luke 4. 34.
the Devils acknowledge him a Nazarite, but Pilate wrote the inscription of his
cross, John 19. 19.
Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews, to this Touchstone Christ himself
directs us, John 5. 35.
search the Scriptures; Luke 16. 29.
Moses and the Prophets are left to keep men out of Hell (the place of
torment) and Peter sends us 2. Pet. 1. 19.
to this sure word of prophecy: and the beloved Apostle commends this
assurance of salvation to the elect Lady. 2. Ioh. 9, 10.
to continue in the Doctrine of Christ, without which they are without God,
that is, are no Church at all, nor members of Christ

I will build my Church: these marks, either of a Church, or building, we
require our adversaries to show in their Church, which boast of faith, and yet
debarr the preaching and reading of the word of God* Romans 10. 14. 17.
which is the foundation of faith; when they brag of their love, and good
works (which are merely Pharisaicall, Hypocritical, and Heathenish) yet they
only Mat. 5. 46: 47.
love their lovers, and persecute the lovers of Christ and his Gospel, Mat. 5,
1, 2, 5. 7.
and do all their good works, and multiply prayers to be seen of men; and
do not Pharisees, Heathens, and Publicans the same? let Faith be the Anchor,
and love the Cable, with which the Shipe and Arc of the Church is stayed in
storms and tempests, that being tossed it cannot sink, Mat. 7. 25.
though the winds blow it cannot fall: the charity of the Romish Church is
contrary to that charity which the Apostle requires and has taught, Acts 20
35.
that it is more blessed to give then to receive; but they have all their
blessedness and happy estate in the rich donations of Constantine,
Charlemaine, and other liberal Donors; and builders of their Monistaries,
Cloisters, Hermitages, and dens of Droanes, where the bread of laborers is
bestowed upon loiterers, which to feed their own bellies, starve the souls
of Gods people; and will keep Peter's Keys so charily, as none shall come to
heaven without gifts; no poor puling souls can come out of Purgatory, nor
penitent sinners obtain pardons, without pence (Peter's pence) powling pence;
the dead must pay them tribute for their Dirges; no Mass without money, no
penney, no paternoster: thus they rob the widows and fatherless, under
pretense of their many and long prayers, and perhaps (it may be) that out of
these robberies, their charity arises to give some what to the poor; which is
to sacrifice the son before the fathers face; nay (such is their charity)
they draw Children from their Parents to be nouices in their Nunneries and
Cloisters, and there to live idly (if not wantonly and wickedly) as late
experience has brought to light their deeds of darkness, and their best
devotions are but supersticions, in numbering their prayers to God, to demerite
his mercy and favor thereby; whereas he rejects them, and accounts them
ignorant services of the tongue and labor of the lips; but no prayers to
him, 1 Cor: 14. 9, 14, 15,
where neither the affections are powered out, nor the understanding edified,
which he specially requires, and prefers before Mat: 6, 7,
their vain bablings in a strange Language and Lyturgie, and dasheth them all
out of his liking and acceptance, with that of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 1. 11,
12, 15.
quis requisiuit haec? who has required these things at your hands? no
Prince, or reasonable man will have orders introduced or practiced in his
house, which himself has not prescribed or allowed; much less will the
wisdom of God permit in his house such foolish services as the brainsicke
invention of men hatcheth and brings forth: In a word, Christ here calls it
his Church, not Peter's, but the Romish Antichrist will have it Peter's Ship,
Peter's Church built to Peter; not by Peter by Apostolical Docttrine, but
Apostaticall doting, and House of Merchandise to sell Pardons; not, as Peter
did Acts 2. 37, 38
proclaim pardons to them that were first penitent, and pricked in their
hearts with the consideration of their horrible sins, and exhorted by him to
return unto God in amendment of their lives, when they enquired of him how
they might be saved: Acts 20. 28.
it is Christ's Church, Matt. 21. 12. 13.
Gods house, Acts 2, 18
Gods people, John 10. 4. 5. 14. 17.
Christ's flock to hear his voice, and not strangers, nor strange Languages,
nor strange Doctrines, which neither Christ 1 Pet, 5, 3.
nor Peter ever taught or allowed of: how unlike is Peter's Church at Jerusalem
and Antioch, to Peter's Church at Rome? there he showed his love to his Master
in edifying his Church, Ioh. 21, 15. 16, 17.
feeding his Lambs, feeding his Sheep, as he was required; but in Peter's
Church at Rome, there is fleecing of the Sheep, feeding on the Lambs, and
slaughtering the true Sheepheards to uphold an Idol Shepherd: 1. Cor 6. 20.
1 Cor. 7, 23,
Christ bought his flock with a price ( 1. Pet. 1. 19. Acts 20. 28.
even with the precious price of his own blood) here the Lambs, Sheep, and
Sheepheards are all sold for a price (Omnia vaenalia Romae) all sins at offer
and proffer, no questioning of their repentance, but of their reputations; not
a word of the greatness and multitude of their sins, but of the heaviness
of their purses, and price of their absolutions; no promises of everlasting
life, nor threatenings of eternal death; but Indulgences for years of pardons,
Leases, but no releases of sins; some paultery penances perhaps are enjoined,
in carnal ordinances and ceremonies; abstayning from some meats, observing
some Feastiuals, serving some Saints; or pattering of senseless and stinted
prayers: and though the Apostles teach that 1 Timothy: 4. 8.
bodily exercise profits little, and 1 Cor. 8. 8
meats neither commend us better, nor make us worse to God, in their kind, but
in their moderation or excess; and that godliness is great gain, and has
the promises of this life, and that which is to come; yet it is far otherwise
taught and practiced, in Peter's pretended Synagogue at Rome: neither can the
wilful ignorant sheep be excused, nor exempted from Gods just vengeance, Luke
19. 14. 27.
which will not have Christ (but Antichrist) to reign over them; and therefore
have justly 1 These. 2. 10, 11.
strong delusions to be led and kept in error, which will not receive the love
of the Truth; as the Apostle prophesied evidently of the days of Antichrist;
and we have in all parts seen the accomplishment thereof in our days: but
let us now proceed to show how to this praise of Peter's profession, Christ
adds a promise of the stabillity of the Church, that the gates of Hell shall
not be able to prevail against it.

The gates of Hell shall not overcome it.

This saying is understood of the Spiritual, and not the Temporal Kingdom of
Christ; for he does not make any promise that the worldly Potentates should
not prevail against the visible Church, (which both the Assyrians, Caldeans,
and Romans often did, and the barbarous Hunnes and Frenchmen against Rome it
self) but the gates of Hell shall not prevail against the true Church and
believers in Christ: no doubt the gates of Hell have mightily prevailed against
that Synagogue of Satan, whose Bishops have gotten the Popedom, and lost their
faith by the Stratagems of the Devil: Nay, Luk: 22. 31. 32.
Satan had sifted Peter himself after this promise, and if he had not stood
firm by faith through Christ's prayer, he was in danger of a downfall, and
Ship-wracke of salvation.

This is also a metaphorical phrase, for Hell and Heaven have no material
gates, though for our weak capacities, it pleases Gods spirit so to express
spiritual powers unto us; by gates is understood the power of darkness, the
malice, might, policy, and flattery of Satan; not only by his own immediate
malice, but by the cruel agency of his profane instruments, the World and the
Flesh; which continually assault the Church of God, and try all their power and
policy to batter and overthrow it, but shall not be able to overcome it.

that the power and strength of Hell, the World, Sin, and the Devil, shall
not overcome them, that by a true faith, are founded on Jesus Christ: Abraham,
Gen 22. 17. Cap. 24. 60.
that his seed should possess the gate, or strong holds of his enemies; and
the holy Apostle speaking of the weapons of our warfare: 2 Cor. 10. 4.
they are not carnal (says he) but mighty through God, to cast down all the
strong holds (as it were the brazen gates) of our enemies.

that he shall not be tempted and tried by Satan; but that Satan shall not
overcome the believer in Christ: the just man Job, and the most faithful
Abraham, the holiest David, the wisest Solomon, and Peter himself were
tempted, tried, and afflicted; but though many were the troubles of the
righteous, yet the Lord delivers them out of all; For as the mountains
encompassed Jerusalem, so the Lord Psalm. 32. 10.
stands about his people, that like mount Zion Psalm: 112, 6, Psalm: 125, 1, 2,
they cannot be removed, but stand firm and fast for ever: they are Gods Vine,
and therefore he pruneth and loppeth them; but withal, he Isa. 27. 3.
so waters the branches, that he makes them to bear much fruit, Nam vbi
spiritus irrigatio defuerit, omnis plantatio exarescit, where the spirit of God
does not water, the plants wither: but faith is still a firm foundation built
upon Christ; Iohh 3, 16
He that believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, let
Psalm. 80, 13.
the wild Boar of the Forest, and the subtle Foxes out of the Wilderness
seek to root up and to supplant the Lords plantation, yet they shall not be
able to prevail against it. It must needs be that Gen: 3, 15,
the seed of the Serpent, will pursue the seed of the woman at the heels;
yet her true seed shall break his head: and the same is more specially set
forth in a vision, Reu. 12, 3. where Saint John saw the great red Dragon with
the seven Heads, ten Horns, and seven Crowns upon his heads, watching to
devour the Child so soon as it was brought forth; but God preserved the
Child, and took it up into heaven, and fed the woman also in the
wilderness: which was a lively ^ype of Gods Church traueling ^o bring forth
Children unto ^im; and Satan watching all opportunities to destoy the holy
seed, (yea the Son of God himself) who is yet taken up into Heaven (as all
other true believers through him shall be) and his Church preserved and
nourished for a time in the wilderness of this World; till the time of the
full accomplishment of her Pilgrimage; when she shall be Apoc. 21. 2.
trimmed as a Bride to enjoy her perpetual felicity with her Bridegroom: to
this agrees the Testimony of Saint Paul; 2 Cor. 4. 8. 9.
we are (says he) afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress; in
poverty, but not overcome of poverty: we are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast
down, but we perish not. Thus David affirmed, that Psalm. 129. 1. 2.
many times the enemies had assailed, but never prevailed against him, for the
Lord was with him: and Saint John presses the same point, and shows the
means whereby the Church and children of God obtain the victory: 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
5.
all that is borne of God, overcomes the world: and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith: who is it that overcomes the world,
but he which believes that Jesus is the Son of God? this is that which God
signified unto Moses, and prepared him to constant perseverance in the midst
of all the Egyptian oppressions, when he showed him the vision of the bush Exodus
^. 2.
burning in fire, but not consumed by the fire: nay rather the Church is a
fire, to burn up her enemies on every side; as the Prophet Zachary foretold
the Israelites, when he had reduced them out of captivity: Zach. 12. 2. 3. 6.
Behold (says he) I will make Jerusalem a Cup of poison unto all the people
round about her: and an heavy stone, for all that lift at her, to tear them,
though all the people of the earth be assembled against her: in that day I will
make the Princes of Judah like coals of fire among the wood, and like a
firebrand in the sheafe, and they shall devour all the people round about, on
the right hand, and on the left, as is there further, and more at large
prophesied for the corroberation, and consolation of Gods afflicted Church.

and to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, to cleave steadfastly
unto the foundation and the Rock Christ, otherwise, 1 Cor: 10, 12.
let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall; as the Israelites
did, which had received those excellent prerogatives, that God chose them as
his precious treasure above all nations of the earth, gave them Sacraments and
Ordinances of his own Institution, fed them with Manna (the bread of heaven)
made them drink of the spiritual Rock (Christ) that followed them, and
guarded them with a pillar of fire, and a cloud night and day, to direct and
protect them in their way; and yet for their stubburnnesse and rebellious
hearts, overthrew their carkeises in the wilderness: hereunto tend those
frequent exhortations in the Scriptures, that the Believers which profess
Christ, 2 John 8.
should take heed that they lose not the good things bestowed on them: Apoc. 2.
25. and 3. 11.
to hold fast that they have received: Heb. 12. 15.
to take heed that no man fall away from the grace of God: and that we 1 These.
5. 19.
quench not the spirit, but to cherish the good sparks of Gods grace given
unto them, which is called 2 Pet. 3. 18.
growing in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
in whom only consists the whole strength of the building, though weak wood
and timber be built thereupon; so as looking into our selves, and the examples
of Gods best beloved Children; yea Peter himself after this promise; how
foulely they have fallen, we may ever find cause of fear and distrust; but
lifting up our eyes unto God; the stablenesse of his counsels, and certainty
of his promises, we may rest safely in confidence of his word, which has said
Ios 1. 5.
I will not leave thee nor forsake thee, John 5. 24.
he that believes in him shall not perish for ever: He it is that does
nourish the holy fire in us, and keeps us unto the end: John 13. 1.
for whom he loves he loves everlastingly: 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
and the seed of God abides in the elect, that being borne of God, they sin
not unto condemnation, Romans 8. 1.
for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: Christ prayed for Luke 22 31.
Peter, and he prayed also for us, Ioh, 17. 2. 12. 20* 24.
and for all that should believe in his name, that none of his might be lost:
neither is any able to take them out of his Fathers hand, which is stronger and
greater then all; and loves us in Christ, as he loved him before the
foundations of the world were laid: against these the gates of Hell cannot
prevail, for they have the Lords privy Seal (not seen nor known to men)
but 2. Tim. 2. 19
the Lord knows his.

Romanists, holding opinion that the visible Church, and the pretended
successors of Peter cannot err: whereas the contrary is apparently verified in
the Scriptures, that Peter himself did err: and therefore though it be true,
that the invisible Church (that is the elect of GOD) cannot err finally, yet
the visible Church (consisting both of good and bad) may err, as appears
through the whole History of the Bible: and in the primative times particular
Churches have erred; witness Corinth, Galatia, Philadelphia, Pergamus, etc:
yea the Church of Rome it self (whether we regard the Head or the Body) has
grievously erred.

First, as touching the Head, Romish Bishops have erred, and diverse of them
became Heretics, Scismaticks, Antipopes, Negromancers, Sodomites, and what
not? Marcellinus sacrificed to the Idols of the Gentiles; Leberius was an
Arrian; Nicholas changed the decrees of John the two and twentieth; Gregory of
Pelagius, Innocentius of Gregory, yea in those things which belong to faith.
Cardinal Ragusanus proves that the Pope may err, and did in the great
Schism at Rome: Cardinal Cusanus affirms the Pope may fall from the faith:
the Council of Basil avouches, that the privilege of not erring belongs
not to the Popes more then other Bishops.

Secondly, and as for general Councels, (which have a more lively
representation of the whole Church, and where the Bishops of Rome have been
present) may, yea they have erred, one repealed the Acts and Decrees of
another, and there can be no correction without error, the Council of Nice
defended Images: that of Constantinople was against them: the third Council of
Carthage says, that he is Antichrist that calls himself an universal
Bishop, the Council of Rome and Trent say and maintain the contrary:
therefore except there be more Truths then one, Councels may err, and the Pope
may err, and consequently the whole visible Church may err: and the truth is,
Isa. 9 17.
many hypocrites (making a great show of godliness) have fallen away from
grace and the truth of the Gospel, become Apostatates in faith, and Satanists
in conversation: and yet the Church stands, For Rom 3. 4. Psalm 116. 1^. Titus
1. 2. Hebr 6. 18.
let God be true, and all men liars: in his truth it stands, and Satan (a
liar from the beginning) cannot overthrow it, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
Antichrists deceivable delusions and lying wonders cannot prevail against it.

Verse 19.
And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Upon such a sure and grounded
confession of Peter proceeds a twofold promise of Christ: 1. (as is formerly
laid down) that hereupon he will lay an immovable foundation of his Church,
that the gates of h^ll should not be able to prevail against it: 2. that he
would for the government thereof commit to his Apostles and Ministers the
Spiritual keys of the kingdom of heaven, with a power to bind and loose in
such manner, as he would ratify in heaven their proceedings in earth,
according to the tenure of his Commission, whereby he had so authorized them to
execute his power in his Church.

In these words observe two things.

First, Datum. The donation. wherein consider 1. who is the giver. 2. to whom
3. what was given.
Secondly, Applicaum. The Application in these words: whatsoever thou shall
bind on earth etc.

Heb. 2. 3. Psalm. 8 6. 1 Cor. 15. 27. John 17. 2. Phil. 2. 9, 10.
put all things in subjection under him in heaven and earth: and so the
Apostle affirms that Christ first received this power from God his Father to
be made the head of his Church, and only had right to give and communicate
such power unto his Church: thus Christ expresses it in the Gospel: Math. 11.
27. and 28. 18, 19.
All power (says he) is given me in heaven and in earth, and thereupon he
groundeth his commission to send his Apostles into all the world: this point is
not only verified by apparent and plentiful texts of holy Scriptures, but
even our adversaries in words not greatly contradict it, howsoever in their
practice and in effect they have paralelled sundry of the Saints with him as
the Turks and Infidels have wholly dethroned him, and placed their false
prophet, and abominable idol Mahomet before him and above him: but because
they deny the principles of faith and religion, we will not contend nor spend
much time in disputing with them, but willingly acknowledge and subscribe to
the Sovereignty and absolute power of Christ, as disposer of all things in
heaven and earth. for him: for we must note that he then instantly gave not,
Luke 24. 49 Acts 1. 4.
to wait and attend at Jerusalem for the accomplishment of Gods promise, in
sending down the holy l John 14. 26 and 15. 26. and 16. 7.
Ghost, after the ascension of the Son of God, to enable and furnish them
with meet gifts for the execution of that charge which he had imposed upon
them. It is also further to be observed I will give (says he) not sell, hire
out o^ lend, but as it is with God in all things Math. 10. 8.
freely to give, that those which receive his gifts should not sell or re^ayle
them (as 2 King. 5. 20, 26.
Gehazi and Act. 8. 18. 19
Simon Magus) for gain, as is too too apparent the Peter's pretended
successors make great and abominable trafique in merchandising the church
keys, in pardoning and retaining sins for money, excommunicating and
absoluing for their best advantage: but leaving them to sell what Christ freely
gave; let us proceed to the consideration of the second particular
circumstance, namely to whom these keys were given.

I will give to thee.

Peter alone, or to him with the rest of the Apostles.

Peter made confession in the name of all, so Christ made this promise in the
name of all, as is most lively exemplified Matthew. 18 verse 18. where it is
evident that what he does here promise unto Peter, he does there make good unto
all the Church, saying, whatsoever you bind on earth, shall be bound ^ heaven,
etc. Whereupon Aretius: Bonum hoc commune, non personale, quod hereditario iure
ad certos pertineat: The donation of the keys, and exercise of that spiritual
power, is not personally tied to one man, but is a gift common to the whole
Church: as also Origin, Chrysostom, Cyril, and many others affirm,
especially Augustine, Qui Petrum ecclesia typum facit, quae in Petro claues
acceperit: Whose opinion is, that the power of the keys was not a personal
gift, neither promised to Peter alone, much less that these keys should be
tied by an hereditary succession, unto one particular Sea or Seat as the
Papists dream: but to omit these frivolous disputes, seeing the Apostles
receive the keys from Christ, we may thence observe.

That the authority of the Ministers calling is derived from Christ, as from
the head, and the Lord of the Prophets, unto his Apostles and Ministers, Matthew.
23. 34. Luke 11. 49. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1. Pet. 1. 11. Revel. 22. 6. Isaiah 6. 8. 9.
Matthew. 28. 19. Gal. 1. 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5. 18 19, 20.
that they have God the author of their calling, whose Ambassadors they are,
and though the world neither regard them, nor reward them, yet they being found
faithful dispensers of Gods divine mysteries, shall expect their reward from
him that put them in office, and sent them; who will one day say to every
faithful Steward, Math. 25. 21, 23.
Come thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy: I doubt
not but the Ambassadors of Princes which are messengers of peace, find such
acceptance of those to whom they are sent of such a grateful message, that
they are not sent away empty and unrewarded of the common enemy for their
message sake, which is Romans 10. 1 5. Isai 52. 7.
so joyful to hear of peace, after a long and wearysome warfare: but because
their places require them oftentimes to denounce war, it is no maru^ile if
their message be ungratefully accepted, and rewarded.

Yet is their reward with God their king that sent them, whose subjects they
are, and must execute his designs whether they be good or evil unto men: and
what indignity soever is done or offered unto them, their mighty King will
show himself a mighty revenger thereof, who in one sense and sentence has
said, Psalm. 105. 15
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: for the injury done
unto David's Ambassadors when they came peaceably to the King of Ammon, was
revenged as done unto the king himself: this is a principle which the Law of
Nature, all Nations allow and ought to maintain. If 1 Kin. 13 4, 6
Jeroboam dare stretch out his hand to strike Gods Prophet and Messenger, God
will smite him, that he shall not be able to pull in his arm again, without
the Prayer of the Prophet, which was stretched out against the Prophet: and
persecuting Iezabel, which 1 Kings 19. 2
vowed to have the Prophets head, 2 Kings 9. 33, 37.
was made dogs meat, and cast out as a carrion carkeise her self. For such
vengeance is Gods judgment threatened, and foretold aforehand by the Prophets:
and howsoever Iehu be Gods Executioner to perform it, yet it is ever annexed,
that it came so to pass according to the word of the Lord, which he spoke by
the mouth of his Prophets. And so much for the second branch; we come now to
show what was given, which is here said to be The keys of the kingdom of
heaven.

The metaphor of Keys (which in part has bin formerly handled) is diversely
taken, yea rested and drawn by constrained Interpretations, to the advantage
of that cause which diverse have diversely fancyed to make for them, and for the
building of their Hierarchy, even an earthly Tabernacle (which Math. 17. 4
Peter sometimes would have made) rather then an heavenly kingdom, which God
himself has appointed to be Mat. 6. 33.
above all things sought for and established.

First, they that by Keys understand Principality to be given to Peter above
the rest, and over the whole Church, and would crown him and his Successors
with an Imperial Diadem, to exercise as well spiritual jurisdiction, as to
have civil and temporal authority over Kings and Princes, have much mistaken
the word Keys, (which are not usual for Kings, but Porters to carry) and
usurpingly enlarged Christ's commission, Luke 12. 13, 14.
who himself would neither be made a King, nor intermeddle so much in secular
affairs, as to divide Inheritances betwixt two brethren, much less give away
kingdoms from the right heirs and owners, to strangers and bastards: So the
usurper Satan, (from whom the Pope-kings, or King-popes may more rightly claim
that power) does falsely affirm, that Mat. 4. 9. Luke 4. 6, 7.
all the kingdoms of the world are his, and given unto him, and he gives them
to whom he will, which yet he will not give, nor promise to give unto any, but
Idolaters, which will fall down and worship him: whereas contrarily, when
Christ perceived such an ambitious inclination in his Apostles of Lording over
their brethren, he forthwith Luke 22 24, to 30.
forbad such affectation of Pope-like domination, and sent them to climb by
humility, and innocence at the lowest step of the ladder, to exaltation, that
so they might attain greatness above the rest, when they had bin most
serviceable to the rest; and then he would appoint them a Kingdom, as his
Father had appointed him, John 18 36.
which was not of this world, (as himself clearly witnessed and expressed:)
and howsoever the Pope likes to have the Keys under his girdle, yet he
likes better of the two Swords, that by them he may ^eepe all men under his
girdle: and to speak the truth, in the one as well as the other, the Romish
Church is driven to a constrained construction of the words of our Savior
Christ, and turns the Keys which were spiritual, into a temporal sword of
Authority; and the Swords which were temporal, into spiritual jurisdiction
of his Ecclesiastical Censures and Excommunications. Luke 22. 36, 38, 50.
It is true, that Peter did rashly attempt to draw and use his temporal sword,
and was commanded to sheath it again; for such weapons his Master needed not,
which might have more then twelve Legions of Angels to deliver him, and destroy
his enemies, if he had aimed at such defense of himself, or offense of his
enemies: but the Math. 26. 51, 52, 53, 54.
Scriptures could not so be fulfilled; for he foretold of his Passion, and
that persecutions should so rage, that a man should need to Luke 22. 36, 38
sell his coat and buy a sword: and when the Disciples by a mis-interpretation
and in a carnal sense, thought he had meant a material weapon, they told him
they had two swords: he replied that it was enough for that conflict. Hence the
Pope has drawn out his two swords, spiritual and temporal, and uses one of
them as a fools dagger, (which is often drawn out and in upon slight
occasions, excommunicating and absoluing hourly for petty offenses) and the
other is made like the tyrannical Turks Semiter, which being once unsheathed,
cannot be put up, till it be made Apoc. 17. 6
drunken with the blood of the Saints, as our times have seen, and do feel
by lamentable experience: two such swords as Christ spoke of, and the Apostle
showed forth, are not enough for him, nor all the swords of two Kingdoms,
(Italy and Spain.) But many Princes swords must rage against their own
bowels, to uphold this their Romish Idol, whose Image they have adored as a
God, for pardoning their sins.

The Judge. 9. 8.
noble Vine and Olive would not leave their goodness and sweetness, to usurp
a dominion over the Trees, as this base Verse 15.
Bramble dare attempt: but his reward shall be, to perish with the Sword of
Gods Word, and to be Apoc 18. 6
served with like plagues of blood and war as he has served others.

And as for mis-interpretation of metaphorical phrases (as we see the Apostles
before they were taught of Christ, misconceiued his Parables, understood not
what Leaven he spoke of, nor what Keys or Swords he meant) yet now let us
look into the Popes Library, and hear his Interpretations: Our Papists (they
say) are honest men, and will be tried by themselves: let us therefore see
what their Church Champion Bellarmine, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 5. ca. 3.
will maintain for Catholic and Canonical in this point: his words be these:
Ex Scripturis nihil habemus nisi datas Pontifici Claues regni Caelorum, de
clauibu^ regni terrarum nulla fit mentio: Out of the Scriptures (says he) we
find nothing given to the Pope, but the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: but
of the Keys of the Kingdoms of the Earth, there is no mention at all; and so
far we need not care much to agree with them.

Secondly, others interpret the Keys to be nothing else, but Munus docendi
Euangelium, the Office of teaching the Gospel, whereunto for our own part we
so consent, that we think it yet falls short of the full scope thereby
intended, for administration of Discipline, as well as Doctrine in the Church
of God: which matter, because it would require a more ample and exact
discourse, than is perhaps fitting for this place* time, and Auditory, I will
pass by also, and refer them that are desirous of further resolution in that
Argument, to that which is purposely written of diverse concerning the same; and
the rather, because I would not have the sores of our Church fresh launced and
ripped up: and therefore omitting these mis-interpretations, which are peccant
and unsound, either in defect, or in excess; let us come precisely to unlock
the true meaning of the Keys.

The Metaphor of Keys, is borrowed from that Instrument which we commonly use
in opening, or safe locking up of things appropriated to our own private use
and commodity, and so the sense of the Keys is diversely taken in Scripture.

Joseph had the Keys of Genesis 39. 4
Potiphar, Verse 22.
the Jailer, and Cap. 41. 40, 41.
Pharaohs house, that is, a power to order the affairs of the prisoners, and
family. So it is in this sense used, when the Lord threatened to depose Shebnah,
and to prefer Eliachim, to be chief Steward in the house of Hezekiah: He
says, that he would Isay 22, 22
lay upon his shoulder the Key of David, that he should open, and no man should
shut, etc. which in the precedent verse himself expounds, saying unto
Shebnah, I commit thy power into his hand; which is understood by the Key of
David,

That Apoc. 1. 18.
Christ has the Keys of Hell and Death; that is, a power as a Judge to
condemn, and punish delinquents against his Law, temporally, and eternally.

Christ, to execute his Judgments upon the damned, is said to have Apoc. 9. 1.
and 20. 1.
the keys of the bottomless pit; that is, power and authority to execute
Gods Judgments upon the reprobates: as Aretius interprets it: Dispensator
hic est poenarum diuinitas ordinatarum: a dispenser (says he) of the
Judgments ordained from heaven by God: and thereunto Brightman accords,
joining the Pope with the Devil, as an Executioner of Gods Judgments, upon
them which have fallen from the truth, and steadfastness of their faith unto
lies and delusions: and these Keys Antichrist may well place in his Arms, to
denotate his power over Apostatates and back-sliders from the truth, and
ancient faith of the Church of Christ: so that we see how that the Keys of
Hell and Death are principally committed by God unto his Son Christ, as to a
Judge: and to others (as Satan and Antichrist) as Executioners of his
Judgments: and as the Judge has authority over the Jailer, so has Christ
supreme power over the Devil, and his hellish torments, as the same Author
says: Suprema est potest as in Diabolum, mancipiandi eum destinatis poenis: he
it is that treads on the neck of his enemies, Gen 3. 15.
bruiseth the head of the Serpent, and Pet. 2. 4. Jude ver. 6.
has reserved him under chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the great
day.

Christ has in his Church, to open and shut, to put in and put out whom he
pleases, Apoc. 3. 7.
These things says he which has the Key of David, which opens and no man
shuts, and shuts, and no man opens: that is, which has plenary power
to rule, order, and dispose all things in his Church, both to teach by his
Word, and rule them with his rod of Discipline.

Luke 11. 52
that they had taken away the Key of knowledge, and would neither enter into
Gods kingdom themselves, nor suffer others that would; which is as much, as if
he had charged them to keep back from the people the knowledge of the
Scriptures, whereby they should have access unto God, and his Kingdom, and to
erect a kingdom of darkness, like hell, for the Devils dwelling, in
maintaining (as the Pope both)) Ignorance to be the Mother of Devotion, and
appoynting blind Superstitions to exercise the people in. In a word, to leave
the pure Fountain of Gods Word, the water of Life, and to dig themselves pitts
of puddle water to poison them.

In all these Senses, this is generally to be held, that. Keys signify, Rerum
aliquam potestatem, A certain power of things, though not alike in all.

1. But either plenary absolute and independent, as it is in God the Father,
who has it of himself, receives it of none; which he communicates equally
to his Son Christ, John 18. 2. Romans 6 23.
who receives it of his Father, and yet is equal and absolute in him as in
the Father; and none else can forgive sins, and give eternal life, but God
only, and Christ as the Son of God: Math. 28. 18. Cap. 11. 27. Cap. 9. 2, 6.

2. But from God and Christ there is a subordinate power dederiued (as well
Civil and Political, as Ecclesiastical and Spiritual) and so 2 Cron. 19. 6
all Kings and Rulers have a power from God to rule and reign, and to exe^ute
his Laws and Judgments, Romans 13. 1 John 19. 11. and therefore called Gods,
Psalm. 82 1, 6. John 10. 34.

3. And likewise such as execute Ecclesiastical power in Preaching, and
punishing offenders, and refractaries, Exodus 7. 1.
have that power from God and Christ. And this is the power of the Keys
committed to Peter, and all the Apostles: this power Paul executed 1 Cor. 5. 3,
4, 5
in binding and casting out to Satan the incestuous Corinthian, and received
him into the Church again upon his repentance: and thus in sundry places of
his Epistles to the Corinthians, (which not only tolerated gross sins, but
were inclined to many factions) he la^oureth to approve 2 Cor. 10. 8.
the authority he had received from Christ to the edification of his Church,
as well in preaching of remission of sins through faith, as denouncing Gods
Judgments, and Excommunication against enormious livers, misbeleeuers* and
contentious persons, and puts it to their choice, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
whether he should come unto them with his rod of Discipline, or in love, and
in the spirit of meekness: he executed no Commission, nor used other Keys
of power, and authority, then Christ committed to all other his Apostles, to
preach the Gospel to all, and such as believed, should be saved, and such as
believed not, should be damned. And this was his loosing and binding of
sinners: with these Keys chiefly he opened and shut the gates of Heaven,
though in the outward Discipline of the Church, he cherished the weak, and
sound, and cut off the stubburne, and perverse members, that they should not
like Leaven putrify the whole body of the Congregation.

That reverend and learned Divine, Master Calvin, observed only two places
mentioned in the Scriptures touching these Keys, and power of binding and
loosing: one here in this Text, and the other, John 20. 23. which expound one
another very clearly: for what he spoke here singularly to Peter, who made
the confession in the name of the rest, verse 16: so in the other he breathed
upon them all, and speaks plurally, and generally, that whosoeuers sins
they remitted, should be remitted unto them, and whosoeuers sins they
retained, should be retained; that is, ratified by God in Heaven, whose word
they preached in the world: for what thing is sin but a Romans 6. 14, 16 John.
8. 34.
bondage, and chains wherein we are fast tied, and made bond-slaues of the
Devil, till we be loosed, made free, and set at liberty by Christ: whose
words does make us free, being received by faith into the hearts of the
believers, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 18. 1 Cor. 1. 21. and 4. 1. John 5. 24, and 8.
31, 32, 34, 36.

Heereunto tended that ratification of the Apostolical Commission, that who so
Math 10 7, 14, 15. Mark 11. 6. Acts 13. 51. and 18. 6.
heard them, heard Christ, and such as despised them, despired him; and that it
should be easier for S^dom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for
those which despised the Messengers, and rejected the Message of Christ, whose
word it was, and not theirs, 2 Cor ^. 18, 19.
and was committed to their dispensation; and was to some 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
the savor of life unto life, that was the loosing; and to others it was the
savor of death unto death, and that was the binding, which God ratifieth in
Heaven: And this is answerable to the preaching of Mercy and Judgment, the
cursings upon Mount Ebal, and Deuteronomy. 11. 29 and 27, 12, 13 and 28. 2, 58, 59.
the blessings upon Mount Gerizim; Deuteronomy 30. 15.
life and death which Moses propounded unto the people, as they were obedient,
and disobedient unto the voice of God: and though great mercy is offered unto
us in the Gospel of grace; yet there are woes and judgments also denounced to
the impenitent, and unbelievers; which is the use of these Keys, and the
binding and loosing, which God in all ages has exercised in his Church by the
Ministry of Moses, and all the Prophets, as by his Apostles in the time of
grace and of the Gospel: so we safely conclude, that the power to forgive or
retain sins, is not properly given to men, 1 Cor. 9. 18. cap. 2. 5. and 3.
6, 7.
but to the word of God, and his divine Sacraments, whereof men are but the
Ministers to plant and water, to teach, exhort, reprove, and correct, but the
effect is of God, which gives power to his Word and Sacraments, as the Sun
to mollify wax, and harden clay, to minister the Acts 10. 44. 2 Cor. 3. 3, 6,
8.
spirit of grace, or Satan to possess reprobates. And to conclude, and close
up this point of the Keys; whether we understand the Doctrine or Discipline of
the Church, or both, (as it may be safely so extended) yet we ascribe unto
God the effectual power only to loose or retain sins.

Paul, and the Congregation was said to be delivered to Satan, who has great
dominion over unbelievers, and contemners of Gods word, and holy Ordinances;
and there were many fearful examples in the Primitive Church, of diverse
excommunicate persons, taken with frenzy, and overtaken with strange judgments,
whereby God wrought a fear in the Church to offend presumptuously against his
Ordinances. So Acts 5. 3, 5, 11.
Ananias and Saphira, censured by Peter, for their hypocrisy, were immediately
stricken to death, and cut off by a consteruation of the body from the grace of
life, and by an eternal malediction of the soul from the life of grace: And
also Act. 8. 20, 21
Simon Magus being discovered and cut off from the Church, was filled with all
iniquity, and returned to his Sorceries, and the Devils services again: 2 Samuel 7. 15 1 Samuel 13. 14. and 15. 26. and 16. 14. and 19. 23.
Saul being denounced by Samuel, to be cut off by the sentence of God, an evil
spirit possessed him, who notwithstanding when he was in the Assemblies of the
Church and Prophets, did also prophecy with them.

It is safe therefore to be in the Assemblies of Gods Saints, where the Spirit
of God has his residence: on the contrary, it is a fearful thing to be in
the Congregations of the wicked, Number. 16. 21, 24, 30, 32. and 27. 3.
as the accomplices of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, which were swallowed up into
destruction, and went down quick to hell with them. To be cast off from God,
which reigns in the Assembly of the Saints, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 11.
is to be cast unto Satan, which rages out of the Church: Let such as neglect
the public Assemblies of Christian Congregations, or reject the word of God,
or his divine Sacraments there ministered, consider how fearfully they offend
against God, and their own souls, which refuse to use that Key, whereby the
kingdom of grace here, and of glory hereafter, is so effectually opened unto
them.

The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Augustine affirms) Potens Instrumentum,
the powerful Instrument for the increase of Gods Church and Kingdom. It is
most true, that this great power promised, was as graciously performed by
Christ unto his Apostles, which brought greater works to pass by this their
Ministry in conquering the whole world, and subduing the consciences of men to
the obedience of God, than all the Potentates and prudent men of the earth were
able by their power and policy to perform. Demosthenes among the Greeks, and
Cicero among the Latins, renowned for their Eloquence: Solon for his wisdom,
Aristides for his Justice, Plato for his divine Philosophy, Aristotle for his
profound knowledge, Alexander for his Prowess, Caesar and Pompey for their
power, famous in their generations in all the world, yet never attained any
such conquest over Satan, or the world, as these poor Preachers, Fishermen,
(and Fishers of men) brought to pass by the virtue of these Keys, and
Commission of Christ, whereby they surpassed all Conquerours, for the universal
largeness, and constant continuance of Christ's kingdom upon earth. Let
Tamberlaine the Tartar, and the Turkish Ottomans boast of their great
Atchieuements, yet they came short of the bounds of their Territories, as
Christ's Kingdom was enlarged from Sea unto Sea, unto the ends of the earth:
of these it was prophesied, and by these it was performed; Psalm. 19. 4. Luke 1.
3^. Romans 10. 18.
Their sound went out into all the world, and their voice unto the ends of the
earth. It is a false brag of Turkish, or Romish Emperors, Jupiter in Coelis,
Caesar regit omnia terris: for they never had any Empire of comparable extent
with this, nor of answerable subjection: themselves were Lords of men, and
slaves of vices: and it was truly verified, which the dogged Diogenes told
Alexander, That he was not a Conqueror, but a drudge of the world; he
overcame not the world, but the world overcame him; and he was a slave to so
many Lords, as he was subject to vices; Pride, Excess, and Drunkenness
overthrew him, and his kingdoms were divided, and failed in the next
Generation: but of this King and Kingdom it is said, Isai. 53. 8. Act. 8. 33.
Who can tell his Generation? Man's Laws and subjection extended but to the
body, goods, and estates of men in this world; 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5
Christ's Kingdom is over Satan, Sin, Death, Hell, and Damnation, and over
the Souls and Consciences of men, Hebr. 4. 12.
to bring even the most rebellious thoughts of the heart into subjection unto
God: yea, it prevailed mightily against all the powers of the world, Apoc. 17.
14.
which by most grievous persecutions set themselves against it; but it was no
more possible for them to suppress it, then Apoc 7. 1
to stay the winds that they should not blow upon the face of the earth; or
that the breath of God should be restrained.

It is recorded by Ruffinus, Ruffin. lib. 2. Cap. 5.
that when the Christians in Edessa, (a City of Mesopotamia) were banished by
the Emperors commandment, yet they had their meetings in the Fields, Woods,
and by the Rivers, to hear and practice the Word of God: wherewithal the
Emperor being enraged, struck the Captain with his fist in fury, demanding
why he did so permit them the Exercise of their Religion, contrary to his Edict
and Commandment. Whereupon the Captain upon the next day resolved to
dispatch them: but beholding their constancy, and bold resolution to suffer
Martyrdom for Christ and his Gospel, he stayed his course, and returning to
the Emperor, offers to obey passiuely, but not actiuely, relating unto him
what he had heard and seen; And hereupon the Emperor was appeased, and
stayed his hand from further persecution: Whereupon Augustine reports truly
of them, Ligabantur (says he) includebantur, torquebantur, and tamen
multiplicabantur: They were fettered, imprisoned, tormented, and yet they
multiplied.

Plentiful and pregnant are the proofs of holy Scripture, of the power and
virtue of these Keys, to open our knowledge, to 1 Cor. 4. 15. Phile ver. 10
James 1. 18. Gal. 3. 6. and 4. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
beget us Gods children, to regenerate our wills, to assist us in afflictions,
to minister consolation to our consciences, and to keep us from the pit of
destruction. If the Glutton will not have his brethren come into that place of
torment, Abraham will direct him to Luke 16 27, 29, to 31.
hear Moses, and the Prophets; he will not send Lazarus, nor any other from
the dead unto them: for they would not believe Lazarus, nor Christ which raised
him from the dead, but John 12. 10, 11
would again have put that Lazarus to death, because for his sake many
believed on Christ.



Roman Catholics, (Peter's pretended Successors, which seek for the Key of
Primacie) and having gotten the Popedom, they build not (Tabernacles) but
Palaces of pleasure, sumptuous and glorious, put on pontifical Robes, which
are rich and precious; provide their Kitchens (like Dives daily Diet) both rare
and delicious, are attended with Trains magnificent, and pompous; they have
turned their spiritual Armor into weapons of worldly Warfare, to overthrow
Towns, and Towers, Cities, and Seigniories, (not wicked thoughts and deeds,
but walls and Bulwarks.) In a word, they have changed Peter's Keys, into Paul's
Sword; or rather into Peter's Sword, drawn out against Gods Forbid.

Their own Italian Stories verefie this of Pope Julius Secundus, that he lay
in the Camp with his Soldiers, at the siege of Mirandula, having nothing like
a Bishop, except it were his name, and some attire of a Prelate.

When shall the World, or the Flesh, or the Devil be overcome and subdued by
their gluttonous Diet, gorgeous Attire, painted Pictures, Musical Instruments,
sweet Perfumes, goblets of Wine, and courtly Curtezans, the best of which can
no more comfort, or convince the Conscience, than Holy Water terrify the
Devil. In their holiest Exercises the simplicity of Christ is despised, their
pallats cannot relish, other Sacramental Bread, then Sugared Wafers, mixed
Wines, charmed Holy Waters, exorcised Oils, Prayers pattered upon Pearls, and
perfumed Beads; and for these have they taken away the Key of knowledge, which
our blessed Savior commended and committed to his Church, Ministers, and
people.

Let Master Harding in his blasphemous and popish Paradoxes seek to maintain,
that the Scripture is but a spiritual dumbness, a dead Letter, and an
unprofitable thing for the people, yet we will hold and maintain that which
Christ, Peter, Paul, and all the Apostles taught and practiced, viz. John 5.
39. Acts 17. 11. Luke 4. 16, etc Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Joshua 1. 8. Psalm. 1. 2. Act 13.
14, 15, 27.
To have the Scriptures read, and interpreted every Sabbath day.

Saint Jerome was of opinion, and affirms, that all the Maidens about the
Elect Lady Paula (to whom Saint John wrote his second Epistle) were daily set
to read, yea to be conversant in reading of the Scriptures. Augustine is of
the same mind, saying, Nec solum sufficiat quod in Ecclesia diuinas Lectiones
auditis, sed etiam in domibus vestris, aut ipsi legite, aut alios legemes
requirite. It is not sufficient to hear what is publicly read in the Church,
but also that you read, or hear others read in your private houses. The
Nicene Council decreed that no house should be without a Bible, which was a
matter chargeable and difficult in those days, before there was any use of
Printing; which now may be had at the tenth penny. Origin says, Vtinam omnes
faceremus quod scriptum est, serutamini Scripturas: Would to God that we all
did, as it is written, John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures. Chrysostom accords thereunto, and cries out to the
Laity: Comparate vobis Biblia, animarum pharmaca, seculares: Provide you
Bibles you Seculer men, the Physic of your souls.

How contrary to all these is the profession and practice of the Popish
Synagogue, which like cruel Saul will deny Gods people to taste of this Psalm.
19. 7, 8 and 119. 103.
honey, and hony-combe; but as the Ape ath her own young ones in ^dmiration,
above all other the ^ost beautiful beasts and birds: ^o they doat upon their
own ^nuentions, Decrees, Decre^als, Canons, Constitutions, Li^urgies, and
Legends, not only permitting them to be read and practiced of all their
Spiritual, and Secular Disciples; but ex^oll them for use above the Ca^onicall
Scriptures, commend them, and command them unto their Catholics, whereas the
^he Word of God is like the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2. 17.
that no man may touch or taste without danger of death: Genesis 3. 24.
that Tree of life is kept with a flaming Sword, (not by an Angel, but by the
Devil) that no man may come at it, to eat and live for ever: O vanity of
vanities; Popish dregs shall describe us Cathotholiques, and the Evangelical
Doctrine shall proscribe us Heretics: give me leave to shoot an Arrowe
against them out o^ an others Bow, which has hi^ the mark long before me.

Tales regunt Petri Naues,
Tales gerunt Petri Claues, Mr. Gostick^ in the Anatomy of Ana. and S^ph
Sacrilege.

Et ligandi potentiam.
Hi nos docent, sed indocti,
Hi nos ducunt sic nox nocti,
Indicat scientiam.
Such Peter's Ship do stere and guide,
Such Peter's keys to them have tid^
To loose and to bind.
These must teach us, which lack sight,
These must lead us in darkenight,
Which are self blind.
Yet we will not cease to tell them what God has threatened by Moses, Deuteronomy 17.
18.
Cursed are they that lead the blind out of the way; and Math. 15. 14. Luke 6.
39.
If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch, even the pit
of perdition. They deal with the people, as the desperate mad ones mentioned
by the Prophet Amos, saying, Tace and ne recorderis nominis Domini: Amos 6. 10.
hold your peace, and remember not, nor speak unto us in the name of the Lord;
and especially such as were guilty of gross Idolatry (as the Papists are)
could at no hand abide the Word of God that was so contrary to their abominable
superstitions; and therefore they said unto Jeremy, I^re. 11. 21. and 18. 1^.
and 44. 16, 17.
The word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee; but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own
mouth; as to burn Incense to the Queen of heaven, etc. And yet these
desperate Rebels against God, in maintaining their Idolatries, were never so
impudent as the Papists, to blot out the second Commandment of the moral Law
of God, for that it left them without all excuse, and could not be avoided by
any glossographical Interpretations. Rome had some soundness of Religion in
the days of the Christian Emperors, till the Imperial Popes confounded all
things. Constantine the Great caused the Bible to be written out, and sent it
to all Kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities within his Dominions: as the great
Apostata Julian (from whom the Papists have drawn this there paradox) objected
it as a great fault, that their women were so expert in holy Scriptures.

will of unwritten Traditions, as the false Catholics endeavor to do, who by
their own Traditions strive to make the Commandment of God of none effect.
It was a great blessing which the Lord promised by the Prophet, Isai. 55. 1, 2.
3.
That they should drink of these pure waters freely, and plentifully: as also
it was the threatening of a grievous curse, Amos 8. 11, 12.
That he would send a famine, (not of bread) but of his Word: and how heavy
has the wrath of God appeared, in pouring these forewarned Judgments upon the
famous Churches of Asia, and Greece, Apoc. 2. 5.
in remoouing the Candlestick of his Word, and suffering a barbarous Mohammedan
Tyrant to trample them under his filthy feet: and so the Church of Ierem. 7. 4.
Romans 11. 21.
the Jews, as well as of the Gentiles, has lost her light, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
And let us that think we stand, take heed lest we fall,

There are two remarkable sins mentioned in sacred Writ, which are noted to
be ever the forerunners of the forementioned judgment, namely: First, the
barrenness and emptiness of good works: Secondly, contempt of Gods Word and
Ministers.

Concerning the first, it is notably expressed of old as well in the parable of
Isaiah, as of Christ himself, Isai, 5. 2 to 6. serem. 2. 21. Mark. 12. 2. to
10. Math. 21 33. to 42. Luke 20 9. to 17.
of the Vineyard let out to Husbandmen, which not rendering the due rent and
fruits to the Lord and Owner, were threatened, as in short time after it came to
pass, both in the old Church and Temple in Jerusalem, destroyed by the
Assyrians and Chaldeans, as lastly by the Romans: for the Lord of the
vineyard, (the God of Israel) had planted, fenced, and dressed it with all
diligence, and sent Messengers to require the fruits: but it brought forth
either no fruit, or naughty fruit; no wine, but wild grapes: and therefore
was worthily Math. 21. 19, 20.
cursed for both barrenness, and badnesse.

Christ (but Antichrist) to reign over them. And this we may observe by the
way, that as Christ would honor the Ministry of the Apostles, by committing
these Keys of knowledge and authority unto them: so the Antichristian rabble,
contrarily cast all contempt as well on the Gospel it self (debarring Gods
people of that Key of knowledge) as also persecuting the Preachers of the
Gospel with all contempt. And this is the occasion that Almighty God often
takes away the other Key, and use of the Word for the contempt thereof: and as
1 Samuel 3. 1.
Visions and divine Revelations were rare, and the Word of God precious
(because it was rare) in the days of Eli: so Numb. 11. 6
men loathed Manna, when it was plentiful, (as we do the Gospel)
complaining that we have too much of our Fathers blessing, as if the honor of
the Ministry consisted in putting down the exercise of it, for which cause
the Lord threatened by the Prophet Amos, Amos 8. 11
to send a famine of his Word: and this is to us a good and necessary caveat,
now in the time of our plentiful harvest, when the Lord has sent such store
of Laborers into his Vineyard, that we be not like the Papists, who keep no
mediocritie in the due estimation of their Ministers, (as the Apostle 1 Cor. 4.
1, 2
requires) but either they advance them too high, and make them Lords over
their faith, or else cast all contempt upon them, if they preuaricate never so
little their Traditions, Math. 15. 6.
which they extol and prefer before the precepts of the Gospel, and
Commandments of God. And so much may suffice to be declared concerning the
Donation of the Keys: the Application of them follows in the last part of
the verse:

And whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Observe the
admirable Sympathy, and the Cooperation of God with the Ministers Office: man
preaches, and God blesses, and establishes his Doctrine, whether he preach
Judgment, or Mercy. Now for the more evident demonstration of this truth, we
affirm, Ezekiel. 33. 7, 8, 9, etc.
that if the Minister of God see and perceive a perverse and obstinate sinner
to walk and go on in his wicked ways, and thereupon denounces against him
Gods just Judgments out of his holy Word; if he yet persist impenitent, the
Minister may lawfully pronounce condemnation against him: and he thereby so
binds him, that God in heaven ratifieth the curse which is contained and
pronounced out of his Word: but if such a sinner shall fear and tremble, and
hearken unto the Word of God; and repenting himself, confess his sins to
God, and make it also so appear unto Gods Minister, he may then from God
pronounce unto him remission and absolution of his sins, which are most
surely forgiven of God in heaven; and the Minister is said, Iam. 5. 19, 20
to have saved his soul which went astray, though his salvation be of God
alone.

Thus the Prophet 2 Samuel 12. 5, 11.
Nathan brought David to confess himself the child of death, having
continued above two years in his sin unrepented of: but as soon as he had
drawn him to the knowledge and acknowledgement of his offense, and saw the
true and infallible signs of his unfeigned repentance, he doubted not to
declare from God his pardon and absolution, Verse 13.
and that his sin was taken away: This is the binding and loosing which the
Prophet Ezekiel speaks of in his third Chapter, from the seventeenth Verse
to the two and twentyeth: as also in the three and thirtieth Chapter, from the
first Verse unto the tenth: and and though this power of binding and loosing
was apparently here given to the Ministers of the New Testament: yet the
effect thereof was the same in the old Covenant in Christ, and to the
believers in him: for Hebr. 13. 8.
He was yesterday and to day, and the same for ever: 2 Cor. 1. 20.
In whom all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen; certain, constant,
uniform, and for all times and ages, always reserving this power to the
Ministers of his Word, who are likewise restrained of all power, which is not
by the Word: for as the Prophet Isaiah speaks: Isai. 44. 26.
He confirms the words of his Servants, and performs the Counsels of his
Messengers: whereunto accords the saying of the Just man Job: Job 33. 23.
If there be a Messenger to declare unto man his righteousness, then will the
Lord have mercy upon him. Thus God binds all m^n to himself, and men unto
men also: for men cannot save men without God, and God will not ordinarily save
men without men: If he will save Cornelius, Act. 10. 5, 22
he must send for Peter, and hear of him words whereby he may be saved.

2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20.
to whom he has committed the Word of Reconciliation.

Mark 13. 11 Math. 10. 20.
But the Spirit of my Father (says Christ) that speaks in them: And so the
people ought to receive it, not as the word of man, but of the everliving God:
and so for the Sacraments likewise, that we look not so much on the outward
Elements of Bread, Wine, and Water, (which otherwise are things of common use
in themselves) but respect chiefly the Institution of God, which makes them
holy and consecrated Mysteries by his Word, to be effectual food unto our
Souls, and means of Salvation; howsoever in the things themselves, and manner
of administering them, there seem great simplicity, which might make them
contemptible to carnal men; 2 Kings 5. 12, 13, 14.
as Naaman esteemed nothing of the waters of Jordan, to have any more power
then Abana and Pharphar, (Rivers of his own Country Damascus) but when he
did it in the Word of the Lord, and by the Ministry of Gods Prophet Elisha,
then that word joined with the Element, made it unto him an holy and effectual
Sacrament: and so not every Lambs blood, Exodus 12. ^, 11, 13, 23, 27.
but that of the Paschall Lamb, which was ordained by God, was a true
representation of Christ, and a Seal unto the Church, that the Destroyer
passes over Gods people, which passes heavy vengeance and destruction upon
the vnbeeleeuing Egyptians: and so likewise the promise is not made to every
man, that God will ratify in heaven whatsoever he shall pronounce on earth:
but this power he appropriateth to his Ministers, which have a lawful
Calling, and Authority to preach his Word, wherein the effect lies, and not
in the persons of the Ministers or people, without the approbation of Christ,
to whose ordinance the whole honor and efficacy is to be ascribed.

but the Word of God is pure, strong, an immortal seed, and endures for ever.
It seems the people in the Prophet Zacharies time made such objections
against their Prophets, to excuse themselves in not obeying them: Zach. 1. 5, 6.
The Prophets (say they) are dead as well as our Fathers, (for all were
sinners) to whom God answers by the Prophet, and by way of concession
grants it to be true, That their Fathers were dead, and the Prophets were
dead, but yet his word spoken unto them by the Prophets took hold of them; and
that was not dead, but does abide for ever, and the after Generations saw the
accomplishment thereof in the appointed time.

Jeremiah was dead in the time of the Captivity, but his Prophecy remained,
and at the end of seventy years they found the due accomplishment thereof.

Let the Ministers be weak men, mortal, and corruptible; yet Gods Word still
abides immortal, and incorruptible: 2. Tim. 2. 9.
The Minister may be restrained, bound, and in prison, but the Gospel is not
bound, that wind is not restrained, nor in prison, Hebr. 4. 12
but it is still mighty in operation: Apoc. 7. 1.
who can stay the rain that it should not fall to moysten the earth? Neither
can the Word of God, more than the Dew of Heaven, be restrained, but it shall
be dispersed, Isa. 55. 10, 11
to accomplish his will that sends it: or as an Arrow which a man shoots,
though he that shot it stand still, or dye in the act, yet the Arrow flies
unto the mark at which it was aimed: And it is true, that power is given unto
them Ministerially to shut Heaven: Apoc. 11. 4, 5. 2 King. 1. 10.
and fire proceeds out of their mouths, which destroys the enemies of Gods
Truth and Grace.

Prou 26. 2.
else the Curse that is causeless, shall not come: but God may and will bless
Number. 22. 12, 18. and 23. 8, 20.
where Balaam, and the false Prophets would curse: God promised to Abraham, to
Gene. 12. 3.
curse those that cursed him, whom God had blessed; Gene. 27. 29.
and that he would curse them that cursed Iaakob: It shall fare with them as
it did with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 43.
which cursed David in the name of his Gods; but David's God blessed him, and
brought the curse upon Goliath himself, and all his Gods could not save him. So
likewise the Apostle interpreteh his own meaning, and shows how Ministers
absolve sinners, where it is said, Acts 5. 31.
That Repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name: for
without repentance in the believer, there is no absolution to be pronounced by
the Minister; Mark. 16. 16.
He that believes, and is baptized; that is, becomes a true Professor of
the Christian Faith, shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be
damned: and all the Moneys and Treasures of the earth cannot purchase any
Indulgence or pardon for the redemption of his soul: Psalm. 49. 6, 7, 8
they must leave that to God, and let it alone for ever, till they can present
the Father with the blood of his Son, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
which is the only price of our Redemption, the Treasure of the Church, the
Rock of Religion, and only appertaining to the believers, which by a lively
faith apprehend his graces, Acts 15. 9.
and have their hearts purified: and without it let us know, that it is
impossible to be 1 Pet. 1. 9.
saved, or to Hebr. 11. 6.
please God.





Then he charged his Disciples, Verse 20.
that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ. Thus far we have
disputed of the Apostles faith and knowledge of Christ in themselves, which
they had so well learned of their Lord and Master, and was so well approved of
him, above all other paradoxes, and by opinions of the world. Now in these
words follows a prohibition, given unto them for a conclusion of this
Argument, wherein our Savior imposes a charge upon his Apostles, not to
divulge him what he was, and what they knew, and had confessed him to be,
namely, Jesus the Christ, or the Anointed Messiah, whom the Jews so long and
earnestly expected.

Adam, Luke 2. 32.
A Light to be reue^^ed to the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel:
Ioh. 3. 19, 20.
Condemnation of the world, that Light being come into the world, men loved
darkness more then light: and especially reprooueth the Jews, and the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, John 1. 11.
that when he came among his own, his own received him not. Math. 10. 6, 7.
Mark. 3. 13.
were chosen to go before, and to preach him in all Cities whither he
himself would come, to confirm by his powerful Word and Works, what they
should teach and publish of him: Was not John the Baptist his Harbenger
purposely sent before to preach and publish him, to be that John 1. 7, 8, 9,
29.
light of the world, and that Lamb of God which should take away the sins of
the world? How is it then, I say, that he does here so precisely forbid them
to preach and publish him to the world?

Solomon, who says, Prou. 25. 1.
That the glory of God is to conceal a thing secret: which if it iumpe not
with Salomons meaning in that place, nor Christ's purpose in this; yet by the
way it is a true and necessary note of observation to us, that we should not
curiously search into

John the Baptist, well answers the point: Ioh. 1. 6, 22, 23, 25, ^6. Mark 9.
13. Math. 3. 3. Malac 4. 5. and 3. 1. Math 17. 12. Luke 7. 27, 28. and 1. 17.
for if it seemed convenient in the wisdom of God, to reveal Christ unto the
Jews by the Ministry of John, of whom they had evident Prophesies, that he
should prepare the way to the Messiah, going immediately before him in the
power and Spirit of Eliah: Which John as well by his new Sacrament of Baptism,
as apparent testimonies, had both witnessed, and poynted him out unto them, (if
they would have believed him) why should they expect other Preachers (besides
his own great works) to publish and bear witness of him?

Shall God be bound unto men of perverse minds, and wayward spirits, to send
them Prophets and Preachers, such, and at such times as themselves would
require them? If they will not receive the testimony of John ( Math. 11. 9. to
15.
A Prophet, and more than a Prophet, greater than any had risen up among the
sons of men) why shall Peter be sent unto them upon the same Message, and
upon what hope of better effect of his, than John Baptists preaching?

Abraham's answer to the hellish Glutton suffice to answer them also, Luke 16.
29, 31.
If they would not believe Moses and the Prophets, (which God purposely
ordained and sent unto them by word, writing, and example:) neither will they
receive Christ, if one should come from the dead to preach him; as appears
some of them had conceived of John to be risen again, after they had done unto
him whatsoever they would, and causelessly killed him.

Messiah, and the Son of God, thereby to give an example, and to teach
humility unto his Disciples, who in all glorious works, hunted after the
glory of the world; which Christ ever shunned, and taught his Disciples not to
seek after it. John 6. 15.
He would not be made a King, when the people thought him worthy for his great
Miracles to be created their King: and when his brethren and kindred would
have him to do his great works at Jerusalem, and at the time of their Solemn
Feasts, and great Assemblies: John 7. 3, 4, 6, 8, 10.
and tell him, that no man that seeks to be famous, but will frequent famous
places. He answers them, That it was not his time to seek glory in the
world, (though their time was always attending on such purposes:) and though
it be true, that Omnia benefacta in luce se collocari volunt: All glorious
actions, and good deeds desire to be seen in the open light: yet it is as
true, that Nullum Virtuti Theatrum Conscientia maius est: Virtue has not a
more stately Stage whereon to glorify it self, than a clear Conscience: and
therefore Christ will have his Followers to content themselves with the
approbation of God and their own Consciences for the doing of good works; and
not as Pharisees, and hypocrites Math 6. 1. to 9.
in their Prayers, Fastings, and Alms, to have all their holiness to appear
outwardly unto men, and to have Trumpets to sound out their Almsdeeds: Ver.
16. to 19.
Christ will not have the left hand know what the right hand does; and
therefore Matt. 18. 2, 3, 4
by the example of little children, taught his ambitious Followers to learn
lowliness, and meekness. In other examples of his great works, he observed
the same Rule; that such as were cured of their Math. 8. 3, 4 and 9. 30. Mark.
5. vlt. and 7. 36.
Leprosies, Deafness, Dumbness, Blindness, and such like, should not
publish it but to such whom it concerned.

works. Christ came at the fullness of time to be manifested in the flesh,
and began at his due time, to reveal himself about the age of thirty
years after John proclaimed him: and when he was transfigured on the
Mountain, and manifested some sparkles of his divine glory; he not only
selected Peter, James, and John, (and not all his Disciples) Math. 17. 1. to 9.
but gave them a charge, (as here he does) that they should not publish that
his miraculous Transfiguration till after his Resurrection. Even so, this
prohibition was but temporary, and for a season, and not simply intended for
ever to restrain them from preaching him to be Jesus the Savior, and Christ
the Messiah, which was in truth the chief part of the Charge and Precept,
which was enjoined them in due season to be performed.

There was a time when the Apostles might not preach Christ to the Math. 10. 5,
6.
Gentiles, nor Samaritanes, till the Jews first had rejected him: And it was
for a time that the Holy Ghost was not given in visible signs unto the
Apostles; Act. 13. 45, 46
for that Jesus was not yet glorified: after whose Ascension he was to be
sent down, that they might know, that it was John 16. 4, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15.
his gift as well as his Fathers, Ephe. 4. 7, 8.
for the building up of his Church: Psalm. 68. 18.
And if he had not gone away, that Comforter could not have come unto them.
And in many other places of the Scriptures, he refers them to the time of
his Passion finished, and says, John 15. 27, 28. and 14. 26. and 8. 28.
That if he were once lifted up, he would then draw all men unto him: and
till then he labored especially to bring home the lost Sheep of the house of
Israel: and after his passion they should all know, that he was the Christ.
And when his Mother would urge him to a Miracle at Cana in Galile, before he
had published the Gospel, he gave her a reason to stay the time; John 2. 4.
For that his hour was not yet come.

And it appears, that the mighty works of Christ were lawfully, and
laudably published by those which received them: and the lunatike person, out
of whom were cast a Legion of Devils, which entered into the heard of Swine, was
by Christ himself required Mark. 5. 19, 20.
to go home to his friends, and to make known unto them what great things the
Lord had done for him. By this and the like examples it is apparently evident,
that it was never the purpose of our Savior, to have either himself or his
works concealed always. And true it is, that Christ does not here simply
charge his Disciples, not to publish him, but only to conceal him for a time,
till he had fully finished the work of man's Redemption upon the Cross: and
then after his Resurrection he sendes them into all the world with a
Commission Math. 28, 19, 20.
to preach him to all Nations: This being the truest answer, (as I conceive)
for conclusion, gives us this brief but necessary Instruction, namely, Eccles.
3. 7.
There is (says Solomon) a time to speak, and a time to hold our peace: And
Samuel was contented to be advised by God, 1 Samuel 16. 2.
in doing his message unto David, for the safeguard of his life. Neither is it
good to show Wisdom out of time: 1 Samuel 25. 3^, 37.
Abigail was wise to stay the reproof of Nabals Drunkenness, and other his
miscarriages toward the Messengers of David, till the wine was out of his
head; and then showing unto him what danger his folly had cast him into, she
stroke him as dead as a stone.

Thus as Leuit. 2. 13.
all Sacrifices must be seasoned with salt, so must all Coloss. 4. 6.
our speeches and proceedings be seasoned with the salt of wisdom and godly
discretion, that so they may be seasonable, and sauoury to the hearers. And
Saint Paul advises Timothy, in what manner he should deal in reproouing and
exhorting all persons, and several sorts of men: 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2
Rebuke not an Elder (says he) but exhort him as a Father, and the younger
men as Brethren, the elder women as Mothers, and the younger as Sisters, with
all pureness. Thus when a Minister has to deal with Magestrates, and men in
authority, they must observe the carriage of Nathan, 2 Samuel 12, 3, 4
who proceeded very warily with King David, whereby he brought him to the
acknowledgement of his sins, which otherwise might have redounded a mischief
to himself. There is a time for Eliah to flee from 1 King. 19. 3
Iezabel, and the outrageous Ahab; and a time when he may 1 King. 18. 2, 8, 15.
show himself, and reprove boldly: with this caution, That every man have
Gods Word for his warrant, both in speaking, and keeping silence: for (to shut
up all in one word) in every Christian there ought to be much salt of
spiritual wisdom, and godly discretion, least by unseasonable speeches and
actions the tender and weak minded be alienated from the truth, and faith,
and tempests of troubles be raised, whereby much damage may redound both to
the Profession, and Professors of our Christian Religion.

FINIS.

