Here begins a little treatise of the dyenge creature enfected with sykenes
incurable with many sorrowful complayntes.
Labores amici.

O homo auerte ab inpatie^tia animam tuam.


Sum captiuatus


deathbed scene
Confusi sumus


Heu infame.


Furore consumor.


animam amissimus.


Spes nobis nulla


deathbed scene
ALas that ever I sinned in my life to me is come this day ye dreadful tidings
that ever I herd / here has been with me a ser geaunt of arms whose name is
crewelte from the king of all kings / lord of all lords / and Judge of all
Iuges lyenge on me his mace of his office saying unto me I arest you and warn
you to make you ready and yt ye fail not to be ready every hour when ye be
called on / ye shall not wete when. And call sadly to your remembrance your
old and long continued offenses / the goodness of god how largly he has
departed with you the gifts of nature / the gifts of fortune and the gifts
of grace / and how he has departed with you largely and ordained you at your
baptym three sad borowes that ye should safly and sewerly be kept in your
tender age as well from vices as fro bodily peril and ordained you a good
angel to keep you and to counsel you if ye have be cou^seylled by him
bethynke you. And when ye come to the year of dyscrecyon he or deyned you three
sad counseyllers / reason / dread / and conscience if ye have be rewled by
their counsel call that to your remembrance. He ordained you also.v. wits
/ servants that ye should be master of and rule them after your dyscrecyou /
that is to say your feeling / your sight / your herynge / your speech / and
your taste How have ye rewled these that be under your obeysau^ce me thy^keth ye
have much thing to answer for for the Judge that shall sytte upon you he will
not be percyall nor he will not be corrupt with good but he will my^ster to
you Justice and equity certainly as well as this There were certain things he
forbad you and the things ye should flee in any wise that is to were the seven
deedly sins and all things that should provoke move or stere you thereto he
badde you flee / have ye do so / have ye kept his commandments.x. And yet
that is but little thing.

The lamentacyon of the dyenge creature.
ALas alas exscuse me I can not / and whom I might desire to speak for me I
wot not / the day and time is so dredful / the Judge is so ryghtfull mine enmyes
be cruel my kyn my neighbors my friends my servants be not favorable to me
/ and also I wot well they shall not be herd there.

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to the good angel.
O My good angel to whom our lord took me to keep where be ye now me
thinks ye should be here now and answer for me for the dread of death
dystroubleth me so yt I can not answer for my self here is my bad angel
ready and is one of my chief accusers with legions of fendes with him and I have
no creature to answer for me / alas it is an heavy caas.

The answer of the good angel to the dyenge creature.
AS to your badde deeds I was never consenting. I saw your natural
inclynacyon more dysposed to be rewled by your bad angel than by me how be it
ye can not exscuse you but when ye were pur posed to do any thing that was
contrary to the commandments of god I failed not to remember you that it was
not well and counseylled you to flee the places of peril and the company that
should stere or move you thereto can ye say nay hereto / how can ye think that
I could answer for you.

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to reason dread and conscience.
O Ye reason dread and conscience ye were assygned to be of my counseyll now
come I require you and help me to answer for me for my defautes be so many
and so abhomynable in the sight of him that shall be my Judge and my accusers be
so many and so unfriendly that they leave not one defaute behind. Now come I
require you and help to answer for me for it was never so great need. The
fere and the dread that I am in dystroubleth me so that one word I can not
speak for my self. Alas that ever I saw this day.

The answer of reason.
BE ye remembered that our lord ordained you a good angel and a badde angel
and he ordained you reason and dyscrecyon to know the good from the ill and he
commanded you to do good and leave the evil / he put you in fre choice whether
ye would do well or evil ye ought to call to your remembrance how well god
has done for you and helped you in every danger and pe ryll he would have been
loved dred and served accordy^ge to the many fold graces and kyndenesses that
he has showed unto you how to answer for you I wot not loath I am to accuse
you / and excuse you I can not.

The complaynt to the dyenge creature to dread saying thus.
A Dread where be ye is there no help and socour with you to speak for me when
I shall come to my Judgment.

The answer of dread.
NO certainly for when ye were set in pleasau^ce and delectacyon of the world
reason put in your mind that ye did not well / and I dread was with you at
all times and in every place and failed not to speak unto you and to put you in
mind of the shame of this world and dread of dampnacyon and of the peril
that world follow as well here as else where rehersynge unto you the
punyssheme^tes that our lord ordained for sin saying unto you. Se ye not how
gracyously our lord has called you from sin and wretchedness if ye would
understand it / how has he long kept you in worship estate and in
prosperyte and could not know the goodness of god / how has he chastysed you
and how often by loss of your children / loss of your kyn and friends / loss
of your goods and loss of all tho things that ye could not be pleased with
and set you in the indygnacyon of the great high and mighty prince and help
you out of the dangers and perils that ye have been in at all times / and yet
have ye not loved him dred him and served him that in all these perils has
preserved and kept you and has been so gracyous and good forde to you who
should speak for you. I. nay certainly

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to conscience saying thus.
ALas conscience is there no help with you I have herd say long ago the
world was to curste / but I would hope that conscience would have compassyon
of my dystresse and much the more that I am frendles.

The answer of conscience to the dyenge creature.
I Am sorry to accuse you and excuse you I can not for conscience and dread have been but seldom from you and called upon you in every time and place of peril
and had you flee the occasyons of sin ye might have fled at that time and
would not / now ye would flee death and can not / we should speak for you and
dare not and though we would it avails not ye must sorowfully and mekely
suffer ye Iugementes that ye have deserved.

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to the five wits.
O Ye five that were ordained to be my servants and under mine obeysaunce and
to have be rewled at all times as I would have you / is there no good word that
ye may a forde to say for me and record my demenynge to you and report of me
how I have rewled and governed you yt were take me to keep rewle and govern me
thinks ye should say for me now / who might so well say for me as ye five
/ ye have been with me contynually ever sith that I was borne night and day and
never at no time from me thinks of your kyndenesse ye should have compassyon
upon me and say the best that ye could say for me. I have been friendly to you
and brought you in every place of pleasaunce and dysporte / now show your
ky^denes again to me and speak to faith and hope for me that they would
charitably do my message unto the most glorious prince that ever was is or
shall be.

The answer of the five wits.
Certainly we meruayll that ye would desire us to speak for you understanding
these worship full people have denied and refused to speak for you your good
angel reason dread and conscience / how should we be herd or what credens
will be given un to us that have been your servants and under your obeysaunce
and no thing at all times but as ye have commanded us to do / call to your
remembrance how ye have rewled us five / sight / herynge / feeling and thought
ye have at all times brought us in places of pleasaunce and dysporte and
though it were dysporte and pleasaunce / for the time it is now sorrow weeping
and wayly^ge for your sake that we can not excuse you nor no thing say for
you that might be to your well or to your ese for we have been preuy and
partyners to all that has been mysdone in any wise and in every place and your
offenses in every thing is in your defaute for and ye had sadly rewled us and
like a sovereign ye should have restrained in us every vice / for we should
have be ruled by you in every thing / and otherwise than ye would have us do
we would not do / therefore of necessyte your defautes must be laid upon you for
we have do as servants should do and obeyed you in every thing and dysobeyed
you in no thing / wherefore of right the peril must be yours what credence
will ye give to us than / if we should say well of you the people would say that
we were falls dyssymulours and favorers of sy^ne.

The lamentacyon of the dyenge creature.
ALas there is no creature that I can complayn me to but utterly refuses to
say any thing that might be to my comfort.

The co^playnt of the dyenge creature to faith and hope.
O Holy faith and hope in you is all my trust for how grievously and how
myscheuously yt ever I offended god you displeased I never. I have always
byleued as the church of crystendome has taught me and specially is of the
most holy incarnacyon I was never in thought. I have byleued in the blessed
and most glorious trynyte fader sone and holy ghost. I have byleued that the
second person of the trynyte descended in to the bosom of the most glorious
and pure chaste meke vyrgyn that ever was is or shall be and meddled his very
godhede with her pure chaste virgynyte and may denhede and in her bosom was
parfytly very god and man conceived by the great mystery of the holy ghost
without knowledge or company of any erthly man and she a pure chaste virgyn
flowrynge in virgynyte and by herynge of the holy archaungell Gabryell which
brought un to her the most gracyous and good tidings that ever came to man
kind. Now holy Faith take with you hope and ye twain of your perfyte charity
be my advocates in the high court / and refuse me not nor dysdayne me not for
mine horrible and abominable sins that I have done / which asks vengeance
in this world and dampnacyon eternal without the mercyes of him which is
almighty / What mean might I have thereto. I pray you counseyll me for ye
know well that my reason never dyscorded with the faith / and as to you Hope I
hope all ways that ye will say for me that I have always hoped to the
mercyes of god almighty and that I should be one of the children of salvation
and one of tho that should be redeemed by the precious and bitter paynfull
passion as other sinners have be and certainly other plee nor resystence I can
not make. But and ye twain would be a mean for me to that most glorious and
pure chaste virgyn that chosen was by one assent of all the hole glorious
trynyte to do the most glorious and worshypfull act that ever was done for
her chastyte her pure virgynyte her meekness her virtue and her constaunce was
cause that she was chosen by all the hole glorious trynyte to be daughter
mother and spouse to the most glorious trynyte and that she should bear him
that should redeem all mankind from dampnacyon who may so well be aduocatryse
to the fader the sone and the holy ghost as she and ye will be mean to her
sone for me I hope she will not refuse me / for I understand and know well
that she has help many a sinner that has right grievously offended and in the
holy psalm that was made between her and her cosyn saint Elyzabeth it was said
that all generacyons should bliss her. I hope at the beginning of the world
our lord put not me out of his nombre of tho that should bliss his most holy
mother and record her mercy pity and grace that she showed to sinners when they
have none other socour ne help. She is mother of orphans / and she is
consolacyon of them that been dyssolate / she is guide to all tho that be out of
the way to set them in the right way. I am an orphan I am dyssolate. I am out
of the way I wot not where to cry and call after socour and help but only
to her that bare our redemptour who may so well be mean to the sone as the
mother. And ye twain Faith and Hope would be mean to the mother of mercy for
me. Now gracyous Faith and Hope do your part and dysdayne not my request
though I desire you to this occupacyon / for and ye twain would deny to say
for me I think I shall fall in dyspayre for on whom to call after socour I
wot not / and to put my self in prees as a poor naked best unclothed of
virtue and repleted with vices naked of grace and in mine own defaute and to
come to the presence of the king of all kings and vnpouruayed of all things
that would accord with his most ryall and Imperyall estate I dare not take it
upon me I should be in such dread and fere I should not con ne dare not speak
for my self for I have prayed my good angel to speak for me and he has
denied it. I have called upon Reason Dread and Conscyens and they have answered
me full heuyly that they be loath to accuse me and exscuse me they can not / and
alleges many a great reasonable cause why yt I can not say nay to. I have
called upon my servants which were take me to rewle and govern as I would
answer for them / and they answer me right sorowfully and say if they should
say any good word for me they should not say troth of me and casts to me
that peril that no body would give credence unto them if they would say well
on me but call them flaterers falls dyssymulours and flaterers of sin. Alas
alas I have heuyly dyspe^ded my long life that in all this long time have not
purchased me. One friend to speak for me had our lord of his most ample grace
ordained me unmedyatly after my crystendome to have dyed forth with I might
say I had be borne in a gracyous hour. But would it please your goodness to
speak for me and understand whether I shall have hardynes to make a byll to
the blessed lady and most holy vyrgyn that ever was and she that dysdayneth
not nor denies not sy^nard sy^ners when they call after grace.
Notwithstanding her chastyte and her pure virgynyte excels all other
virgyns. Now good go your way and let me wete how I shall speed for all this
time I live in such dread and fere that me were better dye anon than live any
longer in the dread that I am in. And also I have so great dread and fere of
the ryghtwysnes of almighty god that I am almoost deed for fere. For reason
dread and conscience said to me full shortly that the high Judge would not be
percyall nor he would not be corrupt with good but he will mynyster to me
Justice certainly but and he atteyneth to mynystre to me Justice without favor
I will appele to his mercyes certainly for other remedy is ther^ none par de.
Origene our blessed lady help Thyofull / and sir Emery how should they have
done ne the mother of mercy had been and many another sinner that her grace has
help. She is queen of heaven lady of the world and empress of hell / and
saying to her sone christ Ihesu has dyed and suffered so tourmentous a death and
in her own sight to her great socour and motherly compassyon I hope she would
be loath that theke precious passion should be lost in any creature that her
blessed sone suffered so pacyently.

The answer of faith and hope to ye dyenge creature.
Have ye none acquaintance with our brother Charity we marvel that ye have
not spoken of him in all this time / for and ye were Joined with us twain your
message should be the more acceptably herd manyfolde.

The lamentable complaynt of the dyenge creature to faith hope and charity.
Certainly I have but little deled with him. I was never conuersaunt with him
and that me repents now / for I feel by you twain that he may do much in
the high court. I have more deled with vengeance than I have with charity /
for I would have been avenged upon every man by my will when the people had
slain my children my kyn my friends and robbed and spoiled my self certainly
I would have been a wroke right feign and I had had power to my will but though
my power were little certainly I have hated them and wylled them to have been
done to as they have done to me / and well I wot that is not the order of
charity. But now I hertely cry god mercy our blessed lady and you holy charity
of the that mine enemies here before god our blessed lady and you three. I
forgive them all that they have done against me / and will not be avenged
thought I might: And I pray you holy charity though it were long or I were
acqueynted with you be not the lother to do for me I sore repent me that I
have thus vnresonably and vnwyttyngely absented me from you and hertely I cry
you mercy / and pray (...)


