POLEOS-NAO-DAPHN. Londons Laurel: OR A BRANCH OF THE GRAFT OF GRATITVDE.
First budded in the TEMPLE, and now begun to blossom, UPON DAVID'S THANKFVLNES
TO THE LORD FOR a Cities kindness. By EDW. DALTON one of the Lecturers in the
Cathedral Church of S. PAVLS, London.

D. Chrysostom. super Matthew. homil. 25. Optima beneficiorum custos, est ipsa
memoria beneficiorum, and perpetua confessio gratiarum. Senec. lib. de benef.
Gratum hominem semper beneficium delectat, ingratum semel. LONDON, Printed by
JOHN HAVILAND, M.DC.XXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR PETER PROBY KNIGHT, Lord MAYOR; the Right
Worshipful and Worshipful, the Sheriffs, Aldermen, Companies, and Citizens,
of the Honorable City of London, Grace and Glory.
Right Honorable, right Worshipful, and Worshipful:
AS the case stands with a man and the parts of his body; so it may fall out
with a City and the members of it; one part is the principal in the Act, and
another in that renown, which redoundeth from that Act: yet the man himself,
as is due, bears away the glory of the deserved praise. The hand by the
Mercurialists Pen, or Martial Pike, sets a wreath, as the emblem of
worthiness, upon the head only; yet blazeth the Fame of the whole man. A
worthy Governor among you, my much respected friend, (whose name, when every
BRANCH shall bear a particular name, another BRANCH, if God permit, shall
mention) as it is not unknown, not only himself showed me a favor, but
took order with his successor in his place, that that storm which did
threaten my ruin, should not with that violence, which was intended, fall upon
me, if a chearing calm should not come between, which by Gods providence and
his means came to pass. Sensible yet of that favor and other courtesies which
I have received from, and perceived in diverse of you, in the good intentions of
some, endeavors of other, wel-wishing of many, I have adventured to present to
your eyes part of that which sometime sounded in some of your ears, as they
especially can witness who were the Lords instruments to manifest his care, in
preventing the violent course of some who would have wrongfully enthralled my
freedom, and damned up the streams of my just and legal proceedings, yet so
as my thankfulness is made known under the name of your honorable city, my
Text casting a favorable countenance that way, and refers its
entertainment to your kindnesses. Now go on (right worthy) as the Lord shall
minister occasion, and your several places call for, in Christian and
charitable actions, for such have carried your cities and predecessors fame
beyond the Ocean, and assuredly God himself will not forget (though those who
have felt the benefit should be (which God forbid) unmindful of) your works of
either piety or pity: and for my self my tongue and pen shall not cease
to afford you more dishes of fruit, as Testimonies of my grateful heart, if the
Lord be pleased to prosper my endeavors about the root of this GRAFT. In the
mean season I shall not cease by my prayers to labor to draw from the
fountain of all goodness, all needful blessings for your whole city and all
in it, from the highest Cedar to the lowest Shrub, and ever rest,

Yours and the Churches denoted Servant, EDW. DALTON.

To the Right Honorable, SIR JULIUS CAESAR Knight, Master of the Rolls, and
Sir EDWARD COKE Knight, both of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council:
Sir HENRY HOBART Knight and Baronet, Lord chief Justice of his Majesty's right
honorable Court of Common Pleas, and Sir LAVRENCE TANFEILD Knight, Lord chief
Baron of his Majesty's right honorable Court of Exchequer; and the right
worshipful his Majesty's Justices and Barons of the same COURTS. AS ALSO To
the honorable Societies, the right worshipful and worshipful, the Master,
Benchers, Counselors, Barristers, Gentlemen Students, and members of either
Temple: Mercy, truth, righteousness, and peace.
Right Honorable, Honorable, and truly Worthy,
YOu (who have, in an aspectuall, either Trine or Sextile, radiation,
vouchsafed Your auspicious influences, and some directly, other collaterally,
all of you favorably beheld me; mitigated with your gentler aspects the malice
of my opposite Planets, in this inferior Orb; hindered by Your beneuolent
powers the maleuolent motions of some irregular Stars in our earthly Globe;
and in process of time, the revolution of heaven so bringing it about, as your
several places and my several proceedings required, met almost in the same
degree, though carried in your distant Spheres, to the clayming, through your
concurrences, of the denomination of a Conjunction for my good) may as justly
as jointly, and as jointly as justly, both justly and jointly, challenge the
publication of those effects which your worths out of good will produced, and
my weakness in way of gratefulness, was, is, or shall be, enabled to make
known.

To you therefore do I dedicate this first BRANCH OF my GRAFT OF GRATITVDE,
which hitherto has not appeared, lacking the life-giuing Rays of one or other
Luminary; yet now at last through a happier constellation, buds and begins to
blossom in open view under your Patronages; whose beams of kind acceptance,
if I shall perceive, Sunne-like to reflexe upon it, I shall be animated to
gather together those Siens which lie dispersed in my nurserie; to adapt and in
seasonable time to inoculate them into one Stock; to dig about the root of
this GRAFT; and so to prune every BRANCH of it, that it may answer the aim of
my now attempt, in yielding some fruit wherewith the Lords name, the Author of
all grace, may be magnified; Your names, who are and have been the instruments
of much good, as with LAUREL were honored the heads of the well-deseruing,
with condign fame according to your deserts, for pattern sake, an end of my
present endeavors, diuulged; mine own thankfulness, who have bin in some
sort the passive subject of adverse might, object of affected malice, to God
and man, the instant wishing of my soul, expressed; the meanest of the Tribe
of Leui (in their places, rights, persons, disesteemed, wronged, contemned, so
much as either Hypocrisy, irreligion, error, or superstition can prevail)
notwithstanding all injurious disgraces, and disgraceful injuries, in our
heauen-respected calling, as my heart hops, encouraged; and all men less or
more, which the Lord now and always vouchsafe, some way bettered. Till when and
ever, that your LOVE and FEAR may so be fixed upon the Lords MERCY and
JUSTICE (the only blossoms which as yet this BRANCH does bear) and all your
affections so ordered and so disposed by God himself to goodness, that you
never, either want the sensible feeling of saving Grace, or go without the
full fruition of eternal Glory, he prays who is till death,

Yours and the Churches devoted Servant, Edw. Dalton.

The Text analyzed, Analogically: three parts, according to the courts of
Salomons Temple. 1 Pet. 1.12. 1. For all, He 2. For the Priests, Showed. 3.
For the High Priest where were the Heb. 9.3, 4. 1. Arc or mercy-seat. 1.
Kindness.
2. Two Cherubims prying into that Arc 2. Time when and person to whom, move
admiration.
3. Two Tables by which, and to which, all duties to God and man are directed,
both aiming at Gods glory. 3. His. In himself abiding, yet to man extended,
and in both respects reflexing upon his own praise.
4. Manner, not ordinary, but beyond expectation and common event, Marvelous.
4. Aarons rod by which miracles were wrought.
5. Place, where this Kindness was reserved, in a strong City. 5. Pot of
Manna.
6. The Heart, from which thanksgiving, a sacrifice so acceptable to God,
issued: Blessed be the Lord. 6. Censor from which ye smell of incense so
sweetly ascended.


Logically the 1. Agent, He 2 Act, showed 3. Object, Kindness, its
Opportunity. in the Time when, Has Tra^scendency, in the person to whom Me.
Propriety in the person by whom His. Rarity in the Manner how, Marvelous
Particularity in the Place where, In a strong city.




Errata.
Page 4. in marg. read 2 Samuel chapter 17, 18, 19. 1 Samuel 30. 1 Samuel 23. page 19. in
marg. add Amos 6.6. p. 35. l. 12. for but r. to be. p. 44. l. 10. after love,
r. looking on the Compass of his mercy. p. 46. l. 11. before For r. Freely. p.
54. in M. for Verse. r. Cha. p. 55. l. 2. r. as God p. ib. l. 3. r. as our God.
p. 68. l. 20. r. former, in that. p. 69. l. 6. r. special. l. 10. for word r.
house. p. 79. l. 9. r. tears. p. 84. l. 15. r. publishing. p. 85. l. penult.
r. did in.

PSALM 31.21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his marvelous
kindness in a strong City.


EVery thing has its turn and time, Eccles. 3.1.
yea time gives to every thing its (...), insomuch as man himself never
continues in one stay: Job. 14.2.
the truth whereof no glass can better show than the Psalms: for in them we
may lively behold the variable and mutable condition of man, though never so
near in affection or dear in estimation unto God: in them David that anointed
of the Lord, Psalm. 107.26.
(and in him all Gods chosen) may be seen in this life, as the Ship in the
Sea; in estate and respect even now lifted up to the clouds sailing with a
pleasant gale, in the calm of prosperity, and by and by let down to the
bottom with the impetuous violence of the blast of one or other calamity in
soul and spirit; sometimes soaring with the wings of hope above the heavens,
and again plunged as low as hell with the weight of distrust, through some
disaster either inflicted or feared. Whence proceed such and so sundry
varieties of expressing, in diverse of them, his own hopes and fears, comforts
and corasiues, solace and sorrows, restraints and deliverances. But in this
Psalm, he stands as it were in the view of all upon the worlds Theater, and
sounds in the ears of all a Diapason, whiles warbling upon his harp, he
touches the string of every passion. For he powers out his prayer with
instancy, in the first and second verses; gathers assured hope in the third;
and yet as one not fully freed from fear, nor dispossessed of hope, returns
again to prayer, and gives the reason of his assurance in the third, fourth,
and fifth; pleads in express terms, his holy affection and confidence which
he had in the time past, in the sixth; publishes his resolute purpose of
gladness and rejoicing in the time to come, by reason of the Lords favor
already showed, as one forgetful and not fearing any present misery, in the
seven and eighth. Yet on the sudden, calling, as it seems, to mind, the
trouble and danger he was then in, renews his suit, which is pressed and
amplified with relating by way of complaint, sundry miseries and indignities
which he does endure, and formerly had undergone, to the fourteenth; in which
miseries and indignities, he reports what was and is his trust and patience, in
the fourteenth and fifteenth; and that again is seconded with another
supplication, in the fifteenth and sixteenth; as also with an imprecation, in
the seventeenth and eighteenth; after both which without interruption, as the
River in a clear channel into the Ocean, he falls into an admiring
exclamation, for the greatness of Gods goodness, toward them that fear, and
trust in him, in the nineteenth; together with a reason of that his admiration,
in the twentieth; from thence he comes to give thanks for a kindness, whereof
the Lord had made him partaker in his own particular, in some extraordinary
manner, and that in a strong City. Either Jerusalem which Absalom had
surprised, 2 Samuel 18.19.
and where Achitophels counsel by Hushaies, to his preservation was deluded,
Iansen. Lorinus. 2 Samuel 30.
as some; or Ziglag, where the people were in mind to stone him, and the
spoils whereof he recovered, Arias. 1 Samuel 19.
as other; or Keilah which Saul purposed to have besieged, and to whom the
citizens thereof, as the Lords, Oracle revealed, had delivered him if there he
had stayed, as the most imagine. Howsoever, or in what city soever, David is
mindful of that mercy, and thankful for that benefit, in such terms as
justly gives me occasion to think upon Solomon his son.

Solomon the mirror of men, 2 Samuel 12.25.
the beloved of the Lord, not liked as a servant, John 8.35.
but beloved as a Son that abides in the house for ever, built a glorious
Temple to the God of Israel, and divided it into three parts. The first or
outmost was Atrium Populi, the court of the people, called otherwise the Porch
of Solomon; the next was Atrium Sacerdotum, the place for the Priests; the
third and inmost was Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies. When I see these
words of David, I survey that work of Solomon, and hearing this warbling tune
of the Father, I behold that worthy Temple of the Son. For if we look for
that part which concerns all, it is here in the Author, He, who makes his
Sun to rise on the evil and the good, Matt. 5.45.
and sends rain on the just and unjust. Would we see what concerns those
that are sequestrated to his service, and linked to him by a nearer bond, as
are all faithful, who being a royal Priesthood, Pet. 2.9.
enjoy a rarer privilege than others? here we find it. All have not the Lords
mercy manifested to them as had David; or if it be made apparent to them, yet
are not they made partakers of it, as was this anointed of the Lord. He showed
me, that is, made me partaker of. Long you to see that which Titus Vespasian
desired, Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 6. c. 10.
nay commanded to be especially preserved from the fury of the fire, the
Sanctum Sanctorum into which the High Priest must enter, Heb. 9.7.
yet not oftener than once in the space of a whole year, such was the glory of
it, and that it signified. Here is the like marvelous kindness in a strong
City; whereof David is partaker but once in all his life, as is very probable;
for this mercy, in this manner, was but once conferred, seeing it is no where
else in the same phrase remembered.

This then is a portion of Scripture, every word whereof has his worth, every
circumstance his weight, and presents unto our meditations David's gratitude,
Blessed be the Lord, and the Lords great goodness toward him, He has showed
me his marvelous kindness in a strong City. In dilating of both which, though
we may perfectly discover the branches before we can discern the tree; yet we
know that the root and bole is in respect of time before the branches, and
when we perceive the effect and consequence, we must needs presuppose a
preceding cause: So howsoever David's thankfulness be the first expressed, yet
it must needs be granted that the Lords kindness was the first extended, and
therefore without prejudice to that order which is here used in the expressing
of both these acts, for my more methodicall proceeding, and your better
profiting, Let the Lords kindness be the first subject of my speech, and the
first object of your attentions, because it was the first in action. For first,
the Lord showed his kindness, and then, David testified his Thankfulness. In
the Lords kindness observe three circumstances. First, the Agent, He.
Secondly, the Act, what this He did, He showed. Thirdly, the acts object, what
he showed, kindness. First of the agent He; that is, the Lord: here is the
first court of the Temple, wherein I no sooner set my foot, but on the sudden
so rare a Majesty is vnueiled in my sight, as my mind is amazed, and my feet
so fettered that I cannot move till I glance at the properties of that glorious
Person, on whom if we cast our eyes, we may behold in him not only the winter
of sharp severity, but also the summer of cheering clemency. We may see as
well a dimple in his cheek, cheerfully favoring, as a wrinckle in his brow
severely frowning: For this He, though he had before smitten as a Foe, yet now
does he smile as a Father. This He, having drawn a foggy veil over his face,
showed a cloudy countenance, and yet removing that veil again, manifests a
gracious look. This He now altogether refreshes David's languishing spirits
with a comfortable calm, who a little before had almost ouerturned his soul
with a tempestuous storm; For he said in his sudden apprehension of his
danger, wherein he justly was, through his sin, I am cast out of thy sight.
Verse. 22.
So that in the Lord are indifferently seated as in their proper subject two
different properties, Mercy and Justice, and by him are indifferently executed
two diverse works, Severity and Clemency. As is partly shadowed in the
creatures, plainly showed in the sacred Scriptures, by his works demonstrated,
in reason may be confirmed, by all must be confessed.

Shadowed in the creatures: Think not much by things created, to learn the
knowledge of their Creator, For Praesentem narrat quaelibet herba D^um, Every
plant represents Gods presence. There is no creature though most contemptible,
but either his unsearchable wisdom, or his irresistable power, or the
all-warming Sun of his goodness, or the all-seeing eye of his providence;
One or other of his ineffable properties is less or more shadowed in it. And
as we may find the Fountain by the River, and the Spring by the Stream, so
we may attain at the least a glance at, and see with Moses the hinder parts
of the Lord by his works. For the invisible things of God from the creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even his eternal power and Godhead, as Saint Paul affirms. Romans 1.20.
And therefore aptly is Seculum called Speculum, this worlds Globe termed a
looking-glass. And not without cause does Job send us to the senseless
creatures to learn our lessons concerning him. Chapter 12. ver. 7, 8.
Ask (says he) the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the Fowls of the
Heaven, and they shall tell unto thee: or speak to the earth, and it shall
show thee; or the fishes of the Sea, and they shall declare unto thee: even
this amongst other, that as the Lion has his paw to imprison, his voice to
terrify, and his teeth to tear his prey, yet withal commiserateth the woes
of the prostrate, and suffers no ravenous beast to touch that which he has
undertaken to protect: So the Lion of the Tribe of Judah can as well encounter
his foes with terror, Reu. 5.5.
as entertain his friends in favor. As the Eagle has his talents to strike,
and his wings to shadow, so the Lord has his threats to chastise, and his
favors to encourage. As the Leopard has comely spots to delight as well as a
crooked countenance to affright: and as whom the beautiful skin of the
Panther allureth to fancy, his speed and cruel pursuit admonishes to fear;
so the Lord has a terrible countenance to beget a dread of his might, and
variety of mercies to breed a delight in his Majesty, and whomsoever the
beams of his bounty cannot warm in affection, the flames of his fury shall
pursue to destruction. But if the creatures be not sufficient trumpeters of
this truth, because they in part do only shadow it, let us hear the sacred
Scriptures, as Heavens Heralds proclaiming it as undeniable, for they plainly
show it. Sometimes drawing our eyes to view the Lord seated on a white Iuory
Throne of Majesty, with eyes sparkling forth nothing but signs of favor, with
a tongue pronouncing words of comfort, to raise up the dejected soul, and
refresh the wearied spirit, with lips divulging promises in their due time
certainly to be performed, to confirm the wavering mind, and make resolute the
inconstant and unresolved man, with arms stretched out ready to embrace those
that in reverence approach unto him, and with a countenance assuring the
freeness of his grace, and the firmness of his goodness: sometimes descending
from his Throne of excellency, to examine the truth of transgressions cry, and
see the sins of man before he strike, as a merciful Judge unwilling to
condemn the accused, till the evidence be too clear against him, and loath to
put the sword of Justice into the Executioners hand till the prisoners fault be
palpably proved; but on the contrary, when the clamor of impiety is justly
apparent, and punishment is declared to be sins desert, they present him
exalted on a sable seat, and set upon wraths tribunal, eyes darting out flames
of fury, mouth threatening certain misery, hands casting down fire and
brimstone, storm and tempest, and a countenance menacing the furiousness of
his wrath, and the fullness of the disobedients woe: Sometimes they call him a
consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. Psalm. 31.3.
to imply the greatness of his displeasure, and a Fortress to decipher the
firmness of his favor: Sometimes they compare him to a Lion roaring for his
prey, and a Lioness robbed of her whelps, pointing at his fury; to a tender
mother comforting her child, and a pitiful father compassionating his own
bowels, painting out his mercy: Sometimes saying, that he is dreadful, yet to
be delighted in; fearful, yet favorable; terrible even to the Kings of the
earth, and yet tender carrying his children upon Eagles wings, far and free
from any danger, as loath to have them harmed as the Apple of his own eye hurt.
A God of wrath with his Bow bent, Arrows ready, and Weapons prepared, and yet
a Sun to solace, and a Shield to shelter those that are afflicted. Truly
therefore did the sweet singer of Israel concerning him warble upon his Harp,
Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each
other: For this is demonstrated by his works of both Mercy and Justice,
wheresoever for the place, on whomsoever for the persons manifested.

For the place, whether in Heaven, Earth, or Hell. In Heaven the persisting of
the good Angels, the joys prepared there for these blessed Saints, who yet
continue in their fleshly Tabernacles, and enjoyed there by those happy, ever
happy souls, who in him have removed from their earthly mansions, resound his
mercy: In Heaven, his thence expelling the backsliding Angels, and excluding
out the cursed crew, blazon his Justice: for his retinue in Heaven, abide in
their created condition by his goodness, his redeemed on earth are restored to
their former far firmer felicity through his grace, and the hellish
reprobates are for their disobedience left altogether frustrate of any hope of
Heavens happiness in his anger.

In earth the seating of Adam before his fall, as Sovereign Viceroy, and Lord
Lieutenant over all his other creatures in Paradise a place of pleasure, ready
and fully furnished with all things to satisfy the mind and sustain the
body: after his fall, the fatherly calling, favorable conuenting, mild
examining of him; nay his providing, even publishing the remedy to redress his
ruins, Adam not so much as dreaming of, much less desiring, least of all
endeavoring any, dictate his Clemency. But the sharp inflicted censure upon the
serpent persuading, and our first parents perpetrating that Act of
disobedience, their then present and for ever after perpetual exile so duly
deserved, from that place so greatly abused, declare his severity.

In hell the worm of conscience gnawing, the fiery flame scorching, darkness
molesting the eyes, howling and gnashing of teeth possessing the ears,
bitterness and unquenchable thirst offending the taste, sulphurious stench
infesting the smell, endless, easelesse, remediless pains, surprising the
touch. To conclude in one word, what must be continued beyond all worlds, and
is not to be expressed by any words; sorrow without solace, mourning without
melody, grievous pangs without the least gladding pleasure; paint out his fury:
yet even there this does point at his favor; that he might at this present
more severely punish them, seeing by an infinite Majesty offended, by an
incomprehensible deity disobeyed, an endless torment might duly be exacted, an
unspeakable torture might justly be inflicted, as well for the greatness as
the continuance of the punishment, as soon as the transgression was committed.

In that then their miseries are not more nor their sufferings more
insufferable; as yet is extended mercy toward those who are altogether
miserable, so as if we consider the place, the Lord is seen both in heaven,
earth, and hell, neither wholly deprived of pity, nor fully possessed with
displeasure. The same we may note in him, if we glance at the persons on whom
his works of Justice and Mercy are executed, whether we survey their diversity
or Identity.

The persons diversity, the Lord being merciful to one at that time when he is
just to another, and contrarily against one furious, when to another he is
favorable. Thus when his wrathful power made way to his indignation utterly
to consume Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 19.
at the same instant his merciful Providence found out a path safely to convey
Lot and his family: In like manner when his mercy stayed the furious waters of
the Red sea, Exodus 14.
for delivering his chosen Israel, his rage burst out by the same waters over
the banks of that mercy and drowned the Egyptians. The Lord as the Sun
withdrawing his presence and light from one Nation, at the same season
disperseth the comfort of his rays upon another region; and as the fire has a
diverse operation, extending its heat to things of different qualities,
softning hard wax, and hardening soft clay in the same moment yet herein the
Creator exceeds these creatures, that he works diversely upon the same subject,
being both just and merciful, merciful and just unto men, considered in the
Identitie of their persons, where without respect of, or relation to any other,
the same man is the object of his actions, be he bad or good.

The bad have children at their desire, leave their substance for their babes
their Tabernacles do prosper, Job 12.6.
and they themselves are in safety, who provoke God; their bellies are filled
with his rich treasure, their riches do so increase, Psalm. 37.4.
and their wealth comes on so fast, in their life is such a seeming bliss,
and in their death no bands; that they do even what they list, they are
ravished with delight, pass their days in iollity, make feasts like Kings,
drink their Wine in bowls, and stretch their bulks upon beds of Iuory; in
this to them is extended Gods favor, but either in that instant they are
besotted with a forgetfulness of Gods mercies, sacrificing to their own nets,
and of others miseries, not thinking of, Hab. 1.16.
or not caring for the affliction of Joseph or they are in the same moment
arested with a sudden fear, as the rich man in the Gospel, or they are
presently attached with a senseless despair, as Nabal, or at the last,
howsoever long first, they are summoned to a dreadful sentence as Dives; so
that as truly said Solomon, that long-experienced much-obseruing King, Prou.
14.13.
either in laughing their hearts are sorrowful, or their mirth does end in
mourning, either their inward griefs are vshered with outward gladness, or
their temporal prosperity attended on with eternal misery, the one whereof in
them is a badge of Gods loving bounty, the other the very cognizance of the
Lords just punishing equity. But do the bad only bear the badges of mercy
and misery? is he not also as well a Lion as a Lamb to the good, before, in,
after their conversion? Yes surely.

Before their conversion as they differ not from the wicked in unworthiness,
so neither are they altogether free from the signs and suffering of his wrath,
threatenings sounding in their ears, hell gnawing on their souls, judgment
seasing on them and theirs, whereby they cannot but discern him just. Yet in
that he is so patient in waiting for, so diligent in working of their
conversion, Esa. 65.2.
spreading his hands out early and late toward them, who are as yet
rebellious, deluing and digging about, Luc. 13.8.
dunging and pruining of those trees, which as yet are fruitless, presenting
himself to them in love, who absent themselves from him in disloyalty,
entreating and wooing them, whom as a father his sons, he might command; as a
Sovereign his subjects, he might inioine; or a Lord his vassals, he might
compel, they cannot toward them not behold him merciful before their
conversion.

Note now the Echo of my accent in resounding his mercy and justice, in the
very moment of his childrens change, then he lets them see themselves plunged
in the devouring sea of their sins, fettered in the Gives of their
transgressions, servants to the rigor of the Law, subject to eternal death,
and slaves to the insatiable tyranny of Satan, which being seen with fear is
felt with sorrow, for hereby their consciences do awake, awakening accuse,
accusing arraigne, convict, condemn them of unkindness to so good, of
rebellion to so great a God: then their hearts boil with throbs, the sire of
remorse is kindled in their souls, and the flames break out at their mouths,
or at least is signified to be there by their sighs, for either the tongue, or
the heart in the tongues silence, cries out with the leprous, I am unclean,
Len. 13.45.
I am unclean: and with the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.20.
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Thus
he appears unto them in the shape of a terrible Lion, but lest they be
circumuented or too much endangered, he presently binds up these wounds, stops
and stays these dangerous issues, tendreth them a plaster compacted of his
own mercies and his Sons merits, a salve compounded of his bounty and their
Saviors blood, and withal so inlightneth their understanding, that they
looking upon his good pleasure, apprehend a possibility of their pardon, he
appears in the meekness of a lamb. In that therefore he brings them by the
mouth of Hell to the gates of Heaven, causing them to condemn themselves, lest
they should be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.31.
then offering them the means of their amendment, the occasion of their better
change, when he might justly leave them in their misery, and pass by them
weltring in their polluted blood; then revealing to them his grace, Ezech. 16.6.
when he might righteously conceal from them his goodness; then presenting
them with a pardon, when he might duly inflict upon them punishment, yet so as
first the horror of their sins must seize upon their souls, and the
heinousness of their iniquities set upon their consciences that deep
impression of their deserts, which afterward can be defaced by no power but
his own spirit: he is just and merciful, merciful and just, to the good in
the very instant of their change, neither is he otherwise after their change,
and in the continuance of their conversion: For sinners hating their apparent
holiness, and Satan envying their prepared happiness, assault the Fortress
of their faith, batter the Castle of their confidence, undermine the Bulwarks
of their obedience, and deface the Towers of their conversation: all which
being built and semented with the rubbish of old corruption, admit many
breaches, the Lust of the flesh, 1 John 2.16.
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: carnal pleasures, coueted
profits, enchanting vanities, are as deceiving baits, whereon their flesh as
the little fish too often greedily feeds, and their corruption as Tinder with
these sparks of Hell are set on fire; and thus becoming sinners, they suffer;
being to corruption affected, with crosses they are afflicted; and tainted with
pollution, are touched with punishment. There is the Lords justice. Yet in that
they are infested, lest they should be more infected; in that their miseries
are mixed with joys, and moderated according to what they are able to bear; in
that their sufferings are seasoned with heavens salt, and salued with an happy
success, they either taken from their trials, or their tribulation removed
from them; in that grace, in the midst of misery, is preserved in them, and
glory, notwithstanding all calamity is reserved for them, is manifest his
mercy: Do then the good after their conversion feel outward sorrow when they
perceive inward solace, and are they perplexed with outward crosses as well as
replenished with inward comforts? though they be ever seized of many graces,
do they yet suffer many grieuances, and is not the Lord even to them just and
merciful? just he is, not freeing corruption from calamity, merciful he is,
not leaving tribulation in perplexity.

Thus it is demonstrated by his works of mercy and justice, whether we look on
the place where, or the persons on whom they are executed, that the Lord as
well bears a knife to cut, as brings a salve to cure, and has as well a heart
to raise up as a hand to cast down.

Let us now attempt to confirm the same, by reason taken from those
absurdities which must be granted if this be denied, whether we consider him,
our selves, or others. In him his attributes or his office are disparaged. The
Attributes which should add oil to this Lamp, and make the light of this
truth shine more clearly, are his liberty, his omnipotency, his verity; but
his liberty is abridged, his omnipotency obscured, his verity falsified, if
either the mercy or the justice of the Lord be excluded, his liberty is
abridged. For if we say he is all mercy, how is not his word controlled, his
will violently carried against it self with the inundations of the sins of
men, which not only in this world, he must necessarily be content to wink at,
but also in the world to come willingly entertain? If he be all mercy, those
who are known to him to be branded in conscience, and to the Devils to be
marked in conversation with the curse of hell, must by him be acknowledged to
have right to, and be made partakers of the bliss of Heaven. On the contrary
side, if he be all Justice, how is not the same will of his enforced to leave
those hopeless, for whom he had purposed, to whom he has promised
happiness? If he had been all Justice, he had left in the paws of Satan,
that roaring devouring Lion, those who are redeemed by the precious blood of
his Son that immaculate Lamb. Ioh. 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists, and the winds Creator works as him
likes, doing as says the Prophet David, what pleases him in heaven and
earth, and in the depths, which he could not do if he were not free: Now
confessing him to be free, we must acknowledge him to be both just and
merciful, or else his liberty is abridged; and besides, a Cloud is cast over
his power, and his Omnipotency is obscured, seeing he must either suffer what
he would not, or not do what he should. Lib. 5. de ciu. Dei cap. 10.
Now Dicitur omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult, says
Saint Augustine. To do what he will, paints out Omnipotency: to suffer what
he will not, points at impotency. Take away his justice, and he must suffer
the blaspheming of his name, the violating of his laws, the contempt of his
commands without all remedy. An earthly Commander shall revenge the least
offered indignity, and Heavens Creator shall not be able to redress, but must
endure the highest, the most heinous blasphemy. Take away his mercy, a worldly
Monarch shall advance his Favorite, a mean Lord exalt a well deserving
servant, a poor father gratify a truly obedient son, but he by whom Princes
reign shall not confer dignity on those in whom his soul delights; nor
the Lord of Lords reward his servants diligence; nor the Father of all that is
called Father in heaven or earth, countenance his Child's obedience. Take away
justice, he who fetters the Nobles in linkes of iron, and breaks in pieces the
Princes of the earth, as a Potters vessel, shall himself be linked in the
chains of impiety, because he cannot punish iniquity. Take away mercy, he who
moves man's heart to pity, opens men's ears to attend, strengthens man's
hands to aid them who are in misery, shall have his own heart so benumbed,
that he cannot commiserate; his own ears so shut, that he cannot hear, and
his own arm so shortened, that he cannot reach them who are in calamity. But
there is no Lord which lives not under his law, either obeying what he
enioyneth, or enduring what he inflicteth. There is no honor or dishonor, but
is received from his hand, either as a gracious sign of his love, or as the
deserved success of disloyalty, which he disposes as powerfully without
resistance, as freely without respect. Is he then destitute of either Justice
or Mercy? far be that conceit from our cogitations, for it is the falsifying of
his verity, both in his promises and in his threatenings. His gracious promises
are as Sugar sweetning every suffering, as honey delighting every
Sinne-distempered taste, as Triacle driving corruption from the soul; as Goats
blood softning an Adamantine heart, his gracious promises give a Supersedeas
against the band of Law, proclaim a writ of privilege from the Arrest of
death, and sue out a Writ of Error, to reuerse the doom of condemnation,
passed against sin in the court of conscience. Yet let this be granted, that
God is only just and not merciful, the mind cannot but conceive, the
understanding must needs assume, and reason will necessarily conclude, that all
his fair promises are but bare pretenses, Sin and Despair sitting at the
helm; Contrarily threatenings are the terror of the Soul, the trouble of the
thoughts, the awakening of the drowsy threatenings, turn Sendall into
Sackloth, cast crowns of gold down among the dust, and advance dust as a more
golden ornament for the head. Threatenings as bitter potions, purge the
superfluous humors of impiety; and as fire the wax, prepares the heart to
receive the impression of Gods spirit; yet if God be wholly merciful and not
just, will not the soul surmise them to be clouds without rain, Scorpions
without stings, and less to be feared than a thunderclap in another horizon,
security and presumption hoising the sails. But now though heaven and earth
shall pass, though the glorious Fabric of the worlds Globe shall be wrapped
together as a Scrole, yet not one tittle of his word shall fail: what he
promised in mercy, shall be performed in clemency, and what he threatened in
justice shall be executed in severity, the freeness of his will, the
greatness of his power, the certainty of his truth, his liberty, omnipotency,
verity, all and every of them, jointly and severally, do convince, that the
Lord as well holds out the black Ensign of war, as the White colors of peace.

Or else to come to his office, how should he be Judge of all the world. There
are three properties in a Judge, which should be as inseparable to him, as heat
is to the fire, moisture to the air, dryness to the earth, coldness to the
water, that he Hear indifferently, Examine diligently, determine impartially,
which proper duties cannot be performed, if either severity be swallowed up of
clemency, or clemency choked with severity. Now howsoever God seeing the
hearts and reins, discerning the secretest thoughts and intentions, to whom
all things are naked, needs not to listen, listening to labor by due sifting
to winnow out the truth, yet in passing sentence he is to deal impartially.
Shall the Judge of the world not do right; and yet when the Sheep and Goats,
Wolves and Lambs, the Children of light and imps of darkness, those who bear
on their souls his own stamp, and those on whose hearts Satan may see the
writing of his own hand, shall stand before him to hear their several
doomes, being all mercy he must absolve the wicked, and being all Justice, he
cannot save the godly, and so he must necessarily pass a partial and
unrighteous judgment, who is holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his
works; Just when he speaks, and pure when he judges; whom neither malice
can justly malign, nor Error shall ever be able to blemish with absurdity,
neither in regard of his office, or his attributes, wherewith Satan would
inueigle us, by blinding our mind with this misconceit, that the Lord is
either only merciful, to cause presumption, or only Just, to enforce
despair. But if he were only just and not merciful, the first Adam had either
not sinned, or having sinned, had continued in vanity: if only merciful and
not just, the second Adam had either not died or died in vain: If he were not
a God of anger, fear were unnecessary; If not a God of favor, faith a fancy:
our tribulations should be endless, if he only frowning; our sufferings
fruitless, if not favorable. What wipes our tears from our eyes, puts them
in his bottle, registers them in his book? not his mercy? What hears the
sighs of the soul, the groaning of the spirit, and the crying of the heart?
not his mercy? What preserues our hands from acting, our eyes from beholding,
our feet from following vanity? not his mercy? Mercy is the mark whereat our
mourning aims; Mercy is the limit where our sorrow boundeth; Mercy is that
Ocean where our misery ends. To no purpose should we grieve if the Lord were
not good, to no end should we sorrow if he were not gracious. On the contrary,
what is that in him which hears our impieties? the ears of his justice: What
is that in him which espieth our vanities? the eyes of his justice: What is
that in him which punishes our iniquities? the hand of his justice. To no
effect should we fear spiritual death, if he be not righteous; in vain
should we fly from eternal danger, if he be not rigorous: If he were not
both just and merciful, merciful and just, caution to prevent sin were a
needless care; care to perfect sanctity an unnecessary corasiue; either of
which not to judge most necessary in our selves, is an horrible absurdity, from
which we could not be freed in judging of others, if we were once persuaded
that the Lord is not either to be drawn to punish, or not to be induced to
pity: For should we not condemn the generation of the just, in pouring out
their prayers to prevent his wrath, sending forth their supplications to
obtain his blessings? doubtless we should not but account their desires of
feruency but frivolous, and their deeds of fidelity to be superfluous, which
absurdity sometime preserved David from a dangerous error, and brought him into
Gods Sanctuary; where we may learn this, as he did the like, that the Lord
does both ascend the throne of Justice, and sit in the seat of Mercy, unless
in contempt of him, injury to our selves, injustice toward others, we deny him
of freedom, power and truth, robbing our selves of faith, fear, and
obedience, disrobing those who are good of their holy hope, and hoped for
happiness, unless we shake hands with the bad, whose conversation express
their minds corruption, and their manners testify the perverseness of their
opinion, and conceit Heavens happiness to be a fiction of poesy, and hels
horror to be only a fable of policy: blasphemies, abominable blasphemies once
to be imagined. We will acknowledge him to be a God abundant in goodness and
mercy, and yet not making the wicked innocent, as by all must be confessed: For
if any might plead altogether for Gods mercy, then Jesus Christ his son the
engraven image of his substance participating of his own essence, equal in
might and majesty with himself, doing nothing which might offend him, all
things appointed by him, his begotten, only begotten, his beloved, best
beloved son, in whom alone he is well pleased: yet if he became a pawn for
sin, he must bear the pangues of sorrow; if he will undertake the childrens
faults, he must undergo the fathers fury, so as though he be preserved because
a son, he shall be punished as a servant; though he shall wear the crown
of glory as a Conqueror, yet first he must bear the brunt of the battle
because a Champion: so that Christ cannot but confess him a God of Justice.
From which, if any other might seem to be free, then the blessed Angels; or if
any might be thought not to partake of mercy, then the infernal and damned
spirits: but as the former must acknowledge the Lord to be just, though Justice
in them may seem to be swallowed up of mercy, so the latter must confess the
Lord to be merciful, though mercy in them appear to be smothered by justice.
For if Justice be to attribute to every one his due, and Gods will be the rule
of Justice, seeing that he has purposed and appointed the blessed Angels
continuance in their created condition, that condition becomes their due,
because the Lord is in some sort become their debtor, not for their
worthiness, but of his own good will. Now as to undo that which he has
done, were to blemish his power, to brand him with impotency; so not to
continue that which he has once vnalterably decreed shall be conferred, is in
him apparent injustice, to them manifest injury. In that therefore, what he
once purposed is still performed, what he once intended is never desisted, the
continuance of his will is the continuance of his justice, whereof his will is
the Life and Law, to which his will gives birth and being, rule and direction,
so as they remaining within the lists of his will, cannot be without the
limits of his Justice: For seeing Justice gives every one his due, and it is
equal and just that the Creator should bind the creature, and the creature
obey the Creator, in that his commands are in force among them, and their
obedience performed toward him: the blessed Angels must confess him just
because they may not deny unto him obedience the badge of Justice, whereby it
is discerned as the tree by the fruit, the flower by the smell, the fire by the
heat, the servant by his liuerie. Therefore as Bernard, De verb. Orig.
In coelo sola vtique iustitia, nihilominus laetitia; so may I say (not against
his sense and meaning) though in Heaven there may seem to be only joy, yet
there is also justice, for obedience the Livery of it is there worn, and Gods
will the Rule of it is there working, and howsoever mercy is there to them set
up for ever, yet his truth is established in the very Heavens.

But how shall it appear that his Mercy is manifest in any manner or measure,
to the damned souls and infernal spirits? As for the damned souls, herein he
is good to them, that he as yet joins not their bodies with them, to partake
of the same punishment, seeing as the body did increase the sin of the soul
while they were united, so the presence of the body in the course of justice
must augment the tortures, sorrows, and pangs of the soul, so soon as they
are again conjoined. As for the infernal spirits, herein his mcrcy toward
them is undeniable, in that their decreed and long since justly deserved
torments are not in the greatest and most grievous measure as yet inflicted, as
some of themselves seem to insinuate, and insinuating confess to our Savior
while they as it were complain of and repine against him, Art thou come to
torment us before the time? which is not so to be conceived, as though they
were not now tormented, but that the greatness of their torments is for a time
deferred. Tormented they now are; for can the Malefactor think of his doom,
and his spirits not be daunted with the thought of death? Perhaps a Malefactor
may be either comforted upon repentance, hoping for a better life, or not
dejected, atheistically conceiting, there is hereafter neither better nor worse
prepared lot: But Satan clearly apprehends, and apprehending certainly knows
the sentence that is decreed to pass against him, is as severe as it is sure,
and therefore needs must the horror of his judgment for the present greatly
perplexe him. Does the emptiness of the Lions entrails make him roar when he
wants, and whiles he seeks his prey, and shall we not think that he is
pinched? Does envy consume the bones, and malice break out into fury, and
shall we not say, that the mind is grieved, and the man much vexed? Surely
then, Satan through his insatiable desire always hungry and roaring for his
prey, never destitute of envy and malice, 1 Pet. 5.7.
in that Gods glory is preserved, Christ's Kingdom increased, those who were
far inferior to him, by created condition and constitution, are daily
preferred to be partakers of those joys and perfections, whereof if not of
greater, he is and for ever shall be deprived, cannot but be much tormented; or
else whence is it that he is said to rage, which is increased by how much more
the day of judgment draws near. An unanswerable argument, that it is out of
a certain fear and an assured expectation, that he shall be made partaker of
greater torment, which without ease or remedy he is ever after to endure. And
if the waters when they are dammed, swell the higher, and the putrified tumor
not launched, pain the sorer: how shall not he now fretting, then even eat
himself in fury, when all occasion by which, and subjects save his own
vassals, whereupon to work his malice, shall be fully removed, and his
powerful rage and raging power finally restrained? And the rather because he
shall still retain a desire to cast dust upon the beauty of Gods glory, and
hinder if then it were possible, the felicity of the blessed Angels, and ever
happy Saints, of whom every Alleluiah which they sing unto the Almighty, being
as so many stinging Scorpions to his malicious mind. Thus far then God is
gracious unto them, in that though they be delivered into chains of darkness,
2. Pet. 2.4. Iud. 9.
where cannot want horror, yet they are as yet only reserved unto judgment,
which hereafter is to pass both against and upon them. Oh the love, goodness
and bounty of God, for height as Jacobs Ladder it stretches to the Heavens,
for breadth as the Curtain, it covers all Nations, for length it extends to
all times, for depth it pierces the darksome dens of the damned souls and
infernal spirits: So as it is shadowed in the creatures, clearly showed in
the sacred Scriptures, by his works of both mercy and justice manifested, in
reason confirmed, by all must be confessed, that God is mercifully just, and
justly merciful, and though his mercy be enlarged, his Justice is not
lessened, and though his Justice be inflicted, yet his mercy is extended. Oh
that we were such Eagles as that the eyes of our minds could so gaze at this
Sun, that bathing our selves in the water of Gods sacred Fountain, our old
corruption might be shaken off, and we so renewed in the strength of our created
condition, that the meditation of his mercy and justice so indifferently seated
in him, the consideration of his severity and clemency so impartially executed
by him, might always sit at the helm of our hearts, hoise the sails of our
affections, and be the Pilot of our practices, in respect of him, our selves,
and others; then should we, in respect of him, not only in our affections
sail with a fair gale of fearing love, and surrender to him his right of our
loving fear, espying the Ensigns of his Justice: but also in our actions his
clemency would cherish alacrity, and his severity inflame our sincerity: For
our affections, as the nobler metals cast into the Furnace, are turned into the
color, and participate of the heat of fire, so the heart of man fixed upon
Gods mercy by meditation, should be fired with the love of his Majesty, having
an eye to his due, our duty, and the dignity of it. His due, it is as he is
God, lovely in himself, loving toward us. Lovely in himself, and therefore
well said Bernard, Tract. de dilig. Deo.
Causa diligendi Deam Deus est; sufficient cause of loving the Lord, is the
consideration that he is God. For whatsoever is desirable, that he is. Does
power is the Adamant iron) draw our affections to it. He is King of Kings, the
Lord of Lords, a God of Omnipotency. Does that which is auncienta lure our
hearts to delight in it? He is the ancient of days, a God of greatest
antiquity. Does knowledge keep the mind in admiration of it? He
understands our thoughts long before, neither is any thing hid unto him, a
God of omnisciency. He is the God of unity, which is the honor of brethren;
the God of constancy, the crown of friendship; the God of wisdom, the glory
of man. He is a shade to the weary, a shelter to the wronged, a treasury to the
needy. He is truth which is so much commended; He is light in which we are so
much delighted; He is life which of all things is so much desired. If honor
the aim of the ambitious, if riches the desire of the covetous, if fame the
hope of the vaineglorious, if excellency, absolute perfection, endless
felicity, or any other thing which souls would wish to be partakers of, may
glue our hearts unto them, then the Lord: For all things that are good are in
him, and derived from him who is goodness it self: to be loved, because in
himself he is so lovely, and so loving toward us, loving us freely, fully,
firmly. For before we loved him, 1 John 4.19.
he loved us first, the dew of his graces fell first upon our fruitless
souls, the beams of his bounty reflected first upon our unsanctified hearts,
the light of his countenance shone first upon our darkened understandings: our
affections were first warmed with the fire of his love, our desires first
kindled with the blast of his spirit, our dead members first revived with the
hand of his power, before we conceived, affected, acted any thing which was
heavenly: Till the furrows of our hearts were sown with the seed of his
blessings, nothing but weeds there appeared; till we as trees were transplanted
into the soil of his Church, nothing but bitter fruits were there to be
gathered; till we as plants were inoculated into Christ the true Vine, nothing
but sour grapes could there be tasted. His love cast salt into our waters and
made them sweet, put clay upon our eyes and made them see: then, then, not
before, we watered the tender sprigs in his orchard, and perceived the
sweetness of his favor; and so loving us first, he loved us freely.

Freely, when we would not, when we could not love him; when we would not, for
when we were filled with malice, swelled with enmity, opposite to all
entertainment of Amity, then did he shadow us with the wings of his favor,
shelter us in the harbor of his goodness, and hide us under the helmet of his
protection; when we sought his infamy, then wrought he our glory, when we
endeavored his hurt, he devised our help; when we actuated his death, he
redeemed our life; when our enmity fled, neglected, resisted, then his
kindness followed, called, persuaded; nay, when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son; Romans 5.10.
when we would not, he loved us freely, no less when we could not, in respect
of our degeneration, generation. For our degeneration; it was so great as there
was nothing gracious in us, such was the wound which Satan by sin had given
us, that we not only lay polluted in our own blood, Ezech. 16.6.
but the vital spirits of our spiritual life were so let out, that we were
dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.5.
having hearts, but no hearts to love him; having souls, but no souls to long
for him; having bodies, but no bodies to worship him; our souls and bodies as
far from purposing any spiritual worshipping, as dead men are from
performing any corporal work: fowls and bodies no more willing to yield him
the least holy affections, than dead men are able to perfect the most
honorable action. Freely then he loved us, in that he died for us and quickened
us by his spirit, when we were sinners and dead in trespasses; so that we could
not love him in regard of our degeneration. Let us now see the freeness of his
love toward us when we could not love him in regard of generation. We had not
then received being, when Gods love toward us had received a beginning; our
souls were then vnbreathed, our bodies then vnframed, when our souls and
bodies were by him affected; When this glorious structure laid on, nay, in the
earth, when our goodliest building was only clay, when our houses had no hands
as Keepers to tremble, Eccles. 12.3.
nor teeth as grinders to cease, nor eyes as Windows to look out at, nor
mouth as the door to be shut, nor iawe bones to sound in the grinding, nor
arteries or ears as the daughters of speech and singing to be abased, no
marrow or sinews as silver cord to be lessened, nor the brains Tunicle, as a
golden Ewer to be broken, nor any Vein as a Pitcher wherein the blood is
contained, to be broken at the Liver as the Well, nor the head which turns as
a Wheel, to be broken at the heart, whence as out of a Cisterne all the powers
of life are drawn; nor the body which was raised out of the dust, nor the
Spirit which came from God: before any of these were to be found, we were
interested in Gods favor; the earth was created for our habitation, the
creatures appointed for our use in Gods love, before ever either we beheld the
Light, or the Light was brought out of darkness, or darkness was upon the
face of the deep. Genesis 1.2.
Love is one of the affections, and affections are seated in the heart, the
heart is placed in the midst of the body, but neither could the body contain
the heart, nor the heart cast affection, nor the affection be carried in the
chariot of Love, till love, affection, heart and body had a being. If then the
Lords favor was set upon us, before any of these were sited in us; it is
cleerer than the Suns brightness, when the cleerenesse of the sky gives
freest liberty to his rays in the midst of the Hemisphere, that we could not
love him when he loved us, because we were not when the eyes of his excellency
did sparkle the flame of his affections toward us: and therefore he loving us
before we loved him, nay when we as enemies would not, as sinners and dead men
in respect of degeneration, and without being in respect of generation could
not love him: I appeal to the testimony of every conscience, if he loved not
freely. And seeing we must confess he loved freely, we may conceit he loved
fully. For in every part of the body, in every power of the soul, is imprinted
the character of his favor. Is the eye at any time restrained from beholding
vanity? it is a sign of his love: Is the mouth at any instant shut, that it
speaks not blasphemy? it is a token of his care. Is the ear at any season
stopped from hearing calumny? it is an emblem of his mercy. Is the foot stayed
upon any occasion from following impiety, oppression, and cruelty? it is the
ensign of his goodness. His love enlightneth the understanding, His love
rectifieth the Judgment, His love orders the affections, and his love
directs the will. Such a Sun is the Lord to us, that there is no cranny of
the heart but his rays do enter, entering enlighten, enlightening inform the
mind, reform the manners, and conform the whole man to religious courses.
Childhood claims a part in his love, Youth challenges a portion in his
favor, and Age has not the least interest in his mercy. He pardons sins
fully, accepts us in Christ fully, received us to himself fully, will
glorify us sully, needs then he must love us fully, which he could not do if
he loved not firmly; for then there should be with him mutability, Jam. 1.17.
with whom there is neither color nor shadow of changing. Love in electing us
before all time was the beginning (if I may attribute beginning to that which
is without all beginning) Love in redeeming us in his appointed time was the
continuing; Love in glorifying us beyond all time, shall be the consummating of
our felicity, all which trumpet out the firmness of it. That friendship is not
firm which is desisted, that favor is not faithful which is not continued,
that faith not constant which is violated. Cancel the evidence of his
Covenant, falsify the truth of his promises, stop the Fountain of his mercies
toward us, how shall he be the finisher of our salvation? Heb. 12.2.
Though this Ocean be dispersed into many channels, it suffers no diminution;
though this Sun be extended into many climates, it admits no division;
though this gold be transported into many countries, it is free from
alteration, so strong as labor cannot weaken it, so solid as use cannot wear
it, so rich a treasury as time it self cannot wast it. It followed Joseph in
his brethrens hatred, Genesis 37.
attended on him among the Madianites, ver. 39.
houered over him in the Prison, ver. 40.
honored him in Pharohs Court. ver. 41.
If Israel travel from one Nation to another people, Psa. 105.13, 14.
Gods love suffered no man to do them wrong, and rather than they shall be
unregarded, Kings shall be rebuked. Contrarieties are combined for the good of
us, if we be within his loves compass, what prosperity promises adversity
brings, and what is denied by calamity, is not yielded by temporal felicity,
love seeking in all things alike our good, and keeping us always at one with
our God, so as neither death, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from his love, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. How are not our
hearts as the thirsty ground greatly desiring, and our bowels troubled within
us, till we find them filled with a love of his Majesty, who is lovely in
himself, loving toward us? seeing we yield unto him no more than his due, as
good, and render him our only duty, as God. The Heavens speak unto the earth,
the earth calls unto the waters, the waters cry unto the air, and all of these
summon every one of their inhabitants to proclaim unto man that God is only
his, and nothing so properly his own as is the Lord, being his portion for
ever: if we be hungry, Psalm. 73.26.
he is bread for us; if we be thirsty, he is water to quench it; if we be in
darkness, he is light; if we be sick, he is our Physician; if we be blind,
he is seeing; though we be deaf, he is hearing; though we be lame, he is
walking; though we be weak, he is strong; to foresee, to attend, to provide,
and to prosecute whatsoever may perfect our good, or prevent our evil,
insomuch as every one of us may truly say with the Prophet David, Psalm. 73.26.
Thou art my lot and inheritance, the strength of my heart, and salvation of my
soul. Let the Fish challenge the waters for their due, the beasts claim the
earth for their possession, the Fowls the air for their interest, and the
glorious Angels the Heavens for their habitation, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
yet being Christ's, and Christ Gods, in him all are ours, he being to us all in
all. Psa. 73.24.
Counsel to advise us, wisdom to direct us, righteousness to acquit us,
sanctification to cleanse us, 2 Cor. 1.30.
redemption to free us, and a King to receive us into glory; so as every one of
us may well say with the sweet singer of Israel, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and here is nothing in earth that I desire
besides thee: And therefore to be admired, admiring to be loved of us in duty,
who did first give us birth and being, protecting us against all dangers,
preserving us in all perils, providing for us in all wants, resolving us in all
doubts, comforting us in all discontents, in a word causing all things, even
all things, though in nature of contrariety, Romans 8.28.
to work together, and shake hands in amity for our good, if as we ought, we
love him who is our God: which duty how should we deny unto him, if we
consider the dignity of it, which appears in the Lords approbation,
acceptance, and remuneration of it, esteeming it highly, else would he not
inioyne so strictly and inculcate it so frequently: strictly he enioynes it,
Deuteronomy. 6.5.
for there is no part of any heart but must harbor it, no parcel of any soul
but must solace in it, nor no portion of any ones mind must be missing to it,
nor the least mite of any ones might must be detained from it: unto this Ocean
as well the little streams as the greatest Rivers must pay their tribute; unto
this Sea as well the smallest torrents as the largest channels must send their
presents, so strictly it is commanded, and the more strictly in that it is so
often called for, called for by the Law, called for by the Gospel. That which
a father (perceiving through his age that death approaches) does most counsel
his children either by way of admonition or exhortation to shun or follow,
the experience of his years, and his hairs gravity do seal the necessity of
it to them, and signify, especially if he often repeat it, how worthily it is
conceited of by him. Moses in diverse messages from the Lord, either by way of
precept or explanation, either exhorting or dissuading, either commanding or
commenting upon his former laws or loving favors, often plainly presses this
duty as the Lords due, and the peoples debt. Often does our Savior Christ and
his Apostles propound it as a grace most excellent, decipher it as a virtue
most orient, paint it out as a duty most pleasant in it self, pleasing unto,
nay the very pleasing of God, and that in so high a degree as he graciously
accepts it; for in the Word that infallible Truth they imply, that the
affecting of his Majesty in his account is the acting of his command, and the
fixing upon him our love is the fulfilling of the whole Law. Mat. 22. Gal. 2.
As he esteems it highly, accepts it heartily, so does he recompense it
manifoldly with temporal, spiritual and eternal blessings. As for temporal,
without rain the earth is as brass, the ground as iron; but to those that
love him, he that is faithful and cannot either deceive or be deceived, he
who is truth and cannot fail, he who is wisdom and cannot err, has promised
that he will give them rain, Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14.
there is a blessing; in due time, there is the greatness of the blessing; even
the first and the latter rain, that is, in the seed time and toward Harvest,
to this end that (unless they wilfully contemn his offered blessings of
plenty, and obstinately draw upon their own heads a curse of scarcity) they
may gather in their wheat, their wine and their oil. Corn without rain could
not grow ripe, and through rain unseasonably falling we could not reap: to
have it then is a blessing; to want it, a curse; and to have it out of season
is rather a curse than a blessing: In his giving it then to them that love him,
in due season, lies the sweetness and marrow of the blessing: but though the
grapes be pressed and the wine sugared in the cup, yet may a man be deprived of
it at the lip, as was Ancaeus, from whence arose that Adage, Eras. Adag. chil.
1. ceat. 5.
Multa cadunt inter calicem supremaque labra: though a man be in full
expectation to reap, 2 Samuel 14.30.
yet a reuengefull Absalom may send to burn up the fields of Ioab when his
Corn is ripe, and Samson by his Foxes frustrate the hope of the Philistines,
Jud. 15.5.
hindering their fruitful harvest: Psalm. 128.2.
but those that love the Lord shall enjoy the fruit of their labors, and eat
the labors of their hands. No politic Achitophel, no malicious Absalom, no
envious Samson shall disappoint them, their enemies must be cast out before
them, and their borders much enlarged: and because all these may be enjoyed,
and yet we not joined with him, to this temporal he adds spiritual
blessings, and such whereby we may perceive him to be ours, and united to us in
the bonds of love. And lest strangeness in association should beget a
strangeness in his and our mutual affections, lest discontinuance of
communion should breed a dislike or disunion in opinion, or lest want of
society should work the violation of amity, Christ promises that both his
Father and He will descend from their glorious Thrones and Seats of Majesty,
John 1^ 29.
and come unto him that loves him, and make not as guests whose stay is
momentary, but as dwellers and Masters of the Mansion, their abode with him, to
whom it is impossible that any spiritual blessing should be absent, where the
Author of all spiritual grace is present. Can that field be vnrefreshed where
a springing fountain remains! or can waters be wanting where is a living
Well? Heavenly graces necessarily there abound, where the giver of them
abides, not for once but for ever; for to those that love him his blessings
are eternal. Many Conquerors do enjoy a crown which is maintained, attended,
with great care, and subject to the greatest crosses; nay the head which it
adorneth many times is divided from the body, but he gives to them that love
him a Crown of life. Iam. 1.12.
Many enjoy the crown, but want power to possess his Kingdom, but those that
love him, 2.5.
he gives not the Crown only but the Kingdom too. How should not we render
the Lord his due in performing our duty for the dignity of it which he so
highly esteems, so readily approves, and so manifoldly recompenceth, with
temporal, spiritual, and eternal blessings? but seeing love is the ground of
all which is conferred from God on us, and the substance of all that is owing
from us to God, let us first see the means whereby it may be obtained or
continued, and the marks whereby it is discerned.

In respect of the means whereby it is obtained or continued, we must be
either passive or active. Passive in the hearts purity: for upon that condition
will this grace enter; and without cleansing, no expecting it as a Companion:
therefore He that was faithful in all Gods house, Heb. 3.2.
promising from the Lord that he will circumcise his peoples hearts, adds
withal the end of that circumcising, that thou may love the Lord thy God:
Deuteronomy. 30.6.
as if there could be no loving of the Lord where there was no circumcising of
the heart: and indeed only then will this love be entertained when our hearts
are purified: For the love of God is a fire, and abhors unfitting fuel, which
may either cause smoke to offend the eyes, or stench to distaste the smell of
God, and at last extinguisheth it self; and therefore as Noah's Dove would not
set one foot upon the muddy earth, nor any Dove will delight in a foul
cottage, as no Lion will frequent any putrified haunt, nor the Turtle pearke
upon a barren tree: so neither will this grace (partaking of the spirits
qualities from whence it comes, as the water tastes of the fountain from
whence it flows) take footing or can delight in a corrupted conscience; nor
seeing it is near allied to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, deigne to harbor
in a polluted heart; nor being the Lords truest Turtle, sit upon or seat it
self in that man whose mind is destitute of holy meditations. Meditate then,
(for you must be active) on the vngodlies deficiency, this graces excellencies,
and the Lords mercies. Meditate upon that woeful yet assured prediction of our
Savior, Mat. 24.12.
that the love of many shall wax cold, and it will be a cock to awake thy
sleeping conscience, a goade to prick thee forward to fervent prayers, lest
thou should be one of them that must be tainted with so great a sin.
Meditate of the graces excellency, in the quality, efficacy, and extension,
and that will be as a fire to inflame, and as a fuel to continue thy desire
unto it. For in the Quality what grace more honorable, in the efficacy what
grace more powerful, 1 John 4.8.
in the extension what grace more large, more lasting? remember then how of all
graces this is graced with the greatest name, as most participating of the
diuinest nature. Remember how of all graces this is most prevailing, Romans 8.28.
seeing all things though in never such an Antipathy and contention among
themselves, yet as united forces, must work together for the good of those
that love him. Remember that howeuer the eye may see much, the ear hear more,
and the heart conceive more than either the eye can see, or the ear can hear;
yet The things which eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
ear has not heard, neither came into man's heart, has God prepared for those
that love him. Remember how of all graces this is most large, most lasting.
13.13.
Faith shall cease upon fruition, hope end upon possession, love only continue
all the time of our eternal happiness. Faith is only for the present, Hope
for the future, Love both for the past, present, and the time to come. Faith is
locked within a man's own breast, hope helps not another heart; only by
Love, as by the Sun, both the Sphere where it is placed is enlightened, and
another place, unto which it diffuseth the rays, is warmed. Lastly, meditate
on Gods great mercies, in his promises, providence, performances, and they
cannot but beget a liking, which ere long will be seconded with a zealous
loving of his Majesty. Think how there is no crown so rich as that which he
promises, no joys so rare as those which he prepares, no kingdom so large
as that which he intends, no society so lovely as that which he purposes,
to them which love him: think how readily he has inclined his ears and heard
thy cries, how cheerfully he has opened his mouth and comforted thine heart,
how lovingly he has stretched out his arm and removed thy dangers, how
freely he has filled his hand and enriched thy soul. Thus the purifying of
thy heart, meditating on the vngodlies deficiency, this graces excellency, and
the Lords mercy, will by the assistance of his gracious spirit, wrought with
faithful and unfeigned prayers, lodge his love in thy heart; where if it be
lodged, by two marks it may be discerned.

For love begets first a desire of Communion, secondly a similitude of
affection. Our Communion with the blessed Trinity is twofold, either Corporal
or Spiritual: this is to be had here, that to be enjoyed hereafter, both to
be desired ever: for they that truly and sincerely love Christ Jesus, they will
long for his coming, and thirst for his last appearing. Love is such a link,
as it cannot lack the Union, nay communion with the party loved; Love is such
a fire in the heart of Saint Paul, that it flames out at his mouth, and
manifests the desires of his soul, Phil. 1.23.
even to be dissolved and to be with Christ; and as a violent fire which
keeps within no bounds, but being driven with the wind of Gods spirit,
sparkles out the wishes of the whole Church, as if it were the words but of one
bride calling for the company of her spouse, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
Reu. 22.20.


Feruency admits no deferring, and earnest desires endure no delays,
especially where perfection, compassion, and mercy, shall upon their meeting
give a full end to all imperfection, wants, and miseries. A Christian soul
well considering this absolute and happy communion, having one only spark of
affection, and one only dragme of love, must needs desire it. Nothing, surely
nothing, can hold it from flying by the wings of fervent prayer, and entering
heavens palace; nothing can quench the flame of it, the fire being as strong as
death, or hinder its burning above the clouds, till the affections of the
Churches Spouse, which seem to be frozen, in that he comes not at her call,
be so warmed within him as he may be moved to descend, that they meeting him in
the clouds may behold his corporal countenance, which (because they cannot yet
enjoy) do manifest the truth and sincerity of their love to him so long as it
is his pleasure to detain the former, the affectioned soul delights here,
in nothing more, than in a spiritual society with him, which often to earthly
men he vouchsafes, in the place and in the exercises by him appointed, his
house, word, meditation, prayer, and Sacraments; and though he be every where,
so as if we would we cannot fly from his presence, yet in that place and in
these ordinances it pleases him to converse with his children, and his
children are partakers of his spiritual presence. In his word he manifests
his glory, in his Word he speaks and powers forth his mind to us: in prayers
we familiarly talk and power forth our hearts before him; in the Sacraments
he gives visible pledges of his favor, and we with the spiritual eye of our
mind, hand and mouth of faith, look upon, touch, and taste the Bread of life:
in meditation we enter into his privy Chamber, and he vouchsafes unto us a
sight and view of all his richest and rarest treasuries, where we may behold
more pleasing, more profitable objects than could Berodach Baladan in the house
of Hezekiah, precious things; 2 King. 20.12, 13.
where we may have cause of greater admiration than had the Queen of Sheba in
the hearing of the wisdom of Solomon, which to hear she was content, upon
the same of it, to leave her own Country, thereby testifying her desire to it:
and shall not we feeling the fruits of his presence who is greater than
Solomon, manifest our delight in it by our love to his house and ordinances? He
that loves God, glad will his heart be, joyful his soul, if he may converse
with him at any time, in any place, or in any manner it shall please him to
manifest himself unto him. Holy David could not better express the greatness
of that fire in his heart, which could not be suppressed till it brake forth at
his mouth, and he in admiration cried out, O how amiable are thy Tabernacles,
Psalm. 84.1, 2.
O Lord of Hosts my soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the
Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God; and yet in his exile
he might have had the fruition of Gods favor; which lest we think he did
not conceive, he explaines his meaning to be this, that his affections were
fixed upon the ordinances of God, and therefore preferring the very Sparrow and
Swallow before himself, as linked to the Lord in a surer bond of love, adds,
Yea the Sparrow has found a house, and the Swallow a nest for her self, where
she may lay her young, even thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King and my God;
and holds them blessed, not as though he were accursed, for how should he be
but blessed who has the Lord for his King and his God? but herein he holds
them more blessed than himself, who dwelt in the Lords house, from which he
was exiled, and where the people of the Lord were made partakers of his will,
and performed his Worship. And lest we should think that this love of David
was only in the time of his banishment, thus fervent to the place where the
Lord in his ordinances did manifest his presence, when he might, and did serve
the Lord free from all impediments, and delivered from the hands of Saul,
pleading in another Psalm his own integrity, in respect of his favorable
dealing with Saul, thinks that his innocence, his confidence in trusting upon
God, his keeping the affections and inward motions of his heart pure, his
abstaining from recompencing evil for evil, in consideration of Gods loving
kindness toward him, his shunning and hating ungodly assemblies and persons,
his resolving with pure mind and holy conversation (as before still) to seek
his God; though these were excellent signs of a good and godly heart, he
thinks all these nothing unless his love which he continually had to Gods
house be added: Lord (says he, besides all the rest) I have constantly loved
the habitation of thy house, Psalm. 26.8.
and the place where thine Honor dwells. And as he loved Gods house, and
all religious duties there exercised, so before and above the rest in Gods Word
was he most delighted, it had not the meanest but the chiefest place in his
heart, not the fewest but the most of his affections set upon it, it was his
delight, his joy, his staff, his stay, his rest, his love, as in the 119.
Psalm, every where appears. He that is affamished, receives not meat with
more gladness than Jeremy did the Word of God: Ier. 15.16.
it was the joy and the rejoicing of his heart. Come we now to Prayer. Oh the
love of the godly to this exercise! Some have prayed often in the day, as
Daniel; some by prayer have prevented the morning watch: to pray night and day
was to some delightsom, as to David: some have neglected no occasion that was
offered, as Paul. It was the usual practice of our Savior, he that needed
least prayed most, teaching us by his own pattern what we should practice: no
sooner had he ceased preaching but he fell to praying, he prayed in the
Mountain, in the Garden, in all places, at all times, he prayed on the Cross
when he was suffering. Now for the Sacraments, in them we behold his passion,
in them we partake of his body, and communicate of his blood, by them our faith
is confirmed, our souls strengthened, and our consciences quieted; with every
of which, what Christian is not delighted? Delighted with them were they in the
Apostles times, who at every meeting did break their bread with gladness of
heart. Act. 2.
And as for meditation, by it we see God in his Word, behold him in his works,
look upon him though in the highest Heavens, by it is presented to our eyes
his Majesty to subject us that we grow not proud; his Justice to fear us that
we be not wanton, his mercy to comfort us that we do not faint, his wisdom
to direct us that we do not err, and his power to defend us that we do not
doubt: By Meditation is manifested before the eyes of our mind, the greatness
of Christ's sufferings, his sorrowing heart, his heavy soul, his bleeding hands
and feet, his pierced side, his wounded heart, and whatsoever else he endured
for our misdeeds, in which the Saints of God have been much exercised, and
that by reason of their love unto it. Thus does our love of God breed in us a
desire of society, in those exercises where God presents himself if they may
be had; if not, a seeking them according to his will above all things in the
world. The Spouse of Christ, the Church of God, every Christian soul says of
Christ; I desire to sit under his shadow, Cant. 2.5.
and I am sick of love; that is, I faint if I want that fellowship with Christ
my head which I so much desire, according to his will as he has appointed to
associat himself with me in his Word, Prayers, Sacraments and Meditation. Let
this be the trial of the truth of our love: Are we as Bears drawn to the
stake to these ordinances? Is the Word to us as a burden? Look we upon the
Lords Table with contempt, as though some homely fare were offered? neglect we
prayers? meditate we never? we have no testimony of our love to God: for our
care, and reverence, and respect to the means, are the emblemes of our
affections to, and the demonstrations of our delight in his Majesty, who
presents himself in his ordinances. True love begetting a desire of communion,
which is always seconded with a likeness of affection, at the least hating
whatsoever he abhors, and loving that in whatsoever he delights. Now he
(to instance in three things especially) loves, First, the honor of his name,
Secondly, the obedience of his will; and thirdly, the prosperity of his Church:
and on the contrary, holds in detestation those that derogate from his glory,
disobey his statutes, and hinder either the flourishing of his Church, or the
furthering of his Saints in their temporal or eternal good.

As for the first, his name and the honor of it, how he does prise it, better
cannot I decipher than from his own mouth, who when he would preserve it as
his own peculiar, proclaims it as in the ears of all, That he will give his
glory to no other: and lest any might encroach upon his right, the better to
detain it, and the more to deter them from attempting it, Exodus 20.
he affirms, That he is a jealous God, which word is (though but one word
yet) as forcible as all the Arguments Invention can afford (if it be duly
weighed) and more perswasiue than all the flourishes Rhetorike can yield (if it
be truly viewed) to prove and paint out his delight in his glory and love to
his name: for all griefs are either to be appeased with sensible persuasions,
or to be cured with wholesome counsel, or to be relieved with bountiful gifts,
or by tract of time to be worn out, Jealousy only excepted. In that then he
alleges his Jealousy, he intimates that Prayers cannot prevail against his
displeasure, sacrifices shall not expiate that sin, time will not wipe out
that blot cast upon his glory. He therefore that loves the Lord will be
grieved at the soul to see and hear the name of God dishonored, his worship
despised, his truth reviled, his religion scorned, and the profession of his
Gospel neglected. He who willingly endures his friends reproach, is a
liplouer. He who patiently puts up the disgrace of his captain, is either a
bufaint or a debosht soldier. He who carelessly passes by the contempt of his
Creator, is through Satan's cunning an hellish and deformed creature. Moses in
his own matters is the mirror of meekness; Numb. 12.3.
but if the people in his absence practice idolatry, oh how does vexation
enuiron his breast, wrath weaken his memory, and anger confound all the
faculties of his soul! What though the Tables of stone were written with the
Lords own finger, his hands cannot hold them! Cunning workmanship is not
weighed, Charity is not regarded, if piety suffer disparagement. Their Idol
God shall be (because a Calfe) consumed in the fire, grinded to powder, Exodus
32.19.
thrown into the water, and the idolaters pallates be seasoned, their bowels
relisht with that sweetness which ashescorrupted water can afford. Does
Rabshakeh blaspheme the living Lord? How will Eliakin and Shebnah express the
love to their God, 1 King. 18.48.
their loathing of that disloyalty! their bodies shall not continue covered,
when his name is clothed with dishonor; their garments shall not remain
vntattered, when his glory was rent with so great disgrace. Psalm. 119.136.
David's eyes (in consideration of the great dishonor cast upon Gods name,
through common iniquity) gushed out rivers of waters. To express the
greatness of his grief, it is said they gushed out. To manifest the multitude
of his sorrows, they are called rivers of tears, and all was because men kept
not his law. Hereby demonstrating his love unto God, by that grief which he
had for the dishonouring of his name. And truly; for they that are sealed to
salvation do mourn and cry for all the abominations that be done in the
midst of the places where they live. Ezech. 9.4.
Is there such a mist drawn over our eyes that we set not, such a thick cloud
over our understanding we mark not, such a caul over our consciences we
feel not, either in ourselves or others, the abominable blasphemies of his
name, the horrible contempts of his honor, wherein he is so much delighted?
how can we love him? Love begetting a likeness of affection, not only to his
name, but his Will also; the obeying whereof is the badge of our true
affection: whence it is that the Prophet David calls upon all that are Saints,
to this duty, Ye that love the Lord, Psalm. 97.10.
hate the thing that is evil; seeing he detests it, ye may not desire it: and
our Savior Christ who can best describe his own disciple, though he gave
often love as his liuerie, yet he will not have them ignorant of the infallible
sign whereby the truth of the livery is discerned, John 14.15.
If ye love me keep my commandments. Oh that we had hearts so enflamed, that
with him who was a man after Gods own heart, in the feeling of our defects
every one would cry out, Psalm. 129.
Oh that my ways were so directed that I might keep thy Statutes, and the
palpable perceiving our failing in not doing the things we should, nay those we
would, cause us cry out with him who was a chosen vessel; Wretched man that I
am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! Neh. 13.14.
and justly plead with Nehemiah and Hezechiah our goodness and integrity:
Esaias 38.3.
then might our souls repose themselves in the sweet bed of peace, assured of
our unfeigned love to God. But is the polluted puddle of iniquity our bathes,
the actions of ungodliness our recreations, the assemblies of the wicked our
choicest company? Is sin our surest stay, wicked counsels our best guides,
hellish drugs our wholesomest Physic, Satan's delights our sweetest potions?
Are we so far from hating, that we delight in covetousness, pride, malice,
profanation? Is that most respected which God least regards, or that
contemned which he commends, or that disobeyed which he enioyneth? that heart
and love toward God is in a dangerous consumption. Poor love is that will
forsake nothing at Gods prohibiting, nor reform any thing at his persuading,
nor perform any thing at his enioyning. Can a woman prostitute her body to a
varlet, and yet truly say she loves her husband, or a child plead his love
to his Parents while he is undutiful, or any call himself, a friend, a
member, a son, or daughter of the Lord, disobeying his will and acting the
works of the devil? May the heart of a Saint never conceit it! for true love
begets a likeness of affection to his name and will: yet if there it stops,
it were like a strange affectioned wife or friend, who can be well content,
the one to maintain her husbands credit, the other his friends estimation, and
both embrace his profitable counsels, and perform his pleasure, because either
their own dignity and good is continued, or distaste and disquiet prevented,
but can least endure that child in whom appears most the fathers image, or
that friend who is most respected; and therefore that soul whose love is
wholly fixed upon the Lord, will love his Church, which is his vineyard planted
by his own right hand, guarded by his Angels, guided by his wisdom, the
flourishing whereof he greatly affects, and they who love him are delighted
in it, whether jointly or severally considered. In every particular member of
it love we the graces that appear in them? love we them for the graces, which
are signs and testimonies of Gods favor toward them? We can have no better
testimony, no better token of our love to God; no surer mark of our salvation:
for if we love him, who by his eternal spirit did beget them to be heirs of
glory, 1 John 3.14.
we cannot but love them who are begotten, and are children of grace, a sign
not to be neglected: for hereby we know that we are translated from death to
life because we love the brethren. 5.13.
Is thy affection rather lessened, then increased, to a Christian because he is
a Christian? Matthew. 10.
Does his love to the word, his delight in good works, his distaste of
wickedness, imbitter thy mind against him? Can he love the father, who
loathes the dutifulness of the son, or honor the Sovereign, who harbors
dislike of the subjects loyalty? Christ will proclaim against them, howsoever
they soothe now themselves, at that great day, in that they loved not his
little ones, Mat. 10.42.
they had no delight in him. For the Church jointly: is it joy to thy soul, to
hear, improve, the prosperity of it, to perceive and procure the propagation
of the Gospel in it? And do thou with Paul in the midst of thy bonds and
imprisonments, for joy forget the sorrows of thy afflictions, at the report of
Christ and his Gospels proceeding? then art thou with the Lord alike
affectioned. Contrarily, art thou with Nehemiah for thy outward state, without
all cause of sorrowing, living in soft raiment and faring deliciously, in
Artaxerxes Court, yet art in countenance sad? art thou not sick, yet weeps
and mournes when thou hear of the distress of Jerusalem, or with Vriah,
will thou lodge with the kings servants and not go down to thine own house,
because the Ark of the Lord is in hazard? Art thou struck as the wife of
Phinees with sorrow, with a deadly sorrow, hearing the glory to be departed
from Israel? Do thou in a word Prefer Jerusalem to thy chiefest joy? The
Lord will not forget thy love, when he will neglect those who are so glued to
the profits and pleasures of this life, that so they may have the fleshpots of
Egypt and the plenty of Sodom, care not which way Religion goes, harken
less to the welfare of the Church then to those things which are done in a
strange Land They solemnise the feasts of Bacchus as the greatest godhead,
present their offerings and enrich the Altar of Aesculapius as a Diety. They
honor Pluto as a divine power, and so they may live in any air, can turn to
any Religion, neither meditating on Gods mercy which would move a desire in
them to delight in, and be affected with, what he loves, nor pondering his
Justice which would beget a fear of his Majesty, as it did the Prophet David,
as of himself he testifies: My flesh trembles for fear of thee, Psalm.
119.120.
and I am afraid of thy judgments. Does David (deeply interested in the Lords
euerlalasting love by Covenant never to be cancelled) tremble? and are we,
loded with sin, lulled in the Cradle of stupidity? Is he, a man after Gods
own heart, afraid of his judgments? and are not we, branded with impiety,
abashed at the contemplation and sight of his Justice?

Oh fear the Lord all ye his Saints, for your souls, observing Justice,
become the banqueting house of the blessed Trinity. Get the fear of the Lord,
it is a faithful Porter. Your souls are either already sick or subject to
diseases, seek for the fear of the Lord, it is a skillful Physician. Your
souls are as Ships in danger to be tossed in tempestuous seas, be fastened to
the fear of the Lord, it is an assured Anchor. Have you entertained disloyal
thoughts or attempted any rebellious enterprise, and are afraid to approach the
Throne of grace to plead your pardon? Call for the fear of God, it is a
powerful Advocate. Are you traveling in the Wilderness of this world,
replenished with many bypath, doubtful which way to take? Take for your
companion the fear of the Lord, it is a faithful Counselor. Are you
environed in the midst of many enemies? guard you with the fear of the Lord,
it is a careful Centinell. Have you entered the danger of the battle? fight
under the banner of the fear of the Lord, it is a courageous Captain.

It is a faithful Porter, not admitting any rebellious suggestion, nor, though
entertaining unawares, suffering to abide any heauen-distasting motion in the
soul, the Lords Palace: for if Joseph be tempted, this either diuerts the
attempt, repels the assault, and makes him cry out, How can I do this, and
offend my God? Genesis 33.9.
or else subuerts the plot and expels the act; rather leaving the looseness of
the thoughts, then loading the conscience with the weight of sin, rather
enduring the loss of a ragged motion, then to defile the mansion of a heavenly
mind: yet sets open, wide open, the door of the heart to every guest wherein
the Lord delights, kindly entertaining every grace which he affects,
cheerfully welcomming every good thing, the presence whereof he desires. Is
mercy and compassion more pleasing then sacrifice? Hos. 6.6. Neb. 5.1.5. Job.
6.14.
The fear of the Lord first inuites it. 2. Chron. 19.9.
Is singleness of heart the delight of God, the desire of man? The fear of
God admits it. Psalm. 187.11.
Is waiting upon the Lords mercy and depending on his pleasure, expected by
him, respected of him? The fear of the Lord brings it in his hand to the
banquet. By him who fears the Lord, Col. 3.22.
Obedience is as readily saluted as the sunshine day after showers in the time
of Harvest; Repentance as lovingly embraced as the prodigal Son by the
commiserating father; Pro. 1.7. Psalm. 112.1.
Instructions as joyfully received as Christ by Zacheus. Thus is it a faithful
Porter.

It is no less a skillful Physician: Eeclus. 1.26.
either purging corrupt humors and restoring health, or preventing sickness
and preserving life. It purges corruption, not suffering sin to nestle it
self in the soul, or iniquity to lodge as a guest in the heart; but speaking
to it as the Lord to Ahab, Indeed have thou killed and also got possession? And
as intruding and pernicious Inhabitants to spiritual graces, drives them out
with violence. It preuenteth impiety toward God, iniquity toward man, and so
continues a blessed life in a wretched world: whence it is that Moses who was
faithful in all Gods house, says, that God came to prove the people of
Israel, that his fear might be before them that they might not sin. Exodus
20.20.
Let then the fear of God be before our eyes, presented to our minds, sin,
which is as subtle as the Serpent cannot deceive us; sin though it put on
the shape of sanctity, shall not circumuent us; sin though it promise much
affected pleasure, much followed profit, shall not persuade us. For sins
Stratagems by the fear of God are discovered, sins persuasions by the fear
of God are rejected; sins strongest arguments by the fear of God are
confuted. Thence it is that by that exact obseruer the Prophet David, these two
are set together as if they were as inseparable as Hypocrates Twins, Psalm.
4.5.
standing in ame, and not sinning, fearing, and not falling, for where fear
has seized, sin cannot be admitted; where fear has got possession, in
vain for sin to pretend a title. The Lords Palace, the soul, so furnished,
is no fit mansion by Satan's tenant to be inhabited; the spirits temple so
garnished, has no Altar on which sins sacrifice may be offered; The blessed
Redeemer has there no Table whereat sins service, though never so plausible,
can be entertained. Let Pharaoh enioine, Exodus 1.17.
if evil, fear denies obedience, and holds his directions to be deuillish:
Let Nebuchadnezzar prescribe; if wicked, his prescriptions as unsound
Principles are neglected; Genesis 19.
Let Joseph be entised, by the fear of God all entisements are prevented,
Prou. 14.27.
for it is a Well spring of life to avoid the snares of death, and not only to
avoid death, but even to preserve life, 10.27. etc.
nay and increase the days: Psalm. 34.11.
what though the number of your days be accompanied with many dangers, and you
tossed with many tempests? the fear of God is an assured Anchor; Moral. 22.
Anchora mentis pondus timoris, says Gregory; the fire of concupiscence cannot
fasten upon this affection to consume it, the waters of tribulation cannot
enter into this grace to rust it, the earthly quality of Covetousness cannot
infect this seed to spoil it, nor the contagion of vainglory and false
opinion toss this gift of the spirit to overthrow it. Though the rain of
miseries shower upon the soul, though the flood of temptation come against the
heart, though the wind of diverse opinions blow upon the mind, and all these
with united forces beat upon the whole man; yet where the fear of the Lord is,
those showers find a good soil to suck them up, those floods meet with
great rampires to repel their fury, those winds find sufficient strength to
resist their rage; Prou. 19.23.
so as that man continues safe, and falls not, being built upon the fear of
God as upon a rock.

But be it, the violence of these storms have captiued your thoughts, and made
you yield to that which has displeased your God, so that you dare not approach
his presence: this fear is a powerful Advocate. Though sin made Adam hide
himself from him, whose face he was afraid to see for shame: though murder
caused Caine to fly from the Lord, to whose presence he durst not approach:
though Treachery compelled Judas violently to hasten the end of his own
accursed days, as hopeless of any pardon, as he was hapless in that impiety,
and persuaded him to fly from the sight of angry Heaven (as he thought) by
quitting himself of the horror of his own heart; yet the fear of God, as a
well-tongued Orator, persuades so pithily; as a sound Logitian, argues so
profoundly; as a Judges favorite, preuailes so powerfully; that all showers of
dislike are ceased, all clouds of doubts are dispersed, and all tempests of
discontents are ended; and he who is seized in this tenure, enjoys and is
admitted this privilege, to be accepted of the Lord. Act. 10.35.


Are you yet again doubtful to be drawn away to error before your Journey
be ended, Heb. 12.28.
and fear uncertain wandering? no better Cumrade can be had than this
Counselor, for it instructs the Mind, directs thy Manners. Would you
pluck the fruits of the tree of knowledge? this fear gives entrance to it.
Would you make use of knowledge in due practice? This fear is the beginning of
Wisdom, Prou. 1.7. Psalm. 111.10.
which is to keep the Commandments. Whosoever is possessor of this grace, is
so gracious in the eyes of the Lord, that the Lord himself will become his
teacher and director, not in the way which the world, Psalm. 25.12.
nor that wherein his own natural corruption delights, but that whereof he
himself who cannot err nor be deceived, makes a choice. Such a sweet
Companion is this Counselor, and such a faithful Counselor is this
Companion, that through all the tearing briars, all the pricking thorns, all
the alluring fruits, all the dangerous and doubtful paths, all the cares,
pleasures, and encumbrances of this world, it finds out a path, Frou. 19.23.
chalkes out a way, and leads us safely unto Life.

Be it while we are traveling we are beset with the beasts of the forest,
environed with many oppositions, yet subject to security. The fear of God is
a careful Centinell to give notice of our dangers. A Centinell it is, watching
the approach, discovering the plots of the Enemies: for Satan labors first of
all to put out the eye of fear, well knowing the whole army remains sure,
though securely sleeping, while the Centinell is unslain, and so far
prevails he, as this grace becomes his Captive, assuring himself the day
when this is conquered. For when he had dimmed the eye of fear in Eve, she
became to read, as if it had been a larger Character than it was, and with her
tongue to speak as Satan's slave in his mincing language, lest peradventure ye
die: Genesis 3.
whereupon the Serpent takes occasion, and luls, as with Mercuries enchanting
rod, by his charming speech, each corner of her mind asleep, ye shall not die
at all: then showed her the excellency of it; whereupon she gazed: happy had
she, happy had we been, if she had not glanced at that Tree, Genesis 3.6.
and perceived that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to
the eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise.

But she took and eat. Thus was it quite put out, and she forgot God who gave
her this for her Centinell, which duly watched, truly warned her of her danger,
but she treacherously gave way to the suggestion of the Serpent, and so became
a slave, which otherwise had never been; for if she had preserved it lively,
she had lived happily, and we holily; for so long as it watches, Gods
judgments are discerned and avoided, sins ugliness seen and abhorred,
dangers descried and prevented. For fear being opposed, calls up care, care
enformeth reason, reason ministers the means of safety, and prescribes
resistance.

And thus the fear of God having sounded the Alarm, called up all the
faculties of the soul to the fight, behaues it self as a generous Captain
which Combats courageously, Conquers victoriously, and Crowns her assistants
richly. Combats courageously, for what a conflict was in Joseph's judgment?
What a combat in the minds of the Egyptian midwiues? What battles in the
thoughts, what horror-threatning Cannon-shot thundered in the ears of Job?
Joseph's fear to displease his God, lothnesse to wrong his Master,
unwillingness to discontent his Mistress, grapled furiously together: Her
present authority, her future amity, her continual eminency: His larger power,
higher place, constant honor, caused his corruption to plead in this manner:
Why Joseph, do thou demurre? Thou art a bondslaue, she a beautiful
creature; thou her servant, she thy Lady: Thou a stranger, might to thine own
content, brag of the abuse of her beauty, yet she locks her reputation in the
Casket of thy secrecy. How many have made known their shameful desires, yet
have heard to their shame serious denials? Yet moves she the suit before it be
granted, nay grants the suit before it be moved. How many would account
themselves happy in long continuance to enjoy only one accepting countenance?
She gives thee her face and her favor too. How many have laid long siege to
beauties fortress, and have failed? She parlees, not to conclude a peace and
be gone, but before the assault, to yield her self to thy pleasure. Does
discovery hinder thee? why who is here but you two, Genesis 39.
every one else of the household being employed abroadin their several
businesses. Can any blab save thy self? And for her, thy constancy, Putiphars
fury, her own infamy, tie the strings of her tongue that she cannot tell.
Prevent, unwise man prevent, assured repentance; nay procure thy certain good.
If thou should despise her, she will despite thee; if thou fail to give her
thy heart, thou shall feel the greatness of her hate. Her house is now thy
harbor, her husband thy favorer, she will be thy continual friend: If thou
fear any hurt, repair to her and presume of her help; she can speed,
when thou may not speak. If thou show unkindness, she for saving her own
credit may accuse thee, and who will acquit thee? thou shall be condemned, and
she cleared. Thy brow shall bear the brand of ignominy for ever, seeing
every one will be as ready to maintain as entertain any misreport of a
stranger. Whereunto the fear of the Lord seemed to reply: Pause a little
Joseph, haste makes waste, let not a Creature cause thee to forget thy Creator.
Is she beautiful? who did give it? not thy God? why did he give it? for thee
to abuse it? can thou embrace her motion, and not wrong thy master, who has
cast all his household affairs upon thy fidelity? Consider, oh consider it
well; the more he trusts thee, the more monstrous thy fault if thou be
faithless. He has entertained thee into house, when thou wantedst harbor,
he has advanced thee from a slave to be a servant, from a servant to a
Steward, from a Steward to a Ruler. He in his house sees nothing but by thine
eyes, hears nothing save what thou reportest, acts nothing but subscribed by
thine hand, prescribes nothing, unless thou direct. Has he honored thee to
dishonor him? has he displaied the banner of his courtesy to grace thee, and
will thou obscure his dignity with the clouds of disgrace and discontent? Is
thy affection so insatiable? are thy lusts so unlimited? cannot much, nay, the
most satisfy, but thou must have thy desire in all? Remember the first
Creation: have thou forgot Adam? Do thou not call to mind Eve? One, only
one Tree was reserved, and that must be tasted: But that taste did so much
distaste the Lord, and load their consciences with confusion, that being
subjects of misery, they could neither see nor seek for mercy: All men sorrow
for that sin, Romans 8.22.
all Creatures yet groan through that transgression: besides, to her greatness
oppose Gods graciousnesse, to her favors the Lords fury. Thou wast a
bondslaue, who brought thee to this liberty? not thy God? thou wast a stranger,
who did provide thus for thee? not thy God? Thou wast a servant, who raised
thee to be a Ruler? not thy God? how dare thou then recompense his mercy
with this mischief, require his love with such disloyalty, answer his power
with such perverseness! can thou doubt of his providence, which have such
trial of his protection, or will thou distrust his care for thee, having such
experience of his comforts? Be it that the darkness of the night should hide
thee, or the fact remain perpetually buried in the grave where all things are
forgotten, or if discovered, so salued that it shall be forgotten as a thing
vnacted, yet the Lords eye ever watches, and is of so piercing a power that it
enters into all secrets, and discouers every most hidden device, and though
all the world have let it slip, yet thine own conscience will never sleep;
that thy God will waken if it chance to slumber. What are the delights here?
Syrenes either striving to sink us, or to suck our blood. What are great ones
faucurs? fading flowers, often withered ere they can be cropped. What can she
do? Is not all power derived from and belonging to God? Flows not all pity
and compassion from him as from the proper fountain? Psalm. 62.11.12.
Can man or Angel prevail if God seek to prevent them, or will they pity if
he seem to prohibit? Keep then the favor of that God, at whose frown the
Mountains shake, and on whose love, thou know, attends life.

In Pharaohs commanding the Egyptian Midwiues to kill the Israelites
malechildren, Exodus 1.16.
they might perceive cruelty to brandish his weapon, aggravating the seeming
goodness of the fact, extenuating the assured greatness of the fault,
presenting Pharaohs might and the parents misery, pressing the childrens
present condition, and their posterities future calamity, in these or the like
imperious terms.

Are not you Pharaohs subjects? Exodus 5.2.
you must submit. From what Sovereign does he hold his Scepter? by what
Commander will he be controuled, or who dare call him to account? if you
respect your weal, obey his will. His care is your quiet, his corasiue your
calamity, his power your protection; seeks he in this any thing but your
preservation? Aims he in this at any thing save your good? They so greatly
multiply, if you now forbear, hereafter they may prove too great a burden:
little sprigs if they be not pruned will grow too high; and Nettles if not cut,
will spread too far. Cut then the weed while it is in growing, and prevent a
mischief, lest you sigh in sorrow, through too late repentance; If your
posterity in the succeeding age feel the plague, have they not cause to
condemn your pity and call it folly, that fostred stings in your own
bosoms? Nature teaches every thing to preserve it self, and every creature
will provide for the young ones safety. Cut then the thread of these Infants
lives, for what are their Parents? such as with whom it is abomination for the
Egyptians to eat, and care you so much to let them breath, with whom you may
not participate in eating bread? Are they not diverse from you in your rites,
contrary to you in your Religion, great contemners of your gods? and shall they
live? Thus had cruelty wounded them and become their Conqueror, if the fear
of the Lord with a mild and gracious spirit, distilling mercy and lenity, had
not softened their breasts, and abated the edge of their more than humane fury,
refelling these seeming-sound positions with better grounded Principles; that,
the Almighty had indeed transferred with his Attributes and titles his own
dignities and honors upon earthly Monarchs, and cursed is that soul which
submits not to them, Romans 13.1.
either doing what they enjoin, or enduring what they inflict: for to resist
their Rule, though unjustly laid, is justly to procure your ruins; to rebel
against their will, though wicked, is causlesly, at least indiscreetly and
obstinatly, to work your own woes: for you war against Heavens providence,
and provoke the highest power of whom they are. If then it be good which they
bid, yield all submissiue; if indifferent, all respective obedience: and if it
be evil which they enjoin, though you must shun the deed, Act. 5.29.41.
yet show your duties and their due, in submitting your selves to suffer
patiently when they shall punish. But for these Infants, what have they done?
When the Babe is crying for the dug, as desiring to have the life preserved,
shall it be done to death? Do as you would be done to. How comfortable is a
calm after a tempestuous storm, but how great the grief when the hope is
frustrate, and expectation fails! Are the Mothers pangs no sooner past, but
will you intercept their joy, nay renew their sorrow? Health is despaired after
a relapse has surprised. Think how much would be your mourning if you saw
such murder! Would not grief gripe your hearts to see such cause of
heaviness? They poor souls expected you as helps, and will you be the
instruments of their hurt? Would you not judge him cruel should lay so hard a
charge against you or yours, and them too bloody should be Agents in such a
butchery? Think you to preserve your lives by their death, or your posterity
by massacres, and to maintain your Religion by murder? Hell may indeed rejoice
at the cruelty, but the Heavens will revenge that impious inhumanity and
inhumane impiety. Has their God even before your eyes redressed their wrongs,
and relieved their wants, and will he not repay this wickedness upon you and
yours? what people ever prevailed against them, or what policy did ever delude
his providence? Let your hearts neither harbor, nor your hands execute this
unheard of Murder; and then their God will prosper you in your estates, and
make your households like a slocke of sheep. Exodus 1.


Job feared God and suffered many sore bickerings with Satan; Sin brought in
upon him sufferings, Sufferings vshered sorrows, Sorrows surprised his soul
with impatience, which made him a burden unto himself, Job. 7.20.
whereupon begun a grievous combat, continued with a dangerous conflict
between his passion, impatience, and the fear of God. Impatience entering the
Lists, brandished these weapons with most furious courage-danting countenance.
See Job, how thy wife which lies in thy bosom, thy second self, which should
be thy comfort in thy crosses, is the augmenter of thy calamity; thy children
round about thy table, the hope of the continuing of thy name in after ages,
are swept away as the Spiders web; and for thy friends, will not thy tongue
cleave to the roof of thy mouth, thine eyes be dim to behold them come to
visit thee? How strange is thy misery inflicted upon thy body? did ever eye
behold the like? Thy seeming sanctity was assured sin, for have thou confirmed
him that was falling, and strengthened the knees of the weak? Has thy tongue
dropped honey into the heavy breast, and art thou as a man despairing of all
hope? either thy consolations to them were the flourishes of thy speech, and
had no affinity with thy faith, or thou art inconstant in thy confidence. It
is suspicious that the practice of that Physician is counterfeit who admits of
no such medicines as he has ministered to others. Thou have persuaded others
patience in their perplexities, to lift up their heads in the midst of their
heaviness, yet now when thou art afflicted thou frettest: thou have ministered
to others comforts in their calamities; tribulation has touched thee and thou
art troubled: thou have advised them cast Anchor during the continuance of
their storms; and art thou so unsettled, that with the billow of every wave
thou art tossed? They must account that blessing which thou now esteemest a
bane, they must accept that as a Plaster which thou deemest a plague, else why
do thou curse the day of thy birth and the night of thy nativity, wish the
door of thy mothers womb shut, and her breasts by thee never sucked? It was
either evil that thou then exhortedst, or thou now wicked that do not now
admit it. Where is thy former righteousness whereof thou so much presumedst?
Remember I pray thee, who ever perished being an innocent, or where were the
upright destroyed? They that plow iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the same;
if thou had been devout, thy devices had not been scattered. Was it not thy
conscience of sin which stopped thy mouth and made thee silent? Whence is this
that thy words are swallowed up? not from thy sin? Whence is it that the
venom of the Almighties arrows drink up thy spirits? not from thy sin?
whence is it that the terrors of God fight against thee? not from thy sin?
Those who did in thy prosperity admire thee, now mock at thee; they who hate
thee open their mouths upon thee; thine eyes behold it, and thou can not
help it; thine ear hears it, and thou can not shun it; every sense is
sorrows subject, and thou can not ease it. Death is better than derision, as
appears in Sampson: and nothing more unpleasing unto David than
unthankfulness, yet thy brethren fly from thee, thy acquaintance are
strangers to thee, neighbors forsake thee, familiars have forgotten thee, thy
friends for honey give thee gall, for comforts corasiues: where before all
diligence was yielded, thy desires are now denied; where before thy command was
answered with all cheerful readiness, thy prayers cannot now prevail. Thy
servants speed is slacknesse. Nay, is not thy soul tormented, that thy wife
whose willingness should not be wanting to work thy ease, is afraid to come
near that breath, which she with delight sometime sucked? Neither your former
faith, nor mutual love, nor the remembrance of the children of thine own
body, can either move her to provide for thy health, or pity thy mishap, but
casting off all care of thy good conscience toward God, persuades thee to
blaspheme him, and die accursed. Do not they whose fathers thou refusedst to
set with thy flocks mock thee? do not the children of fools and villains
more vilde than earth, spit in thy face, and spare not to abhor and make
songs of thee? Does not age neglect, and youth push at thee, and all take
pleasure in thy calamity? How have thou offended that God, who casts not away
the upright! Thou art wicked, else would he take thee by the hand, thy
rejoicing should not be so short, nor thy joy so momentary. Does he stablish
the posterity of the righteous, and were not thy children in the midst of their
feasting sent to the place of their iniquity? There is some deep matter in
thee: wickedness was sweet in thy mouth; though it lay hid under thy tongue,
thou did favor it and would not forsake it, and therefore thou have
vomited thy substance, and thy mounting in excellency is perished as thy dung;
neither is there hope left for ease or remedy. Thou art compassed with
endless care; no tongue to comfort thee, no hand to help thee, no music to
delight thine ear and cure the sting of this Tarantula. Where is any freedom
from byles in thy body, any ease in thy bed, any solace in thy spirit? Painful
nights are appointed thee, and no mitigation of thy misery in the day. The
Almighty, the Almighty has set himself against thee, and will not let thee
alone till thou swallow thy spittle; and art thou not as one that teareth his
soul in anger? Better a short life than such a lingering death, and therefore,
curse God and die. Unto which blasphemy the extremity of his woes had drawn
him, if the fear of God had not resisting preserved the fire of faith, and
continued the power of patience with these persuasions: What have thou lost?
that which was never thine when first thou saw the light. And what are Oxen,
Camels, Servants, Children? did not God give them upon condition, that thou
should resign them? will thou desire to withold that which he will have,
or endeavor to recover what he did take? have not servants bin the cause of
sorrow to some masters? Children the occasion of discontent to some Parents:
Riches the ruin of many men: and might not all have been so to thee? The
earth is none of thy peculiar, thou expectest thy patrimony in a better place:
It is not thy proper right, it is given into the hands of the wicked, who many
times are most wealthy. Let it not then grieve thee, that thou art not loaded
with the clay of a strange country, nor adorned with the counterfeit pearls
of a foreign people. High advancement and great favors in another nation, are
not always seconded with good success. What though thy misery is not limited
with want, but enlarged with many woes, not in missing good, but suffering
grief? Greater than thy self have felt the weight of the Lords hand, Job
12.19.21.
for he leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools: he
loses the bond of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle: He leads
Princes away spoiled, and powers contempt upon them; he weakeneth the strength
of the mighty and overthrows them. But howsoever the same afflictions arrest
not, the same event at the end attends all men: One dies in his full
strength being in all ease and prosperity, Job. 21.
his breasts run full of milk, and his bones are full of marrow. And another
dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure; they
shall sleep both in the dust, and the worms shall cover them: what pleasure
has the former in his prosperity, when the number of his months is cut off?
may he not be one of those, who is kept unto the day of destruction, and shall
be brought forth to the day of wrath? or what disprofit has the latter either
in life or death? In life, does not his miseries lift up his mind to God, open
his ear to discipline, and draw his feet from iniquity? Job 28.
Iron is taken out of the dust, and Brass is moulten out of the stone: out of
the same earth comes bread, and under it as it were is fire turned up. From
the dust of misery proceeds the strength of affiance, and from the stone of
calamity comes contrition: from affliction is fetched the bread of
instruction, and under them as it were is turned up the fire of devotion. Be it
that thy tribulations be tedious, thou have sinned and thou must suffer: yet
thy God who seems to set himself against thee, is man's preserver, will he
destroy the work of his own hands, which he loves, or deface that image
which he affects? Acquaint thy self with him and make peace, and thereby
thou shall have prosperity: Job 9.15.
though thy righteousness were as a robe upon thee, yet thy safest course were
to supplicate his grace. Be thou patient, and he will speak peace unto thy
soul; gird up thy loins like a man, look on his creatures, and observe his
power, which by every thing is obeyed; note his wisdom, whereby every thing is
disposed: He that shut up the sea with doors, 38.8.
can as well stop thy sorrows. He that commands the morning light can as
suddenly sparkle the beams of his bounty upon thee. puts an end and sets
a bound to darkness and the shadow of death: and cannot he chain thy
calamity, and finish thy perplexities? Though he kill thee, 13.15.
yet trust in him and call upon him. What is it he cannot do; or what means
is unknown unto him? Let death sease upon thee; if thou reliest on him, thou
shall live, and therefore wait: thy days may end in prosperity; and thy years
in pleasure. In death: Art not thou persuaded that thy redeemer lives, and
shall stand the last on earth, and that thou shall behold him, not with other
but with these thine eyes? behold him, not as an angry Judge to condemn, but a
loving Savior to absolve thee: behold him not as a revenger of thy sins, but
as a Redeemer of thy soul.

Thus does the fear of God entertain for us the combat, and fight
courageously; yet this were not so comfortable, if it did not Conquer
victoriously; but now upon the conflict follows the conquest. For did not
this sword murder the bloody command of Pharoh, in the hearts of the Egyptian
Midwiues? did not this stone flying from the heart of Joseph strike sin on
the head, so that it sunk down groueling upon the ground never to revive
again? Many and sore were the skirmishes which Job had with Satan, impatience,
and his affliction, but you have heard his end; the Serpents head was broken,
Impatiencies swelling bulk was burst, and outward afflictions as the Clouds
with the Suns presence dispersed, and he became the master of the field,
which feared God. Though then the conflict be cruel, they that fear the Lord
may be constant; though the battle be continued, they may be comforted, for
they are not forsaken, but are delivered, Psalm. 33.18.
and the victory is certain to be theirs; for it conquers victoriously, and
richly crowns both them and theirs, opening a Treasure wherein nothing which
may content the eye, please the taste, delight the smell, enrich the soul,
bless the estate, is wanting. Ecclus. 40.27.


It is a Garden replenished with variety of Gods mercies to delight the
spiritual smell of our apprehension; it accompanies us to the Temple, Psalm.
5.7.
which is filled with Gods glorious presence, to content the eyes of our
understanding; It pleases the pallat of our affections, Psalm. 34.7, 8.
with the sweet Nectar of his graciousnesse; It is a Sun to warm our
benumbed will in the practice of goodness, and a fire to inflame our zeales in
contemplation of holiness; It brings with it a comfortable use of worldly
blessings, Pro. 12.27.
for many hunt after worldly profit, but have it not, have it, but it helps
not; they take great pains and attain their expectation, but put their gains
in broken bags. Hab. 2. Eccles. 6.2.
The covetous man keeps them so safely, as he dares not touch them; the
Prodigal spends them so lauishly, Luke 15.
that he comes to want them; many possess them comfortably to their worldly
content, as the rich man in Saint Luke, but do not blessedly either possess
or use them, only he that fears God obtaines them, possesses them, spends
them, spares them, uses them blessedly; for nothing is wanting to him, Psalm.
34.9, 10.
nothing that is good; whatsoever may hurt his hope or hinder his confidence,
cool his zeal or freeze his forwardness, may be wanting; but nothing that
may further his faith or inflame his obedience shall be missing. Psalm. 128.2.
He shall labor and eat the labor of his hands, he shall be blessed and it
shall be well with him; He opens his hand and gives to him that needs,
Psalm. 112.5.
and yet expendeth with judgment. Howsoever it goes with the wicked in life or
death, yet I know, says Solomon, Eccle. 8.12.
that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord and do reverence before
him: Psalm. 33.18, 19.
For his eyes are on them to deliver their soul from death, and preserve them
in the time of dearth. And that we may take notice of the abundance of their
wealth, the greatness of their worth, the fear of God is compared to a
Wellspring, an euer-flowing Fountain, Pro 14.27.
so as though the channels decay and be dried up, this ever yields sufficient
supply of knowledge to confirm the mind, of direction to conform the manners,
of wisdom to inform our contemplations, of caution to reform our actions.
The ways of God are unsearchable, the mysteries of godliness
incomprehensible, yet to him that fears God will he teach the way, Psalm.
25.12.
not that which the world follows, the flesh sauoreth, Satan affects, but
what himself chooses. Natural reason cannot comprehend, carnal knowledge
cannot search, earthly affections cannot desire these secrets which the Lord
reueales unto them that are possessed of his fear. verse. 14.
Prou. 22.4.
Riches attend on it, Honor will not be without it, Life is the guerdon of it.
Yet here is not the bounds of this Ocean, it brancheth it self into every
Channel, every Meadow, every Tree; the root is not only partaker of this
moistness, the bole only receives not benefit by this River, but every branch
communicates of this treasure, Esaias 33.6. Psalm. 103.17.
for the loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon them that
fear him, and his righteousness upon childrens children. Psalm. 25.13.
The soul of the man himself shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit
the earth. Neither is this benefit temporal but spiritual, which from this
Fountain is derived; for they shall see the wealth, not of an earthly
Monarchy, so much desired of a worldly Empire, so much thirsted after, but of
Jerusalem, 128.5, 6.
that is, the true Church of the everliving all-disposing God, not for a
little moment or a few months, but all the days of their lives; yea, not
themselves alone shall be partakers of it, but they may certainly expect to
behold their posterity invested in it, even the constant and continual peace
upon Israel. Pro. 14.26.
For in the fear of the Lord is strong confidence. Howsoever Persecutors may
rage, and persecution may threaten to ruin all before it, yet the children of
them that fear God, shall have a place of refuge. So as with the Prophet
David, Psalm. 31.19.
we in admiration may cry out, How great is thy goodness, O Lord, which thou
have laid up for them that fear thee, and done to them that trust in thee,
even before the sons of men! ver. 20.
Does pride seek to insult over them? He hides them privily in his own
presence. Does malice seek to prevail against them? he keeps them secretly
in his Tabernacle from the strife of tongues. Chrysostom. in sermon. de Johan. Bapt.
This is that only whereby our minds are corrected. sins are shunned,
innocence preserved, and ability to all goodness is conferred. No evil can
visit them; evil may surprise, but shall never seize upon; evil may oppress,
but never suppress them that fear the Lord. It is like Cammomile, the more it
is trod on, the more it spreads; like Spice, the more it is pounded, the
better it smells; the Chestnut tree, the more it is beaten, the better fruit
it bears. Let then the fear of God find footing in your hearts, and for this
purpose observe his works of Majesty and might.

The consideration of Christ's Majesty was the means of Paul's conversion, for
when he beheld the glory of the Lord, though with a full resolution and
resolved purpose, he was breathing out persecution against the Saints, seeking
to terrify, nay, to torture the sons and daughters of God, he himself was
struck with terror. Act. 9. Mat. 17.6. Luke 2.9.
Does a bright Cloud ouer-shadow Jesus, Moses, and Elias, and are Peter, James,
and John at the sight of the same amazed? Does the glory of the Lord shine
round about the Shepherds, and are they astonished? and shall not fear
possess our hearts in the contemplation of his Majesty?

His works of might in the worlds creation, wickeds confusion, and godlies
preservation: In the worlds creation; Dei Dicere, was Rerum Esse; Gods Word was
of such worth, and his breathing so binding, that his only saying gave essence
unto every Creature, Psalm. 33.7, 8, 9.
for he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it was created: whereupon the
Prophet David persuades all the earth and all that dwell in the world to fear
him. Extraordinary acts imprint in men a reverent awe to the Agent: what our
ear hears, our eye observes, our judgment apprehends to be spoken,
seen or done, and was not cast in our mould, not portraied in our proportion,
not comprehensible in our judgments, leaves in the heart a seal of an
admiring reverence and reverent admiration. Jeremy who with John Baptist
participated of the same manner of calling to their several functions, in
contemplation of the Lords great power, with whom none is to be compared,
seems to be peremptory, and concludes with a
none-excepting-question-answering admiration: Jer. 10.7.
Who would not fear thee, O King of nations!

Why did you, Exodus 14.31.
ye people of Israel, yield such reverence unto the Lord, testify such fear
of his name, manifest such a we in his Worship? Oh you that now live, would ye
know the ground and cause of our fearing him? The Mountains which did hinder
our passage, were cast down by the Lords power; the Valleys which threatened
our contempt, were filled up by his working; the mighty men in Egypt were
discouraged, and the mean ones were afraid by his might; his power turned
their waters into blood, so as they wanted to quench their thirst; his power
brought Frogs over all their land, even into their Kings houses, odious to
their choicest sights; his power turned dust to Lice, abhorred of their
daintiest touch, his power corrupted the earth with swarms of Flies, offen
sieve to their sweetest smells; his power sent a murraine amongst their cattle,
so as provision was hindered; his power by casting up ashes brought scabs upon
all their skins, so as their beauty was spoiled; by his power the Heavens
opened their windows, and sent forth hail and fire mingled together, hail of
the nature to quench fire, and fire of the nature to dry up hail, so as
whosoever was in the fields felt, but never reported the violence of them; his
power brought Grasshoppers, so as their Fruit was devoured; his power brought
darkness, so as the comfort of seeing, conferring, associating one with
another was denied; his power deprived of life their first borne, Genesis 49.3.
their might, the beginning of their strength, the excellency of their dignity,
and the excellency of their power, the hope of their succession, the comfort of
their years, and the staff of their age: so as they became like water spilt
upon the earth, as unprofitable for any use, as it is without expectation of
being gathered; his power divided their waters, set us free, and put them in
fetters, so as they could not pass, stopped their breath and brought their
confusion. These seized (O ye sons of men) upon our souls, filled our
apprehensions with admiration of that great God which has so confounded their
counsels, overthrown their devices, and prevailed against their power, who did
resist his will and plot our woe, hinder his Word and determine our ruin, that
we cannot but fear him. Tell me, O Pharaoh, what has thy greatness got
thee? Greatness without godliness is become thy grief; in what has thy
sorcery prevailed for thee? it could neither salve thy sore, nor procure thy
succor; what has thy wisdom produced to thee? it could neither warn thee,
nor warrant thee against these plagues: what goodness have thy gods granted?
they could neither provide for thy good, nor prevail against his greatness,
whose most contemptible creatures have been his mighty army to subdue thy
might. Him will I fear, whose hand thou have felt; him will I reverence, whose
power has curbed thy perverseness. Can I consider the counsel of the wise by
him turned to folly, the strength of the potent by him turned to impotency, the
malice of the envious turned to their own mischief, and not fear him? Oh the
power of his fear! With it my soul is ravished, through it my heart is
enlarged, by it my affections are inflamed with a desire of and a delight in
it. When I survey his rare, unexpected, unthought of preservation of those that
fear him, and confusion of those that are disobedient to him, let the waters
cease to drown, the fire to burn, winds to blow, seas to boil, earth their
solidity, Heavens their glory, sooner than I to forget or cease to fear him:
for what David fears not, seeing Vzzah struck to death, 2. Sam. 6.9.
for coming upon what color soever without the limits of his own calling? my
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments, which
work fear of thee in the heart of the very Heathen.

The people whom the King of Ashur (after he had carried away the Israelites)
placed in Samaria, 2. King. 17.24, 25, 26, 27.
were slain by Lions, and the superstitious policy of his Princes would
provide a remedy, and send of the Priests to worship God in their own fashion,
according to former custom of that Nation, who being now a commixed people,
ver. 33, 34.
performed a divided service, and are said to fear God, and yet not to fear
him. It was rotten at the core, faulty at the heart, they feared him as a
negligent servant does his master, to avoid displeasure, not as an obedient
son his father to discharge his duty: we must not fear as a Slave does a
Tyrant in dread of his law, but as a faithful subject does a favorable
Sovereign out of love: That is the fear of the Reprobate, which in time of
extremity drives them from him, and causes them to murmr when they are
afflicted: This the fear of his children, which in time of misery draws them
to him, and causes them to magnify him when they are corrected. Whence it is
sometimes taken for his whole worship, and may thus be discerned by the
effects it works, whether we consider God, our selves, or others. In respect
of God, find me prayer, patience, piety, praise, and you cannot fail of his
fear.

Where true fear has taken sure possession, there is fervent, frequent
prayer, as Eliphaz the Temanite truly affirmed, how unaptly soever he applide
it to Job: Surely, says he, thou have cast off fear, Job. 15.4.
and restrainest prayer before God. Note how confidently he does affirm it;
his heart, his affection, his reason, his soul and spirit were so possessed
with the truth of this (that there is no restraining of prayer where the fear
of God is) that he takes them to be inseparable: and justly, for fear being
the beginning of wisdom, Prou. 9.10.
foreseeth the danger and preuenteth it by prayer, presents a blessing and
procures it by prayer, reuealeth Gods pleasure and obtains ability to obey it
by prayer. There is no good which is not truly disciphered, no evil which is
not lively delineated by fear, the one whereof is obtained, and the other
avoided only by prayer.

Be it that he deferreth to grant the suites we make, conferreth not his
blessings which we need, or withdraws not his hand which we feel, or
continues to shake his Rod, which we fear will fall upon us, yet by our
patience may we know we fear him, Psalm. 115.11.
depending upon his power, bearing of the punishment, ready to embrace his
pleasure, either in accepting of our desires, or afflicting our deserts: for
the fear of God which never exalts, Prou. 3.7.
ever submits it self, being opposite to presumption, Deuteronomy. 17.13.
banisheth carnal security, Zeph. 3.7.
the fear of God receives instruction, and becomes patient to behold the
Lords end in deferring the manifestation of his mercy, in the continuing his
childrens misery, and in his threatening their future calamity; conceiting (not
daring to misconceit any thing of the Lord) that it is either for the proving
of their faith and constancy, the purging of their filth and impurity, the
preventing of their sin and iniquity, and the providing for the continuance
of their piety, unto which the fear of God is always glued.

As when Iosuah had called to the remembrance of the Israelites the Lords both
justice and mercy; Jos. 4.14.
justice upon their enemies, mercy toward them, he exhorts them to fear the
Lord, but withal advises that it want not the true companion, upright serving
of him: and the Prophet David when he had affirmed that man blessed who fears
the Lord, Psalm. 112.1.
he instantly adds, and delights only in his Commandments: as if there
could be no true reuerencing of the Lord, without due regarding of his laws;
no standing in awe of his wrath, without observing of his will; no fearing of
his name, if failing in his worship. Thence is it that the Lord himself gives
it as a charge, and lays it down as a statute never to be repealed or
appealed from: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Genesis 22.12.
And testifies with and to Abraham, that he truly feared him because he
withheld not his son, his only son. And Solomon when he would describe
true fear (his description though plain, is pithy, though short, yet
sententious) paints it out to this purpose, and makes the hating of evil to
be the badge of it, Pro. 8.13. Job. 1.1. Act. 10.2.
which Job did wear, and Cornelius was not without.

And lastly, whosoever receives from the Lords hand good or evil, sorrow or
solace, gladness or grief, how ever his prayers may seem to be rejected,
his patience neglected, his piety not regarded, yet he gives praise, or else
he fears not. Fear opens the eyes, and lets him see the Lords mercy, Psalm.
118.4.
which deals with him so mildly, his wisdom disposing all things so warily,
his providence attending all things so watchfully, himself so unworthy, the
Lord so wise; himself undutiful, the Lord for all that so many ways
bountiful; himself so disobedient, the Lord so provident for him; himself
careless of the Lords honor, the Lord still following him with his favor,
that he cannot but both in mind and mouth praise his name, by whose power he
is thus preserved, knowing that in this he does put on no other Livery than he
is enjoined, nor take any other companion to true fear than is required by the
Prophet David, Psalm. 22.23.
Praise ye the Lord that fear him.

And for our selves, then may we be sure that the fear of God swaies in our
souls, when our minds are enlightened with prudence, our prudence seconded with
providence, our providence attended with hope, our hope assisted with power,
our power made apparent by prevailing, and prevailing continued in stability,
either concerning what may tend to Gods glory and our good, or threaten his
dishonor and our eternal hatred: For to whom soever the fear of the Lord is,
as it is in it self, a treasure, he draws thence, Es. 33.6. Geneu. transl.
as from an Armory, Knowledge, Wisdom, Salvation, Strength and Stability, as
is not obscurely declared by that Evangelical Prophet, who speaking to the
heart of Zion, comforting her in the destruction of them that spoiled her,
assures her of double felicity, the one is liberty through deliverance, and
the other stability in her freedom; which stability is branched out in the
means whereby it is preserved, and the root from whence it is derived: the
means whereby it is preserved are, strength for prevailing, safety in
resisting, wisdom in providing, knowledge in discerning. The Root out of
which every one of these branches buddeth, and the foundation whereupon he
builds this bulwark of their consolation, is the fear of the Lord. Now seeing
by what means any thing is preserved, by the same means often it is obtained:
we may take the Prophets gradation in the Retrograde, and then we find the
fear of God to be the fountain out of which the rest, as little rivers, do
issue, though in their different neerenesse or remoteness. Howsoever, as by
the colors the soldiers discern their Captain, as by following the stream
we come to the spring, as by tracing the Conduit pipes we find the head of the
river: so we may see where this grace rests, if we can espy her handmaids
waiting.

The first and nearest whereof is Prudence, with which the fear of God
enlightneth the soul, as a candle the darkest house, and drives away the
mists of ignorance and error; as the Sun rising disperseth any clouds or
vapors. For it informs the reason, persuades the will, tutereth the
affections, and directs the actions: presents to the mind, both heavens
mysteries and hellish mischiefs; opens to the understanding, the records of
celestial secrets and infernal subtleties; lays before the will, the Lords
Majesty, and his Childrens felicity; Satan's malice and the damneds misery;
offers to the affections, virtues dignity, and vices deformity; and
tendereth to every action, as the proper end, glory or ignominy, Psalm. 111.10.
pain or pleasure: Whence David (the worthiest father) and Solomon (the wisest
son) affirm, Prou. 1.7.
that it is the beginning of Wisdom, and the Lord assures him, in whom his
fear remains, that he will be his teacher, Psalm. 25.12.
even he who is wisdom, knowledge, and truth. So as Prudence to discern is
one of the notes whereby the fear of God is known.

But because where the enemy knows wisdom wants, he the rather
attempteth, in that the heart is surprised with a greater fear in the approach
of danger, and the soul tortured with a more grievous torment in the
apprehension of safety, perceiving both, yet not conceiving which way either to
prevent the one or be partaker of the other, the fear of God leaving not his
harbourer either deceived or unfurnished, nor the enemy vnaffrighted or
vnpreuented, hangs forth another flag, and that is, providence, Greg. in
moral. Timere Deum est nulla, quae facienda sunt, praeterire bona.
wisely preparing every thing which Prudence suggested as pertinent or
expedient, and neglecting nothing which wisdom has revealed as requisite for
prevention. What was it which moved Noah that preacher of righteousness to
prepare the Arc, Heb. 11.7.
whereby he and his family were saved in the worlds great deluge? Was it not
reverence to him who threatened their ruin, revealed his deliverance? Exodus
9.20.
What persuaded the Egyptians to drive their cattle and keep themselves
within their houses, till the hail and the danger was past? Was it not a dread
of his power, who had made known that plague and the danger of it? What was it
which caused the Apostle of the Gentiles, notwithstanding the Lord promised
safety to himself and all that sailed with him, Act. 27.29.31.
in that great danger of shipwreck, not to suffer any to go out of the Ship?
was it not fear to provoke and distrust him, who had so graciously made known
his pleasure? Whence it is that Job the pattern of patience, who saw many of
Satan's plots, and was sensible of many perplexities, Job 28.18. Pro. 14.27.
Psalm. 11.10.
calls it wisdom it self; for it is a Wellspring of life to avoid the snares
of death, and all they are accounted of a good understanding that do thereafter.

Now lest any, through the multitude of Foes, greatness of contrary strength,
or strangeness of Stratagems, which he either sees or conceiueth, and against
which he prepares, might, conscious of his own spiritual wisdom and
natural weakness, fear to fail in the encounter, the fear of God holds
forth an assisting hand, and ministers hope of safety, by presenting the
greatness of Gods power, the graciousnesse of his promises, and certainty of
his protection: For by what was the true fear of God, which never makes flesh
its arm, more manifest in undaunted Daniel, Dan. 3.17.
and his fellows, then in their hope of deliverance grounded on Gods power to
preserve them? By what can the beams of this grace more sparkle out then by
relying on his promises? Therefore the Prophet David makes the attending on
his mercies, Psalm. 147.11.
the expectation of his merciful promises, an attendant on it, by which it may
be known as a fit guest by his marriage garment; and lest we might think him
to imply that, whereof he was not persuaded, he makes his prayer the
proclaimer of his hope, and manifests his hope in the promise to be grounded
on his fear of God. Psalm. 119.38.
How shall we know that Simeon feared God? Ask Gods holy spirit, his
comfortable intelligencer, our best interpreter of the truth, and he will tell
us, and let us see the sign, look on him; behold ye his hope expecting, his
expectation waiting for the consolation of Israel? Luke 2.
Do you judge of a man by his mates, and of his condition by his companions?
Luke 2.25, 26.
and can you not see Simeon to be a man who feared God, seeing with it is
joined his waiting for the accomplishment of that promise, of not seeing death
till he had seen the Lord Christ? Lastly, the hope of the Lords assistance is
assured by the certainty of his protection, and certain persuasion that his
eyes are over those that fear him, Psalm. 34.7.
and that his Angel pitcheth his Tent round about them. David a man sore
turmoiled in many troubles, had fainted, but his strength was by the Word of
God, Psalm. 130.5.
the word of his promise, sustained. Fear of the Lords Majesty presented his
power, his promise and his protection, and comforted David's heart, for it is
always accompanied with hope.

And when hope beholds assistance, as then the fear of God administreth
courage to enter the lists, entertain the combat, so it furnishes with
strength, to defend the soul, offend the assaylants; Pro. 14.26.
defend the soul, for in it is assured, an assured strength; it is not a
failing, but a fortifying, not a shrinking but enduring, not a false, but a
firm fortress. No dart can pierce it, no blow wound it, no shot enter into
it, a bulwark that cannot be undermined, a Castle that cannot be battered, a
City that cannot be ransacked. It was a shield to cover Joseph from the wound
of concupiscence; a buckler to bear off the blow of impatience burgoning from
Jobs friends and afflictions; a brestplate to all the Saints, to keep safe
their hearts from all spiritual hurts, and more powerful than that Laurel,
which Tiberius Caesar is said to wear, to preserve them from the danger of
Satan's Thunderbolts, and so defends the soul. It no less offends the
assailants, defeating Satan of his hopes, and enforcing him and his to take
their flight. It defeateth him of his hopes, fettring our affections, sugring
our afflictions, seasoning our spiritual food. It fettereth our affections
with the chains of Gods displeasure; It danteth our carnal resolutions with a
sight of his powerful anger, it bridleth our unlimited desires with the reins
of his threatenings, and glutteth the greediness of our sinful appetites, with
presenting his power. What deuillish delight is not distasted? What fleshly
hope is not frustrated? What hellish deed is not crossed? where the fear of
God resideth? It, as the oil of Nenuphar, cools the desire of sin, and as
that fountain in Armenia turns our hottest love of iniquity to a cold
liking. It sugreth our afflictions, as Elishaes wood sweetened the bitter
waters, lest grief should make us senseless through too much suffering; and as
the tree Alpia, rather withers with the due of mercy, then wastes with the
fire of misery. It seasoneth our spiritual food: For, has Satan cast into the
pots of our celestial nourishment, the gourds of false glosses, or erroneous
interpretations, or any way corrupted the sacred well of salvation, that we
expecting an Egg might fasten upon a stone, looking for a fish catch a
serpent, or thinking to be quenched might be poisoned? The fear of God as
Elishaes meal, makes that meat wholesome, and having tried it with the rules
of piety, faith, and charity, auoides as with the Unicorns horn, the sacking
in of soule-killing poison. Thus it defeateth Satan of his hopes, preventing
his fallacies, weakening his forces, dashing his hellish Impes against the wall,
crushing sin as a Cockatrice in the shell, nay binding Satan's hands with
fervent prayer, and wounding his head with the two edged sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God, that he is enforced to fly, hating as much the
beholding of this grace in gods children, as the Serpent disliketh the shadow
of the Ash tree, which rather chooses (if it must needs do the one) to run
into the fire than come near it, whether he see it in the morning of their
conversion, or the evening of their dissolution; at the Sun rise of their
prosperity, or the Sun set of their adversity, and so prevails. For it is
not visited, Prou. 19.23.
not so visited with evil, as it shall be vanquished: For maugre the malice of
all, it brings stability with it, and does persist.

Though it day by day be allured to folly, as it neglects at the first, so
at least it distasteth, all allurements even at the last. This fire enflameth
the soul with zeal, that it can never be altogether quenched; this dew
moistneth the heart with grace which will never be thoroughly dried up; this
food fills the bones with marrow that will never be wholly wasted: For they
who fear the Lord shall never depart from him, Jerem. 32.40
and assuredly shall continue, Prou. 19.23.
continue in his love, continue in their loialty, continue prudent combattants
against Satan, potent Commanders over sin, so as no sooner can any part be
undermined, but prudence espies it, no sooner any place battered, but
providence repaires it; no sooner any encounter offered, but hope of safety
entertaines it; no sooner the least assault made, but strength resists,
resisting prevails, and prevailing persisteth.

Now we proceed to those flowers which the fear of God puts into the
hearts and hands of every one that has it, that he may not (as Jacob feared
he should) stink among his neighboring Inhabitants, Genesis 34.
but yield a sweet and pleasing smell to others, whether living or dead. It
respects the living in regard of their superiority, or inferiority, or
promiscuously. To superiors, who either in mind or body, or state, are better
furnished then other, it presents Dittany, not for the show or smell, but for
the use and virtue of it, which is double attractiue and expulsive; so the
fear of God at the sight of others miseries is touched with them and lays
them to the heart, whence proceeds a pitying of their wants and woes, a
providing for their wealth and welfare; pitying of their wants, neither
neglecting their need, nor adding to their calamity, knowing that they must
do just and equal to the most inferior, because they have one who is their
supreme, and that they may neither put a stumbling block before the blind, Leu
19.14.
for that were inhumane cruelty, nor rule over the meanest too rigorously, for
that were cruellinhumanity. 5.15.
Nehemiah feared God, but how shall that be known? he did so attract to
himself the miseries and oppressions of the people, that he would neither be
chargeable himself, where he might, nor suffer his servants to bear rule over
them, as no doubt they would. But is the sign hung out whereby these fruits
and want of pity may be left ungathered? The Lord gives the token in pressing
the duty to be performed, saying, But thou shall fear thy God; Leu. 19.14.
so that then the fear of God is that herb on which pitying of others wants
appears; and where usury, taking of advantage, oppressing a neighbor, such a
one as is dear or near unto us, either in a spiritual, natural, or
political respect, or in a corporal, spiritual or accidental need, do
spring; we may pass by these because unfit flowers to garnish the Lords
Temple, nay we must neglect them because they stink already in the Lords
Nosthrils, having neither any participation with, nor sent of moisture from his
fear, which as Dittany not only attracting but expelling, cures not the
wounding but the wounded, not only pittieth the wants, but provides for their
weals. It prepares a potion and purges out their poison, it anointeth their
wounds and asswageth their woes, it powers into their ears the wine of
comfortable words, and fills their hands with the suppling oil of supplying
works. Their words as the flower of the Almond-tree, suppled with the oil of
compassion, cure those who are subject to the falling sickness of spiritual
Apostasy, or the Lethargy of forgetting either of Gods power and mercy, or
their own wretchedness and impotency, and pounded with the honey of
consolation, asswageth the stinging of a wounded conscience, and the Ulcers of
a wicked conversation. And as the Vine branches cover the buds of their now
sprouting hopes, that they for the present and in future time continue safe
from the Summers scorching and Winters scourge, from the boisterous winds of
calumny and bitter weather of calamity, from the breath of envy, 1 King. 18.3,
etc.
and from the hands of cruelty. Obediah is reported of, to have feared God
greatly, but what argument is used to assure the truth of it? What sign or
token is there in him? What work done by him to persuade it? Do we know the
Tree by the Fruits, or the day by the Sun rising? Oh Obediah, the fear of
God shines in thy facts. Iezabel hates the Lords Prophets, thy heart groaneth
for their grief; Iezabel is persecuting the Lords Prophets, thy head is
devising their safety; Iezabel is destroying the Lords Prophets, thy hand is
preparing their security; are they disconsolate, and do thou comfort them?
Are they houselesse, and do thou harbor them? Are they afraid of Famine, and
do thou feed them? The fear of God was greatly rooted in thee; wast not
thou the Governor of the Kings house? thou could not be ignorant that great
ones have many an Argus to watch over them; that they who are near Princes,
have the eyes of ambitious emulation, and envious ambition to pry into them:
thy foresight could not but tell thee, that if this were discovered, the
displeasure of the king (whose anger is as the roaring of a Lion) would be
unappeasable; the stings of Baals Priests (as so many Bees about thee)
insufferable; the cruel malice and malicious cruelty of the Queen, according
to her greatness, would be grievous, and (as her hatred) vnlimitable. What
labourer seeing a cloud arise out of the sea, does not suspect a shower? what
Hare espying the approach of the Hound, does not at least expect a course? What
beast seeing the Lioness range as robbed of her whelps, fears not to become
a prey? or who dare take the prey out of the Lions mouth? Can I then see her
bloody purposes prevented by thy prudence, her cruel persecutions to thy
utmost endeavor bounded within less than her intended limits? do I look on
them miserable, and thee merciful, observe them perplexed, and thee pitiful,
and not admire it? What heavenly heart-cheering Zephirus caused this motion?
What spirituall-comfort-bringing-fire inflamed this zeal? What divine
ouerswaying power directed this action, which neither apparent might, nor
potent malice could hinder? The fear of God was that tree which did bear this
fruit, that bellows which did blow this fire, whereby the fear of man and of
earthly mischief was consumed. Can you perceive this Dittany kept in the
heart, held in the hand, of Superiors, by its operation sucking out the
venom, saluing of the sores, of such as are disconsolate or distressed,
helping any that are any way wanting or woeful? Doubt not, the fear of God
gathered that herb, and there has given it.

Now that which this grace provides for inferiors, is the Rose, known and
delighted in for two special properties, because it does decore visum pascere,
and odore olfactum afficere, feeds the sight with rareness of the beauty, and
delights the smell with the sweetness of the savor: So the fear of God may
be known to be in such as are subject to others by submissiue reverence, and
sincere obedience; Submissiue reverence, Prou. 16.31.
for age is a crown of glory, especially if it be found in the way of
righteousness; a glorious Crown, (by others so to be conceived, but howsoeur
so it is in it self considered) to which all respect must be rendered, the
rendering whereof draws the affections of all to delight in it. It is like
fair weather in the height of harvest, no less comfortable than profitable,
no less profitable than comfortable, comfortable to them that receive it,
profitable to them that yield it, both comfortable and profitable to them that
see it: to them who receive it, it is like the song of the Swanne before her
death, the warmth of the fire to a cold benumbed body, sweet words to a
departing friend, and the underpropping to a declining wall. For this stirs
up their fire that lay under the dead ashes through age almost extinguished,
this adds more oil to their Lamps, so as they shine more comfortably in
themselves, more brightly to others benefit, though welnigh consumed. To them
that yield it, it is a laurel to adorn their heads with honor, and a
treasure to enrich their hearts with grace, purchasing the applause of men, and
procuring that praise which is of God. To them that see it, it is the rauishing
of their affections with joy, the filling of their minds with pleasure, and
their mouths with praise, ministering matter either for imitation or
instruction. Now this leaf of this Rose, whose beauty does so inchant the eye,
is not presented in true manner without the fear of God, as the Lord himself
will witness. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, Leu. 19.32.
and honor the person of the old man, and dread thy God. A silly Idiot may
rise up before the hoary head, and yet not consider that gravity is a
representation of his Makers wisdom: a Heathen wise man may honor the person
of the aged, and yet not take notice that old age pourtraieth out in a special
manner the Lords eternity: a moral Christian may both rise up and honor the
grave man, and in doing thereof meditate that the Lord is only wise and the
ancient of days, and yet fail to perform it in a due manner; and therefore
he adds, and dread thy God; as if this gave the other duties their life and
luster: and surely this honor given in a true and reverent manner, grows in
no garden-plot, but only where the fear of God is planted; so as we may know
it by the first property of the Rose; which is, if it feed the sight and breed
submissiue reverence.

The other property is, odore olfactum afficere, to delight the smell with the
sweetness of the savor in sincere obedience: For what is our rising up before
the hoary head, if our heart lie groueling? What is the honoring of the aged
person with our affections, if not testified by our actions? heart and hand
concurring in this honor to our Superiors, is as acceptable as Incense unto
God, and as the sweetest perfume unto man; the one so highly esteems sincere
obedience to Superiors, that he makes it by way of motive a pattern for his
peoples practice, Ier. 35. Col. 3.22.
and by it puts them in mind of their duty toward him; with the other, it is
of such powerful operation, that what pains soever they take for those of
whom they are overseers, Heb. 13.17.
the same is turned to pleasure, and they are glad when they can promoue their
good. Such is the property of this Rose: but can it be plucked in every hedge,
or found in every field? ah no, it is of Heavens sowing, and is not to be had
save in that heart, nor seen save in that hand which the fear of God
directs. When Joseph propounded a condition to his brethren, who knew him
not, promising life upon the observation of that condition, by performing
whereof he in some sort was to become their inferior, because their debtor,
preoccupateth and preuenteth what they might object: Thou art the chief under
Pharaoh, even as the Lord of the whole Land of Egypt; if one of us be left as
a Prisoner, and he miscarry through too much misery, who will call thee to
account, dare accuse thee of cruelty, or can cause thee to answer for his life?
If he continue alive (though a prisoner) till our return, when we have
brought our youngest brother, whose company is our fathers comfort, whose
health his happiness, and whose death (which God prevent) will cut the thread
of his aged life (which God preserve) if thou determinest to keep the one in
bonds, and bind the other to a like condition, let us complain, thou art
Pharaohs ear, we shall not be heard; let us plead, thou art Pharaohs mouth,
our doom shall be harsh; let us upon the sentence crave pardon, and humbly beg
a mitigation of the penalty, thou art Pharaohs hand, and our burden shall
continue heavy. We have made thee acquainted with the greatness of our
pinching famine, is it not in thy power to exact one after another till we all
be thy servants, or else to withhold thy help? But how does Joseph remove
these mists, and clear their minds of these misconceits? What sign could he
hang out that they might know the truth of his heart? or what pawn does he
tender whereby they might cast themselves upon his trust? What earnest does he
give to bind that bargain, and assure them of his honest dealing? by no
better token can man's faith be manifested, by no sign his sincerity made more
known, by no pledge his truth more plainly demonstrated; for it was his fear
of God which he engaged; Genesis 42.18.
Do this and live (says he) for I fear God; Intimating that whereuer this
grace is grafted, trust may certainly be reposed, and unblameable dealing
assuredly expected. The same may be collected from the speech of Iethro giving
advice to Moses to select some among the people to bear with him the burden
of their affairs; for in prescribing the persons which would be fit to be so
employed, he describes their properties to be four, Men of courage, Exodus
18.22.
fearing God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness; Which we anatomizing,
may behold the fear of God lying in the midst as the heart in man, and though
it incline to one side, yet from thence issues life both to that side and
every part beside; For if there be fearing of God, the might or malice of man
cannot prevent; if there be fearing of God, neither the glistring of gold, nor
a bountiful bribe can corrupt; for the fear of God begets courage, and
courage hates to be captiued by covetousness: And where courage triumphs
and covetousness is hated, there dealing truly is harbored: wheresoever then
is the fear of God, there true dealing may be found. Why did Cornelius choose a
soldier which feared God to attend upon him? Acts 10.2.
surely he dreamed of his greater diligence: why did the same Cornelius select
that soldier which above others was devout and feared God, 10.
joining him with two others of his servants for a special service, such a
service as was advised by an Angel, one of heavens Heralds, to an Apostle,
one of the Lords-Vice-gerents, for the informing of himself how to fight that
he might find a kingdom, how to combat that he might win, winning triumph,
and triumphing wear a Crown that does not fade? Surely he thought, as none
could be more fit for that message, so none could be more acceptable, more
faithful, in that embassage. It cannot be, but sincere obedience, as well as
submissiue reverence, will be found to bud and blossom, where the fear of God
has watered. Thus does the fear of God furnish both superior and inferior
severally considered, either of them with an useful and mutually pleasing
posie.

Let us now see wherewith it garnisheth the spiritual houses of all
promiscuously, of both the mean as well as of the mighty, of the high as of
the low, poor as rich, one as another. And the first is Helitropium,
fashioning the man, wherein it is, according as the Lord is pleased, in anger,
or favor, to absent, or present, himself; and lying at the heart, sends out at
the bosom the leaves which are of that property, that they are powerful
against all swelling tumors of spiritual pride, preserving humility: and yet
always white, implying innocence; for he that fears God, is not arrogant in
opinion, not estranged from any others in affection, neither offends
willingly, nor offended easily; becomes all things to all men, yet neither
deceiving nor being deceived, neither tainting others with the Leven of
impurity, nor tainted himself by others with the Canker of either heretical
impiety, or impious heresy; for selfe-conceited wisdom is a tumor which the
fear of God breaks, and therefore is prescribed by the Lord as an Antidote
against it. Prou. 3.7.
Be not wise (so advises Solomon) in thine own eyes: for that is a poison;
but that thou may avoid it, fear the Lord. Where there are humble thoughts
without ambition, brotherly care without contempt, like affection without
contradictious vainglory, or vainglorious contradiction: where in private
there is not a self conceited meeting to increase schism, but a holy assembly
mutually to continue true zeal and a religious society; in public not a
Christs-coat-renting, but a Church-cheering-conuenticle, not a
schisme-furthering, but a true zeale-enflaming conference; there is submitting
themselves one to another in the fear of God: Ephesians. 5.21.
Romans 12.16.
See we any like affectioned one to another, and not high minded? See we men
making themselves equal toward them of the lower sort? See we men esteeming
every man better than themselves? Is there none so scornful but will cast his
eyes upon others meanest matters, none so froward but will suffer others to
cast an eye upon their actions, none so wise but will embrace another
watchword? Are they thus inwardly decked with lowliness of mind? as sure as
the Lord lives the fear of God is in them; for to have outward cause of being
haughty, and yet to be humble; to be outwardly humbled, and not inwardly
haughty, either through patience in obeying without expectation of reward or
merit, or in bearing without offending by murmuring, is an infallible sign of
fearing God, the property whereof is in all things to depart from evil. Prou.
8.13.


Further, as the Dove in her bill did bear the Olive branch, as an Ensign of
rest, so these in their words and works, do bear the leaves and wear the
livery of unity, which is so acceptable to God and man, that it made David to
use an emphaticall exclamation, Psalm. 133.1.
Oh how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity!
We might have given credit if he had once affirmed that it was good; we with
him had had reason to admire, if he had only cried out, How good. But seeing he
cannot comprehend the goodness of it, in that he adds, Oh how good, I will do
as that Painter who was to decipher the sorrow of a Father for the loss of his
son, who because he was not able to delineate it, drew the curtain over him,
and left the spectators to conceive what he was not possible to pourtray forth
with his Pencill. This one bare assertion of David, Good it is, might have
admitted doubt: his acclamation, How good, might have received answer among the
exceptious; But his Behold how good, implies, that either he himself was not
able to comprehend How good it is, or having only a glimpse of the goodness
of it, he calls all to take a view of the excellency of such an heavenly
blessing, whereby men do most resemble the euer-blessed Trinity, imitate the
state of the glorious Angels, and glorified Saints, pleasant to God who is
delighted with it, and profitable to men who are enriched by it, with
spiritual graces and all sorts of goodness. And though men cannot lively
express what it is, yet considering what the Prophet David says, they may
conceive what it is like, out of David's mouth, It is like the precious ointment
upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went
down to the skirts of his garments. It is like the dew of Hermon, which fell
upon the hill of Sion. The Oil wherewith Aaron was anointed, was made for that
purpose by Gods appointment: The blessings which unity brings, are prepared
in heaven, and conferred as God appoints. The Oil wherewith Aaron was
anointed, ran from the head to the beard, from the beard to the skirts of his
clothing: That blessing which unity brings falls upon the highest, and
runs along to the middle sort, till it come to the lowest and meanest of
Gods people, and rests not till every one be partakers of it. That Oil
wherewith Aaron was anointed, was powered out; while it is kept in the box
none receives any benefit, nor are delighted in it; but when it is powered out,
the savor is perceived, and those that partake it are thirsting after it, as
is seen by what the Spouse says to Christ, Can. 1.2.
Thy love is better than wine; why o thou beloved do thou so conceit it?
Because of the savor of thy good ointments. But how came thou to take notice
of their goodness? Thy name is an ointment powered out. ver. 3.
Oh that I knew where this olive branch might be plucked! from the root of the
fear of God, there it is growing. I will give them (says the Lord) one heart
and one way that they may fear me. Jer. 32.39.
Fear is the beginning of wisdom, and wisdom is the cause of unity: For
demand of the Apostle Paul what he means by walking worthy of their calling,
and he will tell them one part of it among others is this, Ephesians. 4.
their endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of peace. Ask
him again how this worthy walking may be obtained, and he will answer, by
being filled with the knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding: Col. 1.9.10.
So as we must not conceive of fear, whereof the Lord speaks by Jeremy, as
though he meant the act: For first in every grace there is God conferring it
upon man; man's reflexing at the gifts collation back upon God, and then
diffusing of it in the fruits among men. Unity in opinion (one heart) and
concordancy in action (one way) has relation of man to man, and therefore is
not the cause of that true fear which was infused first by God himself; so as
by fear there we are to understand not abstractiuely as it is severed, but
concretiuely as it is joined with degrees or circumstances; and indeed,
sometimes the act is taken for the measure how far it is extended; sometimes
for the extent of time to the which it reaches, and then it is as if the Lord
had said, I will give them one heart and one way, that it may be manifest and
made apparent to any that make question of it, that they fear me in no little
measure. Besides, he speaks of the time for ever, whereof unity is a great
occasion: For where a Church within it self by Schisms is disioynted, the
fear of God is greatly cooled, and where the fear of God is cooled, the
continuance of that Church may be justly doubted. Do we then find in our
selves a desire, and see we in others and our selves the practices of peace, a
striving for unity, an embracing of concord? Is there among us agreement in
opinion, sympathy in affection, concord in conversation, eclesiasticall,
oeconomicall, political? we may assure our selves the fear of God abides
among us, for we keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
which is one special part of our walking worthy of that calling whereunto in
Christ we are called. Now this worthy walking is begot by wisdom and
spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9, 10. Pro. 1.7.
whereof the fear of God is the beginning.

The last note of Gods fear is equity, which I may compare to Mandrakes, the
smell whereof is commended by the Spouse, whereof there are two sorts, Male and
Female. Cant. 7.13. Geneu. transt.
The Mandrakes have given a smell, and in our gates are all sweet things new
and old. These are carried in either hand one, of him that fears God; which to
every sex, every state does justice, not pitying the poor nor favoring the
rich, not fearing the mighty nor neglecting the mean, not unjustly helping his
friend nor hurting his foe, whereby his name is an ointment powered out, and
delights the smell of them that come near to sent it in the continuance of
their days; at their death. They continue as the Palm Tree in the house of
the Lord. Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the upright man and behold the just, the end of that man is peace. It is
no Thistle that bears this Fig. What makes Judges execute judgment? the
fear of God. What makes the great to keep themselves free from oppression?
the fear of God. What preserves all men from injurious dealing? the fear of
God. But if that be wanting, the reins are laid on the neck of every sin,
and the spur given to every injury; what wrong is neglected, what
wickedness is omitted, what cruelty is vnacted, if the fear of God be not
embraced? Genesis 10.11.
Abraham knew there was readiness to act injury, pronenesse to commit
iniquity, promptness to perpetrate all wrong, where the fear of God was
wanting, for how can they deal faithfully with any who have no feeling of the
goodness or greatness of the Lord?

Thus for the living: for the dead, even by works of charity toward them may
we know we fear the Lord, so as whom the fear of God moved to honor living,
the same fear will provoke us to give unto him his due when he is dead. Act.
7.
That Protomartyr died for the profession, even in professing of the truth,
such was the height and heat of that persecution, such the frowardness and
fury of the Persecutors; so great it was against the Church at Jerusalem, that
they were all scattered abroad through the region of Judea and Samaria. And was
there not one to interre this Martyrs body, not one to cover it in the Grave,
not one to cast this seed in hope of resurrection into the earth? If there
were any, who durst adventure to do it? Saul made havoc of the Church,
entered into, not one, but every house, and drew them out both men and women,
and put them in prison. No place was unsought, no person vnsifted, no age
favored, no sex spared. Did the hoare head of the ancient find mercy? no.
Did the weeping eyes of bewailing women behold pity? no. Did the crying of
little babes move compassion? no. Their goods were made a spoil to the
ravenous, their bodies were used as a prey by the malicious, their honorable
credits and never dying names were as Tennis-balls ignominiously tossed in the
mouths of the opprobrious. How was their hope weakened, their faith shaken,
their spirits troubled, and they themselves eternally endangered, Act. 22.4.
seeing he persecuted this way even unto death. The malice of one might by many
have been prevented, and many would have received mutual encouragement, and
might have performed mutual duties of their profession, if one only had
persecuted: but alas, this way was contemned by the people, hated by the
Priests, condemned by all. The people would speedily report what they either
perceived in, or saw done by any which inclined to it; the Priests instantly
press the punishing of what they heard, and the Rulers were as ready to give
sentence of scourging, ver. 5.
if not death. Who then durst endanger their estates, hazard their lives, and
interre Stephen? There were men, Act. 8.2.
not merely men, but men devout fearing God, which carried him to his burial,
and made great lamentation over him, their reverent devotion cast out all doubt
of death or danger, and wrought in them a respect of that body whose Spirit was
with the Lord to whom it was commended. Act. 7.59.
And surely if it work such regard of the liuelesse corpse of a Saint, what
care will it not work in men for the good and right of his left and living
Image, and of every one to whom his special love and care was linked? For is
it not a desperate presumption in the servant whom hopeful fear should make
obedient, to neglect that which his Master has not only laid before him by
pattern, but laid upon him by precept? Destitute of reverent devotion is that
man who seeing his glorious Creator continuing his mercies to the childrens
children of them that fear him, and hearing his gracious Redeemer give a
charge in giving up the ghost for the good of her that was dear unto him,
takes no care for the posterity of those who were interest in their Creators
mercies and their Redeemers merits. And these are the signs by which the fear
of God is discerned.

The plaster is made known, the physic is prescribed, there wants nothing
but the applying of it. Are thy hands often stretched out to God? art thou
content to wait his pleasure, to undergo his wrath, to endure the smart of his
rod, though to thine own ruin, with continuing in piety toward him, and
praising of him? Art thou informed, informed do thou provide, providing see
thou assistance to sustain thy hope in encountering, encountering find thou
strength in resisting, is thy resisting seconded with prevailing, and thy
prevailing accompanied with persisting? Art thou pitiful toward, and provident
for, such as are more woeful than thy self, commiserating them in thine heart,
comforting them in thy words, and helping them with thy best endeavors? Do
thou yield submissiue reverence, and sincere obedience, toward those who are
any way above thee, or thou bound to? Live thou humbly, peaceably, justly,
with all? Have thou a care to give the dead their due, and is not thy love
finished when their life is ended, but do thou manifest the truth of it
toward them in theirs? Of a certain the fear of God is in thee indeed, and
surely his salvation, saving assistance, assured safety is near unto thee.
Thou need not be afraid of the perilous time, thou shall not be visited
with evil. Thou need not be discouraged for Satan's subtleties, thou shall
avoid the snares of death. Thou need not fear thy final falling, for thou
shall continue. Pro. 14.27.


But as for those who live as though they received no good from him, could have
no use of him, or it were unprofitable for them to pray unto him, who murmr
in their miseries, grudge in all their griefs, snarle at the stones which hurt
them, never look to the hand which throws them, who seek not to him, as men
without hope despairing of his help, who add sin to sin, drink iniquity
like water, and pull transgression to them with Cart-ropes, who observe no
benefit or blessing from him, and therefore cannot hold him worthy either to be
sanctified in them or magnified by them, who doubt no danger, prevent no
peril, hope for no aid, have no strength to resist, dare not encounter, and
cannot conquer; yield themselves cowardly to be captiued at Satan's pleasure,
and remaining without stability, have their states like Reubens, Genesis 49.
unstable as water, and are themselves like water run out and spilt upon the
earth, impossible to be gathered up, or at best unprofitable for any necessary
use in the house of God, who mock at others miseries without commiseration,
take advantage at others calamity to oppress them, use their power, wit,
wealth, to work their injurious wills in others wants and weakness, who are
so far from furthering in, that they put the blind out of his way, lay
snares to entrap the ignorant, insult over the impotent, and are faithless in
what is committed to them; whose pride, self-conceit, and arrogance, stop the
passage and damme up the stream of mutual comfort and conference, who embrace
no opinion though most true, save their own, though most false; who admit of
no alteration in things wherein change is commendable, preferring their own
censure, before the grauest sentence, their own disgrace in recanting before
Gods glory, his Churches good, their own eternal quiet, in confessing and
disclaiming what was either unfit to be done or thought, Prou. 31.
wilfully forsaking their own mercy; who with the Salamander, love to live
in, though they might avoid, the fire of contention and contradiction, renting
the Commonwealth with seditions, and the Church with schisms, thinking suits
in law to be the surest course to keep what their souls assure them is
another right, and the wisest way still to hold what their conscience tells
them is not truth: whose ingratitude forgets another goodness, lust respects
not another interest, and care is to laugh though other weep, self pleasing
and profit making all fish that comes to net: All these are as far from Gods
fear, as they are near to these faults, and as much as they are haunted with
these hellish Hags, so little are they frequented with those happinesses which
accompany the fear of God: For well may I say with the Prophet David, Psalm.
36.1.
The transgression of the wicked man says within my heart, that there is no
fear of God before his eyes. My conscience tells me that sin and impiety
persuade the ungodly and unrighteous person that there is no God of whom he
should be afraid.

And what is the cause of all impiety toward God, iniquity toward man? Is it
not the want of this fear? The Prophet there affirms it. For thence is it
that he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to
be hateful. Thence is it that, the words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit,
and himself has left off to be wise and to do good. Thence is it that, He
deuiseth mischief upon his bed, sets himself in a way that is not good,
and abhors not evil. Romans 3.10.
And the Apostle Paul having from the same Prophet affirmed that None is
righteous, no not one, proves it by their inward defects, they had no
understanding; They did not seek after God, they are all gone out of the way:
in the particular members of their bodies, their throats are an open sepulcher,
their tongues deceitful, poisonous, and bitter, and their feet are swift to
shed blood; calamity and misery is in their ways, as attending on them in all
their paths; and lastly makes known the cause of all these their wants,
wickedness, there is no fear of God before their eyes. Let us then work out
our salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.
For it is the fear of God which bridleth the fury of men, and interesteth men
deeply in the favor of God, Genesis 31.29.42.
Psalm. 147.11.34.103.12, 13, 14.
seeing the eyes of the Lord are over them, his mercy toward the^ is as great
as the heaven is above the earth in height, and his loving kindness is for
ever and ever upon them that fear him. Oh let us ponder the pureness of his
justice, and the greatness of his judgments, that we may attain to a
reverence of his name as well as a love of his Majesty, in the meditation of
his mercy. Yet let not these two be severed, for is he mercifully just, and
justly merciful, mixeth he clemency with severity, and is not justice in him
separated from mercy? Man must then render unto him a fearing love, and a
loving fear; for, what God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Now
the fearing and loving of the Lord are linked together by their, 1. Commander.
2. Causes. 3. Companions. 4. Subjects. 5. Acts. 6. Effects. 7. Opposites. 8.
Conditions.

By their Commander, for Moses who was faithful in all Gods house, and
delivered nothing unto that people, upon whom God had fixed his affection above
other nations, without his warrant, testifies the Lords will in these words,
Deuteronomy. 10.12.
And now Israel what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul. Where we may perceive the
two affections, Fear and Love, equally required. So as whosoever neglects
the fearing of him, though (if they could be severed) he love him; or whosoever
cares not to love, though (if it were possible without the other) he should
fear him, he becomes a transgressor, Ia. 2.10, 11.
rendering a single service, where a double duty is required, and so neglecting
either, he stands guilty for both, because he that enjoined the one, commanded
the other, either of which who so omitteth, goes against the will of the
Commander; neither of them therefore must be missing, because both by the same
authority commanded. And as they are united by their Commander, so in their
Causes they are confounded, for that Mercy should move Love none will
question, but that it should make us Fear some may doubt, and without all
peradventure to affirm it would seem a Paradoxe, if the Prophet David (a man
after Gods own heart, and therefore knew what was his truth to be delivered,
and could not be unacquainted what was his will to be revealed, and surely to
the Lord himself durst not have produced the offspring of his own brain, a
vain conceit) turning to the Lord, had not auerred. Psalm. 130 4.
There is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared. What is it now in
the Prophets judgment is the cause of fear? is it not mercy? This
harsh-seeming and bitter-deemed fruit of fear must grow upon that truly known
pleasant, and taste-pleasing tree of his favor, for so has the Lord ordained,
as is recorded in the second of the Kings, the seventeenth Chapter. Fear the
Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt with great power, and
with a stretched out arm. His loving deliverance must be the foundation of
their fear, and his preserving of them, the root from which must spring their
reuerencing of him: whence it is that the Psalmist attributes the fearing of
the Lords name by the Heathen, Psalm. 103.15, 16.
and of his glory by the Kings of the earth, unto one special act of his
mercy, the repairing of his Zion. Deuteronomy. 10.11.21, 22.
Now Moses though speaking with the same Spirit, declared what the Lord had
done for Israel, how he had delivered them from their enemies, placed them in
the promised Land, the Land of covenant, done for them great and terrible
things which their eyes had seen: and further, of seventy persons had so
multiplied them, as they became as the stars of Heaven in multitude; and why
does he number thus the Lords mercies? even for this purpose, as he himself
expresses, that these acts of mercy might be motives to inflame the peoples
affections to him. Therefore (says he) thou shall love the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy.
10.11.21.22. Ios. 23.9.
In like manner does Iosuah his successor, press the same duty from the same
ground, upon the same people: For the time past, the Lord had driven out before
them great Nations and strong, so favorable he was to them. No man was able
to stand before them to that day, so mighty was he in them: For the time to
come, one man of them should chase a thousand, so powerful he would be with
them: all undeniable arguments of his mercy toward them. But to what end does
he call to their remembrance the one, or give them notice of the other? because
in the effect, the consideration of the one is not so profitable as the
remembering of the other is precious; the truth whereof is employed by the manner
of the charge which is added. Verse. 11.
Take heed, carelessness will prove a corasiue; take good heed, a little
negligence may be the cause of great and long repentance; therefore, you have
seen his preseruations of you, have heard his good purpose toward you, unto
your selves, selfe-caused woe is a festring wound, selfe-breeding folly is a
double fault. Take good heed therefore unto your selves, that ye love the
Lord your God. Is not now the Lords mercy a motive to love him, and is not his
favor an occasion of his fear? Surely his favor does inflame our affections
to him, and kindle in our souls a fear of him: And as his mercy, so likewise
his justice is a cause of both. Justice is indeed as oil to continue the
burning of the Lamp of fear, but it may seem as water to quench the fire of
love. Seem it may, but it does not, in the Saints of God, for as Lime though
it be naturally cold, as all stones are, participating of the earth in
substance and general properties, yet it retains in it an hidden heat and a
fiery quality, Not. bist. lib. 36. c. 33. Mirum, aliquid postquam arserit
accendi aquis. Aug. de Ciu. Dei, Quoddam valde mirabile accidit, quia calx ex
aqua incenditur, ex qua omnis ignis extinguitur: oleo vero extinguitur, quo
omnis ignis nutritur.
specially if it be once burnt (as Pliny says) in so much that it is kindled
by water; so the love which the Saints bear to the Lord is more inflamed by
his judgments inflicted on them, and through his justice observed by them:
though they may seem to be an hurt, in truth they are an help; though they
may be thought to decrease our love, yet they are found to increase that
loyalty which cannot be severed from love. Psalm. 119.175.62.164.52.
Seven times a day (says David) do I praise thee because of thy righteous
judgments: though then the thinking of his justice may be imagined to daunt
our courage, yet the remembering of his judgments is the cause of comfort; I
remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord (says that anointed of the Lord) and
have been comforted: though the appearance of them quench our delight in them,
My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times, And lest we should conceive it only of the Revelation of his justice in
his word (as may be collected sometimes in that Psalm to be conceived as
verses 137, 138.) Thou have destroyed the proud, (and by thy punishments
declared that) they are cursed which do err from thy Commandments, so that
there it must needs be understood of the execution of them in his wrath upon
the wicked, or in his wisdom upon the godly, which sorts of people may by them
see his equity, which will cause them to love him, and be sensible of their
own misery, which will move them in affection to fly unto him; to the Lord
himself, that his flesh trembled for fear of him, and he was afraid of his
judgments; and by his actions as well as words declared, that he conceived
Gods justice to be a just cause why every man should fear him; for though
before, in all joy, and with such solemnity as testified the delight of his
heart, he was bringing into his own City the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.9.
yet as soon as Vzzah was struck dead, he durst not adventure to bring it any
further, but desisted, though it were the testimony of the Lords presence: thus
both justice and mercy are the causes, either of them, of both love and fear,
and as the Lord does adorn the heart with his fear, so he does enrich the
soul with his love; as the Word by his promises draws our affections to him,
so the same Word by his threatenings causes us to stand in awe of him: we may
see them both then growing upon the same ground, and united in their causes. No
less in their companions.

For as serving of the Lord is required where the fearing of him is enjoined,
Deuteronomy. 10.12.
so the loving of him is prescribed where his service is commanded. Fear must
have with it walking in his ways, and walking in his ways may not be without
love: as there is required the keeping of the Commandments by them that love
him, so there is a delighting in his Commandments by them that fear him:
Where as true society and sociable unity for the greater increase of mutual
comfort, will seek to settle and solace themselves in the same (and that a
selected place) so these graces will be lodged in the same (and that a
peculiar) Cabinet: For both these pearls are not found together in every
Fountain, both these Gems are not dug together out of every ground, both
these flowers are not growing together in every Garden; for in the hearts only
of Gods children are they both harbored, in the souls only of Gods Saints
are they both nourished, in the affections only of the Lords elect are they
both planted Caine, Esau and Judas had a kind of fear, but false, for they
wanted love; the Pharisees and Simon Magus had a kind of love, but counterfeit,
for they wanted fear; if the former had had love, they had desired, and
desiring expected Gods grace: if the other had had fear, they would have
neglected their own respect, and have sought for and aimed at Gods glory; they
all wanted both true fear and love, for of the one sort the hearts were
envious, and they despaired, which love entertaines not; of the other, the
Spirits were vainglorious, and they presumed, which fear admits not. Neither
let it seem strange that fear and love, whose very names imply a great
diversity in their natures, should with an vnanime consent lodge in the same
breast, seeing the bitter Rue and the sweet Fig Tree draw moisture in the same
ground, the solitary Turtle and the sociable Dove must be offered in the same
sacrifice. Fear that seems to be bitter in the objects (threatenings and
judgments) and solitary in the operation (trembling and being ashamed to
appear in presence) and Love which is sweet in its proper objects (promises
and goodness) and pleasing in the effects (hope and boldness to approach the
Throne of grace) flowing from one heart as the Lords Altar, are as incense in
his acceptance. For they act one and the self same thing, though diverse
ways, in the soul of man.

For let it be granted, which cannot be denied, that Love unites, David will
affirm that Fear knitteth the heart unto the Lord. Let it be auerred, Psa.
86.11.
that Love willingly hears, Zephany dare assure any who shall make scruple of
it, that Fear is not altogether slack to receive, Zeph. 3.7.
instruction. Will Love pry into the secrets of the party loved, to be
partaker of them? Fear is as obseruant of, and as loath to want, those
mysteries which the party feared has reserved for it. Love wounds the soul
when it sees Gods favor, and Fear wounds the spirit in beholding his
displeasure. Love inflameth the desire to do what it knows is acceptable, and
Fear sets on fire the affections, to consume what it conceiues to be
abominable. Love humbles a man seeing the greatness of the beloueds mercy,
and Fear casts down the pride of mind, in viewing the glory of the feareds
Majesty, together with the number of its own offenses. Love as the fiery
pillar, guides in the night of adversity: and Fear as the Cloud, gives
directions to our paths in the day of prosperity. Love mitigateth the sorrow
which fear had caused, and Fear qualifieth that joy which Love produced.
Fear as Rue tempereth Loves Figge-like sweetness, lest it should pass the
golden Mean, and become unpleasing, and Love as the Fig Tree, moderateth
Fears Rew-like bitterness, that it exceed not its equal measure and be made
unprofitable.

As for their effects; Exodus 20.
is Gods mercy showed to thousands of them that love him? it is no less from
generation to generation on them Luke 1.50.
that fear him. Deuteronomy. 30.16.
Is Fear made partaker of his blessings? Love communicates of his bounty.
Life the promised recompense of Love? Death shall not be the allotted reward
of fear. Does Love indue the heart with abundance of celestial grace? Esaias
33.6.
Fear is a treasure to enrich the whole man with all good. Does Fear make man
acceptable unto God? Acts 10.30.
Love makes him at least as gracious with him. Does Love provide for posterity?
Fear leaves not the succession in calamity: if any either temporal,
spiritual, or eternal good attend upon the one, it likewise becomes a
follower of the other, so like they are in their effects. There is as mutual a
conspiring between them in their general and particular opposites. For as
displeasing of the Lord is avoided by Love, so offending of him is abhorred by
Fear. Will not Love cleave to Heathenish, either works or worship? Jos.
23.11, 12.16. 2 Kin. 17.35, 36
Fear will fly from heathenish, both confederacy and Idolatry. Fear hates
presumption as the Serpent the Ash tree, and Love shunneth rashness as the
Scorpion Aconitum. Josiah durst not disobey when he heard what was threatened,
nor David presume when he saw what was inflicted, 1 Chronicles. 13.12.
for they were withheld by Fear. The Disciples would not molest their Master,
Matt. 8.24, 25.
till there was no hope of safety, because they were bridled by Love, as the
Church would not suffer any to awaken her Spouse in sign of her affection.
Cant. 3.5.
Fear participating of the nature of the Lion which is terrible, loatheth a
putrified den, and love which communicates in property with the Dove which
is loving, shunneth a foul cottage: such is their sympathy in respect of
their opposites.

Now for their conditions. We cannot but see how nearly they are in them
conjoined, if we observe their mutual, 1. Excellency. 2. Dignity. 3.
Validity. Their Excellency appears to be the same, in that God has
indifferently made known himself (as it were by name) by either of them. We
justly make account of the name, especially if it be given of purpose, not by
peradventure, for the better finding out of the nature of that whereunto it is
given, and if Ambassadors receive their respect according to the Majesty of
their Master whom they present, how shall we not esteem of the excellency of
both Love and Fear, seeing the Lord himself who did all things (gave even
names) in number, weight and measure, in his sacred Word, where every one may
and ought to read, his pleasure will have us to conceive himself sometimes
when Fear is mentioned, and other sometimes when Love is repeated. Jacob calls
him the Fear of his father Isack, and John which lay on Christ's bosom, that
beloved Disciple, calls him Love. 1 John 4.
Can a Christian hear himself called in the Scriptures by the name of King,
and not conceive of what repute he is of through Christ in the eyes of God? Can
any hear the names of Fear and Love, to be transferred to the Lord himself,
and not confess the excellency, the mutual excellency of either? For he
bearing their name, they must needs partake of his nature. Their mutual
dignity is as manifest, for these two comprehend all what man can perform to
God, or which God requires of man. For our Savior for the accomplishing of
the Commandments, calls for nothing but Love, whereupon Paul says, Love is
the fulfilling of the law; Gal. 6.2.
and Solomon, who had too much experience of falling from God, having testified
his distaste of his too much tasted vanities, affirms that the end of all
which any can persuade, advise, or press, is to Fear, and to keep the
Commandments, Eccles. 12.
and he gives the reason, for that is the whole duty of man. Surely our
blessed Savior and his elect vessel, extolling Love, include fear, or they
contradict Solomon: and Solomon in his Fear, and keeping the Commandments,
implied Love, or he gainsaied our Savior and his Apostle. But they all
speaking by the same spirit, affirm the same thing. For nothing but these two
(which give life and luster unto every duty besides, and therefore joined
sometimes with one, sometimes with another) are above other, yet indifferently
required; And now Israel what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
fear and love him? Deuteronomy. 10.12.
Whereby we may observe these to be all are expected by him, accepted of him.
Showing in his expectation, what are to be performed to him by us as our
duties, intimating in his acceptance, how greatly he delights in these graces,
and in both manifesting what is in his estimation, the dignity of them: either
of which indeed were of no worth, if they were not both permanent. But now the
Validity of either is such, Cant. 8.
that as much water cannot quench love, nor the floods drown it, so many
troubles cannot ouerturne Fear, Job 15.15.
nor calamity conquer it. Cant. 8.7.
Love is not to be drawn by force, for it is strong as death; Fear not to be
united by flattery, for it is suspicious of danger. Genesis 20.20.
Love is not to be persuaded from God by any power, having fully tasted of his
favor: Fear is not to be enforced from the Lord by any terror, Psalm. 34.8.
having drunk deeply of the cup of his power. Dan. 3.17, 18. Ier. 32.40.
That heart wherein the Lord has put his fear, departs not from him; and that
soul which has yielded to his love, will not leave him. Fear looking on the
promises, and the power of him that made them, grows up to the perfection of
full holiness, till it be endued with it; 2 Cor. 7.1.
and love wanting full fruition of prepared joys, aspireth to perfect
happiness till it be invested in it. Neither of them ceasing before they be
made partakers of their expectations. Thus then they agree in their Commander,
Causes, Subjects, Acts, Effects, Opposites, and Conditions, of mutual
Excellency, Dignity, and Validity. And therefore as well the one as other, to
be harbored in every Christians heart. 1 John 4.18.
But perfect love drives out fear. It is true, one poison prevails against
another; Aug. ser. 13. de Verb. Apost. Timor servus est, Charitas libera est.
two contraries cannot subsist together in one subject in the same measure of
contrariety, and look how much soever is the power of a sonne-like love, so
much less is the strength of a slavish fear; where love has apprehended the
firmness 1 John 4.17.
of Gods favor, there is no doubting of his help in the time of danger, no
want of boldness in the day of judgment. That love then which the Lord
accepts as perfect, casts out that Fear which he rejects as faithless.
That love which strives in expectation of prepared pleasures to perfection,
banisheth that fear which labors in apprehension of allotted judgments
with painfulnesse, as plunged in the gulf of despair. To fear him then, not
as a Judge that will condemn, but as a Judge that will discharge us, is that
fear which love is so far from driving out, that it likes it, liking it
loves it, loving it cannot live without it: Psalm. 2.11.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling, is the
exhortation of David; where love is not harbored, joy cannot be expressed; as
then there must not be serving without fear, so neither must there be
trembling without love, for there is no service acceptable which wants
reverence, nor reverence commendable which is rendered without affection: And as
one well says, Hugo de S.V. de instit. nouit. c. 5.
Reuerentia sine amore magis seruilis, and amor sine reuerentia puerilis
iudicari debet. Reverence without love is too slavish, and love without
reverence is too childish: if there be love and not fear, it answers not the
Lords worth; if there be fear and not love, it argues the greatness of our
unwillingness: Psalm. 5.7.
and therefore what the Prophet David had exhorted others, he resolves and
promises that he himself will practice, I will come (says he) into thine
house, O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship
toward thy holy Temple. Mercy moves him out of love to come, and fear makes
him in reverence to continue; love draws him to the duty, and fear directs
him in his devotion. Such is the efficacy and dignity, end and use of them
where they are united, that this loving fear and fearing love is the way by
which God walks unto man, and the Ladder by which man climeth unto God. They
humble God, but exalt man, bring God down below, and lift man on high, Joh.
14.23.
for that heart where love is harbored will he inhabit, and that spirit which
in fear of his displeasure is bruised will he visit. Esa. 57.15.
For by them are the fetters of sin loosed from our feet, the manicles of
iniquity taken from our hands, the caul of hardness removed from our hearts,
and the some of calumnious blasphemy and blasphemous calumny wiped from our
mouths, for Love softneth as the Goats blood the adamantine, Fear breaks as
the hammer the stony, heart; Love loses the spirits as the hot Sun the
frozen Fountain, and sends out floods of tears; Fear makes man, as the
fire the hardest metals, pliable to every truth; Love and Fear united in one
soul, dissolve there the cursed works of the Devil, and kindle the fire of
true devotion, and therefore not to be severed, because the Lord is both just
and merciful, merciful and just. Fulg. l. 1. de rem. pecc. ad Fabiol. man's.
23.
Let all men therefore entertain these dear and inseparable associates. Let
the wicked learn to fear and love the Lord for his justice and mercy, that
being converted they may miss of that punishment which his justice has
threatened, and receive that pardon which his mercy has promised. Let the good
love and fear him for his mercy, and justice, that being prevented by his
mercy, through love of it they may continue in good works, and in Fear of his
justice keep themselves carefully from sinful ways. Let the wicked think of
his mercy, lest too much swallowing of his justice they forget his favor and
be denoured by sin through desperation. Let the good fear his iustce, lest
too much swilling his mercy they neglect his anger, and be seduced by Satan to
presumption. Let all men both love and fear him, fear and love him, that his
Angels may pitch their tents round about them, his Spirit in all their ways
direct them, himself take them, while they remain here, unto his protection,
and hereafter in his due time translate them to an immortal Crown of glory,
which he give unto all us, and every one that are his, for his sake who has
so dearly bought us, Jesus Christ the righteous, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

