THE EPISTLE CONGRATULATORIE OF Lysimachus Nicanor Of the Society of JESU, TO
THE COVENANTERS IN SCOTLAND.

VVherin is paralleled our sweet Harmony and correspondency in diverse material
points of Doctrine and Practice.

JUDGE. V. XXIII. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly
the Inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the
help of the Lord against the Mighty.

JER. I. X. See, I have this day set thee over the Nations, and over the
Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down,
to build, and to plant.

Anno Domini M.DC.XL.

LYSIMACHUS NICANOR of the Society of JESU, TO THE COVENANTERS IN SCOTLAND,
Wishes full Union and Peace with us.
I Do heartily congratulare with you (most worthy Brethren of the holy League)
and also rejoice in behalf of our Mother Church of Rome at your begun return
from your former errors and heresies. This puts us in expectation, that shortly
your return shall be full: for seeing in so short time, and with so good
success, you have forsaken the former erroneous Doctrine of the Protestants
concerning the Civil Magistrate, and have happily joined with us, you will also
betimes abjure all that yet remains. You have so well begun at the Head, the
Civil Magistrate, that we trust you shall embrace the remanent members of our
doctrine with a continued success, whereof you may justly glory.

Quod fortuna ratum faciat quis dicere falsum
Audeat, and tantae suffragia vincere sortis?
I remember the salvation that was given to the Scots Protector (who is now our
holy Father Pope Urbanus) about the time of his inauguration and consecration
to be Pope, Salve Protector Scotorum, and of his answer, Agnosco nomen and
omen: And now he is more ready to protect you then ever he was, since you
draw so near unto him. And yet at your last defection to your King again at
the Camp, we feared your revolt to your rejected Protestant doctrine: but this
your last Protestation, wherein you recollect your strength, 1 Julii, 1639.
puts us in hope that you will not return to your vomit.

And albeit the Anticovenanters think you so near the height of impiety, that
they say,

Nil erit ulterius quod vestris moribus addat
Posteritas.
Yet we think it is praise worthy that you are come to such degrees of
perfection, that your posterity shall be so far from out-stripping you, that
they, imitating you, shall take you for their pattern. To them it shall be
sufficient glory (seeing they cannot go beyond you) to do the same things
which you have done: eadem capient facientque minores. And therefore you do
most prudently in your Protestations defend your Covenanting without and
against Authority, lest acknowledging a fault herein, you should defraud your
posterity of the like remedy; or to use your own words, Protestat. in Sept.
1638. Reas. 5.
You should precondemne also the like laudable course in the like necessity to
be taken by the Posterity. And therefore it is your wisdom to stand to the
justification of all your proceedings, and to refuse an Act of Oblivion, and
accept of no less then an Act of Justification. It is so far from being a
fault which you have done, in taking the Kings Castles, and thrusting out his
other subjects out of their houses, with your other actions, that it is rather
a meritorious work; Protest. 18. December. 1638
and therefore you say well, We deserve and expect approbation and thanks from
his Majesty in his own due time, for keeping his evil Counselors and bad
Patriots from putting hand in his best subjects. And in your last Petition to
his Majesty after your Assembly, to desire your King to approve of your
proceedings, you say, that you are assured of his justification of your
actions, and that you are afraid you should be thought to have offended in
nothing so much as in Lenity.

The Anticovenanters are no more offended with your writ and printed Books,
(which they call infamous Libells, and Jesuiticall Pasquils) then they do
please us, not that we delight in your contention; as the Vultur in the
Apology beheld the strife of the Lion and the Bore, to snatch the prey from
both parties, but with an assured hope that within short time you shall become
our fratres fraterrimi, for your writings and actions promise no less; as being
most conducible for our ends, and grounded upon our arguments. You shall do us
no small pleasure, if you will cause to be drawn up such heads of Doctrine,
wherein we do now of late agree, that setting those apart, as not controverted,
we may confer with you in that wherein as yet we differ: and in the mean
time, as by your diligent perusal of our books, our strong reasons have
prevailed with you; so I pray you be instant in reading of them: which I hope
shall produce the like effect in that which remains. For a preparative to
this work, I will thankfully remember (so far as my weak memory will serve)
some points, which by hearing and reading your papers, I find first to be ours,
and from us wisely received by you.

Monarchical government does please us very well; for we dislike it so much,
that (to speak this under the Rose) we cannot simply grant it to the Pope
himself, but with such restrictions and limitations, that what we grant him
now, we may take it from him the next day to our selves, as I might instance in
many particulars; but especially in his infallibility and temporal power;
which we give him with such distinctions and limitations (if you will consider
our books) that we intend for our selves, that which we give him. But more
especially, we agree with you in contemning the Monarchical government of the
civil Magistrate: for as we say by that great pillar of our Church, Cardinal
Bellarmine: Billa^. de Romans Pont. li. 1. ca. 3.
Haec gubernatio id requirit, ut sit quidam in republica summus aliquis
Princeps qui and omnibus imperet, and nulli subjiciatur, that is, This
government requires this, that there should be indeed in the republic some
Prince that is Supreme, both to command all, and be subject to none. For this
government has this great inconvenience, that when the Prince does wrong his
subjects (as you protest your King does you) there is no remedy but patience;
for why, all the Judges under him are but his Deputies, and all the power and
authority they have of the Sword, is the Kings, and it can never stand with
sense or reason, that his Majesty's own Power and Authority can be used
against Himself. And hence it is, that Princes being Legislators, are above
their Laws, and may dispense with them as they think expedient. To this
purpose says the Prince of the Schoolmen, Princeps non obligatur ^nis legibus,
quia nemo sibi imperat, and sibi ipsi lege^ imponit; Tho^. quaest 93. a. 5.
A Prince is not bound to his own laws, because no man does command himself, or
impose a Law on himself. Though this see^e strange to ignorant men, yet it is
most true, and therefore consider it well, for its grounded upon good reason:
for the Law is given by a Superior to an Inferior, and no man can be inferior
to himself, and so can give no Law to himself; and since he can give no Law to
himself, none of his Laws can oblige him.

But what? shall he be an Exlex, a lawless man then? I answer with the
Schoolmen in two Aphorisms. I. Princeps non potest servare legem suam ex
affectu obedientiae, quia nullum agnoscit Superiorem in republica: sed tantum
ex affectu illius virtutis, in cujus materia collocatur id quod lege statutum
est: The Prince cannot keep his own Law, out of the affection of Obedience,
because he acknowledges none in the republike to be Superior to him: But only
he can keep his Law, out of the affection he has to that virtue, in the matter
whereof, that which is ordained by Law, is placed. II. Aphorism. Princeps
tenetur quoadvim directivam, non quoad coactivam, ac proinde tam^tsi peccet
contra suam legem, non tamen fit reus poenae per legem impositae quia nemo
potest legitime puniri nisi a Superiori. The Prince is bound to his Laws in so
far as they have a virtue to direct him, but not as they have any coactive
power. And therefore albeit he transgress his Laws, yet he does not become
guilty of the punishment of the Law, because no man can be punished lawfully,
but by his Superior. For this cause, that saying of Cyrillus is remarkable.
Nemo leges regum impune reprobat, nisi reges ipsi; in quibus pravaricationis
crimen locum non habet. Prudenter enim dictum est* impium esse, qui dixerit
regi, Inique agis. No man can reject the Laws of Kings without punishment, but
Kings themselves, in whom the crime of their transgression has no place: Thom.
loc. cit. Suar^^^th. 3. cap. 35. Laym. in* lib. 1. De ^^^th. cap. 9. Decan.
cap. 6. de legel ^^^ana. quaest. 12. Syl. cit. quaest. 14. Vasqu^^. cit. cap. 3.
for it is wisely said, that he is an ungodly man who shall say to the King.
Thou do wickedly. As this is the judgment of the Fathers and Modern
Divines, so is it the common judgment of all the Schoolmen, as they say
themselves.

Therefore since in Monarchical government, the supreme Prince has such
absolute power, it were well done to change it into a mixed government. If we
had suffered the Roman Emperor to remain an absolute Monarch, (as you do your
King) we had never gotten so much of our wills, and his Holiness the Pope would
have been hindered from the fruition of his lawful supremacy over Emperors:
and if you shall endure this your government, it will be a great impediment to
the ends you aim at. For this cause, regimen temperatum ex Monarchia,
Aristocratia, and Democratia mitius est^ its a more mild government that is
mixed of Monarchy, Aristocracie, and Democracie. You do well then to aim at
it, for it is our advice. Bellarmine in that same place speaks home to you.
It llar. de Romans Pont. lib. 1. c. 3.
Prasides provinciarum vel civitatum ne sint regis vicarii, aut annui judices,
sed very principes; qui and imperio summi principis obediant, and interim
provinciam vel civitatem suam non tanquam alie^am, sed ut propriam moderentur.
Let not the Presidents of Provinces, or cities be the Kings deputies, or
yearly Judges, but let them be true Princes; who may both be obedient to the
command of their chief Prince, and in the mean time govern their province or
city, not as it were another man's, but as their own; by this means, both a
kind of Monarchy, Aristocracie, and Democracie may have place in the
republicke.

Proceed therefore to the perfecting the good work which you have begun.
Consider the power you have had, as absolute Lords over your Tenants, and as
Princes and Chief over your Clans, every one of you being little Kings, like
Dionysius Corinthi, commanding and ruling your Vassals, as you pleased; but see
now how it is abridged by a new form of justice, by introducing Justice of
peace, etc. Which (to say the truth) though it tend to the settlement and peace
of the Kingdom, yet it mainly opposes your former domineering, and makes your
Vassals look more to the King and his Laws, then to you and your commands. It
is certain by our well grounded principles, that there is no reason that your
King of Scotland should be a more absolute Monarch then the Emperor of Rome; he
is not like your King an absolute Prince by succession; but a conditional
prince by election; tied by such strict conditions, which if he transgress, he
may be thrust from them. For first, the Prince Electors may choose whom they
please to be Emperor, by their Imperial Laws. Secondly, the Princes Electors
have power to judge and cognosce upon the Emperors fault^. Thirdly, if they
find him worthy of deposition, they may depose him. And by the Emperor Elect
his own consent, it is statute and ordained, that if the Princes Electors, or
the whole body of the Kingdom shall withstand, or take arms against the
Emperor, it shall be accounted lawful without any crime of rebellion. Ex
sanctione Henrici 7. and aurea bulla Caroli 4. and capitulatione Caesarta. Read
this capitulation in Melchior Goladast. tom. 3. page 424. which is thus, Quod
si nos ipsi, (inquit Imperator) quod absit, aut quisquam successoru^ nostrorum,
quod non speramus processu temporis aliquo, huic nostrae statutioni, aut
ordinationi contravenire voluerit aut eam retractare aut alio quevis mode
violare prasumserit: praesentium literaru^ autoritate, quas mera nostra
autoritate, and potestatis regiae plenitudine, ex certa nostra Majestatis
scientia, nec non cum consensu and been placito praefatorum sacri Romani
imperii principum Electorum, in robur perpetuae firmitatis sancivimus, ex tunc
tam ipsi Electores quam caeteri Principes, ecclesiastici and saculares,
praelati, comites, barons, nobiles and communitates sacrinostri imperii,
universi ac singuli praesentes and suturi, licitum habeant sine rebellionis aut
infidelitatis crimine, resistendi ac contradicendi nobis, and successoribus
nostris, Romanorum regibus, vel imperat^ribus, in perpetuam libertatem.

And I will assure you, his Holiness the Pope was not sleeping when the
Emperor was thus clogged: and albeit it may be thought that this change of
simple Monarchy in this mixed government, has been a chief ground of all the
bloody war of Germany this long time by gone, which would not have bin if it
had remained an absolute Monarchy: for while it so continued an absolute
Monarchy in the Primitive Church, their plea was, Rogamus Caesar, non
pugnamus: and, aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere. Ambros^^^l. contra
Auxen^.
Yet let not this trouble Us: for herein is fulfilled the prophecy of Christ
while he said, He came not to send peace, but the sword. And again, this
change is necessary, for else his Holiness the Pope should be subject to the
Emperor, according to that of Paul, Let every soul be subject to superior
powers: which he neither is nor ought to be. Romans 13.1.
And therefore Bernard is herein deceived himself, while he makes this a
general rule without exception, Bernard Epist. 42.
saying, Qui conatur ab ha^ regula excipere, conatur decipere: for both Pope
with us, and people with you must be a excepted. The Church of God has ^^ter'd
too much already in the Primitive times, she has been too long in the Category
of Passion, crying with tears Oramus non pugnamus: she ought now to be in the
predicament of action, with Pugnamus and oramus, holding (that I may use your
own words) a supplication in the one hand, and a sword in the other To this
purpose Master Andrew Ramsey Minister of Edinburgh said pretty well, that it
was Gods will that the Primitive Church should confirm the truth by suffering,
and that now the truth being confirmed, its his will that we defend the truth
by action, in resisting Tyrants; and what war is better then that which is for
Religion? But here an Auticoveuanter will reply perchance, and say. Where did
ever any suffer under Tyrants for defending of your Presbyteriall government of
active or ruling-elders, and of passive or ruled-elders, which had its first
beginning from Calvin in some sort; but as you have it, it was never in the
world till the year 1638. For in Geneva it is only proper to the supreme
Magistrate to choose the Lay-^lders: for they are only Commissioners for the
Seigniori^, neither has the Minister any voice in their Election, much less
the Multitude: and all that Calvin gave them, is praesse moribus, and in Church
matters they are called ad consiliu^, but not ad consensum. But now in
Scotland, not only the whole Church takes the supreme power to it self, but
also every parish takes upon it to be an absolute independent society, quire
contrary to the practice of Geneva, choosing their Ministers and Elders also
without number, and to those Elders equal power is given with the Minister, in
Presbyteries and Assemblies, in giving decisive sentence in matters of faith,
and deciding of controversies, whereof, God knows, they are most ignorant: and
in a word, they want nothing of the power of the Minister, but that they preach
not, nor baptize in public congregations: and yet its common to see Laymen
among them in private Conventicles to take upon them the calling of a Minister
in preaching and praying. Or where did any at any time suffer for abjuring
Episcopacie as an antichristian government? so this being a truth never yet
confirmed by suffering, must not now be defended by resisting, according to
Ramseyes own rule, but being an Article of his negative faith, it must first be
confirmed by suffering. I would enquire then (says the Anticovenanter) of
Ramsey, if he dare suffer for it, and be the Protomartyr in this cause? but he
would be like the man that came to the marriage without the wedding garment,
dumb and speechless. Or if he speak, it would be negative like his faith,
saying with Athanasius, Quod non a patribus profectum est-sed nuper inventum,
quid de co aliud exist imari debeat quam illud ipsum cujus Paulus mentionem
facit, 1. Timoth. 4.1.

But finding my self dig^^ssing, I will return to the point, which I was about,
concerning government. Seeing this mixed government is most conducible for your
ends, it were requisite that your Nobles would assume to themselves Princely
Authoriti^ (as is thought some of you have done) and make progress in this
good work. For (let me speak it between me and you) till you Kings government
be changed, you shall never lawfully resist him. For I have perused all your
Divines and find them all condemning the lawfulness of resisting such a King
as yours is: but at the most they hold it lawful in some cases only to resist
conventionall or conditional Princes. Hence it was that the Ministers of
Wittenberge were most opposite to our doctrine of resisting Princes, ^p^^
M^^^^. W^^^^h.
in their public sermons, but when they beheld upon what express conditions
the Emperor was elected to the Empire to the which he was not borne, then they
said, Docuimus quidem hactenus nullo modo resistendum esse Magistratui
ignoravimus vero ex legum civilium praescripto, id in certis quibusdam casibus,
etiam legitime fieriposse. We have hitherto taught that the Magistrate by no
manner of way ought to be resisted: for we did not know that by the prescript
of the civil law, it might in some certain cases be lawfully done. So Pareus
(as you know) was the last that wrote upon that subject, whose opinion when it
was condemned by your learned Divines; his son Philippu^ Pareus purposing to
defend his fathers opinion, yields his sword* and gives over the combat even
at the entry, Append. a^ 13. ad Romans
in those words: Loquitur enim D. parens meus, ut and Theologicaeteri juxta cum
politicis and jurisconsultis iis quorum sententiam ac judicium in hoc argumento
sequutus est parens noster, non derege absoluta potestate indut^, sed de
principibus sub condition admissis. That is, my father, and the rest of the
Theolognes, Politicians and Jurisconsalts, whose sentence and judgment in this
argument my father has followed, do not speak of a King endued with absolute
power, but of Princes who are conditionally admitted. And therefore if you
would make any lawful resistance for time to come, its most necessary that
you labor for a change of government now, and make your selves free. We have
Scripture for us, But if thou may be made free, use it rather. 1. Cor. 7.26
Claudian did but deceive himself, neither can I endure him while he says

Fallitur ogregio quisquis sub principe credit
Servitium: nunquam Libertus gratior extat
Quam sub rege pio.
Nay, I say, Quam sub rege meo, such a King as is mine; so mine, that I may
un-make him again, whom I have made mine. Try this at your Parliament, see if
your King will yield to this order which I have told you of the Roman Emperor,
to subject himself to you his Subjects, that the Majesty may reside in you.
Audentes fortuna juvat. Your success may be gloryed of. Your King has yielded
so much unto you, that you may be confident to have this yielded also. If he
had been a merciless Tyrant, he had been so far from granting you all your
Petitions, that he might have imposed more burdens upon you, who did refuse
obedience to that which is judged by all your prime Doctors to be lawful. Thus
those two famous Doctors of yours Gualter and Bullinger did write in an Epistle
sent to the Schismatics in England, who had opposed themselves, as you do, to
the Service Book of England. If in case (say they) any of the people be
persuaded that those things savor of Popery, let them be taught the contrary,
and perfectly instructed therein: and if so be, through the importunate crying
out hereupon before the people by some men, many be disquieted; let them beware
that do so, that they bring no greater yoke upon their own necks, and provoke
Queen Elizabeth her Majesty, and bring many Ministers in such danger, as they
cannot rid themselves again.

I will show you an example hereof, which fell out in Germany at Magdeburge,
and within the Territories of Marquess Albertus. The Prince required the
Ministers to follow the whole book of Augustan's confession, where is a
Liturgy that has all that is in yours, which you have condemned; but some m^e
ceremonies, and does retain the name of the Massebook. Refusal thereof was
made by the Nobility, Gentry, Ministers, and Citizens, even as some of all this
rank among you have done. The Court hereon ran upon another deliberation,
proposing Articles, which do not alter the doctrine and Liturgy, but thrust
upon them m^e Ceremonies ( which yet howsoever may well enough be borne, says
Melancton, whom you call the light of Germany) adding withal a threatening,
that they, who will not follow this prescription, should depart the Land. Upon
this some too forward Ministers affirmed, It were good to affright the Court
with some terrible writing, with the scare of Sedition, and with this Scar-crow
to repress and hinder further alteration. Ill^ricus Flaccius was chief man,
the Demetrius in this upreare, crying out (as your Ministers did) That rather
desolation should be made of the Church: and, Princes are to be frighted with
terror of Insurrection. But for my part (said Melancton I will be author of no
such sour advice. Whereupon the ^est of the Ministers did slander Melancton
(as Anticovenante^s say you do them) as Popishly affec^ed, Cou^^h Melan. part.
2 page 90.91.100.
and was upon the plot to reduce Popery, and wrote to Calvin to this effect.
But truly I am of Beza's opinion, that they accused him without cause, as
afterward Calvin knew more truly. For (says Beza) at the beginning it was not
known with what intention that evil spirit, ^^^a (...) 1^^0.
and whole Troup of the Flaccinians raised so many tumults, and now at this
time does hinder the work of God against Papists. Thus Beza.

And it is true indeed, that the Flaccinians, who thus did combine against
their Prince, did more advance our cause, then Melanc^on. and the remanent of
your Doctors; whose judgment was, that the Church should not be troubled by
refusing the Service book: and (as Melanctons words are) to wrangle about a
Surplesse, or the like matter; where wisemen will exclaim against us, that we
withstand and disobey Authority, and nourish contention with a foolish
forwardness.

Now seeing it has pleased your King to deal thus with you, to lay no heavier
burdens upon you, who have complained of a light one: but to grant you all that
hitherto you have p^titioned; see if you can obtain of him a change of the
government. But I pray you, do it with great prudence and circumspection,
laying such grounds, as you may firmly build upon them. For, if at the first
you declare your self, and say plainly; Sir, we desire your government
changed, he will resile, and not grant it: and to proceed suddenly from one
extremity to another, is difficult. Therefore first of all, by such fair
ways as you can, be instant to take from him his negative voice in Synods and
Parliaments, which is a thing so essential to Soveraigntie, that it stand^th
an^ ^alleth with it. For he being destitute of this P^llar, if in Parliaments
by pluraliti^ of voices it be carried, that you will not have this man to reign
over you, of necessity he mu^^ be gone. Secondly, see if you can take from him
the power of making Laws, and let the Parliament and Synods be the Law makers.
You have taken this de facto already in your large pro^e^ation, in September.
1638. where you say in express terms, that the Parliament and Syned are the
Lawmakers, and the Law-interpreters. As you have it de facto, see if you can
get it de jure, established by Law; which if you obtain, you may think you
have attained your end: for, if not the King but Parliament and Synods be the
Legislators, he must he subject to such Laws as it shall please them to make,
who are the two Supreme judicatories, to which in your protestation you
appeal, from the King and his Council: thus subjecting your King to
Parliament and Synod, which is a thing that ^ee can hardly suffer. But to
please him withal, appoint him to be the Executioner of the Laws, and so let
him have the name of a King. But it may be, that if he have no more but the
execution, of your Laws, that he shall rid himself of that too, if you grant
him no more power; because men will say, He is not your King, but your Officer,
or H! etc. Thirdly, if so be, that he shall be content with what portion of
authority you judge sufficient, take heed that he fall not upon you who have
thus curbed him, and execute the laws against you: and therefore to make all
cock sure, because he cannot do all by himself, but must have Officers under
him; let this be granted to you also, to be Chusers of his Officers, and let
those be such as you know most expedient for you: and so they shall be rather
your men, then His. I heard that all this was motioned by you, but you have not
shown me what success it has taken.

Coven^^te^: in^^^m f^r d^se^si^e. a^g. 3.
And I cannot but applaud you for rejecting that former error, to defend that
Kings are of Divine Institution, and do now hold with us, that they are of
humane Institution by positive Laws. Inregnis hominum potestas regis est a
popule, Bell de Concil^l^^, 2. cap. 19.
quia populus facit regem. In the Kingdom of men, the power of the King is
from the people, says Bellarmine: and commends Navarre, Qui non dubitat
affirmare, nunquam populum ita potestatem suam in regem transfer, quin illam
sibi in habitu retineat, ut in certis quibusdam casibus etiam Al^^, astu.
actu recipere potest. Who does not doubt to say, that the people did never so
transfer their power to the King, but they did retain it habitually
themselves; so that in certain cases they may actually take it from him
again. Let all Protestant Doctors condemn this, yet let it never repent you
to have received light from us. The best works that ever Augustixe wrote, were
the books of retrectations; and the best works that you can do, is to forsake
your errors. You say the people makes the Magistrate, and may be without him,
and have been many a year without him. The Majesty does remain in the people,
and therefore, as it is said in the Gospel, May I not do with my own what I
please? Bell, de cle^ie lib. 3. (...) 6.
So say we, Potestas immediate est tanquam in subject^ in tota multitudine,
and si causa legitime adsit, potest multitudo mutare regnum in Aristocratiam
and Democratiam. The power is immediately, as in the subject, in the multitude,
and if there be a lawful cause, the multitude may change the Kingdom into an
Aristocracie, or Democracie. When the King becomes an enemy to the Common
wealth, he ought to be removed, Melius est ut pereat unus, quam unitas. And
therefore you may not without reason say (as in your Sions Plea) to his
Majesty, We must not lose you, and the Kingdom, by proferring your fancies,
and groundless affections, before sound reason. You should complain to the
heart that the head is much distempered; The Lion must be cured of the Kings
evil. The Potter may destroy the vessel which he has made himself. (But I
pray you let this be spoken under the Rose; for if we too much divulge it, it
will make both you and us most odious to all princes, who will keep us at such
a low ebb that we shall never be able to rise against them when we think it
necessary.) When the shepherd becomes a Wol^e, let the dogs cha^e him away:
he is for the people, and the people is not for him; when he turns to their
hurt, let one who is for th^^r good be put in his place: for you know who said,
Virtuti, non gener^ debetur regnum. And it is better to have Kings by election
then succession. And therefore you do mos^ learnedly reason from the
unreasonableness and absurdities of those Court Parasites (in your learned
informations for Defensive arms against the King) who attribute such illimited
power to their Kings, Covenanters in^^^ at for D^^^nsive. ^^g. 1.
that they loose all the bonds of civil society against all the bonds of
oaths and laws; suffering the Prince to do what he pleases, to the ruin of
Religion, the Church and Kingdom; and the people shall do nothing but suffer
themselves to be massacred or else stie, which is impossible. In parallel to
this we say thus: The danger is so evident, Des^^^^ of (...) Cath^^^^ 5.
and ^evitable, that God has not sufficiently provided for our salvation and
the preservation of the Church and holy Laws, if there were no way to
restrain such wicked Princes, etc. (...).
this were (as you say) to expone all to the fury of the Prince. Ibid.
And therefore we conclude in the same place with those words, The bond and
obligation we have entered into for the service of Christ and his Church, far
exceeds all other duties which we owe to any humane creature: and therefore
where the obedience to the inferior hinders the service of the other, which
is superior, we must by law and order discharge our selves of the inferior.
Covenanters inform for Defensive.
This our conclusion is most consonant to the words and sense of your second
and fourth argument for war.

And since you were put to this necessity to take up arms for your defense,
notwithstanding of your Kings specious pretenses, who could condemn you to
press and urge the people, by your reasons to take up arms, to resist the
violence of your King, Covenanters inform for Defensive. 57. Sigebert in anno
1088.
who was furiously inveding you as you say? and to thrust all away from their
places that did withstand you, as traitors to you, the Church and Country, and
unworthy of your society. I do not regard, neither need you to be offended at
that idle speech of Sigebert; neither would I hear him, if he did not ask
leave of all good men (from which number I will not be excluded) to speak,
while he says thus, ^o speak, with the leave of all good men, this only
novelty. I will not say heresy was not crept into the world (before the days
of ^elldebrand) that Priests should teach the people that they owe no
subjection to evil Kings, and that although they have sworn fidelity to him
yet they must yield him none; neither may they be counted perjured for holding
against their King, but rather he that obeys the King is excommunicate, and
he that rebelleth against the King, is absolved from the blemish of disloyalty
and perjurie. etc. Thus he. And is this a matter to be condemned, I pray you?
Do we not clearly see this performed among your selves? the King himself
will approve of it: for you are confident of it, while you say: We are very
confident of his Majesty's approbation to the integrity of our hearts,
pr^^e^^^^se S^p^^ 1633.
and peaceablenesse of our ways and actions all this time past; and do
protest that we will still adhere to our former proceedings mutual defense,
etc. And good reason, for rebellion for such an important business against a
King, cannot be disloyalty; and they that have not followed your course,
justly deserve Excommunication and Banishment. Athanasius was but too silly a
man, being under the tyranny of Constantius the Arrian Heretic, that did not
incite the people to rebellion, or to promove the designs of the Emperors
brother, who was Orthodoxe, and worthier of the Crown. Which if he had done, he
might have made a better Apology to the Emperor Constantius, who charged him
with the same, as if he had stirred up his brother, and the people against him.
If he had done so, he might have made Peter's Apology, Its better to obey God
then man. But because he did it not, he makes an Apology most beseeming a
coward, who did not (as you did) with counsel and courage lead the people to
war against their Prince: but says thus, Vincat quaso, apud te, Ad an^si^
Apo^^^ a^ Constant.
veritas: and ne relinquas suspicionem contra universam ecclesia^, quasitalia
ant cogitentur aut scribantur a Christianis, (...) potissimum Episcopis. Let
truth I pray thee prevail with thee, and leave not a sus^^cion against the
Catholic Church, as if such things were either thought or written by
Christians, and especially by Bishops. I am not so mad, I am not beside my
self, O Emperor, that thou should suspect I had any such thought; I am not
so mad, neither have I forgotten the voice of God, which says, Curse not the
King in thy heart, nor backbite the mighty in the secrets of thy chamber: for
the birds of the air shall tell it, and the fowls that she shall betray it.

Covenanter^ inform. for D^fensive. 4.
This man was too fearful: but you were of another spirit, encouraging the
people, and dehorting them from being afraid of shadows; yea, your Priests
were good patterns to the rest to follow. There was one of them, who is worthy
(if you could permit Images) to have his Statue engraven in Marble, Da^id (...).
to eternize him to the worlds end, who went so stoutly to the Camp upon his
horse, with two Carabins at his Sadle, two Pistols at his side, with a broad
Scottish sword; those five weapons were like unto David's sive smooth stones
which he took out of the brook to kill Goliath with. This David no doubt would
have killed sive English at the first encounter with his five deadly weapons,
and would have returned with triumph, saying with Paul, I have fought a good
fight: for, 2 Timothy 4.7. Nehem. 6.11.
should such a man as he fly? But if any shall produce the Canons of diverse
general Councels, ordaining Clergy men that bear arms to be degraded and put
from their place: And that of Davenant, Christ^^ gladium verbi promittit, non
ferri: Davenant deter. quaest. 4.
fugam suadet, non pugnam. Christ promises to his Pastors the sword of the
word, and not the sword of Iron: he persuades to ^lie, but not to sight: the
answer is easy. Those general Councels though not intoto, yet pro tanto, are
like your 6. general or n^tionall Councels, which you have condemned, because
they were against you: and Davonant is a Bishop, and so your adversary.

which you at last, being put to it, do acknowledge to belong to the Church,
not to the King. What has he to do there?

Let Kings take care of civil state,
Let Church, of Church Matters debate.
This was the presumption and error of Henry the 8. King of England, Bell. de
Romans Pontis. l. 1. ca. 7.
as Bellarmine observes. Is enim se caput ecclesiae Anglicanae constituit, and
eodem modo censuit alios principes capita suprema in suis ditionibus esse. For
he made himself Head of the Church, and after the same manner judged other
Princes to be supreme heads within their own Dominions. And thus King Charles
would also be: therefore in your Pretestations, you declare that it is your
ancient grievance, Protestat. 18. December. 1638.
That his Majesty takes upon him, that spiritual power and authority, which
properly belongs to Christ, as only King and Head of his Kirk The ministry
and execution whereof is only given to such as bear Ecclesiastical
government of the same So that in his Majesty's person some men press to erect
a Popedom. And all your Protestant Divines do hold the same doctrine, as so
many Court Parasites. The Fathers went too far on this way, August. contra
l^^^^^^ P^ti^^ae lib. 2. c. p. 92.
I will but name Augustine: All men (says he) ought to serve God, by common
condition, as men: in another sort by several gifts and offices, by the which,
some do this, some do that. No private person could command idols to be
banished clean from amongst men which was so long before prophesied. Idem
contra Cr^s^. lib. 8. cap. 51.
Therefore Kings* beside their duty to serve God common with all men) have, in
that they be Kings, how to serve the Lord in such sort, as none can do, which
are not Kings; for in this, Kings, as they are Kings, serve the Lord ( as God
by David enjoined them, Psalm. 1.) if in their Kingdoms they command that which
is good, and prohibit that which is evil not in civil affairs only, but
also in matters concerning Divine Religion, etc. This man is so confident that
in his 50. Epistle he cries out, Who being in their right wits dare allege
the contrary? But truly the Donatists held the better part, they durst allege
the contrary; so dare We, so dare you do: macti viri virtute nova. The fathers
judgment in such state matters is not approved by his Holiness the Pope.
Bellarmine our trusty Champion speaks better for you: That the civil
Magistrate regit homines, ut homines sunt, and magis ratione corporum quam
animarum: but on the contrary, the Church Governor regit homines, ut
Christiani sunt, and magis ratione animarum quam corporum: ille habet pro fine
temporalem quietem, and salutem populi* iste vitam and sempiternam
foelicitatem: ille utitur naturalibus legibus. and institutis humanis; iste
legibus divinis. The King governs men as they are men, and rather in regard
of their bodies then their souls: but the Church Governor governs men as
they are Christians, and rather in regard of their souls then their bodies.
The end of the one is to procure the temporal quiet and safety of the people;
the other has for his end, everlasting life and happiness: the one uses
natural Laws and humane institutions; but the other uses Divine Laws.

And whereas your Doctors say, that the King is the Keeper of the Tables and
the Minister of God for our good, and if for our good, then chiefly for our
principal good, the good of our souls; to have a care of Religion according
to the examples of the religious Kings under the Law, and Christian Princes
under the Gospel, etc. Those, and many such like idle arguments are not worthy
that I should stand to answer them, especially in an Epistle; for there is no
such need of Kings, the people may well enough be without them, Covenanters
informat. for Defensive. arg. 3.
for there was none till Cains days, as you say: The Church was well governed
in the Primitive time while there was no Christian King. Ad annos fermee 30^.
nullus fuit in Ecclesia Christianus Princeps secularis. For the space of 300
years there was no secular Christian Pr^nce in the Church, says Bellarmine.
And therefore, says he, Bell. de laicis, cap. 17.
Christus Ecclesiam regendam Petro and Episcopis commisit, non Tyberio and ejus
Praefectis: He committed the government of his Church, to Peter and the
Bishops, not to Tyberius the Emperor and his Officers. He said to Peter, Feed
my sheep; not so to Kings, but, Do my Prophets no wrong. The Churchmen must
give an account to God of men's souls, Kings have no such account to make, as
our Stapleton says well with you and therefore concludes, that not Kings, but
the Church is to be obeyed in Ecclesiastical businesses; according to that of
the Apostle, Obedite praepositit vestris. Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves unto them for they watch for your soul. Heb. 13 17.
You do then as it becomes you, not to regard the Kings words, nor ohey his
Proclamations: but to persuade the people (that I may use your own words) to
submit themselves obediently to follow their Leaders, Covenanters inform for
Pes^n^ive.
whom God at this time has largely furnished with counsel and courage for the
good of his Church and Kingdom: The reason why they should follow them, and
not be carried away with the Kings Proclamations: quia potestas civilis
subjecta est potestati spirituals quando utraque pars est ejusdem reipub. B^^^
de (...) l^b. (...).
Christianae.

A fourth error which you with good success have abolished, that you deny the
power of convocating and distr^ss^ng of Assemblies to belong to the Supreme
Magistrate. In the Protes^ation in July 1638. you maintain your power of
convocating Assemblies: therefore in the 27. August, 1638. it was well put in
among your Instructions before the Assemblies, VIII. Instru^^.
that the ablest man in each Parish should be provided to dispute Depotestate
supremt Magistratus in Eccclesiasticis, praesertim in convocandis Conciliis.
Its your wisdom to assemble when he commands you, so long as it is conducible
for your ends; but yet you have power to assemble in a National Assembly, in
what place of the Kingdom you please. S^^rat^^^ (...).
Socrates did smell too much of a Court Parasite, while he said, we make
mention of Emperors throughout this History, for that since they became
Christians, ^cclesiastical matters depend on them and the greatest Synods have
been, and yet are called by their appointment. He offended you who said that as
Moses is custos utriusque Tabulae, so is he custos utriusque tubae: as the
civil Magistrate is keeper of both the Tables; so he is keeper of both the
silver Trumpets, for war, for calling of Assemblies, and dismissing of them*
and that you would but blow the Trumpet of Sedition, it (without the Kings
authority) you should convocate Assembles either for peace, or for war.

The Marquess of Hamilton was too presumptuous, being called with the Kings
Authority, to discharge your last Assembly, which (as you said well) was to
raise Christ's Court: and therefore, it was not ill advised by one of you, that
seeing the Marquess was faithful to his Master the King, so you ought to be
faithful to your Master the King of kings Jesus Christ, and to defend his
Royal prerogative above all the Kings of the earth. In your answer to the
Marquess of Hamilious Declaration, you affirm that your Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is independent, and in your Zions Plea* you say, that your
Presbyterian discipline is the Scepter of Christ, swaying his own house
according to his hearts desire, the soul the chief Commander in the c^mp
Royal; and your ^ravers says, De dis^^p E ^cl s^^ ^g. 142.
Huic disciplinae omnes orbis Principes and Monarchas fasces suos submittere,
and parere necesse est: There is a necessity that all the Princes and Monarchs
should submit their Scepters, and obey this discipline. And your Mae Lellan
(whom some call a fool) spoke not foolishly, while he preached, that the King
had no more to do to meddle with your Assemblies; then you have to meddle with
his Parliaments. It was wisely then don't by you, in rejecting any protestation
or appellation from your Assembly by the Bishops, and their adherents, to the
Kings Majesty; for such appellations ought not to be, seeing there is none
Supreme above your National Assemblies. And therefore, as you have not
hitherto regarded their protestation and appellation, but have proceeded
against them to deposition, and excommunication* so continue, and be not
dismayed though they should renew their protestations and appellations, even in
the words of Athanasius, in protesting against, and appealing from the partial
coun ell of Tyrus, Athanas^* polo^. cap. 2.
which appellation and protestation of Athanasius, and the rest of the orthodox
Bishops was in these words: Because we see many things spitefully contrived
against us, and much wrong offered the Catholic Church under our rames we be
forced to request that the debating of our matters may be kept for the Princes
most excellent person. We cannot bear the drifts and injuries of our enemies;
and therefore, require the cause to be referred to the most religious and
devout Emperor, before whom we shall be suffered to stand in our own defense,
and plead the right of the Church, etc. If those your Bishops flying to the
King, as Athanasius and the rest of the orthodox Bishops did to the Emperor,
shall procure an edict or command from the King, (as those did from the
Emperor) to charge you all to appear before him to plead your cause, you ought
not to appear as that miserable Synod of Tyrus did: The Edict was so
peremptory, that they durst not resist. The Edict was in these words: Your
Synod has decreed I know not what in a tumult and uproare, while you seek to
pervert truth by your pestilent disorder for hatred against your fellow
Bishops. But the divine providence will (I doubt not) scatter the mischief of
your contention, and make it plain in our sight, whether your Assembly had any
regard of truth, or not. You must therefore all of you resort hither, to show
the reason of your doings, for so does it seem good and expedient to me; to
which end, I willed this rescript to be sent you, that as many of you as were
present at the Council of Tyrus, without delay repair to the place of our
abode, there to give an account how sincerely and soundly you have judged, and
that before me, whom your selves shall not deny to be the sincere Minister of
God in such cases etc.

I say then, if you shall receive such a charge from your King, you should not
obey: (for in your sense that is, To betray the Royal prerogative of your King
Jesus Christ) but return the answer of Core, Dathan and Abiram with
ingemination, We will not come, n^m 16.12, 14. J^r. 2 31.
we will not come: or your Lords, Lay Elders may return that of Jeremy, We are
Lords, We will no more come unto thee. And if your King will not be content
with your answer, prosecute your begun course with all diligence and
earnestness; having begun in the spirit, end not in the flesh, but go on with
that which they call disorders, till you get the King in your power, and then
he shall know what subjects you will be. If the people of one city falling in
sedition for matters of Religion, so prevailed and passed all power of
resisting, (...) lib. ^. c^p. ^4.
that Anastasius the Emperor was fain to come to an open place without his
Crown. and by Heralds to signify to the people, that he was ready with a
very good will to resign the Empire into their hands: how much more may you
who have many cities, by continuing your courses force your King to resign his
Crown of Scotland? And howbeit the people of that city seeing the Emperor in
so pitiful a case, were moved with the spectacle and changed their minds, and
besought the Emperor to keep his Crown, and promised for their parts to be
quiet: yet do not you so, till your King shall perform all your demands.

From that which has been done by you, 5.6.
and repeated by me, I see other two errors banished, which I conjoyn for
brevities sake, lest my Epistle should increase to a Treatise, viz. That the
King is no more to be President, nor supreme Governor in causes
Ecclesiastical. It is the folly of your Divines, to make the Moderator of your
Assemblies to be unto the King or his Delegate in Assemblies, as the Chancellor
in the Parliament is to the King, or his Deputy in Parliaments. But I extol
your courage, who now conclude with us, Bellarmin^.
Ad Regium officium pertinet, ut legibus and edict is suis, ^am fidem teneri,
quam sacerdotes tenendam docent, etc. Its the duty of Kings, by their Laws and
Edicts to cause that faith to be kept, which the Priests teach should be kept.
For the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets. But is Saul also
among the Prophets? Is it true that the Anticovenanter says, that in your
Ecclesiastical judicatories, called 1 Sessions, 2 Presbyterles, and 3 Synods,
there will be in the first, sometimes twelve, sometimes sixteen, in some places
24. Lay Elders for one Priest? Secondly, in your Presbyteries, Lay Elders of
equal power and number? Thirdly, in your Synods as many Lay Elders with their
Assessors as there is Priests; all which Lay Elders have as great power in
matters of Doctrine and Discipline as the Priests themselves, to judge, and
pass Definitive sentence? etc. But I trust it is not so, for I hear that they
are offended to be called Lay Elders, and will be called Ruling-elders, and
Ecclesiastical persons, and so I doubt not but they have received orders from
you. And therefore seeing Ecclesiastical persons among you, have the managing
of Church-affaires, the civil Magistrate must be content to execute what you
decree; neither ought he to judge otherwise then you judge; neither can he
hinder you to make Laws in the Church. For, as Stapleton says very learnedly
with you, Oves non possunt judicare pastores. Let the sheep-heards judge of the
sheep, who must follow them; as Christ's sheep heard his voice and followed him.
Therefore you have most valiantly shaken off that yoke of the Kings supremacy
in causes Ecclesiastical, Novemb^ 29. 1638. Pro^^t in Juhi 1638 5 5.
and at the Cross of Glasgow proclaimed to the world (against the Kings
Proclamation for raising the Assembly) that your Assemblies are the supreme
judicaterie in all causes ecclesiastical; and since supreme, its independent
from the King, (...) appeal from (...) and (...) C^^^ ^^ll ^o^^e general
Assembly and Parliament. (...) 3.
and your reason is good: for that which is superior cannot be subject to that
which is inferior. Now (as Bellarmine also says) Regimen Ecclesiasticum
sublimius est Politico. The Ecclesiasticke government is higher then the
Politic: for Principatus politieus institutus est ab hominibus, and de jure
gentium: at principatus ecclesiasticus est a solo Deo, and de jure divino. The
Politic Government is institute by men, and of the Law of Nations: but the
Church Government is from God alone, and of Divine institution. Therefore you
conclude right, that the king has no more power to appoint officers in the
Church, then you have power to appoint officers of state for his Court.

In Zions Plea, page 289. You answer well to the Protestants objection, thus:
If any object the Magistrates interposed anthority, it is quickly answered, That
his power is not to weaken any ordinance of God, but for guarding and making
good all Gods ordinances with the Sword. And in your protestation at Edinburgh,
18. December, 1638. you bring from your Book of Discipline, a full and perfect
description of the Kings authority in Church matters, which is this, To assist
and maintain the discipline of the Kirk and punish them civilly who will not
obey the censures thereof. And in your answer to the Marquess of Hamilton his
Declaration, you say, That the Supreme Magistrate, as a Son of the Kirk, ought
to receive the true meaning of the Kirk and cause it to be received by those
whom God has subjected unto him. Yea, it is so f^rre from being a prerogative
due to the Supreme Magistrate to be Supreme governor in causes
Ecclesiastical, that it is a favor granted unto him to have any precedencie
in Synods without voycing, (except he would become a ruling Elder, and have
accommission to come.) Therefore, it is most remarkable which you say in your
Protestation 29. Novem. 1638. at Glasgow. After 39 National Assemblies of this
National Church, where neither the Kings Majesty, nor any in his name was
present: At the humble and earnest desire of the Assembly, His Majesty
graciously vouchsafed His presence either in His own Royal person, or by a
Commissioner, not for voiting or mukiplying of voices; but as Princes and
Emperors of old, in a Princely manner to countenance that meeting, and to
preside into it for external order, etc. And this is all that we grant to
Emperors and Princes in our Disputes against Protestants. And I pray you, what
Royalist can answer the Arguments which you have borrowed from us? all their
answer is, that they exclaim that you do borrow your Arguments from your
enemies, yet not so great enemies, as they suppose; for the Jesuit is called
the Popish Puritan: and the Puritan is called the Protestant Jesuit; and I
trust that the like may be said of us, which is said of Christ and Franciscus.
Turs. l^^.


Exue Franciscum tunica, laceroque cucullo
Qui Franciscus ^rat, jam tibi Christus erit,
Francisci exuviis, si qua licet, indue Christum,
Jam Franciscus ^rit, qui tibi Christus ^rat.
And we are both by Papists and Protestants (though unjustly) branded with
these vile Epithers, Ludav^de C^^zam.
to be called Holy Devils, the Standard-bearers of persidionsnesse, the
Architypes of Rebellion, the Bellows of Sedition, the Emissaries of the Devil,
the Kings evil, and the Incendiaries of the whole world, etc. and our Thuan is
so far out of Love with us, that he says our Society is,

Nata Magistratum convellere, nata ministris
Subtrahere obsequium, Praesulibusque suum.
But albeit there were some od^ between us, what is that to them, since they
be good for you? who found fault with him who said, Mutemus clypeos, Danaumque
insignia nobis
Aptimus, Dolus an virtus quis in host requirat?


Who can blame you while you say, Protestat. 18 Novem^^ 1638.
that if Princes shall have such power in Assemblies, and in matters of
Religion, then all Religion and Church Government should depend absolutely upon
the pleasure of the Prince. and he may change it as he will? So says learned
Stapleton in his dispute against the Protestant Doctrine: Posita hac potestate,
nec in una provincia velregno din erit fidei unitas vel cultus, and religionis
conformitas, quia finguli principes quod ipsis melius videbitur, flatuent,
quoru^ decretis siro sistatur, perpetua erunt besla. This power being granted
to Kings, then Unity of faith and worship, and conformity of religion will not
remain lorg in one province or kingdom, because every Prince will ordain
that which see meth best in his eyes. To whose decrees if resistance be made,
there will follow perpetual war. But this power being granted to the Church,
which cannot err in her Synodicall acts, there shall ever be Unity of faith
depending upon the infallibility of Church Assemblies.

infallibility of general Councels or Assemblies. For that Assembly which you
did hold at Glasgow lately, Covenanters in^^^at for De^^nsive 7.
is to you so infallible, that long time before, you do profess that you did
swear for judgment and practice to adhere to the determination of it: And now
of late, Julii 1. 1639 do protest before God and the world, that you will still
adhere to it. And you have good reason so to do: for if general Assemblies may
err, then, say we, ^^l^. de au^^^. co^^^. or. Cap. 4.
Possent merito revocari in dubium omnes damnatae hareses, and concilia nullo
honor digna essent. All heresies which are condemned, may again be called in
question, and our Assemblies esteemed worthy of no honor. And therefore you
may justly fear, upon this ground, that your Assembly might err, and that you
may be branded with error in your decrees, and have all called in question
again which you have condemned. As for us of Rome, condemn your Assemblies who
will, we shall never do it: but rather desire that you may still appoint the
same Commissioners for your future assemblies, therein to confirm all which
they had decreed in the former: for your acts of abjuring Episcopacie, the
Articles of Perth, Service book, Book of Canons, pleases us very well: howbeit
we do not thoroughly approve the reason of your acts. You have thrust away and
excommunicated your Bishops, because you think them Antichristian: so do we
excommunicate your Bishops, because they are Antichristian. But you think them
Antichristian, because you make it an Article of your Negative faith, that they
are a part of the Popish Hierarchy: And we think them Antichristian, because
they are not so, neither do they acknowledge the Pope for their Head, but do
declaime against him, and the greatest wound that ever we have received, is
from such Bishops as they are, as Cranmet, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, Jowell,
B^lson, Andrews (...), stupor mundi; Whitgift, Babington, Abbots, King,
Downame, Ussher, Morton, Davenant, Montague, Hall, White, and that Arch-enemie
of yours and ours Canterbury, with diverse others, whom I like not to recite.

In this particular, King James is opposite to us both, because ( as Becanus
well observes) he holds, Recan. de prim. Reg. Angl. ca. 7. Jacobi Regis
praesa. monit.
that Bishops have their jurisdiction immediately from God, while he says,
Episcopos esse in Ecclesia debere, tanquam institutionem Apostolicam, ac
ordinationem proinde divinam contra Puritanos, contraque Bollarminum semper
sensi, qui negat Episcopos a Deo immediate suam jurisdictionem accepisse. Sed
nihil mirum, a Puritanis cum stare, cum Jesuitae nihil aliud quam
Puritano-papistae sunt. I ever thought that Bishops ought to be in the Church,
as an Apostolical institution, and therefore a divine ordinance against
Puritans, and against Bellarmine; who deny that Bishops have their jurisdiction
immediately from God; but no marvel that Bellarmine takes the Puritans part,
seeing Jesuits are no other thing but Puritan-papists. And in that same place,
the King shows that from a general Council convocated by Christian Princes,
for the settling of Religion, he would have Jesuits and Puritans excluded, whom
he calls by a common title novitios, and furiosos incendiarios: and says,
Ibidem.
Mihi praecipuus labor fuit dejectos Episcopos restituere, and Puritanorum
anarchiam expugnare. My chief labor was to restore the Bishops that were cast
down, and to overthrow the anarchie of Puritans.

We thank you also for removing the Articles of Perth; for they were not
rightly established: for your Church did esteem those ceremonies to be only
things indifferent, commended and commanded by Authority, for Decency and
Order. The not observation whereof was held no damnable sin, if it were
without contempt of Authority, and without the case of scandal; and at the
most, your Church did hold that those ceremonies were only significant, and
not operative, as we hold. But if they had been rightly established, you should
have observed them as things necessary to salvation, and as parts of Gods
worship, which under pain of damnation ought to be performed, and that they
are s^gns operater, working grace in those who observe them. And therefore
seeing your Church did not hold this opinion of them, they a^e not Popish
Ceremonies, and so not ours; and whatsoever you have more, that is not ours, we
request you to abjure it.

The condemning also of the Service Book is most acceptable unto us, because it
is not our Masse-book; and that you may see how much we hate it, Be it known to
you, that by venue of the Popes Bull many years ago we will suffer no Roman
Catholic to go to the Church, so long as the Service-booke is reading either
in England or Ireland, and yet we will permit them to go to their Sermons, and
of all Sermons we sympathize best with yours: So that it seems a most
unfortunate book, having both us and you for its enemies.

And since I am fallen upon this point, let me relate an History that passed
between a Covenanter and an Anticovenanter, as it was reported to me,
concerning this book, that you may make your use of it. The Covenanter
demanded the cause, why he could refuse to join with them in a Supplication to
his Majesty against the book of Common Prayer, seeing there were so many hands
of able Ministers subscribing the same, and obliging themselves to make it
good, that it was 1. Superstitious. 2. that it contains the maine essential
parts of the Mass. 3. that it opens a door to let in all Popery? The
Anticovenanter answered thus, or to this effect: Because such unjust aspersions
are cast upon that poor Book, which does not contain so many Lines, as it
does suffer Lies, hated be all that love not truth; Papists and Puritans
striving who shall speak most against it, I shall be so far from becoming
a causlesse enemy to it, that I cannot deny it my friendship and helping hand.
But because you are so furious, and I for speaking but one word in its favor
have been hotly persecuted with tongues, and hands too; it will be better to
be possessed with a Lethargy* then to appear in defense of this Lyturgie,
which the most part, even of the Ministry, has condemned with blind
obedience, before they did see or read it. It might be sufficient for me to
deny what you peremptorily affirm against it, and its your part to prove the
Affirmative: and your best Pr^bation is your naked assertion, seconded with
railing against all that will not believe you. But I pray you hear the Book
speak for it self, and it shall ^urge i^ self of such calumnies, in the
judgment of all indifferent men, and it will tell you that you are like David's
enemies, cas^ing iniquity upon it where you find none, and laying to its
charge the thing it never knew, and so do have it without a cause.

^ust entry of the book, where it shows the reasons why some ceremonies are
abolished, and some retained, in plain words, saying: The multitude of
ceremonies are rejected, because of their multitude and superstition. And in
the celebration of the Holy Communion, it recommends the use of common bread.
But wherefore? for the avoiding of Superstition, says the book; so that at
the very entry, the book is most careful to satisfy all scrupulous people,
thus telling them that it hates superstiti^n as well as they. Again, if there
were any thing superstitions in this book, it must be enjoined as a thing
necessary in it self, as unchangeable; the not observing of it would be
damnable, as the breach of Gods Law. To all this the Book answers in the same
place, that it enjoyneth nothing in that manner but what the Word of God
commands. And as for the ceremonies contained in it, it is so far from
esteeming them things necessary, that it places them in the rank of
indifferent things. The keeping or omitting whereof is but a small thing, says
the book: It says further, that those ceremonies are taken away which were
most abused, and did burden m^ns consciences without cause, and that those
which remain are retained for disciplin^ and order. It tells that they are also
changeable, and not to be compared to Gods Law, whilst it says of them thus,
Upon just causes they may be alt^red and changed, and therefore are not to be
esteemed equal with Gods Law. What can any man say more against superstition
then is said by the book it self? Therefore, its very likely that they have not
read the book, (as I am sure the most part have never done) or at least, have
read it with an evilleye; who condemn it of Superstition, whereof it is most
free.

As for the second, that it does contain the essential parts of the Mass,
read and see the contrary in the book it self, which does keep Christ's
institution it self, and Paul's repetition of it, in such sort, that I think
no Church can celebrate the Sacrament with more purity, sincerity, gravitie,
and none with more Majesty then by this book. But let me speak a little for
it. I pray you, Why are you so sparing? you may say as well, that it contains
the whole Mass, as the maine essential parts of the Mass; for (if you have
any Logic, or natural reason) you may so conclude: for where that is, which
is essential to a thing, there the thing it self must be: But in this book
(say you) are the essential parts of the Mass, what does hinder then, but
that it has the Mass it self in it? for, if it have the maine essential
parts of the Mass, what does it lack or want? not the proper accidents, for
these do flow from the essential parts, and are inseparable from it. It can
want nothing then of the Mass, unless it be some common accidents, which may
be either present or absent, without any hurt of the subject. What boldness is
this then to speak such a maine essential lie? Let me either see that the book
maintains, that, sub speciebus panis and vini, the body and blood of Jesus
Christ is bodily offered up by the Priest, to God the Father, a propitiatory
sacrifice for the quick and the dead; or else, lay your hand on your mouth, and
speak no more.

Finally, since it has neither Superstition, not the essentials of the Mass,
how can it open a door to Popery? certainly, it is purged from all such
stuff, and restored to the ancient integrity, the least thing that might tend
to superstition being thrust out of door, as Ammon did Tamar, without hope of
return: and if any superstition would dare to enter, as the Sodomits at Lots
door, the door is so fast shut (by that which I have told you from the mouth
of the book it self, in the beginning of the right use and abuse of
Ceremonies) that they must despair of any entry.

What needs all such uproare then without cause? such fearful Schisms such
Dictatorial censures, and uncharitable verdicts, that they are all Papists, or
Popishly affected, that ^un not with you to mischief? Show me but one
masculine reason (and lay aside wives tales) and I shall take it in place of
many: and ^runt ultimi primi, I shall redeem my time with redoubling my
course, and shall be so far from approving the least point, which you shall
show to be Popery, that for that one points sake, it shall get no more pity
then Samuel gave to Agag: I shall rent it in pieces.

Read over that which you have condemned with judgment, and not with
prejudice, and I shall oblige my self to make good those particulars: First,
that you shall never be able to find any thing in it contrary to the word of
God. 2. That it contains nothing contrary to the practice of the Primitive
Church, but which is most agreeable thereto. 3. That all the points which you
condemn, are not controverted between our classical Divines and Papists, but
agreed upon on both sides, as things not controverted. 4. That there is nothing
in it contrary to our Confession of Faith in Scotland. Yea, which is much, you
shall not show me one Protestant Divine of any note or eminency, even among
the Reformers of Religion, who ever did condemn this book of the least point
of Popery: But on the contrary did commend it, and defend it against all petty
preachers who refused it, as you do. Learned Bucer thus affirms, Bucer,
Script. Angl^^. in con. page 456.
In the Ceremonies of the English L^turgie, I have found nothing which is not
taken out of the Word of God, or at least, which is repugnant to it, so it be
favorably understood. Calvin himself perusing the Lyturgie, Cal^ in epist.
200. fol. 336.
declared that he found no fault in it at all; and wrote to the English Exiles
at Frankford, who had made a rent and schism in the Church, to be moderate and
return to the Church Vos ultra modum rigidos esse nolim. I would not have you
stiff above measure; and bids them return to Conformity, and proponeth his
own opinion, in Anglorum controversia moderationem semper tenni, cujus me non
poenitet. In the controversy of England I have ever kept a moderation, whereof
I do not repent: and was very much offended with those who would not yield in
such indifferent things, for peace sake. It was Calvin with Peter Martyr who by
many arguments persuaded Bishop Hooper to conformity, especially to put on the
Surplesse, which he did. I might produce all the rest of those worthy Divines,
Beza, Melancton, Bullinger, Peter Martyr, Gualter, Zanchius, who all of them
condemn your opinion and schismatic practice, who had rather rent the body
of Christ Jesus, then yield to any thing that does not content your turbulent
lusts: and therefore your prayers are turned into sin, while you pray the Lord
of heaven truly and fully to inform his Majesty how far this Book is full of
idolatrous superstitions and popish errors, as you affirm in your Protestation
against his Majesty's Proclamation. And it is no marvel that you condemn this
Book of Common Prayer, seeing you have condemned your own book of Common
Prayer made at your Reformation. The Ringleaders of your faction condemn all
set Prayer whatsoever, all set form of celebration of the Sacraments and
Marriages. The prayers which were read since the Reformation till this rupture,
are now banished the Church, yea your Ringleaders have banished the Lords
Prayer, and say that those who use it make it an Idol: and therefore in their
prayers it is never mentioned, to the great scandal and grief of many poor
souls among you, who yet love it, because Christ's command is when you pray,
say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. You Baptize, celebrate the Communion,
not as you were wont to do after the form set down unto you at the
Reformation: but every day after a diverse form and manner, being changeable
like the wind; so do you with Marriage. Thus you differ from your self like
the double-minded man, Jam. 1.8.
who is unstable in all his ways; wavering like the waves of the sea, driven
with the wind, and tossed. And what pleases you to day, displeas^th you to
morrow. You do also daily coin new Articles of faith, as to believe Episcopacie
to be Antichristian: and the young Layelder government to be that which Christ
has appointed in his Church. It is an Article of your faith to believe, that
to receive the body and blood of Jesus Christ, in the humble gesture of
kneeling is idolatry. It is an Article of your faith, that it is Popery, if the
Church set apart a day for the solemn and thankful commemoration of Gods love
to the world, who so loved the world, Galat 4 4
that when the fullness of time was come, sent forth his Son made of a woman,
made under the Law, to redeem them which were under the Law; that we might
receive the adoption of Sons. It is an Article of your faith, that it is
Popery, if the Church does set apart a day for the solemn and public
commemoration of the Passion of Christ, Heb. 12.2.
that the people may look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of their faith,
who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the
shame. Its an Article of your faith, that it is Popery to give the Communion on
Pasch day. Its an Article of your faith, that it is Popery, if the Church
appoint a day for the thankful remembrance of Christ's Ascension into Heaven.
Its an Article of your faith, that its Popery, if the Church appoint a day for
the thankful remembrance of the Descension of the Holy Ghost on Whitsunday, to
give gifts unto men. Its an Article of your faith, that the Service Book is
Popish. Its an Article of your faith, that the Book of Canons (which directly
overthrowes the Popish Supremacy) and the High Commission are abjured in your
Confession of faith. Its an Article of your faith, that it was the intention of
those whom you call blessed Reformers, that all the foresaids, which you have
in your Covenant abjured expressly, was abjured by them also as well as if it
had bin expressly set down: which is the most ridiculous thing in the world;
for intentio est actus immanens, which is impossible for any man to know,
except it be revealed. And therefore since there is such difference among your
selves, every day bringing forth new dreams, since to you some things are
sometimes indifferent, sometimes necessary good, sometimes necessary evil,
sometimes a matter of faith, sometimes Not: I cannot but end this discourse
with that of Hilarious in Application to you. Hilar. lib. 3. cont. Constant.
Faith is come now to depend rather on the time then on the Gospel: our state
is dangerous and miserable, that we have now as many Faiths as wills, as many
doctrines as manners. Whilst Faiths are either so written as we list, or so
understood as we will, we make every year and every month a faith, and still
we seek a faith, as if there were no faith. This I would fain know of you, what
faith at length you believe!you have changed so often, that now I know not your
Faith. That is happened unto you, which is wont to follow unskilful builders,
ever disliking their own doings, that you still put down that which you are
still putting up. You subvert the old with the new and the new you rent asunder
with a new correction: and that which was once corrected, you condemus with a
second correction. O wicked men, what a mockery do you make of the Church!
only dogs return to their vomit, and you compel the Priests to sup up those
things which they have spit forth; and do you command them in their confession
to allow that which before they condemned? What Bishops hand have you left
innocent? What tongue have you not forced to falsehood? Whose heart have thou
not brought to the condemning of his former opinion? You have subjected all to
your will, and to your violence. Thus Hilarious.

And therefore of those your new-coyned articles (especially of your abjuring
Episcopacy, and establishing Presbyteriall discipline) I may well say that of
Jerome Plantatio vestra non est vetus, Jerome. in ^sal. 1^7.
sed novella est; non est de veterilege, non de Prophetis, non de Apostolis,
sed de novis magistris est. Your plantation is not old, but a novelty, (for it
is not three years old) it is not taken out of the old Law, nor from the
Prophets, nor from the Apostles, but new masters. And therefore, adulterum est,
impium est, sacrilegum est, quicquid humano furere instituitur, ^^pr. lib. 1.
c. 8.
ut dispositio divina violetur. Whatsoever is established by the fury of man,
whereby the divine disposition is violated, is an adulterate, wicked and
sacrilegious matter. And I hold that, as an undoubted rule of Augustine, Quod
universalis tenuit ecclesia, August. lib. 4. de Bapt. cap. 24.
quodque non Conciliis institutum sed semper retentum est, non nisi Apostolica
authoritate traditum rectissime creditur. Whatsoever the Catholic Church has
holden, and which was not institute by Councels, but ever kept in the Church,
that is most rightly believed to be an Apostolical tradition: and he brings
for instances those holy days, which your Covenant abjures, which has ever
been retained in the Church from the Apostles days. And albeit we could not
prove Episcopacy from Scripture (as we may very well prove it, and is proved by
those who defend the same) yet this unquestionable rule of Augustine will be
sufficient to prove it to be of Apostolical institution; for you say, it is
not of Divine institution, and I say, it is not instituted by Councels: and yet
all that are but little exercised in antiquity, shall find that Episcopacie
was ever in the Church from the Apostles days, till this present time that it
is called in question. And beside that rule of Augustine, consider that it is
the general tradition of the Catholic Church, that Episcopacie has ever been
in it, as an Apostolical institution. And by this general tradition of the
Catholic Church, we are as certain, that it is of Apostolical institution, as
we are certain of the received number of the Canonical books of Scripture:
for we receive and take that number upon the continued, general tradition of
the Catholic Church of Christ from age to age. We reject and detest particular
traditions of any present particular Church; such as are those of the Church of
Rome, if they cannot show those traditions to have been generally received at
all times in the Catholic Church. But there is no Protestant that does not
receive general traditions of the Catholic Church; such as is this,
concerning the definite number of the books of the Canonical Scripture: and if
I would assume a schismatic humor, I might with as good warrants deny, that
there are so many books in the Canon, as the Catholic Church says there be;
as you deny Episcopacie to be of Apostolical institution.

Anticovenanter and Covenanter, which I leave to your consideration, and
return to my purpose. From this sweet harmony in the preceding points,
especially of your independent power in Church matters, there follows another
parallel by way of consequence, viz. that you may excommunicate your King, if
he do not obey the Acts and Constitutions of your Assemblies. Thus you
threatened King James, and his Council both, with excommunication, if he would
not execute your Acts of your Assembly; and good reason, seeing it is the
supreme judicatory, and the King is a son of your Church, from whom he ought
to take the meaning. And if he be refractarie, why may not the Assembly
excommunicate him, as Ambrose did Th^^dosius? And as I have said already from
your Travers, of your government, Huic disciplin^ omnes Principes, etc. There
is a necessity that all Princes and Monarchs should submit their Scepter, and
obey this Discipline. Its your chief Commander in the Camproyall. Thomas
Cartwright being asked, whether the King himself might be excommunicated,
answered, That excommunication should not be exercised upon Kings, I utterly
mislike: and so do we also; yea, albeit they be not Heretics themselves, yet
if they do not punish such as their Pastors commands them, they may be
excommunicate. Potest ac debet Pastor regibus jubere ut puniant Haereticos,
Bellar. contra Barklaiun^.
etc nisi fecerint, etiam cogere per excommunicationem. The Pastor may, and
ought to command Kings to punish Heretics, and if they do it not, even to
compel them with excommunication. But especially, si sit Haereticorum vel
Schismaticorum fautor, A^or. ins^. moral. part. 2. l. 10. cap. 9.
receptor, vel. defensor; if he be a favourer, receiver or defender of
Heretics and Schismatics. If your Bishops be such men, is not this your Kings
fault? your fault is, that you use but too much lenity, in not ascending from
the Myter to the Crown; for this may stand very well with your Tenent and Ours,
though Protestant Divines disclaim it: for your Buchanan teaches you, that not
only it is lawful to excommunicate Princes, but that they should both depose
him, Buchan. de ^ure reg. apud Scot. page 70.
and destroy him; for he says, Ministers may excommunicate Princes, and he
being by excommunication cast into Hell, is not worthy to enjoy any life upon
earth. But truly Knox and Buchanan are more rigid then we are herein; for
howbeit, we grant that it is lawful to excommunicate Kings, yet we hold it not
necessary that upon excommunication, either deposition or killing. should
follow. Indeed by our common Tenent it will follow, that excommunication is an
antecedent to deprivation or killing; but we do not hold that deprivation or
killing of Princes is a necessary consequent, or effect of excommunication. For
(say we) quando talis effectus adjungitur, Sua^ez. de censur. disp. 15. sect. 6.
non est effect us ipsius excommunicationis, sed specialis poena simul cum
excommunicatione imposita. When such an effect is joined to excommunication,
its not the effect of it, but a special punishment imposed with it. But its
wonderful to see the wide difference between this our Tenent and yours, and
that which Protestants hold; for they make the power of the supreme Magistrate
Architectonicke, and subject unto it, all power civil and Ecclesiastical. So
that, as in civil affairs they use the counsel and help of Politicians and
Jurisconsults for establishing of Laws, according to reason; so in
Ecclesiastical business, they use the help and advice of learned Divines for
establishing religion according to Gods Word, which ought never to depart from
their hands. And its most boldly said by them in the words of Bishop Davenant,
Reges non it a astringuntur Episcoporum vel Theologorum suorum opinionibus,
Daven. deter. quast. 19.
quin si adversentur legi divina (cujus oportet reges studiosissimos and
peritissimos esse) teneantur ex officio regio, veram religionem, illis omnibus
licet reclamantibus, tueri, and subditis suis proponere: Kings are not so tied
to the opinions of their Bishops and Theologues, but if they be contrary to
the Law of God, (of the which Kings ought to be great studiers, and very well
skilled) they are bound by their Kingly Office to defend the true religion, and
set it before their Subjects, albeit all those Divines should cry out against
it. But those men are Court Parasites, as your usual word is; or as Beeanus
calls those that defend the Kings Supremacy, regios adulatores,
King-flatterers. And I admire that Tertullian being under Heathen Emperors
should be guilty of those flatteries, while he says in a Court-like
complement, Reges in solius Deipotestate sunt, Tersul. ad Scap.
a quo sunt secunds, post quem primi^ante omnes, and super omnes de^s and
homines: Kings are only in the power of God, from whom they are second, after
whom they are first, before all, and above all gods and men. But I like not to
trouble my self with such men, but proceed to another head.

the chief Commander in the Camp royal, have the greatest power. You do
learnedly hold, Answer to the Marquess Hamillons Declaration.
that the Kings high Court of Parliament, cannot hinder you to make Laws
Ecclesiastical, seeing your Ecclesiastical government is independent. Yea,
you do hold, that your Assemblies may repeal^ and adnull, even the
Ecclesiastical laws that are confirmed in Parliament, so that upon your
re-calling them, the sanction of the Parliament is nullitated, and of no
effect. Your own words are Emphaticall: Ibidem.
Albeit acts of general Assemblies b^^ ratified in Parliament, yet a general
Assembly may re-call those confirmed acts, which being adnulled, the civil
ratification and sanction falls ex consequenti. Certainly, I dare promise you
the Popes blessing for this most learned Thesis: for now a door is opened to
let in all Popery, whether the King will or no; so that I trust (as I said at
the beginning) our Union shall be full. For since your Assemblies have such power
over Parliaments, as to adnull all ecclesiastical laws confirmed therein (as
you have done already with Episcopacy and the articles of Perth, which stand
ratified and confirmed by diverse acts of Parliament) then it shall be easy for
you at any Assembly, when or where you will, to repeal and adnull all the
ecclesiastical laws ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament in favor of
the Protestant Religion: and to establish new laws for our Roman Religion in
stead of it, though the King, Parliament and Council should resist you. You
have good reason for it: for as Bellarmine says, B^ll. de ^lericis, lib. 1.
cap. 29.
Habet se potestas ecclesiastica ad secularem, quomodo Spiritus se habet ad
carnem, quam regit, moderatur, and aliquando cohibet. Caro autem nullum habet
imperium inspiritum, neque illum ulla in re dirigere, vel judicare, vel
coercere potest. Sic igitur potestas ecclesiastica, quae spiritualis est, as
per hoc naturaliter seculari superior, secularem potestatem cum opu^ est,
dirigere, judicare, and coercere potest, ipsam vero a seculari dirigi vel
coorceri nullaratione permittitur. The ecclesiastical power is to the secular
power, as the spirit is to the flesh; which rules, moderates, and sometimes
restrains. But the flesh has no command over the spirit: neither can it
direct, or judge, or restrain it in any thing. So then the ecclesiastical
power which is spiritual, and therefore naturally superior to the secular,
may direct, judge, and restrain the secular power when it is needful. But by
no reason is it permitted to be directed or restrained by the secular power:
and therefore when your King did by his Proclamation discharge your Assembly at
Glasgow, which ought to direct him, and not be cohibited or restrained by him,
you did well to sit still, and adnull diverse acts of Parliament. And in your
Protestation against the Kings Proclamation for raising your Assembly,
Protestat. November. 29. 1638.
as it was your wisdom not to enter into direct action with his Majesty, so it
was your courage, to summon all the Lords of his Majesty's Council who
consented to the Proclamation to appear before the Parliament the 25 of May,
1639. There to be punished for giving the King evil council, viz to raise the
Assemblies. When the K. commands one thing by acts of Parliament, or by his
Proclamations, you may protest against the same, and command the contrary in
your protestations and acts of Assembly: for as we say well, Author. lib. ad
pers^cu^. Angl. fol. 336.
p^^et ecclesia praposites facultas est amplissi^a interdicendi nobis, ne reges
obedient^a and absequio nestre honoremus. These that are set over us in the
Church have a very large power given them, even to interdict us, that we honor
not our Ks. with our obedience. So the Council of Trent commands all to
receive the decr^^^ without regard to their Princes consent, and denounces ex
communication in case of refusal, requires an oath of obedience, approves
violence in rooting out of heresy, and ordains the Inquisition for them.
Therefore when the King by his Proclamation did command that the Covenant of K.
James as it was in 1581. year of God, should be subscribed, you by your
authority did prohibit any to subscribe it, but will have your own subscribed.
For this cause in your general Assembly you have set down An act discharging
subscription to the Covenant which was subscribed by the Kings Commissioner and
Lords of the Council; which his Majesty, in his marginall note, calls a
traitorous act. You have another excellent Act, discharging all Printers in
Scotland to print any thing in Ecclesiastical affairs without the warrant of
Jhons^on your Clerk You have Acts also concerning mills, salt pans, and market
days on Monday and Saturday. And especially your Assembly has adnulled his
Majesty's Court of high Commission: all this we see in the Index of your Acts,
and all is well done, though it encroach upon the civil power: for in
temperalibus Ecclesia non solu^ praecipit, dirigit, Odoard. West. in Sanctu^r.
juris Pontis ^.6.
sed coercet, disponit, virtute potestatit gubernativa. In temporal things the
Church not only commands and directs, but restrains and dispones by virtue of
her gubernative power. And you know we do not maintain a direct power in
temporal things, but an indirect power in ordius ad spiritualia; for we stand
not upon words, when we are sure of the matter it self, and may bring all
temporality within the compass of our power. But I pray you, why did you
forget to adnull the Acts of Parliament that do ratify the Kings Supremacy,
especially in spiritual things? since you have adnulled other Acts of
Parliament, why have you prejudged your selves so much as to leave those acts
for Supremacy uncancelled? If you had remembered the complaint of your holy
brethren in former times, you would not have forgotten this, but as you have de
facto, taken it away, so de jure, you would have declared the same an unlawful
act: for (as your predecessors said) If the King have supreme power in causes
Ecclesiastical, Thinus addition to Holinshed, page 446.
then there is nothing left of the whole ancient form of Justices and policies
in the spiritual estate, but a naked shadow.

dispensation with oaths, even with the oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
with the oath of Canonical obedience. You will not upbraid us again with this,
as if we were only enemies and traiters to Kings: For we dispense with no
Subjects oath of Allegiance, so long as they defend the religion; but if they
either fall from the religion themselves, or will not defend it by the civil
sword, we do absolve subjects of their oath of Allegiance, as we did in the
holy League of France, tying all to us by covenant very like unto yours, and in
the end, took up arms against the King: for Kings fall from their authority,
when they fall from religion, as you say in your Covenant: The Kings authority
and true religion are so strictly joined together, that they stand and fall
together. And therefore you do well to limit your obedience unto him, so long
as he defends the Religion and Laws, wherein if he fail, by oath of Covenant
you have made a mutual band of defense against him, so that what is done to
the least of you, shall be done to you all in general and particular. And so,
if he shall do any harm to the meanest Kitchen boy, you are all in general
and particular bound to take his part against your King. Now all this could not
be lawfully done, without a Dispensation and Absolution from your oath of
Allegiance taken long before the Covenant. Our enemies say, that they who thus
being absolved from their oath of Allegiance, do take up arms against their
Prince, will have such success in the end as Radulphus Duke of Swevia (whom
Gregory the seventh absolved from his oath of Allegiance to Henry the fourth
the Emperor,) received in battle against the Emperor, and hopes that they
shall make the like confession as he did. He^mold in Chron Sla^orum. cap. 29.
For he being deadly wounded in the right hand, said to his company, You see
how my right hand is sore of a hurt, it is the hand whereby I swear to my Lord
and Master, that I would never annoy him, that J would never lie in ambush to
intercept his glory: but the Popes commands brought me to this, to break my
Oath, and usurp an honor which was not due to me. You see, what end it is
come to, J have received this mortal wound upon the hand that brake this Oath.
Let them then who have incited us to do so, consider in what manner they urged
us, for fear that we be not brought to the downfall of damnation, etc. But be
not you troubled nor afraid of shadows: Covenanters inform. for Defensive.. 4.
and 2.
But let unity be earnestly recommended, as that which strengthens the cause,
and will make you invincible. Your success has been great hitherto, so that
you may have confidence for the time to come.

You have also dispensed with the Oath of Canonical obedience: for I cannot
think that you would exact of your Clergy the Oath of your Covenant, except
you did first give them a dispensation for their former Oaths. For all have
sworn the Oath of Canonical Obedience, some once, some thrice, and all
admitted since the year 1618. had sworn to Perths Articles, and present
government of the Church, and now have taken the direct contradictory Oath, and
abjured them all. And therefore it was not ill advised by you, to make an Act
in your general Assembly at Glasgow, November. 1638. declaring the nullity of
the Oath exacted by Prelates of intrants, and of their bonds of Conformity.

But here I must tell you, that you are gone a little beyond us in your
dispensation with the Oath of Allegiance to your King, and taking the Oath of
mutual defense against him: for according to our practice, you ought by all
means endeavored to recall him from his errors, and being obstinate, then to
excommunicate him: for as our Tolet says well, Licet sit notorium crimen
principis, non absolvuntur vasalli a juramento (ut been dicit Cajemnus) ante
denunciationem ab Ecclesia: qua facta, non solum sunt absoluti ab obedientia,
sed tenentur non obedire, nisi forte propter periculum vitae, vel damnum
bonorum temporalium. Albeit the crime of the Prince be notorious, yet the
Vassals are not absolved from their Oath (as Cajetan says well) before the
sentence be denounced by the Church: which being done, they are not only
absolved from obedience, but also are bound not to obey, except perchance for
danger of their life, or loss of temporal goods. And Emanuel Sa says the
same. Emanuel Sa in voce Tyrannus.
Tyrannice gubernans, just acquisito Dominio non potest spoliari sine publico
judicio: lata vero sententia, potest quisque fieri executor. Potest autem
deponi a populo etiam qui illi juraverat obedientiam perpetuam, si monitus, non
vult corrigi. A Tyrant that rules tyrannically, cannot have his justly
acquired Dominion taken from him, without public judgment: but the sentence
being given, any man may be the executioner, and he may be deposed by the
people who have sworn perpetual obedience unto him, if after admonition he
will not be amended. And then it follows clearly which Suarez says, Suarez
lib. 6. cap. 3.
Si subditi juramento soluti sunt, quamvis rex ille proditionem vocet, omnisque
regni aut reipublica conspirationem, revera tamen talis non est, sed justa
defensie, vel justum bellum, seu supplicium. If the Subjects be absolved from
their oath, albeit that the King call it treason, and a conspiracy of all the
Kingdom and Commonwealth, yet certainly, it is no such thing, but a just
defense, or just war, or punishment.

But I must crave your pardon for saying, that you went beyond us; for there
are some of us as hot-blouded as your selves. De fide certum est quemcunque
Principem Christi^^um, si a Religione catholica deflexerit, Philopat. 2. page
109.
and alios avocare voluerit, excidere statim omni potestate and dignitate,
idque ante prolatam Papa sententiam: posseque and debere subditos, si vires
habeaut, istins^^^^ Hareticum ex hominum Christianorum dominatu ejicere. It is
certainly a matter of Faith, that whatsoever Christian Prince shall depart from
the Catholic religion, and shall withdraw others, does immediately fall from
all power and dignity, even before the Popes sentence be given; and that the
Subjects may, and should (if they have strength) cast forth such an Heretic
from the dominion of Christian men. To this purpose, your Reformer Knox says
well. Knox to England and Scotland, fol. 78.
If Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth, their Subjects are free from
their Oath of Obedience. And in his History of Scotland, page 343. he sets the
Nobility on work, saying. God has appointed the Nobility to bridle the
inordinate appetite of Princes, and in so doing, they cannot be accused, as
resisters of Authority. And again, Knox Appeal. fol. 33.
It is the duty of the Nobility to repress the rage and insolency of Princes,
and then, he conjoynes the Nobility and the people together against the Supreme
Magistrate, saying, Ibid. fol. 28. and 30.
The Nobility and Commonalty ought to reform Religion, and in that case may
remove from honors, and may punish such, as God has condemned, Deuteronomy. 12. of
what estate, condition, or honor soever. For as he says well in the same
place, The punishment of such crimes as touch the Majesty of God, does not
appertain to Kings and chief Rulers only, but also to the whole body of the
people, and to every member of the same; as occasion, vocation, and ability
shall serve to revenge the injury done against God. I will not spend time to
show this by your practices against Queen regent, who did oppose your course,
Knox hist. of the Church of Scot. page 217.
how by M. Knox and his followers, an Oath of Confederacy was taken: and the
Nobility threatened to join with you under the pain of excommunication, page
272. Then an imperious letter was written to her Majesty, that if she should
hinder their reformation, Ib^d. 265.
They should be compelled to take the Sword of just defense: and protested,
that without the reformation which they desired, they would never be subject to
any mortal man. And last of all, They deposed her Majesty at the Council of
our good friend, M. Knox, Page 378.
by a formal act penned by M. Knox, and set down in his History of the Church
of Scotland. And you do well (as you say in your Covenant) to follow the
laudable example of your Progenitors, as dutiful children, according to that
of the Wiseman. Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, Prove. 4.1.
and attend to know understanding: for I give you good doctrine; forsake you
not my law. And our worthy Father Mariana has shown you a ready way, which
you, as dutiful Sons, have hitherto diligently followed. Non dissimulandum
esse, Marian. lib 6. de. reg. cap. 6 page 59.
expeditam autem maxi^^^, and tutamviam esse, si publici conventus facultas
detur, communi consensu, quid statuendum sit deliberare, fixum ratumque habere
quod communi sententia steterit. Monendus imprimus Princept crit, atque ad
sanitatem revocandus, etc. qui si medici^am respuat, neque spos ulla sanitatis
relinquatur, sentemi^ pronunciata, licebit reipublica ejus imperium detractare
pri^^^m. Et qu^^iam bellum necessario concitabitur, ejus defendendi consilia
explicare, expedire arma, pecumias in belli sumptus imperare populis: and si
res feret, neque aliter se respublica tueri possit, codem defensionis jure, ac
vero potiori auctoritate and propria, principem public hostem declaratum FERRO
PERIMERE. This is not to be dissembled, that it is the most expedient and safe
way, if a public meeting may be granted, to deliberate what shall be done by
common consent, to hold that as firm and sure, which shall be concluded by
common consent. First of all, the Prince is to be admonished, and to be brought
to his wits again, etc. If he reject the medicine, and no hope of his recovery
be left, when the sentence is passed upon him, the Commonwealth may first
refuse his command; and because of necessity, there will be a stirring up for
war, they may unfold their counsels for defense thereof, and show that it is
expedient to have armor, and to command the people to advance moneys for the
charge of the wars. And if the matter will suffer, and the Commonwealth
cannot otherwise defend it self, with that same right of defense, but with a
better authority, and peculiar of their own, they may kill the Prince, being
declared publicly an enemy.

You have followed this counsel so full, that you have practiced it to the
last comma; yea, till you come to the last two words, FERRO PERIMERE. At which,
the Anticovenanter cries out with a shout, God save the King, let his soul be
bound up in the bundle of life. Let this dream of Ferro perimere be to them
that hate him, and the interpretation thereof to his enemies.

First of all, you sent from Edinburgh, thousands of letters to all corners of
the kingdom for a To conveene them from Dan even to Beersheba.
public convention; then by the common consent of all that appear, your
Covenant (made by the chief men of the confederacy) was sworn and subscribed,
and all of them (bound not to give obedience to the King) but to hold sure and
firm, what should be thought good by common consent. Your admonitions,
supplications and protestations have been multiplied, but all in vain: for,
as you say in your protestations, he is so far from acknowledging those
things to be unlawful, which you have condemned; that in his Proclamations he
holds the plain contrary opinion; and only does remove them, as they say,
for the hardness of your heart, and to preserve peace in the Land. And
therefore, since he rejects your medicine, as poison; Is there any hope of his
recoverie, that is, that ever he shall be of your judgments?

And as for lata sententia, though it be not done formally, yet it is done very
materially, in every corner of the Kingdom. It Is a remarkable sentence past by
one of you, preaching upon some text of the Prophet Zachary (though it may be
said, that his Commenter was from a Sam. 15.16) The Lord has forsaken our
King, R. B.
and given him over to be led by the Bishops, the blind brood of Antichrist;
who are hot begles, hunting for the blood of Gods Saints. D.E.
And another preached as well, upon the 1 Cor. 10.1. Where he told, that they
of the holy Covenant were like Israel at the red sea, and Pharaoh and his Host
coming upon them. Another was as forward as any of them, H. R.
When he compared the King to a wicked Italian, who delighted to kill men both
in soul and body. Another that he might hinder the people to subscribe the
Kings Covenant, G.Y.
preached unto them, That the Kings offer of the Covenant to them was, like
I^abs salutation of Amasa, who tooks him by the beard, and said, art thou well
my brother, and then stabbed him in the fifth rib. And M. Cant (whom for
honors sake I name) his Sermon at Glasgow is known to all our Society, he
prayed God to take away the Kings idolatry, and said, that the dear Saints in
England had their nose and their cares slit, for the profession of the Gospel.
I might be infinite in this point, but because it is so well known, I spare
further instancing.

The next point is Detractatio imperij, this you have done excellently, by not
only refusing obedience to his Laws civil and ecclesiastical, and to his
Proclamations; but also by continual protesting against him, and exhorting all
to stand to the Covenant. You have also kept your counsel of war, provided
Armor, laid taxations on the people to defray the charges: and the King is
public hostis declaratus, publicly declared to be your enemy by the
ministry, pressing them to Arms by your learned informations and have taken
all his Castles and strength from him, and say that they are the ^eyes of your
own kingdom, which you will keep your selves. And lastly you are come so
near to Ferro perimere, Protest. at Edenburg. 18. December. 1938
that you have met him with offensive arms. But I pray you, what made you
stand here? what made you make a period, where was no comma? Can you think it
unlawful to kill a King, and yet set your muskets, pikes, and Canons before
the face of a King, and shoot at random? it cannot be, that you have learned
Knox and Buchanan so ill, and you deserve no reward. Let that golden sentence
of Buchanan never be forgotten. Whiles he says, Buch, de sure reg. apud Scot.
page 40. Suarez. lib. 6. 6.
It were good that rewards were appointed by the people, for such as should
kill tyrants, as commonly there is for those, that have killed either Wolves or
Bears, or taken their whelps.

Your case was, that which is supposed by Suarez. Si supp^natur rex aggrediens
civitatem ut illam injuste perdat, and cives interficiat, vel quid simile, tunc
certe licebit principi resistere, etiam occidendo illum, si aliter fieri non
possit defensi^, tum quia si pro vita propria hoc licet, multo magis pro
communi beno, tum etiam quia civitas ipsa tunc habet justum bellum defensivum,
contra injustum invasorem, etiamsi proprius sit rex. If it be supponed that the
King is coming against a city, unjustly to destroy it, and to kill the
Citizens, or any such like thing, Then certainly, they may resist the Prince,
even killing him, if they cannot otherwise defend themselves: both because, if
this be lawful to be done for a man's own life, much more for the common good,
and also because the city it self has then a just defensive war against an
unjust invader, albeit he were their own King. This Thesis has been well
studied by you, for it is the ground of all your learned arguments for war.

But now since his Majesty is returned back again with his army, and this
first storm is gone without hurt, be not you idle, but labor for some friends
at Court who may inform you of his Majesty's Proceedings. And if you send any
to court, let that be ever one of your instructions, which you gave to the
Earl of Dumfermling, November. 2. 1639.
and the Lord London. To have frequent and sure advertisement to you how
affairs go, with their advise. Amen. And he still upon your guard, and let
the Flaccinian counsel take place with you (if you hear that he shall refuse
to approve of your proceedings) to affright him with the terror of
insurrection again. And desire all that are doubtful and scrupulous of this
matter to read Knox History and Buchanans, where they shall find our doctrine
very clear. The peoples power is great. Populus rege est praestantior and
melior, etc. The people are better then the King, and of greater authority.
For the people has the same power over the King, Buch. de jure reg. page 61.
Jdem page 50
that the King has over any one person. Populo ju^ est, ut imperium cui vult
deferat, the people have power to bestow the crown at their pleasure? its not
birthright, nor succession, nor propinquity of blood that must be respected.
Therefore Knox wrote to England and Scotland; Its not birthright only, nor
propinquity of blood, that makes a King lawfully to reign above a people,
professing Christ Jesus. fol. 77.
Let his Majesty know that you are no Dunces, but men of learning who know the
greatness of your power, and the smalnesse of his, notwithstanding of the
flattery of Court Parasites.

But before I end this point, I cannot but admire why you have not continued
your Parliament even to the end, but suffered his Majesty to adjourne it, you
profess that you follow the laudable example of your progenitors, but if you
do as they did 1560. you would not grant his Majesty a Negative voice, nor
suffer the Parliament to be adjourned, but to have done with it as you did with
the Assembly at Glasgow, November. 29. 1638. to continue it to the end, and then
for the fashion to have sought his Approbation: for the reason is alike, as
your assemblies are above him in spiritualibus, so are your Parliaments in
temporalibus, and may be holden though there be neither Sword, Scepter, not
Crown there. For as Knox says, those things were rather pompous and glorious
vain Coremonies, then any substantial points of necessity required to any
lawful Parliament. Knox hist. of the Church of Scotland page 502.
And therefore after you had kept that Parliament of your own accord in anno
1560. for the fashions sake, you send to the King of France, and your Scotch
Queen his wife, to desire them to ratify the same. But upon their refusal
you spoke as it became you, of their ratification. We little regarded it, or
yet do regard: Idem page 500.
for all that we did was rather to show our dutiful obedience, then to beg of
them any strength to our Religion. If you go not thus far, you come short in
following the laudable example of your Progenitors. And yet when I consider the
instructions given by the body of the Parliament to the Earl of Dumfermling,
and the Lord Lowdon, november. 2. 1639.
I perceive that you are not a foot behind your Progenitors, seeing you will
not grant it to be in the Kings power to prorogate the assembly, except, you
all consent unto it, for your sixth Article of the instructions is thus. Item,
If the King will not condescend^^^ go on presently in Parliament, that the
King prorogate* Parliament with consent of the states, according to the
conditions which you have. I see further, that if he prorogate the assembly, it
must not only be with your consent, but also he must grant your petition sent
to his Majesty, by the Earl of Kinoull from the Parliament; before you will
grant to any peaceable conclusion, or prorogation of the Parliament: for your
sole Argument to have your petition granted in is these words. Without this
point be granted, it is not possible to make a peaceable conclusion, or that
they can rest satisfied with the prorogation of the Parliament. And lest that
the people should rest satisfied herewith, and your Democracie take no good
success, the Ministers would be exhorted to do their part, not to suffer the
people to settle upon their dregs, but to hold them in perpetual motion till
it end, to your perpetual quietness. This was the practice of the zealous
Ministers your Predecessors in the days of Queen- Regent, Queen Many, and in
the tender age of King James, who did both in private and public oppone
themselves to authority for the maintenance of our tenants concerning the
civil Magistrate, and our other Prerogatives. This made King James our common
enemy, speak the truth in exceeding harsh terms, while he said. E ministerio
homines nonnulli praecipites, Basilic. d^ron. page 147.
ignei, audaces, in hac humanarum divinarumque rerum confusione, tam gratiosi
apud plebem facti sunt, ut degustata dominationis dulcedine, ceperunt
Democraticam reipub. formam sibi somniare; and primo aviae, deinede matris meae
subversione elati (and nimirum blandiebatur ijs successus) postrem^ pupilari
mea aetate ad Democratiae sua stabilimentum diu abusi, jam potestatem
tribunitiam specerta deveraverant: ut in populari republica cunt plebem, quo
vellent facile circumducerent, omnium negotiorum momenta soli temperarent.
Itaque nulla in mea pupillari atate vel post, seditie contigit, quin hos
homines sui furoris and amentiae patronos seditiosi facere conati suut. Crebra
adversus me in tribunitijs concionibus calumnta spargchantur, non quod crimen
aliquod designassem, sed quia rex cram, quod omni crimine pejus habebatur. Some
headstrong, fiery, bold men of the Ministers in this confusion of humane and
divine things, became so gracious with the multitude, that having tasted the
sweetness of government, they began to dream to themselves a Democraticall
form of the Commonwealth. And first being puffed up with the overthrow of my
Grandmother: and secondly, of my own mother, (and truly their success
slattered them:) Last of all, having long time abused my tender age for the
establishing of their Democracie, they had already by an assured hope fully
taken to themselves a tribunitiall power: that in a popular Commonwealth, they
alone ruled all business of moment, seeing they might easily lead the people,
whither they pleased. And therefore, no sedition has happened either in my
tender age or afterward, wherein the seditious did not make those men (the
Ministers) the patrons of their fury and madness. There were frequent
calumnies scattered abroad in their Tribunitiall sermons against me, not that I
had committed any crime, but because I was a King, which was esteemed worse
than al crims. Indeed I find our Father Becanus telling the same, that you are
enemies to Monarchy, in the example of Queen Mary. An non Serenissima Maria,
Recan examen. Concord. Angl.
Serenissimi Jacobi matter habuit primatum temporalem in Scotia? omnino habuit,
An non per vos de facto privata est? Nemo dubitat. Had not the most illustrious
Queen Mary, the mother of the most excellent King James, the Supremacy in
temporal things in Scotland? [for neither you nor we will let them have it in
spiritual things] certainly she had it: but did not you deprive her of it? no
man doubts of it.

De ^aca obedientia. Of blind obedience, which we both requice now of our
people. Your Covenant was mightily called in question, even by the Commons, and
yet you forced them to swear, and subscribe it upon your bare word? telling
them, that since the Church men have sworn and subscribed it themselves, that
the Commons ought to do it, and follow their Leaders, whom God at this time
has largely furnished with courage and counsel, for the good of his Kirk and
Kingdom. I hear, that the things which you have condemned in your general
assembly, where in the judgment of the common people of a contrary nature; but
now, having in their Covenant sworn in judgment and practice, to follow the
determination of the first general assembly that should be kept, they are
forced to forsake their own judgment, and embrace the contrary, by virtue of
the power of the general assembly. To this purpose we say: The people are to
subject to their Leaders, that if they err in defining any doubt, the people
(...)
vi regiminis, by the force of our government over them, ought to err. For in
this blind obedience, * requiritur proprij voluntatis and judicij abu^gatio,
mancipatio and in potestatem superioris deditio. There is required the deny all
of our own will and judgment, and a giving our selves over, as slaves in the
power of our Superiors. To this purpose your Andrew Cant (whom I name often for
honors sake) answered as he was very able to do, to those who would have
heard of him some reasons for the subscription of the Covenant, which he so
earnestly recommended in Glasgow, and never brought a reason for it; he told
them true, that they must deny learning and reason, and help Christ a lift.
And our ever honored General, the first founder of our Society, Jguatius
Loyola, Ignat. ^pist. de viatut. obed. 18.
tells us that Prudentia est imperantis non obedientis. Wisdom belongs to the
Commander, not to the obeyer. And therefore his ordinance is this to his
followers. Statuere debetis vobiscum quicquid superior pracipit ipsius Dei
praceptum esse and voluntatem, atque ut ad credenda que fides catholic a
proponit, tot^ animo assensuque vestro statim incumbit is, sic adea facienda
quacunque superior dixerit, caco quoda^^ impetu voluntatis parenda cupida, sine
ulla prorsu disquisitione feramini. You ought to resolve with your selves that
whatsoever your Superior commands you, is the command and will of God himself.
And even as you without delay yield with full mind and assent to believe those
things which the Catholic faith propones, so you ought to be carried to the
doing of whatsoever your superior shall say, with a certain blind force of a
will, that is desirous to obey. So said your Cant in that same Sermon at
Glasgow, while he told the people, to whom he recommended the Covenant, That he
was sent to them with a commission from Christ to bid them subscribe the
Covenant, which was Christ's contract, and that he himself was come as a wooer
to them for the bridegroom, and called upon them to come to be hand-fasted by
subscribing that contract. And told them plainly, that he would not depart the
town, till he got the names of all, who should refuse to subscribe that
contract, of whom he promised to complain to his Master.

bind the conscience, you do well now to maintain the contrary. And therefore
you have deservedly deposed, and thrust from amongst you, those ministers, who
only offered to suffer your laws bind the outward man, and to conform with you
in practice, but would not covenant with you, nor swear to be of your
judgment. As for example. They promised to sit at the receiving of the
Communion, as you do sit on your tail, and thus would conform in practice with
you, but they requested you not to burden their conscience, to believ sitting
only necessary, and that keeling is Idolatry. The like may be instane'd in all
the rest of the matters controverted amongst you. Since they would therefore
conform in practice, and only differ in judgment; why might not you compel
them to subscribe the covenant, and make them swear with you before God and the
world, that they were convinced in their consciences, of the lawfulnes of such
things? The Scripture bids compel men to the wedding, neither need you regard
them, who call your holy violence a Spanish inquisition.

works of Supererogation, as formerly you have been: For when the King urged
you to subscribe the confession of Faith, you refused it, drawing your reason
from the very ground, which has produced all our works of supererogation,
which is this, That a good work, which is done of a man's own accord, is more
excellent then that which is done by command of a Superior, as you reason
learnedly in your protestation in September 1638. and so conclude, that you
have done a more sincere work, and acceptable in covenanting without
authority, than if you should do it now at the command of your Superior: for,
(as you say) thus doing, the more liberty, the less hypocrisy, and more
synceritie has appeared. If this ground of yours be removed, then both your
Covenant, and our Evangelicall Councels will perish. And yet the Anticovenanter
will say, that the Scripture calls him the good servant that does his Masters
will: and whosoever do more than they are commanded by their Masters, get
Affricanus thanks: Non amo nimium diligentes.

Equivocation; for your own ends, to persuade the people to believ, that which
your own heart knows to be most false. As for example, to persuade the people
before they did subscribe the covenant, that it is for defense of the King,
against whom (you say) no man is bound by the covenant to rise up in desensive
arms: and that you are only bound to suffer, if his Majesty were to invade you.
But when they have subscribed, then you tell them that they must provide
armor, to resist the Kings coming to invade you. This made many poor simple
men complain, that they were wronged, and that they would at least be perjured,
if they should do so. Yet the Scripture is plain for such equivocation: for
when the army sent by the King of Syria, came to Dothan, where the Prophet
Elisha was to fetch him to the King, the Prophet came out to them, 2 King 6.19.
and said, This is not the way, neither is this the city, follow me, and I will
bring you to the man whom you seek. But he led them to Samaria, the quite
contrary way. But here is the difference between you and the Prophet, that when
he had misled them and brought them to Samaria, he did not detain them as
captives from their Masters, but said, Set bread and water before them, that
they may eat and drink, and go to their Masters. But you do not so, but
keep them in the net, in the which they are taken, that they cannot escape;
but must join with you against their Master: to whom they shall not return,
but with defensive arms; such as are not shield and buckler, but pike, musket,
and canon. I commend your policy herein, for you know, that the King does not
think, that the common people did ever aim at the contents and consequents of
the Covenant, and so does not impute any disloyalty unto them: and when he sees
that you have them so close tied unto you, they become your buckler and
defensive arms; for whose sake he has spared you, whom he thinks to be heads
of a faction against him, so that here multitudo sociorum parit impunitatem
criminum. And to speak the truth, seeing he condemnoth your zeal to religion,
as if it were rehellion against him; and yet has given you such way, without
curbing your course in the beginning, we cannot but say, that his innate Love
to his ancient Kingdom, whereof he has given plentiful testimonies, has
brought him to this strait, that he has neglected his Fathers direction, which
he was taught by exper^^ce, and which King Charles will teach his Son by a
double example. Basth^. Doron pa^. 14^.
The direction was this, Si ab initio clementians ostentes, crescet in immensum
delinquentium numerus, crescet tui contemptus: and ^am punire volueris, major
erit sontium quam insontium numerus, nec promptum erit discern^re unde facere
oporteat initium panae. At que it a multos perdes invitus, quos tempestiva
pancorum poena servare potuisses. Tu meo ex exemplo potes hic esse cautior, ^am
ego cum mansuetudine mea instituissem populum trahere ad legum obedientians;
contra accidit ut omnia plena facta sint tumultibus. Ego vero promercede ne
grates quidem retule im. If at the beginning thou show clemency, the number of
delinquents will greatly increase, and the contempt of thy self will increase:
and when thou will punish delinquents, the number of the guilty will be more
than of the innocent, neither shall it be ready for thee to discern, whereat
thou must begin punishment. And so thou shall destroy many against thy will,
which thou might save by the timely punishment of a few. In this point thou
may be more wary by my example: For when I had purposed by meekness, to
draw the people to the obedience of the laws, the contrary happened; so that
all was filled with uproares, And as for me, I got not so much as thanks for my
reward.

But go you on, and that you may more and more persuade them to adhere unto
you, tell them, as you do, that if they shall come under the Kings power, he
will utterly destroy them; and that his Proclamations and promises are not to
be regarded, since in your judgment ^e has broken the oath at his Coronation,
when he swear to God to defend his truth* but would now, if you did not re^ist
him, destroy the religion, the laws and liberties of this Church and Kingdom,
as your Protestations and Informations for war do fully show.

It was also a notable Equivocation, whereby you thrust the simple people from
subscribing the Kings Covenant, commanded by his Majesty to be subscribed, as
it was professed in anno 1581. and not according to your new interpretation
added unto it. For in the 1581. it was a Covenant drawn up at his Majesty's
special Command, and by his special authority, the oath and subscription was
prescribed to his Subjects, and so they swear according to the meaning of the
King, that was the exacter of this Oath. So that while his Majesty requires it
now to be subscribed, as it was professed then, he does it in opposition to
this present time, wherein you have put a new Commenter upon it, directly
contrary to the meaning of King James, who first prescribed it. And it is too
evident that Iesuitisme and Puritanisme were both odious to him, and that it
was his chief labor (as he says himself) to hold up that which you are
casting down, so that one of you does not err, while you call him your enemy
in superlativo, infestissimus hostis. But you did hinder this subscription by a
most excellent Equivocation, while you say. That you would be guilty of mocking
of God, Protest. Sept. 16^8. Reas. 2.
and take his name in vain: and as we are not to multiply miracles on Gods
part; so ought we not to multiply oaths and covenants on our part, and thus to
play with oaths, as children do with toys. Thus the people who were
withheld from the Covenant, think that all was true, which you said, not
observing that it was an Equivocation: and also a pia fraus: for if they had
but observed your practice, they would have seen it contrary to this reason of
yours; for how often have you sworn and subscribed your own covenant? At
Edinburgh where you made it, it was sworn and subscribed by you; when you came
home to your Parishes, it was reiterated solemnly by you; when you went to
other Parishes, you did, as good examples to them, renew it again and again;
and thought it no mocking of God, nor multiplying of oaths, or taking his name
in vain.

Answer to the Marquess of Hamiltions Declaration.
But I observe another notable Equivocation, which is so profound in one part of
it, that I think we must be your disciples to learn it: while you say, The
swearer is not bound to the meaning of the prescriber of the Oath, nor to his
own meaning; but is obliged to the reality rei juratae. I am sorry that you
were put to this strait, to find out this evasion. The truth was (as I
perceive) that your affrighting them with mocking of God, and taking his name
in vain, did not hinder, but many thousands did subscribe after the Lord
Commissioner, and Lords of Counsel. And this oath being taken, as it was in
the 1581. year of God, when King James exacted it, it is too evident a
consequence, that all that have taken this oath, are so far from abjuring
Episcopacie and the Articles of Perth, etc. that by the contrary, they are
obliged to defend the same: So that they may say with King James, Protest.
Sept. 1638.
Mihi praecipuus labor est dejectos episcopos restituere, and Puritanorum
anarchian expuguare. Now, though in your protestation against the subscription
of it, you made it one of your reasons why you could not subscribe it, because
it was to be exacted according to the meaning of the exacter, which is King
Charles, Heir of his Fathers opinions, as well as of his Dominions: yet since
it is subscribed by many, according to the meaning of the exacter, you remove
that rub, by saying, that they are not bound to swear and subscribe according
to the meaning of the prescriber of the oath. This is well, for then, when any
takes an oath, he may swear, not according to the exacters meaning, but
according to his own; and so none needs to know what we swear.

But the subscribers will say, we took the oath according to the meaning of the
prescriber, and both our meanings, both who did exact and take the oath, was,
that Episcopacie and Perths articles were not abjured. To this you answer,
that they are not bound to take it according to either of their meanings, but
according to the realitie rei juratae. If it be so, neither the exacter, nor
the taker of the oath did know what they swear and subscribed unto. If this be
to swear blind obedience, I approve it, if not, I will be glad to be farther
made perfect in equivocating: for I can find no third, but either the oath
must be taken according to the meaning of the exacter, or of the taker.

But I take your meaning to be, that that oath of the Kings Covenant ought to
be taken, as we thought to have done with the Oath of allegiance taken by
Roman Catholics in England. The King with his Council used all the wit and
prudence that could be had, to cause them to take the oath without any
Equivocation, or mental reservation, and that they should take no dispensation
from the Pope, for taking such an oath: so that in this case, it was made so
clear, that both the prescriber and the taker of the oath could not differ,
but be of one mind. But our Pascenius did laugh this diligence to scorn, and
found out a pretty way to elude such an oath, by telling them, that if the
Pope did dissolve that oath, and declare it unlawful, they were no more tied
to such an oath. Pas^en. Respon. ad ^p. i Mon^tor. Jacob. Reg. tit. B. 2.3.
Vide (inquit) in tanta astutia quanta fit simplicitas, juramentum tot
circumstantiis connexuisse existimabat, ut salva conscientia, nulla ratione a
quoquam dissolvi possit. Sed videre non potuit, fi pontifex juramentum
dissolverit, omnes illius nexus, sive de fidelitate Regi praestanda, sive de
dispensatione non admittenda, pariter dissolutos fore. Immo^ aliud dicam
admirabilius, juramentum fi injustum aperte declaretur, neminem obligat, sed
ipso facto nullum est. Regis vero juramentum injustum esse abi ipso ecclesiae
pastore sufficienter declaratum est. Vides jam in fumum abiisse illius
obligationem, ut vinculum quod a tot sapientibus f^rreum putabatur, minus sit
quam stramineum. Behold (says he) how much simplicity is in so much subtilty;
he thought to have bound this oath by so many circumstances, that it could be
dissolved no manner of way by any man with a safe conscience. But he could not
see, that, if the Pope should dissolve this oath, all the knots of it, whether
it be of fidelity to be performed to the King, or of a dispensation not to be
admitted, are both alike dissolved. Yea, I will tell another more mavelous
thing, if it be openly declared that the oath is unjust, it does oblige no man,
but by the fact it self it is null. Now this oath of the King is sufficiently
declared by the pastor of the Church himself to be unjust. Now thou sees that
the obligation of it is evanished in smoke: so that, that bond, which by so
many wisemen was thought to be strong as iron, is weaker than a rope of straw.

Thus it was with your Covenant; King Charles was very careful to have it
subscribed according to his Fathers meaning, who did prescribe the oath anno
1581. and his own meaning, which was the some with his Fathers, who approved
Episcopacie and P^rths Articles. So that all equivocation is here excluded: But
(this Pas^enius trick makes all clear) if Dickson or Henderson, etc. shall
dissolve this oath, and declare it unlawful, it has no force, as being not
according to the reality of the things themselves: and thus, are none more tied
to the King by Covenant, but may break it as easily as Sampson did his cords,
and must run your course against his Majesty. I might insist on many instances
to prove Equivocation amongst you, if it were needful, but I am consident you
shall not be such enemies to it in time to come.

pie frauds have not a little advanced your courses, for though the general
cause of all this uproare was pretended to be for defense of religion, laws
and liberties, yet (to speak under the R^se) it flowed from private causes and
respects, for (not to speak of the contempt of Monarchy, nor of private
frettin^ against Sovereignty by malcontents) the course his Majesty was taking
with the tithes, to deliver the ministry, and meaner sort of the Laity from
that which was counted bondage and slaverie, made many fret to see themselves
robbed of that clientely and dependence of the Cl^rgie and Laity, and of that
power, command and superiority, which by the tie of tithes they did enjoy. Some
had their private quarrels against the Bishops, many could not abide to see
them preferred to be on his Majesty's ounsell, etc. And a great hatred was
working against them, for being the chief instruments that the Ministers
maintenance was augmented, and many of the Tithes restored back again, which
made many think that in the end all the tithes, and Church Lands would return
to the ancient owner, whereby many would be brought to a poor estate, if the
tithes were taken from them, and some who have made Churches their habitation,
would not have a dwelling place at all; and some others being ambitious of
preferment both in Church and Policy, were no small causes of all this
uproare. Now howbeit, from those and such like other motives, this disorder
has come: yet its well dissembled by you, in taking this opportunity, to work
your private intended ends, by making the multitude believe that all is for
defense of Religion, Laws and liberties, which otherwise would be destroyed.

His Holiness our Pope, did never laugh more heartily, than when it was told
him, that you made the people believe that the book of Common Prayer was penned
at Rome, and sent to the King, and that it was nothing but the mass turned
into English; and that the King was a Papist, and intended to change the
Religion. That your Bishops were Pensioners to the Pope, and that all, who
would not subscribe your covenant, are Papists; truly he commended your
Policy, to catch children with wiles, and men with lies. The aspersions you
have cast upon King, Bishops, and Anticovenanters will make you noble. It Is a
good policy still to complain of Court and State, and to pry into great men's
lives, to pick out some fault, and to make faults where we find none: still
with Absalom saying, The men who have good and right causes, 2 Samuel 15.3.4.
have no man to hear them, Oh that I were made Judge in the land, that every
man which has any s^it or cause, might come unto me, and I would do him
justice. Thus the silly multitude will lightly apprehend that you are
blameless, who do so narrowly try and cry out against the faults of others,
whom howbeit you do not wound, yet in the vulgar opinion you do greatly stain
and blot them.

practice against Kings and Princes, in cutting them away that are enemies to
the religion. We need not be ashamed to confess, that the armor wherewith such
kings are killed, are forged in our shop: you know that Hackes and Coppinger
who wrote to Scotland to James Gibson, that he with the advice of the brethren,
might tell their opinion concerning the spirit that moved them, and the act
that they had in hand to be done, for the delivery of T. Cart wright out of
prison, and killing of all their withstanders. That which Ravillack did
effectu, was no more praiseworthy than that which they did affectu: all those
our works are not to be accounted points of treason, but only sensible
expressions of our Heroical Zeal to the defense of Religion, which ought to
be more dear to us, than Kings or Princes, father or mother, brother or
sister, all those cords must be broke, and bonds cast from us, when we see them
to set themselves to take counsel against the Lords Anointed. Such men of
courage who put their life in their hand, and cut off such wicked men, ought to
be so far from being counted traitors, that they should be rewarded for doing
it, as your Buchanan says. Knox in his history of Scotland commends the privy
murdering of the Cardinal of S. Andrews perpetrated by Norman Lesley son to
the Earl of Rothsey, and James Melvin calls it a godly fact, and propones it as
an example to be followed by the posterity.

In your Zions plea, and other papers, you speak excellently of that Heroical
fact of Felton your Martyr, Du. Buck.
and pathetically exhort the Nobles of the Land to follow his footsteps,
saying, God has chalked out the way unto you, God having offered himself to
guide you by the hand, in giving this first blow, will you not follow home? the
sprinkling of the blood of the wolf, if we can f^llow the Lord in it, may prove
a means to save us. The counsel of Hushai to Absalom forteth well with this
business, that all Israel should be gathered from Dan to Beersheba, as the
sand on the sea in number, who may with the ropes of their Prayers joined to
the power of your hands, draw the city of their Babel into the river of
destruction, until there be not one small stone found.

You have most zealously embraced this profitable exhortation; and albeit your
intended work took but small success, yet let not this interruption bequench
your zeal, nor cause your heroical spirits to sail, but be forward in this
cause, and let all your words be spoken by Talents, that authority may see that
you do not scare it. Let our example encourage you; and your example encourage
us. It was to this purpose manfully said by one of you. Pain epist. to F.
Our zeal to Gods glory, our love to his Church, and the due planting of the
same, in this horeheaded age should be so warm, and stirring in us, as not to
care what adventure we gi^, and what censure We abide, etc. The Jesuits and
Seminaries their diabolical bolanesse (he wrongs us in his epithet, seeing he
followe^ our way) will cover our faces with shame.

Its true indeed, so long as we are not able to resist, and make out party good
by strength of hand, there is a necessity that we must suffer, and like the
poor man we must use entreaty: for its our wisdom to consider the times, when
we may be forward, and when not. Hence it was that in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, when your power was little, that your answer was humble; for when
the State and Clergy of England charged your sort of men with faction,
sedition and schism, and judged that if you were curbed betimes, you would
bring desolation on Church and policy: your answer was mild (though it might
seem to your adversaries mixed with passion, pride and Hypocrisy) while you
said. Practice of Prelates.
Peace was by those men kept inviolate, for which of them ever dealt
disorderly, or tumultuously? who ever of them in word or deed gave out any just
suspicion of unpeaceable dealing? nay have they not in their ministry, in
their examples, striven for peace more then any? for this cause (as your
Buch^n. well observes with us) Paul writing to the Romans says. Let every
soul be subject to superior powers. Buch de^ure reg. page 5^. Ibid. page 56.
Paul (says he) writes this in the infancy of the Church, there were but few
Christians then, not many of th m rich, or of ability, so as they were not ripe
for such a ^u^pose, as if a man sh uld write to such Christians as are under
the Lurk, in substance poor in courage feeble, in st^ength unarmed, in number
few, and generally subject to al kina^ of injuries: would he not write as Paul
did? So as the Apostle did respect the men h wrote unto, and his words are not
to be extended to the body, or people of a Commonwealth, or whole city And he
tells us in this case, (...) bid. page 57.
if Paul were alive and did see wicked Kings reigning in Christian
Commonwealths, Paul would say, That he accounted no such for Magistrates he
would forbid all men for speaking unto them, and from keeping them Company: he
would leave them to their subjects to be punished: Rel. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 7.
neither would he blame them, if they accounted no such longer for their Kings.
And as Bellarm. says, Talis consensu omnium potest, into debet privari suo
dominio. Si hoc priscis temporibus minus factum sit, causa est, quia deerant
vires. Such a King by the consent of all may, yea ought to be deprived of his
dominion: if this in old times was not done, the cause was, because they had no
strength.

But now the times are changed, Hac atas alios mores postulat, this age
requires other manners, spare not big words, tell the head its sick, press
the people to arms too, strike the Basiliske vein, since nothing but that
will cure the plurisie of your estate. Covenanters inform for Defensive. 5.2.
Your strength is great, yea so great that you profess your selves invincible,
if you k^epe unity and verity, that is the doctrine which I congratulate.

Certainly, you have an invincible General, your head Lesley. And as there is
great union between us in doctrine and practice; so I perceive a great
similitude between both our Generals, our Ignatius Loyola, and your Lesley. As
for their birth, I cannot compare them, for neither Maphaeus, nor Ribadeneira,
nor Valderana, nor Becanus, nor any that writes his life, tells us, who were his
parents; so that it seems pater Ignatii fuit dubii generis, and matter communis
generis. As for his life, Maphaeus in Vu^ Jg^at. lib. 1 cap. 2.
we deny not the truth, for as our own writers say of his childhood. satis
constat cum in pueritia, profanos admodum hausisse spiritus. It is certain,
that in his childhood he drew in very profane spirits. And in adolescentia,
militiae ac vanitati sese dedit. In his childhood, he gave himself to wars and
vanity, Ribad. de vit Ign^^^. lib. 1. c. (...).
being ready to serve any man for his pay, so that our Ribadencira caleth him
Vanitatis vile mancipium, A vile slave of vanity.

But at Pompeiopolis being courageously fighting, his leg was sore wounded, and
it was good for him, Be^ in.
for ac^epto hoc luculento vulnere, ad Deum conversus est. Having gotten this
great wound, he was converted to God, and his leg was amended; but yet, non
nihil claudicavit, sea honest^, Ribad. lib. 4. ap. 18.
and quod ambulan li moderatione tegeretur: He halted a little, but decently,
and which he might hide by the moderation of his walking, and become the
founder and general of our holy Society. All this has happened to your
General, in his childhood, youth-hood, in his wound, in his halting, in his
conversion, and becoming General of your holy Society. But from the halting
of both our Generals, the Anticovenanters draw an ominous conclusion, that we
are like Israel in the days of Elias, halting between God and Baal, and
running creeked courses. But notwithstanding of our halting, they shall find
that we can run, and give them matter enough to work on. They have so sensibly
found it so, in our General Ignatius, that all in our Church, who are not of
our order, wish that he had never been hurt in war, that so he might have
there remained, and never turned home, where in peace he does more hurt, then
he did in wars; for abroad (say they) he fought against the common enemy,
but at home, he raises and fostereth seditions and treasons against Princes.
The same do many of you say of Lesley, and apply that to him, which our men
speak of our Loyola.

Quam bello plus pace noces, and ad otia versus
Crudelis animum vertis ad insidias.
Scotia and in media conscripto milite regnas,
Diraque (fraterno nomine) bella geris.
But I pray you, as we have followed our General Ignatius his command, by
yielding up our selves, our wills and judgments caca obedientia, as he did
require; so do you with your General, in following his command and directions.
And so much rather I require this of you, because I hear, there are divisions
among you, 1 Cor. 11.18.
and partly I believe it, for there must be also heresies among you, that they
which are approved may be made manifest. But you may amend this breach,
consider wisely, where the division is likeliest to be, and prepare your salve
for every man's sore, and your bait for every man's humor. If it be among the
Nobility, then extol and praise what they have done, tell, that all men's eyes
are upon them, as the noble reformers of the Land; let them hear of the noble
facts of their progenitors, commend perseverance, and show them what cowatdize
is, and what infamy will follow to yield to their Prince. Put them in
remembrance of that noble sentence of ours. To^it. lib. 5. cap. 6
Si nobilis invasus, posset vitam servare fugie^do, non tenetur (si inde
infamiam contra^^^t) fugere, s^d hostem occider^ potest. If a noble man being
invaded, may save his life by flying, yet he is not bound to fly, if he
contract infamy thereby, he is rather bound to kill his enemy, much less to
yield. Let the women in the streets continue to preserre those young David's ten
times above their Prince, and still pray for them. And if there be any of the
Nobility of greater worth, tell them, that the whole business depends upon
them, and that you will do all by their direction, and that they shall be
made immortal, by recording their acts to posterity to come.

If you sear division in the ministry, it is easy to help that, keep those
under, who are not zealous in your cause: let them not be acquainted with your
mysteries, nor be chosen Commissioners for assemblies: if there be any matter
of importance to be commended to the people send either conjunctly or
severally, some zealous ministers to their pulpits, to rouse up the multitude,
and put the like edge upon such cold-rise ministers, and if they become not
more zealous, put them in fear of Deprivation.

If you fear any division among the Commons, it is likely that some of them
have seen the Kings extraordinary savor toward them: but you ought to be
careful, that they see not the Kings Proclamations; and if any have seen them,
let them be persuaded that his Majesty's Proclamations have this only end, to
divide them, and then to destroy them; and that all other fair promises shall
have no real performances. Be not you behind the King in your promises to them
also, and howbeit, you have a hundred thousand pound to take of them, yet be
not sudden, but by delaying; put them in hope that you will never exact it:
For if you go now to exact it, it will make them repine and grumble, and say,
instead of Sal^mons easy yoke, we are oppressed with Rehoboams heavy burdens,
and so make a rupture, and return every man to his tent, and in the end submit
themselves to their Solomon again. And especially, let the ruling Elders
command their ruled Elders, or ministers, to be diligent in season and out of
season, to keep the multitude in their zealous humor, for if they do not
uncessantly blow upon them, they will be like mare mortuum, and never be moved.
Cease not to possess them with an evil opinion, of all that oppones
themselves to your courses either by word or writing, make them believe that
all, that writ against your confederacy, are unnatural enemies to their
Country, and that it is not against your faction which they do, but against
Church and Kingdom; and suffer no man to deny this to be a National quarrel,
or to call it a Faction, and all that refuse to cast in their lot with you,
call them the cursed inhabitants of Meroz, that will not help you against the
mighty.

And let all that follow their King, be called the Kings faction, according to
the example of your progenitors, who called all that followed the Queen, a
faction, which they would punish, as Traitors; whenever God should put the
sword of justice in their hands, Knox. hist. of the Church of Scotland. page
364.
that is, when they should find themselves able to depose the Queen, (as they
did) and repress her Subjects. There is another thing which I desire you to
remember to try where those ministers, that have been most opposite to our
doctrines and practices, have had their residence in the ministry, that you
may place able and zealous men for our cause in those same places, to build up
the people which they have destroyed. This work is well begun by you, in
bringing Henderson from the Country, to the town of Edinburgh, Dikson to
Glasgow, and Rhetorfort and Blair (who could not get liberty to vent our
Doctrine elsewhere) to S. Andrews. and in particular let them be careful over
the studients in Colleges, ^uo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa
diu.

And as for those, who like the men of Succoth, and the inhabitants of Meroz,
refused to join with you, its well that you did not take the th rnes of the
wilderness, and briars to teach them, to beat down their houses, this may
content them, albeit you restore not their goods, which you took while you
plundered their houses. Though they be busy seeking it, yet you are not bound
according to our rules, Nullus tenetur cum vitae peri^ulo, Tolet. lb. 5. cap.
37.
aut famae rem alterius restituere, sunt enim vita and fama nobili oris ordinis
quam res. No man is bound 01 with the danger of his life or good name to
restore another man his goods again, for life and a good name are of a more
noble order then goods are: for albeit there be no danger of your life to
restore every man his own, yet your name is not safe, for if you restore to
each man his goods again, at least it will be a tacit acknowledging of your
robbery, and that is hurt some to a good name. But some say, that it is a
matter of conscience, to restore a man's goods again, which is better then a
good name, yea the way to recover a good name: but I refer this to the schools.

I have some matter of expostulation with you, but I will be loath to do it now,
who have begun to congratulate with you for that sweet Harmony both in
opinions and reasons which is of late grown up amongst us. Rome was not builded
in one day, we must not look that at the first you can receive all our
doctrine, though in a short time you have profited much. Et vos conversi
convertite fratres. Master Cant could preach at Glasgow, in what need England
and Ireland stands of the Covenant, where some have their ears cut for the
defense of the truth, and are groaning under the tyranny of the whore of
Babel. And since so it is, you should pity the blindness of those people, who
have not a learned man in England or Ireland to lead them, but the blind
leads the blind; But I perceive you are not negligent herein, your Ironicall
preterition is most notable, while you say, Answer to the M^^quesse of
Hamiltons declaration.
We do not meddle with the Kirks of England or Ireland, but recommend to them
the pattern shown on the Mount. But what pattern of the mount is this I pray
you? is it the Pattern shown by you on Dunce hill, called by your preachers
mount Sion, with an army against the face of your King? if it be so, its a
worthy pattern that requires imitation. But if the Pattern on the mount, be
the Pattern of your discipline, you do well herein, to imitate your
progenitors: for they were desirous to have Episcopacie thrown down in
England as you are now, or as we are desirous; for their pride is so great,
that the least of them says, that they have no more dependence from the Pope,
then he from them: that their calling and place is of as great power and
authority, as his is within his diocese, thus limitating the universal
Bishop, as if he were only a Diocesian. Yea they are not ashamed to say, that
all the Popish bishops are but equivocally called Bishops, and univocally are
the Popes slaves: for as they have their power and authority from the Pope, so
are they tied to his obedience by oath. Romans pentifici veram obedientiam
spondeo acjuro. Form. Iu^^. Bulla Pii 4.
I promise and swear to give true obedience to the Pope of Rome. So that as
the Bishops of Apulia said, so (say they) must all popish Bishops say, Nos
nihil aliud sumus praeterqua^ creatura and mancipia pontificis. Carol Molm.
consil. sape. Council T^^d. n. 21.
We are no other thing but the creatures and slaves of the Pope. And since the
Pope will be only universal Bishop, and all the rest depending on him, as
their head, they tell our Bishops in the words of Gregory. Si unus universalis
est, restatut vos episcopi non satis. If there be one universal Bishop, it
remains that you are no Bishops. G^g. lib. 7. ep. 70.
Therefore I say, seeing your Bishops are greater enemies to our Hierarchy,
then your selves are; you shall want no help that we can afford, to have them
removed. I have seen your Gibsons letter to Coppinger, Hackets fellow labourer
in England: Where he says, The best of our Ministers are most careful of your
estate, and had sent for that effect, a Preacher of our Church this last Summer
(1590) of purpose to confer with the best afflicted ministers of your Church,
to lay down a plot, how our Church might best travel for your relief. But you
do as well to send libels and informations, as to go in your own persons.

But before I proceed any further either in my congratulation or exhortation, I
must relate unto you what I heard of that Anticovenanter, of whom I spoke
lately, when he read, That you did recommend to the Church of England and
Ireland the pattern on the mount.

This (says he) brings to my remembrance a pretty Apology written by
Melancthon. Vulpecula cauda amissa, reliquis vul^ibus callide persuasit, ut
similiter and ipsae caudas resecarent, ne sola turpis and deformis in suo
genere videretur. A fox having lost her tail, craftily persuaded the other
foxes, that they would likewise cut off their tails, lest she her self alone,
should seem the foul and deformed beast of all that kind. Thus is their case who
recommend their pattern to others. But certainly, while they thus labor to
remove episcopacy, as unlawful, and set up a new discipline as the only
lawful, in Christ's Church, they do differ as much from their first Reformers,
as wisemen do from madmen. For it is certain, that even Calvin who first
invented this discipline, did it not because he judged Episcopacie
antichristian, or unlawful, much less did he recommend his discipline as a
pattern to others: but it was only mere necessity which moved him, for if
those who were bishops at the Reformation would have forsaken the Pope as their
head, and embraced the reformed Religion, their calling had never been called
in question, as appears by the words of Calvin to Cardinal Sadolete. Talem
nobis hierarchiam si exhibeant, in qua sic emineant Episcopi, Calvin. epist. ad
Card. Sadolet.
ut Christo subesse non recusent ut ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant, and
ad ipsum referantur: in qua sic inter se fraternam societatem colant, ut von
alio modo, quam ejus veritati sint colligati, tum vero, nullo non anathemate
dignos fatear, si qui erunt, qui non cum reverenter, summaque obedientia
observent. If they do bring unto us such an Hierarchy, wherein the Bishops
shall so be preferred, that they refuse not to submit themselves to Christ,
that they also depend upon him as their only head, and have their relation to
him, in which Hierarchy they may so keep brotherly society among themselves,
that they be not other ways knit together, but by his truth: then surely if
there shall be any, that shall not submit themselves to that Hierarchy
reverently, and with the greatest obedience that may be, I confess there is
no kind of curse whereof they are not worthy. A fore sentence for a
covenanter. Beza likewise himself hearing that some did offend at the
innovation of discipline (which necessity put upon them) and thought that he
and his colleagues did set out the same as a pattern for other Churches, to
follow, was not a little displeased, and told that it was never their intention
to prescribe such a discipline, where the old might be kept, he wishes them
to keep it still. Beza de g^ad. minist. cap. 23.
Frnantur igitur illo quivolent and poterunt. Therefore let them enjoy
Episcopal government who desire and may do it: and says in that same place,
Absit ut tune ordinem temere aut superbe reprehendam. God forbid that I should
rashly or proudly reprove that order, and therefore in the 21. chap. of the
cited book, having spoken of the tyranny of the Popish Bishops did hinder the
reformation, he tells us, that he does neither mean Protestant Bishops, nor yet
set forth their discipline, as a Pattern to be followed. Neque tamen nujus
tyrannidis omnes archiepiscopes, sen episcopes hodie vocatos accusamus: quae
fuerit enim haec arrogantia? i^o cunctos, sic hodie appellatos (modo
sanctissimorum illoruns Episcoporum exemplum imitentur, and tam misere
deformatam d^mam Dei, ex verbi divini regula instaurent) ut ecclesia Chrianae
sidos pastores, cur non agnoscamus, and omni reverentia prosequamur? nedum ut
(quod falsissime and impudentissime aonnulli nobis objiciunt) cuipiam ussiam
ecclesiae sepuenduns nostrum peculiare exemplum praescribamus. And yet we do
not accuse all, that are this day called Archbishops or Bishops, of this
tyranny: for what arrogancy were that? yea, why should we not acknowledge,
and honor with all reverence, all that are this day so called, as the
faithful pastors of the Christian Church: so being they would imitate the
example of those most holy Bishops in the primitive Church, and reform by the
rule of Gods word the deformed house of God? much less that we should
prescribe to any Church in any place, our peculiar example to be followed,
which most falsely, and most shamelesly some object unto us. So the authors of
the Augustan Confession declare ingeniously, that it was not any dislike at
Episcopal government, Augustan. Confess. A^^c. 14.
but the cruelty of Popish Bishops, who did by all means hinder the
reformation of Religion, which did dissolve that government and Canonical
policy, quam magnopere cupiebamus conservare, which we earnestly desired to
preserve. And therefore, seeing popish Bishops were in place then, and
Protestant Bishops could not be set in their place, they declared to the world
in their confession, that (notwithstanding it was removed) they did approve it,
and were so free from having the fault imputed to them, that it did not remain
among them; that they were most willing it should be continued, if those
Popish Bishops would forbear their persecution, and turn Protestans, and
study to advance the Reformation. Ibidem.
For they say, Hiciterum testatum volumus, nos libentur conservaturos esse
ecclesiasticam and canonicam politiam, si modo Episcopi desinant in nostras
Ecclesias savire, Haec nostra voluntas, and coram Deo, and apud omnes gentes ad
omnem posteritatem excusabit nos, ne nobis imputari possit, quod episcoporum
authoritas labefactetur. Here again, we will have it testified, that we shall
willingly keep still the Ecclesiastical and Canonical policy, if so be the
Bishops will forbear to rage against our Churches. This is our will, and it
shall excuse us before God, among all Nations to all posterity, that it cannot
be imputed to us, that the authority of Bishops is decayed. Ibid de potest.
Eccles.
And again, in that same confession they say, Saepe jam testati sumus, no^ von
solum potestatem Ecclesiasticam quae in Evangelio instituta est, summa pietate
venerari, sed etiam Ecclesiasticam politiam, and gradus in Ecclesia magnopere
probare, and quantum in nobis est conservare cupere: non detractamus
authoritatem Episcoporum, modo non cogant facere contra mandatum Dei. Hac
votuntas liberabit nos coram Deo, and judicio univers^^ posteritatis, ne
j^dicomur re^ hujus schismatis, quod initio excitatum est injusta damnatione
doctrinae Lutheri. We have already oftimes testified, that we, not only with
the greatest piety that can be, do reverence that Ecclesiastical power
instituted in the Gospel, but also do very much approve the Ecclesiastical
policy, and degrees in the Church, and desire to keep it, as much as we can:
We do not refuse the authority of Bishops, if so be they do not compel us to
do against the Command of God. This our will shall deliver us before God, and
in the judgment of all our posterity, that we be not judged guilty of that
Schism, which at the beginning was raised by the unjust condemning of the
Doctrine of Luther. O how far do those Covenanters differ from those
Reformers! How can they clear themselves before God, the Reformed Churches,
and the ages to come, who have made this great Schism? They not only have
condemned, that which all reformed Churches do commend, but also study to hatch
the cockatrice egg, and bring forth serpents, Schisms and Rebellions in other
calm Churches, who live at peace. Look now far these Reformers did tender
Episcopacio, as much do these Covenanters hate it: It is not sufficient to
them, to have thrust from them without any cause their Bishops, (except it be
that the Bishops have carried themselves to them, as David did to Adonijah. 1
King. 1.6.
And his father did not displease him at any time, in saying, Why have thou
done so? by which too gentle dealing, they gave them occasion to rise up
against them) but they themselves must be (...), busy Bishops in another man's
Diocese; yea, be universal Bishops, within the Kings Dominions, by their
seuslesse (yet malicious) libels and letters, to his Majesty's good Subjects in
England and Ireland, laboring to produce the like Disorders among them, that
they should not remain alone filthy and deformed in the Church of God.
Howbeit, all good and learned men (even among those, who have not Episcopal
government) do declare their dutiful and reverent respects to Bishops; yet,
for the accomplishing of their bad ends, it has been their chief labor,
first and last, to make Bishops most odious and contemptible to all men.

Thus Cant at Glasgow in his Sermon (because the Bishop of Glasgow did dwell in
the Castle, near to the Cathedral Church) told the people, that Satan had his
dwelling among them, and Antichrist had a nest among them: and cried, pull
down, pull down Antichrists nest, with many other expressions, more worthy of
the speaker; than of the Hearers; there wanted nothing to draw the multitude to
the perpetrating of a mischief against that old reverend Father, but that God
suffered not any to be a head to the furious multitude.

Thus they have too obsequiously observed the direction of their book
entitled, Sions Plea, page 196.
Sions Plea: Where it is said, Ministers and Magistrates mast labor, and cause
others to labor for an holy hatred of Prelates, and their brethren, with an
holy hatred, to dash the brains of the Babylonish Prelacie against the stones.
And according to Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies, that would not that J
should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. And strike that
Hazael in the fifth rib, yea, if father or mother stand in the way, away with
them. Strike the Basiliske vein, for nothing but this will cure the plurifie
of this our state. This is a notable policy, and as well learned by the
Covenanters, as taught by their masters, and have made such proficiencie
herein, that they stand in more need of a bridle, than of a spur; they have
by lies and calumnies with the changeable multitude so prevailed, that they
have not so much as any being among them, but as they say, Have swept the dirt
and dust out of Gods house, and sent them to the land of Nod. But yet, Thanks
be to God, notwithstanding of their throwing stone^ at them, they have not
dashed their brains against the stones, and for Ha^ael^ fifth rib, they have
only smote a Bishops coach-horse. And as for this Basiliske vein, which they
would have stricken, it is of a higher nature, than the killing of Bishops; for
it is borrowed from the Jesuits, who by that phrase, understand the killing of
Kings and Princes: Wherefore one of them said, Erratum valac fuiss^ in fisto
Bartholomai, Carol. Scrib^n.
quod scci^ non f^^rit vena Basilica, id est, quod parcitum fuit regi Navarra,
and principi Condensi. It was a great sault, that in the feast of Bartholomew
the Basiliske vein was not stricken, that is to say, that the King of Navarre,
and the Prince of Co^di^ was let alone. But they have done as much as they can,
to strike at this Basiliske vein through the Bishops sides. For I remember,
when at the beginning of these disorders many did ask, why they did make the
Bishops their adversaries, and complain upon them, since they did never
require any thing, but by warrant of his Majesty's authority, whom they ought
to obey; it was usually answered, Some man must be whipped, and rather the
Bishops, than any. God knows how foul a Commenter this might suffer. And as
for those calumnies, filthy ballads, which these men set out to the disgrace of
themselves, rather than of those whom they hate; they deserve no other answer,
than that of the Prophet. The vile person will speak villainy, and his heart
will work iniquity, Esa. 3^.6.
to practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, etc. And in
particular, this sentence does justy appertain to that vile person, Alexander
Sempill, who for whoredom, drunkenness, and all kind of Licentiousness,
has not a second in Scotland, and now by means of whorish Women, Prove. 6.16.
is brought to a piece of b^ead, and extreme poverty, having nothing left but a
decrepit body, an intoxicate brain, and railing tongue: so that I wonder, who
could be so base, as to lend him their hand to write for him that foolish, (but
seditious) ballad, called the Bishops bridles. And I marvel more, that the
Covenanters have made this pattern of wickedness, to be their fittest man to
present to England and Ireland, their partern on the Mount: for they print
nothing there now without the approbation of one Johnson, Clerk of their
assemblies. So he prints himself (...)
This AS or Alexander Sempill is so beastly and apisl^, that he can find no
other matter or subject for his ballad, but to allude to one Rew's preaching on
Balaams ass, which they make to be the Church of Scotland, that have thrown
off the Bishops, their riders: and therefore must sell their bridles. This
Preacher Rue, did not put shame enough upon that Church, but this AS must
second him, and continue its shame. That of the Wiseman is fit for them, A whip
for the horse, a bridle for the Ass, Prove. 26.3.
and a rod for the fools back.

But since they delight in this comparison, and will have their Church to be an
Ass, and the Bishops their riders; I shall not displease them so to call it.
But let them remember that the Bishops rode upon this Ass meekly, dealing with
them, 1 Cor. 4.21.
not with the rod, but in love, with the spirit of meekness. But the
Lay-Bishops have thrown them off, and now ride so furiously like Jehu, that we
complain with the Psalmist. Psalm. 66.12.
Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and water:
they 2 King 4.24.
drive and go forward, and slack not their riding: they study to make her a
wild Ier. 2.24.
Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the Wind at her pleasure, and
is so far drawn away in the wilderness, that his Majesty has taken more
pains to find her out, and bring her from her wandering, 1 Samuel 9.3.
than Saul did in seeking his fathers asses, he sought his Fathers asses but
three days, but his Majesty has sought this ass three years. There is no
question but she would be found and return, Esa. 1.3.
for the ass knows her Masters crib: but her riders will not suffer her,
persuading her that his Majesty will miscrably handle her: though they
assuredly know themselves, that his Majesty will do no more harm to her, than
the Lion did to the ass, whereon the seduced Prophet rode, 1 King. 13.28.
the Lion did not tear the Ass, the Scripture says, but killed the seduced
rider. This is the only fear they have, not for the ass, but for the riders,
who have justly provoked the Lions wrath, as the messenger of death; and to be
buried with the burial of an ass, Ier. 22.19.
drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. Here the Anticovenanter
would have proceeded, but I not being desirous to trouble my self in dispute
with him, cut him off with your words. The Covenanters are exhorted not to be
moved with remonstrances, were they never so specious* but submit themselves
obediently to follow their leaders, Covenanters i^form for Defensive.. 4.
wh^m God at this time has largely furuished with courage and counsel, for
the good of his Kirk and Kingd^me. But he answered me, The leaders of this
people cause them to err, Esa. 9.16.
and they that are led of them, are destroyed.

But leaving him, I return to my exhortation. If you cannot persuade men to
your pit ne on the mount, at least labor to possess them with the opinions
and doctrines, which you have received of us. I specially his is the duty of
Blair and Livingston, to water the good seed which they have sown in some of
the hearts of some of your contrymen in the North part of Ireland: and by
their frequent exhortations and letters, to persuade them to grow, and be
fruitful in those matters. Especially let them, by fearful threatings of
Gods judgments, aff^ight them from taking that unl wfull oath which
establishes the Kings Supremacy, and is urged by my Lord Deputy, (to whom, I
confess, his Masters honor is more dear, than the Apple of his eye) so
violently, that he will suffer no man to vilipend it, but will have them swear
such an oath, that they shall never tak^ arms against their King, nor protest
against him, but to obey his royal commands. Whereby thus violently he has
put your covenant out of credit among the Scots there, except you provide some
remedy.

I hear that not only Blair and Livingston, but that Rhetorfort, and Dickson
also, have lent their helping hand, and have written a learned refutation of
that Oath to be taken by the Scots there. I am sorry that I did not see it,
that I might have increased my congratulati n. Did you ever see the two
Apostolic brieft, which our holy Father ^aulu^ 5. sent to the Catholics in
England, that were urged with the same Oath, that is pressed upon your brethren
now? Or did you ever read Bellarmines letter to Blakwell? if you did, they have
helped you well in that matter, I am sure. Becanus tells us the sum of all
which the Pope and Cardinal did write. Vterque negat salva conscientia
praestari pos^e, Bec m. dis^id. Angl.
hoc juramentum a rege propositum, quia abnegarent sidem Catholicam. They both
deny, that that oath prescribed by the King, can be taken with a safe
conscience, because they would deny the Catholic Faith. They say, you say the
same, only you add many fearful judgments upon both the exacter and takers
of the same. And therefore you may say of them that take this oath, Ibid.
as Becanus does, Hoc faciunt ad extremam patem and politiam conservandam, quae
pluris abillis quam fides and religio astimatur, ideoque politici poti^s quam
Christiani appellandi sunt. They do this that they may preserve outward peace,
which they esteem more than of Faith and Religion; and therefore they ought
rather to be called Politicians than Christians. Beca^ resut. T^tu^e t^^^^ p. 1
para^t. 1.
For no man will grant the Kings Supremacy, excepto Sacellano, and quibusdam
aliis adulatoribus regiis. Except the Kings Chaplain, (Bishop Andren es) and
some other Court Parasites. And here by the way I must tell you a notable
untruth of that Bishop Andrews, in his dispute against Bellarmine: he holds
that the Puritans do willingly take the oath of Supremacy. But albeit he was
(...), having five tongues, yet with none of his five tongues could he speak
true in this, as our Becanus proves from no less than the testimony of his
own Master K. James, in his Basil. Doron. But I find one Richardus Thomsonus
in Elencho refutationis Torturae torti, defending Andrews, and reconciling him
with his master, by telling, that the King spoke of Scots Puritans; and the
Bishop of English Puritans. Whether this may satisfy or not, I leave it to a
farther inquiry.

If the for lorne brother of our society Abernethie has done our Church any
service among you, in the farthering and promoving this your happy return to
us; he has sowell deserved, that there is hope for him to be received of us
again. Howbeit his crimes were so ugly, that we did exclude him from our
Church and orders; 2. Cor. 2 6.
yet sufficient to this man is the punishment inflicted upon him by many. For
he has reconciled himself (as the people of Gath feared David would do) with
your heads and hearts: in enlightening your brain with the knowledge, and your
hearts with the love of many principal points of our doctrine. 1 These. 2.17.
Exhort him to continue unto the end. I endeavored my self to have come unto
you, I desired to see you earnestly, and would have come unto you once and
again, but Satan hindered me.

Though in this my Congratulatorie Epistle, I have sometimes inserted my
counsel and exhortation unto you, let not this displease you, as if I thought
you deficient herein, or that you had need of spurs, who run with
born-down-head. For all my exhortations are nothing else, but a pleasant
repetition of your doings, and a sympathizing expression of our conjunct
approbation thereof. So that my recommendation of that to your practice, which
you are doing, is so far from insimulating you of negligence, that it is
rather a commendation of your actions, according to that of the Poet.

Qui menet ut facias, quod jam facis, ipse monendo
Laudat; and hortatu c^mprobat ipse suo.
Salute all our friends, and especially at your night-meetings for devotion,
salute the sisters with a holy kiss. To whom you do but your duty when you
acknowledge your cause much obliged unto them, and that in those your Esthers
and Judiths your work had but a small beginning: and when men durst not resist
the beginnings, it is wisely observed by you, that God moved the spirit of those
holy women to scourge the buyers and sellers out of Gods house, and not to
suffer the same to be polluted with that foul Book of Common Prayer. Those
holy Matrons who wast themselves with Fasting, have deserved so well at your
hands, that you should exhort them, (as Paul did Timothy) to take a little wine
to comfort them: and to encourage them to proceed zealously in your cause, for
they are the weaker vessels, and wine will strengthen them. Read 1 Esdras chap.
3. ver. 21. Where it is said thus. Wine is exceeding strong, it makes every
heart rich, so that a man remembers neither King nor Governor, and it makes
to speak all things by talents. And when they are in their cups, they forget
their love both to friends and brethren, and a little after draw out swords,
etc. Albeit this be a passage out of Apocrypha, yet your practice says it is
not false.

Our women here carry a sinistrous opinion of your women, whom they call
virago's and monsters of women, a disgrace to their sex, man-like-women, and a
new kind of Hermaphrodits; because of their violent and turbulent carriage (as
they call it) in abusing all men that are contrary minded, they say,

Non metuunt leges, sed cedit viribus aequum,
Quamque lupi saevae plus firitutis habent.
That is, they fear no Laws, but equity gives place to force, and they have
more savage cruelty in them than the very Wolves. But our Ladies are mistaken,
not knowing that this proceeds from Zeal. Impetus hic, sacrae semina mentis
babet. This violence of theirs has the feeds of a holy mind: And they being
free citizens, ought to have full freedom: their tongues are their own, what
Lord can them control? If Tyberius when he was railed upon in the city, took
it patiently, saying, In libera cevitate oportet linguam esse liberam. Why
should not free Subjects in a free kingdom, have free tongues, and free hands
too? especially of Women, when religion is in question. Gutlielmus Postellus
set out a book, which he entitled: Of the victory of women. I would have the
like done by some of you, especially by him, who gave his ghostly blessing to
those manfull women (who show their valor against their adversaries, in
beating them and their books out of Gods house) My blessing light upon you all
my dear Bird all. Break not off your nocturnall devotions, and assembling
together for the better, and not for the worse. But do it more secretly than
Andrew Lesley, of whom they say, that he forsook Ireland to go to the
Covenant, the first fruits whereof was, to forsake his wife, to join himself
with an harlot. The good old Matron of the holy Sisters of Edinburgh, did more
cunningly cover her daughters infirmity of the flesh, R. A.
who (as she said to her sisters at their meetings) had fallen in a holy
fornication with a brother, not out of Lust, but Love: and therefore decreed,
that she should not confess it before the congregation, lest the Gospel
should be scandalized, and that it was better to fall in the hands of God, by
swearing that she did not know the man, than to fall in the hands of men, by
confessing her carnal fact. We say well to this purpose, To^^t live. 3. cap. 9*
Mentiri in confession, non semper est peccatum mortale. To lie in confession,
is not ever a mortal sin: but it was a pity, that shortly after she had
sworn, her swelling belly belied her; and yet, here the shame and scandal of
your devout profession was more than your sin; for that kind of sin is but a
weakness and infirmity, and if it be acted for good ends and intentions, it is
no sin at all. Therefore, it is well said by a father of our Society. Si quis
pollutionem desideraret ob bonum finem, I lem lib. cap. 13.
scilicet sanitatem, vel ad levandas tentationes quibus interdiu asslig^tur,
non est peccatum. If any desire, etc. for a good end, to wit, for their health;
or to put away the tentations, wherewith they are troubled all the day long,
it is not a sin. And therefore it is thought, when those holy Sisters are longest
out at their night-devotions, they are much amended in their health the next
day. And we do also hold, De judicili l. 2. Decret. 6 Cap. ^ Et Ch^ici.
Adulterium inter minora, crimina censendum esse, That Adultery is to be
esteemed among the smaller crimes; Cause. 31. qv. 1. Cap. Hac ratione.
and esse aliquam honestam fornicationem. and that there is some honest
fornication. Or (as that Matron called it) holy fornication.

But this is very ominous which I hear, that many husbands will not suffer
their wives to frequent those night-meetings as they were wont to do. That is a
fearful presage, that that order and society shall be cried down, except
they get it confirmed by assembly. For we had a Society of Sisters called,
Congregatio Iesuitissarum, suppressed by our holy Father Pope Urban the 8. anno
1631. Quia novum ordir^m instituerunt assumpto Jesuitissarum nomine, -- qua per
multa opera sexus, Bulla V^ban. Papae 8. Roma edita. 1631.
ingenii imbecillitati, and modestiae muliebri, virginali presertim pudori
minime comementia, attentarunt and exercuerunt. Because they did institute a
new order, assuming the name of Iesuitisses, who have attempted and exercised
many works, which do not become the weakness of their sex and ingenie, nor the
modesty of women, and especially most unbeseeming virginal shamefastnes. The
like case may befall your society, if it be not prevented; if your Le^kie and
his Colleagues be not authorized, it is to be feared that the society of those
Sisters shall get a downfall.

I have heard of the great controversy between him and some ministers of
Sterling shire, and that the matter was debated in your assembly, but what was
done, I was not fully informed; only I heard of your moderation, that you
thought it not fit, to discharge his new society by act of assembly, but by
way of counsel, but he rejects your counsel, and though he has not an
ordinary calling, yet he tells that he has an extraordinary calling from God,
and bids you, behold it in the fruits of his labors.

But I am most of all afraid for our selves, though we have an ordinary calling
and authority for our order. We are so hated both by friend and foe, at home
and abroad, that we are daily perplexed, especially since the ^dnulling of the
Jesuinssaes order: upon which some Poet (by way of prophecy, as is thought)
made those verses, with a fiat.

Foemineus sexus sociis immixtus Jesus
Transcendit sexus munia foeminci.
Non tulit hanc labem VRBANI vigilantia Papae,
Suppressit Socias, mox Sociosque premet.
We have suffered already great hurt in diverse places, being hunted to and fro,
as if we were Malefactors. And I doubt not but you know how weak we are in
France, we dare not deny the King of France his Supremacy, and must
acknowledge his Dominion to be independent, in respect of men, and that the
King holds his Kingdom by virtue of, Prove. 8.15.
Per me reges regnant, by me Kings reign. The Doctors of the University of
Paris have done us much evil, 2 Timothy 4.14.
the Lord reward them according to their works. They have condemned some of
the works of our Father Becanus in their Universities, and have published the
same to the world, whether the Pope would or no; and are also become
Court-Parasites. And their chief labor is by their doctrine in contradiction
to you and us, to corrupt all especially Noblemens children, that come to their
Universities: and at least once a year, make every one of them under their
hands, to profess the Kings independent power and authority. Therefore now our
holy League is wholly dead, and death feeds upon it in the grave, Psalm. 49.14.
and we are become vile, and herein are turned Saduceans, to deny the
resurrection of our holy League, or any such insurrection, so long as such
doctors (as the S^rbonists) shall thus infect the land, and make noble and
ignoble such Court Parasites. But your case is far better than ours at this
time: for you have put away from your Universities such as withstood you, and
have placed such men in your Universities of Glasgow and S. Andrews and
Edinburgh, who will cause the scholars to drink such a full draught of our
doctrine, that they shall vomit out all which your adversaries taught them. We
are not so happy, our enemies prevail daily against us. But yours are dying,
especially the Archbishop of S. Andrews, to whom we wished no better death,
nor more honorable burial, then that Martyr and brother of our Society John
Ogleby got, whom he caused to be hanged at the Cross of Glasgow, because he
stood to the defense of our doctrine, which he brought within the compass of
Treason, by the laws of your kingdom, which I pray you to abrogate. D. Baron
that great enemy of ours, is also dead (as they say) in persecution. At this we
do both rejoice, as if we had found a great spoil.

We had also great credit (according to our hearts desire) at Constaminople and
among the Galathians, and diverse parts in the East, but by the means of the
King of great Brittane, etc. his ambassador, and Cyrillus Patriarch of
Constantinople, (who is of the Religion of the Church of England, and disclaims
the Popes jurisdiction, even as the Bishops of England do) We are all banished
the Turks bounds, and a Shipfull of us was sent home to Italy from
Constantinople. Since we cannot get liberty to remain in the East, we purpose
to come to you in the West, where there is neither Patriarch nor Bishop to
trouble us, as Cyrillus did at Constantinople.

But if King Charles follow the direction of his Father King James our common
enemy, your case will be little better then ours was at Constantinople. For
after he has directed his son to beware of Puritans, as most pestilent
follows, both in Church and policy, whom neither the Kings favors and
bounty, nor their own promises and oaths can make faithful and loyal, but
being above measure arrogant, they belch out nothing but calumnies and
seditions, and contrary to the Word of God follow their own dreams and
conceits, as the only rule of their conscience, he says most pathetically.
Basilic doron. page 148
Testor illum magnum Deum (nec testamentum condenti fas est mentiri) nunquam
inter montanos aut limitancos nostros latronos, majorem ingratitudinem, aut per
fidiam reperiri posse, quam inter hos phanaticos nebulones: nee paterec, si
pacate vivere decreveris, ut hi eadem tecum patria fruautur, nisi forte
patientiae experienda ergo, ut Socrates vixit cum Xanthippo. I take the great
God to witness, as if I were making my testament (and it is not lawful for
him that makes a testament to lie) that there can never be more
unthankfulness; or perfidiousnesse found among our High-land and bordering
robbers, then among those brain-sicke villains. Neither do thou suffer them to
enjoy that same country with thee, if thou purpose to live peaceably, unless
perchance, for the exercise of thy patience, as Socrates lived with Xantippe.

This is a dreadful advise, and our case is so miscrable, that it is our lot
and destiny to be like Ishmael the wild man, whose hands were against every
man, and every man's hands against him. But let us not be dismayed, not our
hearts melt, nor our hands be faint; Genesis 16.12.
but let us join hand in hand together, (Virtus unita fortior) And we shall
speak with the enemy in the gate. And the righteous shall be delivered out of
trouble, and the wicked shall come in his stead, Prove. 11.8.

I have many other things to write to you, which I will delay til I have the
opportunity to write a second Epistle, which shall be, so soon as I hear what
fruits this first Epistle shall produce: Which, I pray you cause to be printed
among you for your common good, because I could not get many copies sent to
you, being so far from you beyond sea. If AS's Bridles was thought worthy to be
printed by your authority, in contempt of the Bishops; why may not this my
Epistle be printed, for the edification of your Society. Let it not offend you
that I have not railed in this my Epistle against authority in Church and
policy: for our Society has been so often reproved for railing that I do now
begin to forbear it, for the honor of our Order, neither will we permit
infamous Pasquils longer to come forth, and it were good that you did so too,
and let us speak home to the purpose, convincing our adversaries with evident
reasons; and make their errors and heresies known to the world, rather then to
vent our spleen against them with calumnies; This does but open the mouth of
our adversaries; but that will stop it: this makes disgrace return upon our
selves, but the other, makes us gracious. If we rail, when we should reason,
we get no answer, but increpet te Dominus. But when we reason, without railing;
we beget in them dissentiendi pudorem. and veritatis timorem. A bashfulnes to
dissent from us, and a reverence of the truth; which in time, will bring forth
a profession of it.

Farewell. From my study at Basileopolis The first of January, 1640.

