JOCABELLA or a Cabinet of Conceits with Poems by RC the Featherd god does by
his mirth bet^ays^ the Fat^ll hvswifes of olives to play.



Jocabella, OR A Cabinet of Conceits.

Whereunto are added Epigrams and other Poems, by R. C.

-- juvat esse jocundum
atque animum latis exhilarare jocis,
LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinson, for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at the
sign of the red Bu^^ in Little Britain. 1640.

To his much respected friend Mr. JOHN WILD.
Sir,
BY your favor I am come to make good a promise which in this dedication is
partly (though weakly) performed: your sweet respects did embolden me to make
it, and now an assurance of your kind acceptance has (as I may term it) made
me presumptuous to perform it: you shall meet here with a bundle of merry
conceits, which, while they were in my self, were my own Recreations; but are
now exposed at all adventures to be the mirth of others. For the readers part,
I hope he is gentle, and will make a charitable construction of a thing
intended only for Recreation: and for yours, if it may find a fair
entertainment, it will make me ambitious (if occasion be) to be your servant
in some other business of a greater consequence. In the mean time be pleased,
good Sir, to accept of this as an expression of his love that while he breaths
will study to be

Your friendly Servant, Robert Chamberlain.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I here present thee with the producements of some vaporing
hours purposely intended to promote harmlesses mirth. I wish thee as merry in
the reading, as I and some other of my friends were in speaking of them: do
but laugh at them, and I am satisfied, for to that (and no other purpose) they
were intended.

Farewell.
JOCABELLA, OR A Cabinet of Conceits.
1
ONE asked how it came that Apothecaries were, many of them, so extremely rich.
It was answered, they did trade with Simples; and after composition, sold them
in Latin to those that understood it not.

2
One asked why Soldiers did love beef more then any other meat. It was
answered because it was now and then powdered.

3
One seeing a man that had a holy day face, bid him take heed of coming
before a Judge for suspicion of murder for, said he, Thy very face will hang
thee, it is so bloody.

4
One told a red-nos'd-Gentleman that he was a coward all over, except his nose,
being asked why; answered his nose was good mettle because is was Copper.

5
One asked a citty-Sergeant what spice he loved best, who answered Mace.

6
A yellow bearded man coming into a barbers shop, set himself down in a
chair, saying, sir come give my carret a turnup.

7
One asked whence the word tumult was derived, and was answered that it came
from tu multum dormis and saepe potas; another standing by said it rather came
from tu multum potas and raro dormis.

8
A soldier wooing a gentlewoman, pleaded that he had undertaken brave things,
and had been ancient twenty years ago: the gentlewoman minding to put him off
took the advantage of that word, would not endure him to speak a word more,
but told him she was no antiquary neither durst meddle with things that were
ancient so long ago.

9
A Gentleman wearing one of the new fashioned coats without sleeves or cape,
was asked what he did mean to wear a petticoat about his shoulders? no said
the Gentleman it is a little coat; why sir replied the other, I hope every
little coat is a petticoat.

10
One told a man that was troubled with rhume, that he must forbear claret
wine; who answered if he did forbear claret wine he should not live long; the
other told him again, that if he did not, it would make him blind* it is no
matter said he, it is better the windows be shut then the whole house fall.

11
One said of all trades that of a Butcher was most strange, for he got more by
dead commodities then any thing else.

12
One telling his friend a secret, desired him to keep it close; close! said
he, I will be as close as a rich man's door at dinner time.

13
Two Gentlemen peeping through a keyhole into a chamber, saw somebody at
prayers, but could not well discern whether it was a man or woman; the one
said it was a Gentleman, the other said it was rather a Gentlewoman, for he did
not think any Gentleman would offer it.

14
A Gentleman passing the street in a great shower, was met by a water-bearer,
who with his tankerd on his back, went close to the wall; the Gentleman
thrusting him away, told him he did not think he would have grudged to have
born water, being he got his living by it.

15
A Gentleman wearing a hat like a close-stoole-pan on his head, came to a
promoter to move a suit, to him formerly propounded; saying, sir if you would
do me this favor, you might ease me of a great trouble: he answered (as his
occasions prompted him) there is a thing on your head would ease me of a greater.

16
A fellow that had lost a great part of his estate by gaming, adventured once
to wear an old monmouth cap on his head to see if his chance might be better;
and so it happened, for he seldom lost if he wore that cap, which occasioned him
to call it ever after, his cap of maintenance.

17
Two Gentlemen passing through Cheap Side, one of them taking special notice
of the golden Cross, said it might very well be accounted one of the wonders
of the world; the other answered, o by no means sir, the crosses of this world
are no wonders.

18
Two passing through Newgate, one of them asked why the women in Newgate did
beg singing? the other answered that Newgate was a cage only for canary birds.

19
One asked whether a horse of an ass were the more worthy creature? it was
answered, a horse: o by no means said he, an ass may be a constable of a
hundred, and so cannot a horse.

20
One spit in another face, which was taken very ill; but he that did it
excused it, saying, pray sir be not angry, if you please I Will tread it out.

21
One said a jest was like a Venice glass, spoiled if any poison were in it* o
no said another, the glass is spoiled if poison be in it, because it will
instantly break, but a jest was never good till it was broken.

22
A Poet told a Player that slighted him, that although he was now a Gentleman,
yet he had seen him act a beggar.

23
A child coming from School, his mother called him and bid him show her where
his lesson was; the boy presently turns to it, saying here it is mother, at
(peace and quietness) why yet whoreson blockhead said she, this was your lesson
the last week, do you think I Will give my money for nothing: blame him not,
said his father, though he be so long in that lesson, for I have been teaching
of it to you this seven years, and yet you are not perfect: o sir (quoth she)
that was because I had a fool to my tutor.

24
A Gentlewoman walking the streets with eleven silver laces on her petticoat,
one that stood by with his friend mistaking the number, said look there goes a
woman with a jury of laces at her tail: she overhearing him answered, sir you
are mistaken, I have but eleven; if your nose were there it would make a full
jury.

25
A Gentlewoman playing at post and pair with a Gentleman, chanced to win a
stake with a pair of knaves; quoth the Gentleman, what are you but a pair? no
sir quoth she, but if you had had them, there had been pair-royall.

26
A merry fellow taking oars at Westminster, desired to be landed at Temple
stairs; whither being come, and the water being very low, they were forced to
land him in the mud; who went away and would not pay them their fare because he
bad them land him at Temple stairs and they had landed him at Puddle wharfe.

27
One said that silence and peace were both necessary and commendable in all
games: I deny that, quoth another, for at Tennis it is necessary to keep a
racket.

28
One being committed to Newgate upon a Christmas eve told the Justice his dream
was come to pass, for (said he) I dreamed I should keep a great house all this
Christmas.

29
One said that of all men in the world he would not have a glutton to speak
for him, because he was mealy-mouthed, meaning a man whose mouth was good for
nothing but his meals.

30
A Gentlewoman standing in her Belcony to see and be seen, perceiving a fellow
gazing at her, began to withdraw: he cried out to her saying, what, does the
sun offend you Lady? yes said she, the son of thy mother does.

31
One that had had a long time a sore nose was met by a friend, and asked how
his nose did? who answered it had been very ill, but now was current: the other
replied that to his thinking it was always current, for he never saw it but it
was running.

32
One that was troubled with sore eyes was jeered by another for being
cleere-eyed; who answered they were not so sore but he could see a knave with
them: the other replied, it may be, but you must look in a glass then.

33
A Gentleman presenting a complement to his friend, desired he would be pleased
to admit his heart into his service: who answered he would, if he would first
let him see it, that he might know his servant from another.

34
One said he thought the wind had been a Crier of a Court, for when he made an
oyes, both men and houses stood uncovered.

35
One telling a story of a fearful dream that he had lately had, which was,
that he had been in Hell, and had been there grievously tormented: one standing
by, asked him how he came to awake out of such a fearful dream? who answered
there was such rapping and knocking at Hellgates by reason of the often
coming, that he could not sleep any longer.

36
One asking why women were so desirous to make them selves show ugly by wearing
of black bags, was answered that while they did wear hats and feathers (which
was a fine comely fashion) men did then but only love them, but they did now
wear black bags to make men live in fear of them.

37
One said he wondered much being there was Newgate for thieves, Bridewell for
whores, and Bedlam for mad people; that there was not some such house provided
for fools: another overhearing him, said Sir, I would feign hear you once
motion a thing that were for the common good, but you always speak for your
self, which is not well.

38
One being asked whether such a man was wise or no? answered he was wise with a
distinction, that was, other-wise.

39
One being asked what part of speech a whore was? answered she was a
verb-common, and required a dative case; and a Roarer was an adverb of
swearing, which was commonly joined to that verb.

40
A woman swore she was as chaste as the moon: one standing by objected, as the
moon sweet heart! why that is no chastity at all for she has always a man in
the midst of her.

41
One speaking of an extraordinary great wind which had done a great deal of
hurt, wondered from whence it should come, or what might be the reason of it;
was answered that the Spaniards had lately sown a world of pepper which made
the earth so extremely to break wind.

42
One receiving a blow upon his head while he was eating roast beef, said if a
piece of beef had not stickt in his throat that blow had killed him, but that
sticking there, his soul could find no passage out, and so returned in again.

43
One said his knife spoke french because it had no point.

44
A serving man coming to be entertain^d into a Gentlewomans service, was asked
by the Gentlewoman what wages he would have? who answered three pound a year
if she pleased: the Gentlewoman replied nay if I give wages I will look you
shall please me.

45
A Justice of peace threatening a fellow that was brought before him for
stealing, saying sir I Will teach you to steal: he replied, I thank your
worship, for if I had been well taught I had stolen with more discretion then
to have been apprehended by the manor.

46
One that had been a great usurer had learned to dye scarlet, and was resolved
to set up the trade, but was diswaded by a frind who told him he would never
thrive by it, saying he that had lived ill could never dye well.

47
A poor Scholar walking London streets in the night, (who was going to a rich
uncle of his to receive a sum of money) a boy with a link asked if he would
have a light? no said the Scholar I fear no thieves, for I am not going to pay
but to receive money: o said the boy you cannot find the way thither without a
light yes said the Scholar the lightness of my purse will show me the way
thither.

48
One seeing a fellow ride along London streets extremely fast, called after him
and asked him what play was that day to be played at the red Bull? who stopping
his horse, told him he was an ass to ask him such a question, being it was a
question every post could tell him; the other cried him mercy, telling him he
took him for a post because he rid so fast.

49
A great glutton said he had lost his stomach and could not eat any meat
whatsoever: one that knew him overhearing him, said pray heavens no poor man
find it, for if he do it will undo him.

50
A fellow that was conceived to be a cuckold being in a tavern with an old
cook, and sitting at a table, one on the one side of the table, and the other
on the other side; he that was conceived to be the cuckold, minding to put a
trick upon the other, asked what difference there was betwixt a cook and a
cuckold? the other answered, the table.

51
One that had the disposing of a great place was solicited by a stranger for
the place, the Gentleman that had the disposure of the place asked the stranger
whether he had a note under the hand of some eminent person that might testify
his good behavior? who answered, no: then said the Gentleman I must be
excused, for it is a place of consequence, and if I should put a man of no note
into it, I should be chid.

52
One asked why a cuckold was said to wear horns? it was answered because his
wife was a beast: why (replied the other) should not the wife wear them? then
it was answered, no; because the husband was the head.

53
A gentleman chid his daughter for wearing a cloth of goldwast coat, saying she
was a pretty jewel; his daughter answered, a jewel (father) never shows
better then when it is set in gold.

54
A Gentleman who had been called knave by a witty fellow, by chance meeting the
fellow, asked him whether he was a knave or no? the fellow answering, told him,
if I should say no, I should be very unmannerly with you Sir; why unmannerly,
said the other? why then, said he, I should give a Gentleman the lie, which I
would be very loath to do.

55
One asked whence the word senecta was derived it was answered, that it is
Eti^mon was from se and neco and it is Anagram was se necat.

56
One whose name was John Wheeler, was asked how he writ his name? who answered
in this manner, Foemina quae versa est in vaccam, poena dolentis
Occipitis, bipes littera quarta venit:
-- sed pro cognomine semper
Est rota, sic vaceam stat canis usque latrans.


Wherein is Hirogliphically expressed, John Wheeler.

57
One told a ragged fellow that he was rich in rents, and asked him whether they
were rents of Assize, or no? who answered that he had one of so big a size,
that an ass might thrust in his nose.

58
A fair Lady being at the Assizes in the Country, and seeing the Sheriff, who
was a fine young Gallant, wait upon the Judge, who was an old man; was asked
whether she would rather marry the Judge or the Sheriff? the Sheriff said
she: why so, said her friend? I love judgment well, said she, but execution a
great deal better.

59
One asked why Citizens wives were so affected with wearing of hats? it was
answered, because they did love to be covered.

60
One said a fart was a cunning fencer; being asked why? answered, because it
aimed at the heels, but would always hit the nose.

61
One being asked why younger brothers most commonly were wiser then the eldest
brother? answered, that the father knew better what did belong to the getting
of them, then of the eldest.

62
One disputing that omne leve tendit sursum; said it could not hold, for a
whore tendere deorsum.

63
One minding to rail at a fellow that had lost his ears, was found railing at
the pillory as if it had been the man himself: but being asked why he did not
go and speak to his face? answered, to what purpose? being that his ears are
here.

64
One asking a mad fellow what his name was, had a box on the ear given him;
and asking what the cause was? was answered, that it was a trick of a knave to
question a man's good name.

65
A gentleman having brought his friend down into his cellar, his friend
observing there was no place in the cellar whereon to sit, asked why there were
not seats in the cellar? the Gentleman answered, I allow every man that comes
here, to stay and drink as long as he can stand, and no longer.

66
One whose name was Cornelius, being to declame before his Tutor (by reason of
bashfulnes) when he was to begin, was not able to speak; whereupon said his
Tutor, diu expectavi Cornelium and ^nveni Tacitum.

67
One coming to a friends house, was made to drink: the master of the house
minding to complement with his friend, said the beer was dead; dead! said the
man; it may very well be dead now, for it was very weak when I was here last.

68
Some Scholars in an University grumbling because another was undeservedly
made a master of Arts; one of them said, it is no great wonder Gentlemen, for
you know we say omnis creatio fit ex nihilo.

69
A Gentleman going to take horse was observed to have but one spur; and being
asked the reason? answered, that if he could make one side of the horse go, he
made no question but the other side would go along with it.

70
One observing a young fellow to be too talkative, said vir sapit qui pauca
loquitur; who overhearing him, answered, it is true Sir, but in you it is vir
loquitur qui pauca sapit.

71
An earnest contestation being held betwixt an Engraver and a Sexton, whether
might be the better man; the Engraver told him that he was a far better man,
for his work was in brass, but the others in dirt; whereupon the Sexton
answered, there was no such difference, for, said he, though you engrave a man
never so well, yet in the end I shall be desired to do it over again.

72
An executioner erecting a pillory at his own charges, expected a sum of money
for every man that should stand in it; but being told by the Sheriff that he
might not expect any such thing, and that (besides) there was a man to stand in
it and lose his ears the very same day; he presently swore if he saw him stand
there and not pay him for it, he would have him by the ears.

73
One said it was the most dangerous thing in the world to commit a secret to a
woman: being asked why? answered, that it was impossible they should keep
other peoples secrets close, that could never keep their own.

74
Another was of opinion that a woman's breast was the only safe place to keep a
secret of consequence in; because, said he, there is no wise man will ever
look for it in such an open place.

75
A gentleman that had been a traveller, being in a place where there was a
Gentlewoman that told him she had traveled as far as he; said, Lady if this be
true, you and I may lie together by authority.

76
One asking what a cuckold was good for? was answered, to stand in a great
hall, to hang cloakes, hats and belts on.

77
A company of neighbors being together with their wives, one of them reporting
an untruth, was upheld in it by one of the women; whereupon the husband of that
woman began to chide his wife for lying with another man before his face.

78
One seeing his neighbor newly come out of a barbers shop with his beard turned
up into his nose, asked him why he did turn an excrement into his nose? the
other answered, he would rather a thousand times have an excrement hang in his
nose then in his teeth

79
A soldier that had lost one of his arms in the wars, came to a Gentleman's
door and desired relief for a poor Gentleman that had lost one of his arms in
the wars; one standing by told him that he that could not show arms was no
Gentleman.

80
One asked whether a woman could lose her maidenhead, yet never marry nor
think an unchaste thought? it was answered yes; for her head might be cut off
while she was a maid, and then her maiden head was gone.

81
One that was troubled with a cursed wife, came to a justice to have his wife
bound to the peace; the justice told him it were better to bind her to her good
behavior, because all bonds were void where the condition was impossible.

82
One was telling of a purchaser that was jealous and fearful that he should
shortly sustain a great loss: one overhearing answered, pish (said he) there
is nothing in the world frights a purchaser but a prophecy of a general
inundation.

83
A Schoolmasters upon a bitter cold day, seeeing one of his Scholars
extremely benu'md, asked what was the latin for cold? he answered, o sir I have
that at my fingers ends.

84
A Player acting upon a stage a man killed; but being troubled with an extreme
cold as he was lying upon the stage fell a coughing; the people laughing, he
rushed up and ran off the stage, saying thus it is for a man to drink in his
porridg, for then he will be sure to cough in his grave.

85
A Gentlewoman sending one of her men to bid certain persons of greatquality
to dinner, her man returning told her he had commanded all the Gentlemen to
come to dinner: out you rascal, said she, I commanded you to bid them: why
mistress, quoth he, have you been in the imperative so long and do not yet
know that to bid and command is all one.

86
A Gentleman living near Temple Bar, sent his man to the Rose-tavern for a
pottle of burnt sack; his man returning with the sack, which was very hot,
desired his master to taste it; his master burning his lip, asked his man
whence it came? who answered, from the Rose: I rather think, said he, it came
from the devil, it is so raging hot.

87
A precise fellow standing at the Pope's Head tavern door, began to rail at the
Pope; a drawer overhearing, desired him at that time to forbear the Pope; why,
said he? because quoth the drawer, he has at this time a great deal of wine
in his head.

88
One seeing a fellow at dinner that he did not love, wished every morsel was
steept in aqua fortis; the fellow not understanding latin, asked what the
english of it was? who was told it was strong water: o said the fellow, I knew
he did always love me.

89
A Gentleman meeting the watch, asked his friend that was with him, what all
those woodcocks did together? the watch hearing him, apprehended him and
carried him before a Magistrate: who being asked why he did put that term upon
the watch? answered that he saw so many bills that he took them for a flight of
woodcocks.

91
A mad profane fellow being brought into a Court for a witness, the book being
laid before him, put it back, telling them there was never an oath in England
but he had it without book.

92
A Pirat being taken by the English fleet, and kept in chains a month, at the
last made an escape, and landing in a place where he had some friends, was
asked where he had spent his time all that while, and extremely chid for
following that course of piracy, he swore there was no such matter; for he had
all that time been a prisoner in the fleet.

93
A couple of gentlemen crossing the Thames from Temple stairs into Southwark,
a great storm rose upon a sudden, insomuch that the water flasht over into the
boat; but being landed, one of the Gentlemen swore he began to stink for fear;
no marvel, said the other, for the boat has bepist it self for fear.

94
A waggish Gentleman asked a woman whether she was a maid or no? she told him
yes: take heed of lying, said he, for it is lost with lying; whereupon she
answered no.

95
A woman desiring money of her husband, was told by him that she should not get
a penny from him without law: whereupon she replied, she would ask him no
more; and for recovering of it by law, she would sue his purse to an execution
and he should never know it.

96
A country fellow seeing a mathematician taking the height of a star with his
Jacobs staff, and observing a supposed star to fall, swore the mathematician
had killed the star, for he saw it fall.

97
A fellow that could not endure onions being sentenced to be hanged, desired
the Judge that he might be hanged in a rope of onions: being demanded why??
answered, then the devil would not come near him.

98
A whore complaining that she had an extreme cold in her head, and that she had
got it by taking a cold in her feet; was told that she was like the year in
one of the temperate zones, cold at both ends and horn the middle.

99
A Gentleman wearing a fancy in his hat, wherein there was green and yellow
ribbon, was asked whose colors he wore? he answered, his mistresses: why then,
said another, it seems your mistress is troubled both with the green sickness
and yellow jaundies.

100
A Constable being drunk fell in the street, and there lay, not able to rise;
but observing people to laugh at him, charged them in the Kings name to aid
him; whereupon two or three mad fellows took him up and at the command of a
Justice put him in the stocks; the Constable, when he was in the stocks (not
knowing where he was) swore if they had not aided him he would have set them
all by the heels.

101
Two Gentlemen riding by Tyburn-gallowes, said one of them, methinks the
gallows looks somewhat poorly, I think it is long since there was an
execution; alas, said the other, there is no hope that it can thrive, it has
so many hangers on.

102
One said, that of all prisons in the world, if he must needs go to one, he
would choose to go to Ludgate; because none came there but they had their
freedom.

103
A gentleman whose surname was Bridgman, being born in London, being asked what
Countryman he was? answered, of no Country at all, he was a London-Bridg-man.

104
One whose surname was Ell^t, being buried, his executor ^^nt for the Sexton,
and asked him what he was to have for making the grave? five shillings, said
the Sexton; how, said the executor, five shillings? there is never a Tailer in
the Town but would have made an Ellet hole for a penny.

105
An old usurer being extremely sick sent for a Physician, who upon the view of
his urine, told his friends there was little hope of life, for his ljver was so
ill it would shortly be his death: and is that the only cause? said one of them:
yes, said the Physician: why then, said he, the saying is true, qualis vita
finis ita.

106
When the Eclipse was last upon the Sun, a company of people gazing at it,
wondered what the Eclipse should be; a Gentleman in the company told them that
once in three or four years the Sun did burn dim for want of snuffing, and
that Phoebus was then snuffing it; and that was the cause of the darkness.

107
A Blacksmith falling into shoomakers company, was asked by them what he did
there, not being of their profession? who answered that he was a shoemaker as
well as the best of them: how, said one of them, you a shoemaker? how many
shoes have you made, pray? the Blacksmith answered, where you make one pair I
make two.

108
One was saying that he had always observed that whoremasters were usually the
most plausible and fair conditioned men that were, when they were in men's
company: another answering, said it was very true; for there was no whoremaster
but did love an honest man with all his heart, but could not endure an honest
woman.

109
A Chimney-sweeper coming into an Alehouse where was a Gentleman in black,
the Gentleman minding to jeere him, asked when he did wash his face? the
Chimney-sweeper having a glass of beer in his hand, told him, Sir if you were
not one of my own coat I would wash you presently.

110
One said that of all cuckolds a Huntsman-cuckold was the most patient, for he
wears the horn, and makes himself sport with it.

111
A fellow being set in the stocks, said he was left in a wood, where he could
see over and under and through the wood, but knew not for his heart how to get
out of the wood.

112
A Scholar in his disputations said H non est litera; another sitting by whose
name was Hill said it would go very ill with his name then.

113
One having a sullen wife which much troubled him, asked her how she did? how,
quoth she, neither sick nor well: whereupon he turned her out at doors; and
being examined why? said that he was bound to cherish her, but either in
sickness or in health.

114
A Gentleman observing a poor woman extremely tired with a paile of grains,
insomuch that she sunk down under the burden, said she was an idle slut,
because she was too light by all those grains.

115
A Gentleman going by water, his cloak hung over the boat in the water; one
passing by in another boat, said, Sir your cloak burns; he turning about,
answered, therefore I put it into the water.

116
A Gentleman having his house uncovered in a windy night, and the next morning
being in discourse of it, said that in all his time he never saw the like; why,
did you ever see the wind, said another? yes marry have I, said he; pray what
is it like? said the other: it was like, said he, to have blown down my house.

117
A Welch-man being at the Assizes, and seeing the prisoners hold up their hands
at the bar; coming home, told one of his acquaintance that he had been at a
place where he saw fery good fortune tellers; for (quoth he) do but hold up
her hand and they was tell her presently whether her shall live or dye.

118
A Country fellow that had a mighty great beard, spying a gentleman of his
acquaintance, and observing him to pass by and not to take notice of him, ran
to him, and taxed him for unkindnes: whereupon the Gentleman excused himself,
saying, thou stand'st continually behind such a great beard that a man cannot
see thee.

119
A serving-man wanting money, and remembering his cloak was trimmed round with a
silver lace, rips off the lace, turns it into coin, turns the coin into wine,
and the wine into his guts: within a day or two after, it happened the same cloak
was stolen; whereupon one of his fellows said they were bold thieves that would
steal a cloak so well guarded: he answered, the guard was drunk, else they could
never have done it.

120
It was demanded why that Latin sentence was true, rara est in tenui facundia
panno; it was answered, when a man has a thread bare coat, his wits are a
woolgathering.

121
A Scholar espying the picture of St. Peter with the keys, and another of St.
John, who is usually done in long hair; began to wonder in these words; what a
prepostorous painter was this! what should St. Peter do with the keys, when
St. John carries away the locks.

122
A Gentleman meeting a stage player in a sickness time, who had formerly played
women's parts; told him he was grown grave, and that he began to have a beard;
the other answered, while the grass grows the horse did starve; meaning,
because there was then no playing, and therefore he did let his beard grow.

123
A Scholar in the University being punished xs came into the buttery and made
it xa; being asked how he durst do it? replied, it is not orthography; post x
non scribitur s.

124
A Gentleman having a large hand, being at supper with a shoulder of mutton,
having also with him a witty companion that had played very much upon him,
swore, by this hand I will be revenged; the other replied that he had sworn a
greater oath then if he had sworn by the shoulder of mutton.

125
A Gentleman being accused for lying with another man's wife, denied it, saying,
I never lay with her, but (I confess) I kissed her.

126
A Citizen being made cuckold by one of his neighbors, brings his action
against the party, and lays his clausum fregit, domum intravit, etc. the
business coming to a trial, the Jury bring in a verdict for the plantiffe and
a mark damage: at which the Judge in merriment replied, here is an honest man is
content to enter himself a cuckold upon record, and you give him but a mark
damages? I would you were all so marked, and then you would better consider of
it.

127
A wit out of means meeting an usurer, entreated him to lend him five pounds:
the usurer answered, Sir I know you not; the other replied, therefore I ask
you; for they that know me will not lend me five shillings.

128
One told his friend if he would be pleased to go with him, he would bring him
to a place where they should have wenches and lobsters by the belly.

129
A Bible-Clark in the University being reproved by the Head of the house for
giving short psalms; next time he was to give out the psalm, rises, saying,
sing quicunque vult, and so goes out of the chapel.

130
A poor country fellow in a black threed-bare suit, thought it some policy to
beg near an University, thinking thereby to be taken for a poor Scholar; and
on a time using the phrase of pray Sir remember a poor Scholar, a Gentleman
threw him a shilling, and asked him de quo fuit Collegio? which he understood
not; whereupon the gentleman asked him, did thou not tell me thou wast a
Scholar? Sir I told you I was a poor one.

131
A Gentleman being at supper, where amongst other company, there was a less
newly married, which formerly had an ill report; mean time, a health going
about in a soder'd glass, the Gentleman, when the glass came to his hand,
took an occasion to say though this glass be mended, yet the blemish remains;
the less taking exceptions, said, Sir I think it is as sound as your self:
whereupon he answered, cry you mercy mistress, it was but a letter mistaken.

132
A Gentleman coming into a friends house, was brought up into a fair large
dining room; his dog coming up with him happened to foul the room; which when
the mistress of the house espied, she was very angry, and told the Gentleman
he should have brought him up better: the Gentleman replied, he brought him up
well enough if he could but have behaved himself well while he was up.

133
One bidding his cobbler to put him some nails in his shoes that they might
last the longer; o by no means, said the cobbler, if you will have your shoes
to last your life, never put nails in them.

413
One asked who was the first noted rich man? it was answered, Abraham: another
replied, and that, I think, is the reason why many rich men have been Abraham's
ever since.

135
One seeing a man that had his beard beginning to come under his chin, said it
was like a demicaster, because it was rough under.

136
One that had stole a watch was pursued by the Constables; who escaping them,
was afterward met by the owner, and taken with the watch in his pocket:
whereupon he said that he had very ill luck to escape the Constables and be
taken with the watch.

137
A gentlewoman seeing a man have a red face, said his face was disparkt,
because there was no pale in it: the man answered, though there was no pale,
yet there was a great deele of red dear in it, meaning dear red.

138
One seeing a man have a red nose, said, Sir your eyes are not matches; I know
they are not, said he, for if they were, my nose had set them on fire by this
time.

139
One asked why men did use now adays to wear holland bands and cambrick
boot-hose tops? it was answered, it was a fashion brought from the Antipodes,
and none but Antipodian Gentlemen did use it.

130
One asked why whores were said to be light? it was answered, that many hands
made light work.

141
A Gentleman complained to one of his neighbors that his maid was begot with
child by one of his serving-men; whereupon his neighbor asked him whether he
himself was not a little guilty of it? who answered he did not know of it, but
was asleep in his bed when it was done: the other replied, it seems you did
wink at the fact, which was as bad as if you had done it your self.

142
One asked a Gentlewoman why she so much delighted to ride with Gentlemen in a
coach? who answered, because she did love to be shaken.

143
One said he was very sorry such a venison pasty was eaten, and said that he
could find in his heart to write an epitaph upon it; another answered, he must
then put up his epitaph in the house of office, for there it was buried.

144
One said to his friend, take not tobacco in that pipe for it is foul; foul!
said his friend, it is dead then, for otherwise it would fly away.

145
One asked how old another was? he answered, three and threescore: and why not
threescore and three, said he? he answered, because I was three before I was
threescore.

146
Two conspired together, whereof one was a Goldsmiths to steal a silver-bole,
intending to share the business betwixt them; which when they had stolen, he
that was the Goldsmith; because it should not be known did gild it over: it was
sentenced when the matter came to scanning, though the other stole it, yet the
gilt of the fact lay upon the Goldsmiths.

147
One coming by a Sexton (who was making a grave for one Button which was a
great tal fellow) asked him for whom that extraordinary long grave was? he
answered he had made many longer then that, and said it was but a button-hole
in respect of some graves that he had made.

148
One said a barber was an active man, for if he did once take out his wooden
comb he would box a man about the ears and the man scarce feel it.

149
One said a cook of all men had the worst digestion, for as soon as he had
eaten his meat he would be sure to spit his meat up again.

150
A great tall fellow whose name was Way, lay along the street drunk: one went
over him, and being asked why he did so? he answered, he did but go along the
highway.

151
A Gentleman (that was used to send his letters by a foot-post that was an old
phlegmatic rotten fellow) complained that he suffered much prejudice because
his letters came too late to his friends hands: another standing by told him it
was his own fault, because he did send them by a rotten post.

152
One was saying he wondered why the people in Aethiopia did not write straight
along, as we Northern people: one answered, they writ under the line; and that
was the reason of it.

153
A Dyer who was an idle drunken fellow, was complaining to a Scholar that he
had very ill fortune in his business, and that commonly those things that he
undertook to dye were spoiled: the Scholar told him that the only way to have
this amended, was to reform himself, for he that lived ill could never dye
well.

54
One whose name was Church was telling some of his neighbors that his wife was
with child, and that he never in his life saw any woman so big before; besides,
told them that he feared she would dye on childbed: whereupon one of them
comforted him, saying that there was no cause to fear her death; and for her
bigness, that was no wonder, in regard she had a Church in her belly.

155
A certain man was mightily affected with a woman whose name was Wall, which
did use painting very much, his friends did dissuade him from coming near her,
telling him they did wonder he was so besotted to set his affections upon a
painted wall.

157
One whose name was Milld being in a tavern, took out a new coined sixpence;
who observing the company to take notice of the brightness of the piece, told
them it was a milld sixpence.

158
One asked what the reason was that some women were so light heel'd now adays?
it was answered, because they did wear cork-heel'd shoes.

159
One having a Play-book called the Wits, which he much valued, by chance lost
it: but while he was chafing and swearing about the loss of his book in comes
one of his friends, who asking the cause of his distemper? it was answered that
he had lost his wits.

160
One stood to prove that a Brewers horse was a tapster, because he did draw
beer: another answered him, it could not be; because though a brewers horse
(if he were overladen) would froth, yet he could not nick.

161
One reading of a Curranto, said he wondered that men did so affect to lie in
paper, and yet without sheets.

162
One asked what herb that was that cured all diseases? it was answered, Time.

163
One being about to write the superscription of a letter to his mistress,
asked a Scholar what terms were best to give her? who told him the Venus
less of his affections was a good word; he mistaking, writ to the Venice
glass of his affections; which was a truer title then he was aware of.

164
An Upholster was chiding his apprentice because he was not nimble enough at
his work and had not his nails and hammar in readiness when he should use them;
telling him that when he was an apprentice he was taught to have his nails at
his fingers ends.

165
One whose name was Rapier being a man of a grave calling, yet using to wear a
white suit, was chid for not getting a black scabbard to his rapier.

166
One asked what that young man deserved that did love always to be in a
Playhouse? it was answered, a box.

167
One being at a friends house in the night, was persuaded to stay all night;
but denied, saying he would be gone because it was moonlight: his friend told
him he thought he had not been so lunatique as to love to walk in the
moonlight.

168
One wondered why there were so many pickpockets about the streets,
notwithstanding a watch was at every corner! it was answered, that was all one,
for a pick-pocket would as gladly meet with a watch as any thing else.

169
Certain Gossips discoursing of the company their husbands kept; troth, says
one, my husband is no sooner out of doors, but he has as many about him as
there is to see the great beast with two pair of horns.

170
A company of Country fellows disputing of learning, and what a crooked, hard,
and intricat thing it was to be a good Scholar: truly, says one, and so it
is, for I have heard your best laten is in crooked lane.

171
A young lascivious Gallant wanting money, could not with his credit sell any
thing: yet, his father being but lately dead, at length was checked by some of
his friends for his loose and extravagant life; and withal, told that he had
base and beastly associats that did draw him to ill houses: he taking this
opportunity, answered, truly friends your counsel is very good, I will
presently go sell my coach and horses.

172
A steward being set on by a thief, who commanded him to de^iver, he being a
receiver: the steward replied, I hope you will spare me, I being a receiver
also: you shall be, said the thief, if you deliver not the sooner.

173
One sitting at dinner where great store of rude mirth was discoursed and
laughed at; a prattling youth clapped him on the shoulder, and asked him if he was
making verse, he was so mute? (who replied, he was) speak them, quoth he: no,
replied the other: why you cannot speak them in better company: I suppose so,
quoth the modest man, but two fools at once will be too troublesome.

174
A Gentleman going along the street, was entreated by a poor cripple that had
wooden legs, to bestow his charity: to whom the Gentleman answered, if he
would make a hansome leg he should have a couple of farthings.

175
A company of Gentlemen coming into a tavern whose sign was the Moon, called
for a quart of sack? the drawer told them, they had none: whereat the Gentlemen
wondering, were told by the drawer that the man in the Moon always drunk claret.

176
One that was skilled in writing short hand, promised a Lawyers Clarke to teach
him his skill: who thanked him for his pains; but told him they could not live
by making short hand of any thing.

177
One said a Civit-cat was a dainty thing to keep in a house because her dung
was sweet: another said it was true; but yet it was more profitable to keep a
cook, especially in a dear year, because he spitted roast.

178
A woman having married an old man whose name was Edward (whom she thought had
been very rich, but not worth a penny) being asked what she had by her
marriage? answered, an old Edward.

179
A Gentleman coming in the night to visit an old man who had a hansome wench
to his wife, and suspected to be a little too light, was entreated by the old
man to walk into a room; his wife having a candle in her hand, entreated the
Gentleman to follow her; who told her, he would have her husband (because he
was an old man) to follow the light.

180
Two Gentlemen were in a deep dispute whether the man in the Moon was a
Gentleman or a Citizen? it was determined by a Scholar, that when she was at
full, there was a Gentleman in her; but when she appeared like a horn, there
was a Citizen in her.

181
A Gentleman in wants was advised by his friend to serve a Nobleman, that so
he might raise his fortune: that was, said he, to refuse a lesser poverty for a
greater; for although I am poor, yet I have my self, there I shall not.

182
A Book-binder disappointing a Scholar of his books which he had to bind for
him, the Scholar being angry, called him idle knave: the Binder not long
after, brought home his books; and having received his money for them, desired
to know of the Scholar, why he called him knave the other day? to deal
plainly with thee, said the Scholar, because I would not flatter thee: why
Sir, do you think so, said the Binder? yes faith, replied the Sholler: then I
weigh not your words much, quoth the Binder, since children and fools speak
what they think: I, but they are knaves, said the Scholar, that speak
against knowledge: indeed Sir I took you for one of them, and so went his way.

183
One said Tailers and Button-makers were happy, for they might get their
livings, and yet sit still.

184
One that married a Candlemakers widow, that was supposed to be a little too
light, was asked why he married her? he answered, because he loved light.

185
One said Tobacco-shops of all orher places, were the most dangerous to come
into, because there were none ever frequented them, but he smoakt for it.

186
One whose name was Pippin being in a green suit, chanced on a Christmas day to
meet his friend; who told him it was a rare thing to see a green pippin on
Christmas day.

187
One said Glovers in the Country got their livings most by cutting purses, and
yet they were never punished for it.

188
A pretty wench but lately come out of the Country in her pouledavis and
linsi-woolsy petticoats, living in the strand, was seen not long after in her
silks and sattins; and being by one of her Country-women demanded how such
might be purchased? faith, answered she, only for the taking up.

189
A Cittixen going out of town with some of his neighbors to hunt; pre-thee
sweetheart, says he to his wife, pray that I meet not a Diana, and so come
home like to Actaeon, horned, or be torn to pieces with the dogs: his wife
thinking he had closely jeered her, and thinking to be revenged; said, truly
husband whether you meet Diana or no, I Will take order you shall not want.

190
Certain Gallants being at a Tavern where they spared no liquor, insomuch that
all were well entered, but one whose stomach was somewhat weaker, and therefore
lighter, did nothing but spew; and calling for a reckoning? why, says one of
his friends, cannot you tell, that have so often cast up what you have drunk.

191
A Gentleman meeting of a married Soldier newly come from the wars, demanded
what charge he underwent? the Soldier replied, a Captains: truly, answered
the Gentleman, then you may help your wife to an Ancients place, for she can
bear stoutly.

192
A fellow going down Ludgate Hill, his heels by chance slipping from him,
fell upon his breech: one standing by told him that London-stones were stout
and scornful; it may be so, quoth he, yet I made them to kiss my breech as
stout as they were.

193
A Coward told his friend that one gave him a box on the ear, and he did not
strike him again, but turned the other also to him: to which his friend
answered, sure there was a great fight betwixt you, when blows were given on
both sides.

194
One asked why Prentices were so brief with their clubs when Gentlemen were
falling out or quarreling in the streets? one replied, it was their opportunity
to be revenged on them for meddling with their mistresses.

195
One asked a Gentlewoman in which part of the house she did use to lie? it was
answered, that she lay backwards, and did let out her fore-roomes.

196
A shoo-maker sent his man unto a Gentleman who had owed him money a long time
for boots and shoes that had formerly been made for him: the servant coming
to the Gentleman, told him his master would entreat him to send that little
money which was due to him as aforesaid? whereat the Gentleman (rather willing
to cavell then pay) in a great rage answered, Thou rogue, what does thy master
think I am running away, that he sends after me for such a triflle as this is?
no Sir, replied the servant, my master does not think you are about to run
away, but he is; and that makes him so earnest with you and others that he
might take his money along with him.

197
A hangman being sued in a Court, and perceiving the business was like to go
against him, desired the Court to be merciful, because he was a poor man: the
Atturny that was on the other side, told the Court that there was no cause for
him to plead poverty; being he was a man that had money at use, and that
besides, his place was worth forty pound a year: whereto the hangman replied,
it was not true, for, said he, you shall have it for twenty.

198
A stammering fellow being brought before a Justice for some misdemeanour, was
telling the Justice of one that had abusd him; saying that he was as arrant a
knave as his worship -- ever knew: whereupon the Justice offended with the
stammering fellow, asked what trade he was? who answered, a joiner: whereupon
the Justice replied, pray join your words a little better together, or I Will
set you by the heels.

199
One being at a supper where he was promised a venison pasty, which proved a
mutton one; said, this venison? this is wise venison: whereupon said his
friend, no, it is but venison wise.

200
One being asked whether prose or verse was the best kind of writing? answered,
prose next verse: which may be taken two ways; that is, prose next to verse,
or prose, and next to that, verse.

201
An idle Justice of Peace is like the picture of Saint George upon a signe-post
with his sword drawn to no purpose.

202
He that speaks great Gunpowder words may be compared to a deep mouthed
Dog, or be said to have a tympany in his tongue.

203
A Soldier said he had been in so many battles and had been so battered with
bullets that he swore he thought he had a mine of lead in his belly.

204
Lovers oaths are like mariners prayers, when once the heat is over, they are
not the same men.

205
Women are like dead bodies for Surgeons to work upon, because they tell a man
his imperfections.

206
Musicians may be compared unto Cameleons, because they live by air.

207
One said it was a difficult thing to persuade a multitude (especially in a
City where they are for the most part strong headed) to any reason.

208
One was called fool for asking what Country man a Plough man was, because it
is known said one, they were all borne in Hungary.

209
One asked a man whether he had swallowed a Doctor of Physickes bill, because
he spoke such hard words.

210
The Philosophers stone had need turn all metals to Gold, because the study
of it turns all a man's gold to other metal.

211
One asked a Poet where his wits were, he answered a wool-gathering, the other
replied there was no people had more need of it.

212
One asked whence choler was descended, one answered that she was the daughter
of a great man's Porter begot of a Kitchen wench in the time of a Feast.

213
One asked another why he loved woodcoke so extremely, the other answered why
not I as well as you, for I am sure you never go abroad but you carry one
under your cloak.

214
One asked why a Knight took place of a Gentleman, it was answered because
they were Knights now a days before they were Gentlemen.

215
One said the Midwives trade of all trades was most commendable, because they
lived not by the hurts of other men, as Surgeons do; nor by the falling out of
friends as Lawyers do: but by the agreement betwixt party and party.

216
One said a good Client was like a study gown, that sits in the cold himself
to keep his Lawyer warm.

217
One said the fees of a Pander and a puny clarke are much alike, for the pander
had but two pence next Morning for making the bed, and that was a penny a sheet.

218
A woman was commending a boys face, pish quoth another give me a man's face, a
boys face is not worth a hair.

219
One compared a domineering fellow to a walking Spur, that keeps a great
jingling noise but never pricks.

220
One said it was unfit a glasier should be a Constable, because he was a common
quarreller.

221
One said he had received a shee-letter, because says he it has a young one
in the belly of it.

222
One asked the reason why Lawyers Clearks writ such wide lines, another
answered it was done to keep the peace, for if the Plaintiff should be in one
line and the Defendant in the next line, the lines being too near together
they might perhaps fall together by the ears.

223
One said he was so tender hearted that he could not find in his heart to kill
a Louse, another answered, that it proceeded only from faint heartedness,
because he had not the heart to see his own blood.

224
One said a rich Widow was like the rubbish of the World, that helps only to
stop the breaches of decayed houses.

225
A Master spoke in a strain his Servant understood not, whereupon the Servant
desired his Master rather to give him blows then such hard words.

226
Those that say gallants put all upon their backs abuse them, for they spend a
great deal more upon their bellies.

227
One said it was a strange fashion that we had in England to receive money
with wives and give money for Wenches; It was answered that in ancient time
women were good and than men gave money for their Wives, but now like light
gold they would not pass without allowance.

228.
One persuaded another to marry a Whore because she was rich, telling him that
perhaps she might turn, turn said the other she has been so much worn
that she is past turning.

229
One put a jest upon his friend, O, said his friend, that I could but see your
brains, I would even hug them for this j^st.

230
One asked why Sextons did use to wear black, it was answered that in regard
of their office thee were to meddle with grave-matters and did therefore wear
black.

231
One seeing another wear a threadbare Cloak, asked him whether his cloak was
not sleepy or no, why do you ask said the other, because said he, J think
it has not had a nap this seven years.

232
One asked what was the usual food of Citizens wives, it was answered, though
they loved flesh better then fish, yet for temperance sake they would so diet
themselves, that at Noone they fed only upon carp, at night on Cods-head, and
when they went abroad a little place would content them better then any other
thing.

233
One wondered much what great Scholar this same Finis was, because his name was
almost to every Book.

234
One asked what he was that had a fine wit in jest, it was answered a fool in
earnest.

235
One hearing a Usurer say he had been on the pike of Teneriff (which is
supposed to be one of the highest Hills in the World) asked him why he had not
staid there, for he was persuaded he would never come so near heaven again,

236
A Citizen begins a health to all the Cuckolds in the World, the Gentleman to
whom the health was presented seeing him with his cap in his hand, said, what
do you mean Sir, pray remember your self.

237
One asked a footboy why he was so affected with linen stockings, he
answered because he was troubled with running legs.

238
One said to another that his face was like a popish Almanac all holidays
because it was full of pimples.

239
One said it was a good fashion that was worn now a days, because the Taylers
had so contrived it, that there was little or no waste in a whole suit.

240
One said a jealous wife was like an Irish trouze always close to a man's tail.

241
One said an Apothecaries house must needs be healthful, because the windows,
benches, boxes, and almost all the things in the house took physic.

242
One said a Physician was natural brother to the worms, because he was
ingendered out of man's corruption.

243
One gave a fellow a box on the ear, the fellow gave him another, what do you
mean (said he that gave the first box) I did not lend you a box, I freely gave
it you, the other answered, he was a gamster and had been always used to pay
the box.

244
A Gentleman that bore a spleen to another meets him in the street, gives him
a box on the ear, the other not willing to strike again puts it off with a
jest asking him whether it was in jest or in earnest, the other answers it was
in earnest, I am glad of that said he, for if it had been in jest I should have
been very angry, for I do not like such jesting, and so past away from him.

245
One that was justly Jealous of his Wife said, prithee leave these courses, for
if thou do not they will ere it belong make me horne-mad.

246
One said to a Gentleman that was too full of complement, pray you Sir do not
spend so much wit, if you be so prodigal of it you will ere it belong have
none left for your self.

247
There is nothing says one more revengfull then hemp, for if a man once beat
it, especially in Bridewell, it is a hundred to one but it will be the death of
him shortly after.

248
He that swears when he loses his money at gaming, may challenge Hell by way
of purchase.

249
One asked which were supposed to be the two fruitfullest Acres of ground in
the whole Kingdom? It was answered Westminster Hall, and the old Exchange.

250
It was asked why fat men did love their ease so much, because said one, the
soul in a fat body lies soft, and is therefore loath to rise.

251
One asked why young Barristers used to stick their Chamber windows with
letters, because said another it was the first thing that gave the world notice
of their worships.

252
One having drank a Cup of dead beer, swore that the beer was more then
foxed, another demanding his reason (quoth he) because it is dead drunk.

253
Usurers live, says one, by the fall of heirs, like Swine by the dropping of
Acornes.

254
One said a prodigal was like a brush that spent it self to make others go
handsome in their clothes.

255
One wondered what pleasant kind of oratory the Pillory had in him, that men
loved to have their ears nailed to it.

256
One said suppose all the women in the world were like patient Grizell, then
said another, we might make Christmas-blocks of the Cucking-stooles.

257
An Antiquary says, one loves every thing (as Dutchmen do Cheese) for being
moldy and wormeaten.

258
One said a Player had an idle employment of it, O you are mistaken said
another for his whole life is nothing else but action.

259
One asked his friend how he should use Tobacco so that it might do him good,
he answered, you must keep a Tobacco shop and sell it, for certainly there is
none else find good in it.

260
A simple fellow in gay cloths says one, is like a Cinnamon tree, the bark is
of more worth then the body.

261
If a man be Cornelius, says one, he must be Tacitus too, otherwise he shall
never live quietly.

262
One entreated a prisoner to do him a courtesy, telling him that hitherto he
had found him a fast friend, and he hoped he should find him so still.

263
A Gentleman riding on the way would needs turn back to kiss his wife that
was behind him, he was therefore commended for a kind husband in regard he was
before to kiss his wife behind.

264
One asked whether such a man were twice or no, it was answered that he was
otherwise.

265
One persuaded a Scholar that was much given to going abroad that he would put
away his cushion, and it would be a means to make him sit harder to his study.

266
One said poetry and plain dealing were a couple of hansome wenches, another
answered yes, but he that weds himself to either of them shall dye a beggar.

267
One said he had heard the story of St. George how he killed the Draggon that
would else have devoured the maid, a and did wonder that men would devise such
lies, for says he, it is held by most men that there was never such a man as
St. George, nor ever such a creature as a Draggon, another answers for Saint
George, it is no great matter neither for the Draggon whether there were sueh or
no, pray heaven there be a maid and then it is no matter.

268
A Scholar and a Courtier meeting in the street seemed to contest for the
wall, says the Courtier I do not use to give every coxcombe the wall, the
Scholar answered but I do sir, and so passed by him.

269
One asked the reason why women were so crooked and perverse in their
conditions, another answered because the first woman was made of a crooked
thing.

270
A rich Lawyer that had got a great estate by the Law upon his death bed was
desirous to give twenty pound per annum, to the House of Beallam, being
demanded why he would give it to that House rather then another, he answered
that he had got it of mad men, and to them he would give it again.

271
One said Women were like quick Sands, seemed sirme, but if a man came upon
them, he fell in over head and shoulders.

272
Another said a Woman was like a piece of old Grogram always fretting.

273
One asked why men should think there was a world in the Moon. It was
answered because they were lunatique.

274
One asked why Ladies called their husbands Master such a one, and master such
a one, and not by their Titles of Knighthood, as Sir Thomas, Sir Richard, Sir
William, etc. It was answered that though others called them by their right
titles, as Sir William, Sir Thomas, etc. yet it was fit their Wives should
master them.

275
One asked what was the first commodity a young shopkeeper put off; it was
answered his honesty.

276
One asked why Icarus would undertake to fly in the air: it was answered
because he was a Buzzard.

277
Two Gentlemen talking in Latin in the presence of a woman she grew Jealous
that they spoke of her, and desired them to speak English, that she might
answer them, for she said she was persuaded when men spoke Latin, although they
spoke but two words, that still one of them was naught: whereupon one of the
Gentlemen said presently, Bonae Mulier, she replied, I know Bona is good, but
I Will warrant ye the other word means something that is naught.

278
A simple fellow being too bold with one that was his superior, was told he
might say what he would for that day because it was Innocents day, it being so
indeed.

279
One said a Barber had need be honest and trusty because whosoever employed
him, though it was but for a hair matter, he put his life into his hands.

280
A suit in Law being referred to a Gentleman the plaintiff who had the equity
of the cause on his side pres^^ed him with a new Coach, the Defendant with a
couple of Horses, he liking the Horses better then the Coach, gave sentence on
the Defendants side: the Plaintiff calls to him, and asks him how it came to
pass the Coach went out of the right way, he answers that he could not help it
for the horses had drawn it so.

281
One persuaded his friend to marry a little woman because of evils the least
was to be chosen*

282
One asked how it came to pass that Hosts had usually red Noses, it was
answered that it was given to them by nature to show to the world an experiment
of the virtue of what he sold.

283
A vainglorious man was bragging that his Father and his Uncle had founded
such an Hospital, one answered it is true but yet know that your Father and
your Uncle were the mere confounders of that Hospital you speak of.

284
One said a Tooth drawer was a kind of an unconscionable trade because his
Trade was nothing else, but to take away those things whereby every man gets
his living.

285
One asked why he that drew Beer, was not called a drawer as well as he that
drew Wine, it was answered that Beer made a man to piss, but it was Wine made
him draw.

286
One said he wondered that Lether was not dearer then any other thing, being
demanded a reason: because says he, it is more stood upon then any other thing
in the world.

287
One said a Hangman had a contemplative profession because he never was at
work, but he was put in mind of his own end.

288
One called another Rogue, he answered, durst I trust thee with a looking
glass you would quit me and condemn your self.

289
A fellow that had no money in his pocket, was in a great rage with another,
who told him, pray Sir do not put your self into too much heat, unless you
had more money in your pocket whereby to quench it.

290
One being asked what Countryman he was, he answered a Middlesex man, the other
told him, being he was neither of the Male sex, nor of the Female sex, but of a
Middlesex, he must then be a Hermaphrodit.

291
One said Corn was a quarrelsome creature, because it rose by the blade, and
fell by the ears with those that cut it.

292
Why do Ladies so affect slender wastes (said one) it is (replied another)
because their expenses may not be too great.

293
One commending a Tailor for his dexterity in his profession; another standing
by ratified his opinion, saying Tailors had their business at their fingers
ends.

294
One being demanded the reason why he thought the greatest drinkers quickest of
apprehension, made this answer: Qui super naculum bibit ad unguem sapit.

295
A Poet, says one, is a man of great privilege, because if he transgress it
is by a rule; viz. Licentia poetica.

296
The severest stoics (said one) are the greatest Students, because their
contracted brows are always bent to study.

297
Colliers and Mine-workers, should be well acquainted with all the
Philosophical secrets of the Earth, because they have deeper knowledge in it,
then any others.

298
Tapsters said one should be men of esteem, because they are men not only of a
high calling, but also of great reckoning.

299
It Is impossible that Sailors should be rich men, because they are never so
well pleased as when they go down the wind fastest.

300
A woman said of all men she had a desire to marry a Huntsman, because he would
not disdain to wear the horn.

301
Of all Knaves there is the greatest hope of a Cobbler, for though he be never so
idle a fellow yet he is still mending.

302
The nearest man in a Kingdom (said one) is a Barber, for he cannot endure to
have a hair amiss.

303
Wit bought, is better then Wit taught, because he that never bought any is but
a natural wit.

304
It Is probable that those women that paint most shall live longest, for where
the House is kept in repair there is no fear but it will be inhabited.

305
One said that tall men of all others were most happy, because they were nearer
heaven then all other men.

306
A squint-eyed man (says one) is the most circumspect of all men, because he
can look nine ways at once.

307
One said that tall men should be great Politicians, because they have an
extraordinary reach.

308
One said Hang-men were very happy, because those men they do most hurt will
never be able to render them quid pro que.

309
It is in some sort necessary, that some rich men should be Dunces, because
the pretenders to learning may get preferment: for the good wits will be able
to help themselves.

310
One was saying, it was a fine quality to be able to speak well ex tempore,
why then said another, we may commend every woman, for they have the most
nimble fluent tongues, and that without study or consideration.

311
Hang-men practice their cunning for the most part on good natured men, because
they are ready to forgive before the hurt be attempted.

312
He that has but one eye is more like to hit the mark he aims at then
another, because he has a monstrous sight.

313
Glasiers said one must needs be good Arbitrators, for they spend their whole
time in nothing but composing of quarrels.

314
Carpenters said one, are the civilest men in a Commonwealth for they never
do their business without a Rule:

315
Of all woeful friends a Hangman is the most trusty, for if he once have to do
with a man, he will see him hanged before he shall want money or any thing
else.

316
Bricklayers are notable wanton fellows, for they have always to do with one
trull or other.

317
Stationers could not live if men did not believe the old saying, that Wit
bought is better then Wit taught.

318
Those that carry about with them counterfeit Coin, are more nice and curious
of it, then of good Gold and Silver, for they cannot endure to have that touched
of all the rest.

319
Gunners are more serious in what they do, then other men: for what they do,
they do with a powder.

320
Musketeers of all other Soldiers, are the most lazy, for they are always
at their rest.

321
One among a company of his companions who had been drinking very much, by
chance let a fart, who for conceits sake, said to one of his companions with
whom he might make bold, pree-thee pledge me, he answered I cannot; he then
replied, I pray do but kiss the cup.

322
One passing through Cheap Side, a poor Woman desired his charity, he
disregarding the woman kept on walking, and by and by let a fart: the woman
hearing it, said, much good may it do your worship, he hearing her say so,
turns back and gives her a tester; she thank't him and told his Worship, it
was a bad wind that did blow no body good.

323
A man walking the street, let a great -- upon which he jestingly said, crack
me that nut, it being heard of a waggish wench that was in a chamber over his
head, who being well provided at that time with a perfumed Chamber Pot, throws
it out of the Window upon his head, saying there is the Kernill of your nut Sir.

324
One said a Miller was the sit husband for a Scold, because when the Mill
goes, if her tongue goes never so fast it cannot be heard.

325
One said that Duke Humfrey's guests were the most temperate men in the World,
it being known that at his Table there was never any made drunk, nor with his
diet dyed of a surfeit.

326
One said Physicians had the best of it, for if they did well the World did
proclaim it, if ill the earth did cover it.

327
It is a necessary and fit thing that women learn Roman-hand because (says
one) they were never good Secretaries, nor ever will be.

328
One saw a man and his Wife fighting, the people asked him why he did not part
them, he answered, that he had been better bred, then to part man and wife.

329
One said that Tobacconists would endure the wars well, for they would never be
stifled with fire and smoke.

330
A Drawer for one thing or other is always appearing at the bar, but is not
punished, yet notwithstanding it is all scor'd up.

331
Scriveners are most hard hearted fellows, for they never rejoice more, then
when they put other men in bonds.

332
Smiths of all Handy-crafts men are the most irregular, for they never think
themselves better employed, than when they are addicted to their vices.

333
Those which wear long hair are in the readiest way to make good Friars, for
they may promise to themselves the happiness to enjoy bald crowns without the
help of a Barber.

334
Tapsters are not only very rash but very expert, for they are apt to draw
upon all occasions, and yet suffer very few to go away scot free.

335
Of all diseases the three-quarters harm is most dangerous and most desired:
for all women desire to multiply though they labor never so hard for it.

336
Fiddlers are very unfortunate in their calling, for they never do any thing
but it is against the hair.

337
Trumpeters are much subject to sickly distempers, for commonly when they are
most in health, they will fall a sounding.

338
Horse-keepers and Ostlers (let the world go which way it will, though there
be never so much alteration in times and persons) are still stable men.

339
One said it was no great matter what a Drunkard said in his drink, for he
seldom spoke any thing that he could stand to.

340
A Hypocrite is odious (says one) to God, to Man, and to the Devil: God hates
him because he is not what he seems, Man hates him because he seems what he
is not, and the Devil hates him, because he seems not what he is truly and
indeed.

341
One said of all professions, that Stage Players were the most Philosophical
men that were, because they were as merry and as well contented when they were
in Rags as when they were in Robes.

342
Great Eaters are the most valiant men, for they never fight but with a good
stomach.

343
One asked what the reason was, that few women loved to eat eggs: it was
answered because they cannot endure to bear the yoke.

344
One drinking of a Cup of burnt Claret, said he was not able to let it down,
another demanded why: he answered because it was red hot.

345
A poor man that lived in the Suburbs of London, being owner of a little
field, had got together so much money to buy two little fields more of an acre
of ground a piece, yet he was said to be rich, because he had purchased
More-fields.

346
One said roaring Gallants were like Pedlers, because some of them did carry
their whole estates upon their backs.

347
One said that some Tailors were like woodcockes, because they lived by their
long bills.

348
An Oculist is excellent at sleight of hand, for if he undertake to cure a
blind man, he will so do it, that the patient shall see he does it.

349
One said it was dangerous to wrong a Physician, because if he once have to do
with a man he will be sure to make him stink.

350
An Inkeeper bragged he had a bed so large, that two hundred Constables had lain
in it at one time, meaning two Constables of hundreds.

351
A Prison is a good instrument of reformation, for it makes many rogues and
lewd fellows staid men.

352
One complaining that his Son was a very prodigal, and that he would give an
hundred pounds to have him reclaimed: his neighbor that heard him complain,
answered, let him be a French-Tayler, for they make no waste.

354
One demanded of a wild young Gentleman the reason why he would sell his land,
who answered because he hoped to go to heaven, which he could not possibly do
till he forsook earth.

354
In the Commonwealth of Fishes are many Officers: Herring the King, Sword-fish
his guard, Lobsters are Aldermen, Crabs are Constables, and poor John's the
common sort of people.

355
An idle unthrift having nothing left to maintain his humor of good fellowship
but his bed, sold it; for which being reproved by some friends, he answered
that he could never be well, so long as he kept his bed.

357
Cobblers may be said to be good men, because they set men upright, and are
ever employed in mending of soles.

358
Two men seeing a handsome Wench, but thought to be light, pass by in a very
poor habit; the one said it was a wonder to see such a wench so b^re, the
other replied it was no wonder for she was common.

359
A drunken fellow coming home toward Evening, found his Wife hard at her
spinning, she reprooving him for his ill husbandry, and commending her self
for her good huswifery, he told her that she had no great cause to chide, for
as she had been spinning, he came home all the way reeling.

361
An ignorant drunken Surgeon that killed all men that came under his hands,
boasted himself a better man then the Parson; for said he, your Cure maintains
but your self, but my Cures maintain all the Sextons in the Town.

362
A merry fellow said the Alehouse was the only place to thrive in, for he had
known many a score made there.

363
Musicians may be said to be the best Philosophers, for they will be sure to
keep time.

364
A woman that was very imperious over her husband, was nicknamed by a
neighbor and called Mistress Cap, for which she angerly demanded his reason,
and was answered because she was always above her head.

365
Another woman with her riotous humors having undone her husband, and he being
broken and fled, the same neighbor reproving her, she bade him not meddle with
what did no way belong to him, for she had only broken her own head.

366
A Lady that was painted, told a Gentleman she desired much to have her
picture done to the life, to which he answered you need not that Madam, for you
are a picture to the life already.

367
A Gentleman whose name was Stone, falling off his Horse into a deep water,
out of which he got not without some danger: his companion laughed at the
mischance, and being reproved, answered that no man but would laugh to see a
stone swim.

368
A foolish Gentleman deformed likewise in his person, was called by one a
Monster, nay surely said another the Gentleman he is merely natural.

369
A Country fellow asking which way he might go to Bedlam, a Citizen told him,
the nearest way was to be mad, then, said the Country-fellow you horne-mad
Citizens may the better direct us that are Countrymen.

370
A common wench stepping into a boat, fell into the water, and reaching her
hand to be helped out, one refused it, saying, she need not fear drowning, for
for she was so light she could never sink.

371
One threatened a fellow to break his head with a stone, i will assure you (quoth
he) it is a hard matter to break my head with a stone.

372
A boy seemed much delighted with a Cobblers work, commending and admiring his
workmanship, the Cobbler pleased with the boys admiration asked him if he would
be of his trade, to which he answered no; for though he loved workmanship he
could not endure cobling.

373
One hearing a rich Gentleman (but ignorant enough) discourse somewhat weakly,
how much land there was holden in capite, asked him if his wit was held in in
capite: to which he answered no; the other asked him again, if he had not
some fee-simple held in capite: to which he answered yes; and that it did
descend to him and his heirs forever.

374
A Physician demanded money of another for one of his patients that was dead
long before, he was answered that it was a work of charity to visit the sick;
but if he was so earnest for money the only way was for him to visit the dead,
and then he would never want money more.

375
A rich Stationer wished himself a Scholar, to whom one answered you are one
already, being doctus in libris, nay said the Stationer, I am but dives in
libris meaning rich in pounds.

376
One boasted himself to be esteemed a wit, saying the world spoke him to be
all wit: one standing by that knew him very well, said, is it possible that you
are taken to be a wit, or one that is all-wit, if you be all-wit, then your
anagram is wit-all.

377
A Gentleman hawk'd in another ground, to which the surly owner showed
himself angry, at which the Gentleman spet in his face, what is your reason
for that, said the Farmer: I cry you mercy, said the Gentleman, J gave you
warning, for I hawk'd before J spet.

378
One running hastily with a stick of fire in his hand to light a faggot another
called him rogue, which being angry and demanding his reason: he answered for
that he had a brand in his hand.

379
A patient man being domineered over by his wife that was flying about his
ears, desired her not to tear his band for he would gladly wear it (if she
pleased) without cuffs.

380
One was saying that lead was the basest of all other metals: it is true said
another, but yet it is the stoutest, for the Glasier will tell you that it
keeps more quarrels asunder then any other metal in the world.

381
A Joyner on a time took a pill, and it so wrought with him that he had forty
stools in a minute of an hour.

382
Carriers said one, are wise men, for they will not meddle with any thing but
they will know of what moment and weight it is.

283
One whose name was Gun, called a woman whore; she heing moved as it, had him
before a Justice of peace about it, the Justice reproved him for it, and
deeply charged him not to call her so again. As they were going home, the
woman told him Master Gun, you heard what the Justice said, I hope being so
deeply charged, you will henceforward give a better report.

384
One said Painters were cunning fellows, for they had a color for every thing
they did.

385
One asked why Kitchin-maids went so sluttishly: in regard they dressed
themselves as cleanly as they did their meat.

386
One said to his friend that had been speaking: I love to hear a man talk
nonesence, the other answered, I know you love to hear your self talk as
well as any man.

387
One asked why beggars stood in the streets, begging with broomes in their
hands: it a ws answered, because they did with them sweep away the dirt out of
peoples sight, which while they had a mind on, they would never part with a
penny.

388
A Gentleman took up some Commodities upon trust in a shop, promising the
Master of the shop, that he would owe him so much money: the master of the
shop was therewith very well contented, but seeing that the Gentleman delayed
the payment, he asked the money: the Gentleman told him he had not promised to
pay him, he had promised to pay him, he had promised to owe him so much
money, and that he would in no wise break his promise, which if he paid him he
did.

389
One said he had been kept still to the school, and had been made a
Scholar, if he could but have learned to have declined mulier, and for that
cause was taken from the school.

390
One desired upon his deathbed to have his corpse when he was dead stuck
with Ysop, as is the fashion in diverse places: one of his neighbors sitting by,
told him Time was better; why said the sick man: because said the other
unless you be buried in time you will stink, that no creature will be able to
go with you to the Grave.

391
One asked another what Shakespeares works were worth all being bound
together: he answered not a farthing; not worth a farthing, said he, why so?
He answered, that his plays were worth a great deal of money, but he never
heard, that his works were worth any thing at all:

392
One was commending of the point-makers for good distinct readers, and that
they read better then any other people whatsoever: another asked his reason he
answered that since the fashion of Cassocks came up they kept their points, and
that was the only way to make a man's reading graceful.

393
Two Poets being merry in a Tavern, the one was desirous to be gone, the
other entreated him to stay, telling him, that if he did go away, he would
make a Comedy upon him, you shall get nothing by that, replied the other, for
then I will make a Tragedy on thee, and in the latter end of it, thou shall
hang thy self.

394
One meeting his friend riding on the way without boots, asked him about what
business he rid: the other told him that his business was of great
importance, and he was likewise in great haste: I am very doubtful then, said
he, that your labor is lost: why, said he, because quoth the other, you ride
of a bootlesse errand.

395
One being at Supper at a friends house, it chanced there was mutton and capers
for supper: fell into a Discourse of dancing, saying, that he loved it better
then any other kind of recreation, by and by, taking notice of the Capers which
he had never seen before, took one upon his Trencher, cut it in the middle,
and put the half of it into his mouth: the master of the house observing it,
said, Sir it seems you love dancing very well, when you cannot forbear but
you must cut Capers at Supper.

396
A fellow had the pictures of the five senses stolen out of his house,
whereupon he came to a Justice, and desired that the Thieves might be bound to
the peace, for what said the Justice, for stealing your pictures: yes says he;
I thought said the Justice, you had lost your senses, that you talk so idly.

397
One amongst a crowd of people on the top of Paul's Steeple, had his pocket
picked: what villains are these quoth he, to pick a man's pocket in the Church:
nay Sir said another, you are but robbed upon the Highway.

398
One complained he knew not how to maintain his barns: be a good husband quoth
another, and your barnes will maintain you.

399
A rude deboist young man was placed by his friends with a Proctor, who
observing the misbehaviour of the young man, told his Parents he feared their
Son would never make a civil Lawyer.

400
In some merry company one bid another mend his lests, for they were all
cracked: they ought to be so, said he, for it is no jest till it be broken.

402
One sitting by the fire to take Tobacco, said the fire was his friend, and
presently spet into it: to which one replied you do not well to quench your
friends love by spetting in his face.

403
Two Scholars walking along a River, were stiffely arguing a point, and wished
for a moderator, or a book of some authority: one of them presently espying an
angler sitting on a Tree, cried out, we have our wish! for yonder is Piscator
upon ramus-

404
A Gentleman showing a young student a part of Scotus, wherein was these words,
Dominus Scotus in sententia, and asked him if it was not Dunce Scotus? No,
replied the Scholar that wonnot be; except V be there.

405
One said Gallants had reason to be good Scholars, because they were deep in
many books.

406
One seeing a Printed book, that was but one sheet of paper, said it was not
necessary for any man to libell it, for it did penance in a sheet already.

407
One asked which of the letters in the Alphabet were the most authentic in a
Bill or Bond: it was answered, I O U.

408
One asked why men and their wives did not agree better now adays: it was
answered, men were now more learned, and did know that it was false concord,
that the masculine and feminine gender should agree at all.

409
Two being in a Tavern, the one swore the other should pledge him: why then,
quoth the other, I will, who went presently down the stairs, and left him as
a pledge for the reckoning.

410
One asked wherefore a d^um was in the wars: it was answered to stir up
v^lour in the Soldiers, that is strange, said the other, for wheresoever the
victory falls the Drums are sure to be beaten.

411
One asked why B stood before C: because said another, a man must B before he
can C.

412
One asked how long the longest letter in the English Alphabet was: it was
answered an L long.

413
One asked why some Gentlewomen wore Feathers in their Hats: it was answered
because they were lightheaded.

414
One looking upon a foolish book, asked why Finis was not at the end of it?
another that stood by, answered, because there was no end of idle books.

415
A Country fellow looking into a Scriveners shop, and seeing nothing in the
shop but a deske and a boy sitting at it: asked what they sold? The boy
answered Logger-heads; the fellow replied, it seems you have good custom for
them, for you have but one left in the shop.

416
A drunken fellow coming by a shop, asked a Prentice-boy what their sign was,
he answered, it was a sign he was drunk.

417
One asked how it was possible a woman could have a face like a swine? it was
answered, that her father was a great eater of brawne, and her mother of swines
cheek; and that she was begot a little before dinner, when they had both a mind
of of their victuals.

418
One meeting a mad fellow pitifully drunk, asked him whither he was going? to
the tavern, said he: no, replied the other, drunkenness is the way to hell, and
thither you are now going: o said the drunkard, I never fear that, for I Am so
drunk, that my legs are not able to carry me so far.

419
A Gentlewoman taxing one of her serving-men for telling her a lie, was thus
answered; o mistress, do you think I am such a saucy knave as to offer to lie
with you! heavens forbid.

420
One said a mad choleric man was no wiser then a horse; being asked why?
answered, because he could not bridle himself.

421
One asking which was the way to the devil? meaning the Devill-tavern; was
answered, you must leave the Temple.

422
One having taken physic for being extraordinarily bound, told his Physician
he had done him but little good; whereupon his Physician answered, that the
constitution of men's bodies was much alike to their purses; for if the purse
was bound, the body would never be loose.

423
One told a fat man that was thought to be an extreme wencher, that he was
given to the flesh: o no, said the fat man, the flesh is given to me.

424
One being asked by a Tailer what place in London was the best for a Tailer to
set up in? answered, in Bread-street.

425
One said he wondered at nothing more then that the moon was not lousie, because
she changed but once in a month.

426
One being asked whether a mere proper man was good or no? answered, yes:
being asked for what? answered, nothing.

427
One speaking of Copernicus his opinion concerning the motion of the Earth and
Sea, and the standing still of the heavens; awitty fellow overhearing it, said,
sure Copernicus was in some ship under sail, and near the shore, when he writ
that opinion.

428
One speaking of himself in jest, that he was persuaded he did not weigh above
a pound; why then, said another, you are an As, which is the latin for a pound
weight.

429
An old rich carrier, now dead, was used, when he came into an Inn, to be
kindly saluted by the Chamberlens with the word (welcome) whereto he did
always use to answer, God a mercy, my good friend; and in the mean while clap
his hand upon his money pouch.

430
One asked from whence these strange fashions of cloaks without capes came?
another answered, that the fashion was very far fetched, for it was fetched from
the Cape.

431
A cuckold being in company with a poet was desiring him to make a paper of
verses on him: whereupon the poet told him, yes; and they should be good ones,
for he never looked on him but he thought he saw the forked Hill.

432
A Courtier riding in his footcloth, being requested by a poor man to extend
his charity, asked him what trade he was? who answered, a beggar: a beggar,
said he! how long has that been a trade? he replied, ever since such as you
had good clothes, and rid up and down with a footcloth.

433
One said, a butchers boy was like a woman-slave in Turkey, which carried flesh
to get his master a living.

434
An old man that had used spectacles a long time, was telling his friend, that
notwithstanding his spectacles, he was not able to read above an hour; his
friend answered, that the reason of it was, his spectacles were made of an
houre-glasse.

435
A Player that was to act Pan the shepherds god, as he was entering, was
observed by reason of the coldness of the weather to have a dropping nose: who,
when he was told of it, answered, it was well that you told me, for otherwise I
had acted a dripping-pan.

436
One complementing with a Gentlewoman, telling her that if she pleased he would
not only be her servant, but to do her a courtesy, could be content to part
with a piece of his flesh: who answered, she thanked him very kindly, but she
never loved veale in her life.

437
One asked what he was that was a Pander to his own wife? it was answered, a
pickforke.

438
A Herald coming into a gentleman's room, and observing upon the walls a coat
of Arms of the Gentleman's which the Gentleman could not justify, took a
candle and set it on fire; a servant coming in, asked him what he did mean?
who answered, no hurt; he was but blazing his masters coat.

439
A man and his wife being taken on suspicion of felony, and bound over; the
woman appeared, but not the man: the Judge asking the cause? the woman
answered, that her husband was so sick he could not come without danger of his
life: whereupon the Judge replied, I do believe it, for if he do appear,
there is no question but he will be hanged.

440
Two Gentlemen being together in a friends house near Temple Bar, sent to the
devilltavern for a pottle of claret which was brought accordingly; one of them
desired it might be burnt; o by no means, said the other, it must needs be hot
enough, for it came from the devil.

441
One being in the Lent time at a friends house, the woman of the house not
having wherewith to entertain him, sent her maid to desire the next neighbor
to lend her a pound of bacon; which the Gentleman overhearing, when the bacon
came to be set before him, said he would eat none: being demanded why?
answered, because it was lent.

442
A Lawyer pleading before a Judge, and not speaking to the purpose, the Judge
interrupting him, bid him hold his peace; the Lawyer desired the Judge to hear
him out; whereupon the Judge replied, he had heard him out all that while.

443
A fellow brought before a Judge for stealing a watch, the Judge perceiving
that he was a little too severely prosecuted against, resolved within himself
to save him; and to that purpose put the Jury to value the materials whereof
the watch was made; which was valued at sixpence: the party wronged said, the
fashion (my Lord) stands me in five pounds; o said the Judge, it matters not,
we must not hang men for fashion sake.

444
One that was every spring extremely bound in his body, insomuch that if he did
not help it with physic he should surely dye; was used to say, that he was
bound on pain of death to take physic once a year.

445
A servitor in the University carrying a neats tongue to the Rectors table in
the College, let it fall by the way; for which being checked, he made answer,
lapsus linguae non est error mentis.

446
A Gentleman in the University having his Commons brought cold to him, bid his
servitor go and heat them; who went presently behind the screen and eat them:
the Gentleman long expecting the commons, at lenght called the servitor, and
asked him where his Commons were? he answered, I have done as you bid me: no,
said the Gentleman, I did not bid you eat them, I bid you heat them: it is true
Sir, said the servitor, but you know, h non est litera.

447
Some fishermen being got out to fish, and seeing they were not able to get
any thing, fell to louzing themselves; at length returning, and being asked
what they had caught? answered, what they had caught they had left behind them,
and what they could not catch they had brought with them.

448
A painter whose name was Horses coming into another painters shop where the
picture of Phaeton was, riding in his chariot, slighted the piece extremely;
the other standing upon his workmanship, said, he would maintain it was done to
the life: rather you have drawn him to the death, replied he; o by no means,
said he, Horses drew him to the death.

449
A witty Gentleman wearing an extraordinary short cloak, observing himself to
be jeered at for it, answered, it should be long enough before he had another.

450
A fellow fearing a trial would pass against him, said to the Judge, good my
Lord let me have but your opinion, I will wait upon your Lordship for your
judgment some other time.

451
A Country woman making puddings had set them on the fire to sees, and bad a
child look to them, and when he did see them begin to dance, bad the boy call
her: she wondering a great while that the boy did not call her, asked him
whether they did not yet dance? no, quoth the boy, but they will do presently:
how know thou that? yes quoth the child, for they have put off their coats
already.

452
A Cambridge Scholar being asked why the Towns-mens children were so witty
when they were young, and blockish when they were old? answered that Scholars
got them, and Townsmen bred them.

453
One asked whence the word Interpreter was derived? it was answered, quasi
Inter-prater, for one that prated betwixt two that spoke several languages.

454
One asked why Chambermaids were more troubled with the green sickness then
other women? it was answered, because they used to lie at their masters
beds-feet.

455
One asked what beast in the world might be said to have the best
understanding? it was answered, a Cuckold.

456
A maid told her Mistress she must entreat her to keep more maids, because
she was much overlaid.

457
One whose husbands name was Bean, being delivered of two children at a
burden, told the midwife she had been so troubled with wind all the time she
was with child, that she wondered at it: the midwife said it was no marvel, in
regard her belly so long had been full of beans

458
One speaking of a drunken fellow, said that he knew him drunk for a week
together; that is nothing, said his friend, for I have heard of people that were
drunk ten years together: who were those, said he? the Grecians and the
Trojans quoth the other, for if they had not, they would never have been so mad
as to have fought so long about a whore.

459
Printers (says one) are the most lawless men in a Kingdom, for they commit
faults cum privilegio.


