THE SINNERS Sleep WHEREIN CHRIST WILling her to arise, receives but an
untoward answer.

By HENOCH CLAPHAM.

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY RObert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. An.
1596.

Cum Priuilegio Regio.

TO THE TWO VIRTUOUS GENTLE-WEOMEN, THE RIGHT Worshipful M. RICHARD and
THOMAS OGLE, their Wives: HENOCH CLAPHAM, wishes all good things in Christ
Jesus.
SEnding (Right Worshipful) some tokens unto my friends in ENGLAND, I could not
but pull out, not my purse, but my pen and dispatch the two subsequent
Exercises unto you, as a sign of my Souls wish. My boldness needs your
pardons, and my homely style your favorable constructions. The first I have
ever found, and the second I presume will never be lacking. Let the profane
puffed up with BAALS leaven, swell like a Toade: they shall sooner burst than
you have cause to repent holy Zeal. Blessed Fore-guides, God has given unto
you both, with more comfort may you follow Christ with your Cross. They that
will not (through Pride and Carnalitie) be contented to bear the Cross, shall
have no benefit by Christ his Cross: but (as they deserve) be crossed out of
the book of Life. And so, with the bowing of mine heart, I end.

Edinburgh, 1595. Your poor Cuntry-man, desirous ever t^ show himself
thankful unto GOD for you. H. Cl.

THE SINNERS SLEEP.
The Song of SOLOMON, Chap. 5. Verse 2.3.4.5.6.7.8. The Text. 2 I slept, but
mine heart vvaked (at) the voice of my Well-beloved that knocked, (saying) Open
unto me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled* for mine head is full of
dew, and my Locks with the drops of the Night.

3 I answered) I have put of my coat, how shall I put it on? I have vvashed my
feet, how shall I defile them?

4 My well-beloved put his hand by the hole (of the door) and mine heart being
affectioned toward him.

5 I rose up to open to my Well-beloved: and mine hands dropping down Myrrh,
and my fingers pure Myrrh, on the handles of the Bar.

6 I opened unto my well-beloved: but my well-beloved was gone and past, mine
heart was gone because of his speech: I sought him, but I could not find him:
I called, but he answered me not.

7 The Watchmen that went about the City, found me: they smote me and
wounded me: the vvatch-men of the Walls, took away my veil from me.

8 I charge you (oh Daughters of Jerusalem) if you find my Well-beloved, what
shall you tell him? That I am sick of Love.


SOLOMON, that peaceable Roy of Israel; during whose reign, the bloody sword
of David was sheathed; even this Solomon for his peace, became the glorious
type and fore-figure of Christ Jesus, (not of Christ coming from Isa. 63.1.
Edom and Bozra, with his bloody garments of conquest: for in that, David was
figure) but of Christ the 1. Chro. 22 7.8.9. compared with 2. Cor. 6.16
peaceable builder of the new Testaments Church, signified by his rearing of
Zions material Temple, wherein by his holy spirit he would dwell as a loving,
amiable Spowse. This Solomon of Israel, for this Peace and Spowsage, is
throughout all this Most excellent Song, a glorious peculiar type and
significatour of JESUS, anointed, King, Priest and Prophet to his Church: he
introduced in the person of a Spowse and sweet holy Lover: she brought in as a
woman espoused, and sometimes (considering the diverse estate of the church,
according to diverse times and occasions) as a woman woed and suited unto.

In these verses read, a part of the Church is set down under the person of a
woman slugging and sleeping in her bed, at the door of whose lodging, her
beloved stands knocking and calling, using diverse motives to cause her arise
and open unto him: to whom, notwithstanding she returns a sleepie sluggish
answer, insinuating a denial, whereupon her beloved departs. After that,
She (as better advised) arises, opens, searches, calls, but he would not
be found or heard off. She not resting here, traveleth farther, for the
finding of her beloved what time unawares, she falls into the hands of the
Cities watch, who entreat her fowlie, beating her, wounding her, and snatching
away her veil: But escaping with life, she still sets forward in her holy
pilgrimage, and so, soon after meets with the daughters and chaste damsells
of Jerusalem, to whom she commends her estate, straightly desiring them, if
so they happily meet with her beloved, they would vouchsafe to signify her
estate unto him: namely, That she was sick of Love. And this is the very full
argument of the Text read. It may aptly therefore divide it self, first into a
mutual colloquie, or conference betwixt Christ and the sinful soul,
contained in the two first verses read: secondly, into the issue of that
conference in the residue, until the 9. verse. In the Conference (and
thereupon only at this time) is considerable, first the time intimated in
these words; I slept but my heart vvaked: secondly, the speakers, and their
speech. The first speaker and his speech, is given in these words, It was the
voice of my well-beloved that knocked, saying, Open unto me, my Sister, my Love,
my Dove, mine undefiled: for mine head is full of the dew, and my locks with
the drops of the night. The second speaker, (namely, the sinful soul) and her
speech lies in these words: I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I
have vvashed my feet, how shall I defile them?

The time of this conference was, (as the sinful soul acknowledges) when
she Slept, namely in her Flesh: and yet then Awake, But in another part,
namely in her heart or spirit, I slept (says she) what time my beloved came
unto me knocking, etc. She that before shamed not to excuse her flesh laid
down in the bed of Security t^ sleep; she now acknowledges, how lewdlie
then she was occupied. And i^ every thing that is written, be written for our
learning (as indeed it is) the^ this teaches us not to be abashed t^
confess our former or present sleep^ estate: that is, that such days, month
and years of our life have been slep away in the flesh, the damnable wor^ of
the flesh. There be three sorts o^ Sleep mentioned in the Scripture^ The
first sleep, is that necessary re^ which occupies the body after tra^uell:
so slept Judge. 4.21
Sisera in Iaels Tent. The second sleep, is the rest of the bod^ after the
dissolution of the soul: 1. King 2.10.
David (departing this life) is said t^ sleep with his Fathers. The third kin^
of sleep, is to lie in a natural, carnal sinful, unrepentant estate: Hereof
Pa^ speaks, when he says, Ephesians. 5.14
Awake the that sleep, and stand up from the dead, that is, from the works
that have introduced the first death, as also deserve the second death, wherein
thou yet sleep: And to ly in sin, may well be said to sleep in sin:
first, because the sinner thinks, that sin is as necessary for the comfort
of his flesh, as sleep for the wearied body: secondly, because a man is as
hardly to be stirred and pulled out of sin, as a man in a dead sleep to be
awaked, and to leap out of his bed. As the Serpents sting darted into a man's
leg, does by little and little draw the body to sleep, and that unto the
death, the venom thereby the sooner exhaust of the heart: so the Serpent and
Dragon of Hell, having pierced a man with his venomous darts of Covetousnes,
Idolatry, Theft, Adultery, Murder, Drunkenness, Lying, Pride, etc. He couets
only that man would be tickled with the delight thereof, and so sleep by
continuance in such sin, because he knows the reward thereof will be death.
Adam and Heuah (the corrup^ Root, from whence we as corrup^ branches do
spring) they having suc^ked up the poison of sin, lo, they seek starting
holes, Genes. 3.
among the bushes they go, so far from desirin^ to be awaken out of sin,
as they fli^ from the voice of God, because the^ would not be questioned about
their sin: but as Christ here visits the sinful soul in the time of her
sleep so JEHOVAH there calls out ou^ Fore-parents, examines them, corrects
them, by whipping them out o^ Eden. Awake therefore you sons an^ daughters of
Adam, that have sucked up the poison of Murder, Pride, Adultery, and covet to
sleep therein, accomp^ it a sovereign mercy of God, that h^ calls upon ye, and
vouchsafes to visit ye. Cain so slept in his murder, as God Genes. 4.
marked him for a Reprobate Esau so slept in his belly hunting, and neglect of
holy things, as God would not give him to find Heb. 12.27.
any place to repentance: The Prophet Balaam slept so in Purse-prophecie, as
God therefore not only gave him to Nom. 31.8
be slain together with the wicked, 2. Pet. 2.15.
but also to be canonized for the leader of false Prophets, and as the giver
of ill example to all pievish Prophets in these last days. Iesabell so slept
in 2. King. 9.30. etc.
painting her face, curious tyring her head, and other sorceries, as God in
just judgment gave her to break her neck, and her painted curious flesh to
become dogs meat. Awake thou therefore that sleep, stand up from the dead,
and Christ wlll give thee light. Do now at last with this sinful soul,
confess thy sin to God and forsake it, so shall thou find mercy. David
having about one year slept in his sin, was by the Prophet Nathan awaked; who
awaketh and cries, Psalm. 51.
Have mercy upon me oh God: wash me: purge me: create in me a new heart, etc.
upon which humble and unfeigned Confession and Petition, he received this word
from God, * The Lord has pu^ away thy sin, thou shall not dye. Tha^ thou
may therefore obtain merci^ with David, sleep not in Pride, uncleanness,
Blood-thirstines, prophannesse but awake and walk more warily, redeeming the
time lost: else fear, le^ the Lord swear in his wrath, that tho^ shall never
enter into his rest. To da^ therefore harden not thine heart, b^ arise out of
thy Sin thou have slept i^

But mine heart awaked.) The hear^ which is the seat of that faculty ^ the
soul called the Will, under the which, is contained every Affection, ^ here
put for the whole soul, consistin^ of the faculty of the Mind, seated
esp^ciallie in the head, under the which, contained the interior senses; as
al^ of the Will, especially occupied abo^ the heart, in his several affections.
Because the Affections are seated in the heart, therefore we say, we love a^
hate with our heart: and though the i^teriour senses, as Understanding,
Co^ceipt, etc. be seated in the head (and therefore we say, He has a head
able to comprehend knowledge, to conceive, remember, etc.) yet sometimes it is
said, he has an understanding heart, but this improperlie. Now that she
says, But mine heart awaked, it is as though he should say, Howsoever my
flesh slugged and slept, yet mine inward man or spirit, was then not so
sleepy and vntovvarde. Here we are to observe her upright ^udgment: who
condemns the flesh because it slept, but justifies the spirit because it was
waking. A lesson which we are to learn; namly, to condemn what in us is
condemnable, as also to ^ustifie what in us is justifiable. JOB had learned
this lesson, who when he was to set his work before God his pearcing sight,
he says, Job. 9.30.31.
If I wash my self with snow water, and purge mine hands most clean, yet
shall thou (God) plunge me in the pit, and mine own clothes shall make me
filthy. But when he was to an^wer his kins-men, charging him with hypocrisy,
he says: Job. 26.5.6
God forbid, that I should justify you, I will not take mine innocence from
my self until death: I will keep my righteousness, and will no^ forsake it.
As JOB keeps this equity toward God and man: so in this place the poor
soul keeps an equal balance betwixt her Flesh and Spirit: the flesh a
sleep, the spirit awake. For ^ man to say, I hope I am as good a christian as
any of them all, and then to b^ a sleep in Adultery, Pride, Envy, Murder,
etc. Is to bear false witness against Christ's mystical body, which consists
not of rotten unfruitful twiggs for such are John 15.2.6.
cut off from the Vin^ Christ; neither shall such sleepie Matthew. 25 10.
foolish Virgins enter into the kingdom for the gate shall be shut. And for
man, in whom God has wrought^ care of holiness, a love of truth: for such a
one simply to say, There is n^ one good thing in me, is to bear fals^ witness
against the grace of God, an^ the work of his spirit. As the form is common
to the proud wicked: so this is a spice of hypocrisy, that would humble it
self to the harming of Gods spirit: or else a fruit of desperation to the
daunting of Faith.

That her heart was waking, what time Christ was calling her flesh from
sleeping in securities bed, we are to observe, that there was in her a candle
light; by the glimpse whereof, she in her conscience knew it to be Christ, or
an heavenly power, contrary unto her unregenerate body and soul that knocked,
although she had not willingness yet to arise out of sin. A candle every man
and woman brings in their hand with them into the world, that is Light of
nature, commonly called Conscience, which is not so blind, but it often charge
the heart of the Barbarian with some sin: as also looking upon the Psalm.
19.1. Romans 1.20
Heavens, Firmament, and other visible creatures, they by that little light are
led to the acknowledgment of a God and Lord that ought to be obeyed. This
light and knowledge is sufficien^ to leave a man inexcusable to judgment: but
unable it is to lead a man to salvation. And therefore David says Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of God is a perfec^ teacher, as though he would say, the former
teaches but imperfectly: bu^ as for Gods Law, it teaches perfectly, by
converting the soul and opening the eyes of the spiritual blind As the first
light is a check to the soul so the second being cherished and kep^ burning by
the oil of God his spirit is able to save the soul: but if this ligh^ be once
quenched and put out, how^ great and fearful shall be that darkness Well, she
hears Christ calling he from sleep, her own heart witnesset^ that it was
Christ's voice, and yet (a^ afterward) she gives scope of sleeping to the
flesh. A right fearful estate and an estate, wherein I fear too many at this
day do stand: namely, do^ hear and know Christ's holy voice, calling them from
sleeping longer i^ theft, adultery, profaning the Lords day, drunkenness, etc.
and yet ly still in their sin, as not minding to part with it. Of such a one,
what says Moses? after this manner: Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.21
He that hears the words of the Curse, (namely against sin) and blesses
himself in his heart saying, I shall have peace although I walk according to
the stubbornes of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness unto thirst, the Lord
will not be merciful to him, but then the wrath and jealousy of the Lord,
shall smoke against that man, and every curse that is written in this book,
shall light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under heaven,
etc. A terrible judgment but from a just God, who will race persons, and their
houses and families (be they never so potent) from the face of the Earth, if so
they be found nourishers of their sin, when they hear Gods word cursing
their sin. If therefore the light and vnderslanding thou art endued withal, do
not lead thee unto repentance, fear lest it prove a check-soare to thy
conscience, and seal thee up excuseles against the day of vengence David's
knowledge led him to repentance when he cried, Psalm. 51.4
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned: for with this Confession he
made Conversion, he turned from his sin. But IVDAS Iscariot, his knowledge
caused him after this Confession, I have betrayed innocent blood, to run unto
the rope, an^ therewithal to take vengence on that throat, that had breathed
out wicked covetous counsel, against the Lord o^ Life: so adding one murder to
another. If while we speak unto thee and thy sin, thy conscience secretly
tells thee, this is Christ's voice: it is God his holy word that thus smites
on my sin, awake and sleep no longer therein: let not sin dominere and
rule in thy mortal members: quench not the spirit, but obey his motion to
repentance: giving therwithall thanks to our God, who should so mercifully
fore-warne thee, lest otherwise thou should be damned. So much briefly for
the time of Christ's Call, together with the estate she then stood in. Now
follows the speaker Christ, and his speech.

It was the voice of my well-beloved.) The poor sinful soul awaked, and
making rehearsal of things passed, she now entitleth CHRIST well-beloved, whom
before in her sleepie estate, she no doubt took but for a troubler of Israel.
SOLOMON says, Prove. 28.23.
He that rebukes a man shall find more favor at the length, than he that
flattereth with his tongue. As this is verified here, where he is now called
Well-beloved, as being worthy love, whom before she neither loved nor kindly
entreated, so shall it ever appear in the end, that who vnwoorthilie have
refused our wholesome counsel and correction, shall once (even in that
appointed time) be of another mind. The wicked shall in Hell (when it is al too
late) affirm and cry out, Such and such were vvorthie to have been beloved
for their calling of us to Repentance: howsoever we then hated them. As for the
Elect they shall once in this life leave sleeping in sin, neither then shall
they defer to justify such, as before they condemned: for Repentance is an
altering of the judgment, and a renewing of the affection. Let this therefore
stir up every man to Heb. 13.13
exhort one another, especially, the ministers of the word, (...) give no rest
unto sleepers in transgresion, howsoever the wicked rail upon them, and
entreat them right rudel^ for the day shall come hereafter (wi^ they, nil
they) wherein they shall turn their tongues and account us worth of love and
good liking. Lev. 19.17
Hate not t^^ brother in thine heart, but plainly rebu^ him, and suffer not
sin upon him: ^ though he should say; Let him not M^ begrowe in his sin.

But how came Christ unto her? (...) a voice, by what kind of voice? by
knocking voice: unto this knocking the holy Ghost alludeth, when he tells
the Revel. 3.
Lukewarm people of Laodicea, that he stood knocking at their door, the
word in the original signifying To * dosse with the horn, as does the
strong necked beast with the maine force of his head. As Christ ordinarily for
the awaking people from sin, does send a lively voice, not a confused Noise,
so that voice is a powerful knocking voice: not a bare reading, nor a smooth
calm preaching, but a powerful thundering out, and incessant beating upon the
door of the sleeper, the portal of the conscience unrepentant. Isai. 58.1.
Cry aloude (says JEHOVAH to Isaiah) spare not, sound out thy voice like a
Trumpet. If the sleepie sickness have ceazed on a man, he must not be whispered
in the ear, but scourged on the sides. In a wrong box are these men, that
exclaim on the preachers, because they thunder out Curses against sin,
whereas (alas) God has ordained nothing but Curse for sin If they like not
the curses, let them cas^ away the Cause of a Curse, namely their sins: Romans
6.23
for the wages of sin is death. If men be so foolish as to suffe^ sin to
mos-begrowe them, and as canker to eat their hearts through, ye^ we the Lords
watchmen, must no^ cease to sound the trumpet, but knoc^ till their hearts
awake: either it shall become the savor of life unto life, by repenting: or the
savor of death to death by still sleeping. Jude 22.23.
Some we must save by fearing them (says Jude and others by pulling them out
of the fire If we saw a brother plodding the waters toward a whirle-poole or
Syrtes, we would fear him back by al^ means: and if we saw another in the
fire, we would not stand speaking with Eli the Priest, Thou do ill my son
etc. but we would snatch hold of some limb, and violently pull him out,
because of the present danger. Easier dealing is for bruized reeds, broken
hearts: but knocking and rougher bits for an unbroken Mule and untamed Heifer.

To what end knocks Christ at the portall of her conscience? Open unto me,
says he. so that the end of his voice and knocking is, to gain Entrance. Why
did JEHOVAH call forth Adam? to the end he should come forth and appear. To
what end did Noah prophecy of the deluge? to the end that they should prevent
the judgment by repentance. To what end did Christ so preach to Jerusalem, but
that thereby he might gather them under his wing as a hen gathers her
chickens? To what end does the Lord stir up many in these days, to knock
at the doors of festered Consciences, but that they would open unto him, and
let his spirit enter: not the spirit of adultery enter, for that is there
already: not the spirit of pride to enter, for that is there already: not the
spirit of the world, or hypocrisy to enter, for they are there already: but
to the e^ that Christ by his holy spirit, right^ous spirit, chaste spirit,
loving spirit might enter. They that will not op^ their heart to make this
change, nam^ly to send out Satan, and to receiue^ Christ: to send out the
unclean spirit and to take in the holy, it is pittie^ their life. But why
does Christ cra^ this soul to open to him? can he no without voice and
knocking enter? ye^ he can, but his ordinary revealed wi^ is otherwise:
namely, by the 1. Cor. 1.18.21.
lively voice of preaching to beget faith; an^ that preaching with authority
as di^ Christ, not coldlie or weaklie as di^ the Scribes and Pharisees. A man
ca^ burst open a door without a key, bu^ ordinarily he uses a key: so can
the spirit of Christ burst open an hard heart, without the spiritual key of
David, displaied by preaching, but ordinarily he uses the key of preaching.
As a man is said to open the door, but not without a key: even so, the spirit
of God is said to open the heart, but not without preaching. And as the ^ey is
said to open the door, but not without the help of man's hand; even so, the
word preached is said to open the hard heart, but not without the hand of
Christ, which is his Spirit. What great cause have we then, not only to
pray that God would send Preachers into his Harvest: but also that he would
grant his spirit to accompany their preching, that so God his holy workman,
his spirit, and his holy tool and instrument, the word preached concurring
together, many hearts may be opened to due attending the word, as was the
Act. 16.14.
heart of Lidia the Thyatirian to PAVLS Sermon. Now as he calls and knocks
at the portall of her conscience, so he uses therewithal many sweet alluring
titles, saying: Open unto me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, mine undefiled. If
the King of the Land should come unto the door of some base woman, inhabiting
his Land, who stood in traiterlie estate, and at her door should knock,
entreating entrance under the terms of Sister, Love, Dove, pe^fect one (and
that with a pardone i^ his hand) could her heart be so hard a^ to lie still in
her bed, and not rather to arise hastily, come and open, fall at hi^ feet, and
beg pardon? Our annointe^ JESUS, who has received all power in Heaven and in
Earth, he ever b^ the voice of his written word calls and knocks at our
door, with I beseech you brethren, I beseech you sisters, desire you in the
bowels of JESUS, and many other sweet speeches he oftentimes uses, if happily
any thing might move us: but oh alas, how many arise from the dead? how many
leave sleeping in sin? how many open a free heart unto JESUS, that so
entering Rev. 3.20.
he might suppe with us, and we with him? When Jesus came into Luke 19.8.9.
Zacheus his house, and he entertained him with holy restitution, Jesus told
him, that Salvation was come unto his house. Happy man he, that as verily had
obtained salvation as received the Savior. But in these days, men fear least
the receiving of JESUS bring trouble, poverty and death unto their house,
(whereof anon in his place) and therefore Christ may knock and call at his
pleasure, for they will obey at their leisure: but the day will come, that
shall pay for all.

Open unto me my Sister. Christ in a certain Sermon says, that These are my
brethren and sisters, that hear the word of God and keep it: but here he
calls her Sister, as also undefiled or perfect one, that is, so far from
doing his will, as she refuses it, and does her own will, keeping her heart
barred against Christ, when he would have had her open. This term therefore
and the other, do not properly appertain to her present sleepy estate, as
yet she lay in an unrepentant estate, (for so she was no visible Church or
member of a Church) neither in that presumpt^ous sin, could she warrant the
applying of mercy in Christ, the word being against her: (For to whom one
g^ueth himself as servant to obey, his se^uant is he whom he does obey. Romans
6.1^ but she here gave her self as servan^ to obey unrighteousness: therefore
se^uant to unrighteousness. But she is termed of Christ in regard of her fir^
election, which hereafter should be se^led unto her heart by an effectual
c^ling, what time the power of his ca^ should appear by mooving her to rise,
and seek after Christ with the cross on her neck: denying her sel^ for
following after Christ. So that may well say, he calls her Sister, Lo^ Dove,
undefiled, because she was calle^ to be a Sister, a Love, a Dove, as also to
live in an undefiled estate. Brethren and Sisters we are to Christ, being (...)
him our Mediator reconciled to the Father. Christ the Son of God be nature,
we sons and daughters (...) God by adoption; and brethren and sisters to
Christ, by the handfast and betrothment of faith, which makes us Ephesians. 5.30.
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. So that thereby we are
not only his Brethren and Sisters, but also his Love and Spousesse. Doves we
are called to be, for Mat. 10.16
Innocence and harmlesnes. The Naturians affirm the Dove to be without gall:
and sure I am, we are commanded to be without Bitterness. Undefiled, we are
called to be, as also to be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect: Of
every which title, much might be said, which here I pass by: but from the
whole this we are to learn, that as in regard of our Election known to God,
we are to him, from the beginning known for Sons, Daughters: as also,
Brethren and Sisters to Christ, (even before we can with Jacob and Esau, do
good or evil.) So the calling of a Christian is, for to stand in union with
Christ: in obedience and holy service to him, as to our head and spiritual
husband: to har^ not so much as our enemy: and fin^lie, to be holy in all our
words a^ works, as beseeming the children God: brethren and sisters of Chr^
and these that profess themselves su^jects of the Kingdom of Heaven, not the
World. If a Monarch and great Ki^ should call us to be his brethren a^ sisters,
oh we would stir our stump and endeavor our selves thereunto trow if we heard
the King at our do crying, awake and rise thou man, a^ come and wedde my
daughter: awa^ and rise thou woman, and come to w^ with my son, and that in
pain loosing thy life, I trow we would n^ loose our life and so good a
marriag^ for lying in bed a while. If the Kin^ should cry, come out of these
defil^ and foul ways, and walk in the swe^ hevenly allies, we would not like
swin^ still lie grovelling in the mire, and r^fuse so sweet an offer. And will
we^ found more sluggish, careless and sw^nish toward our heavenly King of
Kings, who offers unto us regal affinity, and right happy undefiled ways?
Awake therefore sluggish flesh, sleep no longer in swinish pleasures, but
arise unto thy God and say, Welcome be the voice of the holy one: cast out of
my heart, the power of darkness and sin: let thy spirit sit hereafter in my
conscience, as in a chair of estate, and there occupy dominion and
jurisdiction over sin, that so as a fruitful branch, I may not only be
graffed into the vine Christ, but also live by the sap of his spirit.

Sweet Christ, having used all the former sweet titles, for the moving of her
heart to give place: does in the second place lay down a weighty and most
reasonable argument, drawn from the misery he underwent for her sake: that
thereby at least and at last, she might buckle her self to arise.

Mine head is full of dew (quoth he) and my locks with the drops of the night.
By the Head, the chiefest member, he^ means the whole: and by the Loch a
beautiful accident unto the body he means outward comelines. A^ the body
oppressed in the night wi^ dew abides much grievance, and the beauteous locks
weather-beaten a^ quickly vnfeaturated and deforme^ as befell unto
Nebuchadnetzers hair^ Dan. 4.30. so would Christ give poo^ souls to
understand, that for their sa^ his body underwent much grievanc^ as also he
lost his beauty. Of the fir^ namely the grievance of his body, the whole story
of our redemption is f^ persecuted in the cradle, in being d^uen Matthew. 2.
to Egypt: hunted after by t^ wicked, and finally smitten, buffere^
crucified, pierced: and that which more, so smitten by his Father, (o^ sins
being imputed unto him) through the anguish of spirit, his b^ die in the Garden
was bedewed wi^ blood: and on the cross he roared o^ vehemently: My God, my
God, why h^ thou forsaken me. This Dew of the Night, not of the Light ISAIAH
fore^awe in the spirit, as already rained down upon him; and therefore
said, He was wounded for our transgressi^ns, he was broken for our
iniquities, Isai. 53.^
the hastisement of our peace was upon him. As for the second, namely, his
Beauty, what outward thing was there in him ^miable or louesome? As Isaiah
long before could say, Isa. 53.2.
He has neither form ^or beauty, for the which we should desire him: so in
his whole life there was but, Penury, infamy, reproach, vnderbearing all hard
usage, having undergone the form of a servant, etc. And wherefore underwent he
this grievance and deformity? His body and soul was tormented, that ours
might be eased: and he became vnbeauteous, that he might so beautify us:
neither is that his embasement ended, nor shall be so long as he has a
Ministry in the Earth: For through them he desires us to be reconciled: a
deep embasement that he should petitionate unto us; he b^ing the Lord of
glory, and we a deg^nerat people. Hard hearts we hau^ that have put him to
such torture an^ grievance, and yet continue so than^ les, ey continue still
sinning, as thoug^ still we would cloth him with new sins, and so put him
every day to ^ newly crucified and tormented.

Secondly, in that Christ gives t^ understand, that during our spiritua^ sleep,
he presents himself before the door of our conscience with his hea^ and locks
bare, as with his cap in h^ hand, whereas he ^ight have co^ with an helmet on
his head, and a tw^ edged sword in his hand, we should the rather be ashamed of
our spiritual i^ civilitie, that so proudely stand in o^ own light, when he
in all patienc^ and long suffering, (desiring not the death of a sinner) does
by his 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors beseech us to be reconc^led to God.

Thirdly, whereas he calls the drops, Drops of the night, he would have us
to know, 1. that while we live in sin, we live in darkness, like battes and
owls that fly the light, 2. as also that these fruits of darkness, black
works of ours did fall upon him. Man having bathed himself in the works of
Darkness: Christ comes and puts man his ougly black garment upon himself:
which the Father seeing, he raineth down on his Son, the dew, hail and
storm, that otherwise was due unto Man. Sin was imputed to him, as verily,
as we had Righteousness imputed unto us: ey, He was made sin for us (says
the Apostle) that we should be made the righteousness of God (not, in our
selves, but) in him. 2. Cor. 5.21. The reason then our Savior here uses, is
this: Seeing I stand bareheaded, entreating, suffering for thy sake the heavy
hand of my heavenly Father upon me, debasing my self in the form of a servant,
that so thou may be freed from the punishment due to the works of
darkness, as also be advaunced into the state of Gl^rie: seeing all this I do
for thy love, I pr^ thee let me stand no more without, but r^ceiue me into the
closet of thy Conscien^*

Oh wonderful alluring argumen^ and vngainsayable request if the dev^ were not
in man, and man vnreason^blie bewitched. But let us hearken ^ her answer.

I have put off my coat, how shall I p^ it on? I have vvashed my feet, how
sha^ I defile them? This answer consisti^ on two branches, let us first exami^
what this Coat is, which she has p^ off. God putting his Image on man
especially seated in the most speci^ part of man, namely his soul: he p^sessed
the higher faculty or power of ^ soul (namely, the Mind) with the fi^nes of
all necessary Holy knowledge, (...) also the Inferior faculty (the Will) wi^
full holiness in every affection: with the Mind and understanding part (for so
call it for learning sake, though a si^ple essence admits no parts) Sa^
begun: who having perverted the mind, and abused the Understanding and
Conceit, lo after that (through Gods just judgment) the Mind, and so
consequently the Understanding, Conceit, etc. went a wrong way by the conduct
of sin, which now had ceased on the powers of the soul. Understanding
perverted and blinded, loosing Light, and admitting Darkness and Error, caused
Adams soul to seem stripped and naked, which before was clothed with
glorious Light. The Mind so perverted and turned out of the right way, the
Will (as an handmaid) was ready to follow in her affections: for the eye being
darkened, no marvel if the foot turn aside from the right way. Thus the Image
of God was turned into the similitude of Satan, light into darkness, and holiness
into unholiness. God had put on our Fore-parents the Coat of an understanding
mind and Holy will, from whence proceeded Power of Moving well, but having
broken the Commandeme^ lo they were stripped of their Co^ and they perceived
themselves N^ked. Genes. 3.7. The Coat put off, t^ Sun was set, and the
Dark-night can upon them, and the Seed of their loyn* And therefore in the
work of Reg^neration and New birth, the spirit God begins to build, where
Sat^ first cast down: namely, with rectif^ing the Mind: and then with
sanct^fying the Will, which is called the pu^ting on of the Ephesians. 4.24.
New man.

This Garment, the putting on^ the second Adam Christ Jesus, by op^ning the
door of her conscience, she insinuates she cannot do, because was
darkenight: that is, because he^ Mind was possessed with ignoranc^ thinking
that darkness, that is, Ign^rance shall be to her a sufficient excus^ of not
arising out of her bed of secur^tie and worldly ease: I have put off my coat,
how should I put it on, is then a^ though she should say: I in my Fore-p^rents
ADAM and HEVAH, have put off my spiritual Coat of an understanding mind and
holy will, sithence which, a spiritual darkness has reigned over me, by
reason whereof, I can not see how to put on that Garment aright, and
therefore thou must have me excused. Thus the sinful soul pleads ignorance
and darkness, when the King of knowledge and light stands at the portall of
her door, with a torch in his hand wherewithal to enlighten her: not unlike
to a foolish person in bed, who called upon by the Kings messenger for
preparance unto the entertainment of his King, should reply: It is night, I
cannot see to attire my body, the King must stay till the day shine in at the
window. Were this a fit answer for a subject, especially if the King
himself were at the door, and offered unto him at the window the benefit of
torche light? Verily Christ knocks not by any minister of his, but
therewithal he offers to the soul sitting in darkness, saving light and
knowledge. But as ^ Jews having in the midst of the Ioh. 1.9.
That true Light which lightneth e^ry man that comes into the world: b^
Chap. 3.19
loving darkness more than light, the would not know him, except to (...)
him, and bury him with a stone sea^on his head, that so he should not (...) so
in these days men will plead ign^rance, when God has lighted man Lamps
amongst them. When Sp^tuall Light, (namely, DAVID'S L^terne (Psalm. 119.105.) is
proffered vn^ them and touches their knockles, (...) cannot see the wood for
trees: yet the can see to dash out the Light: neith^ will they know these
lights, that w^ John. 1.8.
John bear witness of the Light lights: except to persecute them, i^ prison
them, kill them, that so if it we^ possible, the Light might be put o^ that
offends their bleared eyes, a^ makes their lewd works manifest* so much as
multitudes now say wi^ the wicked in JOB, Job. 21.14.15.
Depart from (...) ^or we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the
Almighty that we should serve him? But let such wicked ones know, 2 Thessalonians.
1.8.9.
That the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his migh^ie Angels,
in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, and which
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Well, Christ will come suddenly
as does a thief, Revel. 16.15.
Blessed therefore is he that watches and keeps his garments, lest he walk
naked, and God make all (Angels and Men) to see his filthiness.

But mark that this poor soul confesses her spiritual nakedness, although by an
interrogation she makes it too difficult to be attyred. A confession which
few will be brought unto in these days: for they rather will say, I am not
more naked than others, more ignorant than such. If they may pull others into
their Confession, so be it, they will more easily confess somewhat: but to
single out themselves, and to particulate their own sin, that v^ few will
come unto. Which sin^ confession, although it be a lifting of the head toward
repentance, ye^ it nothing availeable without Rep^tance or Conversion it self.
It is not ^ficient for thee to lie in the bed of ^dultery, and to confess that
thou h^ put off the coat of Chastity, exce^ thou arise from Adultery, and
put (...) the coat of Chastity. Fly evil and good. Prove. 28 13.
He (says SOLOMON) that (...) knowledgeth and forsakes his sins she find
mercy.

The second part of her answer lyi^ in these words: I have washed my fee^ how
should I defile them? Is as much if she said: I have fitted my affections
^therwise, in so much as if I arise and op^ unto Thee, I see not how I shall
do it, b^ with embasing and endamaging my sel^ By Feet every where in holy
writ, meant the Affections, or Will which the container of the affections. B^
Moses Exodus 3.
putting his shoes off from his feet, is there under meant, a putting ^ff, or
laying aside earthly, carnal and ^eastlie affections. By the John. 13.
washing ^f feet commended by Christ to his Disciples, is signed forth the
bearing ^f holy affections one toward ano^er. When DAVID says, Psalm. 119.59.
I turned my ^eete into thy testimonies: he means, ^eturned his affections
to Gods law: and indeed, the feet willingly go on, ^r turn to that way the
Heart affects. By all which, appears my former ^onclusion to be true:
namely, that he thought her self in an estate good enough for the present
season: ey, that now to rise were but a defilement to her ways, an
endangering of ^er health. An answer notably wic^ed, and highly worthy the
departure of Christ: and yet an answer given by many to Christ in these days,
who can say: I affect the Word and the pure Government of the Church of Christ:
not one of them wishes more good ^hereto than I do: but because of the present
policy of the Land; because of my present calling, wherein I mu^ bath my
self (as in a bed) I cannot ^rise and shake of these things for the
entertaining of Christ's Scepter an^ holy government: but first I shall d^file
my name and credet (which nam^ and credit with the world I must a^fect) and
secondly by reason of cold Laws abroad, I should by arising t^ give place to
Christ, hazard the los^ of liberty and revenewes, which I a^fect as my life:
And indeed the prai^ of men rather than of God, and the r^gard of bodily ease
before souls health is so dear unto this serpents brood^ that lick the dust and
go with their be^lies upon the earth, that if they be d^prived of these, they
are ready to sta^ and hang themselves with Achitoph^ in a halter. These say in
their heart^ what profit shall we have in openin^ to Christ, as the wicked in
JOB say Job. 21.15.
What profit should we have, if we pr^ unto the Almighty? These hold the
heresy, that good PAVLE long since ^ondemned: namely, 1. Tim. 6.5
That gain is ^odlines: and therefore after once or wise admonishment to be
rejected, ^it. 3.10. Wicked man thou art, are ^hy feet or affections to be
washed and ^rimmed for any other use than to at^end Christ's call? Paul setting
down ^he spiritual soldiers furniture, Ephesians. ^. appoints the feet to be
shod with ^he preparation of the Gospel, because our affections should turn
our ^eet to the Gospel, not for the gazing ^hervpon, but for the receiving
thereof. But sorsooth it will be a discredit ^o my young Master and young
Mi^tres to leave their chesse, cards, dice, dancing, discoursing companions,
proud curtizan tirings, etc. Oh it will be a disgrace unto them to obey the
voice of the Preacher (upon whose head and locks rests punishment and
dislike of men) to obey their call, would make them forsooth, as beggarly and
as much despised, as he that calls them from these vanities, wherein the have
slept from their infancy. Indee^ the misery and simplicity of Chri^ and the
plainnes of the word, was stumbling block to the Jews, and a offense to the
Gentiles. If Christ wo^ come to our Magistrates, Merchant and rich Na^bals with
a golden crow^ on his head, and Salomons peace-scepter in his hand, oh then it
may be Christ in his Ministers, word and h^ly ordinances should be welcome.
Christ would come unto our weom^ with a curle^d fore-heade like a Bu^ with
pictures of Serpents dependa^ his locks (figuring their serpentine ^fections)
apparelled like the Nomb. 25.
Moab^tish weomen, for the alluring of Go^ Israel to whoredom: If Christ wou^
come unto the poor people with ple^tie of barli eloaues and fishes: finall^ if
he would not keep such a knockin^ but would bless the Adulterer, ki^ the
Murderer, embrace the thief, a^ preach strong drink to the pot companions, oh
then he should be a Prophet for the nonce: they would bring him in with the
voice of a Trumpet, and as much diversity of Minstrelsie, as was at the Dan. 3.
dedication of Nebuchadnetzars Image. But seeing he comes in earthen vessels,
poorly, not making any noise in the streets: therefore their feet are washed
to another use: they bought not their shoes for to run at Christ's call: they
can use their feet to a more credible and pleasurable service. Well, Eccle.
11.9
walk in the ways of thine heart (not of Gods heart) and in the sight of thine
eyes (not of Gods eyes) but know that for all these things (not one of thy
sins forgotten) thou shall come unto Judgment.

Christ stands without: we with this sinful soul keep our selves within: he
powerfully cries, Open: we lie tumbling in our sins the mean while, making
interrogatories, with What, and If, and How? he desires entrance with sweet
speeches and forcible r^sons: we (with SALOMONS Slugga^ that thinks himself
more wise, the seven men that can render a reason) d^ give him a sly answer
to our own ^ter sorrow. Do we say that we ^ coupled to Christ by faith; and
in t^ mean time keep Christ at the spea^ point? are we coupled, or rather se^
red? he wooeth us and we will not wooed, when are we like to be wed^ 1. John
2.4
He (says JOHN) that says he kn^ Christ, and keeps not his commandem^ is a
liar: then much more say I, is h^ liar, that says he is coupled to Ch^ and yet
denies to do his commanments. Let us therefore at last awa^ arise and open our
hearts wide, t^ Christ by his holy spirit may en^ and there establish an
heavenly re^ment and kingdom. We pray, Let Kingdom come: take heed lest by
nying the passage of his word thro^ our souls, we be found adversari^ his
Kingdom. We pray, Let thy will be done by us in earth, beware therefore, lest
we be found resisters of Gods glorious will revealed in the word, and so
consequently be not found Mockers in steed of Prayers. The Lord has knocked in
these parts of the world a long season: defer not to repent: lest thou
grieving his spirit (which should seal thee up to the day of glorification)
he leave of knocking, and leave behind him a flint stone at thy door, I
mean, do give thine heart up to be hardened with Pharaoh, and in steed of an
heart sealed, thou have thy conscience seared with an hot iron.

But leaving this our Sinner here sleeping: or rather between Sleeping and
waking, namely in a Slumber: I will in the next tractate (God permitting) take
examination of her soul: by which time I exspect her first Resurrection. In the
mean time rowse up your Souls heavy through sleep; that finding with Her, an
assured place in ^ First Resurrection: you may finally w^ her Rise joyfullie in
the second Resurction: whereas these that Rise not h^ first from the Bands of
sin, shall sluber and soundly sleep on to the po^er of the Second Death.

Melior vigilantia somno. FINIS.
THE SINNERS RESVRRECTION.
The Song of SOLOMON, Chap. 5. Verse, 4.5.6.7.8. The Text. 4 My Well-beloved put
his hand by the hole (of the door) and mine heart being affectioned toward
him,

5 I rose up to open to my Well-beloved: and mine hands dropping down Myrrh,
and my fingers pure Myrrh, on the handles of the Bar,

6 I opened unto my Well-beloved. but my Well-beloved was gone and past: mine
heart was gone because of his speech: I sought him, but I could not find him:
I called, but he answered me not.

7 The Watchmen that went about the City, found me: they smote me, and
vvounded me: the Watchmen of Walls, took away my veil from ^

8 I charge you (oh Daughters of Ier^lem) if you find my Well-beloved, ^ shall
you tell him? That I am si^ Love.


Now follows ^ issue of the Con^rence betwixt C^ and the sinful So^ wherein
is consid^ble: first, the depar^ of Christ insinuated in these worcester My
Well-beloved put his hand by the of the door: Secondly, her Arise Search after
Christ in the residu^ the Text. In her Arise and Search, ^ is set down the
cause of her Aris^ these words: Mine heart being ^ctioned toward him, I rose
up to open ^ to my well-beloved, together with ^ Cause of that Cause in these
word^ And mine hands dropping down Myr^ and my fingers liquid Myrrh upon
handles of the Bar, I opened to my Well-beloved. Secondly, is set down the
fruit of her late opening in the next verses. The first fruit is sour, because
of her late obedience, and that lies in the 6. and 7. verses, where first with
an heavy heart (remembering Christ's former speech) she searches for and
calls after her Beloved, but cannot see or hear of him: Secondly, during her
search, she falls into the hands of the Cities watchmen, being by them
smitten, wounded, disrobed. The second kind of fruit (because late repenting is
better than never repenting) is more sweet and comfortable: for last^ie, she
meets with the Daughters of Jerusalem (the visible Church, or body of Christ)
to whom she communicates her perplexed estate, that so together with her (as
feeling members) they may bewail her unto her well-beloved, with love of whom,
she ^s now not a little wounded. Thus much for the whole, now to the parts.

The silly sinner having returned a^ untoward answer out of her bed of
S^curitie, Christ he cease knockin^ not awayting her lewd leisure a^
longer, and therefore drawing his han^ from the door, he departs. This ^
does, because as his presence make^ her wanton, so his Adieu for a season may
happily cause her to search into the cause, and by little and little be d^uen
into a dump, and so after that ^ as inquisitiue after her Love lost, ^ before
she was toying and negligen^ The like course the Lord was urged ^ take with
Hos. 5.15.
Judah and Ephraim (that ^ Israel, the greatest Tribe put for the whole) They
not listening unto h^ voice by Hoseah and other his Prophet JEHOVAH determins
on the case the I will go and return to my place till the acknowledge their
fault and seek me, ^ their affliction they will seek me dilige^^lie. By these
two witnesses appeare^^ the cursed crookednes of our nature who the more we are
woed, the mo^ wilful we be, but being once set at six and seven, almost or
altogether cast off, even then (if ever) we seek after Christ. I will not
say, oh ye two Sisters Judah and Israel hearken, but oh ye two Sisters, England
and Scotland harken: how long by the voice of his Prophets sounded out in
words and writings, has he called upon you for reformation of manners? how
have the hearts of your Magistrates been knocked upon, that once Christ might
be received fully, and not only in part? that not only he might use his
voice ^n your judgment seats, but also his hands for executing judgment and
justice in equal balance: not passing by ^he Murders, open professed Atheism,
Adulteries, thefts of the Rich and Noble, as also to render unto the Widow,
Orphane, and Strangers their ^ight? how long has Christ sued unto ye, for
obedience to his Scepter and Power, born and exercised in his church; ^ut ye
answer as being fast a sleep, and not yet well wakened. Christ's voice too
homely, and his spiritual ordin^ces too naked for such a cowple^ spangled
Sisters, as is England and Sc^land. His word and ordinances she not further
be received in (kno^ Christ till his heart ache) then they ^gree with present
policy, and the pl^sures of festered consciences. W^ well, mock on: If Christ
can doe^ good by the voice of his own P^phets, but day by day shall be pos^
off (if not have a flat answer, He s^ not reign over us) then expect ere lo^
his departure, his lamentable dep^ture. As two sisters (by natural vn^ and
Evangelicall covenant) ye wa^ hand in hand, but not without bit^ one another,
take heed that (by Ch^ his desertion) ye consume not (as ^ Gal. 5.15
Apostle says) one another: that phraim eat not up his brother Ma^ses, and
Manasses Ephraim: and a^ that, a third eat you up both, I h^ said. Sure I am,
that if Christ brea^ house and depart, ye have to exspect no better judgment,
than had Ezekiel. 23
Aholah and Aholibah, Jerusalem and Samaria. What prerogative royal have ye oh
^he Rulers of the Earth before Judah and Jerusalem, that (knock the belo^ed) ye
will sleep on, and scarce lift up ^our leaden heads, under your arms ^n your
Pillowes, while his holy voice ^ sounded out by his Prophets, and ^et suppose
to escape scotfre? Gal. 6.7.
Be not ^eceived, God will not be mocked, as ^e sow assuredly ye shall reap.
If the lord for disobedience cast off the Jew, his kins-man according to the
flesh) and has at this day marked him forth ^ith bloody Cain, to wander in
the ^rth as an abject: If for the establish^g their own devised Priesthood,
and unholy ordinances, the Lord stir^d up the Assyrian King to come against the
ten Tribes of Israel, who led them away Prisoners, neither what is ^ecome of
them, can be heard off to ^his day: What art thou (oh Brutus Land) that the
Lord should forbea^ thee, and not rather hastily forsa^ thee? ey cause one of
you to whip another, till both be weary: Pro. 14.14
For the he^ that declineth shall be satiat with his o^ ways. What is the
Lord, that y^ should tempt him? Is he vnrighteou^ Is he like unto thy self? He
is patie^ and of long suffering say thou. I deed he is so, and that thou
maist^^ by his former sparing thee, thou^ now no longer he defer Iudgmen^ He
goes to battle with a leaden foo^ but come he once in the field, he w^ as
hardly be entreated to depart wit^ out bloodshed. He has called a^ knocked
upon both your doors, ^ within your Palaces: First, by Pe^lence: Secondly, by
present Fami^ What follows in the third plac^ Alas, alas, fearful and
horrible Blo^shed. Pestilence and Famine, came n^ like dumb dogs, but had there
Ange^ or Men sent of God, preaching the^ withal the Cause and the End. But t^
heed, lest when the sword passes thorough (and it will assuredly ere it be
long, if you repent not) least I say, when the sword passes through you, it
preach in an horible confused noise, not in a distinct voice: lest in stead of
hearing the lively voice of the Prophet, your ears hear nothing but clashing
of weapons and armor, horrible lamentations and roarings, crying out, Aes me,
Aes me, Rev. 6.17:
the great day of IEHOVAHS wrath is come, and who can stand? If you will not
otherwise be wakened, this way the Lord will wake ye and rowse ye up. If fair
means will do no good, he will put a cutting bit in your mouths, sharp spurs
in your sides, and ride ye up and down, till your eyes be open, your hearts
ache with the burden of your sins, and you unfeignedly fall down, and cry out
in the bitterness of your souls: Have mercy upon us, oh God, have mercy upon
us, we are weary of our by-pathes, we covet peace oh our God, that so we may
serve thee in the Sepulchers of our Fathers. We h^^^ abused thy Prophets, oh
Lord we rep^^^ it: Oh take away our Sins, and let (...) Sunshine of thy
countenance once aga^^ shine in our streets, and we shall not on^^ profess
thee in word, but also in deed. (...) Lord hear, oh Lord forgive, oh Lord
c^^sider and do it: defer not for thine ow^ names sake, oh our God. Wit is
nothi^^ worth till it be bought, nor will m^^ know what Christ's face is, till
he ha^^ turned his back. 2. Sam. 24:
David seeing the p^stilence inflicted on his poor subjec^ could cry out, Oh
Lord, I have sinne^^ yea I have done wickedly. The Prod^gall, being thoroughly
bit with famin^ came to himself and repented, b^^ neither pestilence nor
famine has y^^ done good upon us: a fearful sign^ that the Basilik has
stoong unto det^ and men's hearts brawned with the f^^ of sin, and made
insensible: and therefore either incurable or not to be c^red but by extreme
rigor. To da^ therefore hear his voice, lest to morrow Christ depart. Yet
he knocks, ^ot only upon the door of thy heart, ^ut also puts his finger
in at the Hole of the door, that is, he touches ^hy conscience, or that
light of nature that every man brings into the world ^or making him
inexcusable, which is ^s an Hole prepared for Light, as also, ^or his Finger
that should open the Door. While the Prophet touches ^hy conscience, and the
supernatural Light is offered to the Hole of thine heart for enlightening the
Inbred ac^using light, thou art in the way to Sal^ation? but if the saving
Finger of God ^e once taken away from thy door, Oh plague of all plagues, how
great shall be thy darkness? A man coming forth of the Sun into his Chamber,
is blinder than when he went out: and thou, after Christ shall cease shining
unto thee by his own Prophets, and so art left unto the closet of thine own
heart, shall be more blind and stuped than before the finger of God was upon
thee. If the finger of God cast^ out thy devil of pride, murder, the
adultery, prophanenes, assuredly taking away of that finger, shall be hardening
of thine heart, and very ha^ly after that, will the keepers of (...) house be
dispossessed: and that wh^ worse is, ten to one whether eve^ gain the holy
hand of God snal co^ upon thee: for having before giu^ the good spirit the
repulse, how ca^ thou exspect his presence at anoth^ season.

This sleepie soul, having sent h^ beloved away with a sleeueles answ^ what
ensues? he departs. He bei^ departed, what follows? I arose (sai^ she) to
open to my Well-beloved. A tri^ time. She arises to cope, when t^ Merchant is
gone. A right discriptio^ of our crooked ways. Christ cryet^ Rev. 3.18.
Buy on me Gold, white Raiment, a^ eye salve: when he is gone, then we ^
rise: the quality of one that is rath^ minded to play Bank rupt, than for ^
maintain credit in the Lord his com^on-wealth, and City of the Saints. While
the Physician offers his help ^ee repute him vile; but when he is ^one, then
we are ready to call for him. Well, better at last than never. Better ^is for
David after 12. months, to a^se out of his sin, than to die and ^t therein:
better for Paul at last to reach JESUS, than with Herod ever ^o persecute him
in his members: better for Zacheus once to make restituti^n of pelf falselie
purchased, than to ^e in the Devils debt: and better for ^ee whatsoever thou
art, now to shake ^ff thy sin, by unfeigned arising there^ut, than with the
reprobate to per^st in thy wickedness, and so suddenly ^e together with thy
sin, swallowed ^p into the Hell of Hells. Many (and ^hese be hypocrites) tell
us, that they ^re risen from their sin: but howsoever their bodies be arisen
to our judgment, yet their heart (and that God ^eeth) is still upon their
halfe-pennie: and of the abundance of their vnh^ly heart their lips (if we
mark well) ^ oftentimes run over. Pro. 28.13
He that confesses and forsakes sin, shall fin^ mercy. Content not thy
self with a^ knowledging thy open-seene or t^ known sin to man offended the^
by: nor yet content thy self with confessing thy secret unknown sinnew to
God, to whom thy sin is one^ known: except herewithall thou fo^sake the
same. If thou arisest in thy o^^ward man to the satisfying of man, d^ likewise
arise in the inward man (ev^ with thy whole soul and strength) f^ the pleasing
of God, who is the Prove. 16.2
Po^derer of the Spirits. This Rising from f^ and error, is termed the First
Res^rection or Rising (Revel. 20.5.6.) Ble^sed and holy is he, that has place
i^ this first Resurrection (or true Repentance here made) for on such the
second death (awarded unto the body (...) soul in that great day of Doom)
obta^neth no power.

That this Arising of hers was not hypocritical, and only in show to man,
she in these words explaineth: Mine heart being affectioned toward him, I
Arose. How came she by this hearty affection? it follows: Mine hands did
drop down Myrrh, and my fingers liquid Myrrh upon the handles of the Bar.
That the Cause is here placed after the Effect is a thing common in all speech
human and divine. As for the liquid or thin Myrrh, it is here set down, as
the cause of the Door-barres giving place and Opening. And indeed, except
(after Christ by his Ministry has called upon us) he does therewithal
inject and cast in by that hole and light of nature (termed Conscience) except
I say, he thereby convay in the Pure oil of his Grace, the door of our hard
heart will never open. Though light flash in upon our soul, to the
enlightening of the Mind, yet without the oil of Sanctification be powered
upon our Heart (the seat of the Will and Affections) all light and kno^ledge
will do no good. What help^ the Natural will unto this Resurre^on? as much as
a stream running to the North, helps the Boat to f^ into the South. When
the stream^ turned backwarde by Art, then stream is serviceable, not before: e^
so, our natural Will, free enough run from the warm Sun into chill North,
being once by God Grace converted (and therefore Rep^^tance is called
Conversion) then not fore, it becomes serviceable in work of this first
Resurrection. Iam. 1.18.
God his own Will (says James) beget^ by the word of truth. As the wor^ God
is the instrumental cause of C^version, Regeneration: so the free-wi^ God (tied
to nothing in man) is effectual moving cause thereto.

The Luke. 10.30. etc.
passenger in the parable ^ing down from Jerusalem to Ieri^^ wounded and left
half dead, as h^ brought in only to stop the mouth a proud Scribe, who
bragged of his ^ntegritie toward God and his Neigh^our, as may appear by our
Savior ^is exhortation, verse, 37. compared with the 29. aforegoing: so Free
will men (who make that Passenger to be ^dam left but half dead in his will,
and therefore even in nature to have ^re-will to good) must remember that God
said, Genesis 2.17.
In the day thou eatest of the ^orbidden fruit, thou shall die the death:
meaning an whole, not an half death: As also, that Adam himself acknow^edgeth
that Genesis 3.10
He was naked, not half ^aked: together with Paul's calling the Ephesians to
remember how their Re^urrection was from Ephesians. 2.1.5
Sins and tres^asses, wherein before they lay Dead, ^ot half dead) so
Fre-wil men I say, must learn, that doctrine must expound parables, not
parables doctrine. And therefore, if by the passenger they will understand Adam,
let them by that Halfe-Death, understand that which ^he Scriptures deny not,
namely to be the Powers or Faculties (of the So^ themselves left undestroyed,
tho^ the qualities were perverted. Wh^ in the time of Unregeneration, t^
strongly run in the ways of Death to Death: so, (neither does God spirit work
upon us, as Carpenter on Logs, having no sense: but) he death in us a Mind and a
Will, which him being renewed and turned into right way, are made lively in the
w^ of life: 1. Ioh. 5.3. Mat. 11.30
insomuch as they can say, Commandments of God are not grieu^ but the yoke (of
Christ) is easy and burden light.

As the holy Ghost is (for this w^ termed Ointment by Saint JOHN Epist. 2.20.)
alluding to the legal ^ the figure hereof: so, till Christ left this oil of
myrrh for the so^ning of her hard heart, she had power to open: and therefore
m^ methodicallie follows, That ^ she was unawares enoyled with this or thin
Myrrh, then she opened says some Free Will man, I grant that she opened
not her heart for entertaining the Spirit of Christ, till first she was by the
same spirit anointed: notwithstanding (says he) she arises of her self,
though she open not of her self: and that Self-arising I resemble to the
power of man's Free Will, by the which he wills good before he do good. Then
(oh Fre-wil-man) thou graunts unto me, that to do good is not in our power. As
to your willing good in a Carnal unregenerate man, and then not to be able to
do good, it is no other Will than was in Balaam, who cried, Nom. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the Righteous (Israel) and let my latter end be like
his. He herein willed (or more properly wished) to die the death of the
righteous; but yet he willed not first to live the life of the righteous. So
some wicked men I doubt not, but often are convicted with the sight of God his
word, and sometimes do wish that they could live by the Rule of that word: but
what makes them so wish? the terror of Gods wrath thre^ned to the disobedient
and unholy, ^ of any love they bear unto God holiness. This is a slavish vvish,
no ^ will, and therefore in the Nature man, no preparation (as of nature) open
the hard heart. The Devil a damned souls may so wish or will, are they unable
to arise to saving ^ pentance. Secondly, to Arise with t^ soul, is to repent
with this soul. S^ arises not for a while, and after the go and bind her
self unto her sin^ couch again (for that were to A^ in Show, not In-deede)
but she so a^seth, as she after that cease not follow Christ: and this
Reall-Resur^ction, none will deny to be True Rep^tance. At no hand then can
this her sing resemble the vvil which is befo^ Repentance. Thou will reply: To
op^ the heart, is to repent, therefore to ^ (which goes before Opening) is ^
to Repent. I answer, To open the he^ here, is properly the manifestation of
Repentance first begun in the heart (even as the Apple-bud is a sign of the
Sap in the Tree, not the sap it self) And therefore mark, how the holy
Ghost says, that the liquid Myrrh after her Rising, besmeared her Hands, (or
outward works wrought by the hands) not her Heart. This Oil of grace,
wherewithal her outward actions were now seasoned and sanctified, had it not
therefore in the first place enoyled her Heart and inward man? ^es verily: for
if the Heart of the Tree were not first moistened, the Branches would never
bring forth Blossom. The Psalm. 1.3.
spiritual Tree is first planted by the Rivers of waters, and then brings
forth seasonable fruits.

1 Let us then learn, that Romans 7.18
in our flesh dwells no good thing: but fre-will unto obedience, is a good
thing: therefore free will unto obedience, dwells not in our flesh.

2 Iam. 1.17.
Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes from the Father (...)
Lights: not from our degenerate man and unregenerate flesh: But to obtai^
freedom in the affections, to embrace a^^ follow the holy spirit, is a right
good a^^ a perfect gift: Therefore from above, ^uen from the Father of Lights,
and n^^ from our degenerate man and vnt^ generate flesh.

3 Romans 2.4.
The bountifulnes of God, leads us (...) Repentance, therefore not our own will.

4 To approve the thing that is Good, less than to will the thing that is Go^
But to approve the thing that is good, i^ work of the Regenerating Spirit, and
(...) of our nature (Ephesians. 5.8.9.10.) Therefore to will the thing that is
good, is (...) more a work of the regenerating spirit and not of our nature.

5 Phil. 2.13.
God (without regard of any thi^^ in us, even of his own pleasure) wor^eth in
us not only the Deed, but also t^ will unto good: therefore, no such W^^^ is
ingenerate in nature. This Less^ had our poor sinful soul here le^^ned by
experience, who had no power ^o Arise and Open, until first her belo^ed had
left a secret power behind him, by the subtle odor whereof her heart was
pierced, smitten with a dis^ike of her sin, and provoked with an ^oly hunger
and thirst after the pre^ence of JESUS.

And this Doctrine would not be oppugned by our late Free Will men in England,
if they first had been smitten ^owne in the feeling of their damna^le nature,
and the deathfull ways of ^he flesh. But as a sort of them have hi^herto
preached Man's Misery, as a Parrot sings Sol, Fa, that is rather because they
have heard it with the outward ear, then for that it is drawn from an
experienced heart: thereof it ^ommeth, that their vnhumbled heart ^reaketh out
into such doctrine of Pride: causing every proud Iavell at his Epicure table,
to brag of his own natural power, by the which he can choose any thing that
is good: for says the proud Glutton, Here is an apple the fruit dish, is it
not in my power to t^ it or forsake it? No, thou belly-god^ if a sparrowe set
not his foot on t^ ground, but by the fore-decree God, (and so says our
Savior Mat. 10.29
Matthewe) how can thou think t^ he has not decreed of thy taking forsaking
the Apple? If the Sparro^ fall on the ground by necessity of ^ Decree, so
shall thou eat or not eat necessity of the same Decree. Ask ^roboam the son
of Nebat, whethe^ be in a man's power to put out ^ hand, and to pull it in
again? he w^ tell thee no: 1. King. 13.4. Ask Lots w^ whether it is in ones
power to cast t^ eye back, and then to turn it forw^ again? she will tell
thee No. ^ though with the learned, I in so^ sense do grant, that thou have
Fre-w^ (as unto ill, so) to every thing tha^ in the doing or not doing, of an
ind^ferent nature, or whose action is me^lie Civil: yet does it not therefore
f^^owe, that thy vvil is Free to the Take^ng or Doing of things spiritual,
heavenly, holy. Because thou have power in thy hand to take or forsake a
mor^ell of meat, (a thing neither Holy nor unholy in it self) it therefore
follows, that thou have like freedom natu^allie to the things of God: the
Consequent may sound reasonably to the Belly that has no ears: but unto him
that has but one crum of spiritual sense, it reasons thus: I have power to
do the thing is not holy, therefore I have power to do the thing is holy. Lord
Bishops have opposed themselves ere now to Doctrines more tolerable than
these: let every of them that will not be suspected of Popish hearts in
Protestants skins, use their great power to stop the course of such Romish
seeds, else I can tell them, these that have forsaken the English Parishes,
because of the Ecclesiastical government, will ere long say, they have cause so
to do, because of public countenancing of popish grounds. Oh says he (that
writ upon the words of Christ in Luke 23.28.) some tell us that the^ weep for
our Church of England, bu^ unto such our Church says as Chri^ to the women;
Weep not for me, b^ weep for your selves. Surely, the man may so say in the
name of the church, but sure I am, that all that have an^ sense of sin, will
with sorrow affirm, That the present estate of the English Church is
mightelie to be lamented. Bu^ in a Sermon stuffed from head to toe, with
Poetical vanity and affectation of speech, what should we exspect? Bu^ to
leave false Prophets (teaching false fundamental doctrine, or crying peace
peace, where is no ground of peace) Let us examine the remaindor.

Christ receiving an untoward answer, sets down with himself to forsake
her, as the Hose. 5, vlt.
Lord forsook Judah and Ephraim for a season: and yet mark that he leaves the
Oil of Grace, namely, his working spirit behind him: so that it may be said
of him, as ^f a politic lover, He departs in his body, but stays behind in
his spirit. Not vn^ike to a discrete besieger of a Castle, who not prevailing
by outward batte^ie, does secretly undermine the walls while the enclosed
(dreaming of the besiegers departure) slepeth soundly. Christ departs in his
comfortable voice, My sister, my love, my Dove, mine undefiled, but in the mean
time uses the inward unction of his spirit for the suppling and making the
hard heart soft and pliable to every holy motion of that spirit. But to
whom communicates he this inward workinge Grace? does he give this inward
teacher unto such as to whom the gospel has not sounded powerfullie by some
outward teacher? If that be so, then what needs the ministry of man. No,
no; this grace internal was Communicated to the poor sinner, whose ears
before had been pierced with Doctrine. As it is 1. Cor. 3.6.7.
God, by the inward work of his spirit that gives encre^ unto his spiritual
plants, so first (...) has appointed Paul to preach and pollos to water. The
Apostles eni^ing first the outward ministry of ^sus, unto them after was sent
the Ioh. 14.26
S^rite of truth, who brought the form doctrins unto mind: insomuch as so^what
which they understood not the time of his bodily presence, the after his
bodily departure called vn^ mind, and then truly understood; as amongst other
things may be seen ^ their after conceauing the sense ^ these words: Destroy
this Temple, and ^ three days I will raise it up again. Ioh. ^ 19. compared
with verse. 22. All whi^^ as it teaches us to depend on the or^nary means to
grace (namely the ou^warde ministry, together with which the Lord ordinarily
convaieth his sp^rite, 2. Cor. 3.6.
and therefore are they called M^nisters of the spirit) so we whom the Lord
has stirred up in this declynin^ age (or rather confused times) are no^ to be
discouraged, though oftentimes we see not present obedience to our preaching.
The husbandmans seed cast into the earth, seems to be lost a ^ong seson: yet
the wise seedsman with patience awaiteth the Lords time, and ^n time receaueth
a comfortable crop and of that which does spring up, al is not of one days
sprout, but some soon and some latter. Though Saul yet slaugh^er Christians and
cause many to blaspheme Christianty, yet hope the best; ^n patience posses we
our souls: when he has the commission and broad seal of the hy priests
utterly to destroy the beleuers at Damascus, then hapily the Lord will knock
down sir Pursevant, and send him to make his recantacion at Damascus. As the
spirit blows where he list, so when he list; some must be called at one
hour, some at an other: cease we not in the mean time (hoping the best) to
persevere in our embassage.

The spirit of God works by little and little in the heart, as liquid oy^som
and some penetrateth the flesh passageth through the hand. Deali^^ with
worldlings, we have not to de^ with half dead folks (as freewill-n^ teach us)
but with these that are Ephesians. 2.5.
D^ in sins. Life is not so easily put into dead man. Much a do we have ^
gain a person out of a trance, we ^fuse into him. Angelica water, rub^
temples with Aqua-Vitae, thrust al^ into his mouth, buffet him, shake hi^ hoist
him up in the air, and more w^ will do but to kindle the coal of l^ that is
ready to quench: how mu^ more ought we toil and sweat, to fy^ a dead cole and
to raise up dead Laz^rus from his grave of Sin, wherein ^ has lodged not 4.
days, but 4. year^ 20. years, 40. 50. years. Yet if Ie^^^ love him, he will
after some groni^^ in the spirit, raize him: and if he lo^ unto the Lords
vineyarde, he shall fetched in, though but at the last hou^ Though now they
neglecte the o^ward ministry, as this sinner did in the former treatise, yet
happily (as she does here) they shall once arise, open, and seek after that
ministry which before they neglected.

She arising (because her heart now at last affectioned Jesus; and what
freewil-man dare say, that an unregenerate person does affect Jesus) she
arising by virtue of a secret touch, or draught of Gods spirit (for none come
to God without drawing, John. 6, 44.) she sets hands to remove the Bars
of the door, that is, she is not only contented with the good affection she
bare unto her beloved, but for her further comfort, as also to testify
obedience to her beloved, she labors with heart and hand, even with all her
soul and strength to put away and remove the occasions (which were as bars) to
the hindering of her heart in the ways of holiness. Do thou mark this (oh
thou hypocritical professor) she says not with thee: I have a good meaning
and a good heart to God: I could wish I had more le^sure to hear the word: If
it were not (...) these and these lettes or bars. I would (...) aside my falls
Calling etc. she says not but knowing her former offense, she arises and
sets hand unto the ban^ of her heart, not to make them fa^ (as many do to
the searing of the conscience) but to remove them: the so 2. Tim. 2.16.
coming out of the devils snare ((...) all such bars are snares) she may co^
to amendment of life. When the kin^ of heaven invited guests to the lam^
supper, one was let by his oxen, (...) other by his farm, another by his
(...) not unlike unto many in this despe^ age, who called and invited to
fello^ship with the faithful, and to spiritual ^uing communion, do thus reply:
I ^ not do it but by neglecting my Cattle, ^zarding my farms, displeasing my
w^ make my self a gasing stock to al men, (...) Oh fool, were these as
beloved as t^ eye, and as serviceable as thy hand, t^ savior (if thou mean to
follow hi^ has commanded thee to pull them ^ut, cast them away, and
contentedly ^o take up thy allotted Cross and follow ^im. Nay, were it that Dan.
6.
Darius made law, that none should make petition unto God for 30. days, under
pain of ^eing cast into the Lions den: every ^rofessour of Christ must, rather
then ^e Lions den bar him from that, or a ^y other holy exercise, give not
only ^n eye, or hand, but his whole body to ^eath. Better it is for me and
thee, to ^nter into the kingdom of heaven by ^auing a Lymme, ey, my whole body
be^ind me in the adversaries hand, then ^king them away with me, to have ^oth
body and Soul Perpetually tor^ented in hell fire. He that will not ^rsake
father, mother, wife, children, and all that he has for Christ's sake when it
stands on loosing Christ or ^oosing them) verily, he is unworthy ^f any
portion in Christ. And if these ^ings which are not il in themselves ^ut by
accident, must not bar us from any Christian duty, how much le^ are things
merely il in themselves su^ficient bars to hinder us? Chur^ callings derived
from the Son of per^tion, Common-weall (or rather co^mon-ill) callings derived
from the Dragon the Beasts parent, Reu. 13.
must m^^ alledg these for excuses? One says, (...) Emperor and prince by
Donation h^ authorized me, invested me, impo^ this yoke on me. But oh fool:
if n^ Emperor or Prince can before G^ his judgment seat allege father,
m^ther, wife, life for sufficient bars lawful lets unto duty, what can the
or thou say in behalf of bottomless ^ Callings? oh says the domb ministe^ can
live noe otherwise: oh says ^dice-house keeper, I can live no otherw^ so
says the thief, I know not h^ to live but by stealinge: what then? because
thou can live but by Evil, thou content to go to the Devil thou be not,
then cast aside these ba^ for 1. Ioh. 3.8.
he that commits sin is of ^ devil. But if thou be contented to go to the
Devil (never say God forbid, when thou will do that which he does forbid) then
let the magistrate in due time hang thee up, lest otherwise thou live to the
death of many bodies and souls. Alexander the Copper-smith, could not live
except he did 2. Tim. 4.14.
Evil to the holy man, but what got he by it? even this prayer he got of Paul:
The Lord reward him according to his works, which in plain english is thus
much: The vengance of God light upon him. Though Paul thus imprecated by
special instinct, yet I can tell thee whatsoever thou art that lives by
unlawful Calling and works, Thou have all prayer against thee: for the Saints
ever pray, That if men will not forsake false callings it will please God to
root them out of the Common wealth, and bring confusion upon their lewd
exercises, wild beats are not to dwell in the Lords mountain, nor Rats in the
Lords commonwelth. If we will profess our selves Christians that is, followers
of Christ, let us man^fest the good meaning of our heart, (...) setting our
hands to the remouall ^ all Bars, that otherwise may keep from performing
any part of obe^^ence due unto our God.

Some there be, that can be contented to remove some Bar, but not ev^ry Bar: if
they put away one sin, the will keep another sin: these have ((...) the
Hebrews speak) an heart and an hea^ that is, one heart for God, and another
(...) the devil: one heart to embrace Relig^on (as Ioab had on hand for Amasa)
b^ with the other hand they secretly st^ Religion, as Ioab did his friend. But
su^^ must know, that God uses not to p^ stakes with the devil, he will have
(...) or none. The consideration whereo^ caused David to cry, with my vvh^^
heart have I sought thee O God. Lot h^ at first gone unto the mountain (...)
God, had not fertile Ge. 19.19.20.
Zoar been a ba^ting Bar in the way. Naaman had b^come a good Israelite, had
not his (...) lawful calling of 2 King. 5.18.
supporting his master in the house Rimmon, been a Bar ^n his way. One leaf
of Coloquintida will mar the whole vessel of pottage: and one Bar can keep
Christ and the Sinner assunder. We read, that Caine murdered but once: that
Cham brui^ed his fathers nakedness but once: Saul spared Amalek but once: Ezekiel.
11.
Pelatiah mocked the Prophets sermon but once: Judas betrayed his master but
once: yet for that one sin and for that once committing it, Cain was marked a
Rogue for ever: Cham not only in him self but in his Posterity accursed for
ever: Saul left of God to seek unto the Deuel in stead of Samuel: Pelatiah
smit with sudden death: and Judas left to trusse up his carcass in a halter.
With ^his poor soul then arise with thine whole heart, open with thy whole
heart and testify thy hearts affection toward ^hy Beloved Jesus, in not removing
some Bar but every Bar, seem it otherwise as necessary as the Eye, as
helpful as thy Hand, as serviceable as thy F^

And because these Bars to ne^nesse of life, will not easily be rem^ued, the
poor soul lays not h^ hands only on the Bars but first on t^ Handles of the
Bar: that is, she appl^eth heart and hand to grype the Bar^ fast, as at one
Push (if it be Possibl^ her heart shall be patent and wide op^ to the spirit of
Jesus. Many seem to l^bour the removal of inward and o^warde Bars unto
godliness, but the go so aukwardly and untowardly abo^ that removal that no
good is done long labor. As Paul teaches Ti^thie not only to war, 2. Tim.
2.4 5.
but to warn^ as he ought: so would Solomon not on^ have us to remove our
Bars, but remove them as we ought: that is, n^ to stand dandling our lusts,
or tr^ling the time in putting away the o^casions of sin: but even at once
(if may be) to cast them behind us. So d^ Saul the Commissioner, who at t^
first blow cried: Act. 9.
what will thou h^ ^^e to do Lord? he determined not first to go sell his
unlawful commission, and then attend on Christ: but at the first, setting that
and all things else aparte, he betook himself to a new lord. So did Math.
9.9.
matthew the tolegatherer, and so did the residue of the Apostles. But so do not
our people, who either will not permit Christ to enter at al: or if, yet at
their lesure. Master Parson and Master Vicar will it may be, leave of murdering
souls, but when? after he has provided fot himself and his wife, in the
mean time souls shall starve ere his carcass starve, after his belly is
served, god shall have his due if he can get it. Such belly Gods will lay hand
on the Bar, but so untowardly and looselie, as the Door shall open I know not
when: an evident sign that they have as much meaning to part with their Sin,
as an hors-leach with a gowtie leg: that is, they will leave sin, when they
are bursten with sin. A nettle gingerlie handled does ranckle the hand; but
being rudely a^ roughly griped, it nothing harme^ Sin must be suddenly
strangled the throat, or else, as an Adder it w^ slide through thy fiste and
leap in t^ face. Agag living but a while, after S^ was commanded to kill him,
was ca^ that Saul afterward was left to (...) himself. Spare not sin, for
it will n^ spare thee: strangle it, or it will strang^ thee.

This poor soul setting Heart a^ Hand to the remouall of all lets and
i^pediments to godliness, what foll^weth? Liquid, Myrrh, drops from (...)
hands upon the handles of the Bar, the is, the oil of Myrrh made her han^
soople and nimble unto this work of (...) moving the Bar. Going in good
ea^nest roundly unto the work, she w^ awares, finds the spiritual oil ^
Anointed Jesus helping her hands, an^ furthering her holy labors, not vnl^ to
him, that digging to pit a carry o^ finds a coffer of treasure: seeking (...)
thrust out the evil spirit, she unawares meets with the good. Not that the
good spirit had not before possessed her heart; and bound the strong man Sin:
but that the holy spirit is not visible Mat. 12.29
unto us, til we bring forth holy works. This caused S. James to say, Iam. 2.18.
Show me thy faith (which is inward) by thy work, which is outward. The hearts
affection must be manifested by the hands action. This lesson she had learned,
and this will James have every professor of faith to learn.

We are called Christians: and what is this word Christian in plain english?
Every Grecian can tell thee, that Christian (in english) is One anointed, Jesus
Christ, is, Jesus anointed. We take the name Christians of Christ, because we
should be anointed as was he. He was anointed Ioh. 3.34.
above measure, because Ioh. 1.16.
of his fulness we might receive: not only in our mouth and lip-profession,
but also in our hand and outward action. Every one calling himself Christian,
calls himself anointed; annointe^ to what? anointed to whordome? anointed
to murder? anointed to quaf^ anointed to pastime? such annoynting comes from
the spirit of the black burning pit. Nay, to be a tru^ Christian, is to be
truly anointed t^ every good work; as was our annoi^ted head before us. The
father is the husbandman; Jesus anointed, Ihon. 15.
is the vine; and every true Christian is a branche enoyled with an 1. Ioh. 2.20
oyntmen^ from him that is holy. This secretly transfused to the heart,
caused her to affection her beloved, and so to arise to open. But anointing
her hands to Do (as well as her heart to think and her mouth to speak) she
casts aside such cursed Bars, as before kept the spirit of Jesus without,
and therwithall opens the Dorre of her soul in good ernest: the oil of god
his grace, not only bedewing her hands, but streaming down every finger.

To these that are called Romans 8.
according to God his purpose, all things fall out happily Psalm 1.4.
whatsoever they do, it shall be prosperous. The poor Shunamits oil incresed
not more fast (2 King. 4.) then does the oil of the Good spirit in a right
Christian or Anointed: faith upon faith (Romans 1.17.) Grace upon grace (Ioh.
1.16.) Strength upon Strength, Psalm. 84, more and more anointed (as it were)
to the every fingers end: that is, to the ending of every action. This is new
learning to the fool, and smally heeded of the counterfeit Christian: who
thinks Christianity a science speculatiue not practick: a prating of the
tongue, not a practice of the hand. But he that is not anointed from heaven to
do good, he is anointed from hell to do evil. Iam. 3.6.
The (bad) tongue is set one fire from hell: and I am as sure, that wicked
working hands are set on fire from the burning lake. He that increases not in
good, increases in evil: and he that goes not to day a step toward God,
does to day go two steps toward the devil. If wickedness drop from thy
fingers, thou art wicked: if h^ly actions issue from thy hands, wh^ dare say
but thou art holy? Math. 7.18.
for a goo^ tree brings not forth evil fruit, m^ an evil tree good fruit:
make the tre^ good and his fruit good, or the tre^ evil, and his fruit evil.

But this liquid or thin pearcing oil, is said to be of Myrrh, sweet i^
savor but bitter in taste. As mani^ can be contented, to savor and smel^ to
many symples, whereof notwithstanding they abhor to taste: so more can be
contented to smell unto Christianity; to hear and look upon Christian doctrine,
then spiritually to eat, and digest into practice. To hear the word is sweet:
to read the word is sweet: to talk of the word is sweet: but to do that
word is far more bitter then Aloes. Till we come to practice, all is well:
but beginning once to turn hearing, seeing, speaking into Doing, then begins a
battle betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit: a strife betwixt the Oil of grace,
and the sap of our crabtre nature. A greater strife was not betwixt Jude.
Michael and Satan about the body of Moses: then here will be betwixt old Adam
and new Adam, for the producing a good work. The spirit cries, Obedience:
the flesh proclaims Disobedience. As Ezechiels scrowle was sweet in gusture,
but sour and bitter in digesture: so spiritual things at the first, do
rauishe the whole man; but when obedience is required, then three parts of the
same man resist, and cry out with the sons of the Prophets, oh, Death is in
the pot. Elisha must cast a little meal in the pot, or the brothe will be to
bitter; as bitter as the waters of Exodus 15.23.
Marah in the wilderness of Shur.

Neither is the oil of God his spirit bitter in it self, but of a sovereign
preserving and comfortable operation: but as the word of God is called the
savor of death unto death (not simply, but in respect) so is this liquid
percing Myrrh bitter, not in it ow^ nature, but by reason of our pevish co^rupt
nature, which as a corrupt st^macke is apt to convert a sugared pot^^on into
poison. The Sophies of Per^^^ offered corporeal Math. 2.
Myrhe unto Jesus in the swaddling clouts; and Nicodem^^ (John, 19.39.) brought
Myrhe to h^^ burial: the one preaching bitternes^^ in his life, and the other
proclamin^ no les bitterness in his death: and ye^ such a bitterness, as
without which, o^^ fruit would never have been sweete^ nor our actions, to God
acceptable^ To live with Christ is bitter to the flesh: but to die with Christ,
more bitter: and yet of absolute necessity, we must both live and die with him,
if w^ will appear with comfort before the Father. If thou long after the
Sweet o^ heaven, do not then repine to foretaste the Bitterness of the earth.
The sharp battle must be fought, before the golden crown be got.

But having risen out of her sin and put away these Bars, that in fore time
kept the spirit of Jesus, from entering in unto full operation, what ensues?
Her beloved was gone and past. A correction for late repentance: yea, very
just and equal, that if man will repent at his leisure, he should meet with
the spirit of comfort at Christ's latest pleasure. But here was not an end of
her hearts sorrow. As he was gone past her feelinge, so immediately hereupon,
she remembers his former speeches kind and reasonable: the remembrance
whereof, smites her to the heart, whereupon she sounds and is ready to
depart away in a qualme. When she at first heard him crying bareheaded, Open
my sister, my, love, my Dove, mine undefiled, for mine head and locks suffer
the nights tempest, then she lay tumbling in her sin, and regarded not his
sugared voice. Then she returned her sluggish answer, with interogatories
implying Impossibility, thinking Christ had nothing else to do, but to wait her
lazye leisure: Well, no^ at last (though at her own leisure) she arises, and
looks for the comfortable presence of Jesus his spirit, but (alas) he is gone
and past. He gone an^ past, now her memory presents hi^ former speeches unto
her conscience Her conscience pondering upon the^ speeches, straight it
accuses and condemns her soul of Ingratitude, o^ Churlishnes and abusing of
the spirit o^ Jesus. She thus charged and condemned of her conscence, she
(through the waighte of the burden) falls down in a spiritual trance, her
heart overwhelmed with sorrow. And is here an^ end? no, She seeks her
beloved within her, and without her, but finds him not And is there an end?
no, She calls S^ cries upon her beloved, but he answers not. Seek she him
in the leaves o^ the sacred Bible, or seek she him elsewhere, she meets not
with him. Ca^ she and cry she, never so earnestly upon him in her morning,
noone-tyde and evening prayers, yet he speaks not peace unto her consience.
Oh judgment of all Judgments unto the wicked: and the sharpest correction of
all corrections to the sons and daughters of God.

When the wicked have despised the voice of wisdom, and rejected her
Correction, what shall befall them? Solomon says, Prove. 1.27 28.
That when affliction and anguish shall come upon them. Then shall they call
upon her, but she shall not answer: they shall seek her early, but not find
her, meaning, Not at all. Esau shall seek Repentance with tears, but shall not
find Repentance, though his heart break: Judas shall Repent his treachery,
but shall not find the comfortable face of Repentance though he hang himself.

As for the sons and daughters of God, if they defer Repentance, and grieve
the spirit of Jesus, they shall not escape scot free. Many times shall they toss
their natural Reason, and turn over the leaves of the Gospel, but ye^ for a
season not find any comfor^ within them, any solace without the^ Many times
shall they call for Comfort in prayer, but cold prayers sha^ they make: rising
with as heavy hart^ as they kneeled down: seeing yet nothing in God, but angry
face, a frowning countenance. Who has spen^ any years in Christianity, and
know not this by experience? he that says he has spent some years in truth
o^ Christianisme, and yet was never plunged in this pit; either he has walk
in perfection of obedience, beyond many: or that (which is more to be feared)
he has been for the time bu^ in a deludinge dream.

But how comes it about, that she meteth not with her beloved, or wit^ the
spirit of Jesus, seeing she could no^ Rise out of her sin, but by the spirit
of Jesus? seeing she could not put asid^ the Bars, that before hindered the
free work of Jesus, except thereto she had the help of his hand, which hand is
his spirit: how could she be said, not to find or feel the spirit of Jesus,
seeing she could not persist in seeking and calling after her beloved, were it
not that she had the spirit of Jesus?

True it is, that Jesus and his spirit were not passed away, nor yet absent
from her. Nay, in very deed, they were present touching her heart, and guiding
her hand in all this her comfortles toyling: but how? They were present in
preparing her spiritual temple to an after banquet. Christ by his spirit was
sweeping her heart, With an hard stubbed broom, that so she might not only
be half, but wholly swept and prepared to a glorious marriage. Should a sick
person say, that the physician is never present, but when there is ease in the
sickness? Is not the Physician as well present, when he ministers bitter Pills
for cleansing the stomach, as when afterward (the stomach cleansed) he
administreth sugared receipts? But as the poor patient cries out (the dead
flesh cutting out) oh that I had a Chirurgian indeed, for he would not torment
me, after such a butcherlike manner: even so, the spiritual Patient languishing
under the burden of sin, (whereof the Memory speaks, and the conscience
accuses still) he thinks the beloved far away when the Beloved is hard by,
working the souls good as fast as he may. David being i^ extreme trouble, he
cries out Psalm. 10.1
wh^ stand thou so far of Jehovah, hiding the in the time of affliction?
Good man because the lord cast a mist of afflicti^ about him: he therefore
jmagined the Lord to stand a loofe: alas, it was b^ the want of clear sight,
for the Lord was never more near him. Nay, ou^ Beloved David, Jesus himself
on the Cross rored out Mark. 15.34.
, My god, my god, wh^ have thou forsaken me? Alas (sweet savior, encompassed
with our infirm^ties, but without sin) God was ne^ nerer then at that time, as
it appear^ presently after, when he lastly cried John. 19.30.
Tetelestai. It is finished, that is, the whole work of man's Redemption is
finished. Christ, then was not absent wholly in his spirit to this poor
sinner, for she had Faith, by virtue whereof she Rose, by virtue whereof, she
Sought, by virtue whereof, she called upon God. Had she not Believed, she would
not have sought ease: had she not hoped, she would not have continued seking:
and had she not loved the spirit of Jesus, she would not have sowned for Love,
nor her heart been ouer-swaied by the recordating his former speeches. In a
word therefore, she Believed, she Hoped, she Loved: that is, she was endued
from above, with the holy guiftes of Faith, Hope, Love; the holy Trinity, from
the Trinity in unity. Christ was present in the beginnings of his spirit, only
absent in the full Reveal of Mercy, of forgiveness, of Syns remission.

If fair means will not prevail, to cause us arise out of sin: then, well done
it is of our father (and a worthy wor^ of mercy) to whip us, to briech us, and
^ so bring home the prodigal, and once ^ lost Son. If, when with much patienc^
he has awaited our Rising, and wit^ sweet means allured us to conver^ yet
we will not arise, yet we will no^ convert. Let us expect a famine of the
body, a famine of the soul, and an Ili^ of Crosses in our way. To open the
heart freely for entertaining the Spirit of Jesus, and having opened, not t^
receive him, what greater cross? T^ seek after the spirit of Jesus, ey, to
cr^ and call for the grace of God by much and often prayer, and yet to be deny
the thing we seek for, to miss the grace we call for. Oh what great cross
then this. If peace of conscienc^ be a sweet gift passing all understanding of
man, then the want of the peace with a through feeling of the want, must be as
bitter gall passing ^ the conceit of man. If Prove. 15.15.
a good heart ^ a continual feast, then a bad accusin^ condemning heart, must
be a continual famine. He that once has been well burnt with this fire, and
bit thoroughly with this Scorpion, will be afraid for ever after, of abusing
Gods call, and of turning his grace into wantonness. And shall not some men's
harms, teach others to beware? having seen another under the lash of
halfe-despaire, shall not that fear thee, and fright thee from nousling Sin
(Satan's snake) in thy bosom? Just then should it be for God, to leave thee
crying with Caine: My punishment is intolerable: Genesis 4.
and with Saul to say Slay me: and with Achitophel to cry, Com halter and
strangle me, for I have abused the goodness of my God. But a great mercy of God
it shall be, to lash thy heart, to wound thy Conscience, to confound thy
affections, and for a time to kindle a feeling of hels fire in thy breast; that
so thy stubble burnt up, thy sin consumed, and the inward man once purged of
the sin thou have slept in, thou so may meet with the comfort of God hi^
spirit, and the amiable countenanc^ of Jesus.

But is this torment of Conscience all the punishment inflicted on o^ huswife
newly risen out of sins be^ No, what follows? The watchm^ of the city
found me, they smote me a^ wounded me: the watchmen of the wall took my
Veil away from me. Here is ^ new skirmish, a new rod stiept in vinegar, a
sharp bitte to the flesh. H^ soul before perplexed within: her lazy flesh now
vexed without. Certain^ watchmen find her (find her against her will) and
they smite her, wound he^ and take away her veil. She dwelt i^ a City, and the
City had watchme^ wakefull watchmen: the little Mou^ could not styr, but the
Cat had her b^ the throat. He leaps at her, another smites her, another
wounds her, another pulls (as it were) her Skin oue^ her head: and this is the
fruit of h^ late repentance, of her late resurrect^on, of her obedience almost
ouer-late. She arises at her own leisure, and therefore is Whipped of God at
his pleasure. When she lay slugging and snorting in sin, suffering Jesus to
stand without in the night cooling his toes, then she demed her self most
master: but now at last, she fyndes that she wished not to find, that Christ
is Head, an ouer-ruling head, able enough to bring a proud soul under, and
sufficient for humbling the rebellious flesh.

This City shadows out the World and False-Church: into the which Jesus
sometimes, steppeth to call from sleep such as the Father has given unto him.
The Watchmen of the City (that is within lodged in the streets of the city)
they shadow out the worldlings Civil maiestrate: The vvatch-men of the walls
(or hiest parts of the City) do liuelily denote the Ecclesiastical or false
spiritual Rulers, who stand a lofte to ouer-watch the city, and by their
tempests trumpets sond to give warning of a^ adversary to the worlds state. By
the^ finding her (for she no doubt had le^ned to bevv are of men) is argued
the^ industrious watchfulnes: by their sm^ting, wounding, vnvailing her, is
she^ed their studious care of keeping ^ their Citizens in subjection to the^
vvorldly state. This vvatchfulnesse an^ Care of theirs, argues the world mo^^
witty in their dark generation, the^ are the childeren of light. Christian
magistrates and ministers, may be se^ to school of these men: these being more
watching and caring to keep their worldlings in subjection to the Princ^ of
Darkness, then are they for causing and continuing subjection to the Lord of
light.

But to pursue the Sinners story: She being disquieted in her soul through the
absence of her beloved, what dot^ she? she seeks al about, and calls an^
cries, but finds and hears of no^ comfort: What does she then? dot^ she
go back again to her sinful bed, and so sleep it out with the residue of the
city? Does she say unto her soul: Soul, seeing there is no more comfort to be
had (though thou have shaken of thy former sin) seeing there is no more
solace in seking after Christ, go back again my soul and glut thee in sin,
go sleep on again with the cities bone companions: says she so? does she so?
If so she had said, she had said like a number of false Christians in these
days? If so she had don, she had had a number of companions in this swynish
age: wherein (having taken the start of profession) they twine to their first
crookedness, and suck up their former unclean vomit: so making 2. Peter.
2.20.
their end worse then the Beginning. Or does she say within her self: Cursed
am I of God: reprobated am I of God there is no mercy or salvation for me:
therefore come ye cursed hands and strangle me: take up a dagger and stab me:
go to some cursed water and drown thee: does she say thus? does she ^ thus? If
she had said so, she should ^ have lacked fellows. If so deuellis^ she had
don, she should have found desperate souls in these days. B^ none of these
wickednesses she do^ what then does she? She takes (a^wer) her Tent on her
back, and throu^ the city she ploddeth, if happily she may meet with comfort
elsewhere, se^ing it was not there: finding not comfort at home, she labors
to fin^ comfort from home: her feet that before were washed for sleep, are
no^ washed and fitted to voyage abroad^ a sign she was well wakened: a sig^ of
a new mind: a sign of new feete^ sign of a new soul: a sign of a ne^ body,
in-somuch as it might be tru^ said of her, 2. Cur. 5.17.
Behold, all things ar bec^^ new.

She setting forward to find comfort^ lo, she falls into the hands of the
streets watch; Here was a new d^ comfort. She was smitten of the stree^
watch; another discomforte. She was ^ounded of the streets-watch, another
discomforte. What a finding of ^omfort was here? one hart-breake in ^he neck of
another: one sea-billowe ^eating upon another: not unlike to ^ Jobs Job. 1.
case, who after the first smarte ^hewes, had a second: after the second, ^
third: after the third, a fourth tale is ^old more sour then all the former.
The Lord set Job as a Butte to shoot ^at: and is not this poor sinner here
^bet on like a smithes Anvell? does not blow sound upon blow: one stroke
fall on the neck of another. This is the Lords salve for deferrers of
Repentance a plaster of Galbanum and calx viua, or vnquencht lime, must
corrode, the botch, that will not be sesonably ripned? if the feet have bin to
tender, to tread the way to the Temples door at the nerest, they must be
whipped in and out, and so brought unto the Lord, though by the furdest way
about. The flesh that for dayntenes may not now arise till the Sons heat have
taken ^way the mornings cold, must (if Go^ love it so much) be accomodated
(...) al wethers, al fare, al kind of clothing As persons must not think to
sleep to heaven, so neither to find aye t^ well-beloved at the threshold, much
le^ at the elbowe. To these that have da^ lied with repentance, shall a placard
of sins-remission be hardly (if at al^ purchased.

The civil officers smite her: why they wound her, why? because she ce^sed to
be that she had been, and no^ would be trudging from their city. She might have
slept to the Deuell if she would, they would never have said Black was her
ey. But now arising and seeking after Jesus his lively voice, the^ beat her,
and fowly entreat her. It seemed strange unto them, that she wol^ not run with
them in the same excess of riot. They muse much that she wi^ be more precise
then all the city besides. That now she will begin to stan^ upon points: and to
call her ancestors ^eligion into question. What, was she not borne in the Reu.
17.18
great city of the nations, or in the sub-vrbs of the Metrapolitan? was she
wiser then the whole world that had dronk of the Rose-co^orued Queens cup? had
she borne in her forehead so long the beasts mark, and would she now scratch it
out, and take upon her a new mark? How would she Reu. 13.17
buy or sell in the world, if she cold not content her self with her former
Constitution? Had not her father, mother, grandfather dyed in that city, and
had they not sealed the cities laws with their blood? would she not be cooled
a while in prison for taking of her fiery edge? would she not be smitten till
she left of her new fangle-way; and would she not be rather wounded to death,
then by her leaping out of their sheepfolde, others should be enticed to skip
after? Be sure, the magistrates had the cities law on their side, and they
wanted not sufficient reason, for doing all they did. Be sure, they wo^ bid her
mend herself where she co^ and no doubt they would give her le^ to try her
cause in their cities Co^

Alas poor soul, thus she fell amongst wolves, then where was h^ right? If
she appeal, she has to a^peale there but to the Court of Lio^ where Pilate is
president, and a company she Bears the grand-jurie. H^ Beloved was there
smitten before h^ and is it possible for her there to sc^scot-free? Her Beloved
was there cro^ned with thorn, and thinks she not to crowned with brambles?
Poor sou^ before her estate was lamentable, b^ now more worthy to be deeply
d^plored. No remedy now, but do as h^ head did there before her: namely, ^turne
no answer to the deaf Adde^ but patiently undergo their repro^ful dealing. She
that before, comise^ted not the body of her welbelou^ standing in the nights
weather, she must now be whipped a while in t^ body, that so she may the
better know what it was for her Beloved to suffer. He suffered in the soul, so
does she: he suffered in his flesh, so does she: thus is she conforming her
self to her Beloved in spirit and flesh. Christ Heb. 2.10.
our Prince was consecrated by afflictions; and will we be made holy without
them? We would come a nerer and softer way to heaven then he did: but foft fire
maks sweet malt, no have but good. Though there be variety of sleeping ways
to hell, there is but one waking way to heaven. A waking way? ey, a way that
will keep a person waking and sober that walks in it. A narrow way, an
ascending way, a rough unbeaten way: for few find it: and few having found
it, do keep it to the vp-shot. If there were no other hinderance, but worldly
rulers in the wais entrance, to keep a people back with push or pyke,
assuredly, they were sufficient to keep one wakinge.

But was here an end of her misery? No. When the Civil rulers ha^
apprehended her, smitten her, wounded her, wh^t then? Some body m^ needs salve
their mischeife don. H^ case was a Case of conscience, how the might the civil
rulers do that they h^ don by law? Tut, that they had done they would stand
to it before t^ judicial bench. That they had done her, was, because they
found her ro^guing from lawful home: because the found her discontented with
the p^^sent state, and therefore by conseque^ a rebel and underminer of the
Citi^ weal: as for her Case of conscience the refer that to the watchmen of
the wa^ these that were more highly seene^ spiritual things, for as for
themselu^ they were but Lay men. The poo^ soul thus handled and spitefully o^
treated by the street-watch, dow^ coms the wal-watch to see what st^ in the
streets. Down coms Lord M^lefacious (I should say, Bonifacius) Lo^ Im-pius, (I
should say, Pius) Lord ^pus, Lord Vorax, Lord Focus, Lord Furcae, even all
Bishop Boners brethren. Holding up their trains, com all the Perjured Parsons:
after them com the half sterued Vicars: and behind them with bag and baggage
come trailing on the Cur-rats and lack-learning syr-Nick, and sir Tom, these
com not with out their Commissione, sealed long since by Siluestr Magus. They
hale her before the pontifical seat: ad appositum: she must stand forth and
answer to her Ordinaries interrogatories.

Poor soul, how was she hemmed in with trobles before the temporality and now
the spirituality must course her. What do they? They pull away her veil, her
foreheads shadow the covering of a shamfaste browe. Thamar having some shame
in her face (and therefore not brazen-fast like an hedge-hore) did with Genesis
38.14.
a veil ouershadowe her face. Holy Rebecca under standinge that Isaac (her
hoped-hus. ^and) was coming toward her, she covered her bashful face with h^
veil, and so meet him Genesis 24.65. A^ Ahimileck reproving Sarah for h^ want of
shame (in having after a so^ denied her husband) does tell her, the Genesis 38.14.
Abraham was the veil of her ey^ that is, should have been as a vaile^
covering of her more modesty. By ^ which appears (contrary to man their
ignorant assertion) that the V^ was a covering for matrons, not pr^fessed
harlots. Thamar her sitting ^ the hie ways caused Judah to demeh^ an whore,
not her veil. Let the va^ therefore for Civil use, remain a rig^^ Civil and
matronelike wearing. ^ Scotland it is much used, in hy and lo^ Germany most
common: and I thin^ every where more frequent then in E^gland excepting such
places as when they et forth their painted faces sail.

What is it that the spiteful mi^sterie do with her? They take away ^vaile;
that is, they take away the co^^ing of her bashful face, that so she may
seem to all the city, an Harlot. The term of modesty taken away, how
reproachful shall that person be? But how do they this? I will not say they
disgrade her (as father Latimer was vn-vailed) But I say, they at least spoil
her of the ornament of Credit, they rob her of her good name, and that ^is, by
proclaiming her Schismatike from the true faith: by proclaiminge her obstinate
in some fundamental point, and so consequently an heritique. when the dragon
with his horns cold not push the Revel. 12.
woman and her seed to death: then his filthy mouth spues out corrupt waters
after her: and the prophets like frogs, com out of the dragons mouth, go
croking up and down to incense the whole city of the world against Jesus his
spowsesse. Never is there a notable mischeife practiced in a commonwealth, but
some hob gob^in priest is in the one end of it. I am not so young but I have
seen that, and thousand besides me have put it dow^ in their tables, Probatum
est.

And here, (oh my God) let m^ earth and wormsmeate, debate this o^ question;
what is the cause, that coming into diverse places (and teac^ing nothing but
truth and such trut^ as the adversary Cannot convinc^ nay, dare not appose to)
diverse supp^sed Brethren, Cannot abide to se the multitude of people following
or ^pairing to my exercises, But the straight deem my credit to be the^
discredit, and the Lords harvest reap^ by me, they deem they own loss ^
though the Lords kaies should be p^ under their own only girdle? Wh^ is the
cause, that I but seeking thy glory and the peopls salvation, the citi^
wall-watch do often times rise up against me, saying of me as the Sod^mits of
Lot. Genesis 19.9.
He is come alone as a stranger, and shall he judge and rule? Surely t^ God, I
now perceive the cause of t^ correction to be my late reformat^ ^y Repentanc
shaped forth at my own ^easure. I having before neglected thy ^imely voice,
thou now gives me into ^he hands and power of counterfeit Cant. 1.6.
Companions, that have a look but ^o true love unto thy voice: what then
^emaineth oh my God? should I therefore desist and leave of to go forward? my
head Jesus preching so powrfully, as the catching hearers durst not but commend
him, the proud Pharisees to them hearers returned this speech: John. 7.48.49.
Do any of the Rulers or Pharisees believe ^n him but this people which know not
the ^lowe are cursed. I see the same lot light ^ on my master Jesus: but with a
difference He was punished in thy wrath, because our sin was upon him, and he
was to be plagued every way for our sin: as for this dealing against me,
thou stirs it up (not as a plague, but) as a correction for my former
neglegence and therefore may more comfortably be supported Only (oh my God)
in due me with patience, love, faith unfeigned, discresion and holy
pe^seuerance in thy fear, and then exe^cise me as thou will; be it by lashin^
magistrate, or false brethren. Give m^ as willingly to pass through blood^
stripes, as sweet oyntings: give me ^ cherfully to pass through bad repo^ as
good report: through poverty, a^ through riches: through death, a^ through
life: and then a fig for their railinges, for their lashings, for their
vnvailings.

The poor Soul distressed thus within, through the not beholdinge the
comfortable face of Jesus: and oppressed without, first by the ungodly Civil
magistrate, then by the virulent tongued Prophet or Ruler Ecclesiastical, what
does she? Does she now desperately cast down her Cross and turn to her bed
of ease and worldly rest again? Does she curse the time that ever she Rose to
follow Religion, does she recant her Resurrection, and subscribe to the
Ecclesiastical Vultures? Does she cry out, oh my soul, oh my body, I am ^t
able to endure longer this burden, and therefore farewell Jesus, here is an end
of my pilgrimag? Good Job says, that Job. 16.12 14.
the lord had taken him by the neck and beten ^im: that he had broken him
with one breaking upon another, and that he did ^ou upon him like a Giant: but
as all that cold not either cause him profes himself an hypocrite (for so he
had lied of himself) nor yet could make him cease his hope in God his Redemer:
so neither could the Sea of surging calamities beating, and still rebeating
upon her, cause her either to profes her self an heretic, Schismatique, nor
yet cause her to desist hoping in her well-beloved: and therefore forward she
goes in her pilgrimage. Behind her she leaves the lashing officers Civil:
behind her she leaves the lewd Cities ministry (counterfeit Companions,
false brethren) by what name or title soever they were termed: Were they Lord
bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars. Curats: or were the lewd
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons; whatsoever they were, wicke^ they were. Such
as would have had the Poor Soul, to have slept with them (...) the Deuell for
company sake: Behin^ her back she leaves them, as Lot lef^ Sodom, and as the
Lord would ha^ his people to Rev. 18.4.
forsake spiritual Bab^lon.

The poor soul having after much turmoise escaped the hands of the Cities
watch, she Iere. 50.8.
like an he Goat befo^ the flock, goes marching on with he^ face toward
mount Sion the City o^ David, even of Jesus anointed. She^ lift up her feet
(as did Jacob flying from Esau) and cease not plodding forward (not looking
back with a repenting ey, as did Lots wife) until she attaine^ the sight and
presence of Jerusalem daughters. Being fallen upon their co^ what says the
poor distressed Soul unto them? This she says: I charge y^ oh Daughters of
Jerusalem, if you me^ my Well-beloved, what shall you tell him? that I am sick of
love. A petition she puts up unto them: first with a charge, then with a
patheticall Interrogatory (for the Hebrewe admits that) and by both plainly
intimating her fresh bleeding heart, whose gushing streams none could stanch,
but only her Well-beloved.

As the Lord jested not with her soul: so neither does she offer up her
petition as a jest, but in right good earnest, as earnest of her perplexed
soul. But who are these daughters of Jerusalem to whom she incommendeth her
case? Such they were, as to whom she might boldly speak: and such they were,
as at whose hands she might boldly expect help: and such they were, as by
whose prayers unto her Beloved, she might be the rather accepted: and such they
were, as were like to obviate her Beloved, before her self. All these
Circumstances (gathered from her manner of dealing) do plainly prove that
these Daughters of Jerusalem, a^ opposite-ones to the former Watc^ men of the
City: and that therefore the must necessarily be, The true visi^ Church. As
Jerusalem was called Psalm. 87.3.
The City of God, (first, because God ha^ there placed the Temple, his
Delight Secondly, because that material Ci^tie, figured out the New
Testament^ Church, called Jerusalem from about Galat. 4.26. Revel. 21.) so
Jerusalem Daughters (that is, people) were G^ his Citizens and visible Church.
To these the distressed soul comes, unto them she makes her moan, and her^
she exspecteth comfort, or no where She runs not to the Daughters o^ Sodom,
nor yet of Babylon and Egypt spiritually so called: Alas no, she comes to
Ierusalems Damzels, Saints by calling, the Daughters not of slavish Hagar, but
of Sarah, who is free with her children. Without the City of the Saints, out
of Shems Tent no comfort, much less is Salvation to be had.

Oh the palpable blindness of wounded souls in these days! If the hand of God
have smiten them, have wounded their soul, have crushed their conscience,
whither repair they for balm, to Gilead? One starteth aside with Ion. 1.
Jonah, to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of JEHOVAH. Another runs
unto the smooth Prophet, that he may daube up the wound with untempered
mortar. The third goes for life (Ezech. 12.18.) to the smoth tongued
prophetesses, who lay soft pillows under their sore elbowes, that so rhey may
sleep on peaceably to the Devil. But how many after they are once wounded, do
stand forth with Hosheahs people, and cry one unto another Hos. 6.1.
Com, let us convert unto Jehovah: for he has spoiled and he will heal us: he
has wounded us, and he will bind us up: how many (I say) once smitten by the
Lords hand, do turn back to be cured at the Lords hand? The heathen prophets
write that, to whom Ajax his spears head gave a wound, by it or by n^thing
the wounded was to be cure^ but sure I am, that if the Lord by the ministry
of his word have gadge^ any conscience, by the same word o^ the Lord they
must (if ever) be cure^ for where he by his heavenly kay opens, no man by
human help ca^ shut; and where Jehovah by his ka^ shuts, that by no
natural wit o^ man can be opened. If the two edge^ sword of his word have
given thee a gash, it is neither cards, nor dice, nor dauncinge, nor bone
companionship that will surely heal thee. Well i^ may for a season skin over
the malady of thy soul, but the day of the Lord will come, wherein Eze.
13.13
a storm from heaven shall burst out in Iehouah^ wrath, and then shatters
down the untempered mortar, false application of life and peace: for There is
no peace unto the wicked, Isa. 48.22. no salvation to the slepy impenitent, and
therefore no promise of the Gospel to be applie^ to such.

If when the spirit of Christ has ^tabbed thy vlcerous soul, thou de^esire
releife, repair unto the same ^pirite, who within the true visible Church
seals up the promises of the Gospel. Lot gained b^t vexation of soul in
Sodom, and thinks thou to gain hearts ease there? Lot could not sleep
quietly in his Zoar, and thinks thou to reap holy contentment in thine
unholy choice? Henoch finding no solid or sound joy in the society of the
prophaine, he therefore abandoned such fellowship, and Genesis 5.24
walked with God, and therefore was taken away from men, as worthy the only
presence of God. Seek comfort where thou should seek, and thou have promise to
find comfort. Knock for it at the Lords portall, and thou shall find
entry: but ask for souls health, where thou should not ask for it, and my
soul for thine, thou shall receive but a false comfort. Badde powder may give
a false fire, but the guilt of thy soul rests vndischarg^ and when Jehovah
coms to exami^^ thy general acquittance, lo, it will pro^ a peculiar blank
fair without, nothi^ within: a false heart seduced thee: a^ thou but dreamed
of releasment.

Well, this poor soul labored have peace spoken unto her conscienc^ and
therefore she comes to Ieru^^lem, that is, To the vision of peace: (...) only
in the Church is there peace a^ the vision of peace: without, neith^ peace nor
vision is sanctified or seal^ to any soul: much less, assurance ^ salvation.
This, holy Luke intimate^ in his Apostolical history, when h^ says, Act. 2.47.
And the Lord added to the chur^ from day to day, such as should be sau^^
Neither is it possible for any to love Jesus, that covet not to be joined wit^
his mystical body: for where the Corp^ be (says our savior) thither will
the Eagles resort. CHRIST has given hi^ slaughtered corpse to be fed upon wit^
in (not without) the Church, and the Eagles of Jesus (not Sodoms Car-crows) ^re
to be fed of that sacramental body. Job says, that Job. 39.13.
the Eagle makes ^er nest in the rock, and sure I am, that ^pirituall mounting
minds will nes^el within the Rock Jesus, against whom ^ell gates cannot
prevail. Job says, 32.
that the Eagles eyes behold the meat a ^^r off: and sure I am, that the
Lords Eagles by the eyes of faith, behold Jesus their spiritual food as far
off as above the Sun. Job says that the Eagles young^^es suck up blood: and
sure I am, that jesus his Eagles do by the mouth of fifth, suck up the
sacramental blood shed on the Cross, by whose blood they live, and in whose
blood their garments are only made white. Al which considered, what marvel
was it, that his poor soul would by no means be hindered from Jerusalem, the
place of saving vision and eternal peace, what marvel is it, if unto these
heavenly ^tizens, she commence her souls mea^^ng: If unto these damzels, she
offer her petition and more then a petition Let us examine the words.

I charge ye Oh daughters of Jerusalem etc. Here is an homely Exordiam, a
seeming rude beginning. In stead of, I desire ye, she says, I charge ye: and
what should be the cause of such abrupt entry, and so emphaticall admiration?
Surely, her case required n^ less. If a man com to petition at something of
his king that is of less value, or may at leisure be timely enough granted,
then such a supplicator uses speeches more circumstantious and less
patheticall: but if a man (having committed wilful murder) have his deadly,
adversaries pursuing him at the heels, he suddenly comes running unto his
King, and (considering a minutes delay may danger his life) he as suddenly
falls down crying Oh King, as thou would find fau^^^ presently before
Jehovah his iudgemen^ seat, so let me obtain a pardon at t^ hand. The
present perplexity of h^ soul causes him to pass by common form of
petition, and in stead thereof, to exact pardon by an open or secret
adiuration. If a man come to his sworn brother in so tickle and desperate case,
he stands not saying, Good brother, I am now to petitionate a thing at your
hands, whereto if you shall vouchsafe to lend an auaritious ear, as also a well
construing mind, I shall think my self not only happy, in being yoked with
such an Alter ego another I, but also account my self for ever after, tied
unto you, as to another parent: his case being (as the former) desperate, he
stands not upon such ambagious insinuations, but he in a more homely sort
rusheth into his friends chamber, and without by your leave, or good-euen, he
(with hands folded together, and half dead countenance) cries, I charge thee
as thou art a man, and as thou have any drop of ho^est blood in thine heart,
that thou commiserate my present estate, and labor with the king for my
pardon. Our poor soul here, was not her case desperate, and hung not over her
head an heavy sword in a small single thread? How was she tormented within? and
how was she scourged without? She might say with the Psalmist, One deep
calls another for in the neck of one distress ensued another: storm upon
storm, flooke upon flooke, lash upon lash. Was it any marvel then, if here
she omitted common form of petition? If for bodily health men will deal so
earnestly, how much more for souls safety.

Again, she had not to deal with curious companions, false brethren and
sisters, but with such as had truly put of the old man with his deceiuable
lusts, and had put on the new Adam Christ Jesus, as a fashioning garment upon
their words and works with them therefore she might converse after a more
bold and familiar manner. Had she to deal with a number of our prattling
professors (preachers and hearers) she would have bin twice advised, ere she
had powered her soul into their lappes: for Prove. 29.7.
the righteous knows the cause of the poor, as for the wicked they regard
not knowledge.

But wherewith does this poor passionate Soul Charge the daughters of
Jerusalem? for sooth with this: That if they meet her beloved, they should
unto him impart her estate. And because they should be specially attent unto
this her special suite, she frames her speech thus: If you meet my
well-beloved, what shall you tell him? she urges them to tell her case, and then
she demands what it is they should speak? This verily notifieth her
insatiable thirst and spiritual appetite: first, of having her souls wish
imparted to her beloved: secondly, of her deep swallowing affection, that
would be satisfied with nothing but the presence of her beloved Jesus. The
first is plain by her manner of stirring up the church members to attention:
the second is as openly demonstrate in her answer to the former demand which
is this: tel^ him, That I am sick of Love.

The particle (If) admits not a doubt, If they should meet with her
beloved, but (as every one knows that is acquainted with the Hebraisme in
other places) it is as much as if she said when, or, as you shall meet with my
beloved, tell to him this. The Anglisme is of like sense: for we say
indifferently, If you have to deal with the King, or, When you have to deal
with the King, or, as you shall have occasion to deal with the King, do
insinuate this thing. Neither is the particle (if) les significant then when,
or As, but a particle (indeed) of more modesty, putting a bit in the mouth of
her former Charge or homely speech, as willing to qualify her former homely
dealing: any good Rhetorician will acknowledge this, but fools will understand
no reason.

The poor soul, charged and almost surcharged with Iehouahs heavi^^ pressure,
she charge the daughters of mystical Jerusalem with the receipt of her
souls oblation, that so in their more purified censers, they might offer up
her bitter (but sauourie) myrrh unto her beloved. By their ascending to her
right regal lover, she hoped the return of an happy answer: no marvel then
if she were, first, ernest to seek them out: secondly, ernest to acquainte
them with her estate: thirdly, ernest to set them on work for her
intercessours: Prove. 25.25.
for as cold waters are to a weary soul, so are good news from a contry
(though) far of. Special cases, require special speed: and a devine whip must
be sal^ed by divine physicians. As the Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord: so unmeet it is, that such should be acquainted with
our souls misery. To what end communicate we our spirits affliction, if not
to receive comfort? and what warrant of comfort is there to be had by such
intercessors, as have no promise to be heard for themselves? As the Lord is
able and willing to cure a^^ our private sin, upon private confession: so, by
publishing that to others who are themselves profane, wh^ are like unto
Terentius pratler, that sai^ he was Full of holes, unable to conceal^ a secret,
what good can we exspe^^ from such? namely this: to have it polished in 2.
Sam. 1.20.
Gath, and in the streets o^ Ashkelon, at the hearing whereof, the
Uncircumcised shall leap for joy. By this foolish devout Confession, the
grief of soul that before was private and single, it becomes publik and
double, worse than ever it was. It is but blind devotion, that lacks the
eyes of discretion: let younger Christians learn that.

She communicates not her hearts sorrow to the blessed Saints departed, but
to the Saints living. James i^ special case, wills Iam. 5.16.
this, but the first is no where willed or commanded Our Savior, Mat.
18.15.16.17. urges in some cases, Confession to the Saints living, but no
where unto the dead. JEHOVAH ( Job. 42.8.) urges Jobs kins-men to make Job
their Intercessour by sacrifice, but no where he wills men to seek unto the
dead. Saul sought unto dead Samuel, but he met with a living Devil. Know what
thou art to confess to God, what to men, and also learn, Where* when, what,
how, and to whom to confess, when thou do confess: for the devil under
color of devotion, seeks how to overturne true Religion and the credit of
the Saints. Neither must thou think, that Saints here living are properly
Intercessours or Mediators, ( 1. Tim. 2.5.
For there is (but) one Mediator between God and man (even) the man Christ
Jesus) but improperly are they so called: namely, because as faithful feeling
members, they communicate to the Lord their fellow-like misery: and therefore
it is, that the Saints interceeding for any their poor members, they come unto
the Father, (not by themselves) but by the Son: for his Reu. 8.3.
Cuser is only Gold, and in him is the F^ther well pleased. Let the Saints
departed have their due: let the Saint living have their due, neither to
either or both, do attribute the Lords due.

But what would she have them to impart to her beloved? namely, this That she
was sick of Love: alluding unto a Virgin over-rapt with an amorous conceit,
who by reason of her Betrothed his absence, is ready to sound and to pass away
in a loue-qualme. David but wanting the Tabernacles presence he Psalm. 84.2.
faynted: how much more would he have fainted and faultered under loves
affection, if so he had lacked the feling presence of his God, that could not
be contained within any material Tabernacle or Temple? She here was arrived
at the Lords Tabernacle, (namely, at the society of Saints) but she yet
attained not the comfortabl^ face of him, that has promised, tha^ Where two or
three are gathered together (...) his Name, there in the midst he will be.
She sees the body but not the Head: She, therefore makes suite, eye, charge
the body (by reason of that duty which is owing from member to member) to
acquainte her beloved with this, namely That she was sick of Love. She that
before, would make no better use of Christ his knocking at her door, must now
be glad to seek after Christ and knock at his door. She that before would not
make better use of Christ his private petition, must now be glad to come unto
Christ by public petition, and that under the broad seal of his church. when
Christ knocked, called, suited, she lay snorsing in her sin: just therefore
that now she knock, call, and suite unto Christ, though come out of sinne^ey,
she who before for keeping fellowship with the City, had neglected fellowship
with Christ and his mystical body, just it is, that now she should come unto
Christ no other way, but by f^seking unto his body. An acquittan^ for sin, is
not so easily won. Ma^^ thinking they have it, go unto hell i^ a dream: many
feeling the want the of, do labor for the plakard of Rem^sion, but seeking for
it where it is no^ they pop into hell without it. Some feel the want, labor
for supplied that Grace, and quickly have it, by reason they come roundly off
at Christ Call. Others finding their box empt^ of that quittance, do labor for
it, b^ obtain it at leisure, by reason of their former rude behavior to their
Ca^

Turn not therefore God his grace into wantonness: if thou do, then expect
either to have thy conscience s^red with ane hot iron, that so thou ma^^ pass
up and down, a Goat brande to hell: or (at the best) awaite a black glooming
day, wherein thy soul she be stripped in the eyes of many, an^ thou in body
and soul whipped from one place to another, before thou o^taine the
heauens-charter of sins re^ission. Isa. 38.14.17.
Hezekiah chattered like a ^rane, and mourned like a Dove, before (...) had
assurance that his sins were ^^st behind Iehouahs back: neither was David
(who so often was bet in the lords ^orter) unacquainted with passing through this
fiery furnace, before he ^^s fit Gold to receive Iehouahs im^resse. But as
their coming under his lash correctory, may fear us from ^allyinge with
repentance: so their ^nce meting with the Sunshine coun^^nance of their
beloved, may teach ^s not to despair of mercy: conside^ing, Jehovah desires
not the death of ^ sinner, but rather that he would re^ent and live. Lastly
(for some necessi^e urges brevitie) that perplexed ^^ule may undoubtedly
believe and ^^pe for happy release, who truly can (...), My soul is sick of
Love, as David ^^de, Psalm. 42.2.
My soul thirsts for God. If God have given thy soul to hunger (...) thirst
for righteous things, it is because he is minded afterward to (...) thee. As
a prudent householder wi^ there bestow his meat, where f^^ he perceives
appetite and hunger: s^ the householder of the Church (eue^ Christ Jesus)
reaches there forth h^ hidden Manna, where first he percei^ spiritual
appetite, Need maks the n^ked run, and hunger breaks the sto^ walls: neither
will any thing stop, st^^ or quench the souls want, the soul wish: Cant.
8.6.7.
for love is strong as death, dev^ring as the grave, like to fiery coals and
vehement flame. This Love of God wa^ not in Cain, in Esau, in Achitophell, ^
Iscariot: for if it had, Cain had not be^ finally impatient? Esau had not
nourished fury in his breast, Achitophel wol^ have thought no shame, that the
lo^ should have shamed him, in frustrating his delphik-like oracle: nor wo^
Iscariot have demed Christ his oblat^on insufficient to save him.

If we would not be driven in^ these straites, let us prevent that (...)
timely Resurrection from Sin. If we have slept away the third, sixth, ninth,
and tenth hours, yet let us not now at the last hour shame, to arise and go
into the Lords blessed vineyarde, and there labor with others for the penny of
promise. Every man and woman in that vineyard, works in some honest room and
holy calling, one bearing the infirmities of another, laboring to do all
their things in love. Awake therefore oh Sleeper, arise, it is day: nay, the
Sun is ready to set and to leave our horizon: Christ tendreth his mercy, as yet,
but after Sunset, catch christ and mercy where thou can, I have no promise of
mercy for thee. Happy is ^he who by others harms is more wary let this
sinners affliction fear thee from sleep, and let her patience and discreit
carriage, lead thee unto the infallible Vision of peace: where peace of
conscience is not finally failing, howsoever sometimes it stands a far of for a
season.

Sero, sed serio surgit. An Animadversion.
SOme (from my Epistle to Engla^ prefixed to the Sommons to Doo^day) would
gladly collect, That I he^ unlawful for a Pastor of the new Testam^ Church,
openly to rebuke open sin. Such (...) know, that I never was so absurd: na^
would have them to know, that I wo^ not only have public sins publi^
rebuked, but (which more is) I do leeue that such offenders (not satisfy the
congregation by apparent hum^ation upon the Churches rebuke) ^ Church ought
(first, for keeping her s^ unleavened: secondly, for the humbl^ such sinners)
without delay to excomunicate such.

Because of Salomons speech ( Prove. 26 I have said now no more: but beca^ of
his next speech (verse. 5.) I have sa^ thus much: and so an end.


