The Food of the Soul: against the day of Judgment.

By A. D.

John 6. 35. I am the Bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger,
and he that believes in me shall never thirst.



Printed at London by M. F. for I. Wright. and C. Wright. 1624.

THE FOOD OF THE SOVLE.
John. Chapter 6. Verse 35. I am the bread of Life, he that comes to me shall
not hunger; and he that believes in me, shall never thirst.
WHEN our Savior Christ had performed that heavenly Miracle in feeding five
thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, the people which were satisfied
with that gratis cheer, did follow him to the City Capernaum. But when Jesus
perceived their hypocrisy, that they were fleshly and carnal hearers, and as
a good Writer says, Parasiti quos platina conglutinat, hypocrites and
belly-gods, whom the trencher does make friends to Christ: like unto him which
when he sweat over his trencher yet cried out, O quanta patimur pro amore
Christi, Lord what suffer we for the love of Christ! Jesus therefore
reprehendeth these men, saying, Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye seek me
not, because ye saw the miracles, but because ye eat of the loaves and were
filled. Yet they obstinately answered him, What miracles have thou done? have
thou commanded the Sun and the Moon to stand still, as Joshua did? have thou
revived the widows son, as Elias did? have thou made iron to swim, as Eliza
did? have thou revived the dead bones, as Ezechiel did? have thou been in the
Whales belly with Jonas: or parted the red sea with Moses? Our Fathers did eat
Manna in the Wilderness, Moses gave them bread from heaven to eat. But mark
I pray you how Jesus did answer them, Nay, (says he) Moses gave you not bread
from heaven, but my Father gives you the true Bread from Heaven: For the Bread
of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world.
Then said they unto him, Lord evermore give us this Bread. And Jesus said, I am
the Bread of life, he that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst.

And thus much for the coherence, and occasion of our Savior Christ's words: now
particularly as they lie in order: First, who is the Bread? Which is Christ,
Persona loquens, signified in this word, I. Secondly, what is this Bread? It is
the bread of life. Thirdly, the powerful efficacy, and effect of this bread,
declared in these words, He that comes to me shall not hunger; and he that
believes in me, shall never thirst.

And first, who is this Bread, which is, Christ: I am the living Bread which
came down from heaven, says Christ. Ego sum panis vitae, and fons aquae
viuae. I am the bread of life, and fountain of living water: Omnia nobis est
Christ us: (says Ambrose) si esuris, ipse est panis; si sitis, ipse est fons
aquae viuae; si caecus es, ipse est lumen; si infirmus es, ipse medicus; si
mortuus, ipse vita gratiae and gloriae. Christ is all things to us: if thou
be hungry, he is bread; if thou be thirsty, he is the fountain of
living water; if thou be blind, he is the light; he is the health of a
feuered soul, light of thy life, life of thy desire, heaven of thy mind,
guide to thy wandering feet, succourer in necessity, helper in adversity: yea,
he is all things to thee: I am the living Bread, says Christ. The bread which
I give is my flesh, and the drink which I give is my blood: my flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the latter day.

O blessed meat, O celestial food: O heavenly Manna: it far excels the
Poets Ambrosia: would to God that all of us daily might eat of this Manna:
would to God that all of us which travel in the Wilderness of this world,
might lodge at such an Inn, where God the Father is the host, the holy Ghost,
the Hostess, the Church the Inn, the Cross the sign, and Christ the meat
and drink. Aristotle must dine when it pleases Philip, but here thou may
have store of spiritual food for the repast of thy soul, and take it when it
pleases thy self. Say but thy grace before this blessed banquet, and then sit
down and satisfy thy hunger. The more thou eatest, the more it increases.
like to Jupiters Nectar, the more it is drunk of, the more it ouerfloweth.
Neither need thou use the counsel of Lysander, which he prescribed to his
Daughters, to drink with a drop of wine a spoonful of water. Thou may
drink as much of this precious wine as thou will, neither can thou infuse
any mixture of water, but of the water of eternal life. This meat is of the
like quality with the stone of Thracia, which whosoever finds, is never after
troubled, so whosoever eats of this meat, is never after grieved: labor
therefore to get this meat which endures to everlasting life. No water was so
good as that which came out of the Rock, no meat so delicate as Manna which
came from heaven, no Wine so wholesome as that which Christ made of water at the
marriage of Cana, no oil so precious as that which the Samaritan had, no robe
so costly, as that which the father gave to the prodigal son, no bread, no
food, no meat so profitable, as this meat of the soul which endures to
everlasting life. This meat is water to refresh us, and wine to cheer us, this
is bread to strengthen us, and Manna to nourish us, it is a treasure to enrich
us, and a pearl to adorn us, it is a fire to purge us, and salt to powder us,
it is a trumpet to call us, and wisdom to instruct us, it is a way to direct
us, and life to revive us, it is a Lantern to guide us, and a buckler to
shield us, it is physic to recure us, and a salve to heal us: if we have
this meat, this Manna, this bread, we shall have no need of Elizeus to increase
our oil, no need to beg at the gluttons gate, or to send unto Naball the
churl for food: if we have this treasure, we shall not need to rob the
Egyptians: if we have this pearl, we shall not need the gold of Ophir; if we
have this water we need not draw water at Jacobs well; Naaman needs not wash his
feet 7 times in Jordan, the sick needs not to go to the poole of Bethsaida:
for this precious meat, and inestimable Manna will purge us from the leprosy
of sin: So that we shall loath to drink of the slumbring cup of the devils
sorceries, to be witch us to sin: this bread is Homers Mol^, and Plinies
Centauria against all lustful enchantments: for this bread, this spiritual
food, will so cleanse our minds, and purify our hearts, that we will always
detest the eie-pleasing baits of carnal desires, and wholly delight our selves
with this inestimable treasure: carnal voluptuousness is transitory and
fading; the minutes that lackey at the heels of time, run not faster away then
do these pleasures: but this spiritual food, this bread of life, is not like
palate pleasing dainties, whose sugered sweetness once relisht is presently
gone; but it yields the hungry soul an everlasting fruition of most
rauishing sweetness: labor therefore for this bread which brings to
everlasting life.

The Bees do labor to get a little honey:

Mella stipant and dulci distendunt nectare cellas.

But this bread is sweeter then honey, or the honey-combe. Our forefathers did
eat of the Acorns of the Oaks, and thought them pleasant meat; And we, which
by Ceres huswiferie have learned to bury the reviving grain, do think that
bread most delicate food: O foolish Caterers, let us rather learn to bury in
our hearts this reviving grain, that in this general famine of true Christian
food, we may with Joseph provide abundance of this bread of life, for the
benefit of our souls: then should we not have such spiritual penury, and
dearth of religion, if our hearts were made fertile to bring forth the seeds of
our souls nourishment and sustenance. Labor not therefore for the bread that
perishes but for this bread which remains unto everlasting life.

Ay, but some will say, where shall we find this spiritual food, this bread
of life? I tell thee Christ is this bread of life. Ay, but he will perhaps
reply: how shall I come to Christ to get this food? I bid thee go to the
Scriptures, (Christ's treasury) where thou shall find this Manna, this bread of
life, there is plentiful store, take and satisfy thy self; neither need
thou go far to seek it, as David did the Ark of GOD, or as Josias did the
book of the Law; Neither can thou desire with the Glutton, that one from the
dead might arise to teach thee how to find this bread of life: for now adays
(thanks be given to GOD for it) the dispencers of this bread of life be
plentiful, who may without fear or peril show thee the compendious way to
seek this bread of life. Now Obadia need not fear Queen Iezabel, to hide a
hundred Prophets in a Cave: Moses need not fear King Pharaoh, and say, I have
a stuttering tongue: Jeremy need not fear the Jews, and say, I am a child:
for now the Ministers of GODS word are maintained, and preserved, and may
freely without danger, and boldly without fear, dispense of this bread of
life. Yea and every one of Christ's faithful Children, although he be not an
head in the mystical body of Christ, or an eye, or a leg, yea, if he be but an
hand, yet he may gather of this bread of life; if he be but an ear, he may
hear of this bread of life; or a tongue, he may praise this bread of life; or
a mouth, he may receive this bread of life. Labor therefore for this bread
which endures to everlasting life: I am the bread of life: O Jesus thou art
the bread which give life: Thou art a guide to our ways, a guardian to our
persons, a Councellor in our doubts, a Comforter in misery, a Patron in
necessity, and will thou be bread also? Thou art our keeper, our shepherd, our
defender, our Savior, and will thou be bread also? O Jesus thou art light unto
our eyes, music to our ears, contentment to our souls, and will thou be
bread also? O loving Jesus, O merciful Redeemer, O blessed Emanuel, O Jesus, we
give thee our bodies, our souls, our substance, our wealth, our honor, our
friends, our children, our life, and all that is ours: Jesus we are not our
own but thine, claim us as thy right, keep us as thy charge, love us as thy
children: Jesus fight for us when Satan comes, heal us if he wounds,
revive us if he kills, receive us if we fly into thy merciful bosom:
protect when he approaches, detect us when he comes: Jesus thou art our food
in the day, thou shall also be our repose in the night: Jesus make us pliable
to thy will, resigned wholly to thy pleasure. Jesus forsake us not, lest we
perish, leave us not, lest we be overcome: Jesus direct our intentions, correct
our follies, erect our cogitations, protect our endeavors: Jesus grant us ^^row
for our sins, fear for thy Judgments, love of thy mercies, thankfulness
for this bread of life. I am the Bread of life, that is, I am the bread of
immortal and heavenly life, not of this mortal: and earthly life: for else
Christ might rather have said, I am the bread of death, and not of life; for
this life is a living death, and a dying life: But Christ is not bread of such
a life; But, he is the bread of an immortal, and neuer-fading life.

Happy therefore is he which is at this banquet, and tastes of this bread of
life: Neither is this an imaginary fruition, or a painted banquet, resembling
the hungry cheer, which the birds had that fed themselves with Zeuxis painted
grapes, until with picking at shadows they waxt so lean, that they were glad
with Esops Cock to scrape for a barley corn. But with this bread of life thy
Soul shall be so cherished: with this Manna thou shall be so wonderfully
delighted, that ever thou shall loath the fleshpots of Egypt. Hic panis est
corpus meum. This bread is my body, and therefore thou can not mislike it. O
you Ministers, the faithful dispencers of this hallowed bread of life, feed
duly Christ's flock with this bread of life. Christ said to Peter, Pasce,
pasce, Pasce, Feed, feed, feed: Feed with this bread of life, with your
doctrine, with your alms: Feed first with this bread of life, for it is the
bread of salvation: Secondly, feed with your wholesome doctrine, that Christ's
sheep do not surfeit with vice, and so need the corosiue of his correction to
amend them. Thirdly, feed with alms: but what shall I press you to that? Nay
I must in conscience spare you, for the case now so stands, that you are liker
to live of alms, then be able to give alms: and therefore till happier times
come, wherein your divine function may more bounteously be rewarded, I will
spare you for that point, for necessity has no law. In ye mean while feed with
this bread of life, and spend your breath happily in the fires of devotion
crying alarm spiritual against foul vice, and all wickedness: so at last
you having not defrauded Christ's children of this bread of life, may have a
most bountiful remuneration of your painful labors, and enjoy all heavenly
happiness, and celestial joys, tasting this bread of life, which is prepared
for all GODS faithful children: And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of
the first parcel of my text, I am the bread of life.

Now it follows, that I should briefly speak of the powerful efficacy, and
effect of this bread of life. Which by the tongues of Angels cannot be so well
declared, as by these our Saviors words, He that comes to me shall not
hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst. After a man has tasted
of all manner of delicate meats, yea although he has caroused new grapes in
Alexanders cup, and plentifully paid that daily tribute to the stomach, which
the law of our nature exacteth, yet that food will not satiate him for ever, so
that he shall never hunger, or thirst after. But this bread, this bread of life
has another power, and effect, for he that eats of this bread, shall never
hunger, or thirst more.

We read in the fourth Chapter of Matthew, That man lives not by bread only:
but I say, man only lives by this bread: for this bread is the bread of
heaven, which gives life unto the world. Therefore be careful to seek for
this bread, for Christ does not forbid us to seek for this bread: he says in
Matthew the sixth Chapter; Be not careful what you shall eat, or what you shall
drink, behold the fowls of heaven, they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into
their barnes, yet your heavenly Father feeds them; the Lillies do not labor
nor spin, yet Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these:
therefore take no thought, saying. What shall we eat, or what shall we drink,
or how shall we be clothed? but seek ye the Kingdom of Heaven, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. Yet in all these exemplified admonitions
of our Savior Christ; he does not forewarne us to be careless for seeking
of this bread of life: will Christ forbid us to seek himself? Christ is this
bread of life, feed on his flesh, and nourish your souls: he is the oil, and
lamp, with which the five Virgins entered into the Bridegroomes chamber. He
is the Lord of life, the way of life, the bread of life.

Believe in this Lord, come unto this way, eat of this bread, you shall never
hunger, or thirst after.

But some man peradventure may object, Can bread extinguish hunger and thirst?
When a man is dry and thirsty, he does not use to eat bread.

I answer, that the Hebrews do use this phrase, Panem comedere, pro coenare,
for to sup, as Master Calvin here well notes: so we say in the Lords prayer,
da nobis quotidianum panem, give us our daily bread, signifying all necessary
things belonging to a man: eat of of this bread of life, and you shall not
need to say, give us our daily bread, for you shall never hunger, or thirst
after: He that comes to me, shall not hunger: Accedat ad Christum omnis
anima: let every Soul come to Christ, and he will refresh it: I will (says
he) feed the hungry soul, and refresh all faint hearts. I am the strength of
the feeble, the succor of the hungry, a refuge against evil weather, a shadow
against heat: a continual feast, where all hungry and languishing souls may
satisfy themselves with celestial food. O well are they, and happy shall they
be, which sit at this heavenly Table, and eat of this blessed and spiritual
meat, the price and redemption of their souls. Here is Manna which the
children of Israel shall never loath: the wise Ethnic man's saying upon a
feast, here takes no place: Prima cratera (says he) ad sitim pertinet,
secunda ad hilaritatem, tertia ad voluptatem, quarta ad insaniam: The first cup
belongs to thirst, the second to mirth, the third to pleasure* and the fourth
to insobrietie But at this feast of the Soul, it is quite contrary, for the
more thou drinkest, tant o proprior es ad animae sanitatem and salutatem: thou
art so much the nearer to the health, and welfare to thy soul. Calistenes said
to Alexander, that he had rather carouse old grains with Diogenes in his
dish, then new grapes with Alexander in his cup, for of all the goods (quoth
he), I love not Aesculapius. But whosoeeuer drinks in this cup, shall not
need Aesculapius physic, for it is a present remedy, and a sovereign
restoratiue against the maladies of a sinful soul: it is an excellent potion,
and a most wholesome purgation to expel the leprosy of a sinseared soul.

The precious stone Sandastra has nothing in outward appearance, but being
broken, it pours forth beams like the Sun: so this bread of life has not
an outward glea of super-excellent goodness, but taste it, and then it pours
forth such admirable excellency, that thou shall never hunger any more.
Therefore the shepherds of Christ's flock, should only feed his Lambs with
this bread of life.

When they be hungry, they should fill them with this Bread of life. They
should cry unto them always, Come unto Christ, and he will give you the bread
of life, so that you shall never hunger or thirst any more. The Ministers
should have a continual cry, not like the Swallows, which have matutinum
cantum, a morning song, or as the Grasshoppers, meridianum cantum, a noone song,
or as the Owls, vespertinum cantum, an evening song, or as the Cocks,
antelucanum cantum, a song before morning: But they should have a morning song,
a noone song, an evening song, and a song before daylight, to awake Christ's
slumbring sheep to come unto Christ, and eat of this bread of life, so they
shall never hunger for this more. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and
he that believes in me, shall never thirst.

To believe in Christ, is the total sum of all Christian Religion: For our
faith in the death and passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is the
sure foundation of our salvation. Fides in Christo (says Saint Jerome) est
fundamentum humanae saluationis: Faith in Christ is the foundation of man's
salvation: without this faith, all our virtuous actions, and good endeavors be
in vain. So says Saint Augustine, Sine fide falsa est omnis virtus, without
faith, all virtue is in vain: Sine fid^ impossible est placere Deo, without
faith it is impossible to please God: Sine fide omnis labor vacuus, without
faith all our labor is frustrate. Faith is the porter of heaven gate, and not
Saint Peter.

He that has faith, yea but as much as a grain of mustard seed, shall be
able to remove mountains: Wherefore let us labor to get this faith, which
being obtained, we shall not need any other treasury: let us lay up this jewel
in our hearts, which will enrich us ever after. The Anatomists say, that in the
heart of man there is a little hole, which has nothing in it. Whereupon a good
writer says, that this little Cabinet and Cell of the heart, God does reserve
for himself, to be a Chamber, and a private mansion for him to dwell, and
keep therein: let us therefore bestow upon our gracious Lord this precious
gem, this excellent ornament to adorn and beautify this inward chamber: that
when it shall please the Lord to call us to the high Star Chamber over our
heads, he may Antipelargein; that is, requite us with far more sumptuous
jewels, and richer ornaments, making us cohabitors with Angels, and the admired
paragons of all perfection: let us therefore confidently believe in Christ,
desiring him most heartily and unfeignedly, to give us of this bread of life,
which is the only restoratiue against hunger, and thirst. Auicen like a fool
said in his Aphorisms, that good was the best restoratiue. No, no, this bread
of life, is the most heavenly remedy against all diseases: it is a poison for
vice, but a life-giuing potion for virtue. It is the bread of death, for
carnal gluttony; but it is the bread of life, for spiritual hunger. If thou
be famished, eat of this bread, and it will revive thee; it can heal all
leprosy of sin, and remove all maladies from a sin-sicke Soul: it is the
Nectar of our salvation, and the Lethe of our iniquities: taste but once of this
bread of life, and thou shall ever after loath the sugered cates, and
bewitching dainties of lustful affections: look daily upon this bread of
life, and thou shall ever after hide thine eyes, and stop thine ears, which
are now captiued vassals to behold and hear the legerdemane of humane iugling
desires: All Siren songs of carnal concupiscence, and vices loue-lines, which
are now imprinted in thy breast, shall be quite cancelled out, after thou have
once digested inwardly, and thy soul has had an happy concoction of this
bread of life: it purges all the hidden corruption of man's folly, and gives
working pills to vomit up original transgressions: it is the present remedy
for a body, which lies in a consumption of grace: to taste of this bread of
life, within a short space by the unspeakable hidden operation, will make a
blessed recovery for this languishing creature. If thy soul be hungry or
thirsty, behold two sacramental rivers flowing out of the Paradise of Christ's
body: in the one thou shall find this bread of life, in the other this water
of life: taste either of them, and thou shall never hunger, or thirst more: yea,
the power of this bread cannot be sufficiently declared by the tongue of the
worthiest Orator. Wherefore let us only satisfy our souls with this bread of
life, whose power, and efficacy our daily Orator Christ Jesus, has declared
unto us in these words, He that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirst. Wherefore to draw to a conclusion, let us
from the bottom of our hearts, desire Christ Jesus evermore to give us of this
bread, that when the glass of our life is run out, and with the Pheni^ we
may discern the term of our days, and with the Swan discover our fatal
end, that it would please him to feed our hungry souls with this spiritual
food, this bread of life, and place them at his heavenly table, to satisfy
themselves* with this celestial banquet: yea, when our breath vanishes, our
eyes wax dim, and we turned out of the house-roome of this transitory world,
repair unto our doomesday house, where the worms (the dead men's Lawyers) shall
take their fees out of us their grave clients, and our bodies shall be their
bread to satiate their hunger, yet thou (O Jesus) would vouchsafe to give us
thy body, the only bread of life, for to nourish our hungry souls, that by the
wings of a lively faith we may fly up to the heavens, and enjoy that age of
unspeakable pleasures: the eternal Father through the merits of his dearest
Son, by the scepter of his holy Spirit, so rule our hearts, that we being
righteous as Elias, and our prayers fervent as those of Elias, they may pierce
the clouds, and open heaven, and thence bring down this bread of life, this
dew of divine grace, upon us, and satisfy our souls with this mystical
banquet of Christ's body. O Lord inflame our tongues with the zeal of devotion,
that our prayers may be fervent, and may make a sweet incense to pacify thy
wrath, that thou blotting out all our unworthiness out of thy memory, may
graciously hearken to our petitions, and may grant us this inestimable
treasure, the price and ransom of our souls redemption. If Lions seek their
meat of God, if the Ox know his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, grant us
a most careful desire to crave this meat of our souls, and to wait and seek
for this bread of life, that we which were created by a consultation of the
Deity, redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, sanctified by the holy
Ghost, may be partakers of this blessed bread of life, and in the end, and
without all end, sit at his heavenly table, reigning together with the Trinity
in the Kingdom of Heaven: to which be all glory, power, praise, and dominion,
both now, and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
PRAYERS FOR PRIVATE HOVSHOLDS.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray.

O Most mighty and eternal GOD, who art the Creator, Guider, Governor, and
Preserver of all things both in Heaven and Earth, vouchsafe we humbly beseech
thee, to look down with the eye of pity and compassion upon us miserable and
wretched sinners; who at this time are prostrate here before thee, to offer up
this our Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving unto thee. And although we be
unworthy, by reason or our manifold transgressions, to present our selves
before thee: yet we humbly beseech thee, for thy Son Christ Jesus our blessed
Lord and Saviors sake, to accept of us, and to grant these our prayers and
petitions which we do make unto thee.

We render unto thee LORD (most mighty and most merciful) humble and hearty
thanks for all thy blessings, and thy benefits from time to time bestowed upon
us; for our Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation, Justification, that
measure of Sanctification in this life, and the assured hope of Glorification
in the life to come: As also for our Health, Wealth, Peace and Prosperity, for
the free passage of thy glorious Gospel; for sparing us thus long, and giving
us so large a time of Repentance; as also for all other thy benefits,
whenever or howsoever bestowed upon us: We give thee humble and hearty thanks
more particularly for thy gracious protection of us this day past, and
delivering us from all the perils and dangers of the same. And seeing thou
have brought, and kept us safe to this present night, we humbly beseech thee
LORD, to protect and keep us in the same: watch over us with thy providence;
Shelter and defend us from all the assaults of the world, the Flesh, and the
Devil. Keep us from all sin, especially from those sins whereto by nature
we are most addicted: Make us sorrowful for our sins past, and seal unto our
hearts, we humbly beseech thee, full assurance of the forgiveness of them, in
thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ: Increase our faith, our zeal, and our
knowledge, and make us daily more and more to increase in piety, and true
holiness. Set a watch O Lord before the door of our Hearts, that they think
not; before the door of our Lips, that they speak not; before all the parts
of our body, that they do not any thing which is amiss, or may breed offense.
Bless us also we beseech thee, in our calling wherein thou have set us:
prosper that which thou have given unto us, and which in thy fear we set our
hands unto. Stir us up to employ our selves faithfully, religiously, and
industriously, in our calling: Give us all things needful for this present
life; and grant that we may so pass through things temporal, that our
affection by them may not be with-drawne from things eternal. These things
and all other, which thou know meet and requisite for us, we humbly crave
at thy hands, in the name of thy Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
concluding these our Petitions with that form of Prayer which himself has
taught us; saying: Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Another prayer.
O Merciful Lord and loving Father, that of the incomprehensible riches of thy
mercy, toward the disobedient and lost children of Adam, (who serving Satan
after the blind and unbridled lusts of the vile flesh, where carried away
through sin and ignorance to damnation) have reconciled us to thy favor
through grace and adoption in Christ Jesus the righteous, by faith and holy
conversation: in whom we are delivered from eternal death and destruction:
Have mercy upon us, and for love of thy sweet Son our Redeemer, defend us
against the power of the destroyer, and with thy mighty hand lift us up out of
the filthy puddle, and deathfull corruption of this abominable world:
purifying our hearts with thy grace that we being wholly inclined to thy
heavenly desires, may grow perfect in all holiness, and abounding in the good
works which thou have prepared for thy Saints to walk in, for the glorifying
of thy name: we may grow an acceptable Temple, for thy continual dwelling in
us O Lord: to the unspeakable peace and comfort, and the everlasting bliss
and salvation of our souls: through Christ our Savior, Amen.

FINIS.

