Here begins a little treatise of the dyenge creature enfected with sykenes
incurable with many sorrowful complayntes.

Labores (...) O homo auerte ab inpatie^tia animam tuam.

Confusi ^^mus Heu infame. Futore consumor Animam amisimus Spes nobis nulle

ALas that ever I sinned in my life to me is come this day ye dreadful tidings
that ever I herd / here has been with me a sergeaunt of arms whose name is
crewelte from the king of all kings / lord of all lords / and Judge of all
Iuges lyenge on me his mace of his office saying unto me I arest you and warn
you to make you ready and yt ye fail not to be ready every hour when ye be
called on / ye shall not wete when. And call sadly to your remembrance your
old and long continued offenses / the goodness of god how largly he has
departed with you the gifts of nature / the gifts of fortune and the gifts
of grace / and how he has departed with you largely and ordained you at your
baptym three sad borowes that ye should safly and sewerly be kept in your
tender age as well from vices as fro bodily peril and ordained you a good
angel to keep you and to counsel you if ye have be cou^seylled by him
bethynke you. And when ye come to the year of dyscrecyon he or deyned you three
sad counseyllers / reason / dread / and conscience if ye have be rewled by
their counsel call that to your remembrance. He ordained you also. v. wits
/ servants that ye should be master of and rule them after your dyscrecyon /
that is to say your feeling / your sight / your herynge / your speech / and
your taste How have ye rewled these that be under your obeysau^ce me thy^keth ye
have much thing to answer for for the Judge that shall sytte upon you he will
not be percyall nor he will not be corrupt with good but he will my^ster to
you Justice and equity certainly as well as this There were certain things he
forbad you and the things ye should flee in any wise that is to wete the seven
deedly sins and all things that should provoke move or stere you thereto he
badde you flee / have ye do so / have ye kept his commandments. x. And yet
that is but little thing.

The lamentacyon of the dyenge creature.
ALas alas exscuse me I can not / and whom I might desire to speak for me I
wot not / the day and time is so dredful / the Judge is so ryghtfull mine enmyes
be cruel my kyn my neighbors my friends my servants be not favorable to me
/ and also I wot well they shall not be herd there.

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to the good angel.
O My good angel to whom our lord took me to keep where be ye now me
thinks ye should be here now and answer for me for the dread of death
dystroubleth me so yt I can not answer for my self here is my bad angel
ready and is one of my chief accusers with legions of fendes with him and I have
no creature to answer for me / alas it is an heavy caas.

The answer of the good angel to the dyenge creature.
AS to your badde deeds I was never consenting. I saw your natural
inclynacyon more dysposed to be rewled by your bad angel than by me how be it
ye can not exscuse you but when ye were purposed to do any thing that was
contrary to the commandments of god I failed not to remember you that it was
not well and counseylled you to flee the places of peril and the company that
should stere or move you thereto can ye say nay hereto / how can ye think that
I could answer for you.

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to reason dread and conscience.
OYe reason dread and conscience ye were assygned to be of my counseyll now
come I require you and help me to answer for me for my defautes be so many
and so abhomynable in the sight of him that shall be my Judge and my accusers be
so many and so unfriendly that they leave not one defaute behind. Now come I
require you and help to answer for me for it was never so great need. The
fere and the dread that I am in dystroubleth me so that one word I can not
speak for my self. Alas that ever I saw this day.

The answer of reason.
BE ye remembered that our lord ordained you a good angel and a badde angel
/ and he ordained you reason and dyscrecyon to know the good from the ill and
he commanded you to do good and leave the evil / he put you in fre choice
whether ye would do well or evil ye ought to call to your remembrance how well
god has done for you and helped you in every danger and peril he would have been loved dred and served accordy^ge to the many fold graces and kyndenesses
that he has showed unto you how to answer for you I wot not loath I am to
accuse you / and excuse you I can not.

The complaynt to the dyenge creature to dread saying thus.
ADrede where be ye is there no help and socour with you to speak for me when
I shall come to my Judgment.

The answer of dread.
NO certainly for when ye were set in pleasau^ce and delectacyon of the world
reason put in your mind that ye did not well / and I dread was with you at
all times and in every place and failed not to speak unto you and to put you in
mind of the shame of this world and dread of dampnacyon and of the peril
that would follow as well here as else where rehersynge unto you the
punyssheme^tes that our lord ordained for sin saying unto you. Se ye not how
gracyously our lord has called you from sin and wretchedness if ye would
understand it / how has he long kept you in worship estate and in
prosperyte and could not know the goodness of god / how has he chau^ysed you
and how often by loss of your children / loss of your kyn and friends / loss
of your goods and loss of all tho things that ye could not be pleased with
and set you in the indygnacyon of the great high and mighty prince and help
you out of the dangers and perils that ye have been in at all times / and yet
have ye not loved him dred him and served him that in all these perils has
preserved and kept you and has been so gracyous and good lord to you who
should speak for you. I. nay certainly

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to conscience saying thus.
ALas conscience is there no help with you I have herd say long ago the
world was to curste / but I would hope that conscience would have compassyon
of my dystresse and much the more that I am frendles.

The answer of conscience to the dyenge creature.
I Am sorry to accuse you and excuse you I can not for conscience and dread have been but seldom from you and called upon you in every time and place of peril
and bad you flee the occasyons of sin ye might have fled at that time and
would not / now ye would flee death and can not / we should speak for you and
dare not and though we would it avails not ye must sorowfully and mekely
suffer ye Iugementes that ye have deserved.

The complaynt of the dyenge creature to the five wits.
OYe five that were ordained deyned to be my servants and under mine
obeysaunce and to have be rewled at all times as I would have you / is there no
good word that ye may a forde to say for me and record my demenynge to you
and report of me how I have rewled and governed you yt were take me to keep
rewle and govern me thinks ye should say for me now / who might so well
say for me as ye five / ye have been with me contynually ever sith that I was
borne night and day and never at no time from me thinks of your kyn denesse
ye should have compassyon upon me and say the best that ye could say for me.
I have been friendly to you and brought you in every place of pleasaunce and
dysporte / now she we your ky^denes again to me and speak to faith and hope
for me that they would charitably do my message unto the most glorious prince
that ever was is or shall be.

The answer of the five wits.
Certainly we meruayll that ye would desire us to speak for you understanding
these worship full people have denied and refused to speak for you your good
angel reason dread and conscience how should we be herd or what credens will
be given unto us that have been your servants and under your obeysaunce and no
thing at all times but as ye have commanded us to do call to your
remembrance how ye have rewled us five sight herynge feeling and thought ye
have at all times brought us in places of pleasaunce and dysporte and though
it were dysporte and pleasaunce / for the time it is now sorrow weeping and
wayly^ge for your sake that we can not excuse you nor no thing say for you
that might be to your well or to your ese for we have been preuy and partyners to
all that has been mysdone in any wise and in every place and your offenses in
every thing is in your defaute for and ye had sadly rewled us and like a
sovereign ye should have restrained in us every vice / for we should have be
ruled by you in every thing / and otherwise than ye would have us do we would
not do / therefore of necessyte your defautes must be laid upon you for we have
do as servants should do and obeyed you in every thing and dysobeyed you in
no thing / wherefore of right the peril must be yours what eredence will ye
give to us than / if we should say well of you the people would say that we were
falls dyssymulours and favorers of sy^ne.

The lamentacyon of the dyenge creature.
ALas there is no creature that I can complayn me to but utterly refuses to
say any thing that might be to my comfort.

The co^playnt of the dyenge creature to faith and hope.
O Holy faith and hope in you is all my trust for how grievously and how
myscheuously yt ever I offended god you displeased I never. I have always
byleued as the church of crystendome has taught me and specy ally is of the
most holy incarnacyon I was never in thought. I have byleued in the blessed
and most glorious trynyte fader sone and holy ghost. I have byleued that the
second person of the trynyte descended in to the bosom of the most glorious
and pure chaste meke vyrgyn that ever was is or shall be and meddled his very
godhede with her pure chaste virgynyte and maydenhede and in her bosom was
parfytly very god and man conceived by the great mystery of the holy ghost
without knowledge or company of any erthly man and she a pure chaste virgyn
flowrynge in virgynyte and by herynge of the holy archaungell Gabryell which
brought unto her the most gracyous and good tidings that ever came to man
kind. Now holy Faith take with you hope and ye twain of your perfyte charity
be my advocates in the high court / and refuse me not nor dysdayne me not for
mine hortyble and abominable sins that I have done / which asks vengeance
in this world and dampnacyon eternal without the mercyes of him which is
almighty / What mean mygth I have thereto. I pray you counseyll me for ye
know well that my reason never dyscorded with the faith / and as to you Hope I
hope all ways that ye will say for me that I have always hoped to the
mercyes of god almighty and that I should be one of the children of salvation
and one of tho that should be redeemed by the precious and bitter paynfull
passion as other sinners have be and certainly other plee nor resystence I can
not make. But and ye twain would be a mean for me to that most glorious and
pure chaste virgyn that chosen was by one assent of all the hole glorious
trynyte to do the most glorious and worshypfull act that ever was done for
her chastyte her pure virgynyte her meekness her virtue and her constaunce was
cause that she was chosen by all the hole glorious trynyte to be daughter
mother and spouse to the most glorious trynyte and that she should bear him
that should redeem all mankind from dampnacyon who may so well be aduocatryse
to the fader the sone and the holy ghost as she and ye will be mean to her
sone for me I hope she will not refuse me / for I understand and know well
that she has help many a sinner that has right grievously offended and in the
holy psalm that was made between her and her cosyn saint Elyzabeth it was said
that all generacyons should bliss her. I hope at the beginning of the world
our lord put not me out of his nombre of tho that should bliss his most holy
mother and record her mercy pity and grace that she showed to sinners when they
have none other socour ne help. She is mother of orphans / and she is
consolacyon of them that been dyssolate / she is guide to all tho that be out of
the way to set them in the right way. I am an orphan I am dyssolate. I am out
of the way I wot not where to cry and call after socour and help but only
to her that bare our redemptour who may so well be mean to the sone as the
mother. And ye twain Faith and Hope would be mean to the mother of mercy for
me. Now gracyous Faith and Hope do your part and dysdayne not my request
though I desire you to this occuparyon / for and ye twain would deny to say
for me I think I shall fall in dyspayre for on whom to call after socour I
wot not / and to put my self in prees as a poor naked best unclothed of
virtue and repleted with vices naked of grace and in mine own defaute and to
come to the presence of the king of all kings and vnpouruayed of all things
that would accord with his most ryall and Imperyall estate I dare not take it
upon me I should be in such dread and fere I should not con ne dare not speak
for my self for I have prayed my good angel to speak for me and he has
denied it. I have called upon Reason Dread and Conscyens and they have answered
me full heuyly that they be loath to accuse me and exscuse me they can not / and
alleges many a great reasonable cause why yt I can not say nay to. I have
called upon my servants which were take me to rewle and govern as I would
answer for them / and they answer me right sorowfully and say if they should
say any good word for me they should not say troth of me and casts to me
that peril that no body would give credence unto them if they would say well
on me but call them flaterers falls dyssymulours and flaterers of sin.

Alas alas I have heuyly dyspe^ded my long life that in all this long time
have not purchased me. One friend to speak for me had our lord of his most
ample grace ordained me unmedyatly after my crystendome to have dyed forth with
I might say I had be borne in a gracyous hour. But would it please your
goodness to speak for me and understand whether I shall have hardynes to make a
byll to the blessed lady and most holy vyrgyn that ever was and she that
dysdayneth not nor denies not sy^nard sy^ners when they call after grace.
Notwithstanding her chastyte and her pure virgynyte excels all other
virgyns. Now good go your way and let me wete how I shall speed for all this
time I live in such dread and fere that me were better dye anon than live any
longer in the dread that I am in. And also I have so great dread and fere of
the ryghtwysnes of almighty god that I am almoost deed for fere. For reason
dread and conscience said to me full shortly that the high Judge would not be
percyall nor he would not be corrupt with good but he will mynyster to me
Justice certainly but and he atteyneth to mynystre to me Justice without favor
I will appele to his mercyes certainly for other remedy is ther^ none par de.
Origene our blessed lady help Thyofull / and sir Emery how should they have
done ne the mother of mercy had been and many another sinner that her grace has
help. She is queen of heaven lady of the world and empress of hell / and
saying to her sone christ Ihesu has dyed and suffered so tourmentous a death and
in her own sight to her great socour and motherly compassyon I hope she would
be loath that theke precious passion should be lost in any creature that her
blessed sone suffered so pacyently.

The answer of faith and hope to ye dyenge creature.
Have ye none acquaintance with our brother Charity we marvel that ye have
not spoken of him in all this time / for and ye were Joined with us twain your
message should be the more acceptably herd manyfolde.

The lamentable complaynt of the dyenge creature to faith hope and charity.
Certainly I have but little deled with him. I was never conuersaunt with him
and that me repents now / for I feel by you twain that he may do much in
the high court. I have more deled with ven geaunce than I have with charity /
for I would have been avenged upon every man by my will when the people had
slain my children my kyn my friends and robbed and spoiled my self certainly
I would have been a wroke right feign and I had had power to my will but though
my power were little certainly I have hated them and wylled them to have been
done to as they have done to me / and well I wot that is not the order of
charity. But now I hertely cry god mercy our blessed lady and you holy charity
of the that mine enemies here before god our blessed lady and you three. I
forgive them all that they have done against me / and will not be avenged
thought I might: And I pray you holy charity though it were long or I were
acqueynted with you be not the lother to do for me I sore repent me that I
have thus vnresonably and vnwyttyngely absented me from you and hertely I cry
you mercy / and pray you of your charity to put out of your mind my
presumptuous folly for certainly I shall never do so more again but in every
thing that I have to do I shall desire your favor socour and your counseyll
and I vttery denyle and desire vengeance and never to dele with him no more
how someuer I be done to but take it in pacyence and think as me ought of
rrght that worse than I have been done to I have deserved to be done to / but
that is not the world / for him have I served and pleased and dyspleased
almighty god that is maker of al thing and his holy begotensone that conceived
was of the holy ghost and borne was of a pure chaste vyrgyn and dyed for our
redempcyon when I have grievously offended and broken his commandments in all
thing knowing that I did not well wherefore my peril is the more. Nor I have
not called after the blessed holy ghost graces mercy socour and her help when
I have been in places of peril of deedly sin. Nor I have not called upon yt
most holy pure chaste and most excellent vyrgyn and I have be sought her of
grace and she turned her vysage from me not for lack of faith but for me
though yt her most excellent charity and chastyte must of very right abhor
my sins and all thing that I pleased the world with I know well that I
dyspleased him that ordained me with his precious passion. And this I wot well
deserves a great punysshemente than I have it suffered and there as me lacked
suffycyaunce and boldenes to come in the presence of them that I have so
grievously offended / will it please your goodness Faith Hope and Charity
charitably to goo and stere and be mean for me to the mother of mercy and pity
that she would go forime to the glorious trynyte and take you three with her /
for well I wot the glorious trynyte will no thing deny that she desires
they understand her perfyte charity such that every creature that calls
after grace she has pity upon them have they never so grievously offended I
should fall in dyspayre and I had not perfyte trust in her grace mercy and
pity. And so I have great cause for to have brought my Ioly soul in to great
bondage and in such aduersyte without remedy that it passes my power to ease
him or help him nor the great special trust that I have in that most
blyssed good lady and in you holy Faith Hope and Charity.

How the sorrowful soul complayneth him to the dyenge creature saying thus.
HOw nyghe haste thou done with thy master the world / how nyghe be ye twain
departed understand thou not how unsure he is / and at thy most need will
fail the / haste thou not sith before this time in the times of thy great
aduersytees and troubles / what has he eased or profyted the. Certain but
little or naught / for and he have flatered or dyssymuled with the one day or
one hour he has lowred and grutched with the more than an hole year
therefore. Haste thou not understand him before in all this time / but hanged
upon him always as long as thou might est / and yet more longer would thou
if that thou myghtest / but now the season and time is come that he will
depart and go from the / and what dystresse that ever thou art in little will
he favor socour or help the / such as thou thynkest be thy friends will
show the a feigned fououre till they know the certain of thy riches / and if
thou have good they will cherysshe and favor the for the season / and
complain and wayle thy death. And yet they would full feign thou were ago and
be right glad with thy death and when time thine eyes be closed / thy herynge
ago thy speech withdrawn and may not speak / than shalt thou se what thy
master the world will do for the / seek thy cofers he will and every corner
by the way of lykelyhode that any good is in / and little will they depart
with to the than / and little compassyon will they have upon thy poor soul /
and they find little or naught in thy cofers what will they say / thou thou
than they will say thou were a fool a waster thou cou dest not keep / thou
spendest more than than had thus will they say by the / and though they
find much thou shalt have but little thereof and fare but little the better /
and if they find but little they will grudge with the and say the never a
good word / think thereon by times and be thine own friend / for and thou can
not love thy self who will love the / can thou love any creature better than
thy self / and if thou do so in faith thou art not wise / remember what I
say now / for thou shalt find this true every word / and though I speak
thus grievously and straytly unto the meruayll not for it. I am that shall abide
suffer and endure the pains for thy defenses. Alas that ever I was cowpled
with the / and so have I cause to say / for I shall be punysshed without
favor for thy deeds / how hastily how sone I can not say. How vnauysedly and
how vnredyly thou purueyest for me I wot never how should any other creature
have compassyon upon me when thou haste not that sight that thou were first
fourmed a creature I have always be with the and never from the and in the
aege of thine Innocencye was kept full virtuously to my great comfort. And in
thy myddle age was kept full vycyously and synfully to my great sorrow / and
in thine old age little or naught remembered thy wretched living. Alas Alas
Alas that ever thou and I were coupled together for the season hastes fast
that I must goo to pains for thy mysrewle and endure pain whether it be
eternal or for a long season I wore not what remedy thy worldely friends will
find to ease me. I am in great dread I trow they will have but little
compassyon on me that am thy poor soul / but give their attendaunce for to
bery the rychely and worshypfully and make thy houses clenly and to make thy
purse emptye and little compassyon or remembrance will they have upon the and me
certainly but let me brenne eternally but if the mercyes of him that is
almighty by the means of his most holy mother that pure chaste maiden that
helps every sinner that calls after grace when there is none other remedy.
Now farewell body thou shalt to earth and ly and rotte and worms shall ete the
and I shall to pains long or else eternally mercy blessed lady that bare
christ Ihesu our redemptour for in none other help I assure me.

The lamentable lamentacyon of the dyenge body to the soul.
ALas sely soul the tourmentes and the pains of mine offenses shall ye suffer
I am so sorry there can no tunge tell the sorrow that I endure that have
brought you in such bondage peril danger and aduersyte without remedy nor
the high and mighty mercyes of almighty god whose mercyes can not be had but
by the means of his blessed holy mother and if she that is so chaste so pure
and so holy would abhomyn the abhomynacyon of our sins what shall I do. I
have desired faith hope and charity to be my advocates to her that bare our
lord Ihesu christ. And when I am answered again such answer as I have I
shall let you wete.

How the dyenge creature complained him to. faith hope and charity saying thus.
OYe holy faith hope and charity where have ye ben so long I have lived in
great dread how have ye spedde have ye ben with the queen of heaven lady of the
world and empress of hell that most glorious pure and chaste vyrgyn that
bare the sone of god that should redeem all mankind / how will her chastyte
her pure vyrgynyte receive me that am a sinner and suffer me to come to her
presence and put a supplycacyon to her most glorious high and excellent
prince that I have so grievously offended her blessed sone and her / will she
not abhor ne dysdayne to look on me that am of all sinners the most horyble
and abhomynable / and have so done that I can not without her most
haboundaunt grace find a mean how to make a sight / but I have herd say of
old antyquyte that she is so mercyable and so gracyous to sinners when they
call after grace and have helped so many sinners that of right must have
perysshed neher grace had be. But what comfort ye have of her most
haboundaunt grace I pray you let me wete / for certainly I live in great
dyspayre / for here has be with me sythen that ye went my soul and
complained that he must perysshe eternally in my defaute and cries and
wayleth the time that ever he was coupled with such an ungracious body that
so has rewled him / and I can not give him no comfort whithout you three.

The answer of faith hope and charity to the dyenge creature.
MEsemeth faith hope and charity have done your message and find that princes
full gracyously dysposed and faith that she remembers well how the glorious
trynyte chose of one assente to be medyatryx and mean between god and man and
that her great worship and Joy was caused for our redempcyon which she can
not put in oblyuyon / ano also the great sorrows not one but many that she
had at her sons passion and saw her blessed and best beloved child dye
so tourmentously for the redempcyon of sinners and he gylteles him self in
every thing but of his great and most ample grace mercy and charity that he
showed unto all sinners and so precious so glorious and so tender was never
man as he was for he was the very pure / and godhede meddled with her pure
chaste vyrgynyte and maydenhode and in her precious body made his holy
habytacyon nine moan these and in her soul eternally. And when she understood
the prophecy of her great mekenes desired that she might be one of those and
symplest servant to her that should bear the sone of god and him that should
redeem all mankind and her great mekenes thought her self not worthy to that
most holy occupacyon: And therefore be of good chere for we faith hope and
charity will bring you there and not leave you till ye be answered and sith ye
have put your specyal trust in us to be your advocates and laid aperte all
temporal and wordely trust we three will not fail you / and therefore put
your soul in comfort / and arm you with the armure of a sure and a hole
confession with a sorrowful contrycyon purposynge to do very satysfaccyon and
out of doubt / we hope ye shall speed right well if it be in your heart as ye
speak with your mouth and else trust not to our frendshyp in no wise but go
and labor your supplycacyon as effectually as ye can deu yse and be out of all
dyspayre for we faith hope and charity will not leave you for the trust that ye
have always had in us.

How the dyenge creature calls after the soul again.
WHere be ye dear soul that was with me but late complaining that ye must to
pain for a long while or else teternally and in my defaute and without
remedy I have been in such dread sorrow and fere for you that no thing could
comfort me till Faith and Hope came to me and asked me if that I were not
acqueynted with Charity. And I have an swered them semely that I was never
acqueynted ne conuersaunt with him and that me repents sore / now Faith and
hope have brought me with him and I have humbly and lowly submytted me to him
and lowly cried him mercy of my presumpcyous folly promising that I will never
effende him more denyenge all such as be his enemies and as he loves not
vengeance / hatered / and cruelte and promised him faithfully that I will
never dele with them more and I hope he has pardoned me / and has be in the
company of Faith and Hope to the mother of mercy for me and brought me a right
gracyous answer again. That she can not put in oblyuyon the great Joy
worship and comfort that she had of ye sone of god for the redempcyon of us
sinners / nor the maydenly and moderly compassyons that she suffered for him in
ye times of his most precious paynefull and bitter passion and that I shall
have herdynes to come to the presence of that most royal and emperyall
princes and put a supplycacyon to her / and therefore be of good chere and
suffer your pains pacyently for though it be long I hope it shall not be
eternally and good dear soul while ye and I be together or yt we depart puruey
in your wisdom some remedy what can be do to your ease and I will be right
agreeable thereto / for when we twain ones be divided and departed few or none
would have compassyon on your pain. Se ye not how the world lowreth upon us
now every day and is ready to depart from us every day for little thing or
naught and less would they do for us and we twain were departed. Therefore
dear soul the remedies that may be found thorughe your wisdom I pray you
find them and I shall be right feign to execute them / for I am at this hour
as sorry as is possible any wretch to be that I have brought you in the peril
of danger that ye be in and as feign would be to do that should ease you and
gladder than ever I was to do any thing that has hurt you.

How the dyenge creature puts his supplycacyon to the mother of mercy Mary
replete with grace princes of reuth / mercy and pity to whom all sinners
resorteth when they be socourles.
MEkely besecheth and sorowfully complayneth your dreadful supplyaunt than al
my long life unto my eldest age have lived and not obeyed ye commandments of
almighty god in no thing but mysused my life in all the seven deedly sins /
and synfully and symply have occupied my five wits and set aside all
virtues and used and occupied all vices and sexued the devil the world and
the flesh having very knowledge both of good and evil and knew well that
yt pleased them despised dyspleased almighty god. I spared not to dysplease
god but I dread to dysplease them and now has a sergeaunt of arms be with me
and laid upon me the mace of his office cruelly and has commanded me to make
me ready every hour for I shall not wete when I shall be called to my Judgment ye
certaynte of death he has brought me in to the grievous infyrmyte that none
erthly medycyne can cure me mine enemies be so great in multitude and have
overcome me and all my defautes brought with them / and I wot well they will
accuse me my worldly friends has for sake me I have cried and called after
them to answer for me and they have answered me right straytly and unfriendly
that they neither dare ne can ne will not answer for me nor excuse me And
shortly they be departed away from my good angel first reason dread and
conscience and my five wits hastes them fast from me ward and leueth me
destytute and all one / and where to have socourne help I wot not but as it
fortuneth me in good time may I say I met me with Faith Hope and Charity and
they have promised me yt they will speak to your most excellent benygne grace
and mercy for me and so I trust they have for certain of your most pure
chaste vyrgynyte and vnwemmed maydenhode I was never in thought. And I have
hoped and trusted to your mercyes always I have herd say that ye be mother of
orphans and I wys I am a very orphan fatherles and motherles / ye be dyssolat
comfort and socour to all tho that be destytute dyssolate and socourles I wys
lady that am I for I have neither socoure help nor conforte of no creature but
only the trust that I have in your benygne grace ye be guide unto them that be
out of the way and seek the means for to come in to the right way. A blessed
lady I have be so long out of the way that I fere and dread for too call to
you for grace / but as Faith Hope and Charity have put me in comfort how loath
ye be to see your blessed sons precious and bitter passion lost in my
creature and they have given me hardynes for to call upon your most noble and
benygne grace. And so good blessed lady with humble dreadful and sorrowful
heart and mind I beseech your most benygne grace mercy and pity to set me in
the right way of salvation and make me one of the partyners of your blessed
sons precious passion and of your maydenly and motherly compassyons and as ye
be come borowe for Mary Egypcyan to your blessed sone. So good lady be my
borowe that I shall never from hens forth wylfully offend your blessed sone
nor you but sore repent that ever I saw / herd or did any things that has
dyspleased your blessed sone or you being in will never to return to sin
and wretchedness again but rather to dye than wylfully to do any thing that
should dysplease my lord christ Ihesu or you. Now princes excellent and
excelly^ge of might and worthynes al creatures as in dygnyte my heart lady my
worldly chief goods pray your sone to have mercy upon me sith in all my
gretest myschefe to your grace I flee I can no ferder refute to find any
consolacyon / and sith my hope and trust is only set in you be ye my refuge
now in this great trybulacyon cover my sinful soul with the mantyll of your
mercy es and set your sons precious passion bytwyne me and eternal dampnacyon.

The supplycacyon of our lady to our lord Ihesu her sone for the seek creature.
O Ihesu my lord my god most blessed sone in whom is all plente of grace and
of vnthoughted mercy to and for all sinners that in sted fast faith and assured
hope devoutly call unto you for help and grace and humbly besechynge mercy and
foryeuenes of their mysfawtes and offenses to you I come as a solyciter and a
besecher for this seek creature which with humble and sorrowful and a contryte
heart sueth contynually for your grace and pardon that it might like you to in
clyne you of your unity pity to his requests and complayntes and graciously to
consider his needs and causes he is sore abashed and dyscomfyted in him self
and as who says utterly confounded considering his grievous and deep sins by
the which he has provoked your wrath and indygnacyon by the which also he is
sore encombred and stands in great danger of his enemy and namely he fereth
him of your dreadful Judgment for well he woteth if ye do him Justice he is but
lost for ever / yet for all this he dyspayreth not of your mercy for he is in
good opinion and trusts to rejoice your pardone and to be reconsyled to grace
whereupon he sueth contynually unto you as he may and dare / for he knows him
self so depely charged in sin and so far elonged for sin grace by sin
yt he thinks him self unworthy to approach to offer his own prayer /
therefore he sueth by means and specially by me to whom he calls inportunely
with pyteous and waylynge voice and seeks not but contynueth to sobbing and
weeping so lamentably that my heart erneth to here / and certes I can not me
no longer conteyne but to instant his prayers and to put me in your grace for
him for he calls me the mother of mercy for encheson that I bare you with be
the very fountay nes and wells of mercy and have it of vnseuerall proprete to
be mercyable to all sinners / and for this he chasengeth me in manner as though
I should owe of dute to enterparte my labors and prayers in this behalf with
him and for him / and to sue for the hasty speed of his reconsylacyon and that
he lets not to put me in mind that I was ordained of god to be mean by
twene him and man / and certes I allow well his mind therein / for true it is
that I ought so to be that like wise that ye my dear lord and sone descended
from heaven to earth by me and be came pertyner of man's nature by me. So all
sinners that be not in estate of grace should be reconsyled and restored to
grace by me and be made pertyners of your Joy by me. This is well sygnyfyed in
the figure of aarons rode which bare a flower myraculously as scripture
witnesses. The which rode sygnyfyeth me like as the flower be tokeneth you /
for as a rode grows dyrectly upwarde and is the straight mean between ye
rode and the flower / and he that will clyne together the flower must ascend by
the rode or else bow the rode and cause the flower to stoop / so he that
wylleth to rise from sin must rise by me / and he that will acclyne your
grace and rejoice your pardon must bow me by prayer that I may cause you to
stoop that is to say too inclyne to here prayer and requests and to let
dyscende your bemes of grace to them. Lo thus my dear sone and lord it is
open and euydent that I am ordained to reconsyle man and that / it is in manner
my dewte and office so to do / wherefore sith this seek creature thus
contynually and vnfatygably cries to me with pyteous and doulfull complaynt
and requires me so straytly that I can not seas to put me in endure for him
and enterparte my labors with him for him / and certes it is not only for his
inportune suyte and prayer but also for other consyderacyons reasonable and
charytable that moves me to tender and instant his causes / one is that he is
alyed to me right nigh by spyrytuall cognacyon for both we have one fader that
is god which is your fader by creacyon and one mother the church which is our
mother by regeneracion thus is he my brother and I his sister and now my lord me
seems right unsitting me being a queen to se my brother a prisoner I at
lyberte and he in thraldom I in bliss and he in tourment / wherefore I am
constray ned as who says by nature to sue for his delyuerynge and reconsylynge
and this is one of the consyderacyons that resonably moves me to sue for his
pardon.

The second consyderacyon.
ANother is that sith it lyked you of your great bounte and inestymable charity
for ye reconsylynge of man to take of me your handmayden flesh and blood and
bone and the said flesh and blood to offer in sacrefyce for redempcyon of me
and this and all other whom it has and shall like you to call to your faith
me seems I ought not / for as much as in me lies to see that thing myscarye
which you have so precyously redeemed and bought as derely as ye bought me and
with the same flesh and blood that ye took of me your humble creature and
handmayden.

The third conderacyon.
AN other is this I and every your other creatures before your party bowed to
sue means to honor to worship to gloryfye you in that we can or may / but
so it is that in Iustyfyenge of this sinner great honor and glory shall be to
you and to your saints for your scripture says. Gaudiu^ est angelis dei super
vno peccatore penitenciam agenti. That is to say Joy and gladness is to your
aungelles the conuersyon of one sinner contryte and penytent and in another
place your scripture says. Magis gaudium est super peccatore penitenciam
agenti quaui super nona ginta nomen justice. That is to say and to sygnyfye
that more Joy and honor is to god in reconsylynge a sinner that is in full
and assured purpose to persevere in grace than in great multitude of other
ryghtwys that never offended. Wherefore my lord as I am bound to honor and
gloryfye you so am I bound in manner to make instau^ce for reconsylynge of this
your creature in the which thing ye shall be gretely honored and gloryfyed
and these be the things that moves me to instau^ce and solycyt his causes and
to submytte me for him.

The fourth consyderacyon.
FOrthermore I se in him great abylyte and lykelyhode to se that creature that
may serve you honor and gloryfye you for he is entyerly dyspleased with him
self that he has so grievously sinned and offended your grace and he is right
heavy and contryte therefore and he remembers him many sythes of his old sins
not as delytynge ne having pleasure in them but to his shame and great remors
and he has them in perfyte hatred in so much that he would not offend
again in the leest of them for all the world he has fastened his entente
and purpose to be here after all of other demeanynge through your help and
grace and he will gladly do penance for that he has trespassed and he lowly
submytteth him self to the correccyon of your church and wylfully assenteth
to pay the fynau^ce and suffer the penance atttaxed by your church and to do
satyffaccion as is for his freylte possible. And where as he says him self
not of abylyte ne power to do satysfaccyon as him owes in that behalf he
puts him self holy in your grace and remytteth him to your great mercy and
to the merit of your passion which counteruayleth and preuayleth all the
penance and satysfaccyon that might be possible for to be done by all the
world from Adam till to the last creature that shall be borne. And he
pyteously cries to me and besecheth me to enterpose my merytes between your
Judgment and him and to offer in sacryfyce for him the sobbing and syghynges
the sorrowful and lamentable terys that I wept for you in your tender age and
chyldhode when Symeon prophesied to me your passion / and when I had lost you
in Iherusalem and the sorrows that I suffered for you in time of your paynefull
and grievous passion when the sword of sorrow perysshed my heart. And certes I
am right will content and glad so to do. And I beseech you so to accept my
merytes for his / as he goodly desires and to set my sorrows and teres of pity
in place of his penance and contrycyon. Forthermore it might like you to
consider the great labor and besynes of Faith Hope and Charity and namely for
charity which sueth for him contynually and never is ydell but besy to labor
for him / and she cleueth and calls for me for him incessauntly to se the
expeccyon of his causes / and she undertakes for his aberynge and well ye wot
that her desire and prayer may not be void ne frustratte but she must be
gracyously herd in all her goodly requests and desires. She has also
received faith and hope on her party for this seek creature and has professed
to keep your faith inuyolably and hope has put him in full assurance of your
mercy / for though it so be that he se not in him self whereof he may trust
to rejoice your pardon / yet she shows him that in you is so great
promptues of mercy and contynuall costome that you be wont and used always to
forgive and have of natural proprete for to be mercyable to all sinners that
it makes him bold to fasten the anchor of his hope in you and trusts finally
to make a vyage in the port of your mercy.

The conclusyon of our ladies supplycacyon.
NOw my lord sith all the good abylytes and dysposico^ns unto grace be in this
creature by your suffraunce / there is no more to do but that ye let descend
your grace to the vessel so dysposed and that you vouchesaufe to suffer him
rejoice your pardon and reconsyle him to your church and make him a membre
thereof the sooner and spedlyer for this my prayer and request. I you beseech my
most dear lord and sone who me it has lyked you always to here gracyously
and never suffer to depart boteles of petycyon for which be to you and to
your most honorably and drad father with the holy ghost your egall pere
everlasting Joy honor and glory. Amen.

Here ends a little treatise of the dyenge creature
Enprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of ye son by wynkyn de
word. Anno dn^i. M. CCCCC. vii.

Sis humilis Victus sum Superbos punio

Wynkyn de Worde's device Wynkyn de Word




