A Brief DECLARATION For What manner of special Nuisance concerning private
dwelling Houses, a man may have his remedy Assise, or other Action as the Case
requires.

Unfolded in the Arguments, and opinions of four famous Sages of the Common
Law; together with the power, and extent of customs in Cities, Towns, and
Corporations, concerning the same: together with the determination of the Law,
concerning the commodity, and use of Houses, and their appurtenances.

Whereunto is added, The Justices of Assise their Opinion, concerning statute
law for Parishes, and the power of Justices of Peace, Churchwardens, and
Constables; and to know what they are to do concerning Bastards borne in their
Parishes, relief of the Poor, and providing for poor Children, what remedy
for the same.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM COOK, and are to be sold at his shop, near
Furnivals-Inne gate in Holbourne. 1636.

The Arguments, and opinions of four famous Sages of the Common Law touching
the power, and extent of customs of Cities, Towns, Corporations, and
Inheritances, together with the determination of the Law concerning the
commodity, and use of Houses with their appurtenances, and wherein an action
may be maintaineable concerning the same, and wherein not.
A Man has a house, Mr. Mounsons argument.
and the windows thereof open into an others man's house, whether he may build
a house, so as to stop up the same lights, or not: concerning which, I
purpose to show you my opinion, and likewise to show unto you the necessity and
use of Houses.

The first, and chief use of an house is to defend man from the extremity of
the wind, and weather. And by the receipt of comfortable light, and wholesome
air, into the same to preserve man's body in health.

Therefore who so takes from man so great a commodity as that which preserves
man's health in his castle, or house, does in a manner as great wrong as if he
deseised him altogether of his Freehold.

As if I have a Mill, and another will turn away the water running to the
same, I may bring an Assise against him.

So, if I have a Pipe, which conveyeth water unto my house through the ground
of another man, and he will cut my pipe, I shall have an action against him: In
like manner who so stops my light, is the cause that no air can enter into
my house, without which no man can live, and a house lacking light, is rather a
dungeon then a house.

If one who has a horrible sickness be in my house, and will not depart, an
action will lie against him, and yet he takes not any air from me, but
infecteth that which I have.

So if one cast filth near unto my house, I may bring my action against him.
If a man build so high that his house droppeth on my house, I shall have remedy
against him.

And though light and air be common, yet if by any man's own act they may be
made private, they may not then be taken from him, and if they be, he shall
not be without remedy.

This appears by Hawks, and Dear, which be feraenaturae, yet if by man's
industry they are made tame, the owner will thereby gain property in them: but
peradventure it will be said, The soil is his own, and it is Damnum absque
injuria, what then? Though it be his own, he must so use it, that he hurt not
his Neighbor.

As if a man had a Pond of water, and will suffer it to drown his neighbors
land, he shall have remedy against him.

If a man be bound to repair the banks of the sea that it drown not the land
adjoining, and so does not, but the land is drowned; an action lies against
him. You may perhaps say there is plenty of light remaining, this
notwithstanding our action will lie very well, for the taking away, or
impayring part thereof. As an action was brought quare arctavit, and 2. H. 4.
where a man had a way and another plowed the same, and it was thought there
that an action would very well lie, and yet the way remained. If I have common
in your Land, and you will plough part of the same Land, I shall very well
maintain an action against you. So it is of Common of Estovers, and piscary:
And yet in all these cases, the whole is not gone, but some part remains.
This proves that though he has not stopped the whole light of the house, yet
for that he has stopped parcel, an action is very well maintainable, but if
you had said, that on the same side there had been plenty of light, it might
have better stood with reason.

As touching your custom, whereby a man may stop his neighbors lights: I
think this is rather Malus usus, then any custom: for as I have learned of
Mr. Hales, a custom is thus defined, Consuetudo est jus non scriptum nunquam
repugnans rationi naturali, and therefore if any custom swerve from reason,
and natural equity, it is but malus usus; and for that to be abolished, for
by entendment, and consideration of the law, and reason, every custom had a
reasonable beginning, as that case in 35. H. 6. of selling Jewels in Cheapside
may have a reasonable beginning. In like manner the custom of Gavelkinde, that
Sons shall equally inherit the Lands of their Fathers. Such is the custom,
that if a woman marry without license, that she shall loose her dowry.

So is it also of the custom that one town may enter Common with another. All
these, and such like may well be thought to have a reasonable beginning.

Otherwise it is, where by intendment their beginning cannot be thought
reasonable.

As that a man shall pay relief, when that he shall marry his daughter. And
as the custom is in Mich. 35. H. 6. fol. 31. of the pledging of goods: So it
is of the custom, to arrest a man before the day of payment. In like sort in
2. H. 4. that the tenant shall not put his beasts into the Common, before the
Lord has put in his, which peradventure he will never do, so it is 10. H. 6.
If the Major of a town will prescribe to impound all beasts which shall be
damage fesonet in his own pound, and there to keep them till he be
satisfied as he list, or if he prescribe to use, and occupy the same beasts
howsoever he pleases.

In 2. R. 3. and 22. E. 4. one demanded whether it were a good custom, that if
the Mayor of a town suspect a man, that he may arrest and imprison him 3.
days: this was thought no good custom, but to be most abhorring, and
dissonant from reason. And therefore forasmuch as houses be necessary, and
cannot be without light, and air, their beginning was lawful, necessary, and
reasonable, but that a man might stop up his neighbors lights, was never
necessary, neither had lawful, or reasonable beginning, neither at any time
obtained the force of a law, or custom, for in K. Henry the 2. his time, it
was but a constitution in London, and not any custom, or law; and therefore
never allowed, or confirmed by Parliament, for Magna Charta Ca. 9. did confirm
such old liberties and customs as London had at that time: And therefore, if
this were not any law or custom at the time of the making of that statute, it
neither was nor could be confirmed by the same, for the more general Statutes
shall have a reasonable construction. As the Statute that does prohibit
maintenance, shall have a construction, for lawful maintenance is not thereby
prohibited. The like law is that where it is said, that a fine shall be a
Bar to a feme coverte, this is to be understood of a good, and lawful fine,
so this confirmation by Parliament of customs, and liberties of London, shall
be intended a confirmation of all their good, and lawful customs, and not of
unreasonable, or wrongful usage, such as in 27. H. 6. if the house of tenant
for term of years decay, that then he shall pay no rent, etc. But if your
custom were then good, and so confirmed by Parliament, yet the words thereof
may not be stretched to our case, the words are visus fenestrarum, and the
Civil law says, a man may estop visum, and not lumen, lumen est descendens de
coelo, visus est meus prospectus ad terram.

And our Law says, petit visum terrae, And visus and lumen differ. But Sir you
cannot in this case defend your self both by the Common law and custom too.
For you ought absolutely to trust to the one of them, and if you had plead thus
by way of Bar, your plea without all doubt would have been double.

As if a man will plead affeafement with warrenty, and rely not on the
warrenty, this plea is double. So in the case at the Bar, you plead both the
common Law, and the custom, and your plea is double, and therefore for all
these causes I think the plaintiff ought to recover.

Mr. Plowden.

Albeit it has been alleged, Mr. Plowdens Argument.
that the windows have been time out of memory there, and the lights ancient,
it is all one, as if the house had been built at this day. Put the case there
is a pale betwixt your ground and mine, and you build to the uttermost part of
mine, by your first building I am bridled and stopped of my building; And in the
Country who so makes a hedge, will make a dike in the uttermost part upon his
own land. So he that makes a Park, will leave ground out of the same
compass without the pale for this Keeper to walk about it, for there he may
better hear if any body be there within, then if he were within himself, And
this is called free-bownd. If a man build his house so high that it droppeth on
mine, an action will very well lie, for there is a manifest hurt, and wrong
done unto me: but 22. H. 6. where the Prior of St. Edees had three Mills, an
other man built an other by them, he could not have any remedy for this. But
if any of his tenants which held of him by grinding at his Mill grind at the
new Mill, the Prior may have an action against him, for he whose the land is,
might use the same for his greatest commodity, and gain.

If a man cut down Trees which fall upon an other man's land, he shall have
his action; otherwise it is, if a Tree fall by reason of wind. So in our case:
of our own soil we may make the best, as in 12. H. 8. a man had a pond, and
let the same run out, whereby the next dwellers land was drowned, this was
but damnum absque injuria, wherefore no action would lie. In 4. E. 3. a man had
a Lime kilne, which destroyed the Fruit of his neighbor, who maintained his
action, for in that case this takes place, Sic. utere, tuo, ut alienum non
laedas; And Mr. Rastall says in his book, if a man have a Dye-house, and the
water which runs to his house, kills the Fish of another, an action lies.
If a man cast filth under my walls, I may punish him for it. And in the 46. E.
3. The Prior of Buckhurst had a sluice, whereby Salmons came in, and one
stopped the same, wherefore he had his action. Like whereas one cutteth away
the water, which runs to my Mill, for the proof whereof Mr. Reynolds put a
case out of 19. E. 3. where an Assise was brought for two things, one because
he had levied a house to stop the light; an other, because he could not
repair the same: There it was thought that no action would lie, because he
might have remedied, this in the beginning when he built his house. And the
case was in 7. Edw. 3. in the last point, and there the Lawyer said, that he
might have left space enough in his own Land, and the party was non-suted.
Horwoods report has two verses, Saepe recordare si debes adificare
Vt poteris stare cum came vis reparare.


But you aid your self with a prescription that you have had light time out
of mind, this is no good prescription, for a prescription must be against some
party. But this is against God; You say further, that the other had no house,
which is not good, for a prescription must be in the affirmative, and this is
in the negative, and so says Pris^t in 22. H. 6. that a man cannot prescribe
in the not having a house. But admitting it to be the usage.

An usage is general, and a constitution special in 12. E. 4. A diversity is
taken between usage, and custom, for that a custom is a thing disagreeing
from the Common law, but not contrary, and also it would not be beautiful that
Cities should have any void places, in them, and it would be most honorable
that they should be populous. And therefore was there a Statute made 27. H. 8.
caprim^, that there should not be any void places in diverse Cities, also
houses are necessary for the sustenance of man, in 22. E. 4. there is a custom
that if a man plough his Land, he might turn his plough upon an other man's
land: and this was thought a good custom for the favor of Tillage, much more
our case of Building is to be favored. 8. E. 4. the custom is, that a
Fish-man may drive stakes into an other man's ground to dry his Nets, which was
allowed for a very good custom. Likewise 15. E. 2. one prescribed that when
the Hay was carried out of a certain Meadow, that he should occupy the land
until our Lady day, which was allowed by the Court. So a man may prescribe to
have Common of estovers in another man's Land, and to cut them down himself.
The Lord in ancient demesme prescribed, that if the villain of another Lord
remained a year and a day in ancient demesme, that then it shall not be
lawful for his Lord to take him from thence. In like manner, one may prescribe
to have gravel in my Land, and all these customs stand very well with reason.
If I have a way, and another man plow up the same, I cannot have an action on
my case, but I must have an Assise and to is the book in 2. H. 4. Mr.
Fleetwood says that all customs must stand with reason. And in 5. E. 4. it is
said, that albeit all customs are confirmed, yet they must be examined, by the
rule of reason, as the custom of Gavelkinde stands with reason. The Statute
that gives a writ of ravishment, de Gurd to Guarden in soccage shall be
extended to the Mayor, and Aldermen of London, to give them like remedy which
was confirmed by 1. E. 3. Also the Statute that no man shall give lands in
Mortamaine, yet Citizens and Freemen of London may give lands in Mortmaine by
their custom, which custom is also confirmed by act of Parliament. As for the
doubleness of the plea I will not say any thing, for that it is not any
Justification, but only for to diminish the damages, if perhaps it be found
against us. And therefore upon the whole matter, I think the plaintiff ought
not to recover in this action. I think the contrary, and first I will consider
these four things.

First, whether such buildings, ex opposito, Mr. Wrayes Argument.
be a nuisance by the Common law. Secondly, whether this custom be a good
custom. Thirdly, whether such kind of buildings be for the beautifying of the
City. Fourthly, whether the said confirmation by Parliament make this custom
good, or not.
As touching the first matter, the nuisance which is supposed to be in stopping
up of windows in the South part of an house, I conceive is a nuisance by the
Common law, for by the Common law, one shall not hurt the Freehold of another,
and no greater hurt, grievance, or damage can be done to any man's Freehold,
then to take away the light and air thereof, which is comfortable, and
commodious for him, for when this light, and air are taken from him, his house
remains as a dungeon. And diverse cases there be where a man takes away from
another not the thing it self, but the commodity of the thing, and for that he
shall have his remedy by action: as if I have a water running through your
ground unto my Mill, and you will turn away the course thereof, or stop the
same; I may bring an assise 9. E. 3. pla. 19. yet I will confess, that if
another build a Mill by my Mill, I may not have any action, as 22. H. 6. for it
is damnum absque injuria. So it is in 2. H. 4. in the case of the School cadem
ratio. But if any ought to grind at my Mill, and another will hinder them, an
action lies 9. H. 6. fo. 45. where the Pryer of St. Bartall had a Fair, and
one interrupted the comers thereto, whereby his Toll was impaired, and yet not
his Fair, but the profit of his Fair taken away, and he had remedy. So in
our case he has not meddled with our Freehold, and yet has he hurt our
Freehold. So in 4. E. 2.13. E. 3. If I have a Fair, and the King will grant
another, if my Fair be impaired by this I shall have an action, and so of a
Ferry, and the reason is, because a man is compellable to maintain his Fair,
Ferry, or Market, and if he do not, it is punishable in a Leete. But of a
School, otherwise it is, for that a man is not bound to maintain it, but
Houses in Cities men are bound to maintain, and that by Statute, otherwise
they may in curre the punishment. 18. E. 3. one built his house so high over
mine, that the rain dropped from his upon mine, and it was thought there that
an action was maintainable, yet that hurt might have been amended a fortiori
in our case where the hurt is perpetual, and cannot be amended. And if for a
way an action lies, as it is in the 42 E. 3. much more for an hurt to our
health, which above all things men have regard unto, for the proof whereof we
have a writ in the Register de leproso amovendo. Likewise the selling of
corrupt meat, whereby men's bodies may sustain harm, is punishable in a
Leete, which proves that the Common law has regard unto the health, and
welfare of every private man. There is a case in 4. E. 3. lib. ass. pla 3.
where one built a Lime-kilne, and his neighbor was anoyed by the smoke
thereof, and had his remedy. If a man shall be punished for smoke, which may be
avoided, and dureth but at times, what shall we think of the taking away of
light, and air, which cannot be amended, but remains a continual and
perpetual nuisance? as for the cases in 19. E. 3. which has bin avouched so
often to make strongly against us, I take them to be one case, for so much as the
Justices which speak in one place, speak also in the other place; and last of
all in both cases, the case was thus, an assise of nuisance was brought, and the
Plaintiff counted how the defendant had levied a house, so that thereby his
light was stopped up, and that he could not so well come to his house as he
did before, also that he could not repair his house so well as he could before.

Herebe said, as to the light be it a nuisance, such a one as it is. Tiel. quel.
for the repayring none, for when a man builds, he must leave so much space on
his own ground that he may come to repair his house, and if he had thought
that stoping of his light had bin no nuisance he would not have said, be it a
nuisance Tiel quel. but have said as he did to the other case of repayring, it
is no nuisance. And therefore for the first matter, I think this to be a nuisance
by the Common law.

As touching the second matter, whether this custom be a good custom or not,
and I think the same is no good custom: For consuetudo est in etc. ut supra,
a custom is not against law, and reason, but this custom of yours is against
reason, and is in effect, as if a man should take my life from me, for these
be the instruments to maintain, and preserve man's life, and the law says,
sic utere tuo, ut alienum non laedas, therefore a custom against this precept,
is malus usus, and therefore abolendus, as the case in 21. E. 4. It the Kings
Bayliffe or any other Bayliffe distraine Cattle, and bring them to the Lords
Pound, and if the owner did not within three days agree with the Lord, that
then he should loose bis Cattle, this was thought unreasonable and not allowed
for any good custom. So in 9. H. 6. where there the Lord of a Leet would have
prescribed to have all the waste ground, but he could not, because it was
against reason, that he who had nothing in the Land should have the wastes. Like
unto the said case in the 35. H. 6. fo. 31. of pledging of goods, and such is
that case in 43. E. 3. where the Lord of the Ma^nor would have prescribed, that
none of his Tenants should marry their daughters without his license; this
custom was thought to be against all equity, and reason. In 13 E. 3. in a dum
fuit infra aetatem, one would have prescribed, that if the Plaintiff could
number 12 d. he might alien his land by the custom: this is not a reasonable
custom, for a man may be able to number 12 d. and yet not have discretion
enough to alien his Land. So it is likewise against natural reason, that one
should bar me of my light, and air, without which I cannot live, and
therefore these things be of necessity. Also it is against the Law that one
should meddle with the Freehold of another man, unless it be for a
Commonwealth, as 8. E. 4. where one justified the setting in of stakes for to
dry his nets, and likewise in the 11. H. 2. where one brought an action for
taking or driving his Hogs, the Defendant justified, because the custom of
the City was, that if any man's Hogs came into the City, and upon warning
given to the owners to keep them out: if they came again, that then they
shall be forfeited. This is a reasonable custom, because Swine are beasts that
may cause diseases to be in a City, and therefore it is against the
Commonwealth, in 22. E. 4. Where it is said; that a man may turn his plow
upon another man's land, that is a good custom, for by this means no land
shall be unsowne, which is for the maintenance of Tillage, and the benefit of
the Commonwealth. But this your custom is but a private custom, and not for
the maintenance of the Commonwealth, and therefore is like unto the custom in
43. E. 3. that if the tenant cease to do his custom, the Lord may enter, this
custom stands not with the Common law, neither with the Statute which
puts the Lord to his cessavit, and gives him not any entry. So it is to be
thought of the custom in 2. H. 4. that the Tenants shall not put their beasts
into the Common before the Lord has put in his, which peradventure he will
never do, so that the Tenants shall never have their Common. So it is if a man
prescribe that the alienation of the Husband of the Lands of his Wife shall be
good without examination of her. Like law of the Custom in 43. E. 3. that if
any goods be wayned in any manner, and if any man take them, that then it
shall be lawful for me to distraine, and detain the distress until such
time as I am satisfied: by these cases rehearsed it is manifest, and clear
that all usages against natural reason, and the Common law of this Realm, are
not customs, but evil usages, and not to be allowed. So in our case a custom
to take away a man's light, and air, preservers of health, must needs be malus
usus, and therefore ought to be taken away; For good usages stand with reason,
and as Bracton says, must give place to reason, and law. But you will say,
that the Law of your City is such: I say, if it stand not with reason, and law,
it shall not be allowed. As 10. E. 3. in an appeal brought by a Citizen, the
defendant waged battle, the Citizen said the custom of London is such, that
a stranger should not wage battle against a Citizen, this was thought no good
custom, nor sufficient to deprive a man of a benefit, which the law gives
him. And so in 27. H. 6. in an action of debt upon a lease for years, the
defendant said that the custom was, that the plaintiff should repair the
houses, and if not, that the defendant should pay no rent, this was thought to
be no custom allowable. For the third point, this is no beautifying at all to
the City. In our case Mr. Hayles his house is an ancient house, and therefore
against reason that by latter building, the commodity, and use of the same
should be taken away. You say also that it is a thing honorable to have
buildings in Cities; This I grant, and I think no man will deny it: but by
building of one, to impair a better house, this is not any beautifying, or
honor at all to a City, but rather the contrary. For the fourth matter, if the
custom be not good, the confirmation cannot make it good: for as I take the
law, the common learning is, that a confirmation cannot make a void thing
good: as for a confirmation est firmum facere id quod non firmum fuit ante, sed
fuit tamen 26. H. 8. If an Infant grant an advouson, and at his full age
confirms the same, by this confirmation nothing is wrought. So it is in the
case of 33. E. 3. where the lease for years was made by a Bishop, and he dyed
before the years expired, the successor confirms the said lease, and
nihiloperatur. Likewise in 39. H. 6. the King granted an advouson to one, and
after granted the Manor with the advouson to another, and after the
confirmation is made, yet the advouson passes not. But where the Statute
limitteth, that men may devise unto corporations in Mortemaine, yet if they
will devise to any that is not a Corporation, it is without warrant: And also
albeit a man may not wage his law in London, yet if at the Common law, an
action be brought against him, he may: So it is of the case in 20. H. 6. that
if one be brought before the Sheriff, that the Mayor may dismiss him, yet
after judgment he may not dismiss him.

Likewise 12. E. 4. where one would have prescribed to buy things without
paying of toll, that he could not be allowed. And therefore I will conclude
that such customs as stand with law, and reason, are to be allowed, and
contrary such as swerve from the rules of law, and reason, to be disallowed. As
this custom of yours, that a man should stop his neighbors lights is
altogether unlawful, and unreasonable, and therefore the plaintiff ought not
thereby to be barred of his action.

Mr. Manwood.

Mr. Manwoods Argument.
Here be two matters chiefly to be considered, whether by the Common law this
be a nuisance, to stop up part of a man's light, then if the Common law seem to
be doubtful, whether the custom will help us, or not, diverse cases have
been put, when a man touches not the Freehold of another, but on his own
land does wrong unto another man's. But all these cases do vary from our case,
for they are where a man has a private profit in a thing, and another by doing
an act upon his own land takes away the same, wherefore an action will lie,
as the case in 46 Edw. 3. where the Abbot of Buckhurst had Salmons, coming in
at sluice from the Sea, and a stranger stopped the same, so that they could not
come, and he had his action. So it is where one takes away my way, because
this is a thing local. And so if water running to my Mill, if one miscarry the
same: generally wheresoever I have a private profit, or interest, and one bar
me of the same, it is injury: but the air is not any element local, neither
may any man miscarry it, for it suffers nothing to be void, also light, and
air be not things of necessity, but of pleasure, and be not any profit in
certo loco, and therefore not like unto other cases of things both profitable,
and also necessary. The case of the Ferrie I will grant, that if I have a
Ferrie to transport men, and another will erect another I shall have an action,
because that I am compellable to maintain it, and the not keeping of it, is
presentable in a Leete. The same Law is of the Market, where the King grants
another Market ad nocumentum of mine, I may have a Scire-facias to repeal his
letters patents if he have these words in them, that the grant should not be
to the hurt, or prejudice of any other market; and if not, I shall have an
action on my case: your case was also compared to the case in 4. E. 3. and 4.
ass. pla. 3. where the ass. was maintained, not for that the plaintiff was
annoyed by the smell of the smoke, but because his Apple Trees, and other his
fruits were destroyed by the same, and this is a good reason, for that it is to
his disinheritance. As for the case of the Lime-house at Ratcliffe, and the
smoke of Smiths houses which cast many unsavory smells, it is damnum absque
injuria. And I my self was by a Smith annoyed by the smell of his smoke, but
yet might I not have any action against him. In 18. Edw. 3. one built an house
so high that it dropped from his to mine, in this case an action will lie, for
my tyles are thereby consumed, gutta cavat lapidem. So of the case in 2. H. 5.
if by common assent our Houses join and a gutter is made betwixt us, if I
pluck up my part, you may maintain an action against me. All these cases
hitherto put, have been of taking away a local commodity, or else of
consuming something.

The case of the filth I find not in my book, but in the book of Entries,
and there it was Per parietes, so that the walls were hurt thereby. But I will
agree with you, that if all your windows were stopped, that an action will
lie, and where you say fit utere tuo ut alienum non laed as, this is not meant
of things of pleasure, but of things of profit. And here is not any part of
your house consumed, but herein a let of your pleasure only, for which your
action is not maintaineable. And if I have a Windmill, and another will build
another by mine, I cannot have any action against him, 11. H. 4.7. E. 3.22. H.
6. But otherwise it is of a Water-milne, 9. assisar. pla. 19. where one had a
Watermill, and another built near unto him, so that he could not grind so
much as he was wont, in this case a man may very well mainetaine his action.
If I have an Inn, and another set another in the same Town, he is not
punishable, but if he will stop my guess, which come to my house, I shall
have remedy. If I have a Brew House, and another build another by mine, I shall
have no action. 12. H. 8. If water fall on my land, and I make a Sluice, and
let it out of my land unto another man's; this is dispunishable, for every man
may do this one after another until it come unto the River, but if it be a
river, otherwise it is; For there it is in loco certo. If one house should not
be adjoining unto another, it would be a great deformity, and if Cheapside
were so built, it would be a strange Cheapside. And the Civil laws say, that
two lights on the former part, and back of an house, are sufficient. And if
you make your windows into our garden, this is a wrong done unto us, for by
this means I cannot talk with my friends in my Garden but your servant may
see what I do, and so the wrong first begun in Mr. Hales. And therefore Vim vi
repellere licet. And I S has not consumed, or hurt any part of his house, but
interrupted him of his pleasure only. But I further affirm, that for every
hurt a man may not have an action, but if a man be oftentimes hurt, he may very
well have an action. As if the Lord distraineth for rent, an action lies not,
but if he distraine so often, that I cannot plow my land, I shall have an assise.
So the Kings grant of exemption to one is good, but if it be to diverse, it is
not good. But if the Common law would not help us, yet custom will, and
whereas it has been said, that it is against natural reason, and law, it is
not so, Consuetudo ex rationabili causa private communem legem, and unless it
do privare communem legem, it is no custom. As that an Infant of 15 years
age, may aline. For at this age he may consent to marriage, therefore in as
great reason may he alien his lands; and in some places any Infant of 9 veeres
may bind himself apprentize, which is a good custom and stands with
reason. But some customs there are that be not good, As that the tennants
shall not drive their Beasts into the Common before the Lord has put in his.
So if the less will prescribe to surrender at his will, 7. H. 6. otherwise it
is of the custom in the 14. H. 4, that the Tennant shall not alien without the
presentment of the same before, this is a good custom, and yet against common
reason, but yet if it has any taste or smatch of reason, it shall be allowed.
As if the Lord prescribe that the tennant shall not Common with any beasts, but
those which were bred on the same land, this is good, for this will cause the
tennant to breed Cattle; likewise that a female sole Merchante shall sue
without her husband, this is good, and yet against Common law, and reason,
because the husband hereby is discharged of all such business: therefore if a
custom have any part of reason, it shall be allowed. As 8. E. 3. that a man
may make an estate to his wife during her life, and that should be as good as
an endowment ad ostium ecclesia. So is it of the custom of the Isle of Man,
that to steal a Capon, or a Pigge, shall be Felony, and not to steal a
Horse, or Cow, for that the one may be hid, the other may not. Likewise is it,
that the youngest son shall inherit, because he is less able to help
himself. So is it of the custom of Kent, The Father to the bough, the son
to the plow, and yet directly against the Common law. So I think of the case
of Hogs put by Mr. Wray, for that in the time of pestilence it is dangerous to
let them come into Cities.

This City is the greatest City, and most populous in this Realm, and the
more populous the more honorable, and the more buildings, the more populous
and honorable will it be. And therefore Building is to be favored. And by
this building all his light is not stopped, but parcel. And Mr. Hales thereby
loses no not any great commodity, but is restrained of a little pleasure, for
which he cannot maintain his action.

To the act of Parliament I will speak nothing, but this I will say, that if
any custom be merely void of reason, it is not good. As the custom in 5. H.
7. that if the Lord distraine the beasts of his tenants for rent, that he may
detain them until he be satisfied at his pleasure; and 21. H. 7. that if any
do break the Pound he shall pay 3 l. this is a void, and unreasonable custom
to bind an estranger, and yet by common consent of the Lord, and tennants, it
is good to bind the tenants.

So if I prescribe, that if any man's Sheep go on my ground all the day, to
have the foldage of them in the night, is a good custom, because by common
entendment the owner has quid pro quo. So our custom is for the maintenance
of the City, neither is it against the common law directly, neither hereby any
offense, or hurt is done unto Mr. Hales, for his House is not thereby impaired.
And therefore, I think his action will not lie.

Finis de cenx Arguments.
Resolutions of the Judges of Assizes, 1633.
1. Question.

WHether the Churchwardens, and Overseers of the poor of a Parish with
assent of two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, may by the
Statute of 43. Elizabeth, cap. 2. or any law enforce a Parishioner of the same
Parish to take a Child of a poor parishioner of the same parish, who is not
able to keep his said child, to be an apprentise?

Resol. The Statute of 43. of Elizabeth, which says, that the Churchwardens
and overseers of the parish shall put out Children to be apprentices,
necessarily implies, that such as are fit must receive Apprentices, and the
putting out of poor Children to be apprentices is one of the best ways for
the providing for the poor.

2. Q. If they may, then whether they must not give money with him, and who
shall determine what money shall be given with him, if the party that is to
take such an apprentice, and the Churchwardens, and Overseers cannot agree
thereupon?

Resol. There is no necessity that money must be given, but that must be left
to the discretion of the Churchwardens, and Overseers, all circumstances of
age and ability, being considered, and if they cannot agree with the party,
then the Justices of Peace near adjoining, or in their default the Sessions of
peace are to determine these Controversies.

3. Q. Whether a Knight, Gentleman, Clergyman, or Yeoman, or one that is
Sojourner, using husbandry, clothing, or grasing, or the like, may be enforced
to take such an apprentice?

Resol. Every man who is by calling or profession or manner of living, that
entertaineth, and must have the use of other servants of the like quality, must
entertain such apprentices, wherein discretion must be given upon due
consideration of circumstances.

4 Q. Whether a wealthy man keeping few or no servants, nor wanting a servant,
but living privately may be enforced to take such an apprentice; if not, then
whether he may be taxed toward the putting forth of such an apprentice?

Resol. For the receiving of such apprentices, the answer may be referred to
the question next before; but out of doubt every such person must contribute to
the charge, as to other charges for the provision for the poor.

5. Qu. Whether they may enforce a parishioner that is of one parish, to take
such a child, apprentice, that is of another parish, but within the same
County or division, if the proper parish be not able to provide for the
children of the same parish?

Resol. The Justices may provide Masters for them in other parishes within the
same hundred; if the same hundred be not able, then out of that hundred in the
rest of that County; As for other provision for the poor, which must be at a
quarter Sessions.

6. Q. If such a Parishioner may be enforced to take such an apprentice, and
shall refuse not only to take such an apprentice; but also refuse to be bound
to appear at the next quarter Sessions, or Assizes, what shall be done to him?

Resol. If any refuse; let such a one be bound over to the next Sessions or
Assizes; if he refuse to give such bond, let him be sent to the Jail, there
to remain until he will give such bond.

7. Q. If such a Parishioner who refuses to take such an apprentice shall be
bound over to the Sessions for not taking such an apprentice, and when he
appears there, shall likewise refuse, what shall be done to him, and what
shall be done to the Parents who refuse to suffer their Children to be put
out to be apprentices, themselves not being able to maintain them?

Resol. If at the Sessions or Assizes such a one refuses to take an apprentice
and his excuse be not allowed, it is fit he be bound to the good behavior,
and it will be a good course to indict such a refuser for a contempt, and
thereupon to fine and imprison him; if he refuse to be bound to the good
behavior, let him be imprisoned until he will; and the Kings book of orders
directs that such be bound with good sureties to appear at the Council
board; and if the Parents of such poor children refuse to suffer their
children to be bound apprentices, or being bound, entice them away, themselves
not being able to maintain them, let them be committed to the house of
correction.

8. Q. Whether it be in the power of any general quarter Sessions to mitigate
any penalty upon a Statute law; If the party indicted shall submit himself to
the fine of the Court, and waive the traverse?

Resol. If the party be convicted or confess the fault, it is not in the Power
of the Court to mitigate the fine, in such cafes where the Statute makes it
certain: but if the party indicted protesting his Innocence, yet quia noluit
plitare cum domino Rege puts himself up into the grace of the Court, the Court
may impose a moderate fine, and order to forbear the prosecution.

9. Qu. If any be bound to appear at the Sessions, and shall tender submission
to the Court, whether the Sessions may stay the indictment, and mitigate the
fine aforesaid upon the confession of the fact?

Resol. This is answered before to the next precedent Article.

10 Q. If a man be convicted for being drunk, tippling, and keeping an
unlicensed Alehouse, or being licenced, for suffering others to remain tippling
in his house, or for swearing or driving Cattle upon the Sunday contrary to
the Statute in that case provided: whether the Justice of Peace, before whom
he was convicted, or any other Justice of the Peace may discharge him of all
or part of the Forfeiture or punishment appointed by the Statute?

Resol. The Justices have no such power of mitigation after conviction, where
the Statute appoynts the measure of the punishment.

11. Qu. Whether a Constable may upon a warrant for carrying one to the house
of correction for keeping an unlicenced Alehouse upon the second conviction,
break open the house wherein the party convicted is, to apprehend him?

Resol. This question is to be advised upon, it is put in general terms and
referred to be considered in the particular where it appears.

12. Qu. If a woman unmarried be hired from week to week, or from half year
to half year, in one Parish, and there is gotten with child, and then goes
from thence unto another parish, where she is settled in service by the space of
two or three months, and then discovered that she is with child: The question
is, whether she shall be settled in the Parish where she was begotten with
child, or in the Parish where she was last settled?

Resol. The place where such a woman was lawfully settled, is the direction in
this case, not where she was begotten with child.

13. Qu. If a woman-servant unmarried be begotten with child, and then goes
out of her Mistress service, before or after it is discovered that she is with
child, and the reputed father be run away, or is not able to free the Parish:
whether the Master may be enforced to provide for her till she be delivered,
and for a month after?

Resol. If the Master has legally discharged his house of such a servant, he
is no more bound to provide for her then any other.

14. Qu. In case a Parish consist part of ancient Demeasne, and part of
Guildable, an Assize is made for the relief of the maihemed Soldiers, the
Jail, etc. according to the Statute of 24. Elizabeth, cap. 2. whether the
tennants in ancient demesne shall contribute with the Guildable for the payment
of the Assize?

Resol. The Statute does not distinguish between the ancient Demeasne and the
Guildable in these cases, ubi lex non distinguitur, ibi nec nos distinguimus.

15. Q. Whether an Indictment of forceable detainer be within the Statute of
1. Iacobi, cap. 5. and not to be removed by Certiorari, unless the party
Indicted first find sureties according to that Statute, and whether the party
Indicted be to be bound in his absence to prosecute according to that Statute,
and whether an Indictment of forcible entry, etc. found at a private Sessions
be to be removed by Certiorari without sureties, according to that Statute?

Resol. This is fittest to be left unto the Court of King's Bench, to whose
Commission, and jurisdiction this is most proper.

16. Q. If one be convicted upon the Statute of 3. Car. R. cap. 13. for driving
of Cattle on the Sunday through several parishes; whether he shall forfeit
20. s. to every of the said Parishes; or only to one; if to one, then to which
of them?

Resol. This Statute gives the Forfeiture but of one 20. s. for one Sabbath
day. Although the driving on that day be through diverse Parishes. Therefore
where the action is first attached, and the distress first taken, that parish
shall have the benefit of the Forfeiture, and not the other.

17. Qu. If one who is under the age of 30. years, and brought up in
Husbandry, or a maid servant, or brought up in any of the arts or trades
mentioned in the Statute of 5. Elizab. c. 4. and not enable according to that
Statute, to live at his or her own hand, shall be warned by two Justices of
the Peace to put him or her self in service by a day prescribed by them, and
shall not do the same accordingly, but shall after continue living at his or
her own hand, what course shall be taken with such a person, and how punished?

Resol. Such persons being out of service, and not having visible means of
their own, to maintain themselves without their labor, and refusing to serve
as an hired servant, by the year, may be bound over to the next Sessions or
Assizes, and to be of the good behavior in the mean time, or may be sent to
the house of correction.

18. Qu. Whether the tax for the relief of the poor, upon the Statute of 43.
Elizabeth, shall be made by ability or occupation of lands, or both, and
whether the visible ability in the parish where he lives; or general ability
wheresoever, and whether his rent received, within the Parish where he lives
shall be accounted visible ability, and whether he shall be taxed of them
only and for any Rents received from other Parishioners: and what shall be
said visible ability? Resol. The Land within each parish is to be taxed to the
charges in the first place equally and indifferently, but there may be an
addition for the personal visible ability of the parishioner within that
Parish according to good discretion, wherein if there be any mistaking, the
Sessions, etc. or the Justice must judge between them.

19. Q. Whether shops, salt pits, sheds, profits of a Market, etc. be taxable
to the poor as well as lands, Cole-mynes, etc. expressed in the Statute 43.
Elizabeth?

Resol. All things which are real, and a yearly Revenue, must be taxed to the
poor.

20. Q. Whether the tax for the County stock, Jail, and house of Correction
is to be made by the Statute of 14. Elizabeth, cap. 43. Elizabeth: by ability,
and upon the Inhabitants of the parish only, or upon them, or the occupiers of
Lands, dwelling in that parish: or whether such as occupy lands in that parish,
and dwell in another parish shall be taxed?

Resol. If the Statute in particular cafes give no special direction, it is
good discretion to go according to the rate of taxation for the poor: but
when the Statutes themselves give directions, follow that.

21. Q. Whether any taxes ought to be made for the charges that petty
Constables and Borshoulders are at in conveying rogues from parish to parish,
and relieving of them and how to be rated?

Resol. It is fit to relieve the Constable and Tything-men, in such sort as it
has been used in the several places where they live.

22. Qu. Whether a Justice of Peace may discharge a servant being with child
from her service, allowing that as a reasonable cause that she is thereby made
unable to do the service which otherwise she might have done, and if he may
discharge her, whether that Parish shall provide for her, till her delivery, if
she cannot provide for her self: and so also if her time be expired before her
delivery, who shall provide for her after her time ended?

Resol. If a woman being with child procure her self to be retained with a
Master who knows nothing thereof, is a good cause to discharge her from his
service. And if she be begotten with child during her service, it is all
one, but the Master in neither case must turn away such a servant of his own
authority. But if her term be ended, or she lawfully discharged; the Master
is not bound to provide for her, but it is a misfortune fallen upon the parish,
which they must bear, as in other cases of casual impotency.

23. Qu. Whether being delivered for a bastard child in one parish, and goes
into another with her child; and becomes vagrant, and so is sent to the place
of her birth: her bastard child being under the age of 7. years, shall be
settled with the mother, and there maintained, if the mother be not able, nor
the reputed Father known, found: or whether it shall be sent to the place of
its birth, or being settled with the mother, whether the Parish where it was
borne, shall be ordered by the two next Justices to pay a weekly sum toward
the maintenance of it?

Resol. The Bastard child must be placed with the mother, so long as it is
within the quality or condition of a Nurse child, which shall be, till seven
years of age; and then it is fit to be sent to the place of its birth to be
provided for, the mother or reputed father, not being able. And the Parish
where the child is borne shall not be forced to contribute to the charge, as
long as the Mother lives, and the child be under 7. years old.

24. Q. A man with his Wife and Children takes an house in one Parish, for a
year: and before the end of his term is unlawfully put out of possession, and
after takes part of an house, as an Inmate in another Parish, from whence he
is also put out, and then not being able to get any dwelling, they come to lie
in a Barn in a third Parish where the Husband falls sick, and the Wife is
delivered of another child, where ought these to be settled?

Resol. If a man or woman having house or habitation in one parish be thrust
out, this is an illegal unsetling which the Law forbids, for none must be
enforced to turn vagrant, and such one must be returned to the place where
he or she was last lawfully settled, and the Child also borne in the time of
this distraction.

25. Q* Whether an apprentice put out by the Churchwardens, etc. according to
the Statute to a Master in another Parish, if his Master dye and leave no
Executor or Administrator fit to keep an apprentice or able to place him: He
shall be provided for in the parish where he was apprentice or shall be sent
back to the parish from whence he was put out?

Resol. Servants and apprentices are by law settled in that parish, and if they
become impotent there, the parish must abide the adventure after their term or
time of service be lawfully ended.

26. Q. What is accounted a lawful settling in a parish, and what not?

Resol. This is too general a question to receive a perfect answer to every
particular case which may happen: but generally this is to be observed, that
the law unsetleth none who are lawfully settled; nor, permits it to be done by
practice, or compulsion, and every one who is settled is a native householder,
sojourner, an apprentice or servant for a month at the least, without a just
complaint made to remove him or her, shall be held to be settled.

27. Qu. A rogue is taken at C. and will not confess the place of his birth:
neither does it appear otherwise but that he confesses the last place of his
habitation to be at S. hereupon he is whipped and sent to S. at his coming to
S. the place of his birth is there known by some to be at W. and thereupon the
rogue confesses it to be so: whether he might without any new vagrancy be sent
to W?

Resol. In this case it is fit to sent such a rogue to the place of his birth:
for this is but a mistaking and no legal settling.

28. Q. If an Indictment be preferred to the grand Jury of the quarter Sessions
of the peace against one for murder, manslaughter, for robery, felony, or
Petilarceny, and ignoramus found thereupon, whether the said Sessions may
deliver the party by Proclamation or not?

Resol. Not by Proclamation at all, but for petty Lacenyes, and other petty
Fellonies; in discretion the Jail may be delivered of them.

29. Q. If a Constable be chosen and refuses to take his Oath, what shall be
done, and whether a Constable may make a deputy, and by what means?

Resol. The refusal or neglect to take oath in such a case is a contempt
worthy of punishment, and thereupon to fine, and imprison him, and the making
of a deputy is rather by toleration, then by law.

30. Qu. If a Constable dye or remove out of the parish where, etc. How is his
place to be supplied?

Resol. By the Lord of the Leete, if that time fall near, otherwise by the
Sessions; but if that be too far off, then by the next Justices:

31. Q. If a poor weak man be chosen Constable or Tything-man, and be unfit
for the place, how may he be removed, and a fit man sworn in his room?

Resol. The Justices of Peace must help this, and if the Lord of the Leete
have power to choose a Constable or Tything-man and perform so ill, it is a
just cause to seize his liberty.

32. Qu. If a Nurse-childe, a Scholar at a Grammar-schoole, or in the
University prove to be impotent by Sickness, lamenesse, lunacy, or discovery
of Ideocy, etc. how such persons shall be disposed?

Resol. A Nurse-childe, or a Scholar at the Grammar-schoole, or at the
University, or persons sent to the Common jail, Hospital, or houses of
Correction, are not to be esteemed as persons to be settled there, more then
Travailers in their Innes, but their settling is where their Parents are settled,
and Children borne in common Gaoles, and House of correction, their parents
being prisoners, are to be maintained at the charge of the County.

33. Qu. What proportion Parsonages, or Tithes shall bear to the taxation of
the poor of the parish?

Resol. The Parson or Vicar presentative, shall according to the reasonable
value of his Parsonage, having consideration to the just deductions.

34. Qu. Whether for the placing the poor of the parish, not to be remove by
consent of the parish, these poor men may not be placed as Inmates for a time?

Resol. They may by express words of the Statute of the 43. of Elizabeth.

35. Qu. If a parishioner or owner within a parish do bring into the parish
without the consent of the Parish, a stranger of another parish, which is, or
apparently is like to be burthen-some unto the parish, how they may ease
themselves?

Resol. By taxing such a one to the charge of the rates of the poor, not only
having respect to his ability or the land he occupies, but according to the
damage and danger he brings to the parish by his folly.

36. Qu. For warding in the daytime, for apprehending of Rogues, whether the
Constable may not enlarge it to a farther time?

Resol. Warding in the daytime is of great use, and must be left to the
discretion of the Constables or direction of the Justices to vary according to
the occasion.

37. Qu. Whether Alehouses ought to be allowed only in thorow-fare Towns, and
others in other places to be restrained only to sell to the poor out of
doors.

Resol. The Justices shall do very well to allow none but in places very fit
for their situation and uses, and to moderate the number.

38. Q. A man for his quality otherwise fit to be a Constable, or of other
Office of that nature, procures himself to be the Kings servant
extraordinary, and by that means would excuse himself to serve in the Country?

Resol. A servant extraordinary may well perform his ordinary service in the
Country according to his quality.

The Justices opinion touching the Commissions by which the Justices sit at
Newgate.
Anciently felonies included all trespasses, therefore the Justices of Jail
delivery have power to hold plea of trespasses against them in prison or upon
bail to render themselves.
THE Justices at Newgate sit by virtue of two Commissions (viz.) Jail delivery
and Oyer, and determiner.

By the Commission of Jail delivery they may try all prisoners in the Jail or
by B^yle, or such as be indicted will render themselves, generally for all
Felonies: and also for such other offenses as are particularly assigned to them
by Statute.

The Statute of 4. Elizabeth 3. cap. 2. does give them power to receive
Indictments against Prisoners or such as are upon bail, v. 1. Mar. Dyer, 99.
Justices of Jail delivery hold pleas of all appeals of felony or murder
against one in prison by their general Com: and of appeals: so by the same
reason to take Indictments.
and to proceed to try the same (viz.) Indictments taken before the Justices of
the peace, and by equity thereof all Indictments before coroners, 3. Mar. Bro.
Commission. omnium. 24. says, That the Commission is ad deliberand. Gaol. de
prison. in eisdem existen. But they cannot take Indictments as Justices of
Jail delivery, but being Justices of the peace, they may take Indictments
against prisoners, but not against them that be at large, for as much as power
is given them, consequently they must have means to do so, which is by
Indictments, Id quarend.

Howsoever it is clear, that they may enquire of many offenses and take
Indictments in such cases where power by the Statute is given to the Justices
of Jail delivery, in such cases where they have authority by Law or Statute
there the title of Indictments is, that Ad gaolam deliberationem tent. before
the Commissioners of Jail delivery, I. S. was indicted, and the record must be
made up so.

And whereas by the Statute of 4. Eliz. 3. cap. 2. Indictments taken before
Justices of peace or Coroners, or any other against any Prisoners, then the
entry of the Indictments is returned taken, Memorand quod ad generalem
Sessionem tent. before A, B, C, etc. Justices ad pacem in Com. Middlesex or
London, I. S. was indicted, and then tried before Justices of Jail delivery,
and by virtue of the said Statute, Indictments taken before Justices of the
peace of London or Middlesex, are tried before the Justices of Jail delivery.

The Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer is Ad triand. inquirend. audiend. and
determinand. They may enquire of all offenses mentioned in the Commission,
albeit the offenders be at large, but they cannot try Prisoners upon
Indictments taken before any other then themselves, as the Justices of Jail
delivery may by the aforesaid Statute, unless there be a special Commission
made, as it was in the case of the Earl of Leicester, 3. Mar. Bro. Com. 24.
mentioned in Plow. Com. for the ordinary Commission of Oyer, and terminer is
ad inquirend. audiend. and determinand. therefore they cannot determine of
things unless they made inquiry first, and on the other side also the
Justices of Jail delivery may try Indictments taken before Justices of the
peace, yet if one indicted before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, the
Justices of Jail delivery cannot try the same, because the Record of the
Commission of Oyer and Terminer are to be returned in the Kings Bench, 44. E.
3.31.

The Commission and the Records of the proceedings before the Justices of Jail
deliverie, are to be returned to the Custos Rotulor. of the County, when the
same persons are Justices of Jail delivery, and of Oyer and Terminer, they may
sit the same day and place, and enquire by the same Jury, but the entry of the
Records must be several, according as the Indictment is.

At the Assizes in the Country, the Justices have their several power as the
Justices of Jail delivery, Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of the peace.

But when the Records are made up, they must be according to the power they
made election to proceed upon.

This is the regular and legal course. But the Clerks of the Assizes
promiscuously make entry thereof, But if a Writ of Error be brought, they must
certify according to Law, or else it will be erroneous, and so upon a
Certiorari.

The Sessions of London may be begun at the Guild Hall, and then adjourned to
Newgate, if some Indictments be at Guild Hall, then those must be so
certified: if others at Newgate, then the adjournment must be mentioned, and
that the Indictment was then taken.

Note that the trial of Indictments taken before Justices of the peace of
London, cannot be tried at Newgate, as in nature of a trial before Justices
of the peace at London, for many of the Commissioners, for Jail delivery, are
not Justices of the peace for London, but in such cases the trial must be
before the Justices of Jail delivery: as upon Indictments taken before the
Justices of the peace of London; as in the case of Indictments taken before the
Justices of the peace of Middlesex.

But if Indictments at Newgate be originally taken before them, as Justices of
Jail delivery, then it is inquirable how the Jury sworn, and impannelled to
enquire at the Sessions of the peace of London, or Middlesex, do serve to
present Indictments before the Justices of Jail delivery at Newgate, unless
the custom and usage will warrant, the two several Iuries, sworn at the
Sessions of the peace for London, or Middlesex, are also by the same oath and
impannelling to serve for the grand Jury for the Commission of Jail delivery,
and Oyer, and Terminer.

Upon conference with Mr. Keeling, and the Clerks for Newgate of London, and
Middlesex, and the Clerks of Assizes, and view of the several Entries, a more
mature and certain resolution may be given, this being in have, and without
such considerations as were requisite.

FINIS.

