A battle of Birds Most strangly fought in Ireland, upon the eight day of
September last, 1621. where near unto the City of Cork, by the river Le^,
wear gathered together such a multitude of Stares, or Starlings, as the like
for number, was never seen in any age.
To the tune of Sheres wife. Or to the tune of Bonny Nell.


Mark well, Gods wondrous works, and see,
what things therein declared be,
Such things as may with trembling fear,
fright all the world, the same to hear:
for like to these, which here I tell,
no man alive remembers well.
The eight day of September last,
which made all Ireland much aghast:
Were seen (near Cork) such flights of Birds,
whose numbers, cannot well by words,
acounted be: for greater store,
was never seen, nor known before.
The Rights, so many legions seemed,
as thousand thousands they were deemed,
All soaring up, along the sky,
as if the battle were on hie:
in muultytudes, without compare,
which like black clouds, made dim the are.
First from the eastern skies apeared,
a flight o^ Stares, which greatly feared,
The p^op^e there, the same to see,
as like could not remembered be:
for they in wardl^ke squadroun flew,
as if they others wou^d pursue.
And as this flight, thus houering lay,
prepared all in battle ray:
From out the west, another came,
as great in number as the same,
and there opposed in warlike might,
themselves against the other flight.
Whereas these Stares, or starling Birds,
for want of Helmetts, Glauess, and Swords,
They used their Tallents, Bills, and Be^a^s
and such a battle undertakes:
that trembling fear and terror brought,
to all which saw this battle fought.
For first, the Eastern flight sat down,
with chattering noyes upon the ground,
As if they challenged, all the rest,
to meet and fight even breast to breast,
where presently was heard from far,
the same like chattering sound of war,
And there upon the inesterne flight,
doinne by the eastern Birds did light
Where after they a while had set,
together in their Bird like chat,
they all upon a sudain^ rose,
and each the other did oppose.
The second part,
to the same tune.


ANd filling thus the Azure sky
with these their troops up mounted hie,
They seemed more thick, then moats ith Sun,
a dreadful battle there begun:
and in their kind more strongly fought,
then can immagen'd be by thought.
Thousands of thousands, on a heap,
upon the others backs did leap,
With all their forced strengths and might,
to put their Bird-like foes to flight:
and as it were in battle ray,
long time they kept them, thus in play.
To fight this battle in the air,
their bills and beakes their weapons were,
Which they performed in such a sort,
as makes me doubtful to report:
that silly Birds should thus arise,
and fight so fircely in the skies.
But so it was and strange withal.
that Birds should thus at discord fall,
And never cease, till they had slain,
thousands, stark dead upon the plain:
where people took them up in fear,
a thing most strange to see and hear.
With broken wings, some fell to ground,
and some poor silly Birds were found,
With eyes picked out, struck down half dead,
and some no brains left in their head;
but battered forth, and killed out right,
most strangly in this ayery fight.
Yet long with loud and chattering cries,
each company against other flies:
With bloody beakes, remorselesse still,
their fethered foes to maine or kill,
where whilst this battle did remain
their bodies fell like dropes of rain.
Thousands were to the City borne,
with wounded limbs, and bodies torn:
For all the fields were ouerspread,
with mangled starlings that lay dead.
in blood and feathers strange to se,
which men took up abundantly.
It was a wonder to explain,
the number of them hurt and slain,
And being a wonder let it rest,
the Lord above he knows best:
what these poor creatures did intend,
when thus to battle they did bend.
But such a battle nere was fought,
by silly Birds which have no thought:
In doing ill, nor any mind,
to work contrary to their kind,
but yet as nature gave them life,
so here they strangly fell at strife.
What now for truth is published forth
esteem it as a news of worth:
And by the wonder of these days,
learn to leave off all wicked ways,
for sure it is that God it sent,
that of our sins we should repent.
FINIS.
Printed at London by W. I


