THE BATTLE OF AGINCOVRT.

FOVGHT BY HENRY THE FIFTH of that name, King of England, against the whole
power of the French: under the Reign of their CHARLES the sixth, Anno Dom. 1415.

The Miseries of Queen MARGARITE, the unfortunate Wife, of that most
unfortunate King HENRY the sixth.

NIMPHIDIA, the Court of Fayrie.

The Quest of CINTHIA.

The Shepherds SIRENA.

The Moone-Calfe.

Elegies upon sundry occasions.

By MICHAELL DRAYTON, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for WILLIAM LEE, and are to be sold at the Turks
Head in Fleete-Streete, next to the Miter and Phaenix. 1631.

TO you those Noblest of Gentlemen of these Renowned Kingdoms of Great
Britain: who in these declining times, have yet in your brave bosoms the
sparks of that sprightly fire, of your courageous Ancestors; and to this hour
retain the seeds of their magnanimity and Greatness, who out of the virtue
of your minds, love and cherish neglected Poesy, the delight of Blessed
souls, And the language of Angels. To you are these my Poems dedicated.

By your truly affectioned Servant, MICHAELL DRAYTON.

THE VISION OF BEN. JOHNSON, ON THE MUSES OF HIS FRIEND M. DRAITON.
IT has been questioned MICHAEL, if I be
A Friend at all; or, if at all, to thee:
Because, who make the question, have not seen
Those ambling visits, pass in verse, between
Thy Muse, and mine, as they expect. It Is true:
You have not writ to me, nor I to you;
And, though I now begin, it is not to rub
Hanch against Hanch, or raise a riming Club
About the town: this reckoning I will pay,
Without conferring symboles. This's my day*
It was no Dream! I was awake and saw!
Lend me thy voice, O FAME, that I may draw
Wonder to truth! and have my vision ho^rld,
Hot from thy trumpet, round about the world*
I saw a Beauty from the Sea to rise,
That al Earth looked on; and that earth, all Eyes!
It cast a beam as when the chear-full Sun
Is fair got up, and day some hours begun!
And filled an Orb as circular as heaven!
The Orb was cut forth into Regions sea^^^
And those so sweet, and well proportioned parts,
As it had bin the circle of the Arts!
When, by thy bright Ideas standing by,
I found it pure, and perfect Poesy,
There read I, straight, thy learned Legends three,
Heard the soft airs, between our swains and thee,
Which made me think, the old Theocritus,
Our Rural Virgil come, to pipe to us!
But then, thy*epistolar Heroic Songs,
Their loves, their quarrels, iealousies and wrongs
Did all so strike me, as I cried, who can
With us be called, the Naso, but this man?
And looking up I saw Mineruaes foul,
Pearch'd over head, the wise Athenian Owl:
I thought thee the^ our Orpheus, that would try
Like him, to make the air, one volary:
And I had styled thee Orpheus, but before
My lips could form the voice, I heard that rore,
And rouse, the marching of a mighty force,
Drums against drums, theneighing of the horse,
The fights, the cries, and wondering at the iarres
I saw, and read, it was thy Barons Wars!
O, how in those, do thou instruct these times,
That Rebels actions, are but valiant crimes!
And carried, though with shout, and noise confess
A wild and an authorized wickedness!
Say thou so, Lucan? But thou seornst to stay
Under one title. Thou have made thy way
And flight about the I Will, well near, by this
In thy admired Periegesis,
Or universal circumduction
Of all that read thy Poly-Olbyon.
That read it? that are ravished! such was I
With every song, I swear, and so would dye:
But that I hear, again thy Drum to beat
A better cause, and strike the brauest heat
That ever yet did fire the English blood!
Our right in France! if rightly understood.
There, thou art Homer! Pray thee, use the style
Thou have deserved: And let me read the while
Thy Catalogue of Ships, exceeding his,
Thy list of aids, and force, for so it is:
The Poets act! and for his Country's sake
Brave are the Musters, that the Muse will make.
And when he ships the^ where to use their Arms
How do his tru^pets breath! What loud alarms!
Look, how we read the Spartans were inflamd
With bold Tyrtaeus verse, when thou art named
So shall our English Youth urge on, and cry
An Agin-court, an Agin-court, or dye.
This book! it is a Catechism to fight,
And will be bought of every lord and Knight,
That can but read; who cannot, may in prose
Get broken pieces, and fight well by those.
The miseries of Margaret the Queen
Of tender eyes will more be wept, then seen:
I feel it by mine own, that ouerflow,
And stop my sight, in every line I go.
But then refreshed by thy Fayrie Court,
I look on Cynthia, and Syrenas sport,
As on two flowery Carpets, that did rise,
And with their grassy green restored mine eyes
Yet give me leave, to wonder at the birth
Of thy strange Moon-Calfe, both thy strain of mirth
And Gossip-got acquaintance, as to us,
Thou had brought Lapland or old Cobalus,
Empusa, Lamia, or some Monster more
Then Affricke knew, or the full Grecian store!
I gratulate it to thee, and thy Ends,
To all thy virtuous and well chosen Friends,
Only my loss is, that I am not there:
And till I worthy am to wish I were,
I call the world, that enuies me, to see
If I can be a Friend, and Friend to thee*
UPON THE BATTLE OF AGINCOVRT, WRITTEN BY HIS DEAR FRIEND MICHAEL DRAYTON
Esquire.
HAd Henryes name been only met in Prose,
Recorded by the humble wit of those
Who write of less then Kings: who Victory,
As calmely mention, as a Pedigree,
The French alike with us, might view his name
His actions too, and not confess a shame:
Nay, grow at length, so boldly troublesome,
As to dispute if they were overcome.
But thou have wakt their fears: thy fiercer hand
Has made their shame as lasting, as their land.
By thee again they are compeld to know
How much of Fate is in an English foe.
They bleed afresh by thee, and think the harm
Such; they could rather wish, it were Henry's arm,
Who thanks thy painful quill; and holds it more
To be thy Subject now, then King before.
By thee he conquers yet; when every wora
Yields him a fuller honor, then his sword.
Strengthens his actions against time: by thee,
He Victory, and France, does hold in fee,
So well observed he is, that every thing,
Speaks him not only English, but a King.
And France, in this, may boast her fortunate,
That she was worthy of so brave a hate.
Her suffering is her gayue. How well we see
The Battle labored worthy him, and thee,
Where we may Death discover with delight,
And entertain a pleasure from a fight.
Where we may see how well it does become
The brau'ry of a Prince to over come.
What Power is a Poet: that can add
A life to Kings, more glorious, then they had
For what of Henry, is vnsung by thee,
Henry does want of his Eternity.
I. Vaughan.

TO MY WORTHY FRIEND Mr. MICHAELL DRAYTON upon his Poems.
SONNET.
What lofly Trophyes of eternal Fame,
England may vaunt thou do erect to her,
Yet forced to confess, (yea blush for shame,)
That she no honor does on thee confer
How't would become her, would she learn to know
Once to requite thy Heauen-borne Art and zeal,
Or at the least her self but thankful show
Her ancient Glories that do still reveal:
Sing thou of Love, thy strains (like powerful charms)
Enrage the bosom with an amorous fire,
And when again thou like to sing of Arms
The Coward thou with courage do inspire:
But when thou come to touch our Sinful Times,
Then Heaven far more then Earth speaks in thy (Rimes.)
John Reynolds.

THE BATTLE OF AGJN COURT.
Ceased was the Thunder of those Drums view,
which waked,
The Affrighted French their miseries to
At Edwards name, which to that hour
still quaked,
Their The law Salique was, that women should no^ i^ herite; wh^ law Edward the
third ^ his right to ^ the Crown by his mot^ cancelled w^ his sword: so much
as at that ti^ made way his clarme, though in France the law be inviolable.
Salique Tables to the ground that threw,
Yet were the English courages not slak'd,
But the same Bows, and the same Blade^ they drew,
With the same Arms those weapons to advance,
Which lately lopt the Flower de liz of France.
Henry the fifth, that man made out of fire,
The Imperial Wreath placed on his Princely browe;
His Lions courage stands not to enquire
Which way old Henry came by it; or how
At Pomfret Castle Richard should expire:
What Is that to him? he has the Garland now;
Let Henry the so named ^ Town in L^ colne Shi^ where he borne.
Bullenbrooke beware how he it wan,
For Henry the fifth borne Munmou^ in W^^^^.
Munmouth means to keep it if he can.
That glorious day, which his great Father got, Douglas in that battle ^ew
three in the Kings ^oat A^mo^^

Upon the Percies; calling to their aid
The Valiant Douglas, that Herculian Scot,
When for his Crown at Shrewsbury they playde,
Had quite dishartned every other plot,
And all those Tempests quietly had laid,
That not a cloud did to this Prince appear,
No former King had seen a sky so clear.
Yet the rich Clergy felt a fearful Rent,
In the full bosom of their Church (whilst she
A Monarchesse, immeasurably spent,
Less then she was, and thought she might not be:) Wickliffe a learned Divine,
and the greatest Propestant of those times.

By Wickliffe and his followers; to prevent
The growth of whose opinions, and to free
That foul Aspersion, which on her they laid,
She her strong'st wits must stir up to her aid.
When presently a Parliament is called
To set things steady, that stood not so right,
But that thereby the poor might be inthral'd,
Should they be urged by those that were of might,
That in his Empire, equity enstaul'd,
It should continue in that perfect plight;
Wherefore to Lester, he t^' Assembly draws, A Parliament at Leicester.

There to Inact those necessary Laws.
In which one Bill (among many) there was red,
Against the general, and superfluous waste
Of temporal Lands* (the Laity that had fed)
Upon the Houses of Religion cast,
Which for defense might stand the Realm in sted*
Where it most needed, were it rightly placed;
Which made those Churchmen generally to fear,
For all this calm, some tempest might be near.
And being right skillful, quickly they foresawe,
No shallow brains this business went about:
Therefore with cunning they must cure this flawe;
For of the King they greatly stood in doubt,
Lest him to them, their opposites should draw;
Something must be thrust in, to thrust that out:
And to this end they wisely must provide,
One, this great Engine, Clearkly that could guide.
Chichley, that sat on Canterburies See, Henry Chichly succeeding Arund^ll
(late dec^^sed) in that See.

A man well spoken, gravely stout, and wise,
The most select (then thought of that could be,)
To act what all the Prelacy devise;
(For well they knew, that in this business, he
Would to the utmost strain his faculties;)
Him lift they up, their maine strength, to prove
By some clean slight this So they termed it as unworthy of a better title.
libell to remove.
His brain in labor, gladly forth would bring
Somewhat, that at this needful time might fit,
The sprightly humor of this youthful King,
If his invention could but light of it;
His working soul pro^^cteth many a thing,
Until at length out of the strength of wit,
He found a war with France must be the way
To dash this Bill, else threatening their decay.
Whilst vacant minds sat in their breasts at ea^
And the remembrance of their Conquests past,
Upon their fancies does so strongly sease,
As in their teeth their Cowardice is cast,
Rehearsing to them those victorious days*
The deeds of which, beyond their names should la^
That after ages, reading what was thei^s,
Shall hardly think, those men had any Heirs.
And to this point, premeditating well,
A speech, (which chanced, the very point to cleau^
Aimed, whatsoever the success befell
That it no roomth should for a second leave,
More of this Tittle then in hand to tell,
If so his skill him did not much deceive,
And 'gaiust the King in public should appeare^
Thus frames his speech to the Assembly there.
PA^don my boldness, my Liege Sovereign L^ The Archbishop of Canterburies
Oration, to t^^ King^ and Parliament at Lecester^ in the (...) following
Stanzaes.

Nor your Dread presence let my speech offer
Your mild attention, favorably afford,
Which, such clear vigor to my spirit shall lend,
That* it shall set an edge upon your Sword,
To my demand* and make you to attend,
Asking you, why* men trained to Arms you ^^
Your right in France yet suffering still to sleep^
Can such a Prince be in an Island pent,
An^ poorly thus shut up within a Sea.
When as your right includes that large extent,
To (...) Alps your Empire forth to lay,
Can he be English borne* and is not bent
To follow you, appoint you but the way,
We'^e wade if we want ships, the waves to climme,
In one hand hold ou^ swords, with the other swim.
What time co^trouls your brave great gra^dsirs claim The Cr^^^^ of France
descended upon Edward the third, from Isabell ^u Mother, Daughtar and
su^^^^^ing heir, to King Philip of France named the fair.

To th'Realme of France, from Philip named the fair
Which to King Edward by his mother came,
Queen Isaebel; that Philips only heir,
Which this short intermission does not maime,
But if it did, as he, so yours repair;
That where his blood in right prevailed not,
In spite of hell, yet by his Sword he got.
What set the Conqueror, by their Salique Laws,
Those poor decrees their Parliaments could make,
He entered on in justness of his Cause,
To make good, what he dared to undertake,
And once in Action he stood not to pause,
But in upon them like a Tempest brake,
And down their buildings with such fury bare,
That they from mists dissolved were to air.
As those brave Edwards, Father, and the Son*
^^ Conquered Cressy* with successful luck,
Where first all France (as at one game) they won,
Never two Warriors, such a Battle struck,
That when the bloody dismal fight was done,
Here in one heap, there in another Rucke
Princes and peasants lay together mixed,
The English Swords, no difference knew betwixt.
There Lewe^ King of Beam was overthrown,
With valiant Charles, of France the younger brother
James, Daulp^^^^ of Viennoies. The Dukes of L^^raine and Burbon. The Earls of
Aumerl^, Savoye, Mountbilliard Flaunders, Nevers, and ^^arcourt. King John of
France and Philip his son taken by the Black Prince, at the Battle of
Poyteers, brought Prisoners to ^^ land. John of Cleumount. Peter of Burbon.
Examples of such as have aduan^d themselves to the Crown of France, against
the strict letter of the law Salique, in two following Stanzaes.
A Daulphine and two Dukes, in pieces hewn;
To them six Earls lay slain by one another;
her the grand Prior of France, fetched his last groa^
Two Archbishops the boistrous crowd does smothe^
There fifteen thousand of their Gentry died*
With each two Soldiers, slaughtered by his sid^
Nor the Black Prince at Poyters battle fough^
Short of his Father, and himself before,
Her King and Prince, that prisoners hither broug^
From forty thousand, weltring in their gore,
That in the worlds opinion it was thought,
France from that instant could subsist no more,
The * Marshall, and the * Constable, there ^laine,
Under the Standard, in that battle taken.
Nor is this claim for women to succeed,
(Against which they would your right to France de^ ba^
A thing so new, that it so much should need
Such opposition, as though fetched from far,
By Pepin this is proved, as by a deed,
Deposing Cheldricke, by a fatal war,
By Blythyld dat'd his title to advance,
Daughter to Clothar, first so named of France.
Hugh Capet, who from Charles of Lorayne too^
The Crown of France, that he in peace might raig^
As heir to Lingard to her title stooke,
Who was the daughter of King Charlemaine,
So holy Lowes poring on his book,
Whom that Hugh Capet made his heir again,
From Ermingard his Gra^da^^, claimd the crown,
Duke Charles his caughter, wrongfully put down.
Nor think my Liege a fitter time then this,
You could have found your title to advance,
^t the full height, when now the faction is,
^'wixt Burgoyne, and the house of Orleance,
Your purpose you not possibly can miss,
^ for my Lord so luckily does chance,
That whilst these two in opposition stand,
You may have time your Army there to land.
And if my fancy do not ouerpresse,
^y visuall sense, me thinks in every eye
^ see such cheer, as of our good success
^ France hereafter seems to Prophecy;
Think not my Sovereign, my Alegiance less
Quoth he; my Lords nor do you misaply
My words: thus long upon this subject spent,
Who humbly here submit to your assent.
THis speech of his, that powerful Engine proved
Then ever our Fathers got* which raised us hier,
The Clergies fear that quietly removed,
And into France transferd our Hostile fire,
^ made the English through the world beloved,
that durst to those so mighty things aspire,
And gave so clear a luster to our fame,
That neighboring nations trembled at our name.
When through the house, this rumor scarsely r^
That war with France propounded was again*
In all the assembly there was not a man,
But put the project on with might and maine,
So great applause it generally wan,
That else no business they would entertain,
As though their honor utterly were lost,
If this desine should any way be crossed.
So much men's minds now upon France were s^
That every one does with himself forecast,
What might fall out this enterprise to let,
As what again might give it wings of have,
And for they knew* the French did still abet
The Scot against us, (which we used to taste)
It questioned was if it were fit or no;
To conquer them, ere we to France should go*
Which Raulph then Earl of Westmerland propo^ Ralph Neuill then warden of the
Marches betwixt England and Scotland. An ^^^ adag^ He that will France wi^*
must with Scotland first begin. The Duke of Excester the Kings own ^^^^.

Quoth he with Scotland let us first begin,
By which we are upon the North enclosed,
And locked with us, one Continent within,
Then first let Scotland be by us disposed,
And with more ease, ye spacious France may win^
Else of our selves, ere we our ships can clear,
To land in France; they will invade us here.
Not so brave Neuill, Excester replies,
For that of one two labors were to make,
For Scotland wholly upon France relies;
First Conquer France, and Scotland ye may take*
^is the French pay, the Scot to them that ties,
That stopped, asunder quickly ye shall shake,
The French and Scots; to France then first say I,
First, first, to France then all the commons cry.
And instantly an Embassy is sent, The first brea^h with France.

To Charles of France, to will him to restore
those Territories, of whose large extent,
The English Kings were owners of before;
Which if he did not, and incontinent,
The King would set those English on his shore,
That in despite of him, and all his might,
Should leave their lives there, or redeem his right.
First Normandy, in his demand he makes,
With Aquitane, a Duchy no less great,
Aniou, and Main, with Gascoyne which he takes,
Clearly his own, as many an English seat: The Countries demanded by the King
of England.

With these proud France, he first of all awakes,
^or their delivery, giving power to treat;
For well he knew, if Charles should these restore,
No King of France was ever left so poor.
The King, and Daulphin, to his proud demand,
^at he might see they no such matter meant,
^ a thing sitter for his youthful hand;
^ Tun of Paris Tennis Balls him sent, The King and Daulphine of France,
d^^^deth the King of England.

^tter himself to make him understand,
^riding his ridiculous intent:
^ And that was all the answer he could get,
Which more the King does to this Conquest ^he^.
That answering the Ambassador, quoth he,
Thanks for my Bals, to Charles your Soueraign gi^ Henry the fist answered for
the Tennis Balls.

And thus Assure him, and his son from me,
I Will s^nd him Bals, and Rackets if I live,
That they such R^c^et shall in Paris see,
When over line with B^^dies I shall drive, The language of Tennis.

As that before the set be fully done,
France may (perhap) into the H^zzard run*
So little does luxurious France fore see
By her disdain, what she upon her drew:
In her most brau^^y s^e^ing then to be,
The punishment that shortly should ensue,
Which so incenst the English King, that he,
For full revenge into that fury grew:
That those three horro^s, Famine, Sword, and F^
Could not suffice to satisfy his ire.
In all men's mouths now was no word but w^
As though no thing had any other name;
And folk would ask of them ariu'd from far,
What forces were preparing whence they came ^
Against any business 'twas a lawful bar
To say for France they were; and 'tvvas a shame
For any man to take in hand to do
Ought, but something that did belong thereto^
Old Armours are dressed* up, and new are made^
Iacks are in vvorking, and strong shirts of Male,
He scovvers an * old Fox, he a Blades accounted of the best* tem^er*
bilbow blade,
Now Shields and Targets only are for sale;
Who works for wa^re, now* thriueth by his Trade*
The brown-Bill, and the Battle-Axe prevail:
The curious Fletcher fits his well-strung Bow,
And his barb'd Arrow which he sets to show.
Tents and Pauillions in the fields are pitched,
(^^ full wrought up their Roomthynesse to try)
Windows, and Towers, with Ensines are inricht,
With ruffing Banners, that do brave the sky,
Wherewith the wearied Labourer bewitched
To see them thus hang wauing in his eye:
His toylsome burden from his back does throw,
And bids them work that will, to France he will go.
Rich Sadles for the Light Horse and the Bard, Armed at all points*

For to be brau'st there is not a man but plyes,
Plumes, Bandroules, and Caparizons prepared;
Whether of two, and men at Arms divise,
The Armings for the thigh and leg-
Greaues, or * Guyses were the surer guard,
The Armings for the arm and shoulder.
Vambrasse, or the Pouldron, they should prize,
And where a stand of Pikes placed close, or large,
Which way to take advantage in the Charge,
One traynes his Horse, another trayles his Pike.
He with his Pole* Axe, practices the fight,
The Bowe-man (which no Country has the like)
With his sheafe Arrow, proves by his might,
How many score off, he his Foe can strike,
Yet not to draw above his bosoms height:
The Trumpets sound the Charge and the Retreat,
The bellowing Drum, the March again does beat,
Cannons upon their Carriage mounted are,
Whose Battery France must feel upon her Walls,
The Engineer providing the Petar,
To break the strong Percullice, and the Balls
Of Wild fire devised to throw from far,
To burn to ground their Palaces and Halls:
Some studying are, the Scale which they had got, Great Ordnance then ^u^ newly
in ^^^.

Thereby to take the Level of their Shot.
The man in years preached to his youthful so^
Pressed to this War, as they sat by the fire,
What deeds in France were by his Father done,
To this attempt to work him to aspire,
And told him there, how he an Ensign vvonne,
Which many a year was hung up in the Quire:
And in the Batrell, where he made his way,
How many Frenchmen he struck down that day^
The good old man with tears of joy would tell,
In Cressy field, what prizes Edward played,
As what at Poycteers the Black Prince befell,
How like a L^on he about him laid:
In deeds of Arms, how Audely did excel,
For their old sins* how they the Frenchmen paid^
How bravely Basset did be have him there:
How Oxford charged the Van, Warwick the rear
And Boy, quoth he, I have heard thy Grandsire s^
That once he did an English Archer see,
Who shooting at a French twelve score away,
Quite through the body, stuck him to a Tree;
Upon their strengths a ^^^ng his Crown might lay:
Such were the men of that brave age quoth he,
When with his ^^^ he at his foe did drive,
Murrian and scalpe down to the teeth could riue,
The scarlet Judge might now set up his Mule,
With neighing Steeds the Street so pestred are,
For where he went in Westminster to rule,
On his Tribunal seat the man of war,
The Lawyer to his chambe^ does recule,
For he has now no business at the bar:
But to make Wills, and Testaments for those,
That were for France, their substance to dispose*
By this, the Council of the War had met,
And had at large of every thing discust;
And the grave Clergy had with them been set,
To warrant wha they undertook was just,
And as for moneys that to be no let,
They, bad the King for that to them to trust:
The Church to pawn, would see her chalice laid,
Ever she would leave one Pyoner unpaid.
From Milford Haven, to the mouth of Tweed, Half th^^^^^ cut of the Island,
from the Spanish to the German Ocean.

Ships of all burden to Southampton brought,
For there the King the Rendeuous decreed
To bear abroad his most victorious fraught:
The place from whence he with the greatest speed,
Might land in France* (of any that was thought)
And with success upon that lucky shore,
Where his great Grandsire landed had before. Edward the third.

But for he found those vessels were too few,
That into France his Army should convey:
He sent to Belgia, whose great store he knew,
Might now at need supply him every way,
His bounty ample; as the vvindes that blew,
Such Barks for Portage out of every bay
In Holland, Zeland, and in Flanders, brings;
As spread the wide The Soa betwixt France and England ^^ called. A Catalogue of
the S^ps in ^^ Stanzaes.
sleeue with their canuase wings*
But first seven Ships from Rochester are sent,
The narrovv Seas, of all the French to sweep;
All men of war with scripts of Mart that went,
And had command, the Coast of France to keep:
The coming of a Navy to prevent,
And view what strength was in the Bay of Deep:
And if they found it like to come abroad,
To do their best to fire it in the Road.
The Bonauenture, George, and the Expense, The names of the Kings 7. Ships of
War

Three as tall ships, as ever did Cable tewe,
The Henry Royal, at her parting thence,
Like the Huge Ruck from Gillingham that flevv: An Indian Bird so great, that
she is able to carry an Elephant.

The Antilop, the Elephant, Defense,
Bottoms as good as ever spread a clue:
All having charge, their voyage having bin,
Before Southampton to take Soldiers ^^.
Twelve Merchants ships, of mighty burden all,
New of the ^tocks, that had been rig'd for Stoad,
Riding in Thames, by Lymehouse, and Blackwall,
That ready were their Merchandise to load,
Straightly commanded by the Admiral,
At the same Port to settle their abode*
And each of these a Pinnis at command.
To put her fraught conveniently to land.
Eight goodly Ships, so Bristow ready made,
Which to the King they bountifully ^ent,
With Spanish Wines which they for ballast lade,
In happy speed of his brave Voyage meant,
Hoping this Conquest should enlarge their Trade,
And there* withal a rich and spacious Tent:
And as this Fleet the Seuerne Seas does stem,
Five more from Padstowe came along with them.
The Hare of Loo a right good ship well known,
The year before that twice the straits had past,
Two wealthy Spanish Merchants did her own,
Who then but lately had repaired her wast;
For from her Deck a Pyrate she had blown,
After a long Fight, and him took at last:
And from Mounts Bay six more, that still in sight
Walted with her before the I Will of Wight.
From Plymmouth next came in the Blazing Star,
And fiery Dragon to take in their fraught;
With other four, especial men of war, The Bay of Portugal ^ of the high
working S^ that is know^^.

That in the Bay of Portugal had fough,
And though returning from a Voyage far,
Stem'd that rough sea, when at the highest it wroght*
With these of Dertmouth seven good ships there were
The golden Cressant in their tops that bear*
So Lyme, three Ships into the Navy sent,
Of which the Sampson scarce a mon'th before,
Had sprung a Planke, and her maine Mast had spent*
With extreme peril that she got to shore;
Which them five other out of Waymouth went,
Which by Southampton, were made up a score:
With those that rode (at pleasure) in the Bay,
And that at Anchor before Portsmouth lay.
Next these, Newcastle furnishes the Fleet
With nine good Hoyes of necessary use;
The Danish Pirates* valiantly they beet,
Offering to Sack them as they sailed from Sluice:
Six Hulks from Hul at Humbers mouth them meet,
Which had them often acompanied to A country ^^ng upon ^e ^ast Sea, ordering
upon Poland. ^amous for ^^erring fishng.
Pruce,
Five more from * Yurmouth falling them among*
That had for fishing been prepared long.
The Cow of Harwitch never put to flight,
For Hides and Furs, late to Musco^ia bound,
Of the same Port, another named the Spite,
That in her coming lately, from the Sound,
After a two dayes-still* continued fight,
Had made three Flemings run themselves on ground;
With three neat Flee-boats which with the^ do tak^
Six ships of Sandwich up the Fleet to make.
Nine ships for the Nobility were there, ^ydes to the ^ing by the ^obility.

Of able men, the enterprise to aid,
Which to the King most liberally they lent,
At their own charge, and bountifully paid,
Northumberland, and Westmerland in sent,
Fourscore at Arms a piece, themselves, and laid
At ^ix score Archers each, as Suffolk shows,
Twenty tall men at Arms, with forty Bows.
Warwick, and Stafford leauied at no less,
Then Noble Suffolk, nor do offer more,
Of men at Arms, and Archers which they press*
Of their own Tenants Armed wite their own store;
Their forwardness foreshewes their good success,
In such a War* as had not been before:
And other Barrons under Earls that were,
Yet dared with them an equal charge to bear.
Darcy, and Camois, zealous for the King,
Louell, Fitzwater, Willoughby, and Rosse,
Berkely, Powis, Burrell, fast together cling;
Seymor and Saint-Iohn for the business closse,
Each twenty Horse, and forty foot do bring,
More, to nine hundred mounting in the gross
In those nine Ships, and ^itly them bestowed,
Which with the other fall into the Road.
From Holland, Zeland, and from Flanders won,
By weekly pay, threescore twelve Bottoms came,
From fifty upward; to five hundred Tun;
For every use a Mariner could name,
Whose glittering Flags against the Radient Sun,
^how'd as the Sea had all been of a flame;
For Skiffes, Crays, Scallops, and the like, why these
From every small Creek, covered all the Seas.
The man whose way from London hap'd to lie,
By those ^e met might guess the general force,
Daily encountered as he passed by,
Now with a Troop of Foot, and then of Horse,
To whom the people still themselves apply,
Bringing them victuals as in mere remorce*
And still the acclamation of the press*
Saint George for England, to your good success.
There might a man have seen in every street,
The Father bidding farewell to his Son:
Small Children kneeling at their Fathers feet:
The Wife with her dear Husband never had done,
Brother his Brother, with adieu to greet:
One Friend to take leave of another run:
The Maiden with her best beloved to part,
Gave him her hand, who took away her heart*
The nobler Youth the common rank above,
On their coructing Coursers mounted fair,
One ware his Mistress Garter, one her Glove,
And he a lock of his dear Ladies hair;
And he her Colors, whom he most did love,
There was not one but did some Favor wear:
And each one took it, on his happy speed,
To make it famous by some K^ightly deed.
The clouds of dust, that from the ways arose,
Which in their March the trampling troops do rear^
When as the Sun their thickness does oppose,
In his descending, shining wondrous clear,
To the beholder far off standing shows,
Like some besieged town, that were on fire,
As though foretelling ever they should return,
That many a City yet secure must burn.
The well-rigd Navy fallen into the Road,
For this short Cut with victual fully stord,
The King impatient of their long abode,
Commands his Army instantly aboard,
Casting to have each company bestowed,
As then the time conuenience could afford;
The Ships appointed wherein they should go,
And Boats prepared for wastage to and fro.
To be imbarqu'd when every band comes down,
Each in their order as they mustred were,
Or by the difference of their A blazon of the Ensigns of the several Shire^
in 14. Stanzas following.
Armings known,
Or by their Colors; for in Ensigns there,
^ome wore the Arms of their most ancient town,
Others again their own Diuises bear.
There was not any* but that more or less,
Something had got, that something should express.
FIrst, in the Expressing their freedom, as still retaining their ancient
liberties, by surprising the Conqueror like a moving wood.
Kentish Stremer was a Wood,
Out of whose top, an arm that held a sword,
As their right Emblem; and to make it good,
They above other only had a word,
Which was; Unconquered; as that freest had stood.
An expression of King Harolds death slain with an Arrow i^ the head, at ^ the
Ba^ta^^^ of Hastings fighting against the Conqueror.
Sussex the next that was to come Aboard
Boar a black Lion Rampant sore that bled,
With a Field-Arrow darted through the head.
The men of The first famous Earl of that country.
Surry, Checky Blew and gold*
Which for brave Warren their first Earl they w^
In many a Field, that honored was of old)
And Hamshiere next, in the same colors bore,
Three Lions Passant, The Arms of Benis Bold,
Who through ^he Wo^ld, so famous was of yore*
A silver Expressing the pleasantness of the situation of that country, lying
upon the French Sea
Tower, Dorsets Red Banner bears
The Cornishmen two Wrestlers had for theirs.
The At lying the fittest to expel or fore*warne. Inua^^on.
Devonshire Band, a Beacon set on fire,
Sommerset Express^ng the delica^y of the Bath, their chief City.
a Virgin Bathing in a Spring,
Their Cities Arms the men of Glostershire,
In Gold* three Bloody Cheuernells do bring,
Wiltshire ^ Crowned * Piramed; As higher
Then any other to match to the King;
Barkeshire, a * Stag, under an Oak that stood,
Oxford, a White Bull wading in a Flood. h The Arms of the ancient Family of
Clare Earl of Gloucester borne by the City. Stonidge being the first wonder of
England, standing in Wiltshire: An old Em^l^m^ of B^^^c^, or ^^rkshire.

The mustred men for A ^adge of the ancient Family of the Staffords, Dukes of
that place.
Buckingham, are gone,
Under the Swan, the Arms of that old Town;
The Londoners, and Middlesex as one,
Are by the Red Cross, and the Dagger known*
The Men of Queen (...) Founder-of the Cross, wife to Constantine, and
daughter to King Co^ll, builder of Colches(...) Essex.
Essex ouermatcht by none,
Under Queen Hellens Image Marching down;
Suffolk the most Easterly of the English shieres.
Suffolk a Sun half ris^n from the brack,
For the br^^: prospect to (...) German Ocean.
Norfolk a Triton on a Dolphins back.
The soldiers sent from Cambridgeshire, a Bay a Having relation to that famous
University their Shire towns.

Upon a Mountain watered with a shower:
Hartford The Arms of the Town^ somewhat alluding to the name.
two Hearts that in a river play:
Bedford an Eagle pearcht upon a Tower,
And The Arms of the town of Hunting*don, first so named of a place where
Hunters met*
Huntington a people proud as they,
Nor giving place to any for their power,
A youthful Hunter with a Chap^et Crowned,
In a pyde Lyam leading forth his Hound.
Northampton The Arms of the town.
with a Castle seated high,
Supported by two Lions thither came,
The men of From the abundance of wool in that tract.
Rutland, to them marching nie;
In their rich Ensign bear an Ermine Ram,
And A sport more used in that shire from ancient time* then in any other.
Lestershire that on their strength rely,
A Bull and Mastiue fighting for the game,
Lincoln For the length that it has upon the German Ocean.
a ship most neatly that was lim'd,
In all her sails with Flags and Pennons trimmed.
Sto^^ The Bear and ragged Staff, the Ancient Arms of that Earldom.
Warwickshire, her ancient badg the Bear,
W^rster For the abundance of fruit more there then in any other tract.
a Peare-tree laden with the fruit,
A Golden fl^^ce and The fine(...) of the Wool of Lemster in that shire
Hereford does wear
Stafford* Many Hermites lived there in the woods in ti(...) pas^, it being all
forrestrie.
A Hermet in his homely suit,
Shropshire Expressing the loftiness of the mountains in that S(...) on which
many Hawks were wont ^^ ay^y.
a Falcon towering in the air,
And for the Shire whose surface seems most brute,
Darby, an Eagle sitting on a Root,
A swathed infant holding in her foot.
Old That famous out*law ^^^ed (...)ch in* that Country, and is yet by many
places there Celebrated.
Nottingham an Archer clad in green,
Under a Tree with his drawn bow that stood,
Which in a checkquer'd Flagge far off was seen
It was the picture of old Robin Hood,
And A^c^^nted o^^r the best Archers of England.
Lancashire not as the least I ween,
Thorough three Crowns, three arrows smeard wi(...) blood
Cheshire a Banner very square and broad,
Wherein a man upon a Lion rode.
A flaming Lance, the For their (...) with the sp^are, and (...) of their Nagg^.
Yorkeshir^ men for the^
As those for Durham near again at hand,
A Myter crowned with a Diadem:
An armed man* the men of Being ready still in Arms against the Scots
Cumberland:
So Expressing the s^it^ ther^f ^uting ou^ into those dangerous S^^^, betwixt
England and Ireland
Westmerland linked with it in one Stem,
A ship that wrackt lay fierd upon the sand:
Northumberland Their (...) conflicts ((...)) with the Scots, expr^ss^d in the
fight between ^^^ golden and ^^d Lion*
with these com'n as a broth(...)
Two Lions fighting tearing one another.
Thus as themselves the English men had showed(...)
Under the Ensign of each several Shiere,
The native Welsh who no less honor owed,
To their own King, nor yet less valiant were;
In one strong Reg'ment had themselves bestowed,
And of the rest, resumed had the Rear:
To their own Quarter marching as the rest,
As neatly Armed, and bravely as the best,
Milford Haven in Penbrooke*shi^^^, one of the (...) harbors in the kno(...)
world, therefore not unaptly so expressed.
Pembrooke, a Boat wherein a Lady stood,
Rowing herself within a quiet Bay;
Those men of South Wales of the Partly Dut^^, partly English, partly Welsh.
mixed blood
Had of the Welsh the leading of the way:
Ca^rmardin Me^ i^, by whose birth and knowledge that town ^^ ma^^ f^mous
in her colors bear a Rood,
Whereon an old man leaned himself to stay,
At a Star poynting; which of great renown,
Was skillful M^^lin, namer of that town.
A watch Tower or pharus, having the situation wh^^^ Seuor^ begins to^
widden, as when Pirates have come in to gi^e warning to the other Maritine
Countries.
Glamorgan men, a Castle great and hie,
From which, out of the battlement above,
A flame shot up it self into the sky:
The men of For the glory it has attained to be the Kings birthplace, and to
ex(...)sse his principalities.
Munmouth (for the ancient love
To that dear Country neighboring them so nie)
Next after them in Equipage that move,
Three Crowns Imperial which supported were
With three Armed Arms, in their proud Ensign (bear.)
The men of The Arms of Brecknocke.
Brecknock brought a Warlik Tent,
Upon whose top there sat a watchful Cock,
Radnor, Lying toward the mi^st of W^l^^ (...) for abundance of Sheep living
on those high mountains.
a mountain of an high ascent,
Thereon a shepherd keeping of his Flock,
As Lying toward the mi^st of W^l^^ (...) for abundance of Sheep living on
those high mountains.
Cardigan the next to them that went,
Came with a Meremayd sitting on a Rock,
And For the abundance of G^ate^ (...) those inac^essible Mountains.
Merioneth bears (as these had done)
Three dancing goats against the rising Sun. h Expressing the situation
(...) Sh^^r^, lying on the Maritine part upon the Irish Sea.

Those of The shiere breeding the best Horses of Wales
Montgomery, bear a prancing Stee^
Denbeio^^ As (...) it self to the great North or Deucal^donian Sea. in
Expressing the abundance of Corn and grass, in that little Tract.
a Neptune with his three-fork'd Mace
Flintshire (m) a Workemayd in her Summer wee^
with Sheafe and Sickle (with a warlike pace)
Those of Caernaruon not the least in speed,
Though marching last (in the maine Armies face)
Three golden Eagles in their Ensign brought,
Under which often brave Owen Guyneth fought,
The Seas amazed at that fearful sight,
Of Arms and Ensigns that abroad were brought
Of Streamers, Banners, Pennons* Ensigns pight,
Upon each Pub, and Prowe; and at the fraught,
So full of terror, that it hardly might
Into a natural course again be brought,
As the Vaste Navy which at Anchor rides,
Proudly presumes to shoulder out the Tides.
The Fleet then full and floating on the maine
The numerous Masts, with their brave topsails s^
When as the wind a little does them strain,
Seem like a Forest bearing her proud head*
Against some rough flaw, that foreruns a rain: A Simile of the Navy.

So do they look from every lofty sted,
Which with the surges, tumbled to and fro,
Seem (even) to bend, as trees are seen to do
From every Ship when as the Ordnance ror^
Of their depart that all might understand, The braus solemnity of the
departing of the ^l^et

When as the zealous people from the shore,
Again with fires salute them from the Land,
^or so was order left with them before,
^o watch the Beacons with a careful hand,
Which being once fierd, the people more or less,
Should all to Church, to pray for their success.
They shape their course into the Mouth of Seyne, The Navy Landing in the mouth
of Seyne.

that destined Flood those Nauies to receive,
before whose fraught, her France had prostrate lain
^s now she must this, that shall never leave,
^ntill the Ensigns that it does contain,
^to the air her heightened walls shall heave;
Whose stubborn Turrets had refused to bow,
To that brave Nation that shall shake them now.
Long Boats with Scouts are put to land before,
upon light Naggs the country to disery,
Whilst the brave Army setting is on shore,)
^ view what strength the enemy had nie,
^essing the bosom of large France so sore,
^at her pale Genius, in affright does fly
To all her Towns, and warnes them to awake,
And for her safety up their Arms to take*
At Paris, Roane, and Orleance, she calls,
^d at their gates with groanings does complain:
^en cries she out, O get up to your walls:
^e English Armies are returned again,
which in two Battles gave those fatal falls,
Cressy, and at Poyteers, where lay slain,
Our conquered Fathers, which with very fear,
Quake in their graves to feel them landed here.
The King of France now having vnd^rstood,
Of Henryes entrance. (but too well unprou'd,)
He clearly saw that dear must be the blood,
That it must cost^e'^ he could be removed,
He sends to make his other s^a Towns good,
Never before, so much it him behou'd,
In every one a Garrison to lay,
Fearing fresh powers from England every day.
To the highest earth whilst awful Henry gets,
From whence strong Harflew he might easiest see,
With sprightly words, and thus their courage when The br^ue encouragement of a
^o^ragious King.

In yonder walls be Mines of gold (quoth he)
He^'s a poor slave that thinks of any debts;
Ha^flew shall p^y for all, it ours shall be,
This air of France does like me wondrous we^
Lets burn our ships, for here we mean to dw^
But through his H^ast he first of all proclai^
In pain of death no English man should take,
From the Religion^ aged, or the maym'd, A charitable Proclamation made by the
King.

Or women that could no resistance make;
To gain his own for that he only aimed;
No^ would have such to suffer for his sake:
Which in the French (when they the same did he^
Bred of this brave King, a religions fear.
His arm^ ranged, in order fitting war, The Kings main Standard (for the
p^nderousnes thereof,) eu^^ borne upon a Carriage.

Each with some green thing does his Murrian cro^
With his main standard fixed upon the Carre;
Comes, the great King before th'intrenched to^
Whilst from the walls the people gazing are,
^ all their sights he sets an army down,
Not for their shot he cares not a pin.
But seeks where he his battery may begin.
And into three, his Army does divide, The King makes his aproches on three
parts.

^is strong approaches on three parts to make;
^imselfe on the one, Clarence on the other side,
^o York, and Suffolk he the third does take,
^he Mines the Duke of Gloucester does guide,
^hen caused his Ships the river up to Stake,
That none with victual should the Town relieve,
Should the sword fail, with famine them to grieve.
From his pauillion where he sat in State,
^rm'd for the siedge, and buckling on his Shield,
^raue Henry sends his Herald to the Gate, The King summons Harflew.

^y trumpets sound to summon them to yield,
and to accept his mercy ever too late,
^r else to say, ere he forsook the field,
Harflew should be but a mere heap of Stones,
Her buildings buried with her owners bones.
France on this sudden put into a fright,
^ith the sad news of Harflew in distress,
those inexpected, miserable plight,
^ee on the sudden, knew not to redress,
^t urged to do, the utmost that she might,
^e peoples fears and clamours to suppress,
Raises a power with all the speed she could,
^om what thereby to loose King Henryes hold.
The Marshall and the Constable of France, Charles de A^bert, and John
Boweequalt.

Leading those Forces lev^ed for the turn,
By which they thought their Titles to advance,
And of their Country endless praise to earne,
But it with them far otherwise does chance,
For when they saw the villages to burn,
And high-towr'd Harflew round ingi^t with fire
They with their power to Cawdebeck retire.
Like as a Hind when she her Calfe does see, A Simile of the French power.

Lighted by chance into a Lions paws,
From which should she adventure it to free,
She must her self fill his devouring Jaws,
And yet her young one, still his prey must be,
(She so instructed is by Natures Laws:)
With them so fares it, which must needs go dow^
If they would figh^; and yet must loose the Tow^
Now do they mount their Ordnance for the da^ A description of the siege of
Harflewe, in the 19 following Stanzaes.

Their scaling Ladders rearing to the walls,
Their battering Rams against the gates they lay,
Their brazen slings send in the wildfire balls,
Baskets of twigs now carry stones and clay
And to the assault, who furiously not falls;
The spade and Pick-Axe working are below;
Which then unfelt, yet gave the greatst blow.
Rampires of earth the painful pyoners raise,
With the walls equal, close upon the Dike,
To pass by which the soldier that assayes,
On plankes thrust over, one him down does strike
Him with a mall a second English pays,
^ second French transpearc'd him with a pike
That from the height of the embattel'd Towers,
Their mixed blood ran down the walls in showers.
A Frenchman b^^ke into the town does fall,
With a sheafe Arrow shot into the head,
An English man in scalling of the wall,
From the same place, is by a stone struck dead,
Tumbling upon them logs of wood, and all,
That any way for their defense might sted:
The hills at hand re-echoing with the din,
Of shouts without, and fearful shrikes within.
When all at once the English men assail,
The French within all valiantly defend,
And in a first assault, if any fail,
They by a second strive it to amend:
Out of the town come Crosbowe Arrows.
quarries thick as hail;
As thick again their Shafts the English send:
The bellowing Canon from both sides does rore,
With such a noise as makes the thunder poor.
Now upon one side you shall hear a cry,
And all that Quarter clowded with a smother,
The like from that against it by and by;
As though the one were echo to the other,
The King and Clarence so their turns can ply:
And valiant Gloucester shows himself their brother;
Whose Mines to the besieged more mischief do,
Then with the assaults above the other two.
An old man sitting by the fire side,
Decrepit with extremity of Age,
Stilling his little Grandchild when it cride,
Almost distracted with the Batteries rage:
Sometimes does speak it fair, sometimes does chide
As thus he seeks its mourning to assuage,
By chance a bullet does the chimney hit,
Which falling in does kill both him and it.
Whilst the sad weeping Mother sits her down,
To give the little newborn babe the Pap,
A lucklesse quarry leuel (...) Town,
Kills the sweet baby sleeping in her lap,
That with the fright she falls into a swoone,
From which awaked, and mad with this mishap,
As up a Rrampire shreeking she does clim,
Comes a great shot, and strikes her lim from lim,
Whilst a sort run confusedly to quench,
Some Palace burning, or some fired Street,
Called from where they were fighting in the Trench:
They in their way with Balls of wildfire met,
So plagued are the miserable French,
Not above head, but also under feet,
For the fierce English vow the Town to take,
Or of it soon a heap of stones to make.
Hot is the siege the English coming on;
As men so long to be kept out that scorn,
Careless of wounds as they were made of stone,
As with their teeth the walls they would have torn:
unto a breach who quickly is not gone,
^ by the next behind him ouer-borne:
So that they found a place that gave them way,
They never cared what danger therein lay.
From every Quarter they their course might ply,
As't pleased the King them to the assault to call:
Now ^n the Duke of York the charge does lie:
To Kent and Cornwall then the turn does fall:
Then Huntingdon up to the walls they cry:
Then Suffolk, and then Excester; which all,
In their mean Soldiers habits used to go,
Taking such part as them that owned them ^^e,
The men of Harflew rough excursions make,
Upon the English in their watchful Tent,
Whose courages they to their cost awake,
With many a wound that often back them sent,
So proud a Sally that durst undertake,
And then the Chasepell mell amongst them went,
For on the way such ground of them they win,
That some French are shut out, some English in.
Nor idely sit our men at Arms the while,
Four thousand Horse that every day go out,
And of the Field are Masters many a mile,
By putting the rebellious French to rout,
No peasants them with promises beguile:
Another business they were come about;
For him they take, his ransom must redeem,
Only French Crowns, the English men esteem.
Whilst English Henry lastly means to try;
By three vast Mines, the walls to overthrow,
The French men their approches that espy,
By countermynes do meet with them below,
And as opposed in the works they lie:
Up the Besieged the besiegers blow,
That stifled quite, with powder as with dust,
Longer to walls they found it vain to trust.
Till Gaucourt then, and Tuttiuile that were
The towns commanders, (with much peril) find
The Resolution that the English bear;
As how their own to yielding were enclinde,
Summon to parley, offering franckly there;
If that aid came not by a day assignde,
To give the town up, might their lives stand freee:
As for their goods, at Henryes will to be.
And having won their conduct to the King,
Those hardy chiefes on whom the charge had lain*
Thither those well-fed Burgesles do bring,
What they had off'red strongly to maintain,
In such a case, although a dangerous thing,
Yet they so long upon their knees remain:
That five days respight from his Grant they have
Which was the most, they (for their lives) durst crave
The time prefixed coming to expire,
And their relief ingloriously delayed,
Nothing within their fight but sword, and fire;
And bloody Ensigns every where displayed,
The English still within themselves entire,
When all these things they seriously had way'd,
To Henryes mercy found that they must trust,
For they perceived their own to be unjust.
The Ports are opened, weapons laid aside,
And from the wales th'artillery displaced,
The Arms of England are advanced in pride:
The watch tower, with Saint Georges banner graced
Live England Henry, all the people cried:
Into the streets the women run in have,
Bearing their little children, for whose sake,
They hoped the King would the more mercy take.
The gates thus widned with the breath of war;
Their ample entrance to the English gave.
There was no door that then had any bar,
For of their own not any thing they have: The King of England enters Harflew
in triumph.

When Henry comes on his Imperial Carre:
To whom they kneel their lives alone to save.
Stricken with wonder, when that face they saw,
Wherein such mercy was with so much awe.
And first themselves the English to secure,
Doubting what danger might yet be within,
The strongest Forts, and Citadell make sure,
To show that they could keep as well as win,
And though the spoils them wonderously allure.
To fall to pillage ever they will begin,
They shut each passage, by which any power,
Might be brought on to hinder, but an hour.
That Conquering King which entering at the g^
Borne by the presie as in the air he swamme:
Upon the sudden lays aside his state,
And of a Lion is become a Lamb:
He is not now what he was but of late:
But on his bare feet to the Church he came:
By his example, as did all the press,
To give God thanks, for his first good success^
And sends his Herald to King Charles to say,
That though he thus was settled on his shore,
Yet he his Arms was ready down to lay,
His ancient right if so he would restore;
But if the same he wilfully denay,
To stop th'effusion of their Subjects gore; Hing Henry offers to decade his
right by single combat.

He frankly off'reth in a single fight,
With the young Daulphine to decide his right*
Eight days at Harflew he does stay to hear,
What answer back, his Harauld him would b^^
But when he found that he was never the near,
And that the Daulphine means no such thing,
As to fight single; nor that any were
To deal for composition from the King:
He casts for Callice to make forth his way.
And take such towns as in his journey lay,
But first his business he does so contriue,
To curb the Townes-men, should they chanc^ st^
Of Arms, and office, he does them deprive,
And to their rooms the English does prefer;
^ut of the ports all Vagrants he does drive,
and therein sets his Uncle Excester:
This done, to march he bids the thundering Drums,
To scourge proud France when now her conqueror comes.
The King and Daulphine having understood,
^ow on his way this haughty Henry was,
^uer the Soame, which is a dangerous flood;
^uckt down the bridges that might give him pass,
and every thing, if fit for humane food,
^us'd to be forrag'd; (to a wondrous mass,)
And more then this, his iourneys to fore-slow,
He scarce one day vnskirmish'd with does go,
But on his march, in midst of all his foes,
^e like a Lion keeps them all at bay,
and when they seem him strictly to enclose;
^et through the thick'st he hewes him out a way:
^or the proud Daulphine dare him to oppose;
though offering often his Army to fore-lay:
Nor all the power the envious French can make,
Force him one foot, his path (but) to forsake.
And each day as his Army does remove,
^arching along upon Soams Marshy side, A f^^^d found in the river of Soame.

^is men at Arms on their tall Horses prove,
^o find some shallow, over where to ride,
^ut all in vain against the Stream they strove,
^ill by the help of a laborious guide,
A Ford was found to set his Army ore
Which never had discovered been before.
The news divulged that he had waded Soame*
And safe to shore his Caridges had brought,
Into the Daulphines bosom struck so home,
And on the weakness of King Charles so wrou^
That like the troubled Sea, when it does Foame,
As in a rage, to beat the Rocks to naught;
So do they storm, and curse on curse they hea^
Against those which should the passages have ke^
And at that time, both resident in Roan,
Thither for this assembling all the Peers,
Whose counsels now must under prop their thro^ A counsill held at Roan
against the King of England.

Against the Foe; which not a man but fears;
Yet in a moment confident are grown,
When with fresh hopes each one his fellow chee^
That ere the English to their Callis got,
Some for this spoil should pay a bloody shot,
Therefore they both in solemn Counsel sat^
With Berry and with Britane their Allies;
Now speak they of this course, and then of that,
As to ensnare him how they might devise;
Something they feign would do, but know not w^
At length the Duke Alanzon up does rise,
And craving silence of the King and Lords,
Against the English, brake into these words,
HAd this unbridled youth an Army led, A speech of the Duke Alanzon against the
English.

That any way were worthy of your fear*
Against our Nation that durst turn the head,
Such as the former English forces were,
This care of yours, your Country then might sted,
To tell you then, who longer can forbear,
That into question you our valor bring,
To calla counsel for so poor a thing.
A Route of tattered Rascals starued so,
As forced through extremity of need,
To rake for scraps on Dunghils as they go,
And on the Berries of the Shrubs to feed,
Besides with fluxes are enfeebled so,
And other foul diseases that they breed,
That they disabled are their Arms to sway,
But in their march do leave them on the way.
And to our people but a handful are,
Scarce thirty thousand, when to land they came,
Of which to England daily some repair,
Many from Harflew carried sick and lame,
Fitter for Spittles, and the Surgions care,
Then with their swords on us to win them fame,
Unshod, and without stockings are the best,
And those by Winter miserably oppressed.
To let them dye upon their March abroad,
And fowls upon their Carkaises to feed,
The heaps of them upon the common road,
A great infection likely were to breed,
For our own safeties see them then bestowed,
And do for them this charitable deed,
Under our swords together let them fall,
And on that day they dye be buried all*
This bold invectiue forced against the Foe,
Although it most of the assembly seas'd,
Yet those which better did the English know,
Were but a little with his speeches pleased,
And that the Duke of Berry meant to show:
Which when the murmr somewhat was appeas^
After a while, their listening silence breaks,
And thus in answer of Alanzon speaks.
MY Liedg, quoth he, and you my Lords and pee^ The Duke of Berrys answer to
Alanzon.

Whom this great business chiefly does co(...) ce^^
By my experience, now so many years,
To know the English ^ am not to learn,
Nor I more feeling have of humane fears,
Then fitteth Manhood, or do^ hope to earne
Suffrage from any; but by zeal am won,
To speak my mind here, as the Duke has do^
Th'euents of War are various (as I know,)
And say, the loss upon the English light,
Yet may a dying man give such a blow,
As much may hinder his proud conquerours might*
It is enough our puissant power to show,
To the weak English, now upon their flight,
When want, and winter, strongly spur them
You else but stay them, that would feign be go^
I like our Forces their first course should hold*
To skirmish with them upon every stay,
But fight by no means with the^, though they wo^
Except they find them forraging for pray,
So still you have them shut up in a foold,
And still to Callis keep them in their way,
So Fabius wearied Haniball, so we,
May English Henry, if you pleased be.
And of the English rid your Country clean,
If on their backs, but Callis walls they win,
Whose Frontier Towns you easily may maintain,
With a strong Army still to keep them in,
Then let our Ships make good the mouth of Seyne,
And at your pleasure Harflew you may win,
E^e with supplies again they can invade,
^pent in the Voyage lately hither made*
That day at Poyteers, in that bloody Field,
The sudden turn in that great Battle then,
Shall ever teach me, whilst I Arms can weeld,
Never to trust to multitudes of men;
^ was the first day that ere I wore a Shield,
Oh let me never see the like again
Where their Black Edward such a Battle won,
As to behold it might amaze the Sun.
There did I see our conquered Fathers fall,
Before the English on that fatal ground,
When as to ours their number was but small,
And with brave Spirits France never did more abound
^et often that Battle into mind I call,
Whereas of ours, one man seemd all one wound,
I instance this; yet humbly here submit,
My self to fight, if you shall think it fit.
The Marshall and the Constable about,
To second, what this sager Duke had said:
The youthful Lords into a cry brake out, Young men's counsails ofttimes prove
the utter subversion both of themselves and others.

Against their opinions, so that ouer-sway'd,
Some seeming of their Loyalties to doubt;
Alanzon as an Oracle obeyed,
And not a French then present, but does swear
To kill an English, if ynow there were.
A Herault posted presently away,
The King of England to the field to dare,
To bid him cease his spoil, nor to delay, The French King sends ^o dare the
King of England to Battle.

Against the French power his forces but prepare:
For that King Charles determined to display
His bloody Ensigns, and through France declare,
The day and place, that Henry should set dow^
In which their Battails, should dispose the cro^
The news to Henry by the Herault brought,
As one dispassion'd soberly (quoth he)
Had your King pleased, we son^r might have fou^
For now my soldiers much enfeebled be:
Nor day, nor place, for Battle shall be sought, The King of Englands modest
answer.

By English Henry: but if he seek me,
I to my utmost will my self defend,
And to The Almighty's pleasure leave the end,
The brute of this intended Battle spread,
The coldness of each sleeping courage warmes,
And in the French that daring boldness bred:
Like casting Bees that they arise in swarms,
^hinking the English down so far to tred,
^ past that day never more to rise in Arms.
T'ext rpe the name, if possible it were,
At least not after to be heard of there.
As when you see the envious Crow epsy,
^omething that she does naturally detest, A Simily of the rising of the French.

^ith open throat how she does squall and cry,
and from the next Grove she does call the rest,
and they for those beyond them bawling fly,
^ll their foul noise do all the air infest:
Thus French, the French to this great Battle call,
Upon their swords to see the English fall.
And to the King when seriously one told,
^ith what an host he should encountered be,
^m noting well, the King did him behold, David Ga^ a great Captain in that
War.

(...) the reporting; Merrily (quoth he).
^y Liege I Will tell you if I may be bold,
^e will divide this Army into three,
One part we'll kill, the second prisoners stay,
And for the third, we'll leave to run away.
But for the Foe came hourly in so fast,
^st they his Army should disordred take;
^e King who wisely does the worst forecast,
^s speedy march does presently forsake,
^o such form and his Battalion cast;
^t do their worst, they should not easily shake;
For that his scouts which Forrag'd had the coast,
Bad him at hand expect a puissant Host*
On which ere long the English Vauward light, The Duke of York.

Which York, of men the brauest does command,
When either of them in the others sight,
He caused the Army instantly to stand,
As though preparing for a present fight,
And rides forth from his courageous Band,
To view the French, whose numbers over spread
The troubled country on whose earth they tre^
Now were both Armies got upon that ground
As on a stage, where they their strengths must try
Whence from the wydth of many a gaping wou(...)
There Is many a soul into the air must fly,
Mean while the English that some ease had found,
By the advantage of a Village nie,
There set them down the Battle to abide,
When they the place had strongly fortiside,
Made drunk with pride the haughty French dis^ The French scorning the English
being so few in respect of their mighty power.

Less then their own, a multitude to view,
Nor ask of God, the victory to gain,
Upon the English wext so poor and few,
To stay their slaughter thinking it a pain,
And lastly to that insolence they grew,
Quoyts, Lots, and Dice for Englishmen to cast,
And swear to pay the Battle being past.
For knots of cord to every town they send,
The Captived English that they caught to bind,
For to perpetual slau'ry they intend:
Those that alive they on the Field, should find,
^o much as that they feared lest they should spend,
^oo many English wherefore they assignd,
Some to keep^ fast those, feign that would be gone,
After the Fight, to try their Arms upon.
One his bright sharp edged Semiter does show,
Offering to lay a thousand crowns (in pride)
that he two naked English at one blow,
^ound back to back will at the wastes divide,
^ome bett his sword will do it, some others no,
after the Battle, and they will have it tried:
Another wafts his Blade about his head,
And shows them how their ha^strings he will shread
They part their prisoners, passing them for debt,
and in their Ransom ra^ibly accord,
^o a Prince of ours, a Page of theirs they set,
and a French Lacky to an English Lord,
^s for our Gentry them to hyre they will let,
and as good cheap as they can them afford,
Branded for slaves, that if they hapt to stray,
Known by the mark, them any one might stay.
And cast to make a Chariot for the King,
^ainted with Antickes, and ridiculous toys,
^ which they mean to Paris him to bring,
^o make sport to their Madames, and their boys,
and will have Rascals, Rimes of him to sing,
^^de in his mock'ry; and in all these joys,
They bid the Bells to ring, and people cry,
Before the Battle, France and Victory.
And to the King and Daulphine sent away.
(Who at that time residing were in Roane)
To be partakers of that glorious day:
Wherein the English should be overthrown,
Lest that of them ensuing days should say;
That for their safety they forsook their own,
When France did that brave victory obtain,
That shall her lasting'st Monument remain.
The poor distressed Englishmen the whiles,
Not dared by doubt, and less appaul'd by dread,
Of their Armed pikes, some sharpning are the pyle
The Archer grinding his barb'd Arrow head:
Their Bills and blades, some whetting are with File
And some their Armours strongly Reuited,
Some poynting stakes to stick into the groun^
To guard the Bow-men, and their Horse to woun^
The night fore-running this most dreadful da^
The French that all to iollity incline;
Some fall to dancing, some again to play: The riot in the French Camp the
night before the Battle.

And some are drinking to this great Design:
But all in pleasure spent the night away,
The tents with lights, the fields with bon-fires shi^
The common Soldiers free-mens catches sing^
With shouts and laughter all the Camp does ri^
The wearied English watchful o'r their Foes,
(The depth of night then drawing on so fast,
That feign a little would themselves repose,
With thanks to God, do take that small repast,
Which that poor Village willingly bestows: Pondering in hu thoughts hu
Fathers coming to the crown by deposing of the rightful King. Henry the fifth
caused the body of King Richard to be taken up, where it was meanly buried at
Langly, and to be laid in Westminster by his first. Wife, Queen Anne.

And having placed their Sentinels at last,
They fall to prayer, and in their Cabins blessed,
T'refresh their spirits, then took them to their rest
In his Pauillion Princely HENRY laid,
Whilst all his Army round about him slept:
His restlesle head upon his Helmet stayed,
For careful thoughts his eyes long waking kept:
Great God (quoth he) withdraw not now thy aid,
Nor let my Father HENRY'S sins be heapt
On my transgressions, up the Sum to make,
For which thou may me utterly forsake.
King Richards wrongs to mind, Lord do not call,
Nor how for him my Father did offend,
From us alone derive not thou his fall,
Whose odious life caused his untimely end,
That by our alms be expiated all:
Let not that sin on me his Son descend,
When as his body I translated have,
And buried in an honorable grave.
These things thus pondring, sorrow-ceasing sleep,
From cares to rescue his much troubled mind,
Upon his Eyelids stealingly does creep,
And in soft slumbers every sense does blind,
(As undisturbed every one to keep)
When as that Angel to whom God assigned,
The guiding of the English, gliding down,
The silent camp does with fresh courage crown.
His glittering wings he gloriously displayes,
Over the ^ost as every way it lies,
With ^olden Dreams their travel, and repayes,
This Herault from the Rector of the skies,
In Vision wa^nes them not to use delays,
But to the Battle cheerfully to rise,
And be victorious for that day at hand,
He would amongst them for the English stand.
The dawne scarce drew the curtains of the East*
But the late wearied Englishmen awake,
And much refreshed with a little rest,
Themselves soon ready for the Battle make,
Not any one but feels in his breast,
That sprightly fire which courage bids him take,
For cre the Sun next rising went to bed,
The French by them in triumph should be led,
And from their Cabins, ere the French arose,
(Drowned in the pleasure of the passed night)
The English cast their Battles to dispose,
Fit' or the ground whereon they were to fight:
Forth that brave King courageous Henry goes,
An hour before that it was fully light, The great are of a wise and p^litike
aptaine.

To see if there might any place be found,
To give his Host advantage by the ground.
Where it was his hap a Quickset hedge to view,
Well grown in heigh; and for his purpose thin,
Yet by the Ditch upon whose bank it grew,
He found it to be difficult to win,
^specially if those of his were true,
amongst the shrubs that he should set within,
By which he knew their strength of horse must come
If they would ever charge his Vanguard home.
And of three hundred Archers makes choice, This S^rat^gem the overthrow of
the French.

Some to be taken out of every Band,
The strongest Bowmen* by the general voice,
Such as beside were valiant of their hand,
And to be so employed, as would rejoice,
Appointing them behind the hedge to stand,
To shroud themselves from sight, and to be mute,
Until a signal freely bad them shoot.
The game some Lark now got upon her Wing,
As twere the English early to awake,
And to wide heaven her cheerful notes does sing,
As she for them would intercession make,
Nor all the noise that from below does spring,
Her ayrie walk can force her to forsake,
Of some much noted, and of others less,
But yet of all presaging good success.
The lazy French their leisure seem to take,
And in their Cabins keep themselves so long,
Till flocks of Ravens them with noise awake,
Over the Army like a cloud that hong,
Which greater have inforceth them to make,
When with their croaking all the Country rong,
Which boaded flaughter as the most do say,
But by the French it turned was this way.
That this divining Foul well understood, The French mis-interpre^ the flight
of Ravens ^ouering over there owre (...)

Upon that place much gore was to be spilled,
And as those Birds do much delight in blood,
With humane flesh would have their gorges filled,
So waited they upon their swords for food,
To feast upon the English being killed,
Then little thinking that these came indeed,
On their own mangled Carkases to feed.
When soon the French preparing for the Field,
Their Armed troops are setting in array,
Whose wondrous numbers they can hardly weeld,
The place too little whereupon they lay,
They therefore to necessity must yield,
And into order put them as they may.
Whose motion sounded like to Nilus fall,
That the Vast air was deafned therewithal,
The Constable, and admiral of France,
With the grand Marshall, men of great command*
The Dukes of Burbon, and of Orleance,
Some for their place, some for their birthright stand,
The Daulphine of Auerney (to advance,
His worth and honor) of a puissant hand:
The Earl of Ewe in War that had been bred,
These mighty men the mighty Vauward led.
The maine brought forward by the Duke of Bar* (...) Marshal (...) of the
(...)ch Ar^y* ^ontai^^g three (...).

Neuers and Beamont, men of special name,
Alan Zon thought, not equaled in this War,
With them Salines, Rous, and Grandpre came,
their long experience, who had fetched from far,
Whom this expected Conquest does inflame,
Consisting most of Crosbowes, and so great,
As France her self it well might seem to threat.
The Duke of Brabant of high valor known,
^he Earls of Marle, and Faconbridge the Rear,
^o Arthur Earl of Richmount's self alone,
^hey leave the right wing to be guided there:
Jews of Burbon, second yet to none,
^ed on the left; with him that mighty Peer
The Earl of Vandome, who of all her men,
Large France entytled, her great Master then.
The Duke of York the English Vauward guides, The Marshal ling of the English
Army containing five Stanzaes.

Of our strong Archers, that consisted most;
Which with our horse was winged on both the sides,
^affront so great and terrible an host;
^here valiant Fanhope, and there Beamont rides,
With Willoughby which scowred had the Coast,
That morning early, and had seen at large,
How the Foe came, that then they were to charge,
Henry himself, on the main battle brings,
Nor can these Legions of the French affright,
This Mars of men, this King of earthly Kings:
Who seemed to be much pleased with the sight,
As one ordayn'd t'accompish mighty things;
Who to the field came in such brau'ry dight:
As to the English boades succesfull luck,
Before one stroke, on either side was struck.
In Warlike State the Royal Standard borne, The bravery of King Henryes ow^e
Person.

Before him as in splendrous Arms he road,
Whilst his coruetting Courser seemed in scorn,
To touch the earth whereon he proudly troad;
Lillyes and Lions quarterly adorn,
His shield, and his Caparison do load:
Upon his Helm a crown with Diamonds dec^
Which through the field, their Radient fires ref^e^
The Duke of Gloucester near to him again,
T'assist his Brother in that dreadful day,
Oxford, and Suffolk both true Marshall men,
Ready to keep the battle in Array,
To Excester there was appointed then,
The Rear; on which their second succors lay,
Which were the youth most of the Noblest blo^
Under the Ensigns of their names that stood.
Then of the stakes he does the care commend,
To certain troops that active were and strong,
Only devised the Archers to defend,
Poynted with Iron and of five foot long,
To be removed still which way they should bend,
Where the French horse should thick'st upon the^ thro^
Which when the host to charge each other went*
Showed his great wit that first did them invent.
Both armies fit, and at the point to fight,
The French assuring of themselves the day, The scornful message of the French
to the King of England*

Send to the King of England (as in spite,)
To know what he would for his Ransom pay,
Who with this answer does their scorn requite: The Kings answer to the
French.

^pray thee Herault wish the French to stay,
And ever the day be past, I hope to see.
That for their Ransomes they shall send to me.
The French which found how little Henry makes
^f their vain boasts, as set therewith on fire,
Whilst each one to his Ensign him betakes, The Constables Oration to the
French

^he Constable to raise his spleen the hyer,
^hus speaks: Brave friends, now for your Grandsires saks,
^our countries honor, or what may inspire,
Your souls with courage, strain up all your power
To make this day victoriously ours.
Forward stout French, your valor and advance,
^y taking vengeance for our Fathers slain,
and strongly fix the Diadem of France,
Which to this day vnstead^ does remain:
Now with your swords their Traitors bosoms lance
and with their bloods wash out that ancient stain,
And make our earth drunk with the English gore,
Which has of ours often surfetted before,
Let not one live in England once to tell,
that of their King, or of the rest became:
Nor to the English what in France befell,
But what is bruted by the general fame:
But now the Drums began so loud to yell,
As cut off further what he would declame:
And Henry seeing them on so fast to make,
Thus to his Soldiers comfortably spoke.
Think but upon the justness of our cause, The King of Englands Oration ^o
the English.

And he is no man their number that will w^
Thus our great Grandsire purchased his applause
The more they are, the greater is our prey,
We'll hand in hand wade into dangers jaws,
And let report to England this convey
That it for me no ransom ever shall raise,
Either I Will Conquer, or here end my days,
It were no glory for us to subdue*
Them, then our number, were the French no mo^
When in one battle twice our Fathers flew,
Three times so many as themselves before,
But to do something that were strange and new*
Wherefore (I ask you) Came we to this shore*
Upon these French our Fathers wan renow^
And with their swords we will hew yan forest d^
The meanest Soldier if in fight he take,
The greatest Prince in yonder Army known,
Without control shall him his prisoner make,
And have his ransom freely as his own:
Now, English, lies our honor at the stake,
And now or never be our valor shown:
God and our cause, Saint George for England sta(...)
Now charge them English, fortune guide yo^ ha^
When hearing one wish all the valiant men, The high (...) of the King of
England.

At home in England, with them present were,
The King makes answer instantly again,
I would not have one man more then is here:
^^e subdue, less should our praise be then:
^euer come, less loss shall England bear:
And to our numbers we should give that deed,
Which must from Gods own powerful hand proceed.
The dreadful charge the drums and trumpets sound
With hearts exalted, though with humbled eyes,
When as the English kneeling on the ground,
Extend the^r hands up to the glorious skies,
Then from the earth as though they did rebound:
^iue as fire immediately they rise:
And such a shrill shoute from their thr^ats they sent,
As made the French to stagger as they went.
Wherewith they stopped, when Erpingham which led Sir Thomas Erpingham gave the
signal to the English.

(...)e Army, saw, the shout had made them stand,
(...)ting his warder thrice about his head,
^e cast it up with his auspitious hand,
which was the signal through the English spread,
that they should charge: which as a dread command,
Made them rush on, yet with a second rore,
Frighting the French worse then they did before,
But when they saw the enemy so slow,
which they expected faster to come on,
(...)e scattering shot they sent out as to show,
(...) their approach they only stood upon,
which with more fervor made their rage ^o glow,
^ much disgrace that they had vnder-gone,
Which to amend with Ensigns let at large,
Upon the English furiously they charge,
At the full Moon look how th'vnweldy Tide* A Simily of the French charging
the English.

Should by some Tempest that from Sea does rise,
At the full height, against the ragged side,
Of some rough Cliffe (of a Giganticke sise)
Foming with rage impetuously does ride,
The angry French (in no less furious wise)
Of men at Arms upon their ready Horse,
Assail the English to disperse their force.
When as those Archers there in ambush laid,
Having their broad side as they came along,
With their barb'd Arrows the French Horses pay*
And in their ^lankes like cruel Hornets stong: The three hundred Ar^h^rs lay
a in ambush, disorder the French men ^^ Arms at the first encounter.

They kick and cry, of late that proudly nay de:
And from their seats their Armed riders flong,
They ran together flying from the Dike,
And make their riders one another strike.
And whilst the front of the French vanguard ma(...)
Upon the English thinking them to Route,
Their Horses run upon the Armed stakes,
And being wounded turn themselves about,
The bit into his teeth the Courser takes,
And from his Rank flies with his Master out,
Who either hurts or is hurt of his own,
If in the throng not both together thrown.
Tumbling on heaps, some of their Horses cast*
With their four feet all up into the air,
Under whose backs their Masters breath their last*
So break their rains, and thence their riders b(...)
^ome with their feet stick in the stirrups fast,
^y their fierce Iades and trayled here and there,
Entangled in their bridles, one back draws,
And pluckes the bit out of another jaws,
With showers of shafts yet still the English ply,
^he French so fast upon the point of flight,
^ith the main Battle yet stood Henry by,
^or all this while had meddled in the fight,
upon the Horses as in chase they fly,
^rowes so thick, in such abundance light,
that their broad buttocks men like buts might see,
Whereat for pastime bow-men shooting be.
When soon De Lannies and Sureres have,
^ayde their friends put to this shameful foil, Two wings of French horse
defeated.

^ith two light wings of Horse which had been placed,
^ill to supply where any should recoyle,
^t yet their forces they but vainly waste,
^r being light into the general spoil,
Great loss De Linnies shortly does sustain,
Yet scapes himself; but brave Surreres slain.
The King who sees how well his Vanguard sped,
^ds his command that instantly it stay,
^esiring York so bravely that had led,
(...) hold his soldiers in their first array,
^r it the Conflict very much might sted,
(...)mewhat to fall aside, and give him way,
Till full up to him he might bring his power,
And make the Conquest complete in an hour.
Which York obayes, and up King Henry comes,
When for his guidance he had got him room,
The dreadful bellowing of whose straitbracd dru(...) The English Va^^ard and
(...) Bas^^^^e charge ^he French (...) at (...).

To the French sounded like the dreadful doom,
And them with such stupidity benummes,
As though the earth had groaned from her womb,
For the grand slaughter never began till then,
Covering the earth with multitudes of men.
Upon the French what Englishman not falls,
(By the strong Bow-men beaten from their stee^
With Battle-axes, Halbers, Bills, and Maules.
Where, in the slaughter every one exceeds,
Where every man his fellow forward calls,
And shows him where some great born French(...) bleed^
Whilst Scalps about like broken pot-sherds fly,
And kill, kill, kill, the Conquering English cry.
Now wexed horror to the very height,
And scarce a man but wet-shod went in gore,
As two together are in deadly fight,
And to death wounded, as one tumbleth ore,
This Frenchman falling, with his very weight,
Does kill another stricken down before,
As he again so falling, likewise feels,
His last breath hastened by another heels,
And whilst the English eagerly pursue,
The fearful French before them still that fly,
The points of Bills and Halberts they imbrue
In their sick bowels, beaten down that lie,
(...)o man respects how, or what blood he drew,
(...)or can hear those that for their mercy cry,
(...)ares are damned up with howles and hellish sounds,
One fearful noise, a fearefuller confounds,
When the courageous Constable of France, Charles de (...) Constable of F(...)

(...)h'vnluckly Vanguard valiantly that led,
(...)we the day turned by this disastrous chance,
(...)nd how the French before the English fled;
(...) stay (quoth he) your Ensigns yet advance,
(...)nce more upon the enemy make head:
Never let France say, we were vanquished so,
With our backs basely turned upon our Foe,
Whom the Chattillyon happened to accost, The A(...)

(...)d seeing thus the Constable dismayed:
(...)ift Noble Lord (quoth he) the day is lost,
(...)the whole world upon the match were laid,
(...)cannot think but that Black Edwards Ghost,
(...)ists the English, and our Horse has frayde,
If not, some Devils they have with them then,
That fight against us in the shapes of men.
Not I my Lord, the Constable replies:
(...) my best soul, the field I will not quit:
(...)hilst two brave Battles are to bring supplies,
(...)ither of which one stroke have stricken yet,
(...)y (quoth Dampier) I do not this advise,
(...)re then your self, that I do fear a whit:
Spur up my Lord, then side to side with me,
And that I fear not you shall quickly see.
They struck their Rowels to the bleeding sid^
Of their fierce* Steeds into the air that sprung*
And as their fury at that instant guides:
They thrust themselves into the murdering thro^
Where such bad fortune these brave Lords betide^
The Admiral from off his Horse was stong, The A^mi^all fl^^^^

For the stern English down before them beer
All that withstand, the Peasant and the Peer.
Which when the Noble Constable with grief
Does this great Lord upon the ground behold,
In his account so absolute a Chief*
Whose death through France he knew would be condo^
Like a brave Knight to yield his friend relief,
Doing as much as possibly he could,
Both Horse and man is borne into the main*
And from his friend not half a furlong flaine. The Constable flaine.

Now Wil^ough by upon his well-Arm'd Horse,
Into the midst of this Battalion brought,
And valiant Fanhope no whitlesse in force,
Himself has thither through the squadrons ra^^
Whereas the English without all remorce,
(Looking like men that deeply are distraught)
Smoking with sweat, besmeared with dust and b(...)
Cut into Cantles all that them withstood.
Yet whilst thus hotely they hold up the Cha^^
Upon the French, and had so high a hand*
The Duke of Burbon to make good his place*
Enforced his troops (with much ado) to stand*
To whom the Earl of Suffolk makes apace,
Bringing a fresh and yet vnfought-with band:
Of valiant Bill-men, Oxford with success,
Up with his Troops does with the other press.
When in comes Orleance; quite thrust off before,
By those rude crowdes that from the English ran,
Encouraging stout Burbons Troops the more,
^'affront the Foe that instantly began:
^aine would the Duke (if possible) restore,
(...)Doing as much as could be done by man)
Their Honor lost, by this their last defeat,
And caused only by their base Retreat,
Their men at Arms their Lances closely lock,
One in another, and come up so round,
That by the strength and horror of the shocke,
They forced the English to forsake their ground,
^hrinking no more then they had been a Rock,
Though by the shafts receiving many a wound,
As they would show, that they were none of those
That turned their backs so basely to their Foes.
Panting for breath his Murrian in his hand,
^oodhouse comes in as back the English bear, The ^^^^ag^ of Woodhouse
remark^able.

My Lords (quoth he) what now enforced to stand,
When smiling Fortune offers us so fair,
^he Frenchly yonder like to wreakes of sand,
and you by this our glory but impair:
Or now, or never, your first fight maintain,
Chattillion and the Constable are flaine.
Hand over head pell mell upon them run,
If you will prove the Masters of the day,
Ferrers and Greystocke have so bravely done,
That I envy their glory, and dare say,
From all the English they the Gole have won,
Either let us share, or they will bear all away,
This spoke, his Axe about his head he flings,
And hasts away, as though his heels had win^
The Incitation of this youthful Knight,
Besides amends for their retrayte to make,
Does re-enforce their courage, with their might,
A second charge with speed to undertake;
Never before were they so mad to fight,
When valiant Fanhope thus the Lords be spoke,
Suffolk, and Oxford as brave Earls you be,
Once more bear up with Willoughby and me.
Why now, me think's I hear brave Fanhope sp^
Quoth noble Oxford, thou have thy desire,
These words of thine shall yan battalion break,
And for my self I never will retire,
Until our Teene upon the French we wreake,
Or in this our last enterprise expire:
This spoke, their Gauntlets each does other g^
And to the charge as fast as they can drive,
That slaughter seemed to have but stayed for (...) de^
To make the horror to ensue the more,
With hands be smeared with blood when meager
Looks more grisly then he did before,
^o that each body seemed but as a sheath,
^o put their swords in to the Hilts in gore:
As though that instant were the end of all,
To fell the French or by the French to fall.
Look how you see a field of standing Corn, A Simily (...) the appearance of
the Battle.

When some strong wind in Summer haps to blow,
^t the full height, and ready to be shorn,
Rising in waves, how it does come and go,
Forward and backward so the crowds are borne,
Or as the Edie turns in the flow,
And above all the Bills and Axes play,
As do the Attom's in the Sunny ray.
Now with main blows their Armours ore vnbras'd,
And as the French before the English fled,
With their brown Bills their recrea^t backs they bast
And from their shoulders their faint arms do shred,
One with a gleaue near cut off by the waste,
Another runs to ground with half a head:
Another stumbling falls in his flight,
Wanting a leg, and on his face does light.
The Duks who found their force thus ouerthrown,
And those few left them ready still to route,
Having great skill, and no les^e courage shown;
Yet of their safeties much began to doubt,
For having few about them of their own,
And by the English so impaled about,
Saw that to some one they themselves must yield,
Or else abide the fury of the field
They put themselves on those victorious Lord The Duke of Burben and ^ri^ance
to^^^ prisoners.

Who led the Vanguard with so good success,
Bespeaking them with honorable words,
Themselves their prisoners freely and confess,
Who by the strength of their commanding sword^
Could hardly save them from the slaught'ring pre^
By Suffolkes aid till they away were sent,
Who with a Guard conuayd them to his Tent.
When as their Soldiers to eschew the sack,
Against their own Battle beating in their flight,
By their own French are strongly beaten back:
Lest they their Ranks, should have disord'red quig^
So that those men at Arms go all to wrack.
Twixt their own friends and those with whom the^ fig^
Wherein disorder and destruction seemed,
To strive, which should the powerfullest be d^em'^
And whilst the Daulphine of Auerney cries, (...) of some Guis^ard the
Daulphine of A^ag^n.

Stay men at Arms, let Fortune do her worst,
And let that Villane from the field that flies,
By Babes yet to be borne, be ever cursed:
All under Heaven that we can hope for, lies
On this days battle, let me be the first,
That turn'dye back upon your desperate Foe^
To save our Honors, though our lives we lose.
To whom comes in the Earl of Ewe, which long
Had in the Battle ranged here and there,
A thousand Bills, a thousand Bows among,
And had seen many spectacles of fear,
And finding yet the Daulphins spirit so strong,
By that which he had chancd from him to hear,
Upon the shoulder claps him* Prince quoth he,
Since I must fall, Oh let me fall with thee.
Scarce had he spoke, but the English them enclose,
And like to Mastiues fiercely on them flew,
Who with like courage strongly them oppose,
When the Lord Beamont, who their Armings knew,
Their present peril to brave Suffolk shows,
Quoth he, lo where Dauerney are and Ewe,
In this small time, who since the Field begun,
Have done as much, as can by men be done.
Now slaughter ceaze me, if I do not grieve,
Two so brave Spirits should be untimely slain,
Lies there no way (my Lord) them to relieve,
And for their Ransomes two such to retain:
Quoth Suffolk, come, we will hazard their repreeue,
And share our Fortunes, in they go amain,
And with such danger through the press they wade
As of their lives but small account they made.
Yet ere they through the clustred clouds could get
Often down on those, there trod to death that lay,
The valiant Daulphine had discharged his debt, The Daulphine of Auerney
slain. The Earl (...) Ewe taken prisoner.

Then whom no man had brauelier served that day,
The Earl of Ewe, and wondrous hard beset:
Had left all hope of life to escape away:
Till Noble Beamont and brave Suffolk came,
And as their prisoner seas'd him by his name.
Now the maine Battle of the French came on*
The Vauward vanquished, quite the field does fly,
And other helps besides this, have they none,
But that their hopes does on their main rely,
And therefore now it stands them upon,
To fight it bravely, or else yield, or dye:
For the fierce English Charge so home and sort*
As in their hands Jove's thunderbolts they bore.
The Duke of York who since their fight begun The Duke of York slain.

Still in the top of all his troops was seen,
And things well-neere beyond belief had done,
Which of his fortune, made him over ween,
Himself so far into the maine does run,
So that the French which quickly got between
Him and his succors, that great Chieftaine slew
Who bravely fought whilst any breath he drew.
The news soon brought to this courageous King
Orespred his face with a distempred Fire, The King (...) of the Duk of Yorks
(...).

Though making little show of any thing,
Yet to the full his eyes expressed his Ire,
More then before the Frenchmen menacing,
And he was heard thus softly to respire:
Well, of thy blood revenged will I be, The Kings solution.

Or ere one hour be past I Will follow thee.
When as the frolike Caualry of France,
That in the Head of the maine Battle cam^
Perceived the King of England to advance,
To charge in person; it does them inflame,
(...)ch one well hoping it might be his chance,
(...) sease upon him, which was all their aim,
Then with the brauest of the English met,
Themselves that there before the King had set,
When The Earl of Cornwall with unusual force, The bloody scuffle between
the French and English, at the joining of the two maine Battles in five
S^anzaes.

^counters Grandpre (next that came to hands)
(...) strength his equal, blow for blow they scorce,
^eelding their Axes as they had been wands,
^ll the Earl tumbles Grandpre from his Horse*
(...)er whom strait the Count Salines stands,
And lends Cornwall such a blow withal*
Over the crupper that he makes him fall*
Cornwall recouers, for his Arms were good,
(...)d to Saline* makes up again,
^ho changed such boy strous buffers, that the blood
^th through the ioints of their strong Armor strain
(...) Count Salines sunk down where he stood*
^mount who sees the Count Salines slain,
^traight copes with Cornewal beaten out of breath
(...) Till Kent comes in, and rescues him from death.
Kent upon Blamount furiously does fly,
(...) at the Earl with no less courage struck,
(...)d one the other with such knocks they ply,
(...)at eithers Axe in the others Helmets stuck,
^hilst they are wrestling, crossing thigh with thigh
(...)eir Axes pikes, which soonest out should pluck:
They fall to ground like in their Casks to smother,
With their clutcht Gantlets ^uffing one another.
Courageous ^l^e^ grieved at the sight, Called Cl^e^ of Brabant.

Of his friend Blamounts unexpected fall,
Makes in to lend him all the aid he might;
Whose coming seemed the stout Lord Soales to call(...)
Betwixt whom then began a mortal fight,
When instantly fell in Sir Phillip Hall,
Against him goes Roussy, in then Louell ran,
Whom next Count Morveyle chooses as his m(...)
Their Curates are vnreuited with blows,
With Horrid wounds their breasts and faces slas(...)
There drops a cheek, and there falls off a nose,
And in ones face his fellows brains are dashed;
Yet still the better with the English goes.
The earth of France with her own blood is wash(...)
They fall so fast, she scarce affords them room(...)
That one man's trunk becomes another tom(...)
When Suffolk charge Huntingdon with slo(...) The Earl of Suffolk charge
the Earl of Huntington with brea^h of promise.

Over himself too wary to have bin,
And had neglected his fast plighted troth,
Upon the Field, the Battle to begin,
That where the one was, there they would be both^
When the stout Earl of Huntingdon, to win,
Trust with his friends; does this himself inlar(...)
To this great Earl who dares him thus to charg^
My Lord (quoth he) it is not that I fear,
More then your self, that so I have not gone;
But that I have been forced to be near,
The King, whose person I attend upon,
(...)d that I doubt not but to make appear,
^ow, if occasion shall but call me on;
Look round about my Lord, if you can see,
Some brave adventure worthy you and me.
See yan proud Banner of the Duke of Bars, A desp(...) attempt by the Earl
of Huntingdon.

(...) think it wastes us, and I hear it say,
(...)here is that courageous Englishman that dares,
(...) enture, but to carry me away,
^is were a t^ing now worthy of our wars;
(...) true, quoth Suffolk, by this blessed day,
On, and we will have it, say thou so indeed,
Quoth Huntingdon, then Fortune be our speed,
and through the rancks then rushing in their pride
^ey make a Lan^; about them so they lay,
^ote goes with foot, and side is ioynde to side,
^ey strike down all that stand within their way,
(...)d to direct them, have no other guide,
(...) as they see the multitude to sway;
And as they pass, the French as to defy,
Saint George for England and the King they cry,
By their examples, each brave English blood, One brave ^^ pl^ie^ begerteth
another?

(...) the Frenchmen for their Ensigns run,
(...)e there as trees within a well-growne wood;
^ere great Atchieuements instantly were done,
(...)inst them roughly whilst that Nation stood,
(...)o what man his destiny can shun,
That Noble Suffolk there is overthrown, The Earl of Suffolk (...)

^hen ^e much valor sundry ways had shown.
Which the proud English further does pro^^
Who to destruction bodily were bent,
That the maine battle instantly they broke,
Upon the French so furiously they went,
And not an English but does scorn a stroke, The English kill she French with
their own Weapons.

If to the ground it not a Frenchman sent,
Who weak with wounds, their weapons from the thr^
With which the English fearfully them slew.
Alanzon back upon the Reareward borne,
By those unarmed that from the English fled,
All further hopes them utterly forlorn,
His Noble heart in his full bosom bled,
What fate, quoth he, our overthrow has sworn
Must France a prisoner be to England led,
Well, if she be so, yet I Will let her see,
She bears my carcass with her, and not me.
And puts his Horse upon his full Careere,
When with the courage of a valiant Knight,
(As one that knew not, or forgot to fear,)
He toward King Henry makes in the fight,
And all before him as he down does bear,
Upon the Duke of Gloucester does light:
Which on the youthful Chiualry does brin^
Scarce two piks length that came before the (...)
Their Staves both strongly reuetted with s^^ The Duke of Gloucester ^^ (...) by
the Duke of Alanzon.

At the first stroke each other they astound,
That as they staggering from each other reele*
The Duke of Gloucester falls to the ground,
^hen as Alanzon round about does wheel,
^hinking to lend him his last deadly wound,
In comes the King, his brother^ life to save,
And to this brave Duke a fresh on* set gave.
When as themselves like thunderbolts they shot,
One at the other, and the lightning brake
Out of their Helmets, and again was not,
^'r of their stroke the ear a sound could take,
^etwixt them two, the conflict grew so hot,
which those about them so amazed does make,
That they stood still as wondering at the ^ight,
And quite forgot that they themselves must fight
Upon the King Alanzon pressed so sore,
that with a stroke (as he was wondrous strong) The King of England in dan^e^
to be slan^ by the Duke of Alanzon.

^e c^eft the Crown which on his Helm he wore,
and tore his Plume that to his heels it hong:
^hen with a second brus'd his Helm before,
that it his forehead pitifully wrung:
As some that saw it certainly had thought,
^he King therewith had to the ground bin brought
But Henry soon Alanzons Ire to quit,
^s now his valor lay upon the Rack) Alanzon betten down by the King of
England.

^on'th face the Duke so strongly hit,
(...) in his Saddle laid him on his back,
(...)d once perceluing that be had him split,
(...)llow'd his blows redoubling thwack on thwack
(...) Till ^e had lost his stirrups, and his head
Hung where his Horse was like thereon to tread.
When soon two other seconding their Lord, The King kill le^o two Gentlemen
that adventure to ^resene the Duke.

His kind companions in this glorious prize,
Hoping again the Duke to have restored
If to his feet his Arms would let him rise:
On the Kings Helm their height of fury scor'd;
Who like a Dragon fiercely on them flies,
And on his body slew them both, whilst he,
Recovering was their aid again to be.
The King thus made the master of the fight:
The Duke calls to him as he there does lie,
Henry I Will pay my ransowe, do me right:
I am the Duke Alanzon, It is I,
The King to save him putting all his might,
Yet the rude soldiers with their shout and cry,
Quite drowned his voice, his Helmet being shut, The Duke Alanzon slain.

And that brave Duke into small pieces cut.
Report once spread, through the distracted Host,
Of their prime Hope, the Duke Alanzon slain,
That flower of France, on whom they trusted most,
They found their valor was but then in vain,
Like men their hearts that utterly had lost,
Who slowly fled before, now run amain,
Nor could a man be found, but that dispaires,
Seeing the Fate both of themselves and theirs.
The Duke Neuers, now in this sad retreat, The Duke Neuers taken prisoner.

By David Gam and Morrisby pursude,
(Who thoroughly chased, near melted into sweat,
And with French blood their Pollaxes imbrud)
They sease upon him following the defeat,
Amongst the faint and fearful multitude, Morrisby and Gam a^ contention for
the Duke of Neueres.

When a contention fell between them twain.
To whom the Duke should right^u^ly pertain,
I must confess thou had him first in chase,
Quoth Morrisby; but lefts him in the throng,
^hen put I on, quoth Gam have thou the face,
^nsulting Knight to offer me this wrong;
Quoth Morrisby, who shall decide the case,
^^t him confess to whom it does belong,
Let him (quoth Gam) but if it be not to me,
For any right you have, he may go free,
With that courageous Morrisby grew hot, Morrisby ^^ b^auey ^^ Knigh

^ere not said he his ransom worth a pin,
^ow by these Arms I were, thou gett'st him not,
^r if thou do thou shall him hardly win: David Ga^ often mentioned in this
P(...)

^am whose Welsh blood could hardly brook this blot,
^o bend his Axe upon hi^ does begin,
He his at him, till the Lord Beamont came,
Their rash attempt, and wisely thus does blame.
Are not the French twice trebl'd to our power,
and fighting still, nay, doubtful yet the day:
^i^ke you not th^se us fast enough devour:
^t that your braues the Army must dismay:
^ought but good befall us in this hour:
^is be you sure your lives for it must pay:
Then first the end of this days Battle see,
And then decide whose prisoner he shall be,
Now Excester with his vntaynted Rear, The Duke of Excester comes in with
the Rear.

Came on, which long had labored to come in,
And with the Kings main battle up does bear,
Who still kept off, till the last hour had bin:
He cries and clamours every way does hear:
But yet he knew not which the day should win:
Nor asks of any what were fit to do,
But where the French were thick'st he falls to.
The Earl of Vandom certainly that thought,
The English fury some what had been stayed:
Weary with slaughter as men ouer-wrought,
Nor had been spurred on by a second aid:
For his own safety, then more fiercely fought,
Hoping the tempest had bin somewhat laid:
And he thereby (though suffering the defeat)
Might keep his reareward whole in his retreat^
On whom the Duke of Excester then fell,
Rear with the Rear now for their valoursvy,
Ours find the French their lives will dearly sell,
And The English mean as dearly them to buy:
The English follow, should they run through hell,
And through the same the French must, if they fly,
When to it they go, deciding it with blows,
With the one side now, then with th'other't g(...)
But the stern English with such luck and mig(...)
(As though the fates had sworn to take their part
Upon the French prevailing in the Fight,
With doubled hands, and with re-doubled heart^
The more in peril still the more in plight,
Against them whom fortune miserably thwarts:
Disabled quite before the foe to stand,
But fall like grass before the Mowers hand.
That this French Earl is beaten on the field, The Earl of Vandome slain.

His fighting soldiers round about him slain,
And when himself a Prisoner he would yield,
And begged for life, it was but all in vain:
Their Bills the English do so easily weeld,
To kill the French as though it were no pain:
For this to them was their auspicious day,
The more the English fight, the more they may,
When now the Marshall Boucequalt, which long
Had through the Battle waded every way,
Often hazzarded the murdered troops among,
Encouraging them to abide the day:
Finding the Army which he thought so strong,
Before the English faintly to dismay,
Brings on the wings which of the rest remained,
With which the battle stoutly he maintained.
Till old Sir Thomas Erpingham at last, Sir Thomas Erpingham gets in with
his three hundred A^^hers.

^ith those three hundred Archers comes in,
which laid in ambush not three hours yet past,
^ad the Defeat of the French Army bin,
^ith these that noble soldier makes have,
(...)t other from him should the honor win:
Who as before now stretch their wel-waxt strings,
At the French Horse then coming in the wings.
The soil with slaughter every where they lo^
Whilst the French stoutely to the English stood,
The drops from eithers emptied veins that flow
Where it was lately firm had made a flood,
But Heaven that day to the brave English owed;
The Sun that rose in water, set in blood:
Nothing but horror to be looked for there,
And the slought Marshall vainly does but fe^
His Horse sore wounded whilst he went aside, The Marshal of France slain.

To take another still that does attend,
A shaft that some too-lucky hand does guide,
Piercing his Gorget brought him to his end,
Which when the proud Lord Falkonbridge espide,
Thinking from thence to bear away his friend,
Struck from his Horse with many a mortal wou^
Is by the English nailed to the ground.
The Marshals death so much does them affrig
That down their weapons instantly they lay,
And better ye^ to fit them for their flight,
Their weightier Arms they wholly cast away,
Their hearts so heavy makes their heels so light,
That there was no entreating them to stay,
Ore hedge and ditch distractedly they take, (...)
And happiest he the greatest have could make,
When Vadamount now in the conflict met, Co(...) Vadamount.

With valiant Brabant, whose high valor show^
That day did many a blunted courage whet,
Ere long before that from the field had flowne,
Q^oth Vadamount, see how we are beset, The Duke of Brabant a most courageous
Prince

To death like to be trodden by our own,
My Lord of Brabant, what is to be done?
See how the French before the English run.
Why let them run, and never turn the Head, A bitter exclamation of the Duke
of Brabant against the French.

Quoth the brave Duke, until their hateful breath,
Forsake their bodies, and so far have fled,
That France be not disparaged by their death,
Who trusts to Cowards never is better sped,
Be he accursed, with such that holds faith,
Slaughter consume the Recreants as they fly,
Branded with shame, so basely may they dye.
Ignoble French, your fainting cowardice craves
The dreadful curse of your own mother earth,
Hardening her breast, not to allow you graves,
Be she so much ashamed of your birth;
May he be cursed that one of you but saues,
And be in France hereafter such a dearth,
Of courage, that men from their wits it fear,
A Drum or Trumpet when they hap to hear.
From Burgundy brought I the force I had, Anthony Duke of Brabant son to the
Duke of Burgundy.

To fight for them, that ten for one did fly,
It splits my breast, O that I could be mad;
To vex these Slaves who would not dare to dye:
In all this Army is there not a Lad,
The Ignoble French for cowards that dare cry:
If scarce one found, then let me be that one,
The English Army that opposed alone.
This ^^Spand^^ pu^^ his Horse upon his speed,
And in like (...)ing on the English flew:
(...) son he made to bleed,
W^^st ^^^ with much astonishment they view:
Where having ^cted many a Knight-like deed,
H^^ and his Horse they all too pieces hew:
Yet he that day more lasting glory wan,
Except Al^nzon then did any man. The valiant Duke of Brabant slain.

When as (...) great King Henry came,
Of a vast ro^^^ which ^om the Battle ^^ed,
(Amongst the French men of most special name)
But the stout English fiercely followed;
Ha^ for ^h^i^ safety, (much though to their sha^^e) Many of the French in
^hotr flight get ^^to an old Fort.

Got in their flight into so strong a sted,
So fortified by nature (as 'twas though^)
They might no^ thence, but with much blood be brought
An aged Ra^pire, with huge Ruins heapt*
Which served for Shot, against those that should (...)
Whose narrow entrance they with crosbowes kept
Whose sharpened quarres came in show^'s like hail The Kings slight answer.

Quoth the brave King first let the field be swept,
And with the rest we well enough shall deal;
Which though some heard and so shut up their ^are
Yet relish't not with many soldiers there,
Some that themselves by Ransomes would in r^^^
(To make their pray of Pesants yet despise)
Felt as they thought their bloody palms to 'tch,
To be in action for their wealthy prize,
Others whom only glory does bewitch,
Rather then life would to this enterprise:
Most men seemed willing, yet not any one,
Would put himself this great exployt upon.
Which Woodhouse hearing merrily thus spoke, Woodhou^^ ^eereth at the attempt.

One that right well knew, both his worth and wit)
A d^ng ^ous thing it is to undertake,
A fort, where Soldiers be defending it,
^^^^ path^^ sleep, and if they should awake,
With ^^ones, or with their shafts they may us hitt,
And in our Conquest whilst so well we fare,
It were mere folly, but I see none dare.
Which Gam or'hearing (being near at hand,) Braues pass between Gam and
Woodhouse.

Not dare quoth he, and angerly does frown,
I tell thee Woodhouse, some in presence stand,
Dare propp the Sun if it were falling down,
Dare graspe the bolt from Thunder in his hand,
And through a Canon leap into a Town,
I tell thee, a resolved man may do,
Things that thy thoughts yet never mounted to.
I know that resolution may do much,
Woodhouse replies, but who could act my thought,
With his proud Head the pole might easily tuch,
And Gam quoth he, though bravely thou have fought
Yet not the Fame thou have attained to, such,
But that behind as great is to be bought,
And yonder it is, then Gam come up with me,
Where soon the King our Courages shall see^
Agreed quoth Gam, and up their troops they ^^
Hand over head, and on the French they ran,
And to the fight courageously they fall,
When on both sides the slaughter soon began;
Fortune a while indifferent is to all,
These what they may, and those do what they ca^
Woodhouse and ^am, upon each other vye,
By Arms their manhood desperately to try.
To clime the Fort, the Light-armed English strin^
And some by Trees there growing to ascend;
The French with flints let at the English drive,
Themselves with shields the Englishmen defend,
And feign the fort down with their hands would r^^
Thus either side their utmost power extend,
Till valiant Gam sore wounded, drawn aside, Ca^tain^ Gam ^^ai^e.

By his own soldiers, shortly after died,
Then take they up the bodies of the slain, For this service done by
Woodhouse* there was an addition of honor given him which was a hand holding^
club: with the word, Frappe Fort, which is borne by the Family of the Woodhouse
of Norfolk to t^^^ day.

Which for their Targets ours before them bear,
And with a fresh assault came on again,
Scarce in the Field yet such a fight as there,
Cros-bowes, and Long-bowes, at it are amain,
Until the French their massacre that fear,
Of the fierce English* a cessation crave,
Offering to yield, so they their lives would save*
Lewis of Burbon in the furious heat,
Of this great Battle, having made some stay
Who with the left Wing suffered and feate,
In the beginning of this lucklesse day,
Finding the English forcing their retreat,
And that much hope upon his valor lay,
Fearing lest he might undergo some shame,
That were unworthy of the Burbon name.
Has gathered up some scattered troops of horse,
That in the Field stood doubtful what to do,
Though with much toil, which he does reinforce,
With some small power that he does add thereto,
Proclaiming still the English had the worse,
And now at last, with him if they would go,
He dares assure them Victory, if not,
The grearest fame that ever Soldiers got.
And being wise, so Burbon to beguile,
The French, (preparing instantly to fly) A deuis^ ^^ Burbons to give
encouragement to the French.

Procures a Soldier by a secret wile,
To come in swiftly and to crave supply,
That if with courage they would fight a while,
It certain was the English all should dye,
For that the King had offered them to yield,
Finding his troops to leave him on the field,
When Arthur Earl of Richmount coming in,
With the right wing that long staid out of sight,
Having too lately with the English bin,
But finding Burbon bent again to fight,
His former credit hoping yet to win,
(Which at that instant casily he might)
Comes close up with him, and puts on as fast,
Bravely resolved to fight it to the last.
And both encouraged by the news was braug^
Of the ariuing of the Daulphine: power;
Whose speedy Van, their Rear had almost raug^
(From Agin Court discovered from a Tower)
Which with the Norman Gallantry was fraught,
And on the sudden coming like a shower;
Would bring a deluge on the English Host,
Whilst yet they stood their victory to boast.
And on they come, as does a rolling tide,
Forced by a wind, that shoues it forth so fast, A Simily of the, French.

Till it choke up some channel, side to side,
And the crab'd banks does down before it cast,
Hoping the English would them not abide,
Or would be so amaz^d at their have,
That should they fail to route them at their w(...)
Yet of their blood, the fields should drink their f(...)
When as the English whose o'r-wearied Arms,
Were with long slaughter lately waxed sore,
These inexpected, and so fierce Alarmes,
To their first strength do instantly restore,
And like a Stone their st^ff^ned sinews warmes,
To act as bravely as th^^ did before;
And the proud French as stoutly to oppose,
Scorning to y^e^d one foot despite of blows,
The figh^ is fearful, for stout Burbon brings,
His f^esh(...) forces on with such a shocke,
That they were like to cut the Archers strings,
E're they their Arrows handsomely could nock,
(...)e French like Engines that were made with springs:
(...)emselues so fast into the English lock,
That the one was like the other down to bear,
In wanting roomth to strike, they stood so near.
Till staggering long they from each other reeled,
^lad that themselves they so could disingage:
^^d falling back upon the spacious field,
^or this last Scene, that is the bloody Stage)
^here they their weapons liberally could weeld,
^hey with such madness execute their rage,
As though the former fury of the day,
To this encounter had been but a play.
Slaughter is now desected to the full,
^ere from their backs their battered Armorsfall,
^er^ a ^left shoulder, there a cloven scull,
^here hang his eyes ou^ beat^n with a^mall,
^ntill the edges of their Bill^ grow dull,
p^n each other they so spend their gall,
Wild sh^^t^s and clamors all the air do fill,
The French cry ^tue, and the English kill.
The Duke of Bar in this vast spoil by chance;
^ith the Lord Saint-Iohn on the field does meet,
^ow'rds whom that brave Duke does himself advance
^ho with the like encounter him does greet,
^his English Barron, and this Peer of France,
^rapling together, falling from their feet,
With the rude crowds had both to death been crushed,
^n for their safety, had their friends not rusht.
Both again raised, and both their soldiers shift
To save their lives if any way they could:
But as the French the Duke away wouldlift,
Upon his Arms the English taking hold,
(Men of that sort, that thought upon their thrift)
Knowing his Ransom dearly would be sold:
Dragge him away in spite of their defense,
Which to their quarter would have borne him thence,
Mean while brave Burbon from his stirring hors^
Galled with an Arrow to the earth is thrown,
By a mean soldier seized on by force, Lewis of Burbon taken prison^ by a
mean soldier.

Hoping to have him certainly his own,
Which this Lord holds better so then worse:
Since the French fortune to that ebb is grown,
And he perceiues the soldier does him deem,
To be a person of no mean esteem.
Berkely and Burnell, two brave English Lords,
Flesht with French blood and in their Valors pride*
Above their Armed heads brandishing their swords,
As they tryumphing through the Army ride,
Finding what prizes fortune her affords,
To every Soldier, and more wistly eyde,
This gallant prisoner, by this Arming see,
Of the great Burbon family to be.
And from the Soldier they his prisoner take,
Of which the French Lord seems wondrous feign*
Thereby his safety more secure to make,
Which when the soldier finds his hopes in vain,
(...) rich a booty forced to forsake, Lewis of Burbon st^bd by a Soldier that
took him prisoner,

(...) put himself and prisoner out of pain,
He on the sudden stabs him, and does swear,
Would th'aue his Ransom, they should take it there*
When Rosse and Morley making in amain,
^ing the Lord Darcy up with them along,
those Horse had lately under him been slain,
(...)d they on foot found fighting in the throng,
(...)ose Lords his friends remounting him again,
^ing a man that valiant was and strong:
They altogether with a general hand,
Charge on the French that they could find to stand.
And yet but vainly as the French supposed,
(...)The Earl of Richmount forth such earth had found,
(...)at on two sides with quick-^et was enclosed,
(...)d the way to it by a rising ground,
which a while the English were opposed,
every Charge which else came up so round,
As that except the passage put them by,
The French as well might leave their Arms and fly.
Upon both parts it furiously is fought,
(...)d with such quickn^sse rises to that height,
(...)t horror needs no further to be sought:
(...)nely that might satisfy the sight,
(...)o would have fame full d^er^ly here i^ bought,
(...) it was sold by measure and by weight,
And at one rate the price still certain stood,
An ounce of honor cost a pound of blood,
When so it hapt that Dampier in the Van, The Lords Dampier an ^ Sauesses
tataken prisoners.

Meets with stout Darcy, but whilst he him pr(...)
Over and over comes Horse and man,
Of whom the other soon himself possessed:
When as Sauesses upon Darcy ran,
To aid Dampier, but as he him adrest;
A Halbert taking hold upon his Greaues,
Him from his Saddle violently heaues,
When soon five hundred Englishmen at Arm
That to the French had given many a Chase,
And when they covered all the field with swarms
Yet oft^ hat day had bravely bid them base:
Now at the last by raising fresh alarmes;
And coming up with an unusual pace,
Made them to know that they must run or yee^
Never till now the English had the Field.
Where Arthur Earl of Richmount beaten dow^ Arthur Earl of Richmount taken
prisoner.

Is left (supposed of every one for dead)
But afterward awaking from his swoone,
By some that found him, was recovered:
So Count Du Marle was likewise overthrown, The Count du Marle slain.

As he was turning meaning to have fled,
Who fights the cold blade in his bosme feele^,
Who flies, still hears it whisking at his heel^
Till all disrank'd, like siely sheep they run,
By threats nor prayers, to be constrained to stay*
For that their hearts were so extremely done,
That fainting often they fall upon the way,
Or when they might a present peril shun,
They rush upon it by their much dismay;
That from the English should they safely fly,
Of their own very fear, yet they should dye.
Some they take prisoners, other some they kill,
^s they affect those upon whom they fall:
For they as Victors may do what they will:
For who this Conqueror to account dare call,
^n gore the English seem their souls to swill,
And the dejected French must suffer all;
Flight, cords, and slaughter, are the only three,
To which themselves subjected they do see.
A shoolesle Soldier there a man might meet, The misery of the French.

Leading his Mounsier by the Arms fast bound:
Another, his had shackled by the feet;
Who like a Cripple shu^fled on the ground;
Another three or four before him beete,
Like harmefull Cattle driven to a pound,
They must abide it, so the Victor will,
Who at his pleasure may, or save, or kill.
That brave French Gallant when the fight began,
Whose lease of Lackies ambled by his side,
Himself a Lacky now most basely ran,
Whilst a raged soldier on his Horse does ride,
That Rascal is no less then at his man,
Who was but lately to his Luggadge tide;
And the French Lord now courtsies to that slave,
Who the last day his Alms was like to crave.
And those few English wounded in the fight, The French forced to bear the
wounded English on their backs.

The force the French to bring with them away,
Who when they were depressed with the weight*
Yet dared not once their burden down to lay,
Those in the morn, whos^ hopes were at their h^ig^
Are fallne thus low ^re the departing day,
With picks of Halberts pric^t in stead of goa(...)
Like tired Horses laboring with their Loads*
But as the English from the field return,
Some of those French who when the fight b^gan,
Forsook their friends, and hoping yet to earne,
Pardon, for that so covvardly they ran,
Ass(...)h English C^rri'ges to burn.
Which to defend them scarcely had a man;
For that their keepers to the field were got,
To pick such sp^yles, as chance should then* al^
The Captains of this Rascal cowardly Ro^t^
Were Isa^^ret of Agincourt at hand, A (...) of ras^al French (...) the King
Englands (...)

Riflant of ^lunasse a Dorpe there about,
And for the chief in this their base command.
Was Robin^^t of Burn^^^le; throughout,
The country known, all order to withstand,
These with five hundred Peasants they had ra(...)
The English Tents upon an instant seas'd.
For setting on those with the Luggadge left,
A few poor Sutlers with the Camp that went,
They basely fell to pillage and to theft,
And having ^ifled every Booth and Tent,
^ome of the sillyest they of life bereft,
^he fear of which, some of the other sent,
Into the Army, with their sudden cries,
Which put the King in fear of fresh supplies.
For that his Soldiers tired in the fight, The (...).

their prisoners more in number then they were,
^e thought it for a thing of too much weight,
^oppose fresh fo^c^s, and to guard them there,
^he Daulphines Powers, yet stan^ing in their sight,
and Burbons Fo^ces of the fi^ld not clear,
These yearning cr^es that from the caridge came
His blood yet hot, more highly does i^flame,
And in his rage he instantly commands, The English kill (...) p^^soners.

that every English should his prisoner ^ill,
^^cept some few in some g^^at Captains hands,
those Ransomes might his emptied C^fers fill,
^lls one whose loose, or who is now in bonds,
^oth must one way it is the Co^qu^rours will,
Those who late thought, small ransoms them might free
Saw only death their Ransoms now must be.
Accu^sed French, and could it not suffize, Ex(...)ion.

that ye but now bathed in your native gore;
^ut ye must now infortunately rise,
^o draw more plagues upon ye then before,
and against your self more mischief to devise,
^hen the English could have, and set wide the door,
To utter ruin, and to make an end,
Of that your selves, which others would* not spend.
Their utmost rage the English now has breath'^
And their proud hearts began somewhat to relent,
Their bloody swords they quietly had sheathed,
And their strong bows already were unbent,
To easefull rest their bodies they bequeathed,
Nor farther harm at all to you they meant,
And to that pains must ye then needsly put, The French ^ause of their own
massa^hre. A discripti^n of the Massacre in the four following Stanzaes.

To draw their ^niues once more your throats (...) cut
That French who lately by the English stood,
And freely asked what ransom he should pay,
Who somewhat coold, and in a calmer mood,
Agreed with him both of the sum and day,
Now finds his flesh must be the present food,
For wolves and ravens, for the same that stay,
And sees his blood on the others sword to flow,
Ever his quick sense could apprehend the blow*
Whilst one is asking what the business is,
Hearing (in French) his countryman to cry:
He who detaines him prisoner, answers this:
Mounsier, the King commands that you must die*
This is plain English, whilst he is killing his:
He sees another on a French man fly,
And with a Poleax pasheth out his brains,
Whilst he is demanding what the garboile mea(...)
That tender heart whose chance it was to have*
Some one, that day who did much valor show,
Who might perhaps have had him for his Slave:
But (...) all Lots had fate pleased to bestow:
He who his prisoner willingly would save,
Lastly constrained to give the deadly blow,
That sends him down to everlasting sleep:
Turning his face, full bitterly does weep.
Ten thousand French that inwardly were well,
Save some light hurts that any man might heal,
Even at an instant, in a minute fell,
And their own friends their deaths to them to deal,
Yet of so many, very few could tell,
Nor could the English perfectly reveal,
The desperate cause of this disastrous hap.
But even as Thunder killed them with a clap,
How happy were those in the very height,
Of this great Battle, that had bravely did,
When as their boiling bosoms in the fight,
Felt not the sharp steel through them to slide;
But these now in a miserable plight,
Must in cold blood this massacre abide,
Caus*d by those Villanes (cursed alive and dead,)
That from the field the passed morning fled.
When as the King to Crown his glorious day,
Now bids his soldiers after all this toil,
No forces found that more might them dismay)
Of the dead French to take the general spoil,
Whose heaps had well near stopped up every way,
For even as Clods they cou'red all the soil,
Commanding none should any one control,
Catch that catch might, but each man to his dole.
They fall to groping busily for gold,
Of which about them (...) st^re,
They find as much as w^ll their hands can hold,
Wh^ ^ad but silver, him they counted po^re,
Sc^^fes, Chains* an^ Bracel^^s, were not to be told
So rich as th^se ^^ soldiers were before;
Who got a Ring, would scarcely put it on,
Except therein there were some Radiant stone.
Out of rich sates the Noblest French they strip,
An^ leave their bodies naked on the ground,
And each one fill his Knapsack, or his Scrip,
W(...)some rare thing that on the Field i^ found:
About his bus'n^ss ^^t he ^^^bly Skip,
T(...) upon him many a c^u^ll wound:
And where they found a French not outright slain^
They (...)im a prisoner con^^antly retain.
Who scars^ a Shirt had but the day before,
No^ a whole S^^cking to keep out the cold,
Has a whole Wardrop at commend in store)
In the French fash^on flanting it in gold,
And in the ^auerne, in his C^ps does rore,
Chocking his Crowns and grows thereby so bo(...)
That proudly he a Captains name asiumes,
In his gilt Gorget with his tossing Plumes.
Wagons and Carts are laden till they crack*
With Arms and Tents there taken in the field;
For want of ^arridge on whose tops are pac^^,
Ensigns, Coat-Armours, Targets, Spears, and Shields
Nor need they conuoy f^a^ing to be sack^;
For all the country to King Henry yields,
And the poor peasant helps along to bear,
What late the goods of his proud Landlords were.
A Horse well furnished for a present War:
For a French Crown might any where be bought,
But if so be that he had any scarre,
Though n^'r so small he valew'd was at naught;
With spoils so sated the proud English are;
Amongst the slain, that who for pillage sought,
Except some rich Caparison he found,
For a steel Saddle would not stoop to ground.
And many a hundred beaten down that were,
Whose wounds were mortal, others wondrous deep
When as our English ouer*past they hear*
And no man left a Watch on them to keep,
(...)to the Bushes, and the Ditches near,
upon their weak hands and their knees do creepes
But for their hurts took a^re* and were undressed,
They were found dead and buried with the rest*
Thus when the King saw that the coast was cleared*
And of the French who were not flaine were fled,
Nor in the field not any then appeared,
That had the power again to make a head:
This Conqueror exceedingly is cheered,
Thanking his God that he so well had sped,
And so towr'ds Callice bravely marching on,
Leaves sad France her losses to bemoane,
FINIS. The Battle of Agin-Court.
THE MISERIES OF QVEENE MARGARITE.
I Sing a woman, and a powerful Queen,
Henry the Sixth, the King of Englands Wife,
The beauteous Margarite, whose
misgouern'd spleen
So many sorrows brought upon her life*
As upon woman's never yet were seen,
In the beginning of that fatal strife, The family of York sough^ under hand
to promoue their title about that time.

(Th'^nlucky season) when the Yorkists saught,
To bring the Line of Lancaster to naught.
It was the time of those great stirs in France,
Their ancient Right that the English had regained,
By the proud French attributing to chance,
What by mere Manhood stoutly ours obtained, After the second conque^^ of
France by Henry the ^ift.

Their late-falne Ensigns labored to advance,
The Streets with blood of either Nation stained:
These strive to hold, those to cast off the yoke,
Whilst forts, and towns flew up to heaven in smoke
The neighboring Princes greatly pitying the^ The Christian Princes seek to
(...) a peace between (...) and France.

The Christian blood in that long quarrel shed,
Which had d^^^ur'd such multitudes of m^n.
(...) the full a^th could scarsely keep he^ dead;
Yet for ^ach English of her Nat^^^^ ten:
In zeal to (...) these neighboring Princes l^d*
At Tours in Tourayne set them down a Diet,
(Could it ^^ done* these clamorous fi^uds to quiet*
From The Emperor there Am(...)e,
The Kings of Denmark, Hungary, and Spain,
And that each thing the ^p^ly might cont^iue,
And both the King there largely might complain,
The Duke of O^l^ance for the French does strive,
To show his grie^a^ce; William Poole again,
The Earl of Suffolk does ^o^ England st^^d,
Who st^er'd the state then ^i^^ a powerful hand
For eighteen months they ratify a peace, A (...) 18 months.

Tw^xt these proud Real^s* which Suffolk does pursue
With all his powers, with hope still to increase,
The same expired, that it should soon renew,
For by his means if so the wars might cease, Poo^e in this time of ^eac^
^^^our^th ^^ ^onclud^ a Mar^^age be^^ixt the Lady Margarire and the King his
Master.

^e had a plot of which they never knew,
To his intent, if all things went aright,
Heel make the dull world to admire his might,
For having seen fair Margarite in France,
(that tim's brightst beauty) being then but young,
Her piercing eyes with many a subtle glance,
His mighty heart so for^ibly had stung,
As made him think if that he could aduarce, Poole taken with the ex^^^ding
(...) ^y of the Princess.

This nortall wonder, only that among,
His rising Fortunes should the greatest prove,
If to his Queen, he could advance his love,
Her eyes at all points Armed with those deceits,
That to her sex are natural every way,
Which with more Art, she as enticing baits,
For this great Lord does with advantage lay,
As he again that on her bosom waits,
Had found that there, which could he come to sway
He would put fair as ever man did yet,
Upon the height of Fortunes wh^ele to sit.
Love and Ambition spur h^^ in such sort,
As that (alone t'accomplish h^^ desire,
To fall with Phaeton he would think it sport,
Though he should set the Vnl^^^s^ on ^ire,
Nor recks he what the world of him report,
He must scorn that, who will dare to aspier,
For through the air his wings him way shall make
Though in his fall the frame of heaven he shake.
Reyner descended from the Royal stem He had only the title of these Kingdoms
without any l^^^lyhoo^

Of France, the Duke of An^o^, styled King
Of Naples, Cicil, and Jerusalem,
Although in them he had not any thing,
But the poor title of a Diadem;
Seeing by Suffolk greater hopes to spring;
Puts on his Daughter that great Lord to please, Margarite Duk Reyners Daughter.

Of Englands Counsels who kept all the keys.
But strange encounters strongly him oppose,
In his first entrance to this great Design,
Those men were mighty that against him rose,
And came upon him with a Countermine,
That he must now play cunningly, or lose*
Cunning they were against him that combine,
Plot above plot, does strain aloft to tower*
The conflict great, twixt policy and power,
For Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, styled the good, A (...) of a (...) Amba(...)our
with ^^e ^^^^ of (...) only daughter.

Englands Protector sought a match to make,
^^th a fair Princess, of as Royal blood,
The Daughter of the Earl of Arminake,
And h^^ crowned Nephew* but stout Suffolk stood*
Still for his Mistress, nor will her forsake,
But make her Henryes Queen in spite of all:
Or she shall rise, or Suffolk swears to fall.
By the French faction when she up is cryde; The high praises of the Princess
Margarites beauty.

Of all Angellique excellence the Prime,
Who was so dull that her not Deifide,
To be the only Masterpiece of time:
The praise of her extended is so wide,
As that thereon a man to heaven might clime:
All tongues and ears enchanted with delight,
When they do talk, or hear of Margarite.
And those whom Poole about his Prince had placed Poole^ followers placed about
the King to work ^^ own ends.

And for his purpose taught the tricks of Court,
To this great King, and many a time had graced,
To make his ears more apt for their report,
^auing the time most diligently traced,
and saw these things successively to sort:
Strike in a hand and up together bear,
To make fair Margarite Music in his ear.
Aniou a Duchy, Main a Country great, The provinces of France given to Duke
Reyner for (...) Daughter.

Of which the English long had been possessed*
and Mauns a city of no small receite,
^o which the Duke pretended interest:
^or the conclusion* when they came to treat,
and things by Poole were to the utmost pressed,
Are to Duke Reyner reudred up to hold,
To buy a Hellen, thus a Troy was sold.
When of an Earl, a Marquess Poole is made, Poole created first from an
Earl, Marque(...) and afte^ Duke of Suffolk.

^hen of a Marquess is a Duke created,
^or he at east in Fortunes lap was laid,
^o glorious actions wholly consecrated:
Hard was the thing that he could not persuade,
^n the Kings favor he was so instated;
Without his Suffolk who could not subsist,
So that he ruled all things as he list.
This with a strong astonishment does strike, The people exceedingly r^pin^ for
the giving a^ay of the Provinces.

^h'amazed world which knew not what to say,
What living man but did the act mislike,
^f him it did not utterly dismay,
that what with blood was bought at push of pike,
Got in an age, given in an hour away:
Some largely speak, and some again are dumb,
Wo^dring what would of this strange world become
As when some dreadful Comet does appear,
Athwart the h^ a^e^ tha^ throws his threatening light
The peaceful people that at quiet were,
Stand with wild g^z^s wondering at the sight,
Some War, some Pl^gues, so(...) fa^^in greatly fear* A Simily.

Some falls of Kingdoms, or of (...) of mig^t:
The grieved people thus their judgments spend
Of these strange Actions what should be the end*
When Suffolk Procurator for the King, S^ffolke Procurator for the King.

Is s^^p'd for France, t'^spouse the beauteous Bride*
And fitted to the full of every thing*
Followed with Englands Gallant^y and pride,
(As fresh as is the bravery of the Spring) The marriage solem^^zed^^^ the city
of Towers.

Coming to Towers, there sumpt^o^sl* affide:
This one, whose like no age had seen before,
Whose eyes out-shone the Jewels that she wore
Her reucrent Parents ready in the place,
As one^ioy'd this happy day to s^e,
The King and Queen the Nuptials there to grace* The great concourse to honor
the Sol^^nization.

On them three Dukes as then attend^nts be,
Seven Earls (...) Barrons in their ^qu^pace,
And twenty Bishops* wh^^^^ that only she,
Like to the Ro^^ morning toward the rise,
Cheeres all the Church, as it does cheer the ski^^
T^^umpha^l A^ches the glad Town does raise,
And s^lts and Tur^^ys are (...) at Court,
Conceited Masks, (...) Banq^e^s, witty plays,
(...) them many a pretty sport,
^o^ts write Prothalamions in their praise,
^ntill men's ears were cloyd with the report,
Of either sex, and who does not delight, Margaret in French signif^^th a
Days^e

To wear the Daysie for Queen Margarite.
The Tryumphs ended, he to England goes
With this rich Gem allotted him to keep,
(...)ill entertained with most sumptuous shows, The Queen bravely
ente^tained in passing through Normandy.

^n passing thorough Normandy to Di^pe*
Where like the Sea the concourse daily flows,
^or her departure whilst sad France does weep:
And that the ships their crooked Anchors waide,
By which to England she must be conuayd.
And being fitted both for Wind and Tide, The King stays for the (...) at
Port^mouth.

Out of the Harbor flies this goodly Fleet,
and for fair Portsmouth their straight course they plyd,
Where the King stayed his lovely Bride to meet;
^onder she comes when as the people cried,
Busy with Rush^s strev^ing every street,
The brainelesse Vulgar little understand,
The Horrid plagues that ready were to La^d.
Which but to soon all-seeing heaven foretold, Great and fearful Tempests at
the coming in of the Que^ne.

For she was scarsely safely put a Shore,
^^t that the skies (o wondrous to behold)
Orespred with lightning hideously does rore,
The furious winds with one another scold,
Never such Tempests had been seen before,
With sudden floods whose villages were drowned
Steeples with earthquaks tumbled to the ground.
When to their purpose things to pass were brought
And these two brauea^bitious spirits were me
The Queen and Duke now frame their working though
Into their ha^d^ the Sovereignty to get:
For soon they found the King could not be wrought
Up to their ends, nature so low had set,
His humble heart; that what they would obtain
It Is they must do'^, by color of his Reign.
And for they found the grieved commons grutc^
A^ this which Suffolk desperately had done,
Who for the Queen had parted with so much,
Thereby yet nothing to the Realm had won,
And those that spurred the people on, were such,
As to oppose them openly begun;
Therefore by them some great ones down must go
Which if they mist of, they themselves must so*
York then which had the Regency in France, The Duke of Yor(...) discharged of
hi^ Regency in France, and the Duke of Sommerset in h^^ place.

They force the King, ignobly to displace,
Thereto the Duke of Summerset t'aduance,
Their friend, and one of the Lancastrian Race;
For they betwixt them turned the wheel of Chan^^
It Is they cry up it is they that do abase,
He Is the first man they purposed to remove,
The only Minion of the peoples love.
This opened wide the public way whereby,
Ruin rusht in upon the troubled Land,
Under whose weight it happened long to lie,
Quite overthrown with their il-guiding hand;
For their Ambition looking ouer-hie,
Could in no measure aptly understand,
Upon their heads the danger that they drew,
Whose force too soon, they, and their faction knew
For whilst this brave Prince was imploid abroad,
The Affairs of France his mind up wholly took,
But being thus disburthen'd of that load,
Which gave him leave into himself to look,
The course he ran in, evidently showed,
His late Allegiance that he off had shook,
And under hand his Title set on foot,
To pluck their Red-Rose quite up by the root,
Thus having made a Regent of their own,
By whom they mean great matters to effect,
For by degrees, they will ascend the throane,
And but their own all aid they else neglect,
As with a tempest he to ground is blown,
On whom their rage does any way reflect;
Which good Duke Humfrey first of all must taste
Whose timelesse death intemperately they haste.
This Henryes Uncle, and his next of blood, A Charract^^ of the Duke of
Gloucester*

Was both Protector of the Realm, and King,
Whose meekness had instiled him the Good,
Of most especial trust in every thing;
One to his Country constantly that stood,
As Time should say, I forth a man will bring,
So plain and honest, as on him I Will rest,
The age he lived in, as the only best*
This grave Protector who both Realms had sway
Whilst the Kings nonage his sound counsels crau'^
In his great wisdom when he thoroughly way'd,
How this French Lady here her self behau'd,
To make her Game again, how Suffolk played,
The Realms from ruin, hoping to have saved,
Lost his dear life within a little space.
Which overthrew the whole Lancastrian race*
This Prince* who still dared stoutly to oppose,
Those whom be saw* all but their own to hate,
Then found the league o his inueterate soes,
To come upon him wi^h the power of Fate,
And things to that extremity still rose,
The certain sign of the declining State,
As that their Faction every day grew strong,
Perceived his virtues like to suffer wrong.
Fierce Margarits malice propt with mighty me The greatest persons of the
Queens Fa^^^^^.

Her darling Suffolk, who her forward drew,
Proud Sommerset of France the Regent then,
And Buckingham his power too well that knew,
The Cardinal Bewfort, and with him again,
Yorks great Arch-Prelate, to make up the crew,
By accusations doing all their best,
From the good Duke all Government to wrest*
Who then compel the peaceful King to call,
Parliament their grieuances to hear,
(...) the Duke that to enforce his fall,
(...)y might have something that might Color be^^
^ut then they doubt his answer, and withal,
^he murmuring people they far more do fear,
As their own lives, who loved him, therefore they,
Must cast to make him secretly away,
And therefore with the Parliament proceed, A Parliamentat Saint Edmunds-Bury.

^aint* Edmunds-bury the appointed place,
Whereas they meant to do the fatal deed,
Which with much quickness should decide the case
The cruel manner soon they had de^reed,
And to the Act they hasten them apace,
On this good Prince their purpose to effect,
Then, when the people nothing should suspect.
No sooner was this great assembly met, The Duke of Gloucester ares^ed by the high
Marshall of England.

^ut the high Marshall does the Duke arrest,
And on his person such a guard they set,
That they of him were certainly possessed,
His servants were from their attendance let,
And either sent to prison or suppressed; The Duke murdered.

So that their Lord lef^ in this piteous plight,
Laid in his bed, was strangled in the night.
Then give they out, that of mere grief he did,
To cover what they cruel, had done,
But this black deed, when once the day discride,
The frantique people to his Lodging run,
^ome rail, some curse, yea little children chide, The p^^p^^ mutiny.

Which forced that faction the fair streets to shun,
Some wish proud Suffolk sunk into the ground,
Somebid a plague the cruel Queen confound.
Thus their Ambition would not let them see,
How by his death they hastened their decay*
Nor let them know that this was only he,
Who kept the Yorkists evermore at bay,
But of this man they must the murderers be, The death o^ the Duk was the
utter (...)row of the house of L^^caster.

Upon whose life their safety only lay,
But his dear blood, them nothing could suffice,
When now began Queen Margarites Miserie^*
In either Kingdom all things went to wrack*
Which they had thought they could have made to thy(...) The affairs of
England fall t^ ruin^ upon the death of the Duke.

His noble Cou^sells when they came to lack,
Which could them with facility contriue,
Nor could they stay them in their going back,
One mischiese still another does revive;
As heaven had sent an host of horrors out:
Which all at once incompast them about.
Out fly the Irish, and with sword and fire, The Irish rebel*

Vnmercied havoc of the English made,
They discontented here at home conspire,
To stir the Scot the borders to invade:
The faithless French then having their desire,
To see us thus in Seas of troubles wade,
In every place outragiously rebel, The French ^re up in A(...)s.

As out of France the English to expel.
The sturdy Normans with high pride in flamd,
Shake off the yoke of their subi^ction quite.
Nor will with patience hear the English named,
Except of those that speak of them in spite,
But as their foes them publicly proclaimed, The Norman r^uolt.

And their Alyes to open Arms excite;
In every place thus Englands right goes down,
Nor will they leave the English men a Town.
New Castle, Constance, Maleon, and Saint lo, Town^^ in Normandy y^elded to
th(...) enemy. There had been a form^* contract between the King and th(...)
Earl of Arminacks only Daughter but being by* the Duke o(...) Suffolk
annulled, cause(...) ^he Earl ^^^ after to be ^ vowed ene(...) ^^ the
Englis(...)

With Castel-Galliard, Argenton, and Roane,
P^nteu-de-mer with Forts and Cities more,
Then which that Country stronger holds had none,
Set open their gates and bad the English go,
For that the French should then p^s^^sse their own,
And to the Armies up the Forts they yield,
And turn the English out into the Field.
And that great Earl of Arminacke again,
A puistant peer, and mighty in estate,
Upon just cause, who took in high disdain,
To have his Daughter so repudiate,
(His countries bordering upon Aquitane,)
Pursues the English nation with such hate,
As that he entered with his Armed powers,
And from that Duchy, drove all that was o^rs, The commons charg^ ^he Duke of
Sommerset* with the* loss^ of Normand*

The Enraged commons ready are to rise,
Upon the Regent, to his charge and laid,
That from his slacknesse and base cowardice,
These Towns were lost, by his neglect of aid,
Then follow Suffolk with confused cries,
With Maine, and Aniou, and do him ^pbrayd,
And vow his life shall for their losses pay,
Or at the stake their goods and lives to lay.
In the open Session and Articulate, Articles of Treason put into the Parliament
against the Dukes o^ Sommerset and Suffolk.

S^uen ^^uerall Treasons urged against them both,
As most p(...)tious members of the State,
Which was confirmed by the commons oath,
So that the King who sa(...) the peoples hate,
(In his owneselfe though he were very loath)
^o both the houses la^^ly does assent,
To ^et on Suffolk five years banishment. The Duke of Suf^olke^an^^^ea for
sine y^^res.

His Sovereign Lady Suffolk thus must leave,
And she her servant to her soul so dear,
Yet must they both conceal what they conceive,
Which they would ^ot if any h^lpe there were,
Yet of all comfort they c^nnot bereave,
Her, but his hope her pensive heart does cheer,
That he in France shall have his most resort,
And live securely in her Fathers Court.
His mighty mind nor can this doom molest,
But kicks the earth in a disda^n^full scorn,
If any thing do corrosiue his breast
I^ was, that he was in base England borne,
He cursed the King and Kingdom, but he blessed,
The Queen, but if in any thing forlorn,
It Was that he should her happ^ presence miss,
The endless Sum of all his earthly bl^sse*
His Sentence scarce in Parliament had past,
But that the rascal multitude arise, The extreme hate the people had to the
Duke.

Pluck down his houses, lay his Lordships wast,
And search how they his person may surprise,
That he from England instantly must have,
Coue^'d by night, or by some strange disguise,
And to some small Port secretly retire,
And there some poor Boat for his passage hire,
From Harwitch Haven, and embarked for France, This ship was (as our hystories
report) called the Nicholas o^ the tower, a ship that belongd to the Duke of
Excest^r, of whom ^n^ Water was the Captain.

As he for Callice his straight course does steer,
^O here behold a most disastrous chance,)
A man of War the Seas that scoured there,
One at his actions that still looked asc^nce,
And to this Duke did deadly hatred bear,
After a long chase took this little Cra^e,
Which he supposed him safely should convey.
And from the fisher taking him by force,
He under Hatches straightly him bestowed,
And toward his country steering on his course,
He runs his vessel into Dover road,
Where railing on him without all remorse,
Him from the ship to all the people show^^,
And when no more they could the Duke de^^^e,
They cut his head off on the Cock-boat-side.
SVffolke thus dead and Summerset disgraced,
His title York more freely might prefer,
The Commons love, when cunningly to taste,
Lest ouerweening he perhaps might err,)
He first subbornes a villane that embraced,
The Nobler name of March borne Mortimer, The sub^^ll policy of the Duke of
York.

Which in the title of the house of York,
Might set the monstrous multitude a work,
His name was Cade, his native country Kent,
Who, though of birth, and in estate but poor,
Yet for his courage he was eminent, The character of Jack Cads.

(Which the wise Duke well understood before,)
He had a mind was of a large extent,
The sign whereof on his bold brow he bore,
Stern of behavior, and of body strong,
Witty, well spoken, cautilous, though young.
But for the Duke his title must derive, Deriuing his title from Phillip the
only Daughter and heir of Lyonel Duke of Clarence the third son of Ed the 3
wedded to Edmund Mortimur Earl of March.

Out of the blood which bear that honored name,
Therefore must cast and cunningly contriue,
To see how people relished the same,
And if he found it fortuned to thrive,
Then at the mark he had a further aim,
To show himself his title good to make,
And raise him friends and power, his part to take
All opposition likewise to prevent,
The crafty Duke his meaning does conceal,
And Cade does rise t'informe the government,
And base abuses of the Public Weal,
To which he knew the commons would consent,
Which otherwise his Treason might reveal:
Which rightly took, for by this color he,
Drew twenty thousand on his part to be.
From Sussex, Surry, and from Kent that rose,
Whom hope of spoil does to this Act persuade,
Which still increase his Army as it goes,
And on Black Heath his Rendauous he made,
Where in short time it to that vastness grows,
^s it at once the Kingdom would invade,
And he himself the Conquest could assure,
Of any power King Henry could procure.
And did in fight that general force defeat,
Sent by the King that Rebel to pursue,
When under color of a framed retreat,
He made as though he from the Army flew, The Stafford^ slain by the Rebels*

The slaughter of the soldiers must be great,
When he those Staffords miserably slew,
Captains select and chosen by the Queen,
To lead the powers that should have wreakt her teene.
When for a Siege he to the city came,
Assaults the Bridge with his emboldned power,
And after often repulsed takes the same,
Makes himself Master of the town and Tower, Jack Cade takes London*

Doing such things as might the Devil shame,
Destroys Records, and Virgins does deflower,
Robs, ransacks, spoils, and after all this stir,
Lastly beheaded the Lord Treasurer,
These things by York being plotted underhand,
Wise as he was, as one that had not known,
Ought of these Treasons, hasts to Ireland,
To tame those The Vulgar*
Kerne, rebellious that were grown,
He knew it was not in the barren Sand,
That he this subtle poisonous seed had sown,
Which came it on (as very well it might)
It would make way for his pretended right.
Whilst these rebellions are in England broac^d,
As though the Fa^es should enujo^sly conspire,
Our utter Ruin; which too fast approacht,
About our ears, was Aquitaine a fire,
Their Conquest so upon our Towns incroach't,
That Charles the French King then had his desire.
To see these troubles tire us here within,
That he the whilst in France from us might winn^
To add to Margarites miseries again, The Valiant Talbot slain.

Talbot in France so bravely that had done:
Who many a year had awed proud Aquitaine,
And many a Fort, and famous Battle won,
At Shatiloon (O endless grief) was slain,
With the Lord Lyle his over valiant Son,
When all the Towns that he had got before,
Yielded, nor would for England be no more,
York in the nike from Ireland coming in,
Finding the Kingdom cumbred in this wise,
Thinks with himself twere time he did begin,
But by no means he against the King must rise,
O such a thought in any man were sin,
But that he would proud Summerset surprise,
Yet wanting strength against the whole state to stand
He bears his business with a moderate hand,
And first to mighty Salsbury does sue,
And his son Warwick, and does them entreat, Richard Neuill the Father, and
Richard Neuill the son.

With equal eyes they would be pleased to view,
His rightful Title: these two Neuils great,
^^ power, and with the people, whom he knew,
Deadly the Duke of Somerset to hate,
By his large offers he does win at last,
In his just quarrel to cleave to him fast.
Thus his Ambition having strongly backed,
With these two fatal firebrands of War;
To his desires, there very little lackt,
He and the Earls all three so popular,
To advance himself he no occasion slackt,
^or naught he sees him from his ends to bar,
It Is no small tempest that he needs to fear,
Whom two such Collumnes up betwixt the^ bear.
And by their strengths encouraged does not stick
The others actions boldly to o'relooke,
And for the season that the King was sick,
Upon himself the Regency he took,
^or now his hopes upon him came so thick,
His entrance doors from off the hinges shook,
^e with a nodde the Realm seemed to direct,
Who Is he but bowed, if this great Prince but beckt
And in the Queens great chamber does arest, The Duke of Sommerset arested.

Great Summerset, and sends him to ward,
And all his followers suddenly suppressed,
Such was the number of his powerful guard,
With the proud Queen, this Prince as proud contests
^or for her frown one friend of hers he spared,
Lucks on his side, while such stand by to bett,
Heel'e throw at all that any one dares set,
THe Queen who saw, which way the faction we
And that these wrongs must still reflect on he
The Duke of York to her destruction bent,
Thought with her self it was full time to stir,
And if his plots she ever would prevent,
Must with the wisest of her friends confer,
Their busy brains and must together beat,
To lessen him* like else to grow too great.
His pride a while yet patiently endure,
The Kings* recovery only to attend,
Of which themselves they hardly could assure,
Who once they thought had hastened to his end, The King re^^uired of a
dangerous sickness.

But when they found his Physic to procure,
His former health, then does the Queen extend,
Her utmost strength, to let the world to know,
Queen Margarite yet must not be mastred so,
With smiles and kisses when she woes the King
That of his place the Duke he would discharge,
Which being done, the next especial thing,
She does the Duke of Summerset enlarge, The Queen prevailing against the Duke
of York.

And him of Callice gives the governing,
Whither his friends she caused him to imba^dge,
Doubting the love and safeguard of the Town,
Thus does the Queen turn al things vpside dow^
Which so incenst the angry Duke to ire,
With those two Earls upon his part that take,
Kindling in all that fierce revenge full fire,
Which the dear blood of Summerset must slake,
(...)at into Wales they instantly retire: The Duke of York (...)seth an army
in the Marches of Wales.

(...)nd in the Marches up an Army make,
And there by Oath were to each other tide,
By dint of sword the quarrel to decide.
And whilst these Lords be busied in the West,
Of March-men mustring a rebelling Band,
^enry again his Southern people pressed:
and settles there their forces to withstand:
Then Bows and Bills were only in request:
^uch rage and madness does possess the Land,
Set upon spoil, on either part they were,
Whilst the Weal* public they in pieces tear.
On either part when for this War prepared,
upon their March they at Saint Albans met,
Where drums and Ensigns one the other dared, The first Battle at Sa^^^
Albans.

Whilst they in order their Battalions set,
and with his fellow every soldier shared,
Bravely resolved to death to pay his debts:
When if that ever horror did appear,
On the English earth, it certainly was there,
That day the Queenes-lou'd Sommerset was slain
There took the stout Northumberland his end:
There Staffords blood the pauement did distaine: Humfrey Earl of Stafford,
eldest son to the Duke of Buckingham.

There Clifford fell, King Henryes constant friend,
The Earl of Warwick who brought on the Main:
All down before him to pale Death does send,
Antwessell, Bapthorpt, Zouch, and Curwen, all,
King Henryes friends before the Yorkists fall,
Whilst this distressed miserable King,
Amazed with such fury of the fight,
And peril still his person menacing:
His living friends enforced to take their flight,
He as a needless and neglected thing*
In a poor Cottage hides him out of sight: The King crept into a poor Cottage

Who found by York was as a prisoner led,
Though with mild words the Duke him coforted
And of his person being thus possessed
They in his name a Parliament procure,
For with his Regal power they will inuest
Themselves, supposing to make all things sure,
That if their violent actions should be pressed,
In after time they better might endure,
The censuring, the worst, and so prevent,
To show them done by Act of Parliament,
And cause the King to take into his hands, The lawless ^surpation of the
York^st^*

What to the Crown did anciently pertain,
Besides all Honors* Offices and Lands,
Granted since the beginning of his Reign;
And not a Fee, though ^e'r so little stands;
And are called in, and let who will complain,
And all his friends from counsel are removed,
None must sit there, but those of them beloved,
The silly King a sipher set aside*
What was in him, that in great York was not*
Amongst themselves all places they divide, Salsbury made Ch(...)

And to be Chancellor Salsbury has got,
He is the man must take the Law to guide, Warwick Captaiue of Ca^^^ce.

And Callice falls to warlike Warwickes lot,
And not a man at these must look awry.
They make an Act their acts to justify.
This done the Duke had more to do then this,
Something it seemed more secretly to lurk,
In which such power (though from appearance) is,
As yet once more would fret the Duke of York,
And let him know, he of his ends might miss;
For now the Queen does set her wits to work.
To play the Game that must renown her skill,
And show the Law that rested in her will.
And from the root of Summerset late slain,
Another stem to stand for her arose,
Henry for Edmond* of his Fathers strain, Henry Beufo^^ Duke of Summerset,
after the decease of his* father Edmond.

(One of whose life she knew she could dispose)
Of a strong judgment, and a working brain,
Great Buckingham and Excester are those,
She means to work by, and by these restore,
Her to that height from whence she fell before.
These were the men to whom she trusted most,
To whom that faction much despite had done,
For at Saint Albans Summerset had lost,
His loved Sire, and Buckingham his Son:
And Excester pursude from Coast to Coast;
From them enforced to Sanct'ary to run: The Duke of Excester taken out of
the Sanctuary a^ Westminster.

Fetched thence by them* and to cold Pumfret sent,
And in a dungeon miserably pent.
Equal in envy, as in pride and power,
With every aid to their disignement fraught,
Taking their turns at every fitting hour;
They on the Kings much easiness so wrought,
As that they seemed him wholly to devour,
Until to pass their purposes they brought,
Lifting up still his spirit that was so poor,
Once more to do as he had done before.
For which at Greenewich he a Council held, The Duke of York, the Earls of
Salsbury and Warwick put out of office.

Where with the opinion of those friends supplide,
Those three which late with glorious titles sweld,
Are from their seu'rall places put aside;
Yet more to seek their safety are compeld,
At this prodigious turning of the tide:
For now the wind was strangely come about,
And brings them in who lately were shut out.
The cruel Queen and cunningly had cast, The Queen had plotted to have the
Duke murdered at Couentry,

At Couentry to cause them to appear,
With show to pardon all that had been past,
If they (but then) would their Allegiance swear*
Which had they done, that day had been their last
For she had plotted to destroy them there:
Of which forewarnd, immediately they fled,
Which then their safety only promised.
Yet whilst one wrong, thus from another rose,
Twixt them at last a meeting was ordained,
All former strife and quarrels to compose,
Which but too long betwixt them had remained,
Which to the world though handsomely it shows,
Yet in plain truth, all was but merely feigned,
To outward seeming, yet are perfect friends,
"But devilish folk, have still their devilish ends.
And in procession solemnly they go,
In general joy one smiling on the other,
A Yorkist and Lancastrian make up two, A solemn procession in Paul's by both
the faction^.

Envy and malice, brother, like to brother,
^n mind far sundred, although coupled so,
Bloody revenge, and in their breasts they smother;
Ill's the procession (and fore runs much loss,)
"Wherein men say, the Devil bears the Cross.
These Rites of peace religiously performed,
To all men's thinking the enraged Queen,
At Warwicks greatness inwardly yet stormed, The Queen inwardly g^uching at
Warwickes greatness*

*Which every day still more and more was seen,)
Against the King, who Callice so had Armed,
As it his own inheritance had been,
Which town she saw that if he still should hold*
That she by him must hourly be controlled.
For which his murder she pursued so fast,
As that she soon and secretly had laid,
(...)h to assault him as the streets he past, Warwick in peril to hau^ bin
slain* passing the street.

As if his brave name had not brought him aid,
He of her vengeance had been sure to taste,
The Tragique Scene so furiously was played,
That he from London was enforced to fly,
Like a rough ^e^ her malice grew so hye,
And toward the Duke his speedy iour^y takes*
Who then at Middleham made his most abode,
Which Salsbury his habitation makes,
Whereas their time together they bestew'd,
Whose courages the Earl of Warwick wakes,
When he to them his sudden danger showed,
With a pale v^sage, and does there disclose,
Her brands set on him both in wounds and blow
This wrong in counsel when they had discust,
And way'd the danger wherein still they were,
Continual Treasons shrouded in their trust,
Nor other hopes else likely to appear,
They find that this might make a war seem just,
And give their cause up to the world so clear,
To rise in Arms when they resolve at last,
To raise them force, and wisely thus forecast,
To muster up their Tenants and their friends,
Not as a War upon the land to bring,
Nor to advance their own sinister ends,
Nor wrong a Subject in the smallest thing,
Only to guard them (as their case then stands)
Till they had showed their grieuance to the King,
And give their power to Salsbury to guide,
That wi^h the King the business should decide
With this distinction Salsbury is sent*
Warwi^ke to Callice (with what ha^^ he may,)
By his much speed a mischief to prevent,
Fearing the Town might else be given away,
The Duke of York by general consent,
^t Middleham Castle they allot to stay;
To raise a second power (if need should be)
To reinforce them, or to set them free.
The Queen who heard by such as were her own)
With that false Earl how those of Cheshire sided,
^s in short time how powerful he was grown,
Thinks with her self the shire might be divided,
^f that her love to some of them were known,
Which easily might be, were her pleasure guided,
By some such person, of whose valor they,
Had an opinion, which she thus does lay.
Causing the King to give a large command,
To James Lord Awdley, powerful in those parts,
To Raise him force those Rebels to withstand;
^uch to their Sovereign as had loyal hearts,
And to make Captains over every band*
Men of the best blood, as of best deserts,
Which he so labored till that he had brought,
That th'halfe of one house against the other fought
So that two men arising from one bed, The men of Cheshire ^pan^ ^n the
quarre^^.

Falling to talk, from one another fly:
This wears a white Rose, and that wears a Red;
And this a York, that Lancaster does cry:
He wished to see that Awdley well had sped:
He prays again to prosper Salsbury:
And for their farewell when their leaves they take
They their sharp swords at one another shake.
This fire in every family thus set,
Ou^ go the Brown bills with the well strung bow^
Till a^* Blore heath these boy strous soldiers met, The (...)

For there ^^ chanced the Armies then to close,
This (...) not live if that he strove to let;
Never such friends yet ere became such soes,
With downright strokes they at each other ^^
No word for Cheshire was, but kill and slay,
The Son (as some report) the Father flue, A great (...)

In opposition as they stoutly stood,
The Nephew seen the Uncle to pursue,
Bathing his sword in his own natural blood,
The Brother in his brothers gore imbrue
His guilty hands, and at this deadly food:
Kinsman kills Kinsman, and together fall,
As hellish fury had possessed them all.
There noble Tutch^t the Lord Audl^y did, The Lord A(...)

(Whose Father wan him such renown in France
And many a Cheshire Gentleman beside,
Fell at this field by wars uncertain chance:
These miseries Queen Margarite must abide,
Whilst the proud Yorkists do themselves advance
And poor King Henry on a pallet lay,
And scarcely asked which side had got the day
Thus valiant Audl^y at this Battle slain,
And all those friends to the Lancastrians lost:
Cheshire by her such d^mage to sustain:
So much dear blood had this late Conflict cost:
Wherefore the grieved Queen with might and main
Labors for life to raise a second Host:
No^ time therein she means to fo^^slow,
Either she will get all, or will all forgo.
And whilst their friends them forces gathering were*
The neighboring Realms of this great business ring,
The Duke and those, that to his part adhere,
^roclaimed Traitors; pardon promising,
To those at Blore that Arms did lately bear:
^o they would yet cleave to their lawful King,
Which drive in many to their part again,
To make their full, they York^sts in their wane.
York who perceived the puissant Host prepared,
With his dear Neuils, Counsels what to do,
^or it behou'd him to make good his guard,
With both their strengths and all too little too,
and in the Marches he no labor spared
^o win his friends along with him to go:
With expedition which he could not g^t,
On the Kings side the Commons were so set.
And being to meet so absolute a power,
(...)t wanting much his party good to make;
(...)d Henryes proclamations every hour:
(...)s Soldiers win their General to forsake,
(...)sides the storm which raised this sudden shower:
(...)m all in sunder likely was to shake:
He saw his safety to consist in flight,
Thus ever he wist, o'rmastred in his might,
All on the spur for li^^ away they post,
Their homes too ^^^ nor there they might abide* E^^^rd Earl of March, eldest
son to ^^^ Duke t^^ Ea(...) and Warwick.

The thre^ ^^aue Earls soon reached the western coa(...)
(...) whence to Callice their ^^raight course they pli(...)
The Duke to Wales being there befriended most:
Yet for more safety, he ^o Ireland hyde:
So others ship themselves from every bay,
And happiest he that ^oon'st could get away,
As when a Route of raue'nous wolves are met*
T'assey^^ some Heard the desert p^sturing near, A Simily.

T^^ watchful Clownes which over them are set,
Of^ taught before their ^iranny to fear.
With dogs, with st^u^s, and shouts together g(...)
No^ never leave till they their Cattle clear:
So the Kings power the Yorkists still pursue,
Which like* those wolves before those Herds m^ fl(...)
They gone the King at Couentry begun, A Parli^^ent at (...)

A Parliament, by good advice, wherein,
The Duke of York, with The Earl of March his so(...)
With Sal^bury and Warwick who had bin
Conspirators, much mischief and had done,
And by whose help ^e hapt so much to win:
He there attaints* of Treason, and bestows,
All that was theirs, upon his friends, their foes,
When now those Earls in Callice still that (...)
The charge whereof proud Warwick on him too(...)
In their intended business never slept:
Nor yet their former enterprise forsook,
In to Henryes Counsels who had those that crept,
And did each day his actions ouerlooke,
From whom as their aduertisements still are,
So they their strengths accordingly prepare.
And in mean time the Kingdom to embroyle,
That with less noise their friends might raise an host,
They pl^gue the seas with Piracy and spoil:
And rob the Havens all along the Coast:
They never take pity of their Native soil:
For that they knew this would avail them most,
That whilst the State was busied there about*
Arms might be raised within, by those without.
And slaughtring many that were set toward,
Th'especiall Ports; th'vnweldy Anchors wayde,
Of the Kings ships, whose fraught as prize they sharde
And them to Callice carefully conuayd,
With their sto^n^ Fleet, and his great Navy darde,
As late by land, so now by Sea they swayed:
All in Combustion, and their bloody rage,
Nor Sea, nor Land, can possibly assuage.
Then have they Forces raised for them in Kent,
Their next and most conuenien place to land,
(Where should the adverse power their hopes prevent
In Dover Road yet were their ships at hand)
And by their Posts still too and fro that went,
They certainly were let to understand,
That Kent was surely theirs, and only stayed*
To rise in Arms the Yorkists* power to aid,
When Falconbridge, who second Brother was
To Salsbury, they send away before,
To see no ships should out of Sandwich pass,
To hinder them from coming to the shore,
There of Munition took a wondrous Mass,
Heapt in that Town, that with abundant store,
He Armed many at their coming in,
Which on their side would scarcely else have bin*
That they no sooner settled were on land, The men of Kent rise with the
Torkists.

But that in Arms th'rebellious Kentish rose,
And the Lord Cobham with a mighty band,
With their Calicians presently does close,
That now they swayed all with a powerful hand,
And in small time so great their Army grows,
From Sussex, Surry, and those parts about,
That of her safety, London well might doubt,
But yet at last the Earies she in does let,
To whom the Clergy coming day by day,
From further sheers them greater forces get,
When toward Northampton making forth their way
Where the sad King his Army down had set,
And for their coming only made his stay,
With all the force his friends could him afford,
And for a fight with all things fitly stored
Who in his march the Earl does often molest,
(By their Vauntcurrers hearing how he came)
In many a straight, and often him distressed,
By stakes and trenches that his Horse might lame,
But the stout Yorkists still upon them pressed: The name of Warwick fearful
to hu enemies.

And still so fearful was great Warwicks name,
That being once cryde on, put them often to flight
On the Kings Army till at length they light.
When The Earl of March the^ in the pride of blood
His Virgin valor on that day bestows,
And furious Warwick like a raging flood,
Bears down before him all that dare oppose,
Old Salsbury so to his tackling stood,
And Fauconbridge so says amongst his foes,
That even like leaves, the poor Lancastrians fall,
And the proud Yorkists bear away the Ball.
There Humphrey Duke of Buckingham expired, A great pa^^ of the Nobility slain
at Nerthampton

King Henrys comfort and his causes friend,
There Shrewsbury (even of his foes admired,
For his high courage) his last breath does spend,
Brave Beamout there, and Egremount lay tired
To death, there* Lucy had his lucklesse end,
And many a noble Gentleman that day,
Weltring in gore, on the wild Champion lay,
The wretched King, as Fortunes only son,
His soldiers slain, and he of all forsaken,
Left in his Tent; of men the most forlorn;
(The second time) a prisoner there is taken;
The woeful Queen out of the Battle borne,
In a deep swound; and when she does awaken,
Nothing about her hears, but howles, and cries,
Was ever Queens like Margarites miseries?
York coming in from Ireland ^n the end,
And to his hands thus finds the Battle won^
By the high Prowess of his faithful friend,
Great Warwick, and that valiant March his son,
H^s present hopes the former so transcend,
That the proud Duke immediately begun,
By his bold Actions to express his thought,
Through so much blood, which he so long had sought*
The Kings Command'ment daring to deny,
His Sovereign Lord being called to wait upon, The Duke of Yorke^ insolence.

And on his Fortune bears himself so hi^,
That he in State presumes t'ascond his Throane;
From the Kings lodgings puts his ^^^u^n^s by,
And places in them such as were his own:
So infinitely insolent the grows,
As he the Crown at pleasure would dispose,
When he procures a Parliament with speed,
In which himself Protector he does make,
And only Heir apparent to succe^d,
The King* when death him from the world does take
And what had been at Couentry decreed,
He there Annulls, from him and his to shake
The servile yoke of all subjection quite,
Down goes the red Rose, and up goes the white*
And he with Fortune that this while does sport,
Seeing the Southern* to him still were sure;
Thinks to the North, if he should but resort,
He to his part the Northern should procure,
Seeking all ways his greatness to support;
Nor would an equal willingly endure:
Down into Yorkshire does to Sandall ride,
Whose lofty scyte well suited with his plide.
The vexed Queen whose very soul forgot, The Quee^^ impatient ^ the Dukes
pride.

That such a thing as patience it had known,
And but she found her friends forsook her not,
As mad as ever Hecuba had grown,
Whilst both her wrongs, and her revenge were hot,
Her mighty mind so down could not be thrown,
But that once more the bloody set she will play,
With York, ere so he bear the Crown away.
And down to Sandall does the Duke pursue,
With all the power her friends could her provide,
Led by those Lords that ever had been true,
And had stood fast upon King Henryes side,
With that most valiant and selected crew,
This brau'st of Queens, so well her business plide,
That coming soon to Sandals lofty sight,
Into the Field she dares him forth to fight*
And for this Conflict there came on with her,
Her hope Prince Henry, her dear only Son,
Stout Somerset, and noble Excester,
Dukes that for Margarite mighty things had done,
Devon and Wilt* Earls using to confer,
With this wise Queen, when danger she would shun,
Undaunted Clifford, Rosse in war up brought,
Barrons as brave as ere in battle fought*
When this stout Duke who in his Castle stood, The Dukes often (...) ruin.

With Salsbury (who beat them all at Blore,)
Both which were flesht abundantly with blood,
In those three But a^les they had won before,
Thought in their pride, it would be ever Flood,
No^ against Queen Margarite that they needed more
For they ^d* Fortune chained with them about,
That of the^^ conquest none but fools could doubt.
And for the Field soon Marshalling their force,
All poor delays they scornefully defy,
Nor will the Duke stay for those troops of Horse,
With which his Son him promised to supply,
Inspight of Fate they will give their foe the worse,
On their own valor they so much rely,
And with five thousand marshald well they come,
Meaning to charge the Queens maine Battle home.
But in her Host she having those that were*
Expert in all the Stratagems of War,
To fight with him do cause her to forbear,
Till from his Castle she had got him far,
Whilst in an ambush she had placed there,
Wiltshire and Clifford with their strengths to bar,
Him from his home, in offering to retire,
Or wound his back even as they would desire,
When to it they fell upon an easy plain,
At the hill foot, where furiously they fought,
Upon both sides where there were many slain:
But for the Queen, four to his one had brought:
The Duke of York for all his pride was feign.
Back to recoyle were he was finely caught,
For Wilt and Clifford that in Ambush were,
The Van thus rowted, overthrew the Rear.
Where York himself, who proudly but of late,
With no less hope then of a kingdom fed,
Upon this field before his Castle gate,
Mangled with wounds on his own earth lay dead,
Upon whose body Clifford down him sat,
Stabbing the corpse, and cutting off his head,
Crowned it with paper, (and to wreake his teene)
Presents it so to his victorious Queen,
His Bastard Uncles both courageous Knights,
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer so sped,
Hall, Hastings* Neuill* who in sundry Eights,
Had showed their valor, on the field found dead:
And Salsbury amongst these Tragic sights,
Who at Blore-heath so much dear blood had shed, The E^rle ^^ Salsbury b^^
heade^*

Taken alive, to Pomfret sent with speed,
And for their bloods, himself there made to bleed
Some climb up Rocks, through hedges other run
Their foes so roughly execute their rage,
Where The Earl of Rutland the Dukes youngest son, The end of young Rutland.

Then in his childhood and of tender age,
Coming in hope to see the Battle won,
Clifford whose wrath no rigor could assuage.
Takes, and whilst there he does for mercy kneel,
In his soft bosom sheathes his sharpened steel.
Edward of March, the Duke his Father slain,
Succeeding him* whilst things thus badly sort,
Gathering an Army, but yet all in vain,
To aid his Father, for he came too short,
Hearing that Penbrooke with a Warlike train,
Was coming tow'^ds him, touched with the report,
His valiant Marchers for the field prepares,
To meet the Earl, if to approach he dares.
Iaesper by birth half Brother to the King,
On bright Queen Katherine got by Owen Tether*
Whom Henrys love did to this Earldom bring,
And as from Wales descended sent him thither,
And of South Wales gave him the governing,
Where in short time he got an Host together,
Cleaving to Henry who did him prefer,
As an Alye to The House of Lancaster.
Upon their March when as they lastly mer,
Near to the Cross that Mortimer is named, The Battle ^^ Morti^^^s Cross.

Where they in order their Battalions set,
The Duke and Earl with equal rage enflamed,
With angry eyes they one the other threat*
Their deadly Arrows at each other aimed:
And there a fierce and deadly fight begin,
A bloodier Battle yet there had not bin*
The Earl of Ormond, an Associate then,
With this young Tudor, for the King that stood*
Came in the Vanguard with his Irish men*
With Darts, and Skaines* those of the British blood
With Shaftes and Gleaues them seconding again,
And as they fall, still make their places good,
That it amazed the marchers to behold,
Men so ill armed upon their Bows so bold.
Now the Welsh and Irish so their weapons weeld,
As though themselves they conquerors meant to c^l
Then are the Marchers masters of the field,
With their brown Bills the Welchmen so they mall,
Now th*one* now the other likely were to yield,
These like to fly, then those were like to fall,
Until at length (as fortune pleased to guide)
The Conquest turned upon the Yorkists side.
Three Suns were seem that instant to appear, Three s^n^ey seen* at one time.

Which soon again shut up themselves in one,
Ready to buckle as the Armies were,
Which this brave Duke took to himself alone,
His drooping hop^s which somewhat seemd to cheer
By his mishaps* near lately overthrown.
So that thereby encouraging his men,
Once more he sets the white Rose up again.
Penbrooke, and Ormond, save themselves by slight,
Four thousand soldiers of both Armies dead,
But the great loss on the Lancastrians light,
So ^ll the ^riends of poor King Henry sped;
Where Owen Tudor taken in the flight,
This young Earls father by Queen Katherines bed Owen Tudor^ end.

At Hereford not far away from thence,
Where others with him did for their offense.
THis while the Queen, the gole at Sandal gain
Leads on toward London her victorious H^
Whose blades she shows, with blood of Yorkists stain'^
Nor of her Conquest can she leave to boast,
But to her side, whilst lucky fortune leaned,
Come, what can come, she means to clear the co^^
Of those she knew in Yorks revenge would rise*
Found she not means, their Forces to surprise.
And at Saint Albans finding on her way,
John Duke of Norfolk, and her devilish foe:
Fierce Warwick who there with an Army lay,
Which two, deceased York when he should go King Henry left before to the
keeping of the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Warwick.

To Sandall, left them as his only kay,
To keep King Henry (which they not foreslow)
Lest by the Queen and hers he might be wroug*
T'annull their late past Parliament for naught*
For which to Counsel, calling up her Lords,
Well to consider what was to be done,
Who cheer her up with comfortable words,
And would in no wise she her* way should shun:
For they would make her entrance with their swo^
Here what was lost, might here again be wunn^,
Assuring her their minds them strongly gave*
That of this Field the glory she should have.
And soon their Army ordering for the grou(...)
Whereof a view they e^'ry way do take:
When for Assault they bid their Trumpets sound,
And so their entry on the Town they make:
^ut coming to the market place they found,
^ shower of shafts, as from a cloud it brake,
Which back again made them so fast to bear,
As that their Van, was like to route their Rear,
But thus repulsed, another way they prove,
How in upon their enemy to get,
Which maks their foes, that they their force remove
To stop that passage wherein they were set,
that whilst, they* shafts into each other shoue,
^or a long while it was an even bet,
Death being thus dealt, and both so deeply in,
Whether proud Warwick, or the Queen should win
But by the Queen constrained to recoyle,
their ground from them they absolutely won,
When they the Yorkists miserably spoil,
and in with them on their main Battle run:
Which being greatly straightened by the soil,
^hey could not do what else they might have done: The Queen gets the day
at Saint Albans.

Through thick and thin, o'r hedge and ditch that take,
And happiest he the greatest have could make.
Whilst Warwick cries, ye Southern cowards stay,
and once more turn your faces to your foes,
^is fear, not danger does ye thus dismay:
^ prove the former fortune of your Bows,
^hinke but upon the late-wonne glorious day,
^ot in this place; the fame whereof you lose,
By your base flight; but he his breath might spare
He might as well have called upon the Air*
Scattered like sheep by wolves that had bin scar'^ The Yorkists Army
dis^omfited at this second Batt^ll at Saint Albans

So run the Yorkists; which, when Norfolk saw,
He calls to Warwick scarcely then prepared,
Himself out of this danger to withdraw:
My Lord (quoth he) you see that all is mard:
Fortune has sworn to keep us in her awe:
Our lives are gone if longer here we stay,
Loose not your self, though we have lost the d^
And for they found the Foe came on so fast,
The King by them to this lost battle brought,
And under guard in his pauillion placed,
They Are forced to leave (which late they little thoug^
For there were those which made the^ make such has^
They could not stay to have their Soueraign sough^ King Henry of no account

But since the Battle had such ill success,
That lost, they thought their loss of him the less^
The foe thus fled, they quickly found the King,
From whom a speedy messenger is sent,
His Wife and Son, away to him to bring,
Who with their Lords arriving at his Tent, The King ^^et^ with the Queen and
her ^^^^^

Where after many a fall, and many aspring,
Of tears of joy upon each other spent,
With strict embraces they each other strain,
No one had need a gladness there to feign.
Like as you see when Partriges are flowne,
(In Falconers terms which we the Couy call) (...)

By the sharp Hawke, and into thickets thrown,
There drops down one, there does another fall,
^et when they hear the questing Spaniels gone,
They in the evening get together all*
With pretty iugging and each other greet.
Glad as it were they once again should meet.
But the fierce Queen, her full revenge to take,
Of those she thought the Yorkists well that meant.
^he stout Lord Bonvile for King Henry, sake, The cruelty of the Queen

and Thomas Kerrill, a brave Knight of Kent,
Who the Kings Guard strove ever long to make,
^ll threatening peril thereby to prevent,
And for their safety had his Sovereign word,
That cruel woman puts to the sword.
This well might warn great Warwick not to trust
^oo much to Fortune, which so soon reueales,
^er whorish lightness, like an Auerse gust,
and on the sudden makes him strike his Sails,
Which when he most believed her to be just,
^is forward hopes then most of all she fayles
All his accounts, and teach him thus to sum,
*None ouercomes, but may be overcome,
Some think that Warwick had not lost the day,
^ut that the King into the Field he brought,
^or with the worse, that side still went away, King Henry most (...)

Which had King Henry with the^ when they fought
upon his birth so sad a curse they lay,
^s that he never prospered in ought,
The Queen wan two, amongst the loss of many*
Her husband absent, present, never any*
But whilst her self with further hopes she fed,
The Queen still watchful, wisely understands,
That Warwick late, who at Saint Albans fled*
(Whereas his heels served better then his hands)
Had met the Duke of York, and made a head,
Of many fresh, and yet vnfought-with bands,
At Chipping-norton for more forces stayed,
From whence toward London they their mar^ had lay^ The Londoners deny the
Queen victuaile for her Army.

And for she saw the Southern to adhere,
Still to the Yorkists, who again relyde,
Much on their aid, as London she does fear,
A small relief which lately her denyde,
She can (at all conceive) no comfort there,
With any succors, nor to be supplied,
But to the North her speedy course directs,
From whence fresh aids she every day expect^
Not four days march yet fully on her way, The Duke of York enters London
with applause of the people.

But York to London with his Army comes,
And near the walls his Ensigns does display,
Deaffing the city with his clamoorus Drums,
His Title so the multitude does sway,
That for his soldiers they provide him Sums,
And those prouisio^s they Queen Margarite o^
Taken from hers, they on the Duke bestow'de.
The Gates set open to receive him in,
They with applause his gracious entrance greet,
His presence so the Peoples hearts does win,
That they come flocking in from every street,
Kneeling before him, as he Crowned had bin,
And as he rode along they kissed his feet,
Whilst good King Henry toward the North is gone,
The poor Lancastrians damned by every one.
Whither (at once) do presently repair,
The spiritual Lords, and Temporal, who would have,
Him take the Crown, who far more ready are,
^o give, then he their suffrages to crave:
The Commons take him so into their care,
Upon his name that dotingly they rave,
And being asked who should their Sovereign be,
They cry King Edward and no man but he.
Thus to his height this puissant Prince they heave,
The seat Imperial; where then sitting down,
Their fealty they force him to receive,
Which on his head might firmly fix his Crown,
And in his hand the Regal Scepter leave:
Edward the fourth proclaimed in every Town, Edward m^^ King by the suffrage
of the Commons*

With all the pomp that they could think upon,
They then adorn his Coronation.
THis news too quickly in Queen Margarites ear,
What by the Lords at London had been done,
Even at the point to fall into despair,
Ready she was on her own death to run;
With her fair fingers ^ents her golden hair,
Cursing that hour when first she saw the Sun.
With rage she faints; reviving and does call,
Upon high heaven for vengeance on them all,
To aid her right yet still excites her friends,
By her fair speech enchanted (as by charms)
Scarce any man on any Lord depends,
That follows her, that rises not in Arms:
The spacious North such plenteous succor sends,
That to her side the soldiers come in swarms:
Thus day by day she adds more and more,
To that full Army, which she had before.
Not long it was but Edward understood,
Of this great power prepared in the North,
When he to make his Coronation good,
Calls to his aid his friends of greatest worth,
With whom then rising like a raging flood: King Edward (...) from (...) to
(...)

This forward King breaks violently forth,
That with the help of Tributary flows,
Extends his breadth still onward as he goes.
Nor Henryes Army needed to be sought,
For every man could tell him where it lay,
In twelve days march which Edward easily rough
Without resistance keeping on his way,
Near fifty thousand in his Host he brought,
Whose brandished Ensigns seemed to brave the day
And under Pomfret his proud Tents he pight*
Providing hourly for a deadly fight.
Of Henrys Host, when they who had command,
On whom the Queen imposed had the care,
Great Sommerset, and stout Northumberland,
And Clifford, whom no danger yet could dare:
The walls of York first having thoroughly manned,
There placed the King, when quickly they prepare,
To range their Battle which consisted then,
Of threescore thousand valiant Northern men.
From Edwards Host the Lord Fitzwater went, The Lord Fitzwater and Bastard
Neuill slam^

And valiant Neuill, Warwickes Bastard brother,
At Ferry-bridge the passage to prevent,
From coming over Air, to keep the other;
Against whom the adverse, the Lord Clifford sent,
Who taking night his enterprise to smother:
The dawne yet dusky, passing through a Ford,
Puts them, and all their soldiers to the sword*
At the shrill noise, when Warwick coming in,
And finds his Brother and Fitzwater dead,
Even as a man distracted that had bin:
Out of his face the lively color fled, Warwick ^^w^^ to re^snge his brothers
death.

^oth cruel Clifford thus (quoth he) begin,
For every drop of blood that he has shed,
This day I Will make an enemy to bleed,
Or never more in Battle let me speed.
And to the King returning in this mood,
(...) Liege (quoth he) all mercy now defy,
^elay no longer to revenge their blood;
Whose mangled bodies breathless yonder lie:
and let the man that means King Edwards good,
(...)and fast to Warwick, who no more shall fly:
Resolved to win, or bid the world a due, Warwickes de^^era^e ^^^ s^luti^^

Which spoke, the Earl his sprightly courser s^^e*
This resolution so extremely wrought,
Upon King Edward that he gave command, No quarter ^e^t at Towton.

That on his side who willingly not fought,
Should have his leave, to quit him out of hand;
That eu'^y one should kill the man he cought,
To keep no Quarter, and who meant to stand,
In his just cause, rewarded he would see,
This day he will rise, or this day ruined be.
When near to Towton on the spacious plain* Towton field.

These puissant Armies on Palme-Sunday me*
Where down right slaughter angry heaven does rain^
With clouds of rage the Element is set:
The wind^s breath fury, and the earth again,
With the hot gore of her own Natives wet,
Sends up a smoke* which makes the mall so mad,
Of neither part that mercy could be had.
One horrid sight another does appall:
One fearful cry another does confound,
Murders so thick upon each other fall,
That in one shreeke another shreeke is drowned,
Whilst blood for blood ^ncessantly does call,
From the wide mouth of many a gaping wound;
Slaughter so soon grows big, that co^mn to birt^
The monstrous burden ouer-loads the earth*
This bloody Tempest ten long hours does last*
Whilst neither side could to it self assure
The victory; but as their lot was cast,
With wounds and death they stoutly it endure,
Until the valiant Yorkists at the last,
Although in number near ten thousand fewer:
In their long fight their forces manage so,
That they before them lay their conquered foe.
Courageous Clifford first here fell to ground,
Into the throat with a blunt Arrow struck: A miserable defect of the Queens
friends.

Here Westmerland received his deadly wound:
Here died the stout Northumberland that stuck
Still to his Soneraigne; Wells, and Dacres found,
That they had lighted on King Henrys luck:
Trowluph and Horn, two brave commanders dead
Whilst Summerset and Excester were fled.
Thirty two thousand in this battle flaine, The greate^^ slaughter in all
that ciui^^ War.

Many in strayts lie heaped up like a wall (...)
The restlye scattered round about the plain,
And Cock a River, though but very small,
Filled with those flying does so deeply stain,
The River Wharfe, int'which this Cock does fall,
As that the fountain which this flood does feed,
Besides their blood, had seemed for them to bleed.
King Henrys hopes thus utterly forlorn,
By the late loss of this unlucky day:
He feels the Crown (even) from his temples torn,
On his sword point, which Edward bears away:
And since his fall the angry Fates had sworn,
He finds no comfort longer here to stay:
But leaving York, he post to Barwicke goes,
With His Queen and Son, true partners in his woes*
The King for Scotland, and for France the Queen, The King and Queen forced to
forsake the Land

Divided hence, since them thus Fortune thwarts,
Before this time there seldom had been seen,
Two to be seuer'd with so heavy hearts,
The Prince their son then standing them between,
Their song is sorrow* and they bear their parts:
He to the King of Scots, to get supplies*
She to the French King, and her Father flies.
Which well might show a Princes slippery state,
For when she hither at the first came in,
England and France did her congratulate,
Then in two battles she had Conqueror bin,
Seeming to tread upon the Yorkists hate,
As from that day she had been borne to win:
Now to sail back with miseries far more,
Then were her Tryumphs landing here before.
This cruel blow to the Lancastrians lent,
At fatal Towton that Palme-Sunday fight,
Where so much blood they prodigally spent,
To France and Scotland as enforced their flight,
Lifts up the Yorkists to their large extent,
And Edward now to see his Crown set right,
Pro^d in his spoils, to London does repair,
And re-annoynted mounts The Imperial Chair,
Where he a speedy Parliament does pass,
T'annull those Laws which had been made before*
Against his succession, and dissolve the Mass,
Of Treasons heapt on his, them to restore:
Whereby King Henry so much lesned was,
As after that he should subsist no more,
Little then thinking Lancaster again,
Now but an exile over him should reign.
Where he attaints as Traitors to his Crown, The Earl of Oxford and ^^ Son
attainted.

John Earl of Oxford and h^s valiant son,
A^brey De Vere, with whom likewise went down
Mountgomery, Terrill, Tudenham who were done,
To death; so Heaven on Henry seems to frown,
And Summerset King Edwards wrath to shun,
Himself submitting is received to grace,
Such is Queen Margarites miserable case.
Henry in Scotland* the sad Queen the while,
Is left to France, to Lewis there to sue,
To lend her succor; scorning her exile,
In spite of Fate she will the war renew, Queen Margarit a woman of an
^ndainted spirit.

She will tempt Fortune till again she smile*
In such a pitch her mighty spirit still flew;
That should the world oppose her, yet that strengh,
She hopes shall work up her desires at length.
And with five thousand valiant Volunteers,
Of native French, put under her command,
With Arms well sitted she toward Scotland steeres
With which before she possibly could land,
The wrath of Heaven upon this Queen appears, The Queen in every enterprise
most vnfor^^nate.

And with fierce Tempests strive her to withstand,
The winds make war against her with her Foe,
Which Ioin'd together work her overthrow.
Her Forces thus infortunatly lost,
Which she in Scotland hoped to have encreast,
And in this tempest she herself so tossed,
As never Lady; yet she here not coast,
But since she found her enterprise thus crossed,
She to the Scottish her fair course adrest,
Nor would desist till she had raised again,
Ten thousand valiant well-appointed men.
And in upon Northumberland does break,
Rowzing the Siuggish villages from fleepe,
Bringing in Henry though a help but weak,
But leaves her Son in Barwicke safe to keep;
Her rattling Drums so rough a language speaks, Queen Margarite raises ^ new
Army.

The ruffling Scots, and all the Country sweep;
Which rumor run so fast with through the air,
That Edward thought it shook his very Chair.
And Somerset received to grace before,
With Sir Raulph Percy from that fatal day, Some that ^ad submitted themselves
to King Edward ^e^olt at king Henrys coming.

At Towton; found each minute more and more,
How sad ^ fate on the Lancastrians lay,
Y^^ hoping now King Henry to restore,
Who they supposed had new found out the way,
Revolt from Edward, and in Henrys name,
Call in their friends, to aid him as he came.
THis noise of War arising from the North,
In Edwards ears re-ecchoing bidds him stir,
And rumor ^ells him if he made not forth,
Queen Margarite comm'n he must resign to her,
For they were Captains of especial worth,
On whom she did this mighty charge confer,
For that her Ensigns she at large displayed,
And as she came, so still came^n her aid,
For which his much loved Mountacute he sends,
With Englands valiant Infantry his Pheres:
To whose wise guidance, he this War commends,
His soldiers expert picked in sundry sheeres,
His utmost strength King Edward now extends,
Which he must do, or dragged down by the ears,
From his late-gotten, scarsely-setled Thro^e,
And on his shoulders she remount thereon.
And Mountacute had scarsely marched away,
But he himself sets forward with an Host,
And a strong Navy likewise does puruay, Kin Edward provides to resist Queen^
Margarites coming in.

To scour the Seas and keep the British coast,
Fearing from France fresh succors every day,
To aid Queen Margarit which perplexed him most
For he perceived his Crown sat not so sure,
But might be shak'd should she her Powers procure*
Now is the Northfild with refulgent Arms,
Edwards and English Scots Queen Margarit brings,
The Norths co(...) this ^reat con^ourse warms
Their Quarrel (...)f two great Kings,
Which often b(...) wrought each others harms,
And from that R(...) horror daily springs,
And though (...)od ^^ey both had spent before
Yet not so much, but that there must be more.
At Hegly-heath their skirmishes begin, The Conflict at Hegly-More.

Where two bold Barrons Hungerford and Resse,
With Sir Ralph Percy, he who had lately bin*
Leagued with King Edward, but then gotten lose,
(Strives by all means to expiate that sin)
To the Lancastrian faction cleaues so close,
That when those Barrons from that conflict fly,
In Henrys right, he bravely dares to dye.
Which leads along as Tragical an Act,
As since the Wars had ever yet been played,
For Mountacute b'ing fortunately backed,
By brave King Edwards coming to his aid:
As of their force King Henry little lackt,
The plain called Liuells where the scene was laid: The Bot^aile* of Exh^^.

Not far from Exham near to Dowills flood,
That day discolloured with Lancastrians blood,
There struck they battle, Bowmen Bowmen plide*
Northern to Southern, slaughter cease all;
Long the Fight lasted ever that either side,
Could tell to which the Victory would fall:
But to the Yorkists fortune is so tide,
That she must come when they shall please to call,
And in his Cradle Henry had the curse,
That where he was, that side had still the worse.
This lucklesse day by the Lancastrians lost,
Was Summerset surprised in his flight,
And in pursuing of this scattered Host,
On Mullins, Rosse, and Hungerford they light,
Which this days work ever long full dearly cost* Queen Margarites (...)
goes still ^^ ^wrack^.

and with these Lords were taken many a Knight,
Nor from their hands could Henry hardly shift,
Had not his guide been as his Horse was swift.
Still must Queen Margarites miseries endure,
This Mass of sorrow marked out to sustain:
For all the aids this time she should procure,
Are either taken, put to flight, or slain;
Of nothing else she can her self assure,
That she will leave her losses to complain:
For since she sees that still her friends go down,
She will curse Fortune if she do not frown.
Henry to fly to Scotland back is feign, King Henry and the Queen ^^^^

^o get to France, the woeful Queen is glad,
^here with her Son enforced to remain,
^ill other aids might thence again be had;
^o them that hard necessities constrain,
^o set them down that it does make me sad,
Never so thick came miseries I ween,
Upon a poor King* and a woeful Queen.
This done King Edward* his strong Army sends
^o take those Castles which not long before,
^ad been delivered to King Henrys friends,
Which he by sieges makes them to restore,
and on the borders watchfully attends,
^o Henryes aid that there should come no more,
But o behold as one ordained to ill,
The Fate that follows hapless Henry still*
At Hegly-heath their skirmishes begin, The Conflict at Hegly-More.

Where two bold Barrons Hungerford and Rosse,
With Sir Ralph Percy, he who had lately bin,
Leagued with King Edward, but then gotten lose,
(Strives by all means to expiate that sin)
To the Lancastrian faction cleaues so close,
That when those Barrons from that conflict fly,
In Henrys right, he bravely dares to dye.
Which leads along as Tragical an Act,
As since the Wars had ever yet been played,
For Mountacute b'ing fortunately backed,
By brave King Edwards coming to his aid:
As of their force King Henry little lackt,
The plain called Liuells where the scene was laid: The Bot^aile. of Exham.

Not far from Exham near to Dowills flood,
That day discolloured with Lancastrians blood,
There struck they battle, Bowmen Bowmen plide
Northern to Southern, slaughter cease all;
Long the Fight lasted ever that either side,
Could tell to which the Victory would fall:
But to the Yorkists fortune is so tide,
That she must come when they shall please to call,
And in his Cradle Henry had the curse,
That where he was, that side had still the worse.
This lucklesse day by the Lancastrians lost,
Was Summerset surprised in his flight,
And in pursuing of this scattered Host,
On Mullins, Rosse, and Hungerford they light,
Which this days work ever long full dearly cost; Queen Margarites perty
goes still to ^ wrack.

And with these Lords were taken many a Knight,
Nor from their hands could Henry hardly shift,
Had not his guide been as his Horse was swift.
Still must Queen Margarites miseries endure,
This Mass of sorrow marked out to sustain:
For all the aids this time she should procure,
Are either taken, put to flight, or slain;
Of nothing else she can her self assure,
That she will leave her losses to complain:
For since she sees that still her friends go down,
She will curse Fortune if she do not frown.
Henry to fly to Scotland back is feign, King Henry and the Queen part.

To get to France, the woeful Queen is glad,
There with her Son enforced to remain,
Till other aids might thence again be had;
So them that hard necessities constrain,
To set them down that it does make me sad,
Never so thick came miseries I ween,
Upon a poor King, and a woeful Queen.
This done King Edward, his strong Army sends
To take those Castles which not long before,
Had been delivered to King Henrys friends,
Which he by sieges makes them to restore,
And on the borders watchfully attends,
To Henryes aid that there should come no more,
But o behold as one ordained to ill,
The Fate that follows hapless Henry still,
For out of some deep melancholy fit, King Henry* coming dis, guised into
England, is discovered and taken prisoner.

Or otherwise, as fallen into despair,
Or that he was not rightly in his wit,
Being safe in Scotland and still succored there;
Upon the sudden he abandons it,
And into England Idly entering, where
He is surprizd, and (in his enemies power)
Is by King Edward shut up in the Tower.
This hap had Henry, who when he was borne, King Henry was borne the greatest
of Christian Kings.

Of Christian Kings the greatest then alive,
Now he the Crown full forty years had worn,
Does all his Regal Soueraignety survive;
Of all men living and the most forlorn,
So strange a thing can destiny contriue:
So many sundry miseries as he,
No King before, had ever lived to see.
To hear all this Queen Margarite must end^
Yet sadly to her fathers Court confin'de,
And now King Edward held himself secure,
When things fell out so fitly to his mind,
But when of rest he did himself assure,
Upon a sudden rose so rough a wind,
In his strong hand, which shook his Scepter mo(...)
Then all the storms that ere had blown before
For then in mind to league himself with Fr(...) The policy of King Edward.

Which he perceived would be the surest way,
His questiond Title highly to advance:
And at his need should serve him for a kay,
^o open him their policies; whose chance,
^as then in casting, and the next to play,
For Margarite still the French King Lewis pressed,
For second aids, nor would she let him rest,
Wherefore he sends a marri'ge to entreat,
^ith beauteous Bona (with whose rich report,
^ame was oppressed with, and a task too great)
^he French Queens sister, and with her in Court, Warwick sent into France to
entreat for a marriage betwixt King Edward and Bona the French Queens sister.
The Duchess of Bedford after John her husbands deceas^ was w^dded^^* Sir
Richard Wooquile. Knight, whos^ daughter ^^^ Lady was.

^arwicke the man chose forth to work the feat,
^^^ is sent thither in such sumptuous sort,
And in short time so well his business plyes,
That she was like to prove an English prize,
In the mean while this youthful King by chance
^omming to Grafton where the Duchess lay,
^hen styled of Bedford; his eye haps to glance,
(...) her bright Daughter the fair Widow Gray,
(...)se beauties did his senses so intrance,
(...) stole his heart so suddenly away,
That must he lose his Crown, comeweale, come woe,
She must be his, though all the world say no,
Her looks like Lethe make him to forget,
^on what business he had Warwick sent,
(...) this Lady he his love so set,
(...)at should his Crown from off his head be rent,
^his rebellious people rise, to let,
^s choice of his, they should it not prevent,
For those pure eyes his bosom that had pierced,
Had writ alaw there, not to be reuers'd,
What less amends this Lady can I make, Her husband slain at Saint Albans on
the ^^^g^ part.

For her dear husband in my quarrel slain;
Then lawful marri'ge which for justice sake,
I must perform (quoth he) lest she complain,
For a just Prince, so me the world shall take:
Soothing himself up in this amorous vain,
With his affections in this sort does play,
Till he a Queen made the fair Lady Gray.
This Act of Edwards com'n to Warwicks ear,
And that the sequel showed it to be true,
In his stern eyes, it easily might appear,
His heart too great for his strait bosom grew,
He his Commission does in piece-meale ^eare,
Breaks the broad Seal, and on the ground it the
And prays blessed heaven may curse him if that ^
For this disgrace revenged would not be,
Have I (quoth he) so lifted thee (...) (...) King (...)

That to thy greatuesse I the scorn am grown,
Have I for thee aduentur'd been so often*
In this long War, as to the world is known,
And now by thee thus basely am I scoft,
By this disgrace upon me thou have thrown:
If these thy wrongs vnpunish'd slightly pass,
Hold Warwick base, and fallen from what he was,
Know tw'as the Nevills forthy Title stood,
Else long ever this, laid lower then the ground,
And in thy cause my Father shed his blood,
None of our house, for thee, but bears a wound,
And now at last to recompense this good,
(...) for me this Guerdon have thou ^ound;
(...) proud head, this h^d shall pluck thy crown,
Or if thou stand then (...) Warwick down.
Yet he to England peaceably repaires, Warwick deeply di^^^^bles his dis(...).

And with a smooth browe smother^ his intent,
And to the King (...) the French affairs,
^^ what in Court had past there since he went:
His spleen he for a fitter season spares,
(...) he the same more liberally might vent:
Calm was his countenance, and his language fair
But in his breast a deep revenge he bare.
Mean while Queen Margarit (a poor exile hears,)
How things in England (in her absence) went,
(...) half burst heart, which but a little cheeres:
^^^ from her head she felt the Crown was rent,
^et though fare off a little glimpse appears,
^ seeming hope* and though it fain^ly lent,
It might hau^ said had not the F^^es said no,
These storms at home, might her some profit blow.
(...) hears how Warwick cunningly had wrought,
(...) Duke of George second brother to King Edward, and by him (...) Duke of
Clarence.
Clarence from his brothers side,
^^^ that brave Youth at Callice having caught,
^^^ eldest daughter had to him affide,
How to rebel, the Warwick by his Agents had stirred up this rebellion in the
North, he himself being at Calli^^, the it might s^^^^ not to be done by him,
they had to their Captains, Henry Fitzhugh Henry Neuil and Sir John Coniers.
Northern men were brou^
And who by Warwick poynted was their guide*
A^ on the The Ear^e of Penbroke and h^^ brother Richard Herbert overthrown at
Banbury field
W^l^h he had a mighty hand,
By Edward raised those rebels to withstand,
Of new These R^b^ls had to their Captain one whom they termed Robin of Rids
dale.
Rebellions at Northampton raised,
And to despite the King, what they had done,
How they at Grafton the Earl The Earl Rivers was Father to the Lady Gray,
then Queen of England.
Rivers seas'd,
And Sir John Wooduile his most hopeful Son,
Who with their heads could hardly be appeas*d,
And of the fame by puissant Warwick won:
Who having taken The Earl ^aketh the King prisoner at ^^lney in
Warwickeshir^, entering open this camp (...) the ^^ght.
Edward in his Tent,
His King his prisoner into York^shir^ sent.
Then hears again how Edward had escapt*
And by his friends a greater power had got,
How he the men of They had to their Captain Robert W^lls, sonn^ to the Lord
W^lles, T(...) field.
Lincolneshire intrapt,
Who near to Stamford paid a bloody shot,
And when the Earl his course for Callice shapt,
When England lastly grew for him to hot,
The Lord Vaucleere a Gascoyne borne.
Vaucleere who there his Deputy he put,
The Ports against his late grand Captain shut.
Lastly, she hears that he at A known Port Town of Normandy
Deep ariues*
And lately com'n to A Town where the French King lay.
Amboyes to the Court,
^^ereas King Lewis to his utmost strives,
^o entertain him in most Princely sort:
When the wise Queen her business so contriues,
That she comes thither, small what though her port,
Yet brings along the sweet young Prince her son^e,
To prove what good with Warwick might be done
Wen both in (...)
Court, and presence of the King,
Their due respect to both of them that gave,
^^ willed them in so pertinent a thing,
That they the like should of each other have*
The tears began from both their eyes to spring,
That each from other Pity see^'d to crave,
In graceful manner when the grieved Queen,
Thus to that great Earl, gently breaths her spleen.
Warwick, says she, how merciless a Foe, The Queene^ speech to the Earl in
the sour following Stanzaes*

^^st thou been still to my poor child and me,
that villain York which have advanced so,
Which never could have risen but for thee,
that Valor thou on Edward did bestow,
^ had thou showed for him, thou here do see,
Our Damask Roses had adorned thy Crest,
And with their wreathes thy ragged Staves been dressed.
First at Saine Albans, at Northampto^ then,
(...) fatal Towt^n that most fearful fight,
(...) many, nay, what multitudes of men,
(...) fierce Warwick slain and put to flight;
O if thy Sword that ever stood for ^en,
Had but been drawn for Henry and his right,
He should have built thee Trophyes every wh^^
Wrought with our Crown* supported by the Be^^
What glory had it won the Neuils name,
To have vpheld the right succeeding race,
Of that fifth Henry, he that was of ^ame,
The only Mineon; whom thou now do trace, Barron ^^ulco^ bring was brother
to Richard Ne^^ll Earl of Salsbury, and Richard Earl of Warwick, and John
Marquess Moun^acute were Sons to the said Earl.

But Salsbury the first against us came*
Then Falconbridge, and Mount^cute, o base,
To advance a ^ra^tor to his ^oueraigne thus,
But to our Cr^^ne your name is ominous,
How many a brave Peer thy too-neere Allies*
(Whose loss the Babe that is yet unborn shall ^^e,
Haue*made themselves a willing Sacrifice;
In our just quarrel who it rightly knevv,
Whose blood against York and his adherents cr^es
(Whom many a sad cu^se ever shall pursue:)
O Warwick* Warwick, expiat this gilt,
By shedding their^ for whom our blood was (...)
When in like language, this great Earl again
Regreets the Queen, and vvoes her to forbear,
Of former gree^e one thought to ^ntertaine* Warwickes reply in the two
following Stanzaes.

Things are not now quoth he, as once they were,
To talk of these past help, it is in vain,
What though it ease your heart; and please your ea^^
This is not it* no* ^t must be our Swords,
Must right our wrongs (dear Lady) not our w(...)
Madam (quoth he) by this my vexed heart,
On Edwards head, which often has wished the Crown
^t but Queen Margarit cleave to VVarwicks part,
^his hand that heau'd him up shall hew him down,
and if from Henry, Richard Neuill start,
Upon my house let Heaven for ever frown,
Of back the Crown to this young Prince i will bring,
Or not be Warwick if he be not King,
When they accord, Prince Edward should affye, Prince Edward affyed to Anne the
Earl of Warwicks daughter.

Anne the Earls Daughter, to confirm it more,
By Sacrament themselves they strictly tie,
By Arms again King Henry to restore,
Or in the Quarrel they would live and dye,
(...)ptising likewise in the oath they swore,
That The Earl and Clarence should Protectors be,
When they King Henry and the Prince should free.
When soon great Warwick into England sends, Warwick makes preparation for
a ^^w War.

^o warn his friends that they for War prepare,
^^g Henrys Title, and to them commends,
^^at they should take his cause into their care,
^ow is the time that he must try his friends,
^hen he himself against Edward must declare;
And when much strife amongst the commons rose,
Whom they should aid, and whom they should oppose.
Furnished with all things well be fitting War,
^ great King Lewis to Queen Margarite lent,
^arwicke (whose name Fame sounded had so far,
(...)t men with Wonder viewed him as he went,
Of all men living the most popular,) Warwick so famous that he was seen with
wonder.

Thought every hour to be but idely spent,
On Englands troubled earth until he were,
To view the troops attending for him there.
And in his Army took with him along,
Oxford, and Penbrooke, who had been destroyed*
By Edward, sworn now to revenge their wrong,
By Burgoyne the French Admiral conuoy'd,
At whose A^iue the shores with people throng:
At sight of Warwick, and so ouerioy'd,
That every one, a Warwick, Warwick cries,
Well may the Red-Rose by great Warwick ri^^
Like some black cloud, which houering lately hu(...)
Thrust on at last by th'windes impetuouspower,
The groves and fields, comes raging in among,
As though both fowls and flocks it would devour A Simile.

That those abroad make to the shelters strong,
To save themselves from the outrageous shower;
Sofly the Yorkists before VVarwicks Drums,
Like a stern Tempest roaring as he comes,
When Edward late who wore the costly Crown,
Himself so high and on his Fortunes bore,
Then heard himself in every place cried down,
And made much less, then he was great before,
Nor dares he trust himself in any Town,
For in the In-lands as along the shore,
Their Proclamations him a Traitor make,
And each man charged against him Arms to tak^
For which the VVashes he is forced to wade, Warwick drives King Edward out of
the Kingdom.

And in much peril lastly gets to Lin,
To save himself such shift King Edward made,
For in more danger he had never bin,)
Where finding three Dutch Hulkes which lay for trade,
^he great'st of them he hires to take him in;
Richard his brother, Hastings his true friend,
Scarce worth one sword their person^ to defend.
When Warwick now the only Prince of power,
Edward the fourth out of the Kingdom fled,
Commands himself free entrance to the Tower,
And sets The Imperial wreath on Henrys head, Warwick takes Ki^ Henry the
T(...)

Brings him through London to the Bishops bower,
By the applanding people followed,
Whose sh^ill re-ecchoing shouts resounds from far,
A Warwick, Warwick, long live Lancaster,
And presently a Parliament they call, King Edward and his adherents ai^ai^ted
by act of Parliament.

In which they attaint King Edward in his blood,
The lands and goods made forf^itures of all,
That in this quarrel, with proud York had* stood,
Their friends in their old honors they install,
Which they had lost now by an act made good,
Intayle the Crown, on Henry and his heirs,
The next on Clarence should they fail in theirs,
Whilst Warwick thus King Henry does advance,
^ee but the Fate still following the sad Queen,
^uch Storms and Tempests in that season chance,
before that time as seldom had bin seen,
That twice from Sea she was forced back to France,
As angry Heaven had put it self between
Her and her loyes, and would a witness be,
That naugh^ but sorrow, this sad Queen must see
This might have lent her comfort yet at last,
So many troubles having undergone, Queen Margarite never sees any thing that
might give her comfort.

And having through so many perils past,
To Have seen her husband settled on his Throne,
Yet still the skies with clouds are ouercast,
Well might she hear, but of this sees she none,
Which from far off, as flying news does greet her
Naught but mischance, when she comes in, must meet her,
But all this while King Edward not dis^ay'd,
His brother Charles of Burgondy so plyes, The Duke of Burgondy brother in Law
to King Edward, so was ^he (...) King Henry by his Grand mother being the
daughter of John of Gaunt.

That though the subtle Duke on both side played,
Edward and Henry both his near Allies;
Upon the Duke King Edward yet so laid,
(Having his sisters furtherance, who was wise,)
That Underhand* his strength he sorestores,
As that he dared t'attempt the English shores.
With fourteen Ships from the Easterlings being hired,
And four Burgonians excellently manned,
After some time with storms and tempests tired,
He near the mouth of Humber haps to land,
Where though the Beacons at his sight were fired,
Yet few or none his entrance do withstand,
For that his friends had given it out before,
He sought the Dukedom, and he would no more.
Upon his march when forward as he came,
Resolved to try the very worst of War, Torke yielded up to King Edward.

He Summons York (where of he bare the name)
To him her Duke, her Gates that does vnbarre,
And coming next to Rocke-rear^ Nottingham,
Mountgomery, Borough, Harrington and Par, Succours^on^ ^^ing into Edward.

Bring him their power* at Lecester again,
Three thousand came, to Hastings that retain.
To Couentry and keeping on his way,
(Sets down his Army in the Cities sight,) King Edward sets down h^ Army
beso^ Couentry, daring Warwick to the field.

Whereas that time the Earl of Warwick lay,
To whom he sends to dare him out to fight,
Which still the Earl deferrs from day to day,
Perceiving well, that all things went not right,
For with his succors Clarence came not in,
Whom to suspect he greatly does begin,
And not in vain, for that disloyal Lord,
Taking those forces, he had levied, leaves
The Earl, and with his Brother does accord, Clarence (...) his father in Law
the Earl of Warwick.

Which of all hope brave Warwick so bere^ue^^
that now King Edward hopes to be restored,
Which then too late the credulous Earl perceiues,
Edward toward London with an Army sped,
To take the Crown once more from Henrys head.
The Queen in France this woeful news that heard
How far through England* Edward thus had past;
As how by Glarence (whom she ever feared,)
Warwick behind-hand mightily was cast*
This most undaunted Queen her hopes yet cheered,
By those great perils she had lately past*
And from King Lewis does three thousand pressed*
To aid her friends in England in distress,
Whilst she is busy gathering up those aids,
(In so short time) as France could her afford,
Courageous Warwick basely thus betrayed,
By Clarence lewdly falsifying his word,
The most courageous Earl no whit dismayed, Warwick follows the King toward
London.

But trusting still to his successful Svvord,
Follows the King toward London march'^ before,
Each day his Power increasing more and more.
But Edward by the Londoners let in,
Who in their Gates his Army took to guard,
Warwick this while that trifling had not bin,
But with a power sufficiently prepared,
T'approach the City bravely does begin,
To dare the King, who lately him had dared,
Who then from London his Armed forces leads, King Edward ^^ts ^^^ of London
(...).

Toward where his march ambitious Warwick tread^
From London this, that from Saint Albans set,
These two grand soldiers shoul^ring for the Crown,
They in the midway are at Barnet met, The Armies meet at Bar^t.

Where then they set their puissant Armies down,
Warwick as near as ever he could get,
But Edward only takes up the Town;
Betwixt whose ^ents a Heath called Gladmore lies,
Where they prepare to act this bloody prize.
With Drums and Trumpets they awake the day,
^uffled in mists her lowering self that shows,
To stop their madness doing all it may,
^howing what blood her light was like to lose:
But hope of slaughter bears so great asway,
That with the Sun their rage still higher grows,
Full were their hands of death, so freely dealt,
That the most mortal wounds, the least were felt.
The adverse Ensigns to each other wave,
(As it were) to call them forward to the field,
The King the Earl, The Earl the King does brave,
Nor cares he for the The Arms of England.
Leopards in his shield,
And whilst one friend another strives to save,
He Is slain himself if not enforced to yield,
In either Army there is not one eye,
But is spectator of some Tragedy.
Those wrongs the King had from the Earl received
^^pulst the Kingdom only by his power,
^^en to the height his powerful hand up heau'd,
^or full'reuenge in this unhappy hour,
And by the King the Earl his hopes bereaved,
^heltred by him from many a bloody shower,
Spurs up revenge, and with that violent rage,
That scarsely blood their fury could assuage.
Warwick who sees his Soldiers had the worse, Warwickes high (...)

And at a near point to be put to flight,
Throwing himself from o^ his Armed Horse,
Thrusts in on foot into the deadliest fight,
Edward again with an unusual force,
In his own person in the Armies sight,
Puts for the Garland, which if now he lose,
Warwick his Crown at pleasure would dispos^
To Edwards side, but fortune does incline,
Warwickes high valor then was but in vain;
His noble soul there destined to resign,
Brave Mountacute his valiant Brother slain; The Earl of Warwick and ^is
brother Marquess Mountacute ^aine.

Here Sommerset (with them that did combine)
Forced to fly, and Exceste^ is feign,
To save himself by Sanctuary; this day
Edward's victorious, and bears all away,
THis fatal field unluckily thus lost, that very day that Warwick ^as slain
the Queen ^ands.

That very day so Destiny contriues,
That the grieved Queen at Sea turmoyl'd and tossed,
Near twenty days, in Weymouth Road ariues,
Where scarcely landed, but Post after Post,
Brings her this ill news, which so far depriues*
Her of all comfort, that she cursed and band,
Those plaguey winds that suffered her to land:
Were thou (quoth she) so fortunate in fight, ^he Queens ^eech hea^ng of
Warwicks defeat (...) the three ^ollowing ^anzaes.

O noble Warwick, when thou were our foe,
And now thou stood'st in our indoubted right,
And should for Henry thy high valor show,
Thus to be slain; what power in our despite,
Watches from heaven upon our overthrow?
Th'vnlucky Stars have certainly made laws*
To mark for death the favorers of our cause,
O what infernal brought that Edward back,
(...) late expelled by VVarwickes powerful hand,
Was there no way his rotten Ship to wrack*
Was there no Rock? was there no swallowing sand?
And too, the wretched Subjects were so slack,
To suffer him so traitorously to land;
Surely whole heaven against us have conspired,
Or in our troubles they had else been tired,
Was I for this so long detayn'd in France,
From ragefull Tempests, and reserved till now,
That I should land, to meet with this mischance:
^t must needs be the Powers have made a vow,
Up to that height my sorrows to advance,
That before mine all miseries shall bow:
That all the sorrow mortals can surmise,
Shall fall far short o^ Margarites miseries.
These words scarce spoke, her halfe-slaine heart to ease
^t the least breath of comfort to prevent,
^he next ill news, in rushing after these,
^as that King Henry to the Tower was sent, Cause of new sorrow to the Queen.

As though it self (even) Destiny should please,
(...) wretched Margarites heavy discontent,)
Thrunging so thick as like themselves to smother,
Or as one ran to overtake another,
Those scattered Troops from Barnet that escaped, The remnant of the Army
which escaped a^ Barnet resort to the Queen.

^earing the Queen thus landed with her power,
^ugh much dismayed with what had lately hapt,
(...) Gore* drowned Gladmore in that bloody shower
And fearing by the foe to be entrapt:
Through vntrod grounds* in many a tedious how^
Flock to her daily, till that by her aid,
Equal with Edwards they her Army made,
When Somerset, and Devonshire came in, The Queen encouraged by her friends

To the sad Queen, and bad her not despair,
Though they of late unfortunate had bin,
Yet there was help that Ruin to repair,
What they had lost they hoped again to win,
And that the way lay open yet, and fair,
For that the West would wholly with her rise,
Besides from Wales assured her of Supplies,
And every day still adding to their Force,
As on their Host toward Gloucester they guide,
When Edward finding their intended course,
Again for Battle strongly does provide,
Both Armies they supply with Foot and Horse,
By both their friends, as they affect the side,
And in their march at T^wkesbury they met, The Armies meet at Tukesbury.

Where they in Order their Battalions set.
Ill was her choice of this uneven ground, A place ill ^^osen on the Queens
part

Lucklesse the place, unlucky was the hour,
The Heavens upon her so extremely frownd,
As on her head their plagues at once to power;
As in a Deluge here her hopes were drowned,
Here sees she death her faithful friends devour,
The earth is filled with groans, the air with cry(...)
Horror on each side does enclose her eyes,
Never did death so terribly appear,
(...)e first their Arms the English learnt to weeld,
^ho would see slaughter, might behold it here;
(...) the true shape upon this fatal field,
(...) vain was valor, and in vain was fear, A bloody battle.

(...) vain to fight, in vain it was to yield,
In vain to fly; for destiny discust,
By their own hands, or others, dye they must.
Here her dear Devonshire noble Courtney did,
^er faithful friend great Somerset here fell,
^^lnes, Leukn^r, Hamden, Whittingham beside, The Queene^ Army overthrown.

O Margarite, who thy miseries can tell,
^harp were those swords which made their wounds so, wide
Whose blood the soy^e did with abundance swell,
Other her friends into the Town that fled,
Taken, no better then the former sped.
But the amazing misery of all,
(...) heaven the great'st until the last had kept.
(...) it would say, that after this none shall
(...) mortal eyes be worthy to be wept,
The Prince her son who sees his friends thus fall,
And on each side their ^arkases lie heapt,
Making away in this most piteous plight, Prince Edward taken prisoner. Upon
the Kings Proclamation of a great reward to him that could bring him (...)

(...)s taken prisoner in his tardy flight,
And forth by Cr^fts* before the con(...) or brought
^is Proclamation clearing every doubt*
(...)he youths safety* living where he caught,
(...) a reward to him should bring him out,
But when they once had found him who^ they soug(...) As also of the Princes
safety, Sir Richard Crosts is won to discover his prisoners. Prince Edward
stabd to death.

Hearing his answers, Princely, wise, and stout,
Those bloody brothers, Hastings and the rest,
Sheathed their sharp ponyards in his many br(...)
Queen Margarite thus of mortals most forlo(...)
Her son now slain, her army overthrown,
Left to the world, as fortunes only scorn,
And not one friend to whom to make her moan,
(To so much woe was never woman borne)
This wretched Lady wandering all alone,
Gets to a homely Cell not far away,
If possibly to hide her from the day. Queen Margarite gets into a poor Cell.

But wretched woman quickly there bewrayed,
She thence is taken and to Prison sent,
Meanly attended, miserably arrayed,
The people wondering at her as she went,
Of whom the most malicious her vpbray'd,
With good Duke Humphries death, her heart to rent
Whilst her mild looks, and Graceful gesture drue*
Many a sad eye, her miseries to rue,
Till by Duke Rayner Ransomed at last,
Her tender Father, who a Prince but poor,
Borrowed great Sums of Lewis, with much wast Lewis of France.

Which for he was not able to restore,
Province and both the Cicils, to him past, Duke Rayner ^^d^^th himself to
rans(...) his Daughter.

With fruitful Naples which was all his store;
To bring her back from earthly joys exiled,
The undone Father helps the undone Child.
And though enlarged ere she could lean the land.
(...)king a long year of each short-liu'd hour,
(...)e hears that by Duke Richards murdering hand, The Earl of Gloucester
after Richard the third.

^he King her husband suffers in the Tower,
As though high heaven had laid a strict command,
Upon each star, some plague on her to power:
And until now that nothing could suffice,
Nor give a period to her miseries.
FINIS.
NIMPHIDIA THE COURT OF FAYRIE.
Old Chaucer does of Topas tell,
Mad Rablais of Pantagruell,
A latter third of Dowsabell,
With such poor trifles playing:
Others the like have labored at
Some of this thing, and some of that,
And many of they know not what,
But that they must be saying,
Another sort there be that will,
Be talking of the Fayries still,
Nor never can they have their fill,
As they were wedded to them;
No tales of them their thirst can slake,
So much delight in them they take,
And some strange thing they feign would make,
Knew they the way to do them,
Then since no Muse has bin so bold,
Or of the Latter, or the old,
Those Eluish secrets to unfold,
Which ly from others reeding,
^y active Muse to light shall bring,
The court of that proud Fayry King,
And tell there of the Reuelling
Jove prosper my proceeding,
And thou Nimphidia gentle Fay,
Which meeting me upon the way,
These secrets did to me bewray,
Which now I am in teiling:
My pretty light fantastic maid,
^here inuoke thee to my aid,
That I may speak what thou have said,
In numbers smoothly swelling,
This Palace stands in the air,
By Negromancy placed there,
That it no Tempests needs to fear,
Which way so ere it blows,
And somewhat Southward towered the Noone,
Whence lies a way up to the Moon,
And thence the Fayrie can as soon,
Pass to the earth below it.
The Walls of Spiders legs are made,
Well mortized and finely laid,
He was the master of his Trade,
It curiously that builded:
The Windows of the eyes of Cats,
And for the roof, instead of Slats,
Is covered with the skins of Bats,
With Mooneshine that are gilded.
Hence Oberon him (port to make,
(Their rest when weary mortals take)
And none but only Fayries wake,
Descends for his pleasure.
And Mab his merry Queen by night,
Bestrids young Folks that lie upright,
(In elder Times the Mare that height)
Which plagues them out of measure.
Hence Shadows, seeming Idle shapes,
Of little frisking Elues and Apes,
To Earth do make their wanton skapes,
As hope of pastime hasts them:
Which maids thinks on the Hearth they see,
When Fires well near consumed be,
Their dancing Hayes by two and three,
Just as their Fancy casts them,
These make our Girls their sluttery rue,
By pinching them both black and blew,
And put a penny in their shue,
The house for cleanly sweeping:
And in their courses make that Round,
In Meadows and in Marshes found,
Of them so called the Fayrie ground,
Of which they have the keeping.
These when a Child haps to be got,
Which after proves an Idiot,
When Folks perceive it thriueth not,
The fault therein to smother,
^ome silly doting brainelesse Calfe,
that understands things by the half,
^ay that the Fayrie left this Aulfe,
And took away the other.
But listen and I shall you tell,
^ chance in Fayrie that be fell,
Which certainly may please you well,
In Love and Arms delighting:
Of Oberon that jealous grew,
Of one of his own Fayrie crew,
Too well (he feared) his Queen that knew,
His love but ill requiting.
Pigwiggen was this Fayrie Knight,
One wondrous gracious in the sight
Of fair Queen Mab, which day and night,
He amorously observed;
Which made King Oberon suspect,
His service took too good effect,
His sauciness and often checked,
And could have wished him starued.
Pigwiggen gladly would commend,
^ome token to Queen Mab to send,
^f Sea, or Land, him ought could lend,
Were worthy of her wearing:
^t length this Lover does devise,
^ bracelet made of Emmotts eyes,
^ thing he thought that she would prize,
No whitt her state impayring.
And to the Queen a letter Writes,
Which he most curiously end^es,
Con^^ring her by all the rites,
Of love, she would be pleased,
To meet him her ^^ne Servant, where
They might without suspect or fear,
Themselves to one another clear,
And have their poor hearts cased.
At mid night the appointed hour,
And for the Queen a fiering Bower.
(Quoth he) is that fair Cowslip flower,
On Hipcut hill that grows,
In all your ^raynether's not a Fay,
That ever went to gather May,
But she has made it in her way,
The tallest tuere that grows.
When by Tom Thum a Fayry Page,
He sent it, and does him engage,
By promise of a mighty wage,
It secretly to carry:
Which done the Queen her mayds does call,
And bids them to be ready all,
She would go see her Summer Hall,
She would no longer tarry,
Her Chariot ready straight is made,
Each thing therein is sitting laid,
That she by nothing might be stayed,
For naught must her be letting,
Four nimble Gnats the Horses were,
Their Harnasses of Cossamere,
Fly ^^n^ion her Chariottere,
Up ^n the Coatch-boxe getting,
Her Chariot of a Snayles fine shell,
Which for the colors did excel:
The fair Queen Mab becoming well,
So lively was the limming:
The fear the soft wool of a Be;
The cover (gallantly to see)
The wing of a pyde butter-flee,
I trow it was simple trimming.
The wheels composed of Crickets bones,
And daintily made for the nonce,
For fear of rattling on the stones,
With Thistle-downe they shod it;
For all her Maidens much did fear,
If Oberon had chanced to hear,
That Mab his Queen should have been there,
He would not have aboade it.
She mounts her Chariot with a trice,
Nor would she stay for no advice,
Until her Maids that were so nice,
To wait on her were fitted,
But ran her self away alone;
Which when they heard there was not one,
But hasted after to be gone,
As she had been diswitted,
Hop, and Mop, and Dryp so clear,
Pip, and Trip, and Skip that were,
To Mab their Sovereign ever dear:
Her special Maids of Honor.
Fib, and Tib and Pinck and Pin,
Tick, and Quick and Iill, and lin,
Tit, and Nit, and Wap and Win,
The Train that wait up on her,
Upon a Grasshopper they got,
And what with Amble and with Trot,
For hedge nor ditch they spared not,
But after her they hye them.
A Cobweb over them they throw,
To shield the wind if it should blow,
Themselves they wisely could bestow,
Lest any should epsy them.
But let us leave Queen Mab a while,
Through many a gate, o'r many a style,
That now had gotten by this wile,
Her dear Pigwiggin kissing,
And tell how Oberon does fare,
Who grew as mad as any Hare,
When he had sought each place with care,
And found his Queen was missing.
By grifly Pluto he does swear,
He rent his clothes and tore his hair,
And as he runs here and there,
An Acorne cup he greeteth;
Which soon he takes by the stalk,
About his head he lets it walk,
Nor does he any creature balke,
But lays on all he meets.
The Thuskan Poet does advance,
The frantic Paladine of France,
And those more ancient do inhance,
Alcides in his fury;
And others Ajax Telamon,
But to this time there has bin non,
So Bedlam as our Oberon,
Of which I dare assure you,
And first encountering with a waspe,
He in his arms the Fly does claspe,
As though his breath he forth would graspe,
Him for Pigwiggin taking:
Where is my wife thou Rogue, quoth he,
Pigwiggen she is come to thee,
Restore her, or thou dy'st by me,
Whereat the poor Waspe quaking,
Cries, Oberon, great Fayrie King,
Content thee, I am no such thing,
I am a Waspe behold my sting,
At which the Fayrie started:
When soon away the Waspe does go*
Poor wretch was never frighted so,
He though his wings were much too slow,
O'r ioyd, they so were parted,
He next upon a Glow-worme light,
(You must suppose it now was night,)
Which for her hinder part was bright,
He took to be a Devil.
And furiously does her. assail,
For carrying fire in her tail,
He thrasht her rough coat with his flayle,
The mad King feared no evil.
O quoth the Glow-worme hold thy hand,
Thou puissant King of Fayrie land,
Thy mighty strokes who may withstand,
Hold, or of life despair I:
Together then her self does roll,
And tumbling down into a hole,
She seemed as black as any Cole,
Which vexed away the Fayrie.
From thence he ran into a Hiue,
Amongst the Bees he lets drive,
And down their Combs begins to riue,
All likely to have spoiled:
Which with their Wax his face besmeared,
And with their Honey daubed his Beard,
It would have made a man afeard,
To see how he was moyled,
A new adventure him betides,
He met an Ant, which he bestrides,
And post thereon away he rides,
Which with his have does stumble;
And came full over on her snowte,
Her heels so threw the dirt about,
For she by no means could get out,
But over him does tumble,
And being in this pitteous case,
And all be* slurried head and face,
On runs he in his Wild, goose chase,
As here, and there he rambles,
Half blind, against a molehill hit,
And for a Mountain taking it,
For all he was out of his wit,
Yet to the top he scrambles,
And being gotten to the top,
Yet there himself he could not stop,
But down on the other side does chop,
And to the foot came tumbling:
So that the Grubs the rein that bred,
Hearing such turmoyle over head,
Thought surely they had al been dead,
So fearful was the Iumbling,
And falling down into a Lake,
Which him up to the neck does take,
His fury somewhat it does slake,
He calls for a Ferry;
Where you may some recovery note,
What was his Club he made his Boat,
And in his Oake^ Cup does float,
As safe as in a Wherry.
Men talk of the adventures strange,
Of Don Quishot, and of their change,
Through which he Armed often did range,
Of Sancha Panchas travel:
But should a man tell every thing,
Done by this frantic Fayrie King,
And them in lofty Numbers sing,
It well his wits might gravel.
Scarce set on shore, but therewithal,
He meets Pucke, which most men call,
Hobgoblin, and on him does fall,
With words from frenzy spoken;
Hoh, hoh, quoth Hob, God save thy grace,
Who dressed thee in this pitteous case,
He thus that spoyld my sovereigns face,
I would his neck were broken;
This Pucke seems but a dreaming dolt,
Still walking like a ragged Colt,
And often out of a bush does bolt,
Of purpose to deceive us,
And leading us makes us to stray,
Long Winters nights out of the way,
And when we stick in mire and clay,
Hob does with laughter leave us.
Dear Pucke (quoth he) my Wife is gone,
As ere thou love King Oberon,
Let every thing but this alone,
With vengeance, and pursue her.
Bring her to me alive or dead,
Or that vild thief, Pigwiggins head,
That villain has defiled my bed,
He to this folly drew her.
Quoth Puck, My Liege I Will never lin,
But I will thorough thick and thin,
Until at length I bring her in,
My dearest Lord nere doubt it:
Thorough Brake, thorough Brier,
Thorough Mucke, thorough Mier,
Thorough Water, thorough Fire,
And thus goes Pucke about it,
This thing Nimphidia over hard,
That on this mad King had a guard,
Not doubting of a great reward,
For first this business broching;
And through the air away does go,
Swift as an Arrow from the Bow;
To let her Sovereign Mab to know,
What peril was approaching.
The Queen bound with Loves powerfulst charm,
Sat with Pigwiggin arm in arm,
Her merry May des that thought no harm,
About the room were skipping:
A Humble-Bee their Minstrell played,
Upon his Hobby; every Maid
Fit for this Reuells was arayde,
The Horne-pipe neately tripping.
In comes Nimphidia, and does cry,
My Sovereign for your safety fly,
For there is danger but too nie,
I posted to forewarne you:
The King has sent Hobgoblin out,
To seek you all the fields about,
And of your safety you may doubt,
If he but once discern you.
When like an uproar in a Town*
Before them every thing went down,
Some tore a Ruff, and some a Gown,
Against one another iustling:
They flew about like Chafe in the wind,
For have some left their Maskes behind,
Some could not stay their Gloves to find,
There never was such bustling.
Forth ran they by a secret way,
Into a brake that near them lay;
Yet much they doubted there to stay,
Lest Hob should hap to find them:
He had a sharp and piercing sight,
All one to him the day and night,
And therefore were resolved by flight,
To leave this place behind them,
At length one chanced to find a Nut,
In the end of which a hole was cut,
Which lay upon a Hazell root,
There scattered by a Squirrell,
Which out the kernel gotten had;
When quoth this Fay dear Queen be glad,
Let Oberon be nere so mad,
I Will set you safe from peril.
Come all into this Nut (quoth she)
Come closely in, be ruled by me,
Each one may here a chuser be,
For room ye need not wrestle.
Nor need ye be together heapt;
So one by one therein they crept,
And lying down they soundly slept.
As safe as in a Castle,
Nimphidia that this while does watch,
Perceived if Pucke the Queen should catch*
That he would be her ouer-match,
Of which she well bethought her;
Found it must be some powerful Charm,
The Queen against him that must arm,
Or surely he would do her harm,
For thoroughly he had sough her.
And listening if she ought could hear,
That her might hinder, or might fear:
But finding still the coast was clear,
Nor creature had discride her;
Each circumstance and having scand,
She came thereby to understand,
Puck would be with them out of hand,
When to her Charms she hide her.
And first her Fern seed does bestow,
The kernel of the Messletowe:
And here and there as Pucke does go,
With terror to affright* him,
She Nightshade strawes to work him ill,
There with her Veruayne and her Dill,
That hinders Witches of their will,
Of purpose to despite him.
Then sprinkles she the iuce of Rue,
That grows underneath the Yeu:
With nine drops of the midnight dew,
From Lunarie distilling:
The Molewarps brain mixed therewithal;
And with the same the Pismyres gall,
For she in nothing short would fall;
The Fayrie was so willing.
Then thrice under a Bryer does creep,
Which at both ends was rooted deep,
And over it three times she leepe;
Her Magic much auayling:
Then on Porserpina does call,
And so upon her Spell does fall,
Which here to you repeat I shall,
Not in one tittle failing,
By the crooking of the Frogge;
By the howling of the Dog;
By the crying of the Hog,
Against the storm arising;
By the Evening Curphewe Bell,
By the doleful dying knell,
O let this my direful Spell,
Hob, hinder thy surprising,
By the Mandrakes dreadful groans,
By the Lubricans sad moanes:
By the noise of dead men's bones,
In Charnell houses rattling:
By the hyssing of the Snake,
The ru^^ing of the fire-Drake,
(...) charge thee thou this place forsake,
Nor of Queen Mab be prattling.
By the Whirlewindes hollow sound,
By the ^hunders dreadful stound,
^ells of spirits under ground,
I charge thee not to fear us:
By the Screech-owles dismal note,
By the Black Night-Rauens throat,
(...) charge thee Hob to tear thy Coat
With thorns if thou come near us.
(...)er spell thus spoke she stepped aside,
(...)nd in a Chinke her self does hide,
(...)see thereof what would betyde,
For she does only mind him:
(...)hen presently she Pucke espies,
(...)nd well she marked his gloating eyes,
(...)ow under every leaf he pries,
In seeking still to find them.
But once the Circle got within,
The Charms to work do straight begin,
And he was caught as in a Gin;
For as he thus was busy,
A pain he in his Headpeece feels,
Against a stubbed ^ree he reeles,
And up went poor Hobgoblins heels,
Alas his brain was dizzie,
At length upon his feet he gets,
Hobgoblin fumes, Hobgoblin frets,
And as again he forward sets,
And through the Bushes scrambles:
A stump does trip him in his pace,
Down comes poor Hob upon his face,
And lamentably tore his case,
Amongst the Briars and brambles.
A plague upon Queen Mab, quoth he,
And all her maids where ere they be,
I think the Devil guided me,
To seek her so provoked;
Where stumbling at a piece of Wood,
He fell into a ditch of mudd,
Where to the very Chin he stood,
In danger to be choked.
Now worse then e're he was before:
Poor Puck does yell, poor Puck does rore,
That waked Queen Mab who doubted sore,
Some Treason had been wrought her.
Until Nimphidia told the Queen,
What she had done, what she had seen,
Who then had well-neere cracked her spleen,
With very extreme laughter.
But leave we Hob to clamber out:
Queen Mab, and all her Fayrie rout,
And come again to have about,
With Oberon yet madding:
And with Pigwiggin now distrought,
Who much was troubled in his thought,
That he so long the Queen had sought,
And through the fields was gadding.
And as he runs he still does cry,
King Oberon I thee defy,
And dare thee here in Arms to try,
For my dear Ladies honor:
For that she is a Queen right good,
In whose defense I Will shed my blood,
And that thou in this jealous mood
Have laid this slander on her,
And quickly Arms him for the Field,
A little Cockle-shell his shield,
Which he could very bravely weeld:
Yet could it not be pierced:
His Spear, a Bent both stiff, and strong,
And well-neere of two Inches long;
The Pyle was of a Horse-flyes tongue,
Whose sharpness naught reuersed.
And puts him on a Coat of Male,
Which was of a Fishes scale,
That when his Foe should him assail,
No point should be preuayling:
His Rapier was a Hornets sting,
It was a very dangerous thing:
For if he chanced to hurt the King,
It would be long in healing.
His Helmet was a Beetles head,
Most horrible and full of dread,
That able was to strike one dead,
Yet did it well become him;
And for a Plume a Horses hair,
Which being tossed with the air,
Had force to strike his Foe with fear,
And turn his weapon from him.
Himself he on an Earewig set,
Yet scarce he on his back could get,
So often and high he did coruct,
Ere he himself could settle:
He made him turn, and stop, and bound,
To gallop, and to trot the Round,
He scarce could stand on any ground,
He was so full of mettle.
When soon he met with Tomalin,
One that a valiant Knight had bin,
And to King Oberon of Kin;
Quoth he thou manly Fayrie.
Tell Oberon I come prepared,
Then bid him stand upon his guard;
This hand his baseness shall reward,
Let him be ue'r so wary,
Say to him thus, that I defy,
His slanders and his infamy,
And as a mortal enemy,
Do publicly proclaim him;
Withal, that if ^ had mine own,
He should not wear the Fayrie Crown,
But with a vengeance should come down,
Nor we a King should name him.
This Tomalin could not abide,
To hear his Sovereign vilefide:
But to the Fayrie Court him hide;
Full furiously he posted:
With every thing Pigwiggen said:
How tit^e to the Crown he laid,
And in what Arms he was arrayd,
As how himself he boasted.
Twixt head and foot, from point to point,
He told th'arming of each joint,
In every piece, how neat and quaint,
For Tomalin could do it:
How fair he sat, how sure he rid,
As of the courser he bestrid,
How Managed, and how well he did,
The King which listened to it,
Quoth he, go Tomalin with speed,
Provide me Arms provide my Steed,
And every thing that I shall need,
By thee I will be guided:
To strait account call thou thy wit,
See there be wanting not a whit,
In every thing see thou me fit,
Just as my foes provided.
Soon flew this news through Fayrie land,
Which gave Queen Mab to understand,
The Combat that was then at hand,
Betwixt those men so mighty:
Which greatly she beg^n to ^^w,
Perceiving that all Fayrie kn^w,
The first occasion from her grew,
Of these affairs so weighty.
Wherefore attended with her Maids,
Through fogs, and mists, and damps, she wades,
To Proserpine the Queen of shades,
To treat that it would please her:
The cause into her hands to take,
For ancient love and friendships sake,
And soon thereof an end to make,
Which of much care would ease her.
A while, there let we Mab alone,
And come we to King Oberon,
Who Armed to meet his Foe is gone,
For proud Pigwiggin crying:
Who sought the Fayrie King as fast,
And had ^o well his iourneys cast,
That he arrived at the last,
His puissant foe espying.
Stout Tomalin, came with the King,
Tom Thum does on Pigwiggin bring,
That perfect were in every thing,
To single fights belonging:
And therefore they themselves engage,
To see them exercise their rage,
With fair and comely equipage,
Not one the other wronging.
So like in Arms, these champions were,
As they had bin a very pair,
So that a man would almost swear,
That either had bin either:
Their furious Steeds began to nay,
That they were heard a mighty way,
Their staves upon their rests they lay,
Yet ever they flew together;
Their Seconds minister an oath,
Which was indifferent to them both*
That on their Knightly faith aad troth,
No Magic them supplied:
And sought them that they had no charms,
Wherewith to work each others harms,
But came with simple open arms,
To have their causes tried.
Together furiously they ran,
That to the ground came horse and man,
The blood out of their Helmets ran,
So sharp were their incounters:
And though they to the earth were thrown,
Yet quickly they regained their own,
Such nimblenesse was never shown,
They were two gallant mounters*
When in a second course again,
They forward came with might and maine,
Yet which had better of the twain,
The seconds could not judge it,
Their shields were into pieces cleft,
Their Helmets from their heads were reft,
And to defend them nothing left,
These Champions would not budge yet,
Away from them their staves they threw,
Their cruel swords they quickly drew,
And freshly they the sight renew;
They every stroke redoubled:
Which made Proserpina take heed,
And make to them the greater speed,
For fear lest they too much should bleed,
Which wondrously her troubled*
When to the infernal Stix she goes,
She takes the Fogs from thence that rose,
And in a Bag does them enclose,
When well she had them blended,
She hyes her then to Lethe spring,
A bottell and thereof does bring,
Wherewith she meant to work the thing.
Which only she intended.
Now Proserpine with Mab is gone,
Unto the place where Oberon
And proud Pigwiggen one to one,
Both to be slain were likely:
And there themselves they closely hide,
Because they would not be espide;
For Proserpine meant to decide
The matter very quickly.
And suddenly vntyes the Poke,
Which out of it sent such a smoke,
As ready was them all to choke,
So grievous was the pother.
So that the Knights each other lost,
And stood as still as any post,
Tom Thum, nor Tomalin could boast,
Themselves of any other.
But when the mist began somewhat cease,
Proserpina commands peace:
And that a while they should release,
Each other of their peril,
Which here (quoth she) I do proclaim,
To all in dreadful Plutoes name,
That as ye will eschew his blame,
You let me hear the quarrel,
But here your selves you must engage,
Somewhat to cool your spleenish rage,
Your grievous thirst and to assuage,
That first you drink this liquor,
Which shall your understanding clear,
As plainly shall to you appear;
Those things from me that you shall hear,
Conceiving much the quicker,
This Lethe water you must know,
The memory destroys so,
That of our weal, or of our woe,
It all remembrance blotted:
Of it (...) can you ever think,
For they (...) sooner took this drink,
But naught into their brains could s^nke,
Of what ^ad them besotted.
King O^eron forgotten ^ad,
That ^e for ^^a^ousie ran madd:
But of his Queen was wondrous glad,
And asked how he came thither;
Pigwiggen likewise does forget,
That he Queen Mab had ever met
Or that they were so hard beset,
When they were found together.
Nor neither of them both had thought,
That ever they had each other sought,
Much less that they a Combat fought,
But such a dream were lothing;
Tom Thum had got a little sup,
And Tomalin ^^arse kissed the Cup,
Yet had their brains so sure locked up,
That they remembered nothing.
Queen Mab and her light Maids the while,
Amongst themselves do closely smile,
To see the King caught with a wile,
With one another jesting:
And to the Fayrie Court they went,
With mickle i^y and merriment,
Which thing was done with good intent,
And thus I left them feasting.
FINIS.
THE QVEST OF CYNTHIA.
WHat time the groves were clad in green,
The fields dressed all in flovvers,
And that the sleeke-hayrd Nimphs were seen,
To seek them Summer Bowers.
Forth rou'd I by the sliding Rills,
To find where Cynthia (...),
Whose name so often from the hills,
The Ecchos wondered at.
When me upon my Quest to bring,
That pleasure might excel,
The Birds strove which should sweetliest sing,
The flowers which sweet'st should smell.
Long wandering in the Woods (said I)
Oh whther's Cynthia gone?
When soon the Echo does reply,
To my last word, go on.
At length upon a lofty Fur,
It was my chance to find,
Where that dear name most due to her,
Was carved upon the rynde.
Which whilst with Wonder I beheld,
The Bees their honey brought,
And up the carved letters filled,
As they with gold were wrought,
And near that trees more spacious root,
Then looking on the ground,
The shape of her most dainty foot,
Imprinted there I found.
Which stuck there like a curious seal,
As though it should forbid,
Us wretched mortals, to reveal,
What under it was hid.
Besides the flowers which it had pressed,
Appeared to my view,
More fresh and lovely then the rest,
That in the meadows grew:
The clear drops in the steps that stood,
Of that delicious Girl,
The Nimphs amongst their dainty food,
Drunk for dissolved pearl,
The yielding sand, where she had troad,
Vnt^^cht yet with the Wind,
By the fair posture plainly showed,
Where he might Cynthi^ find,
When on upon my waylesse walk,
As my desires me draw,
I like a madman fell to talk,
With every thing I saw:
I asked some Lillyes why so white,
They from their fellows were;
Who answered me that Cynthia's sight,
Had made them look so clear,
I asked a nodding Violet why
It sadly hung the head,
It told me Cynthia late past by,
Too soon from it that fled:
A bed of Roses saw I there,
Bewitching with their grace,
Besides so wondrous sweet they were,
That they perfumed the place;
I of a Shrub of those inquired,
From others of that kind,
Who with such virtue them enspir'd,
It answered (to my mind*)
As the base Hemblocke were we such,
The poysond' weed that grows,
Till Cynthia by her good-lucke tuch
Transformed us to a Rose,
Since when those Frosts that winter brings,
Which candy every green,
Renew us like the Teeming Springs,
and we thus fresh are s^ene.
At length I on a Fountain light,
whose brim with Pincks was platted;
The Bank with Daffadillies dight,
with grass like Sleaue was matted,
When I demanded of that Well,
What power frequented there;
Desiring, it would please to tell
What name it used to bear.
It told me it was Cynthias own,
Within whose cheerful brimmes,
That curious Nymph had often bin known,
To bath her snowy Limbs.
Since when that water had the power,
Lost Mayden-heads to restore,
And make one Twenty in an hour,
of Esons Age before,
And told me that the bottom clear,
Now laid with many a fett
Of seed-pearle, ere she bathed her there;
Was known as black as Iet,
And when she from the water came,
Where first she touched the mould,
In balls the people made the same
For Pomander, and sold.
When chance me to an Arbor led,
Whereas I might behold
Two blessed Elizeums in one sted,
The less the great enfold,
The place which she had chosen out,
Her self in to repose;
Had they com'n down the gods nodoubt
The very same had chose.
The wealthy spring yet never bore,
That sweet, nor dainty flower,
That damask'd not the checkered flore
Of Cynthias Summer Bower.
The Birch, the Myrtle, and the Bay,
Like friends did all embrace;
And their large branches did display,
To Canopy the place,
Where she like Venus does appear,
Upon a Rosy bed;
As Lillyes the soft pillowes were,
Whereon she laid her head.
Heaven on her shape such cost bestowed,
And with such bounties blessed,
No lim of hers but might have made
A goddess at the least.
The Flies by chance mesht in her hayr^,
By the bright Radience thrown,
From her clear eyes, rich Jewels were,
They so like Diamonds shone.
The meanest weed the soil there bare,
Her breath did so refine,
That it with Woodbynd durst compare,
And beard the Eglanti^e.
The dew which on the tender grass,
The Evening had distilled,
To pure Rose Water turned was,
The shades with sweets that filled.
The winds were hushed, no leaf so small,
At all was seen to stir:
Whilst turning to the waters fall,
The small Birds sang to her.
Where she too quickly me espies,
When I might plainly see,
A thousand Cupids from her eyes,
shoot all at once at me*
Into these secret shades (quoth she)
How dare thou be so bold,
To enter, consecrate to me;
Or touch this hallowed mold.
Those words (quoth she) I can pronounce,
Which to that shape can bring,
Thee, which the Hunter had, who once
Saw Dian in the spring,
Bright Nymph again I thus replye,
This cannot me affright:
I had rather in thy presence dye,
Then live out of thy sight.
I first upon the mountains hie,
Built Altars to thy name,
And grau'd it on the Rocks thereby,
To propagate thy Fame.
I taught the Shepherds on the downs,
Of thee to frame their Lays:
It Was I that filled the neighboring Towns,
With Ditties of thy praise.
Thy colors I devised with care;
Which were unknown before:
Which since that, in their brayded hair,
The Nimphs and Siluans wore.
Transform me to what shape you can,
I pass not what it be,
Yea what most hateful is to man:
So I may follow thee,
Which when she heard, full pearly floods
I in her eyes might view:
(Quoth she) most vvelcome to these Woods,
Too mean for one so true,
Here from the hateful world we will live,
A den of mere despite,
To Idiots only that does give,
Which be her sole delight.
To people the infernal pit,
That more and more does strive,
Where only Villainy is wit:
And Devils only thrive.
Whose vildnesse us shall never awe:
But here our sports shall be;
Such as the golden world first saw,
Most innocent and free.
Of Simples in these Groves that grow,
We Will learn the perfect skill;
The nature of each Herb to know,
Which cures, and which can kill.
The waxen Palace of the Be,
We seeking will surprise,
The curious workmanship to see,
Of her full laden thighs.
We Will suck the sweets out of the Comb,
And make the gods repine:
As they do feast in Jove's great room,
To see with what we dine.
Yet when there haps a honey fall,
We Will lick the sirupt leaves;
And tell the Bees that their's is gall,
To this upon the Greaues,
The nimble Squirrell noting here,
Her mossy Dray that makes,
And laugh to see the lusty Dear
Come bounding ore the brakes,
The spiders Web to watch we will stand,
And when it takes the Be,
We Will help out of the Tyrants hand,
The Innocent to free.
Sometime we will angle at the Brook,
The freckled Trout to take,
With silken Worms, and bayte the hook,
Which him our prey shall make,
Of meddling with such subtle tools,
Such dangers that enclose,
The Morrall is that painted Fools,
Are caught with silken shows.
And when the Moon does once appear,
We Will trace the lower grounds,
When Fayries in their Ringlets there,
Do dance their nightly Rounds,
And have a Flock of Turtle Doves,
A guard on us to keep,
As witness of our honest loves,
To watch us till we sleep.
Which spoke I felt such holy fires,
To ouerspred my breast,
As lent life to my chaste desires,
And gave me endless rest.
By Cynthia thus do I subsist,
On earth Heavens only pride,
Let her be mine, and let who list,
Take all the world beside.
FINIS.
THE SHEPHERDS SIRENA.
DOrilus in sorrows deep,
Autumn waxing old and chill,
As he sat his Flocks to keep,
Underneath an easy hill;
Chanced to cast his eye aside,
On those fields, where he had seen,
Bright Sirena, Natures pride,
Sporting on the pleasant green:
To whose walks the Shepherds often,
Came her god-like foot to find,
And in places that were soft,
Kissed the print there left behind,
Where the path which he had troad,
Has thereby more glory gayn'd,
Then in Heaven that milky rode,
Which with Nectar Hebe stained:
But bleake Winters boystrous blasts,
Now their fading pleasures chid,
And so filled them with his wastes,
That from sight her steps were hid.
Silly Shepherd sad the while,
For his sweet Syrena gone,
All his pleasures in exile:
Laid on the cold earth alone,
Whilst his gamesome cur-tayld Curre,
With his mirthlesse Master plays,
Striving him with sport to stir,
As in his more youthful days;
Dorilus his Dog does chide,
Lays his well-tuned Bagpipe by,
And his Sheepe-hooke casts aside,
There (quoth he) together lie,
When a Letter forth he took,
Which to him Syrena writ,
With a deadly downe-cast look,
And thus fell to reading it.
Dorilus my dear (quoth she)
Kind companion of my woe,
Though we thus divided be,
Death cannot divorce us so:
Thou whose bosom has been still
The Only closet of my care,
And in all my good and ill;
Ever had thy equal share:
Might I win thee from thy Fold,
Thou should come to visit me,
But the Winter is so cold,
That I fear to hazard thee:
The wild waters are waxt hie,
So they are both deaf and dumb,
Loved they thee so well as I,
They would ebb when thou should come,
Then my coat with light should shine,
^urer then the Vest^ll fire:
Nothing here but should be thine,
That thy heart can well desire:
Where at large we will relate,
From what cause our friendship grew,
And in that the varying Fate,
Since we first each other knew:
Of my heavy p^ssed plight,
As of many a future fear,
Which except the silent night,
None but only thou shall hear;
My sad heart it shall relieve,
When my thoughts I shall disclose,
For thou can not choose but grieve,
When I shall recount my Woes;
There is nothing to that friend,
To whose close vncranied breast,
We our secret thoughts may send.
And there safely let it rest:
And thy faithful counsel may
My distressed case assist,
Sad af^liction else may sway
Me a woman as it list:
Hither I would have thee haste,
Yet would gladly have thee stay,
When those dangers I forecast,
That may meet thee by the way,
Do as thou shall think it best,
Let thy knowledge be thy guide,
Live thou in my constant b^e^
Whatsoever shall betide.
He her letter having red,
Puts it in his Scrip again,
Looking like a man half dead,
By her kindness strangely slain;
And as one who inly knew,
Her distressed present state,
And to her had still been true,
Thus does with himself delate.
I will not thy face admire,
Admirable though it be,
Nor thine eyes whose subtle fire,
So much wonder win in me:
But my marvel shall be now,
(And of long it has bin so,)
Of all woman kind that thou
Were ordained to taste of vvoe;
To a beauty so divine,
Paradise in little done,
O that fortune should assign,
Ought, but what thou well might shun,
But my counsels such must be,
(Though as yet I them conceal)
By their deadly wound in me,
They thy hurt must only heal,
Could I give what thou doo'st crave,
To that pass thy state is grown,
I thereby thy life may save,
But am sure to loose mine own,
To that joy thou do conceive.
Through my he^^^ the way does lie,
Which in two for thee must cleave,
Lest that thou should go awry,
Thus my death must be a toy,
Which my pensive breast must cover;
Thy beloved to enjoy,
Must be taught thee by thy Lover,
Hard the choice I have to choose,
To my self if friend I be,
I must my Syrena loose,
If not so, she loses me.
Thus whilst he does cast about,
What therein were best to do,
Nor could yet resolve the doubt,
Whether he should stay or go,
In those Fields not far away,
There was many a frolike Swain,
In fresh Russets day by day,
That kept Reuells on the plain,
Nimble Tom, surnamed the Tup,
For his Pipe without a peer:
And could tickle Trenchmore up,
As it would joy your heart to hear,
Ralph as much renownd for skill,
That the Taber touched so well:
For his Gittern, little Gill,
That all other did excel,
Rock and Rollo every way,
Who still led the Rusticke Ging,
And could troule a Roundelay,
That would make the Fields to ring,
Collin on his Shalme so clear,
Many a high*pit^ht note that had,
and could make the Ecchos near,
^hout as they were waxen mad,
Many a lusty Swain beside,
that for naught but pleasure cared,
^auing Dorilus espied,
and with him knew how it fared,
^hought from him they would remove,
^his strong melancholy fit,
Or so, should it not behoue,
Quite to put him out of's wit;
Having learnt a Song, which h^e,
^ometime to Sirena sent,
^ull of Iollity and glee,
When the Nymph lived near to Trent,
^hey behind him softly got,
^ying on the earth along,
and when he suspected not,
^hus the Iouiall Shepherds song,
Near to the Silver Trent,
Syrena dwells,
^hee to whom Nature lent
All that excels:
^y which the Muses late,
And the neat Graces,
^aue for their greater state,
Taken their places:
^wisting an Anadem,
Wherewith to Crown her,
^s it belonged to them
Most to renown her.
Cho: On thy Bancke,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swannes sing her,
And with their Music,
Along let them bring her.
Tagus and Pact^lus
are to thee Debtor,
Nor for their gould to us,
are they the better:
Henceforth of all the rest,
be thou the River,
Which as the daintiest,
puts them down ever,
For as my precious one,
o'r thee does travel,
She to Pearl Paragon
turns thy gravel.
Cho: On thy Bancke,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swanns sing her,
And with their Music
along let them bring her,
Our mournful Philomell,
that rarest Tuner,
Henceforth in Aperi^^
shall wake the sooner,
And to her shall complain,
from the thick cover,
Redoubling every strain
over and over:
For when my Love too long
her chamber keeps;
As though it suffered wrong,
the morning weepeth,
^^o: On thy Bank,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swannes sing her,
And with their Music,
along let them bring her.
Often have I seen the Sun,
to do her honor,
Fix himself at his noone,
to look upon her,
And has guilt every Grove,
every Hill near her,
With his flames from above,
striving to cheer her,
And when she from his sight
has her self turned,
He as it had been night,
In Clouds has mourned:
^^o: On thy Bancke,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swannes sing her
And with their Music,
along let them bring her,
The Verdant Meades are seene^
when she does view them,
In Fresh and gallant Green,
straight to renew them,
And every little Grass
broad it self spreads,
Proud that this bony Less,
upon it treads:
Nor flower is so sweet
In this large Cincture,
But it upon her feet
Leaves some Tincture,
Cho: On thy Bancke
In a Rank,
Let thy Swanes sing her,
And with their Music
along let them bring her.
The Fishes in the Flood,
when she does Angle,
For the hook strive a good
Them to entangle;
And leaping on the Land,
from the clear water,
Their Scales upon the sand
lauishly scatter;
Therewith to paue the mould
whereon she passes,
So her self to behold,
as in her glasses.
Cho: On thy Bank,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swanns sing her,
And with their Music,
along let them bring her,
When she looks out by night,
The Stars stand gazing,
Like Comets to our sight,
Fearfully blazing,
As wondering at her eyes,
with their much brightness,
Which so amaze the skies,
dimming their lightness,
The raging Tempests are Calm,
when she speaks,
Such most delightsome ba^me,
from her lips breaks.
Cho: On thy Bank,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swanns sing her,
And with their Music, etc.
In all our Brittany
there is not a fayrer,
Nor can you fit any:
should you compare her.
Angels her eyelids keep;
all hearts surprising,
Which look whilst she does sleep
like the Suns rising:
She alone of her kind,
knows true measure,
And her unmatched mind
is Heavens treasure:
Cho: On thy Bancke,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swannes sing her,
And with their Music,
Along let them bring her.
Fair Done and Darwine clear
boast ye your beauties,
To Trent your Mistres here
yet pay your duties,
My love was higher borne
toward the full Fountains,
Yet she does Mooreland scorn,
and the Peake Mountains;
Nor would she none should dream,
where she abides,
Humble as is the stream,
Which by her slydeth,
Cho: On thy Bancke,
In a Rank,
Let thy Swanns sing her,
And with their Music
along let them bring her,
Yet my poor Rusticke Muse,
nothing can move her,
Nor the means I can use,
though her true Lover,
Many a long Winters night
have I waked for her.
Yet this my piteous plight,
nothing can stir her,
All thy Sands silver Trent
down to the Humber,
The sighs that I have spent
Never can number.
Cho: On thy Bancke
In a Rank,
Let thy Swans sing her,
And with their Music
along let them bring her.
Taken with this sudden Song,
Least for mirth when he does look,
His sad heart more deeply stong,
Then the former care he took,
At their laughter and amazed,
For a while he sat aghast,
But a little having gazed,
Thus he them bespake at last.
Is this time for mirth (quoth he)
To a man with grief oppressed,
^infull wretches as you be,
May the sorrows in my breast,
^ight upon you one by one,
and as now you mock my woe,
^hen your mirth is turned to moan,
May your like then serve you so.
When one Swain among the rest,
Thus him merrily bespake,
Get thee up thou arrant beast,
Fits this season love to make?
Take thy Sheephooke in thy hand,
Clap thy Curre and set him on,
For our fields it is time to stand,
Or they quickly will be gone.
Rougish Swinheards that repine,
At our Flocks, like beastly Clownes,
Swear that they will bring their Swine,
And will wroote up all our Downs:
They their Holly whips have braced,
And tough Hazell goades have got;
Soundly they your sides will baste,
If their courage fail them not,
Of their purpose if they speed,
Then your Bagpipes you may burn,
It is neither Droane nor Reed
Shepherd, that will serve your turn,
Angry Olcon sets them on,
And against us part does take,
Ever since he was out-gone,
Offering Rymes with us to make,
Yet if so our Sheep-hookes hold,
Dearly shall our Downs be bought,
For it never shall be told.
We our Sheepe-walkes sold for naught,
And we here have got us dogs,
Best of all the Western breed,
Which though Whelps shall lug their Hogs,
Till they make their ears to bleed:
Therefore Shepherd come away;
When as Dorilus arose,
Whistles Cut-tayle from his play,
And along with them he goes.
FINIS.
THE MOON- CALFE.
Stultorum plena sunt omnia.
Help Neighbors help, for Gods sake need*
come with speed,
For of your help there never was such
Midwiues man* have and dres ye as ye run,
Either come quickly, or we are al undone,
The World's in labor, her throws come so thick,
That with the pa^gs she is waxt stark lunntick:
But whither, whither, one was heard to cry:
She that called thus, does presently reply;
Do ye not see in every street and place,
The general world now in a piteous case,
Up got the Gossips, and for very have,
Some came without shoes, some came all vnlac'd,
As she had first appointed them, and found
The World in labor, dropped into a swound;
Wallowing she lay, like to a boystrous hulke,
Dropsied with ryots, and her big-swolne balke,
Stuffed with infection, rottenness, and stench;
Her blood so fierd, that nothing might it quench,
But the Aspes poison, which stood by her still,
That in her drought she often used to swill;
Clothed she was in a Fools coat, and cap,
Of rich imbroydered Silks, and in her lap,
A sort of paper Puppets, Gawdes and Toys,
Trifles scarce good enough for Girls and Boys,
Which she had dandled, and with them had played,
And of this trash her only God had made.
Out and alas (quoth one) the rest among,
^ doubt me Neighbors, we have stayed too long:
Pluck off your Rings, lay me your bracelets by;
Fall to your business, and that speedily,
Or else I doubt, her spirits consume so fast,
That ever the birth, her strength will quite be past:
But when more wistly they did her behold,
There was not one (that once) durst be so bold
As to come near her, but stood all amazed,
Each upon other silently and gazed:
When as her belly they so big do see,
As if a Tun within the same should be,
And heard a noise and rumbling in her womb,
As at the instant of the general doom:
Thunder and Earthquakes raging, and the Rocks
Tubling down from their scyts, like mighty blocks,
Rolled from huge mountains, such a noise they make,
As though in sunder heavens huge Axtree brake;
They either Poles, their heads together pasht,
And all again into the Chaos dashed;
Some of slight judgment that were standing by,
Said, it was nothing but a Timpany:
Others said, sure she humane help did want,
And had conceived by an Elephant;
Or some Sea Monster, of a horrid shape,
Committed with her by some violent rape:
Others more wise, and noting very well,
How her huge womb did past all compass swell,
Said certainly (if that they might confess her)
It would be found some Devil did possess her.
Thus while they stood, and knew not what to do,
Women (quoth one) why do you trifle so:
I pray you think but wherefore ye came hither,
Shall womb and burden perish both together:
Bring forth the Birth-stoole, no, let it alone,
She is so far beyond all compass grown:
Some other new devise us needs must sted,
Or else she never can be brought to bed.
Let one that has some execrable spell,
Make presently her entrance into hell: The Furies fetcha from hell to bring
the World to ^^d.

Call Hecate, and the damned Furies hither,
And try if they will undertake together:
To help the sick World; one is out of hand
Dispatched for hell, who by the dread command
Of powerful Charms, brought Hecate away,
Who knowing her business from herself does lay
That sad aspect, she wont to put on there,
In that black Empire; and does now appear,
As she is Lucina giving strength and aid,
In birth to women; mild as any Maid,
Full of sweet hope her brow seemed, and her eyes
Darting fresh comfort, like the morning skies. A description of the furies

Then came the Furies with their bosoms bare,
Save somewhat covered with their Snaky hair,
In wreathes contorted, mumbling hellish Charms,
Up to the elbowes naked were their Arms,
Megera eld'st of this damned Femall Fiends,
Gnawing her wrists, biting her fingers ends,
Entered the first; Tisiphone the next,
As to revenge her sister thoroughly vexed,
In one hand bare a whip, and in the other,
A long sharp knife; the third which seem to smother,
Her manner of revenge, cast such an eye,
As well near turned to stone all that stood by,
Her name Alecto, which no plague does rue,
Nor never leaves them whom she does pursue.
The women pray the goddess now to stand,
Auspicious to them, and to lend her hand
To the sick World, which willingly she granted;
But at the sight, as altogether danted,
From her clear face the sprightly vigor fled,
And but she saw the Women hard bested
Out she had gone, not one glance back had shot,
Till heaven or hell she o'r her head had got,
Yet she her self retires, next to the door,
The Gossips worse then ever they were before,
At their wits end, know not which way to take,
At length the World beginning to awake,
Out of the trance, in which she lay as dead,
And somewhat raising her vnweeldy head,
To bright Lucina called for help, that she,
Now in her travel would propitious be,
The Goddess not from feeling of her woe,
Only to see with what the World might go,
As she is draded Hicate, having power,
Of all that keep hells ugly* Balefull Bower,
Commands the Furies to step in and aid her,
And be the Midwiues, till they safe had laid her,
To do whose pleasure as they were about,
A sturdy Huswife pertly stepping out,
Cries hold a while, and let the queen alone,
It is no matter let her lie and groan:
Hold her still to it we will do the best we can,
To get out of her, certainly the man,
Which ownes the Bastard, for there is not a Nation,
But has with her committed fornication:
And by her base and common prosti^ution,
She came by this unnatural pollution;
There is a mean for women thus abused.
Which at this time may very well be used:
That in this case when people do desire,
To know the truth, yet doubtful of the Sire,
When as the woman most of life does doubt her,
In grievous throws; to those that are about her,
He that is then at the last cast disclosed,
The natural Father is to be supposed:
And the just law does faithfully decide,
That for the nursing he is to provide:
Therefore let us see, what in her pangs she will say,
Lest that this Bastard on the Land we lay:
They liked her counsel, and their help denyde,
And bad her lie and languish till she did;
Unless to them she truly would confess,
Who filled her belly with this foul excess.
Alas (quoth she) the Devil dressed me thus, ^^e Moone^lfe beg ^t the devil.

A midst my Riot, whilst that Incubus
Wrought on my weakness, and by him beguilde,
He only is the Father of the child.
His Instrument my Apish imitation,
Of every monstrous and prodigeous fashion,
Abused my weakness: women it was she,
Who was the Bawd betwixt the Fiend and me:
That this is true, it on my death I take,
Then help me women even for pitties sake, The prodigious signs that foreran
the birth of the Moone-Calfe.

When ominus signs to show themselves began,
That now at hand this monstrous birth fore-ran:
About at noone flew the affrighted Owl,
And dogs in corners set them down to howl:
Bitches and Wolves these fatal signs among,
Brought forth most monstrous and prodigious young
And from his hight the earth refreshing Sun,
Before his hour his golden head does run,
Far under us, in doubt his glorious eye,
Should be polluted with this Prodigy,
A Panique fear upon the people grew,
But yet the cause, there was not one that knew,
When they had heard this; a short tale to tell,
The Furies straight upon their business fell,
And long it was not ere there came to light,
The most abhorrid, the most fearful sight,
That ever eye beheld, a birth so strange,
That at the view, it made their looks to change;
Women (quoth one) stand off, and come not near it
The Devil if he saw it, sure would fear it;
For by the shape, for ought that I can gather,
The child is able to affright the Father;
Out cries another, now for Gods sake hide it,
It is so ugly we may not abide it:
The birth is double, and grows side to side,
That humane hand it never can divide; A description of the Moon* Calfe.

And in this wondrous sort as they be Twins;
Like Male and Female they be Androgines,
The Man is partly Woman, likewise she
Is partly Man, and yet in face they be,
Full as prodigious, as in parts; the Twinne,
That is most man, yet in the face and skin,
Is all mere woman, that which most does take
From weaker woman: Nature seems to make
A man in show, thereby as to define,
A Fem'nine man, a woman Masculine;
Before bred, nor begot: a more strange thing,
Than ever Nile yet into light could bring,
Made as Creation meer^ly to despite,
Nor man, nor woman, scarce Hermophradite,
Affricke that is said, Mother of Monsters is,
Let her but show me such a one as this,
And then I will subscribe (to do her due)
And swear, that what is said of her is true,
Quoth one, it is monstrous, and for nothing fit,
And for a Monster, quick let us bury it:
Nay quoth another, rather make provision.
If possibly, to part it by incision,
For were it parted, for ought I can see,
Both man, and woman it may seem to be:
Nay quoth a third, that must be done with cost,
And were it done, our labor is but lost,
For when w'haue wrought the utmost that we can,
He Is too much woman, and she is too much man;
Therefore, as'tis a most prodigious birth,
Let it not live here to pollute the earth:
Gossip (quoth th'last) your reason I deny,
It Is more by law, then we can justify;
For Syer, and Dam, have certainly decreed*
That they will have more comfort of their seed:
For he begot it, and it was borne of her,
And out of doubt, they will their own prefer:
Therefore good women, better be advised,
"For precious things should not be lightly prized,
This Moon-Calfe borne under a lucky Fate,
May powerful prove in many a wealthy State,
And taught the tongues about some few years hence
As now vv'are all tongue, and but little sense:
It may fall out for any thing you know,
This Moon-Calfe may on great employments go:
When learned men for noble action fit.
Idly at home (unthought of once) may sit;
A Bawd, or a Proiector he may prove,
And by his purse so purchasing him love,
May be exalted to some thriuing Room,
Where seldom good men suffered are to come:
What will you say, hereafter when you see
The times so graceless and so mad to be;
That men their perfect humane shape shall fly,
To imitate this Beasts deformity:
Nay, when you see this Monster, which you now
Will hardly breath upon the earth allow;
In his caroch with four white Freezelands drawn,
And he as pyde and garish as the Pavvne,
With a set face; in which as in a book,
He thinks the World for grounds of state should look,
When to so^e greater one, whose might does awe him
He Is known a verier jade, then those that draw him,
Nay at the last, the very killing sight,
To see this Calfe (as virtue to despite)
Above just honest men his head to rear,
Nor to his greatness may they once come near,
Each ignorant Sott to Honor seeks to rise;
But as for virtue who did first devise
That title a reward for, he is to be,
As most contemned and despised she,
Goes unregarded, that they who should own her,
Dare not take notice ever to have known her;
And but that virtue, when she seems thrown
Lower then Hell, has power to raise her own.
Above the World and this her monstrous birth!
She long ever this had perished from the earth:
Her Fautors banished by her foes so hie,
Which look so big as they would scale the sky:
But seeing no help, why should I thus complain,
Then to my Moone-Calfe I return again,
By his dear Dam the World, so choicely bred,
To whom there is such greatness promised;
For it might well a perfect man amaze,
To see what means the Syer and Dam will raise,
T'exalt their Moon-Calfe, and him so to cherish,
That he shall thrive, when virtuous men shall perish*
The Drunkard, Glutton, or who does apply,
Himself to beastly sensuallity,
Shall get him many friends, for that there be,
Many in every place just such as he;
The evil love them that delight in ill,
Like have cleaned to their like, and ever will:
But the true virtuous man (God knows) has few,
They that his strait and harder steps pursue,
Are a small number, scarcely known of any;
"God has few friends, the Devil has so many,
But to return that ye may plainly see,
That such a one he likely is to be,
And that my words for truth that ye may try,
Of the Worlds Babe thus do I prophecy,
Mark but the more man of these monstrous Twins,
From his first youth, how tow'rdly he begins,
When he should learn, being learnd to leave the schole
This arrant Moon-Calfe, this most beastly fool,
^ust to our English Proverb shall be seen,
"Scarcely so wise at fifty, as fifteen:
And when himself he of his home can free,
He to the City comes, where then if he,
And the familiar butterflye his Page,
Can pass the Street, the Ordinary and Stage,
It is enough, and he himself thinks then,
To be the only absolut'st of men:
Then in his Cups you shall not see him shrink,
To the grand devil a carowse to drink.
Next to his whore he does himself apply,
And to maintain his gotish luxury,
^ates Capons Cookt at fifteen Crowns a piece,
With their fat bellies, stuffed with Amber greece,
And being to travel he sticks not to lay,
His Post Caroches still upon his way:
and in some six days journey does consume,
Ten pounds in Suckets and the Indian Fume:
For his Attire, then Foreign parts are sought,
He holds all vile in England that is wrought,
And into Flanders sen^eth for the nonce,
Twelve dozen of Shirts providing him at once,
Laid in the seames with costly Lace that be,
Of the Smock fashion whole below the knee,
Then bathes in milk, in which when he has bin,
He looks like one for the prepostrous sin,
Put by the wicked and rebellious Jews,
To be a Pathique in a Malekind Stevves.
With the ball of's foot the ground he may not feel^
But he must tread upon his toe and heel*
Dublet and Cloak, with Plush, and Velvet linde,
Only his head. piece, that is filled with Wind,
Rags, running Horses, Dogs, Drabs, Drink and dice,
The only things that he does hold in price:
Yet more then these, naught does him so delight,
As does his smooth-chind, plump-thigh'd, Catami^^
Sodom for her great sin that burning sanke,
Which at one draught the pit infernal drank,
Which that just God on earth could not abide,
Has she so much the Devils terrifide:
As from their seat, them well near to exile,
Has Hell new spewed her up after this while:
Is she new risen, and her sin again,
Embraced by beastly and outrageous men.
Nay more he jests at Incest, as therein,
There were no fault, counts sacrilege no sin:
His blasphemies he uses for his grace;
Wherewith he truth does often times outface:
He terms virtue madness, or mere folly,
He hates all high things, and prophanes all holly.
Where is thy thunder god, art thou asleep?
Or to what suffering hand give thou to keep
Thy wrath and vengeance; where is now the strength
Of thy Almighty arm, fails it at length?
Turn all the Stars to Comets, to out stare
The Sun at noone-tide, that he shall not dare
To look but like a G^oworme, for that he
Can without melting these damnations see.
But this I Will leave, lest I my pen defile:
Yet to my Moon-Calfe keep I close the while,
Who by some knave, persuaded he has wit,
When like a brave Fool, he to utter it,
Dare with a desperate boldness roughly pass
His censure on those books, which the poor Ass
Can never reach to, things from darkness sought,
That to the light with blood and sweat were brought:
And takes upon him those things to control,
Which should the brainelesse Idiot sell his soul,
All his dull race, and he can never buy
With their base pelf, his glorious industry;
Knowledge with him is idle, if it strain
Above the compass of his yestie brain:
Nor knows men's worths but by a second hand,
For he himself does nothing understand;
He would have something, but what it is he shows not
What he would speak, nay what to think he knows not
He nothingmore the^ truth and knowledge loathes
And nothing he admires of man's but clothes.
Now for that I thy dotage dare mislike*
And seem so deep, into thy soul to strike;
Because I am so plain thou likd'st not me,
Why know, poor Slave, I no more think of thee,
Then of the Ordure that is cast abroad,
I hate thy vice more then I do a Toade,
Poor is the spirit that fawnes on thy applause;
Or seeks for suffrage from thy Barbarous Jaws.
Misfortune light on him, that ought does way,
Ye sons of Beliall, what ye think or say:
Who would have thought whilst wit sought to advance,
It self so high, damned beastly ignorance
Under the cloak of knowledge should creep in,
And from desert should so much credit win:
But all this poisonous froth Hell has let fly,
In these last days, at noble Poesy,
That which has had both in all times and places,
For her much worth, so sundry sovereign graces;
The language, which the Spheres and Angels speak,
In which their mind they to poor Mortals break,
By Gods great power, into rich souls infused,
By every Moone-Calfe lately thus abused:
Should all hells black inhabitants conspire,
And more unheard of mischief to them hyer,
Such as high Heaven were able to affright,
And on the noone sted bring a double night:
Then they have done, they could not more disgrace her,
As from the earth (even) utterly terace her:
What Princes loved, by Peasants now made hateful,
In this our age so damnably ungrateful:
And to give open passage to her fall,
It is devised to blemish her withal,
That th'hideous braying of each Barbarous Ass,
In Printed Letters freely now must pass,
In Accents so untuneable and vile,
With other Nations was might damn our I Will,
If so our tongue they truly understood,
And make them think our brains were merely m^a,
To make her vile, and ugly to appear,
Whose natural beauty is Divinely clear;
That on the Stationers Stall, who passing looks,
To see the multiplicity of Books,
That pester it, may well believe the Press,
Sick of a surfeit spu'd with the excess:
Which breeds such a dullness through the land,
Among those one tongue which only understand,
Which did they read those sinewie Poems writ,
That are material relishing of wit:
Wise policy, Morallity, or Story,
Well purtraying the Ancients and their glory,
These blinded Fools, on their base Carrion feeding,
Which are (in truth) made ignorant by reading,
In little time would grow to be ashamed,
And blush to hear these lowzie Pamphlets named,
Which now they study, naught but folly learning,
Which is the cause that they have no discerning,
The good from bad, this ill, that well to know,
Because in ignorance they are nourished so:
Who for this hateful trash should I condemn
They that do utter, or Authorize them:
O that the Ancients should so careful be,
Of what they did impresse, and only we
Loosely at random, should let all things fly,
Though against the Muses it be blasphemy:
But yet to happy spirits, and to the wise,
All is but foolish that they can devise,
For when contempt of Poesy is proudest,
Then have the Muses ever sung the lowdest,
But to my Calfe, who to be counted prime,
According to the fashion of the time,
Him to associate some Buffoon does get,
Whose brains he still with much expense must whet,
And ever bear about him as his guest,
Who coming out with some ridiculous jest,
Of one (perhaps) a god that well might be,
If but compared with such an Ass as he,
His Patron rores with laughter, and does cry,
Take him away, or presently I dye,
Whilst that Knaue-foole which well himself does know
Smiles at the Coxecombe, which admires him so:
His time and wealth, thus lewdly that does spend,
As it were lent him to no other end:
Until this Moone-Calfe, this most drunken puff,
Even like a Candle burnt unto the snuff:
Fierd with surfeit, in his own grease fries,
Sparkles a little, and then stinking dies.
The wealth his Father by extortion won,
Thus in the spending helps to damn the Son,
And so falls out indifferently to either,
Whereby in hell they justly meet together;
And yet the World much joys in her behalf,
And takes no little pleasure in her Calfe,
Had this declining time the Freedom now,
Which the brave Roman once did it allow:
With wire and Whipcord ye should see her paid,
Till the luxurious Whore should be afraid
Of prostitution and such lashes given,
To make her blood spirt in the face of Heaven;
That men by looking upward as they go,
Should see the plagues laid on her here below,
But now proceed we with the other Twin,
Which is most woman who shall soon begin
To show her self; no sooner got the Teenes,
But her own natural beauty she disdaines,
With Oils and Broathes most venomous and base,
She plasters over her well-fauoured face;
And those sweet veins by nature rightly placed,
Where with she seemed that white skin to have laced
She soon does alter; and with fading blew,
Blanching her bosom, she makes others new,
Blotting the curious workmanship of nature;
That e're she be arrived at her full stature,
E're she be dressed, she seems aged grown,
And to have nothing on her of her own:
Her black, brown, aburne or her yellow hair,
Naturally lovely, she does scorn to wear,
It must be white to make it fresh to show,
And with compounded meal she makes it so:
With fumes and powdrings raising such a smoke,
That a whole Region able were to choke:
Whose stench might fright a Dragon from his den;
The sun yet never exhaled from any Fen
Such pestilentious vapors as arise,
From their French powderings and their Mercuries,
Ireland, if thou will able be alone,
Of thine own power to drive out thy Tyrone*
By heaping up a mass of Coin together*
Sheere thy old Wolves, and send their Fle^ces hither,
Thy white Goats hair, Wales, dearer will be sold,
Then silks of Naples, or then Thread of gold,
Our Water-dogs, and slands here are shorn;
White haeyre so much of Women here is worn,
Nay more then this, they will any thing endure,
And with large sums they stick not to procure
Hair from the dead yea and the most unclean,
To help their pride they nothing will disdain.
Then in attyring her, and in her sleep,
The days three parts she exercised does keep,
And in ridiculous visits she does spend,
The other fourth part to no other end;
But to take note how such a Lady lies,
And to gleane from her some deformities,
Which for a grace she holds and till she get,
She thinks her self to be but counterfeit.
Our Merchants from all parts twixt either Inde,
Cannot get silk to satisfy her mind:
Nor natures perfect'st pattern can suffice,
The curious draughts for her embroderies:
She thinks her honor utterly is lost,
Except those things do infinitely cost,
Which she does wear; nor think they can her dre^^
Except she have them in most strange excess,
And in her fashion she is likewise thus,
In every thing she must be monstrous:
Her Picadell above her crown up bears,
Her Fardingale is set above her ears:
Which like a broad sail with the wind does swell,
To drive this fair Hulke headlong into hell.
After again, note, and you shall her see,
Shorn like a man, and for that she will be
Like him in all, her congies she will make,
With the man's curtsie, and her hat off take,
Of the French fashion, and wear by her side,
Her sharp Stillato in a Ryband tide,
Then gird he self close to the paps she shall,
Shaped, breast and buttocke, but no waste at all.
But of this she Calfe now to cease all strife,
^le by example lim her to the life,
Not long agone it was my chance to meet,
With such a Fury, such a female spright,
As never man saw yet, except twere she,
And such a one as I'may never see
Again I pray: but where I will not name,
For that the place might so partake her shame:
But when I saw her rampant to transcend
All womenhead, I thought her (sure) a friend,
And to my self my thoughts suggested thus,
That she was gotten by some Incubus,
And so remembering an old woman's tale,
As she sat dreaming o'^ a pot of Ale,
that on a time she did the Devil meet,
and knew him only by his cloven feet:
^o did I look at hers, where she did go,
^o see if her feet, were not cloven so*
Ten long-tongu'd Tapsters in a common Inn,
When as the Guests to flock apace begin,
When vp-staire one, downe-staire another hyes,
With squeaking clamours, and confused cries;
Never did yet make such a noise as she,
That I dare boldly justify, that he,
Who but an hour her loud clacke can endure,
May undisturbed, safely and secure,
Sleep under any Bells, and never hear,
Though they were rung the clappers at his ear,
And the long'st night with one sweet sleep be guile
As though he dreamt of Music all the while.
The very sight of her, when she does rore,
Is able to strike dumb the boldest Whore,
That ever traded: she will not stick to tell,
All in her life that ever her befell;
How she has layne, with all degrees, and ages,
Her Plow-boyes, Scullians; Lackies, and some Pages*
And swear when we have said all that we can,
That there is nothing worth a pin in man,
And that there is nothing does so please her mind,
As to see Mares, and Horses, do their kind;
And when she is Tipsey, how so ever to offend,
Then all her speech to Bawdry does intend:
In women's secrets, and she will name ye all
Read to the Midwiues at the Surgeons Hall.
Were the poor Coxecombe, her dull husband de^^
He that durst then this female Moone-Calfe wed*
Should quite put down the Roman which once leep^
Into the burning Gulf, thereby to keep
His Country from devouring with the flame:
Thus leave we her, of all her sex the shame.
Amongst the rest, at the Worlds labor there,
For good old Women, most especial were,
Which had been jolly Wenches in their days,
Through all the Parish, and had borne the praise,
For merry Tales: one Mother Red-Cap hight,
And Mother Howlet somewhat ill of sight,
For she had hurt her eyes with watching late;
Them Mother Bumby a mad iocund Mate
As ever Gossipt, and with her there came
Old Gammer Gurton, a right pleasant Dame,
As the best of them; being thus together,
The business done for which they had come thither:
Qaoth Jolly Mother Red-Cap at the last,
I see the night is quickly like to waste,
And since the World so kindly now is laid,
And the child safe, which made us all afraid:
Let Us have a night on it Wenches, hang up sorrow,
And what ^leepe wants now, take it up to morrow,
Stir up the fire, and let us have our Ale,
And o'r our Cups, let us each one tell her Tale:
My honest Gossips, and to put you in,
I Will break the Ice, and thus does mine begin.
There was a certain Prophecy of old, Mother Red-Cap^ tal^.

Which to an I Will had anciently been told,
That after many years were com'n and gone,
Which then came out, and the set time came on;
Nay, more it told the very day and hour,
Wherein should fall so violent a shower;
That it new Rivers in the earth should wear,
And Dorps and Bridges quite away should bear:
But where this I Will is, that I cannot show,
Let them enquire that have desire to know:
The Story leaves out that, let it alone;
And Gossip with my Tale I will go on:
Yet what was worse the Prophecy this spoke,
(As to warn men defense for it to make)
That upon whom one drop should chance to light,
They should of reason be deprived quite,
This Prophecy had many an Age been heard,
But not a man did it one pin regard;
For all to folly did themselves dispose,
(On veryer Calves the Sun yet never rose)
And of their laughter made it all their Theme,
By terming it the drunken Wizards dream:
There was one honest man amongst the rest,
That bare more perfect knowledge in his breast;
And to himself his private hours had kept,
To talk with God, whilst others drunk or slept,
Who in his mercy to this man revealed*
That which in Justice he had long concealed
From the rude Heard but let them still run on
The ready way to their destruction.
This honest man the Prophecy that noted,
And things therein more curiously had quoted,
Found all those signs were truly come to pass,
That should fore*showe this rain, and that it was
Nearly at hand; and from his depth of skill,
Had many a time fore-warned them of their ill,
^^d Preached to them this Deluge (for their good)
^^to the old world Noe did before the Flood,
^^t lost his labor, and since it was in vain,
^o talk more to those Idiots of the rain,
^^e let them rest: and silent sought about,
^here he might find some place of safety out,
^o shroud himself in, for right well he knew,
that from this shower, which then began to brew,
^^o roof of Tyle, or thatch he could come in,
^ould serve him from being wet to the bare skin.
^^ length this man bethought him of a Cave,
^^ a huge Rock which likely was to save
Him from the shower, upon a hill so steep,
^s up the same a man could hardly creep;
^o that except Noah's flood should come again,
^^e never could be raught by any rain;
^hither at length, though with much toil he clome
^istning to hear what would thereof become.
It was not long ever he perceived the skies
^etled to rain, and a black cloud arise,
those foggy grosnesse so opposed the light,
^s it would turn the noone-sted into night,
When the wind came about with all his power,
unto the tail of this approaching shovver,
And it to lighten presently began;
Quicker then thought, from East to West that ran:
The Thunder following did so fiercely rave,
And through the thick clouds with such fury drove
As Hell had been set open for the nonce,
And all the Devils heard to rore at once:
And soon the Tempest so outrageous grew,
That it whole hedgerowes by the roots up threw
So wondrously prodigious was the weather,
As heaven and earth had meant to go together:
And down the shower impetuously does fall,
Like that which men the Hurricano call:
As the grand Deluge had been come again,
And all the world should perish by the rain,
And long it lasted; all which time this man
Hid in the Cave does in his judgment scan,
What of this inundation would ensue,
For he knew well the Prophecy was true:
And when the shower was somewhat ouerpast;
And that the sky began to clear at last:
To the Caves mouth he softly put his ear,
To listen if he any thing could hear:
What harm this storm had done, and what became
Of those that had been sowsed in the same,
No sooner he that nimble Organ lent,
To the Caves mouth; but that incontinent
There was a noise as if the Garden bears
And all the Dogs together by the ears,
And those of Bedlam had enlarged bin,
And to behold the bayting had come in:
Which when he heard, he knevv too well alas,
That what had been foretold, was come to pass;
Within himself good man, he reasoned thus:
It Is for our sins, this plague is fallen on us.
Of all the rest, though in my wits I be,
(I thank my Maker) yet it grieueth me,
^o see my Country in this piteous case;
^oe's me that ever they so wanted grace,
^t when as man once casts off virtue quite,
and does in sin and beastliness delight,
^e see how soon God turns him to a Sot:
^o show my self yet a true Patriot,
^e in amongst them, and if so that they
^e not a cursed of God, yet, yet I may,
^y wholesome counsel (if they can but hear)
^ake them as perfect as at first they were,
and thus resolved goes this good poor man down,
^hen at the entrance of the neighboring Town,
^e meets 2 woman with her buttocks bate,
^ot up a stride upon a wall eyd Mare,
^orunne a Horse-race and was like to ride
^uer the goodman; but he stepped aside;
and after her, another that bestroad
Horse of service, with a Lance she rode,
^rm'd, and behind her on a Pillian satt
^er frantique husband, in a broad brim'd Hat,
Mask and Safeguard; and had in his hand,
^^s mad Wives Distaffe for a rvding Wand:
^arse from these mad folk, had he gone so far,
^s strong man will easily pitch a Bar:
^^t that he found a Youth in Tissue brave,
^ daintier man one would not wish to have)
^as courting of a loathsome meazeled Sow,
^^d in his judgment swore he must allow
^^s the prime Beauty, that he ever saw,
^^s was she sued to (by that prating Daw)
Who, on a Dunghill in the loathsome gore
Had farrowed ten Pigs scarce an hour before,
At which this man in melancholy deep,
Burst into laughter, like before to weep,
Another fool, to fit him for the Weather,
Had armed his heels with Cork his head with feather
And in more strange and sundry colors clad,
Then in the Raine-bowe ever can be had,
Stalked through the streets, preparing him to fly,
Up to the Moon upon an Embassy,
Another seeing his drunken Wife disgorge
Her pamperd stomach, got her to a Forge,
And in her throat the Feauerous heat to quench
With the Smiths horn, was giving her a Drench:
One his next neighbor haltred had by force,
So frantique, that he took him for a Horse,
And to a Pond was leading him to drink;
It went beyond the wit of man to think,
The sundry frenzies that he there might see,
One man would to another married be:
And for the Curate taking the Town Bull,
Would have him knit the knot: another Gull
Had found an Ape was chained to a Stall,
Which he to worship on his knees does fall;
To do the like and does his Neighbors get,
Who in a Chair this ill-fac'd Munky set,
And on their shoulders lifting him on hie,
They in Procession bear him with a cry,
And him a Lord will have at least if not,
A greater man; another sort had got
about a Pedlar, who had lately heard,
^ow with the mad men of this I Will it fared:
and having nothing in his Pack but toys,
which none except mere mad men, and fond boys
^ould ever touch; thought verily that he
amongst these Bedlams, would a gayner be,
^r else loose all: scarce had he pitched his pack,
^re he could scarcely say, what do ye lack:
^t that they thronged about him with their money,
^s thick as Flies about a pot of honey:
^^me of these Lunaticks, these frantique Asses,
^^ue him Spurryalls for his farthing Glasses:
^here should you see another of these Cattle,
^i^e him a pound of filuer for a rattle;
and there another that would needsly scorse,
^costly Jewel for a Hobby* Horse:
^r Bells, and Babyes, such as children small,
^e ever used to solace them withal:
those they did buy at such a costly rate,
that it was able to subvert a State;
which when this wise and sober man beheld,
^^ very grief his eyes with tears were sweld.
^s, that ere I saw this day (quoth he)
^at I my Native countrymen should see
^ this state; when out of very zeal
^^th to his native earth, and common weal,
^ thrust amongst them, and thus frames his speech.
Dea^^ Country* men, I humbly ye beseech,
^are ^^ a little, and but mark me well,
^s, it ^^ not long since first ye fell,
Into this frenzy, these outrageous fits,
Be not I pray ye so out of your wits:
But call to mind th'ineuitable ill
Must fall on ye, if ye continue still
Thus mad and frantique: therefore be not worse,
Then your brute beasts to bring thereby a Curse
Upon your Nephews, so to taynt their blood,
That twenty Generations shall be wooed,
And this brave Land for wit that has bin famed,
The I Will of Idiots after shall be named:
Your brains are not so crazed, but leave this riot,
And it is no question, but with Temperate Diet,
And counsel of wise men, when they shall see
The desperate estate wherein you be:
But with such medicines as they will apply,
They Will quickly cure your grievous malady,
And as he would proceed with his Oration,
One of the chiefest of this ^edlam Nation:
Lays hold on him, and asks who he should be,
Thou fellow (quoth this Lord) where had we thee,
Come thou to preach to us that be so wise,
What will thou take upon thee to advise
Us of whom all now underneath the sky,
May well be seen to learn frugalitie:
Why surely honest fellow thou art mad,
Another standing by, swore that the had
Seen him in Bedlam fourteen years ago:
O quoth a third this fellow do I know,
This is an arrant Coxecomb, a mere Dizzard,
If ye remember, this is the same Wizzard,
Which took upon him wisely to fore tell
The shower so many years before it fell:
Whose strong effects being so strange and rare,
Has made us such brave creatures as we are:
When of this Nation all the frantique Route,
(...)ell into laughter the poor man about,
(...)ome made mouths at him, others as in scorn
With their forkt fingers pointed him the Horn:
They called him Ass, and Dolt, and bad him go
(...)among such Fools, as he himself was, who
(...)old not teach them: at which this honest man,
(...)inding that naught, but hate and scorn he wan
(...)among these Idiots, and their beastly kind,
(...)he poor small remnant of his life behind,
(...)etermineth to Solitude to give. The morali^y of mother Red-Caps tale.

(...)nd a true Hermit afterward to live,
The tale thus ended, Gossip by your leave;
(...)oath Mother Bumby, I do well perceive
(...)he morrall of your Story, which is this;
Correct me Dame, if I do judge amiss)
(...) first I Will tell you by this honest Ale,
(...)my conceit this is a pretty Tale;
(...)d if some hansome players would it take,
(sure) a pretty interlude would ^ake,
(...)t to the Morrall, this same mig^^y shower
(...)a plague sent by supernatural power,
(...)pon the wicked: for when God intends
(...)lay a curse on men's ungodly ends,
(...) understanding he does them deprive;
(...)hich taken from them up themselves they give
(...) beastliness, nor will he let them see*
The miserable estate wherein they be.
The Rock to which this man for safety climes,
The contemplation is of the sad times
Of the declining World; his counsels told
To the mad Route, to spoil and baseness sold,
Shows that from such no goodness can proceed,
Who counsels fools, shall never better speed.
Quoth Mother Red-Cap, you have hit it right:
(Quoth she) I know it Gossip, and to quite
Your tale; another you of me shall have,
Therefore a while your patience let me crave.
Out in the North toward Greeneland far away,
There was a Witch (as ancient Stories say)
As in those parts there many Witches be:
Yet in her craft above all other, she
Was the most expert, dwelling in an I Will,
Which was in compass scarce an English mile,
Which by her cunning she could make to floate
Whither she list, as though it were a Boat:
And where again she meant to have it stay,
There could she fix it in the deepest Sea:
She could sell Winds to any one that would
Buy them for money, forcing them to hold
What time she listed, tie them in a third,
Which ever as the Sea-farer undid,
They rose or scantled, as his Sails would drive,
To the same Port whereas he would ariue:
She by her Spells could make the Moon to stay,
And from the East she could keep back the day,
Raise Mists and Fogs that could Eclipse the light,
And with the noone-sted she could mix the night
Upon this I Will whereas she had abode,
Nature (God knows) but little cost bestowed:
Yet in the same, some Bastard creatures were,
(...)eldome yet seen in any place but there;
Half men, half Goat there was a certain kind,
(...)uch as we Satyrs purtray'd out do find,
Another sort of a most ugly shape;
A Bear in body and in face an Ape:
Other like Beasts yet had the feet of Fowls,
That Demy-Vrchins were, and Demy-Owles:
Besides there were of sundry other sorts,
But we will not stand too long on these reports.
Of all the rest that most resembled man,
Was an o'^ worn ill-fauoured Babian;
Which of all other, for that only he
Was full of tricks, as they are used to be
Him in her craft, so seriously she taught,
As that in little time she had him brought,
That nothing could before this Ape be set,
That presently he could not counterfeit;
(...)he learnt him medicines instantly to make
Him any thing whose shape he pleased to take:
And when this skill she had on him bestowed,
(...)he sent him for intelligence abroad.
Thus fully furnished, and by her sent out,
(...)ee went to practice all the World about,
(...)e like a Iipsey oftentimes would go,
(...)ll kind of Gibb'rish he had learnt to know,
(...)nd with a stick, a short string and a noose,
Would show the people tricks at fast and loose:
(...)ell folks their Fortunes, for he would find out
By slye inquiry, as he went about,
What chance this one he, or that she had proved
Whom they most hated, or whom most they loved,
And looking in their hands, as there he knew it,
Out of his skill would counterfeit to show it:
Sometimes he for a Mountebanke would pass,
And show you in a Crusible, or Glass;
Some rare extraction, presently and run,
Through all the cures that he therewith had done,
An Aspick still he carried in a poke,
Which he to bite him often would provoke,
And with an oil when it began to swell,
The deadly poison quickly could expel:
And many times a iugler he would be,
(A craftier knave there never was then he;)
And by a mist deceiving of the sight,
(As knavery ever falsifies the light)
He by his active nimblenesse of hand,
Into a Serpent would transform a Wand,
As those Egyptians, which by Magic thought,
Far beyond Moses wonders to have wrought,
There never was a subtilty devised,
In which this villain was not exercised.
Now from this Region where they dwelt, not (...)
There was a wise and learned Astronomer,
Who skillful in the Planetary hovvres,
The working knew of the Celestial powers,
And by their ill, or by their good aspect,
Men in their actions wisely could direct,
And in the black and gloomy Arts so skild,
That he (even) Hell in his subjection hild;
He could command the Spirits up from below,
And bind them strongly, till they let him know
All the dread secrets that belonged them to,
And what those did, with whom they had to do.
This Wizzard in his knowledge most profound,
Sitting one day the depth of things to sound;
For that the World was brought to such a pass,
That it well near in a confusion was,
For things set right, ran quickly out of frame,
And those awry to rare perfection came:
And matters in such sort about were brought,
That States were pusled almost beyond thought,
Which made him think (as he might very well)
There were more Devils then he knew in hell.
And thus resolves that he would cast about
In his best skill, to find the Engine out,
That wrought all this, and put himself therein:
When in this business long he had not bin;
But by the Spirits which he had sent abroad,
And in this work had every way bestowed;
He came to know this Foul Witch, and her factor,
The one the Plotter, and the other th'Actor,
Of all these stirs, which many a State had spoiled,
Whereby the World so long had been turmoyl'd,
Wherefore he thought it much did him behoue,
Out of the way this couple to remove;
Or (out of question) half the World e're long,
Would be divided, hers, and his among,
When turning over his most mystique books,
unto the secrets of his Art he looks,
And the earth, and The Air does with his Magiques fill,
That every place was troubled by his skill;
Whilst in his mind he many a thing reuolues,
Till at the last he with himself resolves;
One Spirit of his should take the Witches shape,
Another, in the person of the Ape,
Should be joined with him, so to prove by this,
Whether their power were less or more then his;
Which he performs, and to their task them sets,
When soon that Spirit, the Witch that counterfets,
Watched till he found her far abroad to be,
Into a place then of her home gets he:
And when the Babian came the news to bring
What he had done abroad, and every thing
Which he had plotted, how their business went,
And in the rest to know her dread intent,
Where she was wont to call him her dear son,
Her little play-feere and her pretty Bun:
Hug him, and swear he was her only joy;
Her very Hermes, her most dainty Boy,
O most strange thing* she changed her wonted cheer
And does to him most terrible appear:
And in most fearful shapes she does him threaten
With eager looks, as him she would have eaten,
That from her presence he was forced to fly,
As from his death, or deadly enemy.
When now the second which the shape does take
Of the Baboon, determining to make,
The like sport with him, his best time does watch,
When he alone the cursed Witch might catch;
And when her Factor farthest was remote,
Then he began to change his former note,
And where he wont to tell her pleasing stories,
Full of their Conquests, Triumphs* and their glories,
He turns his Tale, and to the Witch relates,
The strange reuolts of Tributary States,
Things go^ten back, which late they had for prize,
With new discoueries of their policies;
Disgusts and dangers that had crossed their cunning,
With sad portents, their ruin still forerunning;
That thus the Witch and the Baboon deceived
Of all their hopes, of all their joys bereaved,
As in deipaire do bid the world adue,
When as the Ape which weak and sickly grew,
On the cold earth his scuruy caryion lays,
And worn to nothing, ends his wretched days:
The filthy Hagg abhorring of the light,
Into the North past Thule takes her flight,
And in those deepes, past which no Land is found,
Her wretched self she miserably drowned.
The tale thus ended, mother Owl does take
Her turn, and thus to mother Bumby spoke;
The tale our Gossip Red-cap told before
You so well ridled that there can no more
Be said of it, and therefore as your due,
What have you done for her, I Will do for you. The morallity of mother Bumbyes
^al^

And thus it is, that same notorious Witch,
Is the ambition men have to be rich,
And Great, for which all faith aside they lay,
And to the Devil give themselves away,
The floating I Will where she is said to won,
The various courses are through which they run,
To get their ends, and by the Ape is meant,
Those damned Villains made the instrument
To their designs, that wondrous man of skill,
Sound counsel is, or rather if you will,
The Divine Justice, which does bring to ^ight,
The wicked plots not raught by common ^ight,
For though they never have so closely wrought,
Yet to confusion lastly they are brought,
Gossip, indeed, you have hit it to a hair,
And surely your Morality is rare,
Quoth Mother Bumby: Mother Owl replyde,
Come, come, I know I was not very wide,
Wherefore to quit your Tales, and make them three
My honest Gossips listen now to me.
There was a man* not long since dead* but he
Rather a Devil might accounted be:
For Judgment at her best could hardly scan,
Whither he were more Devil, or more man;
And as he was, he did himself apply
T'all kind of Witchcraft, and black Sorcery:
And for his humor naturally stood,
To Theft* to Rapine, and to shedding blood,
By those damned Hags with whom he was in grace,
And vsd to meet in many a secret place:
He learnt an herb of such a wondrous power,
That were it gathered at a certain hour,
(For nature for the same did so provide,
As though from knowledge gladly it to hide,
For at Sunset itself it did disclose,
And shut itself up, as the morning rose)
That with thrice saying a strange Magique spell,
Which but to him, to no man they would tell,
When as so ever that simple he would take,
It him a War-vvoolfe instantly would make,
Which put in practice he most certain proou'd,
When to a Forest he himself removed,
Through which there lay a plain and common rode
Which he the place chose for his chief abode,
And there this monster set him down to theeue,
Nothing but stolen goods might this fiend relieve;
No silly woman, by that way could pass,
But by this Woolfe she surely ravished was,
And if he found her flesh was soft and good,
What served for Lust, must also serve for food,
Into a Village he sometime would get,
And watching there (as for the purpose set)
For little children when they came to play,
The fattst he ever bore with him away;
And as the people often were wont to rise,
Following with Hubbubs and confused cries:
Yet was he so well breathed, and so light,
That he would still outstrip them by his flight:
And making straight to the tall Forest near,
Of the sweet flesh would have his Iunkets there.*
And let the Sheepheards do the best they could,
Yet would he venture often upon the fold:
And taking the fatt'st sheep he there could find:
Bear him away, and leave the dogs behind:
Nor could men keep, so much as Pig or Lamb,
But it no sooner, could drop from the Dam,
By hook or crook, but he would surely catch,
Though with their weapons all the Town should watch,
Amongst the rest there was a silly Ass,
That on the way by Fortune chanced to pass,
Yet (it was true) he in his time had bin
A very perfect man in shape* and skin:
But by a Witch envying his estate,
That had borne to him a most deadly hate,
Into this shape he was transform'e, and so,
From place to place, he wandered to and fro,
And often times was taken for a stray,
And in the Pinfold many a time he lay;
Yet held he still the reason that he had
When he was man, although he thus was clad
In a poor asses shape, wherein he goes,
And must endure what Fortune will impose.
Him on his way this cruel Woolfe does take,
His present pray determining to make,
He brayed* and ro^'d to make the people hear:
But it fell out, no creature being near,
The silly Ass when he had done his best,
Must walk the common way among the rest:
When toward his den the cruel Wolf him tugs,
And by the ears most terribly him lugs,
But as God would, he had no list to seed,
Wherefore to keep him till he should have need,
The silly creature utterly forlorn,
He brings into a Brake of Briars and Thorn,
And so entangles by the mane and tail,
That he might pluck, and struggle there, and hale,
Till his breath left him, unless by great chance
Some one might come for his deliverance.
At length the people grievously annoyed
By this vild Woolfe, so many that destroyed,
Determined a Hunting they would make,
To see if they by any means could take
This ravenous War Woolfe: and with them they bring,
Mastiffes, and Mungrells, all that in a string
Could be got out, or could but lug a Hog,
Ball, Eateall, Cuttaile, Blackfoot, Bitch, and Dog,
Bills, Batts and Clubs, the Angry men do bear,
The Women eager as their husbands were
With Spits and Fireforks, swear if they could catch him,
It should go hard but they would soon dispatch him
This subtle Woolfe by passengers that heard,
What forces thus against him were prepared,
And by the noise; that they were near at hand,
Thinking this Ass did nothing understand,
Goes down into a spring that was hard by,
(Which the Ass noted) and immediately,
He came out perfect man, his Wolves shape left,
In which so long he had committed theft.
The silly Ass, so wistly then did view him,
And in his fancy so exactly drew him,
That he was sure to own this thief again,
If he should see him among a thousand men,
This woolfe turned man, him instantly does shroud
In a near thicket, till the boystrous crowd,
Had somewhat past him, then he in does fall
Upon the Rear, not any of them all
Makes greater stir, nor seems to them to be
More diligent to find the Woolfe then he:
They beat each brake, and tuft o'r all the ground,
But yet the War-Woolfe was not to be found:
But a poor Ass entangled in the Briars,
In such strange sort, as every one desires
To see the manner, and each one does gather,
How he was fastened so, how he came thither,
The silly Ass yet being still in hold,
Makes all the means, that possibly he could,
To be let loose, he hummes, he kneeles, and cries,
Shakes his head, and turns up his eyes:
To move their pity: that some said, it was sure
This Ass had sense of what he did endure:
And at the last amongst themselves decreed
To let him loose; the Ass no sooner freed,
But out he goes the company among,
And where he saw the people thickst to throng,
There he thrusts in, and looks round about,
Here he runs in, and there he rusheth out;
That he was likely to have thrown to ground
Those in his way, which when the people found,
Though the poor Ass they seemed to dis^laine,
Followed him yet, to find what he should mean,
Until by chance that he this Villain met;
When he upon him furiously does set,
Fastening his teeth upon him with such strength,
That he could not be loosed, till at length
Railing them in, the people make a Ring,
Struck with the wonder of so strange a thing;
Whilst they are cadg'd contending whither can
Conquer, the Ass some cry, some cry the man:
Yet the ass dragged him, and still forward drue,
Toward the strange spring, which yet they never knew
Yet to what part the struggling seemed to sway,
The people made a lane, and gave them way,
At length the Ass had tug'd him near thereto,
The people wondering what he meant to do;
He seemed to show them with his foot the Well,
Then with an Asse-like noise he seemed to tell
The Story, now by pointing to the men,
Then to the Thief, then to the spring again,
At length waxt angry growing into passion;
Because they could not find his demonstration,
To Express it more, he l^apes into thespring,
When on the sudden, O most monstrous thing,
To change his shape he presently began,
And at an instant became perfect man,
Recovering speech, and coming forth accused,
The bloody murderer, who had so abused
The honest people, and such harm had done;
Before them all, and presently begun
To show them in what danger he had bin,
And of this Woolfe, the cruelty and sin;
How he came changed again as he had proved:
Whereat the people being strangely moved,
Some on the head, some on the back do clap him,
And in their arms, with shouts and kisses hap him,
Then all at once upon the War-woolfe flue,
And up and down him on the earth they drew;
Then from his bones the flesh in Collops cut,
And on their weapons points in Triumph put;
Returning back with a victorious song,
Bearing the man aloft with them along.
Quoth Gammer Gurton, on my honest word,
You have told a Tale does much conceit afford:
Good neighbor Howlet and as ye have done,
Each one for other, since our Tales begun,
And since our stand of Ale so well endures, The morality of mother Howlets
tale.

As you have morral'd Bumbyes, I will yours,
The fable of the War-wolfe I apply,
To a man, given to blood and cruelty,
And upon spoil does only set his rest;
Which by a Woolfes shade lively est is expressed,
The spring by which he gets his former shape,
Is the evasion aft^r every rape,
He has to start by; and the silly Ass,
Which vnregard^d, every where does pass,
Is some just soul, who though the world disdain,
Yet he by God is strangely made the mean,
To bring, his damned practices to light, Gammer Gurtons tale.

Quoth mother Howlet you have hit the white,
I thought as much quoth Gammer Gurton then,
My turn comes next, have with you once again,
A mighty Waste there in a country was,
Yet not so great as it was poor of grass;
It Was said of old, a Saint once cursed the soil,
So barren, and so hungry, that no toil,
Could ever make it any thing to bear;
Nor would ought prosper, that was planted there,
Upon the earth, the spring was seldom seen,
It Was winter there, when each placeelse was green
When Summer did her most abundance yield,
That still lay brown, as any fallow field,
Upon the same, some few trees scattering stood,
But it was Autumn, ere they used to bud,
And they were crookt, and knotty, and the leaves,
The niggard sap so utterly deceiues,
That sprouting forth, they drouping hung the head
And were near withered, ^re yet fully spread,
No mirthfull Birds the boughs did ever grace,
Nor could be won to stay upon that place,
Only the night* Crow sometimes you might see,
Croking to sit upon some Rampick-tree,
Which was but very seldom too, and then
^t boded great mortality to men;
^s were the trees, which on that common grew,
^o were the cattle staruelings, and a few,
^sses, and Mules, and they were used to gnaw
^he very earth to fill the hungry maw,
When they fared best they fed on Fern and brak,
Their lean shrunk bellies cleau'd up to their back,
Of all the rest in that great Waste that went,
Of those quick caryons, the most eminent,
Was a poor Mule upon that common bred,
and from his foaling further never fed,
^he Summer well-neere every year was past,
^re he his ragged Winter coat could cast,
and then the Jade would get him to a tree,
that had a rough bark, purposely* where he
^ubbing his Buttocks, and his either side
Would get the old hair from his starued hyde,
^^d though he were as naked as my nail,
^et he would whinny then, and wagge the tail,
^ this short pasture one day as he stood,
^eady to faint amongst the rest for food:
^et the poor Beast according to his kind,
^aring his nostrill up into the Wind,
sweet fresh feeding thought that he did vent,
"(Nothing as hunger sharpneth so the sent)
For that not far there was a goodly ground,
Which with sweet grass, so greatly did abound,
That the fat soil seemed to be over fraught
Nor could bestow the burden that it brought,
Besides that bounteous nature did it stick,
With sundry sorts of fragrant flowers so thick,
That when the warm, and Baulmy southwind blew
The lushyous smells over all the region flew,
Led by his sense, at length this poor Jade found,
This pasture (fenced though with a mighty Mound)
A pale and quick set, circling him about,
(That nothing could get in, nor nothing out)
And with himself thus wittily does cast,
Well, I have found good pasture yet at last,
If by some means accomplished it might be,
Round with the ditch immediately walks he;
(And long though it was, good luck nere comes too late)
It was his chance to light upon a gate
That led into it, (thoug^ his hap were good)
Yet was it made of so sufficient wood,
And every bar that did to it belong,
Was so well ioynted, and so wondrous strong
Besides a greatlocke, with a double ward,
That he thereby of entrance was debarred
And thereby hard beset, yet though at length,
"It Was done by sleight, that was not don by strengt^
Fast in the ground his two fore-feet does get,
Then his hard Buttocks to the gate he set,
And thrust, and shook, and labored till at last,
The two great posts, that held the same so fast,
Began to loosen, when a gain he takes,
Fresh foot-hold, and a fresh he shakes and shakes,
Till the great Hinges to fly off he feels;
And heard the gate fall clattering at his heels,
Then nayes and brayes, with such an open throat,
That all the Waste resounded with his note;
The rest that did his language understand,
Knew well there was some good to them in hand,
And tag, and rag, through thick and thin came running
Nor dale, nor ditch, nor bank nor bushes shunning;
And so desirous to see their good hap,
That with their thrunging they stuck in the gap.
Now they bestir their teeth, and do devour,
More sweetness in the compass of one hour,
Then twice so many could in twice the time,
For now the spring was in the very prime,
Till pri^kt with plenty eased of all their lacks
Their pampred bellies swollen above their backs,
They tread and waddle all the goodly grass,
That in the field there scarce a corner was,
^eft free by them, and what they had not swallowed
There they had dung'd, and laid them down and wallowd,
One with another they wouldly and play,
And in the deep fog batten all the day,
Thus a long while, this merry life they led
^ill (even) like Lard their thickened sides were fed,
^ut on a time the weather being fair,
And season fit to take the pleasant air,
To view his pasture the rich owner went,
To s^e what grass the fruitful year had sent,
Finding the feeding for which he had toiled,
To have kept safe, by these vile cattle spoiled,
He in a rage upon them sets his Cur,
But for his bawling, not a beast would stir;
Then whoots and shouts, and claps his hands, but (...)
Might as well move the dull earth, or a tree,
As once but stir them, when all would not do,
Last with his goad amongst them he does go,
And some of them he girdeth in the Hanches,
Some in the flanks, that pricked their very pa^ches
But when they felt that they began to smart,
Up on a sudden they together start,
And drive at him as fast as they could ding,
They flirt, they yerke, they backward fluce, and flin^
As though the Devil in their heels had bin,
That to escape the danger he was in,
He back and back into a quagmire by,
Though with much peril, forced was to fly:
But lightly treading there-vpon does shift,
Out of the bog his cumbred feet to lift,
When they the peril that do not forecast,
In the stiff mud, are quickly stabled fast:
When to the Town he presently does fly,
Raising the Neighbors with a sudden cry:
With Cords and Halters that came all at once;
For now the Iades were fitted for the nonce:
For by that time they had sunk themselves so deep,
That scarce their heads above ground they could kee^
When presently they by the necks them bound,
And so they led them to the common pound,
Quoth Mother Red-Cap, right well have you done
Good Gammer Gurton, and as we begun,
So you conclude: it is time we parted now;
But first of my morallity allow.
The common that you speak of here, say I, The morallity of Mother Gurtons

^s nothing else but want and beggary;
^^ the World common, and the Beasts that go
Upon the same, which often are famished so:
^re the poor bred in scarcity; the Mule
^he other Cattle that does seem to rule,
^ome crafty fellow that has slily found
^ way to thrive by: and the fruit full ground
^^ wealth, which he by subtilty does win,
^^ his possession which not long has bin;
^ut he with riot and excess does waste,
^ For goods ill gotten do consume as fast;
and with the Law they lastly do contend,
^ill at the last the Prison is the end.
Quoth Gammer Gurton, well your self you quite,
^y this the dawne usurped upon the night;
and at the vvindow bids them good day
^hen they departed each their several way*
FINIS.
ELEGIES UP ON SUNDRY OCCASIONS
Of his Ladies not Coming to London.
THat ten-yeres-trauel'd Greek returned from Sea,
Never ioyd so much to see his Ithaca,
As I should you, who are alone to me,
More then wide Greece could to that wanderer be,
The Winter winds still Easterly do keep,
And with keen frosts have chained up the deep*
The Sun's to us a niggard of his Rays,
But reuelleth with our Antipodes;
And seldom to us when he shows his head,
Musled in Vapors, he straight hies to bed,
In those bleake mountains can you live, where sno^
Makes the valles up to the hills to grow;
Whereas men's breaths do instantly congeale,
And attom'd mists turn instantly to hayle;
Belike you think, from this more temperate cost,
My sighs may have the power to thaw the frost,
Which I from hence should swiftly send you thithe
Yet not* so swift, as you come slowly hither
How many a time has Phebe from her wayne,
With Phabus fires filld up her horns again;
She through her Orb, still on her course does rang
^ut you keep yours still, nor for me will change.
^he Sun that mounted the stern Lions back,
shall with the Fishes shortly diue the Bracke,
^ut still you keep your station, which confines
^ou, nor regard him traveling the signs,
those ships which when you went put out to Sea,
^oth to our Greeneland, and Virginia,
^re now returned, and Custom'd have their fraught,
^et you arrive not, nor return me ought.
The Thames was not so frozen yet this year,
^s is my bosom, with the chilly fear,
Of your not coming, which on me does light,
^s on those Climes, where half the world is night.
Of every tedious hour you have made two,
^ll this long Winter here, by missing you,
^inutes are months, and when the hour is past,
^ year is ended since the clock struck last,
When your remembrance puts me on the rack,
and I should swound to see an Almanacke,
^o read what silent weeks away are slid,
^nce the dire Fates you from my sight have hid.
I hate him who the first deuisor was
^f this same foolish thing, the Hower*glasse,
and of the Watch whose dribling sands and wheel,
^ith their slow strokes, make me too much to feel
^our slacknesse hither, O how I do ban,
^im that these Dialls against walls began,
those Snayly motion of the moving hand,
Although it go) yet seem to me to stand,
^^though at Adam it had first set out,
^^d had been stealing all this while about,
And when it back to the first point should come,
It shall be then just at the general Doom.
The Seas into themselves retract their slowes*
The changing Wind from every quarter blows,
Declining Winter in the Spring does call,
The Stars rise to us, as from us they fall;
Those Birds we see, that leave us in the Prime,
Again in Autumn re-salute our Clime,
Sure, either Nature you from kind has made,
Or you delight else to be Retrograde.
But I perceive by your attractiue powers,
Like an Inchantresse you have charmed the hours
Into short minutes, and have drawn them back,
So that of us at London, you do lack,
Almost a year, the Spring is scarce begone
There where you live, and Autumn almost done
With us more Eastward, surely you devise,
By your strong Magic, that the Sun shall rise,
Where now it sets, and that in some few years,
You Will alter quite the Motion of the Spheres,
Yes, and you mean, I shall complain my love
To grauell'd Walks* or to a stupid Grove,
Now your companions; and that you the while
(As you are cruel) will sit by and smile,
To make me write to these, while passers by,
Slightly look in your lovely face, where I
See Beauties heaven, whilst silly blockheads, they
Like laden Asses, plod upon their way,
And wonder not, as you should point a Clown,
Up to the Guards, or Ariadnes Crown;
Of Constellations, and his dullness tell,
He Would think your words were certainly a spell;
Or him some piece from Creet, or Marcus show,
In all his life which till that time never saw
Painting: except in Alehouse or old Hall
Done by some Druzzler, of the prodigal.
Nay do, stay still, whilst time away shall steal
Your youth, and beauty, and your self conceal
From me I pray you, you have now inured
Me to your absence, and I have endured
Your want this long, whilst I have starued bin
For your short Letters, as you held it sin
To write to me, that to appease my woe,
I read ore* those you writ a year ago,
Which are to me, as though they had been made,
Long time before the first Olimpiad.
For thanks and ourt'sies sell your presence then
To tattling Women, and to things like men,
And be more foolish then the Indians are
For Bells, for Knives, for Glasses, and such ware,
That sell their Pearl and Gold, but here I stay,
So would I not have you, but come away.
To Master GEORGE SANDIS Treasurer for the English Colony in Virgina.
FRiend, if you think my Papers may supply
You, with some strange omitted Nouelty,
Which others Letters yet have left vntould,
You take me off before I can take hold
Of you at all; I put not thus to Sea,
For two months Voyage to Virginia,
With news which now, a little some thing here,
But will be nothing ere it can come there.
I fear as I do Stabbing; this word, State,
I dare not speak of the Palatinate,
Although some men make in their hourly theme,
And talk what is done in Austria, and in Beam,
I may not so; what Spinola intends,
Nor with his Dutch, which way Prince Maurice bend^
To other men although these things be free,
Yet ( George) they must be my steries to me,
I scarce dare praise a virtuous friend that is dead,
Lest for my lines he should be censuted,
It was my hap before all other men,
To suffer shipwarcke by my forward pen:
When King James entered: at which joyful time,
I taught his title to this I Will in rhyme:
And to my part did all the muses win,
With high pitch Paeans to applaud him in:
When cowardice had tyd up every tongue,
And all stood silent, yet for him I sung;
And when before by danger I was dared,
I kicked her from me, nor aiot I spared,
Yet had not my clear spirit in Fortunes scorn,
Me above earth and her afflictions borne;
He next my God on whom I built my trust,
Had left me trodden lower then the dust:
But let this pass: in the extremest ill,
Apollo's brood must be courageous still,
Let Pies and Dawes sit Dumb before their death*
Only the Swan sings at the parting breath.
And (worthy George) by industry and use,
Let Us see what Lines Virginia will produce,
Go on with Ovid as you have begun,
With the first five books, let your numbers run,
Glib as the former, so shall it live long,
And do much honor to the English tongue:
Entice the muses thither to repair,
Entreat them gently, train them to that air,
For they from hence may thither hap to fly,
Toward the sad time which but to fast does hie,
For Poesy is followed with such spite,
By groueling drones that never raught her height,
That she must hence, she may no longer stay,
The driery fates prefixed have the day,
Of her departure, which is now come on,
And they command her straightway to be gone;
That bestiall heard so hotly her pursue,
And to her succor, there be very few,
Nay none at all, her wrongs that will redress,
But she must wander in the wilderness,
Like to the woman, which that holy John,
Beheld in Pathm^s in his vision.
As the English now, so did the stiffe-neckt Jews,
Their noble Prophets utterly refuse,
And of those men such poor opinions had,
They counted Esaias and Ezechiel mad;
When Jeremy his Lamentations writ,
They thought the Wizzard quite out of his wit,
Such sotts they were, as worthily to ly,
Locked in the chains of their captivity,
Knowledge has still her Eddy in her flow,
So it has been, and it will still be so.
That famous Greece where learning flourisht most,
Has of her Muses long since left to boast,
Th'vnletter'd Turk, and rude Barbarian trades,
Where Homer sang his lofty Iliades;
And this vaste volume of the world has taught,
Much may to pass in little time be brought.
As if to Symptoms we may credit give,
This very time, where in we two now live,
Shall in the compass, wound the Muses more,
Then all the old English ignorance before,
Base Balatry is so beloved and sought,
And those brave numbers are put by for naught,
Which rarely read, were able to awake,
Bodies from graves, and to the ground to shake
The wandering clouds, and to our men at arms,
Against pikes and muskets were most powerful charms,
That, but I know, ensuing ages shall,
Raise her again, who now is in her fall;
And out of dust reduce our scattered rimes,
Th'reiected jewels of these slothful times,
Who with the Muses would mispend an hour,
But let blind Gothish Barbarism devour
These feuerous Dogdayes, blessed by no record,
But to be everlastingly abhord.
If you vouchsafe rescription, stuff your quill
With natural bounties, and impart your skill,
In the description of the place, that I,
May be come learned in the soil thereby,
Of noble Wy^^^ health, and let me hear,
The Governor; and how our people there,
Increase and labor, what supplies are sent,
Which I confess shall give me much content;
But you may save your labor if you please,
To write to me ought of your Savages.
As savage slaves be in great Britain here,
As any one that you can show me there
And though for this, I Will say I do not thirst,
Yet I should like it well to be the first,
Whose numbers hence into Virginia flew,
So (noble Sandis) for this time adue.
To. my noble friend Master WILLIAM BROWN, of the evil time.
Dear friend, be silent and with patience see,
What this mad times Catastrophe will be,
The Worlds first wisemen certainly mistook
Themselves, and spoke things quite beside the book^
And that which they have said of God, untrue,
Or else expect strange judgment to ensue.
This I Will is a mere Bedlam, and therein,
We all lie rauing mad in every sin,
And him the wisest most men use to call,
Who does (alone) the maddest thing of all,
He whom the master of all wisdom found,
For a marckt fool, and so did him propound,
The time we live in, to that pass is brought,
That only he a Censor now is thought:
And that base Villain, not an age yet gone,)
Which a good man would not have looked upon,
Now like a God* with divine worship followed,
And all his actions are accounted hollowed.
This world of ours, thus runs upon wheels,
Set on the head, bolt upright with her heels,
Which makes me think of what the Ethinck* told,
The Opinion the Pythagorists uphold,
That the immortal soul does transmigrate;
Then I suppose by the strong power of fate,
That those which at confused Babell were,
And since that time now many a lingering year,
Through fools, and beasts, and lunaticks have past,
Are here i^bodyed in this age at last,
And though so long we from that time be gone,
Yet taste we still of that confusion.
For certainly there is scarce one found that now,
Knows what t'approue, or what to disalovv,
Al arsey var^ey, nothing is it is own,
But to our proverb* all turned vpside down:
To do in time, is to do out of season,
And that speeds best, that is done the farth'st from reason
He Is highest that is low'st, he is surest in that is out,
He hits the next way that goes farth'st about,
He ge^^eth up unlike to rise at al,
He slips to ground as much unlike to fall:
Which does enforce me partly to prefer,
The opinion of that mad Philosopher,
Who taught, that those al-framing powers above,
(As ^is supposed) made man not out of Love
To him at all, but only as a thing,
To make them sport with, which they use to bring,
As men do munkeys, puppets, and such tools,
Of laughter; so men are but the Gods of fools,
Such are by titles lifted to the sky,
As wherefore no man knovves, God scarcely why;
The virtuous man depressed like a stone
For that dull Sot to raise himself upon:
He who never thing yet worthy man durst do,
Never durst look upon his countries foe,
Nor durst attempt that action which might get
Him fame with men: or higher might him set
Then the base beggar (rightly if compared)
This drone yet never brave attempt that dat'd,
Yet dares be Knighted, and from thence dares grow,
To any title Empire can bestow;
For this believe, that impudence is now
A Cardinal virtue, and men it allow
Reverence, nay more, men study and invent,
New vvayes* nay glory to be impudent.
Into the clouds the Devil lately got,
And by the moisture doubting much the rot,
A medicine took to make him purge and cast;
Which in short time began to work so fast,
That he fell to it, and from his backeside flew,
A rout of rascal a rude ribauld crew
Of base Plebeians, which no sooner light,
Upon the earth, but with a sudden flight,
They spread this I Will, and as Deucalion once
Over his shoulder back, by throwing stones
They became men, even so these beasts became,
Owners of titles from an obscure name.
He that by riot of a mighty rent,
Has his late goodly Partrimony spent,
And into base and wilful beggary run,
This man as he some glorious act had done,
With some great pension, or rich gift releeu'd,
When he that has by industry atchieu'd
Some noble thing, contemned and disgraced,
In the forlorn hope of the times is placed,
As though that God had carelessely left all
That being has on this terestiall ball,
To fortunes guiding, nor would have to do
With man, nor ought that does belong him to,
Or at the least God having given more
Power to the Devil, then he did of yore,
Over this world: the fiend as he does hate
The virtuous man; maligning his estate,
All noble things, and would have by his will,
To be damned with him using all his skill,
By his black hellish ministers to vex
All worthy men, and strangely to perplexe,
Their constancy, there by them so to fright,
That they should yield them wholly to his might,
But of these things I vainly do but tell,
Where hell is heaven, and heaven is now turned he^,
Where that which lately blasphemy has bin,
Now godliness* much less accounted sin;
And a long while I greatly maruail'd why
Buffoons and Bawds should hourly multiply*
Til that of late I construed it, that they
To present thrift had got the perfect way,
When I concluded by their odious crimes,
It was for us no thriuing in these times*
As men often laugh at little Babes when they
Hap to behold some strange thing in their play,
To see them on the sudden stricken sad,
As in their fancy some strange forms they had,
Which they by pointing with their fingers show,
Angry at our capacities so slow,
That by their countenance we no sooner learn,
To see the wonder which they so discern:
So the celestial powers do sit and smile
At innocent and virtuous men the while,
They stand amazed at the world ore-gone,
So far beyond imagination,
With slavish baseness, that the silent sit
Pointing like children in describing it.
Then noble friend the next way to control
These worldly crosses, is to arm thy soul
With constant patience: and with thoughts as high
As these below, and poor, winged to fly
To that exalted stand, whether yet they
Are got with pain, that sit out of the way
Of this ignoble age, which raises none
But such as think their black damnation
To be a trifle; such, so ill, that when
They are advanced, those few poor honest men
That yet are living, into search do run
To find what mischief they have lately done,
Which so prefers them; say thou he does rise,
That makes virtue his chief exercise,
And in this base World come what ever shall,
He Is worth lamenting that for her does fall.
Upon the three Sons of the Lord SHEFFIELD, drowned in Humber.
LIght Sonnets hence, and to loose Lovers fly,
And mournful Maidens sing an Elegy,
On those three Sheffields, ouerwhelm'd with waves
Whose loss the tears of all the Muses craves;
A thing so full of pity as this was,
Me thinks for nothing should not slightly pass,
Treble this loss was, why should it not borrow,
Through this Isles treble parts, a treble sorrow:
But fate did this, to let the World to know,
That sorrows which from common causes grow,
Are not worth mourning for, the loss to bear,
But of one only sonne's, not worth one tear,
Some tender hearted man, as I, may spend
Some drops (perhaps) for a deceased friend,
Some men (perhaps) their wives late death may r(...)
Or wives their husbands, but such be but few:
Cares that have used the hearts of men to touch
So often and deeply, will not now be such;
Who Will care for loss of maintenance, or place,
Fame, liberty, or of the Princes grace;
Or suites in law, by base corruption crossed:
When he shall find, that this which he has lost;
Alas, is nothing to his, which did loose,
Three sons at once so excellent as those:
Nay, it is feared that this in time may breed
Hard hearts in men to their own natural seed,
That in respect of this great loss of theirs,
^en will scarce mourn the death of their own heirs.
Through all this I Will their loss so public is,
That every man does take them to be his,
And as a plague which had beginning there,
^o catching is, and reigning every where,
that those the farthest off as much do rue them,
^s those the most familiarly that knew them;
Children with this disaster are waxt sage,
and like to men that stricken are in age,
^alke what it is, three children at one time,
^hus to have drowned, and in their very prime;
^ea, and do learn to act the same so well,
that then old folk, they better can it tell.
Invention often that Passion used to feign,
^^ sorrows of themselves but slight, and mean,
^o make them seem great, here it shall not need,
^or that this Subject does so far exceed
^ll forced Expression, that what Poesy shall
^appily think to grace it self withal,
^^lls so below it, that it rather borrowes,
^race from their grief, then adds to their sorrows,
^or sad mischance thus in the loss of three,
^o show it self the utmost it could be:
^xacting also by the self same law,
^he utmost tears that sorrow had to draw,
^ll future times has utterly prevented
^f a more loss, or more to be lamented.
Whilst in fair youth they lively flourished here,
^^ their kind Parents they were only dear,
^t being dead, now every one does take,
Them for their own, and do like sorrow make*
As for their own begot, as they pretended,
Hope in the issue, which should have descended
From them again; nor here does end our sorrow,
But those of us, that shall be borne to morrow
Still shall lament them, and when time shall count,
To what vast number passed years shall mount,
They from their death shall duly reckon so,
As from the Deluge, former used to do.
O cruel Humber. guilty of their gore,
I now believe more then I did before,
The British Story, whence thy name begun
Of Kingly Humber, an inuading Hun,
By thee devoured, for it is likely thou
With blood were Christened, blood-thirsty till now
The Ouse, the Dove. And thou far clearer Trent,
To drown these Sheffields as you gave consent,
Shall curse the time, that ere you were infused,
Which have your waters basely thus abused,
The groueling Boore ye hinder not to go,
And at his pleasure Ferry to and fro,
The very best part of whose soul* and blood,
Compared with theirs, is viler then your mud.
But wherefore Paper, do I idly spend,
On those deaf waters to so little end,
And up to starry heaven do I not look,
In which, as in an everlasting book,
Our ends are written, O let times rehearse,
Their fatal loss, in their sad aniverse.
To the noble Lady, the Lady I. S. of worldly crosses.
MAdame, to show the smoothness of my vain,
Neither that I would have you entertain
The time in reading me, which you would spend,
In fair discourse with some known honest friend,
I write not to you. Nay, and which is more,
My powerful verses strive not to restore,
What time and sickness have in you impaired,
^o other end my Elegy is squared.
Your beauty, sweetness, and your graceful parts
that have drawn many eyes, w^n many hearts,
Of me get little, I am so much man,
that let them do their utmost that they can,
^ will resist their forces: and they be
Though great to others, yet no^ so to me.
The first time I beheld you, I then saw,
That (in it self) which had the power to draw,
My stayed affection, and thought to allow
You some deal of my heart; but you have now
Got far into it, and you have the skill
For ought I see) to win upon me still.
When I do think how bravely you have borne
Your many crosses, as in fortunes scorn,
And how neglectfull you have seemed to be,
Of that which has seemed terrible to me,
^ thought you stupid, nor that you had felt
those griefs which (often) I have seen to melt,
another woman into sighs and tears,
A thing but seldom in your sex and years,
But when in you I have perceived again,
(Noted by me, more then by other men)
How feeling and how sensible you are
Of your friends sorrows, and with how much ca^
You seek to cure them, then my self I blame,
That I your patience should so much misname,
Which to my understanding makes known
""Who feels another grief, can feel their own
When straight me thinks, I hear your patience say
Are you the man that studied Seneca:
Plinies most learned letters; and must I
Read you a Lecture in Philosophy,
T'auoyd the afflictions that have used to reach you,
I'^^ learn you more Sir, then your books can teac^ yo^
Of all your sex, yet never did I know,
Any that yet so actually could show,
Such rules for patience, such an easy way,
That who so sees it, shall be forced to say,
Lo what before seemed hard to be discerned,
Is of this Lady in an instant learned,
It is heavens will that you should wronged be
By the malicious, that the world might see
Your Doue-like meekness; for had the base scum
The spawne of fiends, been in your slander dumb
Your virtue then had perished, never prized,
For that the same you had not exercised;
And you had lost the Crown you have, and glory
Never had you been the subject of my Story.
Whilst they feel Hell, being damned in their hate
Their thoughts like devils them excruciate,
Which by your noble sufferings do torment
Them with new pains, and gives you this content
To see your soul an innocent, has suffered,
And up to heaven before your eyes be offered:
Your like we in a burning Glass may see,
When the Suns rays therein contracted be,
But on some object, which is purely white,
We find that color does disperce the light,
And stands untainted: but if it has got
^ome little sully; or the least small spot,
Then it soon fires it; so you still remain,
Free, because in you they can find no stain.
God does not love them least, on whom he lays
The great'st afflictions; but that he will praise
Himself most in them, and will make them fit,
Near'st to himself who is the Lamb to fit:
For by that touch, like perfect gold he tryes them,
Who are not his, until the world denies them,
And your example may work such effect,
That it may be the beginning of a Sect,
Of patient women; and that many a day,
All Husbands may for you their Founder pray.
Nor is to me your Innocence the less,
^n that you strive not to suppress
Their Barbarous malice; but your noble heart
Prepared to act so difficult a part,
With unremoved constancy is still
The same it was, that of your proper ill,
The effect proceeds from your own self the cause,
Like some just Prince, who to establish laws,
^uffers the breach at his best loved to strike,
^o learn the vulgar to endure the like,
You are a Martyr thus, nor can you be,
Less to the world so valued by me:
If as you have begun, you still persevere,
Be ever good, that I may love you ever.
An Elegy upon the death of the Lady Pe^elope Clifton.
MVst I needs write, whose he that can refuse
He wants a mind for her that has no Muse,
The thought of her does heavenly rage inspire,
Next powerful, to those cloven tongues of fire.
Since I kn^w ought time never did allow
Me stuff fit for an Elegy, till now;
When France and England's Henry's died, my quill
Why, I know not, but it that time lay still.
It Is more then greatness that my spirit must raise
To observe custom I use not to praise,
Nor the least thought of mine yet ere depended,
On any one from whom she was descended:
That for their favor I this way should woo,
As some poor wretched things (perhaps) may do^
I gain the end, whereat I only aim,
If by my freedom I may give her fame.
Walking then forth being newly up from bed*
O Sir (quoth one) the Lady Cl^ffto^s dead.
When, but that reason my stern rage withstood,
My hand had sure been guilty of his blood,
If she be so, must thy rude tongue confess it*
(Quoth I) and come so coldly to express it,
Thou should have given a shreek, to make me fear the
That might have stain what ever had bin near the*
Thou shuldst have com'nlike time With thy sca^p bar
And in thy hands thou should have brought thy hair,
Casting upon me such a dreadful look,
As seen a spirit, or thou had been thunder struck,
And gazing on me so a little space,
Thou should have shot thine eye balls in my face,
Then falling at my feet thou should have said,
O she is gone, and Nature with her dead.
With this ill news amazed by chance I past,
By that near grove, whereas both first and last,
I saw her, not three months before she died:
When (though full Summer began to veil her pride,
And that I saw men lead home ripened Corn,
Besides advised me well;) I durst have sworn
The lingering year the Autumn had adiourn'd,
And the fresh spring had been again returned,
Her delicacie, loveliness, and grace,
With such a Summer bravely decked the place:
But now alas, it looked forlorn and dead;
And where she stood, the fading leaves were shed,
Presenting only sorrow to my sight,
O God (thought I) this is her Emblem right.
And sure I think it cannot but be thought,
That I to her by providence was brought:
For that the Fates fore-dooming she should die,
Showed me this wondrous Masterpiece, that I
Should sing her funeral, that the world should know it
That heaven did think her worthy of a Poet;
My hand is fatal, nor does fortune doubt,
For what it writes, not fire shall ever race out,
A thousand silken Puppets should have died,
And in their fulsome Coffins putrified,
Ere in my lines, you of their names should hear
To tell the world that such there ever were,
Whose memory shall from the earth decay,
Before those rags be worn they gave away,
Had I her god-like features never seen,
Poor slight Report had told me she had been
A hansome Lady, comely, very well,
And so might I have died an Infidel,
As many do which never did her see,
Or cannot credit, what she was by me.
Nature, her self, that before Art prefers
To go beyond all our Cosmogaphers,
By Charts and Maps exactly that have shown,
All of this earth that ever can be known,
For that she would beyond them all d^scry,
What Art could not by any mortal eye;
A Map of Heaven in her rare features drue,
And that she did so lively and so true,
That any soul but seeing it might swear,
That all was perfect heavenly that was there.
If ever any Painter were so blessed,
To draw that face, which so much hean'n expressed,
If in his best of skill he did her right,
I wish it never may come in my sight,
I greatly doubt my faith (weak man) lest I
Should to that face commit idolatry.
Death might have tyth'd her sex, but for this one
Nay, have ta'n half to have let her alone,
Such as their wrinckled temples to supply,
Cyment them up with ^luttish Mercury,
Such as undressed were able to affright,
A valiant man approaching him by night;
Death might have taken such, her end deferd,
Until the time she had been climaterd;
When she would have bin at threescore years and three,
Such as our best at three and twenty be,
With envy then, he might have overthrown her,
When age nor time had power to sease upon her.
But when the vnpittying Fates her end decreed,
They to the same did instantly proceed,
For well they knew (if she had languish'd so)
As those which hence by natural causes go,
So many prayers and tears for her had spoken,
As certainly their Iron laws had broken,
And had awaked heaven, who clearly would have showed
That change of Kingdoms to her death it owed,
And that the World still of her end might think,
It would have let some neighboring mountain sink
Or the vast Sea it in on us to cast,
As Seuerne did about some five years past:
Or some stern Comet his curld top to rear,
Whose length should measure half our Hemisphere,
Holding this height, to say some will not stick,
That now I rave, and am grown lunaticke:
You of what sex so ere you be, you lie,
It Is thou thy self is lunatique, not I.
I charge you in her name that now is gone,
That may conjure you, if you be not stone,
That you no harsh, nor shallow rimes decline,
Upon that day wherein you shall read mine,
Such as indeed are falsely termed verse,
And will but sit like mothes upon her hearse;
Nor that no child, nor chambermaid nor page,
Disturb the Rome, the whilst my sacred rage,
In reading is; but whilst you hear it read,
Suppose, before you, that you see her dead,
The walls about you hung with mournful black,
And nothing of her funeral to lack,
And when this period gives you leave to pause,
Cast up your eyes, and sigh for my applause.
Upon the noble Lady ASTONS departure for spain.
I Many a time have greatly marueil'd why,
Men say their friends depart when as they die,
How well that word, a dying does express,
I did not know (I truly must confess,)
Till her departure, for whose missed sight,
I am enforced this Elegy to write:
But since resistlesse fate will have it so,
That she from hence must to Iberia go,
And my weak wishes can her not detain,
I will of heaven in policy complain,
That it so long her travel should adiourne,
Hoping thereby to hasten her return.
Can those of Norway for their wage procure,
By their black spells a wind that shall endure
Till from aboard the wished land men see,
And fetch the harbor, where they long to ^e,
Can they by charms do this, and cannot I
Who am the Priest of Phoebus, and so hie;
Sit in his favor, win the Poets god,
To send swift Hermes with a snaky rod,
To Aeolus Cave, commanding him with care,
His prosperous winds, that he for her prepare,
And from that hour, wherein she rakes the seas,
Nature bring on the quiet Halcion days,
And in that hour that bird begin her nest,
Nay at that very instant, that long rest
May seize on Neptune, who may still repose,
And let that bird nere till that hour disclose,
Wherein she landeth, and for all that space
Be not a wrinckle seen on Thetis face,
Only so much breath with a gentle gale,
As by the easy swelling of her sail,
May at The nearest harbor of Spain.
Sebastians safely set her down
Where with her goodness she may bless the town.
If heaven in justice would have plagued by thee
Some Pirate, and grim Neptune thou should be
His Executioner, or what is worse,
The gripple Merchant, borne to be the curse
Of this brave Island; let them for her sake,
Who to thy safeguard does her self betake,
Escape vndrown'd, vnwrackt, nay rather let
Them be at case in some safe harbor set,
Where with much profit they may vent their wealth
That they have got by vi^lany and stealth,
Rather, great Neptune, then when thou do rave,
Thou once should st^wet her sail but with a vvaue.
Or if some proling Rouer shall but dare,
To seize the ship wherein she is to fare,
Let the fell fishes of the Maine appear,
And tell those Sea-thieues, that once such they were,
As they are now, till they assaild to rape; An I Will for the abunde^ of wine
supposed to be the habita^ on of B(...)

Grape* crowned Bacchus in a striplings shape,
That came aboard them, and would feign have sayld,
To vine spread An I Will for the ab^ndance ^f Wine supposed to be the habitati^n
of Bacchus
Naxus, but that him they faild*
Which he perceiving, them so monstrous made,
And warn them how they passengers invade.
Ye South and Western winds now cease to blow
Atumne is come, there be no flowers to grow,
Yea from that place respire, to which she goes,
And to her sails should show your self but foes,
But Boreas and ye Esterne winds arise;
To send her soon to Spain, but be precise,
That in your aid you seem not still so stern,
As we a Summer should no more discern,
For till that here again, I may her see,
It will be winter all the year with me.
Ye swan-begotten lovely brother stars,
So often auspicious to poor Mariners,
Ye twin-bred lights of lovely Leda's brood,
Jove's egge-borne issue smile upon the flood,
And in your mild'st aspect do ye appear
To be her warrant from all future fear.
And if thou ship that bear her, do prove good,
May never time but worms consume thy wood
Nor rust thy iron, may thy tacklings last,
Till they for relics be in Temples placed;
May thou be ranged with that mighty Arc,
Wherein just Noah did all the world imbarque,
With that which after Troyes so famous wrack,
From ten years travel brought Ulysses back:
That Argo which to Colchos went from Greece,
And in her bottom brought the Golden Fleece,
Under brave Jason; or that same of Drake,
Wherein he did his famous voyage make
About the World, or Candishes that went
As far as his about the Continent.
And ye mild winds that now I do implore,
Not once to raise the least sand on the shore,
Nor once on forfeit of your selves respire:
When once the time is come of her retire,
If then it please you, but to do your due,
What for those Winds I did, I Will do for you:
I Will woo you then, and if that not suffice,
My pen shall prove you to have dietyes,
I Will sing your loves in verses that shall flo^,
And tell the stories of your weal and woe,
I Will prove what profit to the earth you bring,
And how it is you that vvelcome in the spring,
I Will raise up altars to you, as to show,
The time shall be kept holy, when you blow,
O blessed winds! your will that it may be,
To send health to her, and her home to me.
To my most dearely-loued friend Henry Reynolds Esquire of Poets and Poesy.
MY dearly beloved friend how often have we,
In vvinter euenings (meaning to be free)
To some well chosen place used to retire;
And there with moderate meat, and wine, and fire,
Have past the hours contentedly with chat,
Now talked of this, and then discoursed of that,
Spoke our own verses 'twixt ourselves if not,
Other men's lines, which we by chance had got,
Or some Stage pieces famous long before,
Of which your happy memory had store:
And I remember you much pleased were,
Of those who lived long ago to hear,
As well as of those, of these latter times,
Who have inricht our language with their times,
And in succession, how still up they grew,
Which is the subject that I now pursue;
For from my cradle (you must know that) I,
Was still inclined to noble Poesy;
And when that once Pueriles I had read,
And newly had my Cato construed;
In my small self I greatly maruail'd then,
Amongst all other, what strange kind of men
These Poets were; And pleased with the name,
To my mild Tutor merrily I came:
(For I was then a proper goodly page,
Much like a Pigmy, scarce ten years of age)
Clasping my slender arms about his thigh,
O my dear master; cannot you (quoth I)
Make me a Poet; do it, if you can,
And you shall see, I Will quickly be a man,
Who me thus answered smiling, boy quoth he,
If you will not play the wag* but I may see
You ply your learning, I will shortly read
Some Poets to you; Phoebus be my speed,
To It hard went I, when shortly he began,
And first read to me honest Mantuan,
Then Virgils E^ogues, being entered thus,
Me thought I straight had mounted Pegasus,
And in his full Careere could make him stop,
And bound upon Pernassus by clift-top,
I scorned your ballet then though it were done
And had for Finis William Elderton,
But soft, in sporting with this childish jest,
I from my subject have too long digrest,
Then to the matter that we took in hand,
Jove and Apollo for the Muses stand.
That noble Chaucer, in those former times,
The first inrich't our English with his rimes,
And was the first of ours, that ever brake,
Into the Muses treasure, and first spoke
In weighty numbers, deluing in the Mine
Of perfect knowledge, which he could refine.
And coin for current and as much as then
The English language could express to men,
He made it do; and by his wondrous skill,
Gave us much light from his abundant quill.
And honest Gower, who in respect of him,
Had only sipt at Aganippas brimme,
And though in years this last was him before,
Yet fell he far short of the others store.
When after those, four ages very near,
They with the Muses which conuersed, were
That Princely Surry, early in the time*
Of the Eight Henry, who was then the prime
Of Englands noble youth, with him there came
Wyat; with reverence whom we still do name
Amongst our Poets, Bryan had a share
With the two former, which accounted are
That times best makers, and the authors were
Of those small Poems, which the title bear,
Of songs and sonnets, wherein often they hit
On many dainty passages of wit.
Gascoyne and Churchyard after them again
^n the beginning of Eliza's rain,
Accoumpted were great Meterers many a day,
But not inspired with brave fire, had they
Lived but a little longer, they had seen,
Their works before them to have buried been.
Grave morrall Spencer after these came on,
Then whom I am persuaded there was none
Since the blind Bard his Iliads up did make,
Fitter a task like that to undertake,
To set down boldly, bravely to invent,
In all high knowledge, surely excellent.
The noble Sidney, with this last arose,
That Hero for numbers, and for Prose,
That thoroughly paced our language as to show,
The plentcous English hand in hand might go,
With Greek and Latin, and did first reduce
Our tongue from Lillies vvriting then in use*
Talking of Stones, Stars plants, of Fishes, Flies,
Playing with words, and idle Similes,
As the English, Apes and very Zanies be
Of every thing, that they do hear and see,
So imitating his ridiculous tricks,
They spoke and Writ, all like mere lunatiques.
Then Warner though his lines were not so trimmed*
Nor yet his Poem so exactly lim'd
And neatly ioynted, but the Critic may
Easily reprove him, yet thus let me say;
For my old friend, some passages there be
In him, which I protest have taken me,
With almost wonder, so fine, clear and new,
As yet they have been equalled by few.
Noat Barlow bathed in the Thespian spring^
Had in him those brave translunary things,
That the first Poets had, his raptures were,
All Air, and fire, which made his verses clear,
For that fine madness still he did retain,
Which rightly should possess a Poets brain.
And surely Nashe, though he a Proser were,
A branch of Laurel yet deserves to bear,
Sharply Satiricke was he, and that way,
He went, since that his being, to this day
Few have attempted, and I surely think
Those words shall hardly be set down with ink,
Shall scorch and blast, so as his could, where he,
Would inflict vengeance, and be it said of thee,
Shakespere thou had as smooth a Comicke vain,
^itting the socke, and in thy natural brain,
As strong conception, and as clear a rage,
As any one that traffiqu'd with the stage.
Amongst these, Samuel Daniel, whom if I
May speak of, but to censure do deny,
Only have heard some wise men him rehearse,
To be too much Historian in verse;
His rimes were smooth, his mee^ers well did close,
But yet his manner better fitted prose:
^ext these, learned Johnson, in this List I bring,
Who had drunk deep of the Pierian spring,
Whose knowledge did him worthily prefer,
and long was Lord here of the Theater,
Who in opinion made our learnd'st to stick,
Whether in Poems rightly dramatique,
^trong Seneca or Plautus, he or they,
should bear the Buskin, or the Socke away.
Others again here lived in my days,
That have of us deserved no less praise
For their translations, then the daintiest wit,
Tha^ on Parnassus thinks he highest does sit,
And for a chair may among the muses call,
As the most curious maker of them all;
A^ reverent* Chapman, who has brought to us,
Musaeus, Homer, and Hesiodus
Our of the Greek; and by his skill has reard
Them to that height, and to our tongue endeared,
Tha^ were those Poets at this day alive,
To ^^e their books thus with us to survive,
They would think having neglected them so long
They ^ad bin written in the English tongue.
And Siluester who from the French more weak^
Ma^e Bartas of his six days labor speak,
In natural English, who, had he there stayed,
He had done w^ll, and never had bewraid,
His own invention, to have been so poor
Who still wrote less, in striving to write more,
^hen dainty Sands, that has to English done,
Smouth sliding Ovid, and has made him run,
With so much sweetness and unusual grace,
As though the neatness of the English pace,
Should tell the letting Latin that it came
But slowly after, as though stiff and lame.
So Scotland sent us hither, for our own
That man, whose name I ever would have known^
To stand by mine, that most ingenious Knight,
My Alexander, to whom in his right,
I want extremely, yet in speaking thus
I do but show the love, that was twixt us,
And not his numbers which were brave and hie,
So like his mind, was his clear Poesy,
And my dear Drummond to whom much ^ owe
For his much love, and proud I was to know,
His Poesy, for which two worthy men,
I Me^stry still shall love, and Hauth^rne-den,
Then the two Beamounts, and my Brown arose,
My dear companions whom I freely chose
My bosom friends ^ and in their several ways,
Rightly borne Poets, and in these last days,
Men of much note, and no l^sse nobler parts,
Such as have freely told to me their hearts,
As I have mine to them; but if you shall
Say in your knowledge, that these be not all
Have writ in numbers be informed that I
Only myself, to these few men doetye,
Whose works* often printed, set on every post,
To public censure subject have bin most;
For such whose Poems, be they nere so rare,
In private chambers that incloistred are,
And by transcription daintily must go,
As though the world un worthy were to know,
Their rich composures, let those men that keep
These wondrous relics in their judgment deep,
And cry them up so, let such Pieces be
Spoke of by those that shall come after me,
I pass not for them: nor do mean to run,
In quest of these, that them applause have won,
Upon our Stages in these latter days,
That are so many let them have their bays
That do deserve it; let those wits that haunt
Those public circuits, let them freely chaunt
Their fine Composures, and their praise pursue,
And so my dear friend for this time adue,
Upon the death of his incomparable friend, Sir Henry Raynsford, of Clifford.
COuld there be words found to express my loss
There were some hope, that this my heavy cross^
Might be sustained, and that wretched I
Might once find comfort: but to have him die
Past all degrees that was so dear to me;
As but comparing him with others, he
Was such a thing, as if some power should say
I Will take man on me, to show men the way
What a friend should be. But words come so short,
Of him, that when I thus should him report,
I am undone, and having naught to say,
Mad at my self, I throw my pen away,
And beat my breast, that there should be a woe
So high, that words cannot attain thereto.
It Is strange that I from my abundant breast,
Who others sorrows have so well expressed:
Yet I by this in little time am grown
So poor, that I want to express my own.
I think the fates perceiving me to bear
My worldly crosses without wit or fear:
Nay, with what scorn I ever have derided,
Those plagues that for me they have often provided,
Drew them to counsel; nay, conspired rather,
And in this business laid their heads together,
To find some one plague, that might me subvert,
And at an instant break my s^ubborne heart;
They did indeed, and only to this end,
They took from me this more then man, or friend.
Hard-hearted fates, your worst thus have you don
Then let us see what lastly you have won,
By this your rigor, in a course so strict,
Why see, I bear all that you can inflict:
And he from heaven your poor revenge to view;
Laments my loss of him, but laughes at you,
Whilst I against you execrations breath;
Thus are you scorned above, and cursed beneath.
Me thinks that man (unhappy though it be)
Is now thrice happy in respect of me,
Who has no friend; for that in having none
He is not stirred as I am, to bemone
My miserable loss, who but in vain,
May ever look to find the like again.
This more then mine own self; that who had seen
His care of me where ever I had been,
And had not known his active spirit before,
Upon some brave thing working evermore:
He would have sworn that to no other end
He had been borne; but only for my friend.
I had been happy, if nice nature had,
(Since now my luck falls out to be so bad)
Made me imperfect, either of so soft
And yielding temper, that lamenting often,
I into tears my mournful self might melt;
Or else so dull, my loss not to have felt,
I have by my too dear experience bought,
That fools and mad men, whom I ever thought
The most unhappy, are indeed not so:
And therefore I less pity can bestow
(Since that my sense, my sorrow so can sound)
On those I see in Bedlam that are bound,
And scarce feel scourging; and when as I meet free,
A fool by children followed in the Street.
Think I (poor wretch) thou from my grief art
Nor could thou feel it, should it light on thee;
But that I am a Christian, and am taught
By him who with his precious blood me bought,
Meekely like him my crosses to endure,
Else would they please me well, that for their cure,
When as they feel their conscience does them brand,
Upon themselves dare lay a violent hand,
Not suffering Fortune with her murdering knife,
Stand like a Surgeon working on the life,
Defecting this part, that joint off to cut,
Showing the Artyre, ripping then that gut,
Whilst the dull beastly World with her squint eye,
Is to behold the strange Anatomy.
I am persuaded that those which we read
To be man-haters, were not so indeed
The Athenian Timon, and beside him more
Of which the Latins, as the Greeks have store;
Nor not they did all humane manners hate,
Nor yet malign man's dignity and state.
But finding our frail life how every day,
It like a bubble vanishes away:
For this condition did mankind detest,
Far more incertaine then that of the beast.
Sure heaven does hate this world and deadly too
Else as i^ has done it would never do,
For if it did not, it would never permit
A man of so much virtue, knowledge, wit,
Of natural goodness, supernatural grace,
Whose courses when considerately I trace
unto their ends, and diligently look,
They serve me for Oeconomike book.
By which this rough world I not only stem,
^n goodness but grow learned by reading them.
O pardon me, it my much sorrow is,
Which makes me use this long Parenthesis;
Had heaven this world not hated as I say,
^n height of life it had not, taken away
A spirit so brave, so active, and so free,
That such a one who would not wish to be,
Rather then wear a Crown, by Arms though got
So fast a friend, so true a Patriot,
^n things concerning both the worlds so wise,
Besides so liberal of his faculties,
That where he would his industry bestow,
He would have done ever one could think to do.
No more talk of the working of the Stars,
For plenty, scarceness, or for peace, or Wars.
They are impostures, therefore get you hence
With all your Planets, and their influence.
No more do I care into them to look,
Then in some idle Chiromantick book,
Showing the line of life, and Venus mount,
Nor yet no more would I of them account,
Then what that tells me, since that what so ere
Might promise man long life: of care and fear,
By nature freed, a conscience clear, and quiet,
His health, his constitution, and his diet;
Counting a hundred, four score at the least,
Propt up by prayers, yet more to be encreast,
All these should fail, and in his fiftieth year
He should expire, henceforth let none be dear,
To me at all, lest for my hapless sake,
Before their time heaven from the world them take,
And leave me wretched to lament their ends
As I do his, who was a thousand friends.
Upon the death of the Lady Olive Stanhope.
Can thou depart and be forgotten so,
Stanhope thou can not, no dear Stanohpe, no,
But in despite of death the world shall see,
That Muse which so much graced was by thee;
Can black oblivion utterly out-braue,
And set the up above thy silent Grave.
I marueil'd much the Darbian Nimphs were dumb
Or of those Muses, what should be become,
That of all those, the mountains there among,
Not one this while thy Epicedium sung;
But so it is, when they of thee were reft,
They all those hills, and all those rivers left,
And sullen grown, their former feats remove,
Both from clear Darwin, and from silver Dove,
And for thy loss, they grieved are so sore,
That they have vowed they will come there no more;
But leave thy loss to me, that I should rue thee,
Unhappy man, and yet I never knew thee:
Me thou did love unseen, so did I thee,
It was our spirits that loved then and not we;
Therefore without profaneness I may call
The love betwixt us, love spiritual:
But that which thou affectedst was so true,
As that thereby thee perfectly I knew;
And now that spirit, which thou so loud'st, still mine,
Shall offer this a Sacrifice to thine,
And rear this Trophe, which for thee shall last,
When this most beastly iron age is past;
I am persuaded, whilst we two have slept,
Our souls have met, and to each other wept;
That destiny so strongly should forbid,
Our bodies to converse as often they did:
For certainly refined spirits do know,
As do the Angels, and do here below,
Take the fruition of that endless bliss,
As those above do, and what each one is,
They see divinely, and as those there do,
They know each others wills, so souls can too.
About that dismal time, thy spirit hence flew,
Mine much was troubled, but why, I not knew,
In dull and sleepy sounds, it often left me,
As if it self it meant to have bereft me,
I ask'^ it what the cause was, of such woe,
Or what it might be, that might vex it so,
But it was deaf, nor my demand would hear,
But when that ill news came to touch mine ear,
I straightwayes found this watchful spirit of mine,
Troubled had bin to take it leave of thine,
For when fate found, what nature late had done,
How much from heaven, she for the earth had won,
By thy dear birth; said, that it could not be
In so young years, what it perceived in thee,
But nature sure, had framed thee long before;
And as rich Misers of their mighty store,
Keep the most precious long'st, so from times past,
She only had reserved thee till the last;
So did thy wisdom, not thy youth behold,
And took thee hence, in thinking thou wast old.
Thy shape and beauty often have to me
Bin highly praised, which I thought might be,
Truly reported, for a spirit so brave;
Which heaven to thee so bountifully gave;
Nature could not in recompense again,
In some rich lodging but to entertain.
Let not the world report then, that the Peake,
Is but a rude place only vast and bleake,
And nothing has to boast of but her Lead,
When she can say that happily she bred
Thee, and when she shall of her wonders t^ll,
Wherein she does all other tracts excel,
Let her account thee great'st, and still to time
Of all the rest, record ^hee for the prime,
To Master WILLIAM IEFFRYES, Chapleine to the Lord Ambassa dour in Spain.
MY noble friend, you challenge me to write
To you in Verse, and often you recite,
My promise to you, and to send you news;
As it is a thing I very seldom use,
And I must write of State, if to Madrid,
A thing our Proclamations here forbid,
And that word State such Latitude does bear,
As it may make me very well to fear
To write, nay speak at all, these let you know
Your power on me, yet not that I will show
The love I bear you, in that lofty height,
So clear expression, or such words of weight,
As into Spanish if they were translated,
Might make the Poets of that Realm amated;
Yet these my last were, but that you extort
These numbers from me, when I should report
In homespun prose, in good plain honest words
The news our woeful England us affords.
The Muses here sit sad, and mute the while
A sort of swine unseasonably defile
Those sacred springs, which from the by-clift-hill
Dropped their pure Nectar into every quill;
In this with State, I hope I do not deal,
This only tends the Muses commonweal.
What can thou hope, or look for from his pen,
Who lives with beasts, though in the shapes of men,
And what a poor few are we honest still,
And dare to be so, when all the world is ill.
I find this age of our marked with this Fate,
That honest men are still precipitate
Under base Villains, which till the earth can vent
This her last brood, and wholly has them spent,
Shall be so, then in revolution shall;
Virtue again arise by vices fall;
But that shall I not see, neither will I
Maintain this, as one does a Prophecy,
That our King James to Rome shall surely go,
And from his Chair the Pope shall overthrow.
But o this world is so given up to hell,
That as the old Giants, which did once rebel,
Against the gods, so this now living race
Dare sin, yet stand, and ^eere heaven in the face.
But soft my Muse, and make a little stay,
Surely thou art not rightly in thy way,
To my good Ieffrayes was not I about
To write, and see, I suddenly am out,
This is pure Satire, that thou speak, and I
Was first in hand to write an Elegy.
To tell my, countries shame I not delight,
But do bemoane't I am no Democrite:
O God, though Virtue mightily do grieve,
For all this world yet will I not believe
But that she is fair and lovely, and that she
So to the period of the world shall be;
Else ^ad she been forsaken (sure) of all,
For that so many sundry mischiefs fall
Upon her daily, and so many take
Arms up against her, as it well might make,
Her to forsake her nature, and behind,
To leave no step for future time to find,
As she had never been, for he that now
Can do her most disgrace, him they allow
The times chief Champion, and he is the man,
The prize, and palm that absolutely wanne,
For where Kings Closets her free seat has bin,
She near the Lodge, not suffered is to Inn,
For ignorance against her stands in state,
Like some great porter at a palace gate;
So dull and barbarous lately are we grown,
And there are some this sluttery that have sown,
That for man's knowledge it enough does make,
If he can learn to read an Almanacke;
By whom that trash of Amadis de Gaul,
Is held an Author most authentical,
And things we have like Noblemen that be
In little time, which I have hope to see
Upon their foot-clothes, as the streets they ride,
To have their hornebookes at their girdles ti'd,
But all their superfluity of spite
On virtues handmayd Poesy does light,
And to extirpe her all their plots they lay,
But to her ruin they shall miss the way,
For it is alone the Monuments of wit,
Above the rage of Tyrants that do sit,
And from their strength, not one himself can sane,
But they shall triumph o'r his hated grave.
In my conceit, friend, thou did never see
A righter Madam then thou have of me,
For now as Elegiacke I bewail
These poor base times; then suddenly I Will rail
And I am Satiricke, not that I enforce
My self to be so, but even as remorse,
Or hate, in the proud fulness of their hight
Master my fancy, just so do I write.
But gentle friend, as soon shall I behold
That stone of which so many have us told,
(Yet never any to this day could make)
The great Elixar, or to undertake
The Rose-Crosse knowledge which is much like that,
A Tarrying-iron for fools to labor at,
As ever after I may hope to see,
(A plague upon this beastly world for me)
Wit so respected as it was of yore,
And if hereafter any it restore,
It must be those that yet for many a year,
Shall be unborn that must inhabit here,
And such in virtue as shall be ashamed
Almost to hear their ignorant Grandsires named,
With whom so many noble spirits then lived;
That were by them of all reward deprived.
My noble friend, I would I might have quit
This age of these, and that I might have writ,
Before a^ other, how much the brave pen;
Had here bin honored of the English men;
Goodness and knowledge, held by them in prise,
How hateful to them ignorance and vice,
But it falls out the contrary is true,
And so my Ieffereyes for this time adue.
Upon the death of Mistress Elianor Fallowfield.
ACcursed Death, what need was there at all
Of thee, or who to council did thee call;
The subject where upon these lines I spend
For thee was most unfit, her timelesse end
Too soon thou wrought'st, too near her thou did stand;
Thou should have lent thy lean and m^ager hand
To those who often the help thereof beseech,
And can be cured by no other Leech.
In this wide world how many thousands be
That having past fourscore, do call for thee,
The wretched debtor in the Iayle that lies,
Yet cannot this his Creditor suffice;
Does woe thee often with many a sigh and tear,
Yet thou art coy, and him thou will not hear.
The Captive slave that tuggeth at the Oars,
And underneath the Bulls tough sinews rores,
Begs at thy hand, in lieu of all his pains,
That thou would but release him of his chains;
Yet thou a niggard listenest not thereto,
W(...) short gasp which thou might easily do,
But thou could come to her ere there was need,
And even at once destroy both flovvre and seed.
But cruel death if thou so barbarous be,
To those so goodly, and so young as she;
That in their teeming thou will show thy spite;
Either from marriage thou will Maids affright,
Or in their Wedlock, Widows lives to choose
Their husbands bed, and utterly refuse,
Fearing conception; so shall thou thereby
Extirpate mankind by thy cruelty.
If after direful Tragedy thou thirst,
Extinguish Himens Torches at the first;
Build Funeral pyles, and the sad pauement strew,
With mournful Cypress, and the pale-leau'd Yewe.
Away with Roses, Myrtle, and with Bays;
Ensigns of mith, and iollity, as these;
Never at Nuptials used be again,
But from the Church the new Bride entertain
With Weeping Nenias, ever and among,
As at departings be sad Requiems song
Lucina by the old Poets that were said,
Women in Childbirth evermore to aid,
Because thine Altars, long have layne neglected:
Nor as they should, thy holy fires reflected
Upon thy Temples, therefore thou do fly,
And wilt not help them in necessity.
Thinking upon thee, I do often muse,
Whether for thy dear sake I should a^cuse
Nature or Fortune, Fortune then I blame,
And do impute it as her greatest shame,
To have thy timelesse end, and soon again
I vex at Nature, nay I curse her then,
That at the time of need she was no stronger,
That we by her might have enjoyed thee longer.
But whilst of these I with my self debate,
I call to mind how flinty-hearted Fate,
Seaseth the old, the young, the fair, the foul,
No thing of earth can Destiny control:
But yet that Fate which has of life bereft thee,
Still to eternal memory has lef^ thee,
Which thou enioy'st by the deserved breath,
That many a great one has not after death.
FINIS.

