A fruitful and necessary Sermon, specially concerning Alms giving, preached
the Twisday in Easter Week. The year of our Lord. 1572. at S. Mary's Spittle.

By Thomas Drant, Bachelor in Divinity.

Micah. 6. God told thee (O man) what good is, and what the Lord does require
of thee: certainly to do that is just, to love pityefulnes, and to walk
humbly before thy God.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Sir Fraunces Knolls Knight, Treasurer of her Majesty's
household, and one of the most honorable privy Counsel, grace, and peace from
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ with increase of all Godly honor.
NO man can well Judge of that which he knows not, and of that which he
knows a man may judge most fitly: Your honor both heard this Sermon, for
your learning you can judge of it, and for your virtuous zeal to God, and
your common wealth you will not judge amiss of it. And therefore with a very
good will I give, and present it unto your honors patronage.

This Sermon has three specialties in it. The first is it speaks, and
pleads much for the relief of poverty. Secondly, it is earnest for the
saftie of the Prince, and weal public as it now is: Thirdly it is tarte, and
vehement against sin: as bribery, simony, usury, hypocrisy, flattery, hard
hartednes, vitiousnes, trouthelesnes. etc. The first point no man with an
honest face can speak against. The second (God be thanked) as the case is come
to pass, few, or none dare speak against. The third has always been unto
the preachers most dangerous. And therefore I was to crave your honorable
protection.

Of my self I could with a good will have suffered this treatise to have gone
no farther, but so would not other, Both Ministers, and Gentlemen of good
virtue, and understanding. Furthermore that commendation which that learned man
Doctor Humfred gave it at Paul's cross did some thing persuade me thereunto.
Lastly your honors so harry, and ready receauyng of it has concluded the
matter.

The Lord God bless you (right honorable Cou^cellour) and all yours, increase,
and continue the knowledge, and love of his truth in you. And bring you
hereafter unto that life which through Christ Jesus abides to your for ever.

Your honors in Christ most humble to be commanded. Thomas Drant.

A warnyng to repentance.
YE rich men repent you,
and give of your goods,
For if death prevent you,
ye fall into floudds,
Of cares, and of carkyng,
of panges, and of pain,
And of conscience barkyng,
for ill gotten gain.
The worm (lo) will byte you, Esaias. 66. Mark. 9.

as Esaias does tell,
Gods vengeannce will smite you,
for ever in hell.
Ye praters at Preachers,
that keep such a steare,
Ye taunters of teachers
your faults do you hear.
Ye pillars, and pollers,
leave mynding your mucke:
And leave gredy prowlers,
from poor men to pluck.
Ye great ones, and neat ones
make no more delays,
Mark, Gods word, or Gods sword
will cut of your days.
Mitte panem tuum super faciem aquarum quia multitudine dierum inuenies illum.
Eccl. 12.


Da partem septem, aut etiam octo: non enim scis quid erit mali super terram.

Si repletae fuerint nubes, pluuiam super terram effunde^t: and si ceciderit
arbor ad Austru^, aut si ad Aquilonem, in locum in que^ ceciderit ipsa arbor,
ibi erit.








IT is now right honorable, and well-beloved in our Lord, and Savior Jesus
Christ ij years a gone sense that on this day, and this hour I occupied this
place. Se^ce which time I can not report any great news unto you out of the
world. Save only that saying of Terence: Terence.
Poeta cum primum. etc. Terence when he began first to write Poetry persuaded
with himself that all the world would be in love with his doings, but it fell
out otherwise: Revel. 10. verse. 9.
Eue^ so it comes to pass with the preachers of the word of God. The word
of God is sweet as honey in their mouth. But it is bitter in their belly, men
begin with joy and clappyng of hands, But if they stick to the word in
continuance it will replenishe their belly, and their bones with bitterness.
But, for that there is so great number of you come forth to hear, and it
seems that your desire is great to know what you are come forth to hear, I
will therefore tell you. This text that I do mean to entreat of is only for
alms, and for openyng of your bowels, and geuyng relief unto the poor. And
because I would put it in such order that ye might the better bear it away. I
will divide it into these branches.







I do half distrust that these speches of mine will be in vain, and come back
again unto me, even as the Prophet Esaias says? Domine quis credet auditui
nostro Lord who will believe that which I have heard? For it is an hard
persuasio^ to persuade against money, and it is as much to some to depart from
their money to the poor, as to pull out their eyes and cast them away, or cut
of their legs and give them away. Yet I cannot but comfort my self in God,
For these that have the ears to hear me shall hear me. And that I may do it
to the better fruit of you here assembled together unto the glory of God in
heaven: I shall desire you to assiste me with your good and devout prayers. etc.

Now well-beloved, if it please you to see over with me the contents and persels
of this piece of scripture, I will give you this view for your better knowledge,
First, that alms ought to be given, and how, which is contained in these
words Mitte panem and Da partem. The second, what ought to be given, which is
in this word Panis bread. And to whom we ought to give upon the face of the
waters to vij. and viij. Why we should give because after many days we shall
find it again. Secondly, because we cannot tell what ill may be chance upon
the earth. Thirdly, because clouds and trees are bounteous, and liberal.

And touching the first point that we must give alms, I cannot but marvel
that men are so slow, and hard affectioned in geuyng considering the great
threatnyngs of God to those that will not give, Threatening against hard
hartednesse.
and the promises of God to those that will give. Touching ye threatnyngs of
God, Let us think thus. 1. John. 3. Qui habet facultates huius mundi. etc. He
that has the substance of this world, and sees his brother want how can the
love of God be in him. So that this Scripture threatens, that God will love
him no longer that does see his brother in necessity, and will not releue him.
The weight of this threatnyng is the loss of the love of God: the which love
is so great that when as the mother forgets her child, yet the love of God
continues still to his beloved. And it is surely to be thought that those that
are verily beloved of god, cannot by depth or hight, heat, or cold, or any
violente means be separated away. The first threatnyng is the loss of the
love of God.
We may see likewise a president of our punishment for not geuyng alms. In
that rich person which S. Luke speaks of chap. xvi. The which rich man after
his death to his greater grief see Lazarus who he had co^te^ned in one haue^ of
rest with Abraham: Again he could not help his friends by warnyng of the^ to
amend their lives, and that which was worst of all other, he was tormented in
fire. (I am tormented in this fire says he.) Fire burns, scaldeth, scorcheth
and torme^teth, and if the world will not believe this, Let them do as S. Thomas
did into Christ's wounds, put in their hands, and feel. But the world
believes that there is no fire, But I believe that it tormenteth, and that it
will be found so. Further we read Math. xxv. Then he will say to those that be
on the left hand: go ye cursed from me into fire which was prepared from the
beginning. When I was a stranger ye did not receive me. etc. So that the fire
is not only hot, but it is euerlastyngly hot. Martine Luther said, that he
could not remember God the father without horror and fear, except he remembered
also Jesus Christ. Then, Hell exhorts to liberality.
the remembrance of the pains of hell be without Christ intolerable. But
specially eternity of punishment has all terror in it. If that a man should
be priest with a stone as big as the whole earth, and every thousand year a
bird should come, and carry away but one bilfull of this stone, yet in time the
stone would wholly be carried away. But that which is ever can never cease. Let
therefore fire, and eternity of the fire, exhort you to be merciful unto the
poor.

If you will rather be moved by promises, God promises lviij. Promises.
of the Prophet Esaias. If thou do break thy bread unto the poor, and pour
out thy heart, Thy light shall rise in darkness, and thy dymnes shall be as the
none tide, and God shall ever gide thee. He shall fill thy soul in all
drouthes, and he shall fatten thy bones, and thou shall be as a moist garden and
as a fountain whose water shall never fail. Again it is said come ye blessed
of my father possess the kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of
the world were laid. When I was a stranger ye did receive me. etc. So that
the possession of the kingdom of heaven remains to those that harbor
strangers, and cloth the naked, and do the like works of compassion. The
pleasures of heaven are joyful pleasures, our tongue cannot speak how joyful,
nor our ear hear, nor our heart think in what excess they be. The greater
the joys they be, the more they exhort us to be liberal. Give therefore: for
even of it self it is goodly to give. Christ says it is more blessed to give
then to take. The noblenes of creatures consists in geuyng: the Sun in
geuyng his light, the Moon her light, the stars their light, ye clouds
their water, ye trees their fruit, the earth her grass, ye grass her
flowers. Al good natures have been well spoken of for giving. Salust says
Caesar by helping by reliuing and forgeuing got renome. Augustus Caesar thought
that day to be lost in ye which he gratified no man with some pleasure, But you
will say how should a man give? Mitte. That is, cast it, men's alms must be
cast. In casting there are two things. The will of the doing, and the readynes
in doing. Touching ye will it self, Tully says in his offices, That which is
well done is therefore well done because it is willingly done. Concerning the
readiness in giving, we must cast it. We must do eue^ as God does to us, if we
seek the kingdom of heaven all things are cast unto us. The true obedience
of God does not prolo^g, Gene. 7. Gene. 17. John. 10.
or drive of from time to time, Noath the same moment that he was commanded
entered he, and his into the Arc. Abraham Circumcised his house in the same day
he was appointed. Christ said to the Apostles, come and see, and straight way
they came and saw. Jacob being commanded to go out of his country hoised up
his feet, and went. It is commanded in the xx. of the Proverbs that we
should not say go, and come again to morrow. James says iiij. that we know
not what will be to morrow. Gregory Nazianzen says in his Epigrames. That when he
had once lost the good tenor of life, gray hears was got about his head or
he could recover it again. If we begin to harden our heart toward the poor,
being young. If we do not cast our bread readely, but drive their hungry
mouths away grievously, gray hears will come upon our heads, or we can come
back into the way of pity, and compassion.

And as we must cast our bread for our own part so rechelesly that the one
hand shall not know what the other does: So must we do it so equally in the
behalf of our poor neighbors, that there may be a division, for so it is
meant in this word Distribue, or Da parts: that is divide it, or part it. Job.
31. Tobi. 2.
So Job and Tobi are reported in the Scripture to have broken their bread. Our
people have not all one belly. As Nero wished that the people of Rome might
have all one neck. Indiffere^cy in aims geuyng.
One chimney being full of fire an other may be cold. One pot being full of
licour an other may be dry. And one poor ma^s belly being full, An other poor
man's stomach may be knawyng, and hungry. That is a good stomach which
sends out nourishment unto all parts of the body. And that is a good common
wealth, which looks to every member of the common wealth. For as it is good
for every one that all should be looked unto, so it is good for the whole state
of the weal public.

Tertulian says, where there is no Justice, there is no peace. And it is true,
for not only beggars as Irus and Ulysses do fall forth for lack of
equality, but it goes further, and higher: For Esaw wished his fathers death,
because he had given all away unto Jacob. So Caesar says in Lucan. That
certain private men had caught all the wealth into their hands. But that is
the special, and greatest heart break, when as things are so unjustly
divided, that worthy men have little, And unworthy men have much, as when great
learned S. Austen is Bishop of little Hippo, and little learned Aurelius Bishop
of great Carthage. Other some expound this word Da parts, rather thus Da
parte^. That is, give part. And the^ you will ask me how much a man must give
of his substance. I will answer with Nazie^zen out of his Epigrames. How
much a man must give.
Give all or most, or half, or little less. And out of Tobi the iiij. chapter:
and if thou have much give much, if little, give as much as thou can. And out
of Luke the 3. chap. He that has two coats let him give one to him that has
not, and of meat likewise. Here if ye desire that I should quallifie this
straight commandment: surely I will not, our own hard hearts are ready enough
to find excuses* But I will let the commandment ly^ hard as it does, stand
to your own perils and quallifie it as you can.

Let us go forward, and see what w^ must give, and to whom we must give* The
text says we must give bread Bread therefore is the thing we must give. What
and to whom we must give.
In the which there be two things to be noted, the one is to the taker, and
the other to the geuer. To the taker as thus. Bread will serve beggars. Beggars
may not be chosers. They are bold beggars that in Stangate hole take men's
horses by the heads, and ask money, beggars may not be of the opinion of the
Anabaptists that every ma^s goods are common. Beggars must be content to
take up their cross every day, and to suffer. And to know that man's nature is
satisfied with a little. Again here the geuer may learn to give freely. The
thing that he gives is but bread. The Hebrew word Lahem signifies, bread or
fruit. Bread is ye fruit of the earth. The earth gives it us, and therefore we
may ye better give it again. It will be said that bread in this place signifies
as in the Lords prayer all things necessary. Math. 6.
I will not greatly stand against it. Howbeit I must needs say it is worthy
to be noted. That the fare and the there of the old time is contained in bread,
and the drink of the old time is contained in water: But in this thing as in
other things the simplicity of the old world is quite fled, and new things
and corrupt things are crept in. In old time father Jacob desired he might
have but bread in his journey. Gene. 28.
In this new times it is with us as Bernard said it was with his Monks. New
fashions and old fashio^s quyte contrary.
I marvel (says he) that such inte^peraunce is grown amongst my Monks in
their eatynges and drinkynges. All things are dressed with such he defulnes
and craft. The pallat is intised with new sawses. Who can tell by how many
means eggs are tossed and vexed, with what a do they are turned out, and
half turned out, made soft made hard, and deminished, fried, roasted, fersed,
with other meats, without other meats? The stomach does declare it self to
have enough by often belchyng: but yet their curiosity is not satisfied
whilst that the eyes are filled on with color and the pallat with tastes. The
unhappy stomach to whom neither colors do shine, nor tastes are dainty,
whilst it is compelled to receive all things, it is rather overwhelmed then
refreshed.

In old time their drink was contained in the name of water. In the new time
it is as S. Barnard says of ye drink of his Monks. In libro Apologetico de
Monachis.
Primo vinum lymphatum non admittitur etc. First of all we can abide no water
in our wine. We have all gotten weak stomachs. I am ashamed to speak it.
Thou shall see in one dynner half cupfulles of wine carried back again. And
diverse kinds of wine are rather smelled to, the^ dro^ke^ of. Not so much
dro^ke^ as tasted: at length after witty tastyng, and swift allowyng, they
chose one which is most strong, and heddy. Again they myngle their wynes with
honey. Do they that for weakness of their stomach? truly I do see none other
purpose in their so doing, but only that they may drink more, or with more
pleasure. But when the veins are full of wine, and do frote and beat all the
head over, a man rising so from the table, what other lust then has he but to
go to sleep? And when he is come to his bed, he does morn not the sin of his
dronkennes: but because his stomach is gone that he can eat no more. Gene. 18.
In old time Angels were wont to go on foot, In new time as Solomon says,
Gene. 23. and. 38.
servants ride on horseback. In old time father Jacob and Judas traueled
far iorneyes with a staff on their back: In these new times we cannot
traueile from one village to an other, But we have a sword, and a bucler, a
Tucke, and a Targette, a dagger and a raper, a muskete, a cal^uer, a currier, a
hargabush, and an half hacke, a pistol and a pistollet, a dagge and a
snapehanche. I say the malice, and curiosity of new times has driven away
the simplicity of old times. Gene. 27.
In old time my Lady Rebecka came ridyng to her new husband on a camels back,
In new time our Ladies have waggyns, couches, and horselitters soft, silke^,
and sewtable. In old time the Patriarch Judas did know the harlot Thamer by her
apparel, Gene. 24.
In the new time either matrons are so lightly apparelled, or harlots so
gravely, that things are blundered, and confounded. In old time the Prophets
were known by their apparel, 1. Kings. 13 Read Peter Martyrs Commentary.
As that Prophet which was slain by the Lion, In the new time because some
godly men have a remorse in wearyng some kind of apparel. Therefore other
some of the Ministry pretending the same Religion, will go bravely like
mynions. Gene. 37.
In old time Joseph dreamed a dream that he should be in great estimation and
that his brethren should worship him, and told it them. In new time it is
thought a sufferaigne wisdom to be of an hollow, and close heart, and to
disse^ble in all things. Gene. 39.
In old time Joseph could not be pulled by his mistres to co^se^t unto her, In
new time it is a certain kind of trade for me^ to rise up by pullyng their
mistres. Gene. 49.
In old time Joseph forgave his brethren, that had abused him, and done him so
many injuries. In this new time there is nothing but fierce reuengement in all
sorts. Every man takes his fellow by the throt, And if there lack just
occasions, they will pick quarrels. In ye time of Justinius Martyr. They cried
out in matters of doctrine LET OLD THINGS PREVAIL. So I put you in
remembrance of the simplicity of the old world. In matters of manners do now
cry out Let old things prevail. And this much of that point, what we must
give.

To whom we must give.
Let us now likewise briefly see to who^ we must give. The text says in the
first line upon the face of the waters. The second line to vij. or to viij. You
will say you do not know what that saying means upon the face of the waters.
I think so. A good divine may miss the exposition of this place. I will not
take upon me to understand it. But will tell you how others have written upon
it. And first Castalio comes into my mind, who expounds it thus. Cast thy
bread upon the face of the waters. That is, unto moist places. By moist places
he seems to mean such places, and persons as will be fruitful, and thrive by
the castyng of our bread unto them. But this exposition me thinks cannot be
true. Because that in this world no man ca^ tell what success will come unto
man. Solomon says in the ix. chap. of Eccle. All things fall out alike unto
all men. One chance is to the just and unjust. The good, and clean and the
unclean. To him that sacrifices, and to him that does not sacrifice. Even as
the good is, even so is he that does sin. And as he is that does swear, so
is he that is afeard to take an oath. Again he said, I see that in ru^nyng it
did not prevail to be swift. Nor in battle to be strong, that wise men do
not always get their bread, nor witty men riches. And that learned men are not
always in favor. But time, and chance preuayleth in every thing. I do hereby
therefore gather, that we should not stand still upon consultyng, whether the
party that we would give to, would thrive, or not thrive, be lucky or not
lucky, it were but a vain consultation, because man cannot tell it. And
therefore I will let slip this exposition. An other exposition there is. That to
cast thy bread upon the face of the waters, is to send it over the Seas. And if
this be true as it is not all together vnlickly: We may see how large, and
far spreading a thing charity is, which the great and huge body of the
monstrous Sea can not dissunder. They be our neighbors also which dwell
beyond the seas. For charity stretches to the compassion toward all me^.
Charity is not tied to a few but spreads far.
And if yt our power be such, we are bound to reliue those that be beyond the
Seas: then this is but a covetous folly to persuade our selves, That we are not
bound in conscience to give any thing out of our own Parishes. Nay this is a
forcible argument against them that provide only for their own housholdes
kinredes, and families. But specially against those which casting away all
other care, do make their belly their only God. And think them selves borne
only to them selves: men most far of from the obseruyng of this precept.
Send or cast thy bread upon the face of the waters.

There is yet also an other exposition, and that is to cast our bread upon
moist faces, as much to say as faces of tears: Tears.
or weping faces, and in deed tears are great cause of compassion, specially
the tears yt rise from beggars eyes are of great force, and must needs be
regarded. If the tears of Esaw that wept for loss of goods, if of Pompey
that wept at the sight of the City called Cacobasilia, Gene. 17.
of David that wept for ye loss of one city, and two wives, Of Alexander that
wept for the sight of a Tragedy, of Metellus that wept because he was not at
the wynnyng of Numydy, If the tears which rise of foyles, of kyndenes, of
unkindness, of percell losses, if the tears of unkindness be famous, and
remembered: what say you to those tears that rise of beggary, of misery, and of
hunger. O what should a man say to those faces, which be made moist thorough
the styng of hunger. Hunger has most bitter, and sharp effects. It casts
in, all extremities. Proverb.xxvij. To an hungry soul every bitter thing is
sweet, it made the Apostles glad to eat the ears of corn. David glad to
eat the show bread. Lazarus glad to eat cromes. Elias glad of meal,
Corcutus the Turks elder brother to live long with wyldinges. In the
destruction of Jerusalem it made the mother to eat her child In the waylynges
of Jeremy it made people to eat their own ordure. Gene. 41.
It made the people cry unto Pharao for bread. It made so great an hunger in
Samaron, 2. Kings. 2
that the head of an ass, and a little Pigeons dong were dearly sold, Esaias. 51.
it made them to sound and to lie in the streets. Apocal. 6.
It makes them black as suit, And therefore the horse of hunger is called the
black horse, And in this place is said to make men to shed tears, and have
moist faces. David says that God nombred all his tears in a bottell. Dauides
tears were worthy to be preserved. But, if ever tears were worthy to be
nombred, the tears that are shed for famine, howsoever me^ neglect them, are
undoubtedly gathered together into gods bottell, and thence they rain as
waters out of violles in way of reuengement of those that will not look upon
the^. He that regards not tears, regards nothing.
Tears are the last thing that man or woman can move by. And therefore poor
Dido being at the last cast desires Aeneas by her tears to be good to her:
where tears move not, there nothing moves. I desire you, good people, by the
fayntyng of these poor men, by their black faces, by their cryinges, by their
sownynges, by their tears to be good, and merciful vn-them. And to cast your
bread upon their moist faces.

The last exposition of this text, is. That a man should give his alms, though
he have no more hope to recover it, then he has that which he casts upon
the face of the runnyng water. This sense I think to be nerest unto the
truth. And this sense exhorts us vehemently to be francke, and almost
desperate in giving, and takes away almost all excuse of holdyng, and
retainyng. Furthermore if ye desire to know to who^ we should give, the text
will tell you, to vij. or to viij. That is to a great number. The Scripture
says, give to every one that asks, so God in the beginning of the Genesis
gave herbs and other food to every living thing. Every common wealth that
lets any member of it to perish for hunger, is in so doing the worse, and
more uncharitable common wealth. But, there be such doubts that you cannot be
persuaded to part with any thing you have, Objections of the hard heart.
because a man partyng now from his money to a poor man, it is as a man should
cast a thing into the water, it will be lost, and it will not be remembered.
Touching that point that you think it shall be lost, ye shall here more
afterward. The doings of men are soon forgotten.
Concerning the remembrance of your good deeds thus bestowed ye shall here
present. I marvel what this world can do whereby it shall be remembered? Is not
the place of Paradise it self, and the iiij. rivers clean forgotten where
they were? If Paradise be forgotten, shall earthly remembraunces remain? Who
does now bear in mind what manner of apparel Julius Caesar, or Solomon did
wear? Or what were the fashions in attire in those days? Luke. 16.
Who has in mind what meat the rich glotton did eat? is not the Cheualry of
many a man forgotten? True alms never forgotten.
books and book writers forgotten? Dwellynges, feasts, shows, Royalties,
joys, and iestes forgotten? all things in this world are, or shall be
forgotten. But God is not unjust that he will forget the work, Hebr. 6.
and love which you have showed in his name.

Yet there is an other doubt that a man must give to so many, to vij. or to
viij. An other excuse.
Alas will they say, we shall be overwhelmed with number. A man by giving to so
many beggars, him self in time shall be a beggar. David answered to this, I
never saw the just man forsaken, nor his seed beggyng his bread. He means
this, that in so long a life as David had leadd, a man shall scarce see that
upon an upright heart in geuyng a man shall be brought to beggary. But let us see
the weight of this doubt, thou say thou art afraid to give unto vij, or to
viij. Let me hear what you say, is it so great a thing to give unto vij, or
to viij? But you make it no great doubt, thou thy self alone to set upon vij.
viij. ix. x. or xx. dishes. To have xx. coats, xx. houses, xx. farms, yea xx.
Lordshyps. If thou be a Lawyer thou art not afeard to under xx. poor men, or a
Merchant to eat up twenty Merchants. Where there is no fear thou art much
afearde: and where there is much fear, you art nothing afeard. The world can
ever easly find a staff to beat a dog. The world is never without excuse,
it is ever ready to find delays, and find shifts to keep in their alms.
So Naball when David made his moan to him for relief at his hand, Though he
were a stark fool otherwise, yet he redely found excuses to deny him his
request. 1. Sam. 25.
For first says David who is Naball, Nabals excuse.
or who is the son of Isa? Secondly he says, that many servants were gone
a side from their master. Thirdly, that such meat as he had it was provided,
but for him, and his sherers. Well, go to, let us examine these reasons of
Naball, and pursewe his excuses. Who is David quoth Naball, and who is the
son of Isa? Abigall a wise woman, the wife of Naball did know David. The
servants of Naball did report very well of David. David had killed great
Golliath, David was known to the Ladies of Israel, and all Israel: yet
Naball does not know David. Naball did know David, but Naball would not know
David. Deaf ears in adversity, deaf ears in adversity. Never in misery
does any Naball know any David. Let us see this second excuse, Many servants
be gone a side from their master. Naball here seems to accuse David of going
aside from his master, that is of a schism, or rebellion, Never thinkyng with
him self the great cruelty of his Master Saul, The perilous accusations of
Doeg, yea and at such time as David went about to assuage the deuilishe, and
vnte^perat nature of Saul with pleasant, and well tewned music, At the same
time Saul went about to kill David. These things Naball would not consider,
for surely Naball, and wicked men will to the death accuse just me^, rather
then by their alms they will relief the^. Nabals third excuse was yt such
provision as he had was for him, and his shearers, and this excuse is also
worthy to be thought upon. Let us consider David and Naball, what was David? as
I said before, a triumpher upon Golliath, a man of wide renome, and under God
the glory of Israel. What is David? At this instant when he made his
supplication to Nabal a poor Gentleman, yet a Ge^tleman, yea a very honest
godly and famous gentleman. What was David? like to be a Prince, a King, and
his seed to rule in secula seculoru^. Now what was Naball? His name says, he
was a fool. His good wife said he was a fool, and his manners proclaimed him
to be a fool in secula seculorum* Yet foolish Nabal and his foolish shearers
must have all. And David and his godly company must lack all: Thus what for
fear to cast our bread into the water or for fear to give it unto to many as
to vij. or viij. or else for other excuses which wordly Nabals can invent: David
and poor men are most sparyngly refreshed, charity is quenched, and we dare
not cast our bread upon the face of the waters. But these doubts are no
doubts, wherefore we should not give, The first reason why we should give.
but the reasons that follow are great reasons wherefore we should give, because
after many days we shall find it again. And here the world can doubt
nothing, but that we shall find it again. For God says in this place we
shall find it again. In Eccl. 3. It is said, That the Lord which does
recompense favor for favor will be myndefull hereafter. That he which gives
in time of his fall shall receive relief again. In Psalm xlj. It is said.
Blessed is he which does consider of the poor and nedy. Because in the day of
necessity the Lord will deliver him. The Lord will keep him and quicken him.
He shall be blessed in the land, and shall not be given over into the hands of
his enemies. The Lord shall prompt him up in the bed of his sorrow. And turn
his couch in his infirmity. So by these, and many other places it is plain,
that God says we shall find our alms again. The truth of the word of God
proves that we shall receive our alms again.
Neither ca^ the hard hearted man stick here, except he will doubt whether Gods
words be true or no, The which if he do let him know what David says
Psalm. xciij. saying, thy testimonies are very true. Esaias says xlv. chap. De
ore egressum est verbum meum and no^ reuertetur. The word is gone out of my
mouth and it shall not return. 2. Cor. 1. It is said: All the promises in
Christ be yea and amen. And this is true of all Gods other promises, They be
all yea and amen, Gene. 49.
Old Jacob promised that Christ would come so it fell out it was yea and amen.

For God fulfilled that which he promised by Jacob. Gene. 15.
He promised Abraha^s seed like the Stars from the sky: It came so to pass
as we read in third book of the kings: 3. Kings. 3
I am says Solomon in the midst of this people, which can not be no^bred
nor compted. His promise that he made to Sara was true. Hi^ promise that he
made in xxx. of Exodus in deliueryng his people out of Egyp^ was true, That
which he promised t^ Joshua of the wynnyng of the City Ha^^ and all the kings
that conspired agayn^^ him was true likewise. Joshua. 8.
1. Kings. 13 3. Kings. 3 1. Samu. 65 1. Sam. 4.
He promised David his kingdom, Solomon wisdom Pharao destruction by water,
Saul loss^ of his kingdom, Helye neck break Solomon the dividing of his
kingdom And all these proved true, all and ever the words of God shall be found
certain that is yea and amen. Neither are we alon^ to venture of the certeintie
of these promises. They have been that have ventured long before, and with
great ieperdie upon the bare word of God. Gene. 12.
Abraham ventured to forsake the acquaintance o^ his youth, his kinsfolk, and
fre^des, and and to leave that which he had long sen^ with his eyes, to go to
that which he never saw, So ventured he to set upon king Gederlaomer and his
fellow kings. Gene. 14.
And further to kill his own son, and all this upon the bare word of God.
Gene. 6.
Noe ventured to defray great sommes of money for the buyldyng of an Arc, All
the whole world laughyng on him to scorn, by the only warraunt of Gods word,
Moses ventured to forsake the kynred, and acquayntaunce of Pharao, and rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God only for the trust he had in that
word. And as it is said in xj to the Hebr. what shall I more say? the time
will fail me if I should rehearse of Gedion, of Barach Sampson, Iepth, David,
Samuel and the Prophets. If all these have ventured, why dare not you
venture? upon man's word the world will venture: man's word is but pe^ne ink and
paper. Gods word is a rock, Gods word is not subject to casualtie. Man's word
is subject to craft and casualtie. If therefore we venture upon any ground, Let
us venture upon Gods word, why should we not venture? In short time after we
must venture, for we must dye, and leave our goods we wot not to whom. So in
Luke xij. Fool this night they will fetch away thy soul. And then that
which thou have got whose shall it be? So in Eccle. 3. I hate my labor in
the which I have labored under the sun. Because I must leave it unto a man
which shall be after me. And no man can tell whether he be wise or a fool. And
yet he must be a Lord in all the labor, which I have labored under the sun.
Heirs appare^t I say are not always heirs at your death you must venture
it, therefore now venture it. Ve^ture, for after many days ye shall receive it
again. But it forethinketh you yt God differreth your reward many days and
that it shall be long or you find it. Job. 1.
Know you what Job says. If we take good things at Gods hand, Why do we not
take ill things likewise? If we be well content yt God should long differ
our punishment why are we not likewise content yt God should long differ our
joy, and reward? God suffered Cayne long unpunished, He suffered the sinners
before the stud Cxx. years after he had warned them. He suffered the
Amorittes, whilst their iniquity was filled up. He suffered Sodom, and
Gomorra whilst the cry of their wickedness was multiplied, and their sin was
to much made heinous. Esaias. 1^.
He suffered Mohab iij. years, he threatened that the people should be slain
on the alter in Ierobohams days for their wickedness, 1. Kings. 13
yet he differred this punishment CC. and lx. years. He suffered ungodly men
to prolong their days by their malice. He suffers wicked men to live in
great prosperity, and to be buried honorably. Eccl. 7. and 10.
And their sons to be great men, And ride on horseback. He suffered the rich
man in S. Luke to eat and drink even to his death. He bears with iniquity
in all men, and suffers it long unpunished. Therefore if it be long or we
find our bread again, we must be content with it. If it grieve us that it is
differred many days. Let us remember that David also being a good, and just
man was unlooked to many days. And therefore he cries often Vsquequo. Psalm.
6. and.13.
How long, how long Lord, how long, and this he cries ofte^s. The people of
God says, that they were exercised with miseries even from their youth. Godly
men dye unburied, and he that did save a City. Eccl. 9.
God suffered him in this world to be clean forgotten. Sara suffered long
vexation of Hagar, and her son, Abraham suffered long the injury of
Abimileckes servants, Joseph suffered long the wrongs of his brethren, and
of his mistress. Jeremy suffered long and many wrongs. Paul suffered long
troubles, and wrongs. The people of God Apocal. vi. cry out how long O Lord
thou that art holy and true. Do thou not Judge and revenge our blood on
those that dwell on the earth. So that God exercises good men long in the
troubles of this world, Our time is but short though trouble make it seem long.
And therefore we may be contented if after a long time we find the fruit of
our alms again. Neither be these days long days in deed, but in opinion,
and though they be many days, yet are they but days. For the length of our
life is not worthy to be named in ye name of years. Our life is as Jacob says
of his life my days are but a few. Joseph being borne in the middle age of
Jacob is said in Scripture so be the son of his old age. For a man being a
child, is even now at his middle age: and being at his middle age is even now
at his old age. An hundred years in age is but the years of childhode, so it
is said a child of an hundred year old. Esaias. 38.
The Prophet Esaias calls lx. years but one moment. He tells his people he
would forsake them for a moment, He means lx. years in the captivity of
Babylon. Paul calls the greefes that we have in this world the griefs of a
moment, David compares ma^s life to wind, to talk, and to a shadow: Esaias
co^pareth it to the remouyng of a tabernacle. Job to an Egles wyng and to a
Weuers shittell. So that these many days are in deed but a few days. Go to
it freely therefore, For after a few days though you think them many days.
What soever you mercyfully bestow upon the poor ye shall find it again.

There follows an other reason. The second reason wherefore we should give
alms.
Thou can not tell what will be tide upon, the earth. So yt here Solomon seems
to say this much, There will some thing fall on ye earth that thou know not
of, if thou did know of it, o^ would know, it would surely stir thee
up to be liberal. And that thou do not know particular chau^ces I do not
greatly blame thee. In deed Solomon says truly, We do not know things to
come. For it was not given unto the Apostles to know times, and the moments of
times, For even in these things where our book lies open, we are deceived
for lack of knowledge. So Gregory Nazie^zen seems not to know the true honor
of Marriage. Orat. 31.
Nor Justinius Martyr the state of angels, and their affection toward women.
Nor Austen the true meaning of the Psalms. Lib. 3. cap. 8.
Nor Jerome of the little prophets. Nor Ireneus ye age of Christ. Tertulia^ knew
not truth in second Marriages. Nor Chrysostom in free will and taking of oaths.
The Council of Ephesus was deceived with Eutiches heresy. The first Counsel
of Nice had committed a great folly but for Paphnutius. The third Council of
Carthage was deceived, in forbiddyng prayers to be made unto ye son of God.
The third Council of Nice knew not the truth and therefore they set up Images
and ca^dles, and dissanulled the writings of Epiphanius. Peter Martyr seems
to some not to have understood what Sinus Abrill meant. Beza saw some things
that Calvin saw not. And Mollineus would seem to see further then Beza.
Musculus confesses he knows not that saying of S. John, That you may be one
as I and my father am one. Bucer is thought not to have determined well of
usury. Castalio says that he understands not the x. part of the Apocalipse.
Man's knowledge fails in all things, Vesalius is reproved by Columbus in the
Anatomi. Fuxius by Matheolus in the Herball. And Matheolus by others. Galene
the great Physician is reproved by many, Paracelsus has controled them all and
is controled him self. In Arithmeticke they cannot hit the rule of Algebra, In
Geometri Cardanus says but Euclide has not handled the matter with dexterity
enough. In Astronomy Ptolome and all his assistau^ce are called back by
Copernicus; In Logic they are called back by Ramus. In moral Philosophy,
they know not what the chief good of man is, In the Greek tongue, the phrase of
all men is controled by Dionisius Halicarnasseus. In the Latin tongue there is
no man's style, but it has some blemish except ye style of Julius Caesar. If in
toungs and Arts, where nature endoctrineth and our book does help we know
not and are deceived, then in things to come, the knowledge whereof is most
hidden, it is no marvel though our fore sight be naught worth, if these
easier things be so hard to attain unto, then those harder things are most
hardly discussed and specially the knowledge of things to come is in truth it
self a thing of great difficulty. Astrology.
And here appears unto me a deep matter, a wide controversy, and a large
field to speak with or against the Astologers. And the matter is somewhat
doubtful. For if I speak with them my text speaks against the^, If I speak
against them. The greater part of men who laugheth all learning to scorn will
have better will to be rude; and less love to be learned. If I speak with
them Picus Mirandula speaks against them. If I speak against them Ieronymus
Cardanus, Iouianus Pontanus, and Marsilius Ficinus speaks with the^. Speaking
with them Calvin of a great judgment speaks against me, if I speak against
them Phillip Melanctho^ a man of much learning will not speak with me. And to
conclude I say as our Savior Christ some time said, who being called to be a
Judge, and ^^^per in matters of law about partyng of inheritance (he said) who
has appointed me a judge amongst you? Christ would be no judge in such basse
matters. Pyuish holiness makes foolish judgment.
But I dare not judge in these learned matters, Neither will I seem to over
rule the judgments of such worthy, and excellent fathers, yet what I mistake
I will say. And that I say, seems to me to be void neither of reason, nor of
conscience. First therefore I mislike the pyu^^ holiness of some. Who either to
reserve (as they think) the more power to God, do take away all the virtue,
and worthynesse of the creatures: or else to please M. Calvin the more, do take
away all Comercia coeli, that is all the influences of heaven. But as Job said
Go to the beasts of the field and they will teach thee. Job. 12.
So I will the^ to resort, but to the contemplation of nature, and they cannot
be ignorant. The herb called Orphan lives without any root. Natural
proffes.
The Mallow and the Marigold and the herb called Holitropium apply the^ selves
to the presence or absence of the sun. The Bittell according to ye form of
the moon, comes out and goes in with one course. The Pise mire in the full
moon, works day and night. Cucubers in the full moon be more full, in ye
wayning of the moon more empty. Shel Fishes follow the course of ye moon.
The falling sickness and the sickness of eyes Men's sicknesses, and women's
infirmities, are increased and decreased by the semblaunce of the Moon. Yea
and the great huge Sea, also follows the proportion of the Moon likewise.
This grau^teth also Calvin him self, that mellancolly, collar, and other
humors are moved and wrought by the Planettes, and touching ma^s bodies
somewhat more may be granted. Howbeit, he that denies that the heavenly
bodies, have no doings toward, or upon the inferior bodies, for my part I
think them not only to be witles but also to be myndeles. But here I do
specially mislike, that the Astrologians will not only give out their
gessinges in general matters. But also in particular countries, and cases,
They will forspeake of war, and of peace, and of dearth, and of chepth, and
as they call them, particular matters of fortune: it yrketh me farther more to
remember the vanity of these men. For as the Saracens will seem to derive
their antiquity from Sara. And the Haggere^s from Haggar, (and that which
would make a sober man to laugh, The Astrologers do falsely claim antiquity.
) The Heroldes also, will fetch their antiquity of their imblasenyng, from
Cain and Abel, The Papists their Religion from Peter: So these Astrologians
will defend their fact, and prove their Art good by the examples of Adam, of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. As who would say Astrology were a thing of great
primacie. We read in deed that Ada^ gave very proper Hebrew names to fowls,
fishes, and herbs. But that he had any knowledge in the Stars that we read
not.

Gene.xv. It is said to Abraham, Number the Stars of heaven if thou can.
Austen in his book De Ciuitate Der. xvi. chap. says thus. That those are to
be contemned, which say they have found out the number of the Stars, For it
is only the property of God to know the Stars and their names. And surely
if yt any of the^ should at any time have had any knowledge in that science; My
think that the Patriarch Isaac should seem to be instructed therein. For of
him it is written, Cap. 24. verse. 62.
Isaac went into the fields to study. But of the other it is not written that
they went to study or dye study. Of the same Isaac we do read that he did not
know the day of his death, Therefore we may thus conclude. Isaac the studient
did not know the chief part of Astrology, that is his fatal hour.
Therefore Ada^, Abraham, and Jacob, which in Scripture have no name of
stud^en^es did not study Astrology, or at lea^^ were ignorant in those
things, which the Astrologers do challenge unto them selves. I will not urge
here the textes of Esaias or S. Austen, or of Tertulian in his book De habitu
Mulicrum. Let them by me enjoy their Art whether it be much; or little. nmo,
or l^^, Rule or Judgment. Howbeit I meruell, if that clear judgment may be
rendered in their science. Why the^ do they always write darkely, or falsely?
darkly, like Appollo ye devil of Delphos. Such a profound impostor, or deceauer
was Nostradamus, who gave out ye text openly. But kept the Co^mentary in the
chau^cery of his own breast. Our me^ are a little more dull they write plain,
for they write plain lies, and both half disclaymyng, and cortallyng of their
Art, yet they powder it with lies still. There has so many gone about to tell
us great truths, and so few hit in little truths, that I suspect it, there is
not any truth great or little in that their great mystery of Astrology. But
though they know not particular chau^ces or times, or moments of times, yet
though we never view ye face of heaven, but poor upon the earth like brute
beasts, which God has framed to look where they like best. This must needs
be the entry door, The threshold, The Alpha, Eccl. 8.
and the a. b. c. of all Divinity, Scio quod beue erit timentibus Deu^. etc. I
know that it shall be well unto those that fear God, and are afraid of his
face. And it shall not be well unto the wicked: Neither shall they prolong
their days, because they are not afraid of his face. Here then stay. And you
shall see together with me. Whether it be lykely that ill, and mischief will
fall upon the earth, the case is this. If the fear of God be in men, there
will no mischief fall upon the earth. If the fear of God be not in me^ there
will mischief fall upon the earth. And here I enter into the fearful and
discoraging question. Whether the fear of God be in this generation or not.
The fear of God ye know, and the love of God are most nearely knit together.
And where soever is the love, and fear of God there is ye keepyng of Gods
commandments. So that now I must demand whether that Gods commandments be
kept on earth. John. 14.
And now this question grows from bitter to bitterer, from worm woodde to
gall, From worse to worste. For, (thought I) for me to go tell the breach of
the laws throughout the la^d, And ye breakers of Gods laws, and the illnes
that may, and will light upon the la^d: Since Jonas so feared it, Michae so
felt it, and Jeremy so smarted for it: (As I say) I took it be a toto cold
occupation, and a very unthrifty. Since that I my self also have tasted it
before with mine own experience. And hark, how fear cast in many
extremities. This la^d (thought I) is divided into the Nobility, the Clergy,
the Lawyers, and the people. If I should check the offenses of the Nobility,
I should speak against Lions. If of the Lawyers, Soph. iij.
I should speak against Wolfes. If of the Clergy I should speak against Foxes,
if of the people I should have to do with Waspes. And in deed in this respect
I could not but compare the Nobility unto Lyo^s. For as if any beast anointed
with ye Lions grease, no beast of the forest will annoy him. And as the
Proverb says, it is a grievous thing to awake a Lion: so no doubt it is both
grievous and ieberdous to speak against the vices of the Nobility, and to wake
them out of that sleep of sin, wherein they so swetly and quietly slomber.
Though Christ him self called the Priests and Pharise is wolves under La^bes
skins, yet I will rather now call the Lawyers Wolves, both because they are
greedy to swallow; and also in might and power stronger then the Clergy. The
Clergy as it now is resembled most aptly (my thought) the nature of Foxes, who
thought they seem to sleep before company, yet they will spoil and pray
when no body looks on and surely they sleep as sin is said to sleep in
Genesis. Gene. ^.
Sin says the text slepeth before the doors: That is sin sleeps whilst
we live. But when we go out of the doors of this life it sits upon us. So
they will disse^ble their reuengement before the eyes of the world, but when
the preacher is gone out of the Pulpit, They will set upon him. The people I
thought to be like unto Waspes. For if one Waspe styng upon a pyuishe
affection, a number also will styng for fellowship. So that to conclude I see
nothing from the world but emynent danger. And here I assure you I stood in a
cross way, that I could not tell which path was better to tread. For
displeasure being so near unto me from the world. And God being so far of to
the judgment of flesh and blood: I was driven into a most vncerteinetie: Nor
in all this world I could find any one manner thing yt in this case could reliue
me, I left therefore ye dwellers upon earth, and lifted up my mind unto him
that dwells in heaven, in whose cause I did think once again to venture. And
his spirit did assure me, yt so far as heaven is exalted above earth. So
far is his strength exalted above man's strength Gods strength and his
mainteinaunce above man's mainteinaunce, I did therefore by the favorable
protection of God purpose with my self to utter my conscience, How despised
and odious soever it should be in the eyes of the world. But because I was not
very certain whether it would better edify this age to speak in roughnes,
or in myldenes of spirit, I thought to use both ways, and kinds. And to do
as the wise, Lapidary does with his pearls, who according to their nature does
te^per some of the^ with honey. And some of them with vynager. So I will deal
with some gently, and with other some sharply. Neither will I charge them with
sin from my self: but I will ask them of their own conscience. And first
to begin with the Nobility, I must needs say as Job said some time unto God, O
that a man might speak unto you as he does unto his neighbor. I would then
demand of you many questions. And first I would ask of you, whether it be
not in your Court as it was in the Court of Pharao. Where there was Princeps
Pistoru^, and Princeps Laniorum, Gene. 11.
The Prince of Bakers, and the Prince of Butchers. My question is this, whether
that officers and masters of belly cheer and instruments of worldly pleasures
does grow up to great principallitie, And rather by those means then by
wisdom government, temperauncy, council, actiuitie, Cheualry etc? Again if
I might speak to you as a man does to his neighbor, I will ask you if all
preachers be not to you as Micheas was to the Court of Achab, whilst he
pronounced victory against the Syrians, he was a trime prophet and in great
price: but at an other battle when he said they should not wyn, he was in
great disdain. 3. Kings. 22
So that seruyng their appetites they loved him, and not seruyng their
appetites they did not love him. Again I would ask of you this question,
whether that you be of Salomons opinion in this point, who says by taking away
the wicked man from the kings presence, Prouer. 29.
his throne shall be established, And if ye be of that opinion whether you do
practice, it or no? Also I would ask of you whether you do not rather delight
to be noble men like unto Esau, Gene. 34.
whose nobility was in carrying four hundred men after him, then to Jacob
whose nobility was in the invocation of the true God, In calling of him, The
God of Abraham, The God of Isaac, The God of Jacob. Whether that ye be not like
to that nobility which is spoken of in the fourth of Osee. Where it is said.
Osee. 4.
Their nobility or chief men love bring ye filthely? Whether ye be of the
opinion of our Savior in the vi. of S. John. Caro non prodest quicquam. The
flesh (says he) profits nothing. And if the flesh profit nothing, Whether
you can think that blood or gentry profits any thing? Again, whether that
your Seruyng men do not use their badges as Cayne did his mark. Because Cayn
had a mark that if any men killed him, he should be punished seven times as
grievously, But if Cayne killed any we read in this world of no punishment: So I
will ask you whether if one chance to kill one that has your badge, or mark
he be sure of execution, Gene. 4.
or not? But if any of yours chance to kill one, whether that then through the
privilege of your badge, and mark he is not vntouchable, These and many
other the like questions if I might speak unto you as to my neighbor, good
Lords and noble men, I would demand of you. But as in fleyng of an hare, or
conny it is not very hard to pluck of the skin whilst it come at the head,
but then it is very busy and difficulte: so in controlyng of vice, it is never
so hard in reformation, and stays so much as when it comes to you, who are
the heads, and I in this business am more likely to hurt my self the^ profit
you. But that which I cannot, God can. To whom I pray for you. And to whom I
commend you, and your virtuous amendment. If I might speak to ye Lawyers as
unto my neighbor, I would ask them but this one question. Whether they do not
judge Secundu^ aspectu^, that is according to ye outward show. John. 7.
Whether that the face of a noble and a mean man, a rich man and a poor man
be all one or no? Of ye clergy I would demand, whether that in conscience,
they do not think themselves like unto Cucumers, the which Cucumers, if it
thunder from heaven torn them selves round about: so whether that they, if
there be any thundryng from the Court either by speech, or by letter do not
turn their affection and that very roundly. Again, I would demand of them,
whether that they do not suppose that the world does think us very cowardly
and foolish shepherds, that dare speak so boldly against the Pope, or against
ceremonies, or with ceremonies, in which matters we are vpholded with one
faction or an other: But against vice we speak nothing, or very fayntely: And
as cocks nipt with kites claws, we cakle, but we crow not. Also I would ask
of the Clergy, and that by their own experience of those that have preached
sincerely, whether a man preaching freely against these two vices, uncleanness of
life and bribery should not have his soul driven like a Sparrow from place to
place, should not have forrowes made upon his shoulders, have his soul made
low unto the dust, and be blacked with slanders and adversity. To these
Londonners because I may speak as unto my neighbors. I will thus say and
demand of them. How they do live according to the profession of the Gospel,
considering there is so few of them good and so many of them naught. And
again whether they had not rather both the preacher, and Pulpits were set on
fire, Then they would forsake that sweet and gaynfull sin of usury. Whether
those which have had occasion to try them have not found them as unmercifully
as the mercyles Exchecker, as void of Religion as the Papist. I appeal to God
that knows this, to the world that cannot for shame deny it. If I say the
truth go about your own amendment, and not to hurt me. And thus much I have
spoken in gentleness of spirit. If you marvel what can be said more rougher I
will speak to you out of the 5. of Jeremy. Go, and search throughout all the
streets of Jerusalem, and see and know and enquire in every street, whether you
can find such a man, and whether there be such a one as does judgment and
seeks the truth and I will spare the City. And as truly as God lives, they
will swear a very lie. And I said, truly these men are poor me^ and they are
but fools. Because they do not know the way of Iehoua. And the Judgment of
their God. I will go therefore to the upper sort and speak to them for they
know the Judgment of Iehoua their God, but they also truly had broken the
yocke, They had burst to pieces the bands. So that the cause of the
destruction of this City was, that the people was not southefast in word, and
the nobility was violent in work: Even so it is now thorough town and
country, There is fraud and deceate, in bargens and in all speches amongst
the people. The nobility or upper sort are very violent, for they do not take
that thing in hand, which they will not dispatch either by favor or money,
and no rich ma^s matter or noble ma^s matter is an ill matter, or at least an
unlucky matter, I may be deceived, but if it be as I take it, and I pray God I
do not mistake it, if it be so, I will utter my mind as I am compelled: And I
will swear an old oath sworn oftens before by the Prophets Viuit Iehoua, God
lives and by Gods life is all one.
God lives, or by Gods life, Except you do amend you shall all together
perish. I hate no man, I see no man, I mind no man: but upon very love, and
good heart I speak it, except ye repent ye shall all perish. O ye know, alas
you know, But alas you will not know, what ill may betide upon the earth. But
here some men do think their state so sure that no ill can betyde to them upon
the earth, but let us examine this opinion. Where do thou live? upon the
earth, what is above thy head? heaven. Who is the dweller in heaven? God. And
thence says Jeremy our sins being tied to Gods hand does rele amayne upon
our necks. God has diverse ways to punish, and diverse kinds of
punishementes, when as in the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 6.
God councelled with the Cherubins, How to punish the wicked people, one of the
angels said thus, and an other said thus. So that here by it appears that
God has diverse kinds of punishments. Is ma^s heart so foolish, Plagues may
chance upon the earth.
that it does think that there can no mischief betyde upon the earth? There is
a thing they call water or rain, the which once came so largely out of heaven
that it destroyed well nigh every living thing upon the earth. But thou will
say there is a raynebow, I say the raynebow is the worlds raynebow, and not
thy raynebow. In the raynebow it is couenaunted that the world shall not all
be destroyed, Yet thou may be destroyed. This evil therefore may chance to
thee upon the earth. There is a thing they call snow Job calls it ye
treasures of Gods snowes. Job. 38.
God has whole treasures, and storehouses of snow to destroy ye wicked. That
ill also may be tide upon the earth. There is an other thing called Hayle:
Exodus 9.
which in Egypt destroyed all the cattle, trees, and fruits. So likewise in
France, the year of our Lord viij. hundred xxv. And though there be a
Raynebow, which promises saftie to the world from rain, yet there is no
haylebow. This therefore ill may chance upon the earth. Blondus in his ix.
book writes that after the death of Adeotatus, there were so great storms of
lightnynges and thunders, that it destroyed all things save only a few Pulsis
and roots. These illes also may betide upon the earth. There is also blustering
and furious wyndes, which as Cuspinianus writes in the time of Comnenus the
Emperor blew down an huge brazen Image. Job. 1.
And in the time of Job blewe down Jobs house and his progeny. This ill also
may betide upon the earth. There is also the air it self which may engender
frogs to trouble thee, as in Egypt, and Grasshoppers as in France, and
Italy, and as Cromerus reports in Polonia the year of our Lord. 1473. This
air if it be very whote may bring the plagues of pestilence and of the
sweatynges sickness, wherewith we are well acquaynted, if it be very cold it may
destroy all the fowls of the air, as some times in the days of the Emperor
Justinian, it may frees the Sea and kill fishes as in ye time of ye Emperor
Phocas, which is testified by Nicephorus and Paulus Diaconus. These illes also
may betide upon the earth. There is also an other thing most dreadful and
violent called fire. And though all other plagues fail, that plague wilt not
fail Mallachi iiij. it is said that the day of Judgment will burn like an
oven. Esaias lxvj. it is said Behold the day of the Lord shall be in fire. The
fires yt be in your Cities you ca^ help the^ with cla^pes and buckettes, The
great dangers many ways hangyng over our heads.
if it be wild fire you can quench it with milk and vinager. But this fire as
Esaias says ca^ not be quenched, It is said in Luke xvij. That in the days of
the son of man it shall be as in the days of Noe. In the days of Noe a little
dove could not set her foot on the ground for the abou^daunce of water. In
the days of the son of man a little dove shall not set down her foot, but
it shall be singed with fire. This evil will be a general evil, and this evil
shall betyde upon the earth. But let me come near unto thee, And demand a
fresh of thee. Do thou believe that no mischief can betyde upon the earth?
upon what part of the earth do thou dwell? In an Ila^d. Thou must remember
the Isles called Maiorica and Minorica were destroyed with connyes. As also the
Isle Anaphe, as Eustachius writes, if it be an Island, the sea may eat it up,
as it has done diverse Islands. There is also great danger by the nature of
the place of the arrival of enemies. This ill also may betyde upon this kind
of earth. But what profession is thy Island of? Of a Christian profession.
Therefore the Turk is the great and sworn enemy. What is ye Turk. One that
has most large and wide Signiories, one that uses severe discipline and
policy, One that wynneth much, and loses little: One yt has a good affection
to Islands, and this last year has won ye fine and wealthy Island of Cyprus.
And no dout is set on by God to go forward. The Turk they will say is far of.
But God whistelleth to those that are far of that they come like bees, to
light where he will have them. Thou laughest at me peradventure to see me so
careful. I morn for thee without peradventure to see thee so careless. Thou
laughest at me, and God at thee. Thou carest not, but care, thou laughest but
weep. And do good whilst thou may thou can not tell what ill will betyde
upon the earth.

What is the name of the Island? England: what neighbors have thou? France and
Flaunders. The one thou can not reteyne in frendshyp but as men. The other is
thine enemy most subtle, experienced, willing and able to do the hurt. Do
good therefore to all men, and cast thy bread upon the face of the water, For
thou can not tell what ill will betyde upon the earth.

Is England an whole Island? No, but half an Island, how is the other half,
Scotland affected. Some well, and many ill, as you have understood. They have
been oftens in mind to put out the candle of England. To take away our Josias
the breath of our nostrels, and to set up hipocrites upon us. O England, what
if thou be suddenly over taken as the woman with her child panges? Then will thou wish that thou had been merciful, and dealt thy bread. When thou shall
see, and feel what ill will betyde upon the face of the earth. But being but
half an Island, art thou firm and trusty within thy self? Nay, art not thou
a snacke with young thine own brood being ready to bight out thy belly?
England has swords drawn out against her, but provides no buckler. The
state of England is like to children sittyng rechlesse in the Market stead. We
play, and pype to the^ but they relent not: our Sermons are like unto ye
music which Aristotle speaks of. Ethic. 1.
Which when it is once done there is no more remembrance of it. They believe
Lawyers in law matters and follow them, Physicians and follow them: Cou^cellors
and follow them, they here preachers but they do not follow them. I am very
sorry, for I do verily think that some ill will betyde upon this earth.

But admit thou fear no general punishments by wars, by plagues, by
famine: Yet much ill may fall upon the earth. What particular man art thou but
some ill may chance to thee upon the earth. Il may hap to every man.
Art thou a Magistrate? if thou be a good one thou may be tossed and wrong like
David: If thou be an ill one, thou may break thy neck like Hely. If you be
a noble man thou may be suddenly dabte to the heart with a dagger like Abner or
like Amasias. If you be an old Courtier thou may be put to death, 2. Kings. 20
at the coming in of a new king like Ioab. If thou lackest example read the
books of the kings what has chanced unto kings. Truth it is, and time does
tell that kings the^ selves, and Courtiers of great estate have their
florishyng, and their falling, their Regno, and their Regnaui, their Sursum,
and their Deorsum. Let them therefore break their bread and live well for they
know not what ill will betyde upon the earth: If thou be a Minister and a good
Minister, then thou shall always be oppressed in the world, if thou be an ill
Minister thou may be destroyed for thine Idolatry as Helias the Prophet
destroyed Balls Priests. If thou be a graser of cattaile, thou may be
stayne of thine own brother like Abell. If thou be a ploughman thou may
chance to kill an other like unto Cayn. If thou be a landed man, thou may be
spoiled like Naboth: 3. Kings. 21
either by violence of Courtyers, either by subtlety of Lawyers. No trade nor
estate through the whole common wealth has any charter of safty. Cast thy
bread therefore upon the waters, divide it, and part it, for thou can not
tell what will betyde upon the face of ye earth: for both thy self art subject
unto evils, and thy goods are subject unto euilles. For what have thou which
is not subject unto casualtie? Have thou gemmes, jewels, and pearls? Thieves
may burst in, and steal them. Have thou gold, silver, coin, plate, and
metals? Rust may freate them, or thieves may steal them. Have thou tapestry,
silks, clothes, wardropes, mothes may eat them? and of them selves they will
wax old. Have thou great stocks of sheep, they may be burnt from heaven as
Jobs were. Have thou oxen, cattle, horse? enemies may take the^ away. Have
thou houses, and fair mansion places? They may be burnt with fire like to
Ierurusalem, or they may be blown down like to Iobes houses? Have thou grass
and corn? it may be as in the days of the Prophet Helias. 3. Kings. 17
The heavens will not hear the earth. And the soil shall be barren, for lack
of rain and moisture. Whilst thou have light and time work that which is
good. Break thy bread and cast it upon the waters, thou know not who shall
enjoy it. For thou "know not what will be tide upon the earth: For as when
the Mulbery tree does budde, it shows the spring to be at hand, as the
coming of the swallows is an argument of Summer, lightenynges of thunder,
smock of fire, bright sky of fair weather, Prickyng in the left side of
pluresies, Suddenly thernes of sickness, and rutlyng in the throat of death:
Eue^ so, and more then so I gather, and strongly suppose, that some ill will hap
upon the face of the earth. Tree may budde and yet no spring come, Swallows
may fly and yet no Summer come, Smock may be and yet no fire, voluntary
lythernes and yet no sickness, Prickyng in the left side and yet no pluresie:
But where there is so much sin, and so small repentance, Gods mercy so
abused and his justice so egged on, There must needs some ill be tide upon the
earth. You will say you know not, I think, so but the more is your shame, the
greater is your Judgment: you know, not say you? lie for shame say not so,
Forewarnynges of mischief.
Paul's steeple long ago gave you light enough to know by burning. The Thamis
and other waters might have taught you by their extraordinary flowyng. The
Stars by their blasing, mountains by mouyng, Thine own people by rebellyng.
These things argue that thou shall be sick, and diseasefull. Again, I will
reason with thee as S. Paul does in prouyng the resurrection. If (says S.
Paul) that the resurrection be not, then all our preaching is in vain. So may
I say of these times we have all joined together, All ye preachers of this land
have seen mischief hangyng over thy head, Either all our preaching and
foreseyng is to no purpose or else some mischief will betyde upon the earth. But
thou will say, thou know it not, Alas, therefore poor blind country, for
thou will not see, deaf country for thou will not hear, ^eedles, for thou
w^^t not feel, If thy preachers would go like Esaias in sack cloth, like
Jeremy, with yro^s about their neck, if they would divide their clockes like
as the Prophet did to Jeroboam, 2. Kings. 11
yet I would have no hope of thy recovery. Thou art like Esau who now having
lost his patrimony did sit down eat, drink, and was merry. Thou art like the
Jews whom Esaias speaks of xxviij. chap. Examples of deep security.
Who cried out, That they had smitte^ truce with death, and made a covenant
with their grave. Sodom would not know that the vengeance of God come upon
it, and therefore early in the morning fire, and brimstone rayned upon them, and
they were destroyed before they could well open their eyes to see the manner of
their destruction.

The people of Constantinople was so quiet when the town was taken, that their
enemies being present and their vamurs broken, they would give nothing to ye
reedifiyng thereof. Therefore ye Emperor, his Captains, and people were taken,
and murdered. The Empress and her Gentlewomen were abused. The Empire for
ever was removed from the east. This was before foretold her by her Prophets,
but Constantinople would not see it. When the Duke of Bourbon sacked Rome, and
the camp did now enuirone the whole town, the Pope, and his Cardinals were so
quiet, that being at Mass there were some of them taken, their goods spoiled,
and them selves mocked, and derided in most vilanous manner. Cassandra cried out
that the horse which was in Troy would destroy Troy, yet the blind Troyans
would not hear it, nor see it, They heard harnessed men clincke in the horse
belly, but they would not mark it. Harnest men in an horses belly destroyed
Troy: And harnessed me^ in a Lyo^s belly will they not destroy England? The
horse they said was so holy that it might not be destroyed, and yet the holy
horse destroyed the City, it yrketh me except you take heed to your selves to
forthinke your miseries. Cassandra rent her hear upon the destruction of Troy.
Jeremy wished for eesternes of tears to weep the sins of his people. Ierem.
9.
Christ wept upon Jerusalem, Luke. 19.
we may with tears of blood be sorry, and morn for the storms yt will rage in
this nation. If they will not be warned, watch, watch, fast, fast, pray, pray,
cast your bread give your bread, break your bread, for you know not what ill
will betyde upon the earth.

If the clouds be full, they will pour out their rain upon the earth, the
clouds having much rain they let it fall. The trees having fruits, An other
reason to be liberal.
they let them drop. The fountains having waters they let them run. The
cattle having milk they let it streme. The sheep having woll they yield it.
The fowls having feathers they cast them. By these natural examples man's
nature is exhorted to be liberal. The clouds if they be full they yield forth
their rain, if the clouds reteyne their own fulness it is a burden to ye
clouds to retain it. Much riches are burdens.
Much rain is a burden to clouds, and much riches are burthe^s to me^.
Abraham is said in xiij. of Genesis to be burdened with gold. Abraham was a
good man, and yet it burdened his head to be busy with the care of his gold.
Again, to be puffed up in pride and vain earthly cogitations is a burden to
the soul, but that is the effect of much riches as does appear in the first
of Timothy the vj. chap. Therefore to be very rich is a burden. Again to eat
much, drink much, and rest much is a burden unto the soul, though it be
pleasant to the body. But in the xij. of Luke it is proved that abundance of
riches makes one to eat much, drink much, and rest much: Therefore as much
rain is a burden to clouds: So much riches are burdens to men. Again, that
which does pluck a man's heart into diverse thoughts and cogitations, that is a
burden unto men. But in ye vj. of Matthew, it is said where thy treasure is,
there is thy heart: So that if a man's treasure be in an hundred places, his heart
is in as many places therefore to be very rich is a very great burden. Again,
yt which makes a man unfit for the kingdom of heaven is a great burden unto
a man's soul. But much riches makes a man as unapt to go to heaven as a
camel to creep thorough a nedels eyes. Therefore abundance of riches is a
burden unto man. Again, that which makes a man to depart unwillingly out of
his life is a burden unto man's soul, but that do great riches. As does
appear Sirach xli. O death how bitter is thy memory unto him that does live
quietly. etc. Therefore plenty of riches is a burden unto man's soul. A little
will serve nature. Much riches does in our life time disease us. And will at
our death trouble us. Therefore as ye clouds pour out their rain let us be
free and dispense them. Much riches made Ezechias lay his heart to the. Esaias. 39.
Much riches undid Solomon, and undid the Church of Rome, and in all degrees
and states are very pestiferous. In the nobility they have this effect, They
work appetite without measure, and as a dropsy man, the more he drinks, the
more he may: so these men as it is in the 5. of Esaias join house to house, and
land to land: even so far as there is no more ground to purchase. In
corrupt spiritual and te^porall officers, this abundance of money works
all manner of mischief. Salust, says yt a kingdom is easly preserved by ye
means by ye which it is gotten. These me^ some to take good heed to that
saying of Salust, for they get their rooms with money, and maintain the^ with
money. The strength of the Eliphante is in his snoute, Of the Bore in his
tuske, of the Lion in his paws of the Dog in his jaws, of the Horse in his
hofe, of the Bull in his horns, of the Hare in her feet, of the Vrchen in his
pricks, of the Cock in his spurs, of the Ha^ke in her tallentes, and of
these Magistrates in their money. The love of money corruptetly the common
wealth.
This money is their sacrifice for all their sins, the Monarche of the world,
the master of misrule, the abater of discipline, ye smother of wrincled
countenaunces. The wings which they fly with, the legs that they stand
upon, the staff that they lean upon, the buckler that hears of, and ye
sword that stricketh, their glory, and their God that holds up their head.
Though a thousand sins, and enormities compass them on the right hand, And
ten thousand on the left hand, yet under the patronage of money they will lay
them down, and sleep quyetly. I had rather if I were rich bring ten Rivers
from Ware to London, build up ten new Exchanges, build up Paul's steple many
times, them only to defray such sommes of money as are swallowed up in this
Realm by the way of corruption. O that Magistrates, and Ministers should
evidently in the sight of the world redeem their sins with money. O that
money so basse, and earthly a thing should preserve wickedness, and conquer
honesty, wring, and undo godly preachers, confound learning, suppress
godliness, hurt heaven, and do injury to God him self. How much better were
it for these men if they be full to do like the clouds, to gowsh, and drope
out where it needs "and to cast their alms upon the face of the earth? Also
to the common sort of people abundance of riches is a great burden Gregory
Nazienzen says that a great belly cannot enter in at a narrow gate. But these
men having aboundau^ce of riches do stroute out their bellyes with eating, and
drinkyng. Therefore riches is a burden unto them. Again, it is reported of
Naball, 1. Kings. 25
that when his wife had given some of his goods to David his heart was as heavy
as a stone: So likewise in these Londonners the grief of geuyng away and the
fear of losing, makes them some times heauyer to be weyed in a pair of
ballaunce, their covetous heart and wretched humor makes the^ so heavy. To
co^clud it makes sadness. Mark. 10.
For the young man that was very rich went sade away says the Scripture:
Again it makes quarelling, and brabling, as betwixt Lot and Abraham. Luke. 12.
And the two brethren in S. Luke, which strove about inheritaunces. And
commonly in this world, it makes great garboiles. And when as they them selves
will not bestow it upon the poor or to good use, Then the common place will
suck it up. The Kings bench will suppe it up, and the Chauncery will swallow
it up. Therefore do like ye clouds which drope upon the dry ground. Give
according to the necessity of those that want, The clouds bestow the rain
where it needs.
be plentyfull unto thy poor and follow the example of the liberal clouds
which let their waters gushe upon the face of the earth. And if there might be
reason in an unreasonable thing, me think these clouds might move us unto
liberality. For how reasonable is this in ye clouds that they bestow their
rain where it needs that is upon the dry earth. Where it needs the
clouds are liberal. And where it needs not I would not have you liberal. As
for example you bestow upon your bellyes vj. vij. or ten dishes, your bellyes
are filled with much fewer, your bellyes therefore need it not. You have for
your backs change of apparel, fewtes many and costely: The poor have none,
ye air is their peticotte, and they are compassed with cold, as with a
garment, your backs need it not, the poor need it. You have huge quantity
of clothes, and silks about your loins, they have scarce Ieremyes lynnen
breeches about their loins, Ierem. 13.
your loins need it not, their loins need it. You have proud and rich
chains about your necks, I doubt in this case obseruyng true charity how
you can do it. Your necks need it not. They dye for extreme misery therefore
they need it. Ye Ladies, and Gentilwomen ye woare farthingals about your
legs, your legs are otherwise from the cold warmely enough fenced, The
legs of the poor are unclothed: yours are to much clothed: your legs need
it not, theirs need it. Ye Ladies and Gentilwomen ye are women, and but women,
S. Paul wills you not so deck your selves with gold. But you, you deck
your selves, you prick your selves, you pruen your selves, you spangle your
selves, you powder your selves. And being but earthen Ladies you, would make
your selves golden Ladies. Believe me Ladies you need it not, The poor dies
for it, therefore they need it. Also touching your feathers Feathers.
what say you to feathers? You say ye do and will wear the^, I think so, for I
see it in deed, ye wear them great, huge, monstrous, read, white, black,
blew, raynebow colerd, party colerd, and in all kind of coullours. The world
ca^ witness you wear them, and yet me thinks you need the^ not. For, if the
weather be whote they help you not with shaddowe, if it be extreme cold they
warm you not with heat: if your hear fall of, they are not comfortatiue, If
your brain pan perish they are not restrictiue, nor if your brain perish
they are not restoratiue. Truly according to my judgment I think your heads
need them not, The poor dies for want, therefore the poor need them. Again
diverse richmen hang great huge walls with Tapistrie, and their galleryes with
chargeable, and costly pictures, and pile great heaps of plate upon their
tables. I say not but these things may be suffered, but that in so great
excess of some men, that some other men should dye for want that is
intolerable. An other reason to liberality.
Bestow it not therefore upon your walls, and tables, which need it not, but
pour it out upon the poor which need it. Now again here follows an other
argument to persuade us to liberality, which is to be drawn likewise out of
the former words, which say that the clouds rain upon the earth. So that the
argument is this. The clouds which did ascend from the earth do by all
means they can benefit the earth. So we that have our beginning from God must
by all means we can employ all our beneficence toward God. But benefit God
we cannot, nor we need not, for the earth is his, and the fulness thereof, But
if we help the poor, we help him, if we feed the poor, we feed him,
visit the^, we visit him, cloth them, we cloth him, if we pour out upon
them, we pour out upon him, so we shall supply their necessity, and
faithfully, and truly fulfill our own duty.

The text.
The tree where it falls, whether it be toward the North, or toward the
South, there it lies. If this text be expounded as it is commonly, then this
argument rises upon it. It thou dye thou must lie like a rotten tree, and
bear no fruit.

But thou must dye:

Therefore thou must lie and bear no frut, An other reason persuadyng to
liberality.
nor give alms, when thou art dead.

The Mayor or greater proposition, may be thus enlarged. The fall of man is
like the fall of a tree. So it is said in xxv. Gene. That Ismaell did fall
before his brethren. A tree being fallen bears no fruit. Grass being fallen
bears no flower: nor a man being fallen and dead cannot work. Therefore it is
said Eccle. ix. The dead do not know any thing, nor there is not any farther
reward for them. So that here is taken away either doing, or sufferyng in an
other world, in the way of reward of purging. Neither is there any Purgatory,
but only the blood of Jesus Christ, which does purge us from all our sins.
Tyndall, and Frith, and Celius Curio have discredited that matter. Master
Hardings loud voice has helped to ryng down the pains of Purgatory. And
Verone has hunted Purgatory unto the death. And as S. James says to rich men
in his 5. chap. Go to you rich me^, and houle. Because your riches are rotten:
So it may be said, houle you he Monks, and you she Monks, and all you farmers
of the province of Purgatory, Apocal. 18.
it is fallen, it is fallen. Her merchants may houle, and morn for those
things that were dearly sold, and for precious value, are now not worth any
thing, all her fat things and notable things are gone and can be found no
more. Purgatory is chased to the death, there is no Purgatory after this life.
There is no doing of good nor sufferyng of ill by the way of clensing, and
therefore Solomon co^pareth a living dog, and a dead Lion together, and
prefers the living dog, before ye dead Lion, because the dog ca^ do some
thing, Eccl. 9.
and the Lion nothing. At our death comes our consummatum est. There is a
full pause and a periode that we can work no farther, therefore the rich man
being in hell, could neither help him self nor his friends. And therefore
bear fruits and yield fruits whilst ye stand, for be you sure that the
days will come on that you must fall, and become both lyuelesse, and
frutelesse, You must dye be you well assured. Do you not see how clouds
vanishe away trees fall down, and grass vadeth: so likewise you must perish.
Mark also what s. John says. The world passes, 1. Epist. 2.
but you are a parcel of ye world, therefore you must pass and perish
likewise. The long lives of Adam and Mathusala had an end, therefore your short
lives must have an end. It is said that Adam lived and dyed, Noe lived and
dyed, Jacob lived and dyed, So that death and dying is the keeping of the song.
Now these two points do appear both that we must dye, and also when we are
dead, that we shall be frutelesse, and unprofitable. Let us do good whilst we
can, for the days will come that we shall not be able.

And though this exposition does please some, and yeldeth convenient matter for
this purpose, yet me thinks it may be expounded more fittly, and sensibly to
the meaning of Solomon, and that is thus.

The text.
If the fruit of the tree fall into the North, or the South, there they are.
That is, there are sta^ders by together up the fruit, and this exposition may
be as well justified by the Hebrew toungue as the other. And serves the
authors drift very aptly, as though he should thus say, Clouds yield rain,
and trees give their fruit. Trees pass not whether it be to the North, or to
the South. But where so ever men will resort together them, There they will
let fall of all sides unto all men. Thus clouds and trees are patterns of
frenesse, and mirrors of liberality. And thus much seems Solomon to say in
these latter words where he speaks of trees. Where in I note these iij.
things, Note.
the one that he uses eloquence in persuadyng to alms, the other that he
likeneth as it were the sight and show of the world to an apple tree about ye
which men run for fruit, and the last that he proves liberality out of
these natural schools as out of clouds and trees.

And first concerning the eloquence of Solomon it is noted in this place by
others before me. And therefore I am the bolder out of this particular place to
rise up to a general, and speak some thing of eloquence. And but that I look
to have better occasion here after to write some full treatise of the eloquence
of preachers, I would now have used both order, and more speech to the
handlyng of this matter. And first touching that objection which they have out
of S. Paul, speaking of the persuasible words of man's wisdom. Me thinks
that speech of S. Paul should be no prejudice to eloquence. For he speaks of
those that go about to deceive by such kind of speech. Otherwise in
persuadyng to Religion S. Paul has used rhetorical words of man's wisdom,
Ephesians. 1.
and also reasons of man's wisdom. So he proves that the holy Ghost cannot
be removed by the nature of a pawn or pledge, he proves likewise the
resurrection by corn cast into the ground: Therefore neither this saying of S.
Paul, Nor any saying or doing of his that I know can be against eloquence. So
that it be used as it should be and be such eloquence as it should be. Touching
that which S. Jerome tells of him self, that he was cited before the
tribunal seat of God, for to much reading and delighting in Tullies
eloquence, I force not whether it were so, or it were not so. For as the old
saying is, where the Philosopher leaves, there the Physician begins: So I
say where Tullyes eloquence ends and cease, there the eloquence of
Divinity begins: And therefore I would put a great difference between
Tullyes eloquence, parliament eloquence, and Divinity eloquence. And truly our
speeches shall as much differ from theirs, as the spirit does from the mind,
and almost as heaven does from the world, so much differ this and that kind
of eloquence. I do not wreake down as intolerable, neither do I think it
all together sacrilege, to persuade with a common worldly phrase, and with an
human kind of Rhetoric. But the words of the scripture are holy, and
heavenly, and will work greater, Divine eloquence.
and more deeper impressio^s, and the eloquence of Scripture is as fit for
holiness, as the words of Homere be fit for war, or the words of Cicero for
peace, or the words of Catullus for wantonness. And truly for divinity
matters we have eloquence enough to be gathered out of the scriptures. And it
were no hard matter (but that I defer it to some other treatise) to show by
a large discourse the great plenty of figures, and eloquent speeches that are
to be found in the Scriptures. So Esaias uses the figure of Paronomazia, when
he says Sorim Sorerim, as though a man would say, carnal Cardinals, fleshly
Friars. Again, in the xxiiij. Esaias. 24.
chapter he uses these words Paecath, Pacad, Pac. As though I should speak
in our English phrase Darthe, Danger, Death. So likewise he says in an other
place: I looked for Mishpar and behold Mishpa, which is as this, I thought he
would have healt me, and behold he beat me. Ierem Lament. 2.
The Prophet Jeremy uses the figure Anaphora in beginning certain Verses,
with one letter in his lamentatio^s. It is written that old father Jacob made
his testament in Versis. And S. Jerome and Arator do write, that Job in the
Hebrew tongue did write Hexameter verses. David uses he figure of Epiphonema,
when he ends thus, blessed is every one that trusts in him. Psalm. 2.
Paul uses ye figure of exclamatio^ when he says thus. Wretched man that I am
who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Job uses the figure of
wishyng when he says. Job. 6.
O that my sins were wayd in a pair of scoales. S. Paul uses the figure of
Antistasis when he sets these words together aporoumeno ekporoumenoi. 1.
Cor. 4.
As though a man should say Courtiers, Carters, Ma^sis, Mattockes, Kings,
Caytif^es. Psalm. 4.
David uses the figure of Reticentia, as thus, Sons of men how long my glory
unto shame? He means, how long will you study to bring my glory unto shame?
Acts. 23.
S. Paul uses the figure of Sarcasmos or tauntyng, as when he says I knew not
he was a Magistrate, 3. Kings. 24
so does the Prophet Micha say Go up ye shall win he means they shall not
win. So ye Prophet Hely bid the Priests cry higher, 1. Kings. 18
when in deed he iested at them, and thought it was to no purpose at all for
them to cry. To conclude, the Scripture is full of figures, and eloquent
speches, as when the Prophet Ezechiell will describe an obsequious Clergy, he
says they put cushynes under the elbowes of Magistrates. To be obstinate, the
Scripture calls to be of an hard neck. To be impudent, it calls a brothels
brow. A sowthyng page it calls a geuer of titles. An eloquent man it calls
a personage of speeches, a bablyng hipocrite it calls a man of lips. To
live sorrowfully it calls to eat the bread of sorrow. To live joyfully it
calls to live the days of heaven. If any man be welthy, the Scripture will
say that he may wash his ways with butter, And that oil does drop out of
his rocks. To be low brought the scripture calls to have his soul clean to
the dust. But these things are infinite, and will rather beseem a great
Divinity dictionary, the^ a piece of a small Sermon. Solomon him self in the
xij. of Eccle. says, that he studied to search out pleasant words, and to
handle his matters handsomely. And he that will see in deed what eloquence is to
be found in Scripture, let him read Castalio in his preface to the 5. books
of Moses, and Strigelius in his preface to the Psalms. Nay let him perfectly
and with judgment, read the works of Moses, of Job, of David, of Salomo^, of
Esaias of Michae. And, I think he will no more hereafter be an adversary to
eloquence, For, by the faithful, and close imitatio^ of these men is gotten a
true, and godly kind of eloquence. And, thus much concerning the gift of
eloquence that it be not despised in preachers, as also that preachers do not
use a vain, and frothy kind of eloquence, as also that you good hearers will
at this time suffer your selves to be moved by the eloquent words of Solomon,
who exhorts you by the example of clouds, and trees to be liberal.

And now to the 2. point which says where the apples fall there they are: And,
here ye matter falls out so fitly that I cannot but compare the great business
dealings and struglyngs in this world, unto a company of all kind of people
watchyng about an apple tree, lepyng, and snatchyng about it for apples.
Wheresoever apples fall, there they snatch, and there they are. And whersoeuer
any little commodity falls out in the common weal, there swarmeth together
whole legions to gather of worldlynges, The world like an apple tree.
there they are. Neither is it blamefull that men should go about their own
commodities, But that they be two busy and to dilligent. And that often times
they beat the tree to much, to soon, and to many ways. Neither care they
whose the tree is, or whose ye apples be, or whence they drop, so that they
may overtake the^. For the apples of the mouth, young and foolish boys will
adventure all hassardes, for the apples of the eyes and the apples of ye purse,
this whole foolish age of ours is most aduenturous. Where advantage is there
they are. If there be aduau^tage in corruptyng of the holy Bible, there they
are. And therefore in the common translation, they have so corrupted it. It was
profitable, that some thing should be written in commendation of the fragments
of Christ's body, and therefore they have devised that Clement should write
such a treatise. Mo^keries and Abbeyes were profitable, and therefore they have
brought to pass, that Dionisius Ariopagita should speak of monks in his
days. To co^clud, they have sought out profit under ye name of Ignatius in
certain Epistles. And under the name of Gayus in certain Decretal Epistles,
they have abused the name of S. Cypria^, to write of the Revelation of ye head
of John Baptist, because Relics were profitable. They have sought profit by
thrustyng in a book called Farrago Sermonum, into S. Austens works. And iiij.
false quyers of paper into the Council of Constantinople. Turnebus reports
that for profit a couple of Gentlemen in his country said they were in hand
with writing of such books as in deed they never went about to write, and
that was for profit. And to conclud, where soever it be, or how dangerous
so ever it be, how foolish soever it be, if there be hope of profit, there
they will be, and there they will seek for advantage: as by cardyng, dising,
tablyng, poppet playing, stage playing, walkyng on rops, flying in the air,
eating of poisons, diuyng in the sea, deluyng in the bowels of the earth,
alcumistrie, lottaries, and such like: but specially at the Court and about the
Court, For that from thence drope the rich golden apples, In kings Courts ye
apples are most besieged.
there they thrust in, and crowde in, There they creep in, and burst in, there
is the world, there is all in all, there is the greatest wealth of apples, and
therefore there they are. Let "never princes think it otherwise. Those that
flock about Courts, they do it for apples, many for love, but most for
commodity. If the apples be in the South there they will be, if they be in the
North, there they will be, if ye apples be gone they will all forsake the tree,
if the apples be there they will clynge, and watch, and ward about it. And
therefore watch cou^cellors, preach preachers, and pray people. That God will
long maintain, and support our good and natural Prince Queen Elizabeth in
all her Royalties, proprieties, wealths, and commodities, for if they can
dispoyle her of these, if they can pluck, and pil^ere away the apples, they
will soon bring disdain unto the tree: Though the tree be never so
beautiful, and good, and though the root thereof be never so stedy and
certain, yet the eye of this wretched world always gapeth after apples, and
ancreth only upon gain. Luke. 17.
Worldly men are moved by worldly baytes, Eagles are always houeryng about
carries, Bears about honny, Crows about worms, Bees about oil, Wolves about
sheep, Foxes about pullyne, Kytes about garbage, and the world about
advantage. Believe not good Christen people that be of wealth, ye most of them
that seem to love you, they love you, but for apples, specially you noble me^,
trust not these fawning, flering, flattering parasites: what soever they say
unto you. If the days of heaven go from you, if your souls be brought low, it
shall the^ to late appear, that they came to gain, and gather, to pluck, and
deplume you, and when your apples are gone, and your fruits missyng, if by
strikyng down of your bodies, and pluckyng up of your roots they may but
warm them. They will do the best to strike you down and by the roots to
pluck up your families.

My second words in this case are unto my brethren of the ministry, we are
simple, and not so thoroughly trained up in the world as other be, our
greatest dread is not from the Papists: because we trust them lest: but there
be other apple gatherers, who myndyng covetous intentes, apples, and
commodities yet professyng holiness, godliness, and Angelical nature, they will
persuade you that your words are very spirit, that the holy ghost speaks
in you, that they are edified only by you, that ye have the gift: but if they
can once come by flatteryng, and glosyng to abuse you, and when they have so
done, they will clappe their doors upon you, 1. Kings. 13
as Ammon did to Thamar: They will wring you, and train you to their purpose,
and soon after their will despise you. If you have apples they will love you,
if you have no apples, they will loathe you. My next speech is to you Gentlemen
of the Innes of Court, and else where, your good wits and good byrthes will
not suffer me to leave you vnadmonished, you have also apples for you are borne
to lands, and live odes, your Delicta iuuentutis call for expenses, so that
you are brought into ye usurers hands, and they as a spung will cleanse you,
and wring you. Vsurye is called in the Hebrew tongue Tocke and Tarbethe, Tocke
signifies loss, for there is none that meddeleth with it, but he loses
either bodily or ghostly. It is also called Tarbethe that is deceit, for the
greatest cosinage couin and collusion that can be is in usury, and in usurers,
usury is said to bite in the Scriptures, in deed it biteth, for it brings
you out of the Court into the Counter, from silks to sack cloth, from plenty
to penury. If you will be wise in time believe not their money lent at a pinche
their great dynners, and their sweet enterteinementes, for in the end they
will but bite you. No beast by biting does hurt (almost) except it be angry,
but these men smilyng and smerkyng will bite you, and undo you. The bityng of
a snacke may be cured with the herb Dittanye. The bityng of a mad Dog may
be cured with a Crabfish: but the bityng of an usurer is so chargeable that it
is almost incurable. Usurers.
The styngyng of a Scorpion is healed with the body of a Scorpion broosed into
triacle, and surely me think the Magistrates should do right well if they
would satisfy all those that have been bite by usurers, either with their
goods if they have them, or else with ye punishment of their bodies, if they
have the^ not. God molifie their hearts, or break their teeth, and direct men
so in a temperaunce of life, that they light not into the mouths of these
Wolves. For surely they shall be daungerously biten, whilst you have apples and
lands they will flock about you, and cherish you, But when your apples and
wealth is gone they will cast you of, and abrenounce you.

And now to the very last part of this Sermon, wherein I think it worthy the
notyng, that God styrreth up the liberality of men by clouds and trees. There
needs me thinks no remembrance to be kept by house pictures, or Church
pictures, to stir us up to heavenly considerations, for the heaven, the air,
the earth, the sea, are full of such creatures as may welbe our remembrauncers.
Psalm. 19.
The heavens declare the glory of God, says the Psalmist, Divinity to be
found out in creatures.
the stars may put us in remembrance of our uncleanness, since that they
are not clean in Gods sight. And of the omnipotency of God, which out of the
barren womb of Sara did raise up a people like unto the stars of heaven.
Gene. 15.
The Sun and Moon may teach us obedience in Genesis. 1. which being once
commanded to move never ceased since the beginning of the world. The
lightenyng may teach us the brightness Math. 17.
of our Savior, John. 3.
the wind may put us in remembrance of the nature of the holy ghost, which
bretheth where it list. The dew may bring us in mind of peace and concord,
Psalm. 33.
which is compared to the sweet dew of Hermon hill. When we see the Egle fly
we may remember that God is able to take away our infirmities, Psalm. 103.
as he takes away age from the Egle, and renews her into youth. The Pellica^
does put us in mind of the solitarines yt good me^ are often driven unto. The
Storke in discretion yt we should have in knowing the time of our salvation.
Ierem. 8.
The voice of ye Crane and of the Swallow, may teach us how poorly we shall
speak at ye day of our death. Esaias. 38.
The Estredge runnyng away from her young ones, may teach us the ingratitude of
some parents, that will get children and not norish them. Ierem. Lament 4.
The Cock crowing may put us in mind of Peter's offense, and of Peter's
repentance. Math. 26.
The Hen gathering together, and shrouding of her chickens may put us in
remembrance of the tender heart of our savior Christ toward us. Luke. 13.
Ierem. 17.
The Partridge which uses to sit upon other birds eggs, is an Image of a
covetous man, that hordeth up other men's goods. When soever we see the
lightnyng of a sparrow we cannot but remember the providence of God. Mark. 10.
The camel at a nedels eye is the image of a covetous man at heavens gate. A
bullock being leadd to slaughter does signify a yo^g man following an harlot.
An hind desiring to drink does put us in mind of the affection that our
souls should have to God. Psalm. 42.
A goat does put us in mind of the seperatio^ yt shall be in the day of
Judgment. A calfe does remember us of the calves of our lips, that is of
prayer. The worm does remember us of our bassenes. The pisemyer of labor.
Esaias. 1.
The ox and ye ass of kyndnes for they know their master, and their cryb.
The dogs of courtesy for they licked Lazarus wou^des. Math. 16.
The vine does represe^t Christ, and the branches us. The olive tree does put
us in mind of an house well furnished, with a virtuous wife and good children.
Luke. 13.
The fig tree does teach us that those are accursed, which bring forth no
good fruit. Amos. 6.
Wormewoode does put us in mind of ye nature of an ill Judge yt turns ye
fruit of Justice into wormwood. The sight of a lylly tells us we should not
be careful for brave apparel. Math. 6.
The grows of ye musterdsede, teaches us ye power of the kingdom of God,
Luke. 13.
Cocle does tell us yt there shall always be wicked in ye church of god in
this life. Eue^ so did God sometimes induce Job to know God, and him self by
these natural co^te^plations. As by the treasures of his snow, Job. 38.
by the fou^dations of the earth, by ye doors of the sea, by the motions of
Orion, and Arcturus, By his thu^dring, by the nature of ye crow, by the
affections of the wild ass, by the gloriousnes of the pecoke, by the
disposition of the estridge, by the strength of the horse, by Behemoth and
Leuiathan, by the rising of the hawk against ye South, and such the like
means. And so in this place Salomo^ exhorts us to alms, and liberality by
clouds, and trees. Job said when I heard thee, I did not so mind it, but now
that I see thee in thy works, Job. 4^.
I repent me and am ready to cast dust upon me: As Job which could not be
moved by hearing, was allured to repentance, by the sight of creatures: so you
I dout not, though you do not mind these arguments, which you have heard from
me with your ears: Yet the seeing of these creatures will make you merciful as
clouds, and plentyfull as trees, and teach you to gather good affections out
of this schole of nature. In necessity you shall find it again, what so ever
you disburse, what day so ever, come you shall have made your friends of your
Mammon. Luke. 16.
Which otherwise would have been occasion of sin and iniquity. The angels of
those poor men, whom you have reliued with the bowels of mercy shall receive
you out of this vain and miserable world which fades, 1. John. 2.
and the lust thereof into everlasting tabernacles which shall not perish nor
the likyng thereof. Howbeit, this is not in your castyng or breakyng of bread,
nor in your alms, deeds, Romans 9.
or works, though for many considerations you must do it. But in the
effectual passion, and meritorious bloodshed of our Lord Jesus Christ. To
whom with the father and the holy ghost be all honor and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ROugh speches seem rude, smooth speches ar worse:
Forbearyng, and flatteryng (alas) we see
Does lead the world into Gods heavy curse.
If all were well what needs these words from me?
That vices are helped by smoothyng, and smilyng
If any teach so: he means beguilyng.
Though friendly warnynges folyes now appears:
The day draws on, the hour is hard at hand
That you shall curse each cause that stoppt your ears:
And made you kick to hear your vices scand.
Ye fools in heart that think there is no God,
You shall know him, by scourgynges of his rod.

