DIVERSE SELECT SERMONS ON SEVERAL TEXTS.

Viz. 1. Of Quenching the Spirit. 1 Thessalon. 5.19. 2. Of the Sinners suite
for Pardon. 2 Samuel 24.10. 3. Of Eating and Digesting the Word. Ier. 15.16. 4.
Of buying and keeping the Truth. Prove. 23.23.


Preached by that Reverend and Faithful Minister of the Word, IER. DYKE, late
Preacher of Epping in Essex.

Finished by his own pen in his life time, And now published by his Son DAN.
DYKE Master of Arts.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Pain, for L. Fawn and S. Gellibrand, at the sign of
the brazen Serpent, in Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND VERTVOVSLY ENNOBLED Lady, the Lady MAGDALENE BRVCE
(Wife first to the Right Honorable Edward Lord Bruce, Baron of Kinlosse, Master
of the Rolls, and one of the most Honorable Privy Council to King James of
happy memory. Next, to the Honorable Sir James Fullerton Knight, Groom of the
Stool to his Majesty) my very good Lady.
Right Honorable,
WEre I not in awe of your Honors Humility, which though it self does
publish, the rest of your graces, yet commands me to conceal them, I might
here have given the world a taste of that which may more easily be admired,
then either expressed or imitated. For although such is your singular piety mixed
with Prudence, that you, if any, may justly challenge the Doves heart with the
Serpents head, yet that which gives a redolency and fragrancy to all your beds
of spices, is the grace of Humility, which is (to use the metaphor of S.
Bernard) as the violet though the lowest, yet the sweetest of flowers. And
although hereby it comes to pass, that you had rather deserve the praise of
virtue, then have it, yet pardon me my most Noble Lady, if I tell the World
that, which the World and Fame, have long since told me: that you are one of
those who have made Honor Honorable, and Nobility Noble. Madam, it is well
known, that though your House be illustrious, and Family most Noble, yet that
you do not borrow of, but repay unto your Progenitors, and give to your
Posterity true honor. And how? To receive Christ, to be borne of God, and so
become of the blood Royal of Heaven, this is honor of a double die; no favor
on earth can give it, no malice of hell can stain it. Alexander must draw his
pedigree from the gods, or else he thinks himself ignoble, I am sure to be
allied to the King of Heaven is true nobility and a greater honor, to have the
spirit of God flaming in the soul, then to have the arteries flusht, and the
veins fraught with the heroical spirits, and noble blood of our forefathers,
and my short experience of your Ladyships conversation, assures me, that this
is not so much your ambition, as your happiness.

The world is to full of those Glowormes, that shine not unless it be in the
dark ignorance of true honor, I mean that place their glory, in the
ostentation, and pomp of their wealth, and affluency: many such (if now there
are not) I am sure there were in Saint Chrysostom his time, who thought it
might be served in to their Tables, in costly plate, or worn on their backs,
in gorgeous apparel, whom he wittily upbraides, that they might thank (...),
etc. Crysost. in Epist. ad collos. Cap. 3. hom. 7.
the cook, and the swineyard, the weaver, and kember, the goldsmith, and
confectioner, for their honor. But he knows you not, who knows not that your
Ladyships soul is, to sublime and heavenly; thus to lay your honor in the
dust. To be a diligent peruser of sacred heraldry, and to find a name in the
book of life, is superlative glory, this refines the blood of the coursest
peasant, and creates him a regal pedigree, but says the text, Act. 17.14, 15.
there were also honorable women that believed; here is honor laid upon
honor, when terrene honor is the ground of celestial: Pious poverty is a
head of gold on feet of clay, but devout nobility, apples of Gold on pictures
of silver: a religious Lazarus, is an orient pearl on a dunghill, but a godly
Constantine, a religious Emperor, This is emphaticall, this is monopolizing of
honor, this is as rare and infrequent, so rare and excellent. To say all this
of your Ladyship, as it is no flattery, so not to say it, is a more black sin
then envy, witness your friends, nay your enemies, your acquaintance, nay your
conscience, and lastly, witness the backs, and bellies of Gods pupills, (I
mean the poor) which are the field and furrows, receiving the liberal
dispersion of that temporal seed, which will rise (no doubt) in a crop, of
eternal glory. Upon all these your honors divine dispositions, this one does
ensue of necessity, that you are a patroness of the messengers, and a receiver
of the messages of God, which has emboldened your servant, to present unto
your Honor, though the posthumous, yet not the spurious child, of him whom God
honored to be a father of many children in his Church. It has indeed been a
just complaint, that the posthumous works of many learned Divines, have come
forth like the heterogeneall monsters of Africa, which being generated of
diverse species, partly resemble the male, partly the female, or like the
froggs on the Banks of Nile, which aequivocall generation leaves imperfect;
even so the corrupted matter of broken notes, penned from the mouth of a
preacher, mingled perhaps with the weak conceits of some illiterate
Stenographer, cherisht with the Sunbeames of popular applause, many times
presents the world with monstrous, and misshapen births to the unspeakeable
injury and dishonor of the deceased parents. That this present work is none
of those slovenly meteors, it is my task to prove, and that in a word I may
give plenary satisfaction, give me leave to refer your Ladyship, to the rest
of this Authors works, if you find not in these the same comely features, and
sweet complexions, I mean the same strength of Judgment, and clearenesse of
phantacy, that is in the rest, reject it as not his.

For the Author, (my Dear and deceased Father) I need not tell your Honor,
of his fidelity both in preaching and writing; ea liberate scripsit
imperatorum vitas, qua ipsi vixerunt.
how like e Suetonius, he took the same liberty, to cry down sin, that men
took to sin: neither is it fit for me to say, how he preached, and wrote, by
the same rule, that Aeskines gives an Orator (...).
, that his Oration and the Law must be unisones, not to speak any thing,
above, or besides the law. How careful and how precise, he has been in this
particular as in all his works, so especially in this, may appear, as by the
frequent so pertinent, quotations of scripture, wherein your Ladyship shall
find though abundance, yet no superfluity, though many, yet not too many.

As for other marginall Fringe, I mean the quotations of Augustine, or
Crysostome, etc. which may seem here to be defective J shall desire your
honor to understand, that though the author, had otherwise finished this
work, yet this accomplishment as a thing less necessary, he did
procrastinate, and so by immature death, was of his purpose herein frustrate; I
know that to your Ladyship, or any other judicious reader, it will be
nevertheless welcome, because it wants this lace. Who that is wise, would
refuse to see his face in a glass, because the verges are not gilded, or the
sides painted?

The arguments that induced me to make that public, which I might have
engrossed for mine own private good, whether they are more or more persuasive
I know not: The intention of the author, and the necessity of the duties
herein handled, gave me not only a toleration, but a command, to print it, it
treates of the purchase, of the most precious commodity, the truth. Of the
Digestion of the most salubrious food, the word. Of the suite for the most
sovereign balm, pardon of sin. And lastly, of not quenching the spirit; and
if it be the duty of every man, to cherish this holy flame in his own soul,
for me, not to kindle it in others, as far as in me lay, I held it piacular:
It is true indeed, Philosophy tells us, that elementary fire, needs no fuel,
but that culinary does, experience informs us: The spirit of God, consider it
in it self, is so far from needing any helps to cherish the heat thereof,
that it is the original of all, both health and life in the soul, but
consider, it as it works in the frigid soul of corrupted man: So though the
spirit of God need no auxiliary excitations, yet our deadness, and coldness
does: which considerations with a kind of command enforced me to bring this
work to the press, being nothing else but the fiery language, of those
Cloven Tongues, which did rest on the head of that apostolical divine, the
author hereof, which I hope being perused, will cause your Ladyship to say, it
had been pity at the least, if not impiety, to have deprived the altars of so
many Christian hearts, of this sacred fuel.

Many other inducements J had to publish these Treatises, and among many this
not the least, to testify my readiness, to acknowledge your Honors noble
love; and favors to my self, that J might not be of the ungrateful number of
those, that Seneca Quidam furtiue gratias agunt, and in angulo and in aurem,
non est ista verecundia, sed inficiandi genus. Sen. de benef. lib. 2. cap. 23.
speaks of, that love to conceal received benefits, by private
acknowledgements; to acquit my self, of which sin, I have thought fit to
tell the world, that I was never so sensible of my own poverty; as since your
Honor brought me so far in debt, that when I think of repayment, I find a
bottomless sea to fathom: Madam, with your leave, J shall say to your Honor
as Hanc unam habeo injuriam tuam, effecisti ut viverem and morerer ingratus.
Sen. de benef. lib. 2. Cap. 21.
Furnius to Augustus, this is the only wrong you have done me, that I must
live and die unthankefull: and yet that my good will might be seen, I was
glad to snatch this occasion, to testify both my thanks and duty to your
Honor, and since J find not any thing to present unto you, by way of
retribution, as Aeskines said to Socrates, that one thing which I have, I give
you, even my self, to be your servant, and sollicitour, in the Court of
Heaven, not so much, that I think my self worthy, as bound, to pray for your
Honor, and all your most noble Family, that as God has made you an exemplary
piece of piety here, so he would long and long continue you, an encourager of
Christianity, a comfort of Christians, a refresher of the members of Christ,
till the time of your refreshing shall come, when triumph shall be your
recompense, glory your reward, Angels your company, God your glory.

Which shall be the daily prayer of your Honors humble and devoted servant

DANIEL DIKE.

OF QVENCHING, AND NOT QVENCHING OF THE SPIRIT.

By IER. DYKE Minister of Epping in Essex.

REVEL. 2.4, 5. I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen and repent, and do thy
first works. Dicit Apostolus, Spiritum nolite extinguere: non quia ille
extingui potest, sed quantum in ipsis est, extinctores merito dicuntur, qui sic
agunt ut extinctum velint. August. Epistol. Lib. Epistol. 23. Interea parts
nostrae sunt petere a domino ut lampadi accensae oleum suppeditet, servet purum
Ellychnium, atque etiam promoveat. Calv. in Epistol. Pauli ad These. 1. LONDON,
Printed by Tho: Pain, for John Rothwell and are to be sold at the sign of the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

OF QVENCHING, AND NOT QVENCHING OF THE SPIRIT
1 THESE. 1.19. Quench not the Spirit.
IN the 16. Verse. the Apostle had exhorted the Thessalonians to rejoice
evermore. That is, that they should carry themselves so holily, and
circumspectly, they should walk so closely with God, that they might have
continual joy in the Holy Ghost from the sense of Gods love, and favor. For
it is a sure thing that a Christian so demeaning himself as his rule guides
him, may live the most comfortable life of any man in the world. He may keep a
continual feast, and a feast is made for laughter, Eccl. 10. Days of feasting
are days of joy; and so a Christian may make all his days festival, and
joyful like the days of the Jews Purim, Ester 9. days of feasting and of
joy.

If it be not so with a Christian, it is most what his own fault, and comes
from some failing and miscarriage in himself, that he does not that which he
should, to maintain his heart in this happy frame. The Apostle therefore
having advised hereto he lays down some rules and means in certain
precepts, for the procuring and preserving of this spiritual joy.

1. The First Precept, verse. 17. pray continually. He that would rejoice
continually, must pray continually, he that would rejoice evermore, must pray
evermore. As is our conscience of, and constancy in the duty of prayer: such is
the constancy of our joy. Prayer neglected, intermitted brings an Eclips, and
an Intermission, and Interruption of our joy. Seldom praying, and constant
rejoicing will never stand together.

2. The second Precept is this, verse. 18. In all things give thanks, He that
would rejoice in all estates and conditions must be thankful in all estates
and conditions. He that would rejoice (...), whether in every thing, or in
every time must be thankful (...). The more thankful we are to God, the
more cause of joy we shall have in God.

3. The third Precept, is this verse 19. Quench not the spirit. He that would
rejoice evermore must keep the spirit unquench'd. The way to keep ones self
warm, is to keep the fire burning. It is a fond thing for a man to quench his
fire, and then think to keep himself still warm. It is no wonder that this
man complains of cold, that has let his fire go out, or has himself
quenched, and extinguished it. And thus we have the coherence of these words
with the former.

Now for the words, Quench not the spirit. In them there is a Metaphor, and a
Metonymie. The metaphor in the word Quench: Quenching properly is of fire, when
the light and heat of fire is abated and put out, we use to say it is
quenched. And hence is this word borrowed to signify the abating, decaying, or
extinguishing of the spirit.

The Metonymie is in the word Spirit. Spirit is taken

I. For the essence of the Deity. So John 4. God is a Spirit. It is not so
taken here.

II. For the third person in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost. 1 John 5.7. The
Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit. This is not meant here.

III. For the gifts of the Spirit. And thus it is here meant. Quench not the
gifts and graces of the Spirit. Now the Spirit, in this sense is taken diversely.

1. First for the gift of Prophecy. 1 Samuel 10.6.10. Then the Spirit of the
Lord shall come upon thee; And the spirit of the Lord came upon him, viz. upon
Saul.

2. For Gifts and Abilities, to discharge any calling, whether it be
extraordinary or heroical, and this is called the Spirit of fortitude and
courage, Judge. 14.6. The spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson, Judge. 3.10. Upon
Othniel, and upon Saul against Nahash. 1 Samuel 11.6. Or whether it be ordinary
gifts of government by which a man is fitted for Magistracy, 1 Samuel 10.6. or
for Ministerial gifts. Or for art and skill in any mechanical trade, Exodus
31.3. Bezaliel was filled with the Spirit of God to find out curious works to
work in gold.

3. For the gifts and common graces of Illumination, as knowledge of the
doctrine of religion, understanding of the truths of the Gospel, and other
such common graces as Reprobates may have. Thus it is taken Heb. 4.6. have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and made partakers of the holy Ghost. That is, if
they had their understandings enlightened and their judgeme^ts convinced of the
Gospel, if they were enlightened by the work of the Spirit of God.

4. Fourthly, It is taken for the graces of sanctification, for the sanctifying
gifts of the spirit. And therefore it is that the name of the spirit is given
to diverse graces, as Isa. 11.2. The spirit of meekness, Ephesians. 1.17. The
spirit of faith, 1 Cor. 4.13. And the spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1.17. that is, the
gift of meekness, faith, love, infused by the Holy Ghost.

Now concerning these graces of sanctification, we must remember two
Distinctions.

Distinct. 1. Some sanctifying graces are radical, original, fundamental
graces, primary graces as they may be called, which are the immediate work of
the spirit, as faith, hope, love: others are secondary graces issuing and
flowing from these, which though the Spirit works too, yet it works by these:
such is joy which arises from faith, Romans 14. Fill your hearts with joy in all
believing: such is confidence arising from hope; such is zeal and fervor of
spirit arising from love. These are, as it were, the luster, the shine, the
radiancy of the radical fundamental graces. They are the flame of them. There
is a difference between the coals of fire that lie on the harth, and the flame
of the fire which is kindled from the coals on the harth. When a man's faith
causes joy, then faith flames; when his hope breeds confidence, then hope
flames; and when a man's love makes him zealous, then his love flames, and
burns out. They are like the body of the Sun, and the beams of the Sun;
Faith, Hope, Love, they the body; Joy, Confidence, Zeal, they the beams of
the Sun.

2. Distinct. We must consider in the sanctifying graces of the Spirit 3.
things.

1. There are the gifts themselves, the habits infused, the habits of faith,
hope, and love. 2. There is the use and exercise and act of them. 3. There are
the degrees, and several measures of them.
4. The Spirit of God signifies the motions and holy suggestions of the spirit,
those gracious excitements to duty. The Spirit blows where it lists. The
motions of the spirit are the breathings, and the blasts of it. And this is
also here meant. Now seeing what Spirit signifies, we are to inquire in what
sense, and after what sort the Spirit may be quenched. Quenched it may be, or
else the counsel is in vain, not to quench it. And again, if it may be
quenched, it may be an uncomfortable thing; what comfort can a man have in
having Gods Spirit, if it may be lost? what comfort to have this fire kindled
in our hearts, if so be it be a quenchable fire. Therefore for the clearing of
this point, we must know:

1. First, take the Spirit for the spirit of prophecy; that may be quenched and
lost: and so for the gifts of government, Ministry, etc. This Spirit may be
quenched. A man may have such gifts much decayed and abated, yea a man may
wholly lose such gifts. As it is said of Saul, that the spirit of the Lord came
upon him; so it is said of him, that ihe Spirit of the Lord departed from him,
1 Samuel 16.14.

Secondly, Take the Spirit for the gifts and common graces of illumination; and
so the spirit may be quenched, and utterly extinguished, so as such may quite
lose that grace that looked like grace, and came very near a saving grace. If
they fall away, Heb. 6. Therefore men may have all that there is spoken of
which fall away.

Thirdly, take the Spirit for the sanctifying Spirit, and then make use of this
first distinction. And according to it, the radical and fundamental graces of
the spirit, such as faith, hope, love, cannot be wholly and totally
extinguished, where once they are wrought in the heart, but yet their luster,
their radiancie, their shine, and flame may be quenched. A man though he
cannot lose his faith, yet he may lose and want, and quench his joy. A man,
though he cannot lose his hope, yet may lose his comfort, and confidence. A
man, though he cannot lose his love, yet may cool his zeal and fervor: We
see in a fire, the wood may be burnt out, and so the flame abated, and quite
quenched; but yet there remains still an heap of coals on the harth, and there
may be a good fire still, though the flame be quenched. The beams of the Sun
do not always shine out; a cloud may be interposed that may intercept the
beams of the Sun, and the bright and comfortable radicie and splendor of
them: but yet the body of the Sun is in heaven still, though the beams be
intercepted: So joy, confidence, zeal, may for a time be quenched, lost
abated, but though the flame of these be down, and the beams of these be
hindered, yet there are coals of fire in the heart, and the body of these is
there. The flame of the spirit, the feeling and sense of it may be quenched for
a time in the seconda-graces thereof, but yet the spirit it self, and the
cardinal graces thereof remain still in the heart. It may be in this, as in
that case, Isa. 6.13. As a Teyle Tree, and as an Oak, whose substance is in
them, when they cast their leaves. An Oak may be green and flourishing all
the Summer, but when Winter comes, it casts and loses the leaves, but yet when
the leaves are gone, the life is not gone, the substance and the sap is in it
still, though the leaf be gone. Faith, Hope, Love, these are the sap and
substance of a Christian; joy, confidence, zeal, these are his leaves. There
may come a Winter, when a Christian may cast his leaves, may lose his joy, etc.
but yet even then his substance and his sap of faith, hope, and love is in him.
It is one thing to lose life, another thing to lose a leaf. A Christian may be
a Teyle Tree, or an Oak without a leaf, but not without life. This we shall
see plain in David's case, Psalm. 51.11, 12. Take not away thine holy spirit
from me, Restore to me the joy salvation. It is clear therefore that though
David had the joy of the spirit quenched, yet the spirit still unquenched: The
spirit quenched in regard of the joy of the flame, but not quenched in regard
of the fundamental graces thereof, not in regard of the fire of it. The flame
was down, but the fire was alive. That the flame was quenched it appears,
because he prays, Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, as if he should say,
Lord kindle this flame again, therefore the flame was quenched: But yet the
spirit was not taken away in the fundamental graces thereof, for he says,
Take not away thy spirit from me. If that had been taken away, he would have
said, Restore to me thy spirit again, as he does his joy which his sin had
quenched; but saying, Take not away, that argues that he still had the spirit,
though the joy was gone. He was still as an Oak which had cast her leaf, he
had his substance in him: he had lost his leaf, his joy was gone, but he had
not lost his life; Gods Spirit was still in him; untaken from him.

Object. But this may be a Doctrine of security; what care I for quenching the
flame, so long as the fire goes not out? what care I for my joy, if I lose not
my faith, etc.

Answ. This Doctrine is no ground at all for security: For 1. it must be a man's
care not only to maintain fire, but to maintain flame; not only to have
substance, but to have his leaf green. The righteous must be a tree not only
bringing forth fruit, but a Tree also whose leaf must not wither, Psalm. 1.3.
2. There is little comfort in life when there wants a leaf; little comfort in
faith, when by sin we quench our joy. A man when he is a cold takes no
pleasure in a fire that burns not, flames not, it does him no good to see the
coals lie smothering under green wood. Though a man have the radical graces,
yet little comfort in them during the want of the other: Because whilst these
secondary grace are wanting, it brings the conscience to question the presence
and truth of the primary ones. The want of the leaf makes the conscience
question the life of grace. If there were any comfort in such a case, what
needed David, having the spirit, beg to have his Joy restored? And what makes
afflicted consciences in time of tentation call into question the truth of
their fundamental graces, but the want of their flame, of their leaf: So that
this gives no way at all to carnal security.

2. According to the second Distinction,

First, there are the infused habits of Faith, Hope, Love, these habits cannot
be lost, and so in regard of these habits the spirit cannot be quenched.

Secondly, there is the act, use, and exercise of them: In that regard the
spirit may be quenched: For though the habit of faith cannot be killed, yet the
act, use, and exercise of it may be deaded, so as it may not for the present
act and work, and a man not use it. A man in his drunkenness loses the use,
but not the faculty of Reason. A man in his sleep loses the use, but not the
faculty of his sense. Sin and temptation may as much distemper the soul, as
Wine and strong drink may do the brain.

3. For the measure and degree, in that regard the spirit may be quenched. A man
may come to have a less degree of faith, hope, love, a less degree of joy and
zeal. The degrees of these may be abated, and yet the things themselves
remain, Apoc. 2.4. It is laid to the charge of the Angel of Ephesus, That he
had lost his first love; he says not, he had lost his love, or all his love,
but his first love, that degree of love he had at first; he had love still, but
it was not so fervent as before, it was abated in the degree of it, and so the
spirit was quenched in degree. So then, look upon the habits of grace, and in
regard of the habit, there is no amission of grace: Look upon the act, and in
regard of the act, there may be an intermission of it: Look upon the degree,
and in regard of the degree, there may be a remission. A remission of degrees,
an intermission of acts, but no utter amission of habits, of fundamental
saving sanctifying grace. And thus having opened and cleared the Text, come we
now to some observations.

And here first begin with the metaphor, Quench not the spirit. And out of it
learn

The nature of the Spirit of God, and spirit of grace. That the spirit of God
is of the nature of fire: so much the word quench implies, for nothing is
properly quenched but fire; Quench not the spirit, is as much as quench not the
fire of the spirit. The Spirit of God then is of the nature of fire, Mat. 3.11.
He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, that is, with the Holy
Spirit which is as fire, Mar. 9.49. Every man shall be salted with fire: what
fire? As the fire of afflictions, and the the fire of the word, so the fire of
the spirit, Act. 2.3, 4. There appeared to them cloven tongues with fire, and
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. Sometimes the Spirit is compared to
water, Isa. 44.3. And sometimes again to fire. As the Word of God is a fire,
Jer. 23. Is not my Word a fire? so is his Spirit a fire. Is not my Spirit a
fire? And the Spirit is compared to fire in these regards.

1. First, Fire, it gives light: And therefore in the want of the light of the
Sun, we make use of fire to afford us light for doing our works. The Sun
was not created till the fourth day, and yet there was light all the three
first days, which some conceive to have been from the element of fire under
the sphere of the Moon, which gave light unto the world. So Exodus 13.21. They
had a pillar of fire by night to give them light: Fire and light go together.
So is it with the Spirit of God. It is a Spirit of light, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. All
spiritual illumination comes from this fire. Gods Spirit is an inlightning
spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives not the things of God; neither
can he, because they be spiritually discerned, viz. by the light of the Spirit,
which Spirit a natural man wanting, he is in the dark for the want of light
that should show unto him divine truths. The Spirit of God is fire that brings
light with it, wheresoever Gods Spirit comes there comes light.

2. Secondly, fire as it gives light, so it also gives heat; fire and heat
are inseparable: when our bodies are pinched with cold in the winter, coming
to the fire we are warmed and heated; fire warmes and heates that which is
cold, and by the heat of it thawes and melts that which is frozen. Thus is it
with the Spirit of God, it is an heating warming Spirit, it warmes and heates
the affections, our hearts that are frozen and cold in prayer, hearing, it
heates and warmes them, it melts and inlarges them. It kindles both affections
of love, zeal, Joy. The Spirit of God will make a man's heart burn within, in
the hearing of the Word, Luke 24. Did not our hearts burn within us when he
opened the Scriptures? It will make a man's heart glow and flame in prayer, it
will melt a man's heart, and make it drop at a man's eyes, as Ice thawes and
drops against the fire.

3. Thirdly, Fire as it heates and warmes, so it also burns and consumes
whatever combustible matter it lights and lays hold upon: It feeds upon
combustible matter, and leaves not till it have brought it into ashes. Prove.
30.16. Fire is one of the four things that never says it is enough. A little
spark of fire burns down and consumes whole houses and Towns. It is ever in
action, and eating up and consuming what it lights upon. So is it with the
Spirit of God and the graces of it: When the Spirit of God comes once into a
man's heart, look what combustible matter it finds there, it consumes and
eats it up: it will consume and burn up our lusts and corruptions. It will
do with the body of sin, as the King of Moab did with the King of Edom, Am.
2.1. He burnt the bones of the King of Edom into lyme; as the Papists did with
Gods servants in Queen Mary's days, burns the body thereof into ashes. It is
like the fire that came down from Heaven at the fir^ sacrifice in the
Tabernacle, that turn the sacrifices into ashes. Like the fir^ that came down
upon Elias sacrifice it burnt not only the Sacrifice, b^ licked up all the
water in the ditch about the Alter. The Spirit of Go^ when it is kindled in a
man's heart, makes sore work amongst a man's co^ruptions. It eats and lickes
the^ up strangely. A man may see the^ has been fire by the cinders an^ ashes.

4. Fourthly, Fire is a purging, p^rifying, refining element: It purg^ water of
the scum, it separates drosse^ baggage from the metals. And as the^ is a
natural purifying property in fir^ so there was a ceremonial purificatio^ by
fire, Numb. 31.23. Thus is it wit^ the Spirit of Grace. And that which is said
of prayer is true of the Spirit Malach. 3.2, 3. For prayer purifies b^ his
spirit, therefore faith is said to p^rifie the heart, Act. 9. and hope is sai^
to purge, 1 John 3. Gods Spirit is purging, purifying fire, that fetche^ dross
and scum out of a man's soul The fire of the Spirit, this is the true Purgatory
fire, and the Purgatory fire that every one must pass, that ever means to
come to heaven.

By all this may men try themselves, whether they have the Spirit of God in
them or not. If any man have not the Spirit of prayer, the same is none of his,
Romans 8. Therefore it concerns us as much to know whether we have the Spirit,
as to know whether we be Christ's. If men have the spirit of grace in them,
their understandings are enlightened, they have a pillar of fire that lights
them in their way to Canaan. Is the spirit in them, they have their hearts
warmed and heated in holy duties of prayer, etc. enlarged hearts in ordinances.
They have their lusts consumed, turned into ashes, they have their scum and
dross of earthlinesse, covetousness purged out. If thus, it is a sign of
these effects of fire that they have the Spirit of God. But these things show
that men are generally fleshly, not having the Spirit, Jude 19. If thou have
Gods Spirit in thee, ho^ is it thou have no more light of knowledge in thee.
Thou art in the dark therefore no fire in thee, for then would there be light in
thee. How cold, an formal, and frozen is thine heart a Prayer, Sermon,
Sacrament: Certainly, if there were fire in thee, ther^ would be heat in thee
also; no heat^ therefore no fire. All thy lusts an^ the body of sin is
untouched, unhur^ thy lusts as strong, thy corruptions a potent as ever. Alas,
it may be said o^ thee, as of the three children, Dan. 3 when they came out of
the fiery furnace, not an hair of their head was singed, not the smell of fire
upon their garments. Just so with thee. Alas, wha^ do thou talk of having
the Spirit o^ God in thee; See Prove. 6.27, 28 Can a man take fire in his
bosom, and h^ clothes not be burnt? Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet
not be burnt?

So in this case. It were impossibl^ but if this fire were in thee but thy
corruptions should be burnt and consumed. And what purity of heart o^ life is
wrought in thee? The dross and scum of thine oaths, thy rotten speech is still
in thy mouth, the dross of the world is still in thine hands. By this it
appears that men do but vainly boast of having the spirit of Grace in their
hearts, when they have neither light in their hands, nor heat in their hearts,
nor mortification and holiness in their lives. Their fire is a fire without
light, blind dark fire; a fire without heat, cold fire, a fire that does not
burn, that does not flame; It is but false fire, it is but a painted fire. It
is a sign Gods Spirit, and that fire from heaven is not come down into their
hearts.

Now to come to the maine point of the Text: The lesson it teaches is, that it
must be the special care of a Christian, that Gods Spirit and the graces
thereof be not quenched nor damped in him. The Spirit of God is of a fiery
nature, and is as fire in a man. Now a man's care must be to keep this fire
always burning and flaming, and to take heed that he do nothing that may
extinguish, and put out either the flame or the fire, either the light or the
heat of it. It is a rule in the exposition of the Commandments, that always
the negative includes the contrary affirmative; as when we are forbidden to
kill, we are also by all means commanded to preserve our neighbors life: So
here when we are forbidden to quench the spirit, we are not only forbidden the
quenching, but we are commanded withal to kindle and keep it alive, to keep
it flaming and burning in us. This negative comprehends that affirmative, 2 Timothy 1.6. stir up the grace of God in the. He puts him in mind (...), to
blow up, and to kindle and keep alive the grace of God in him. It must be with
the Spirit of God and the fire of it, as it was with the Lamps of the
Sanctuary. Ex. 27.20. they shall bring oil for the light to cause the Lamp to
burn always. It must always be kept burning. This fire must not sometime be
burning, and sometimes out, but a man must have a care to keep it burning
always. See what the Canon was for the fire on the Alter, Levit. 6.12.13. And
the Jews say, that he that quenched the fire of the Altar, was to be beaten;
yea, though he quenched but one coal; yea, if he quenched but one coal that
was down from upon the Altar, yet he was to be beaten. Thus should it be
with us in our care for preserving the fire of the Spirit in our hearts alive.
This fire should be always burning, it should not be put out; and men should
have a care, that not one coal of it, no not one spark of it should be
quenched: It should burn, and never be put out, Quench not the spirit. Quench
not the flame, the coals, the sparks.

That which is the good huswifes commendation in one kind, Prove. 31.18. that
her candle goes not out by night, should in this kind be the praise of a
Christian, that his fire and candle go not out, but are ever kept burning,
Lu^. 12.35. let the lights be burning: The participle notes the continuance,
that is, always burning. We know who they were that said, Give us of your
oil, for our Lamps are quenched: they were none of the wisest, Matthew. 25.8.
The foolish Virgins said unto the wise, etc. They be foolish Virgins that
suffer their Lamps to quench: The wise Virgins slept, but yet their Lamps
were burning: But the foolish Virgins they had their eyes and their Lamps out.
And we see that Hezekiah reckons this amongst other transgressions of their
fathers, 2 Chronicles. 29.6, 7. Our Fathers have trespassed, and have done that
which is evil in the sight of the Lord. And what was that trespass, and what
was one evil they had done in the eyes of the Lord? They have put out (or
quenched) the Lamps. To quench the Lamps of the Temple was a trespass, and a
thing evil in the eyes of the Lord. And so is it no less a trespass, a thing
no less evil in the eyes of the Lord to quench this Lamp, and to put out this
fire of our Spirit.

Now for the further prosecution of this point consider 3. things.

1. First, The means and ways to keep it from quenching, to keep it kindled,
burning and flaming in our hearts.

2. Secondly, The things that do quench it, which must be avoided.

3. Thirdly, The danger of quenching the Spirit, that may make us afraid to
quench it.

1. First, The means to keep us from quenching, and to kindle and keep it
alive and burning in us, are these:

I. First, to be careful and watchful not to quench it, but to cherish it in
the first motions thereof. Quench not the Spirit. Quench not the first motions
thereof. Quench not the spirit; that is, foster, cherish, and make much of the
first motions of the Spirit. In the first creation, Genesis 1.2. it is said the
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the water, or was moving. Incubabat aquis,
says Junius, viz. as Birds upon their eggs, or young. They sit and are moving
upon them to hatch them and bring them forth; and when they are hatched, they
still sit and move upon them to cherish, and sustain them with their heat and
warmth, till they bring them to perfection. So the Spirit of God did sit or
move upon that face of the deep, by his motion or incubation, to hatch and
bring forth out of that vast mass the several kinds of creatures, he by an
effectual and comfortable motion cherished that matter, till he brought forth
the several creatures, till he hatched them and brought them to perfection.
Now look as the Spirit in the creation moved upon the waters, just in the same
manner the Spirit moves in men's hearts, that by the gracious motions of his
Spirit, he may hatch and bring forth graces, and good works in us, and may
bring them to perfection. The same word is used of God again, Deuteronomy. 32.11. As
the Eagle flutters over her young, so the Lord alone, etc. The Lord as an Eagle
over her young, fluttered over his people, or moves, As the Eagle stirs up
her nest, that is, her young ones. The Eagle, she stirs up her young ones,
and rowses them up with her cry, and not only sits upon them, but flutters
over them with her wings to awaken them: So did God stir up Israel to go out
of the land of Egypt, Ezekiel. 20.5, 6, 7. So that before God brought them out of
Egypt, he first stirred them up to be gone; He said unto them, Cast away every
man his abomination. Now how did God stir them up? Not only by Moses and
Aaron in their Ministry, but by the gracious motions and solicitations of his
Spirit; and those motions by which he stirred them up and called upon them to
be gone, and to cast away their abominations, those were the Eagles stirrings
of her nest; these were the Eagles flutterings with her wings: As the Eagle
stirs up her nest; how stirs she up her nest, her young ones? She rowses
them by her cry: So the Spirit rowses, excites, and stirs up men by his voice
in the motions thereof: And therefore those motions are called a voice, though
not a voice audible to the bodily ear, yet audible and sensible to the soul,
Isa. 30.20. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee. Behind thee, as John,
Apoc. 1.10. I heard a voice behind me, not before me, as implying that the
Spirit of God comes and calls upon us being secure, passing by, and not
regarding those things it calls for. It is a voice that many times comes all on
a sudden, Cant. 2.8. The voice of my Beloved, behold he comes. It is a secret
whispering voice, breathing holy motions into our hearts, stirring us up to
some good: But yet it is a pressing voice, that follows a man, and presses him
close to what it calls for, Act. 18.5. Paul was pressed in spirit, and
testified, etc. The Spirit of God moved him, and stirred up his spirit, and
forcibly and strongly moved him, so as his spirit was pressed to do: All this
was, that he had strong and vehement motions from Gods Spirit to do that which
he did. Now then, when we have such motions, such breathings, stirrings,
flutterings, then should our care be not to quench these, but to cherish,
kindle, and uphold these motions. The Spirit of God is fire, the motions of the
spirit, are the sparks of this fire; now our care should be not to quench
these sparks, not to let them go out, but to kindle and cherish them unto a
great fire, unto flame. It is said of Christ, That he will not quench the
smoking flax. That if there be in a man's heart but a small spark of grace,
so small that it burns not, but only makes a little smoke, and a poor
smother, yet he will not quench it, but he will make much of it, cherish and
foster it till it kindle and grow to a great fire: So should it be with us,
when the Spirit of God injects and casts into our hearts but the sparks of
fire in the gracious motions thereof, quench not those sparks, cherish and
kindle those sparks, keep them from quenching and dying, and going out.

Now for the doing of these two things are required: First, have a care to take
notice of the motions of the Spirit, watch where he moves and stirs, that a
good motion may no sooner stir in thine heart, but thou may presently be
able to say, This is Gods Spirit, these be the flutterings of the Eagles wings,
this good motion is from Gods Spirit. Thus does the Church, Cant. 2.8. whilst
she is in that holy discourse, she finds a good motion stirring, and abruptly
she breaks off, and says, The voice of my welbeloved. Now Christ speaks by
the good motions of his Spirit. Excellent is that, Apoc. 1.10. I heard a voice
behind me, and verse. 12. And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. The
voice was behind him at his back; now when he hears the voice behind him,
he does not go on, and never mind, and not vouchsafe once to look back and
to heed it, but he turns him about to see the voice that spoke with him, to
take more special notice of what was said: So when we hear that voice of the
Spirit in the motions of it, and hear it behind us, we should not go on
negligently and carelessly, and leave and cast it behind our backs, but turn
about to see the voice, take special and serious notice of it. Do as the
people did at the poole of Bethesda, they sat watching for the mooving of the
waters by the Angel, that the waters could no sooner move, but presently they
saw it, observed it, took notice of it, and all cried out the Angel moves in
the waters. So should we watch when at any time the spirit of God moves in our
hearts, and take special notice of it; and say, now Gods spirit speaks to
me, this is the voice of the spirit. That when a good motion stirs in our
hearts, we might be able to say as Jacob upon his dream, surely God is here,
surely Gods spirit is here. This were a great means to kindle the spirit in
us, and to make him continue his gracious counsels to us, as the contrary is a
shrewd means to quench the spirit. If a man speak to us, and give us good
counsel, and advise for our benefit, if we hearken and give ear to him, and
take notice of what he says, then he will go on, and give us further
information and direction; but if he perceives that we regard him not, that we
hear him with an oscitancy of spirit, and that we are minding other matters,
and are talking, and twatlin^ with other idle persons that are b^ us, the man
has done, he will not trouble him, he will not lose his swee^ words, he will
have the wit to hol^ his peace, and let him alone. Just so here. If Gods
spirit speaks to us an^ counsels us in the holy motions ther^of, if we will
mind him, observe him, and give him audience, then will he go on and give us
further counsel and continue his directions to us.

We shall see 1 Samuel 3. that God called Samuel three times, and Samuel thought
it had been Ely, and does not take notice of it that it was the Lord: And all
that while that he takes not notice of it to be the Lord, all that while God
is silent, says no more to him, co^municates not his mind to him. But at the
fourth call, when Samuel answers verse 10. Speak Lord for thy servant hears;
then the Lord goes on, reveals his mind to him, and tells him all that in the
verses following, and all that chapter 2.27. ad finem, which is there set down
by way of Anticipation. So when the Spirit of God, calls and we mind it, and
note it, and say Lord I mind and mark that thou movest in my heart, and thou
beginnest to speak to me, speak Lord, thy servant hears thee and takes
notice of thee, then the Spirit of God will go on, will continue his counsels,
and will reveal his mind further to us. But if Gods Spirit stir in his
motions, and we are ^eedelesse, and supine, and regard him ^ot, he will cease
and break off, and we may be long enough ere we hear of him again. Apoc. 3.
I stand at the door and knock. He knockes in the motions of his Spirit,
every motion of the Spirit is a knock, a rap at the door of our hearts to have
us open. Now we see if one of us come to a man's door, and we knock once,
twice, etc. and either they within do not hear ^s, or if they do, yet regard
not our ^nocking (what care they knock let him) ^hen we will away, and knock
no longer, when it may be we come upon an errand that might be beneficial to
t^ family. So if the raps and knockings the Spirit at the doors of our hea^^
be neglected, and disregarded, he w^ have done knocking, and knock (...)
longer, though he knock and co^^ upon an errand for our own goo^ The
observation of the motions of t^^ Spirit is an excellent kindler, and t^
neglect and discontinuance of them a very dangerous quencher of the S^^rit. As
therefore we would kee^ the Spirit of God from quenching, we would keep it
alive, and burning us, so have a care to take notice of, a^ to observe the
first motions of it in o^ hearts.

Give present obedience to the Spirits motions.
2. Secondly, The motions of t^ Spirit observed, and notice taken them, in the
second place be careful give present obedience to them a^ to close with them,
and to do t^^ thing for which the spirit of G^^ moves and excites thee to Do
as the at Bethesda, they not only watch^ when the Angel moved, but every o^
labored to step in, and step in prese^^ ^y into the waters, whilst the moti^n
was on foot. So soon as the Spirit ^trikes these sparks into our hearts to
^ave our hearts as tinder to catch those ^parkes, and to have them take fire in
^ur hearts. Sparks smitten into tin^er, the tinder takes fire, and by it a
^andle is lighted, and so a greater fire. A little spark that lies in the
ashes, if it ^e let alone it soon dies and goes out, ^ut if other small
coals, or small sticks ^e laid to it, and it be gently and soft^y blown, it
at length will kindle to a ^reat fire. So deal with the motions of the spirit,
suffer them not to dye in ^he ashes, but foster and cherish them till by little
and little they grow from ^otions to actions, and from many Actions to an
Habit. The motions of ^he spirit are the knockings and rappings at the door of
the heart, I stand at the door and rap. Now when one ^aps at the door, we
do not only take notice that one knockes, but we command the door to be
opened, we are angry with our servants, if they go not presently, and open the
door. So that is it we should do when t^^ spirit knockes, suffer him not to
sta^ knocking too long, but make haste open the door and give him e^trance.

The motions of the spirit are t^ strivings of the spirit, Genesis 6. My s^^rit
shall no longer strive with man. (...) strives in them to bring us to so^ good,
or to know some evil. N^ when we find him striving with we should not strive
against those m^tions, we should strive with our sel^ to let the spirit of God
overcome in his strivings: We should close w^ him and do what he calls for,
a^ second his counsels by our obe^^ence. We see Mariners at sea if t^^ wind
serves not, how they are looki^^ at their top sail to see and wat^ when the
wind turns, and blows f^^ them. And when the wind blow^ from the point they
desire, they pr^sently take notice of it; Now say the the wind blows fair,
but yet that not all: so soon as they see they ha^ a fair gaile of wind,
they present^^ get every man to his tackling, and as fast as they can hoyse up
their sails: So when the Spirit blows in the motions of it, we should not
only take notice of the blasts and fair gailes, but presently hoyse up sail,
set upon that thing the motion calls for: Do as God commands David, 1 Chronicles.
14, 15. The motions of the Spirit are the sound of his goings the footsteps of
his anointed Psalm. 89. verse 51.

The motions of the Spirit sometimes are for direction, Isa. 30.20. The Spirit
sollicites a man to believe, to repent, to pray, to good duties; this is a good
duty, do it. Sometimes they are for correction and reproof, Jon. 4. Then said
the Lord, Do thou well to be angry? Do thou well to swear? Do thou
well to break the Sabbath? Do thou well to neglect prayer in thy family?
etc. Now then, where motions are for direction, take that good way they point
to; when they are for correction, avoid that evil way they pluck from, thus
hearken to them, and this will kindle and keep alive the Spirit in thine heart.
If I see a man will follow my counsels and reproves, I will follow him with
counsels and reproves still; he encourages me to be forward to do him that
good office: So here, follow the motions of the Spirit, and the Spirit will
delight to follow thee with good motions still.

I stand at the door and knock, if any will open: What then? I will come in
to him, and sup with him, and he with me. As if he should say, if any will
hearken to these motions of the Spirit, he shall have the sweet work, and the
sweet consolations of the Spirit in him; the Spirit shall come in, shall cheer
and refresh him. He that will make much of these sparks, shall have a
comfortable fire kindled, at which he shall warm and comfortably refresh
himself. See how the cherishing of the motious of the Spirit keeps it from
quenching, and causes it to flame, and burn. But on the contrary, when a man
neglects the knockes of the Spirit, and yields not obedience to them, opens not
the door, that causes a sad quenching of the Spirit. See an example, Cant.
5.2. It is the voice of my Beloved that knocks, saying, open to me my sister.
There be the motions of the spirit of Christ: And she takes notice of them,
therein she did aright. It is the voice of my beloved that knocks. But she
failed in the second thing, she does not arise presently and open, but she
shuckes and shuffles, verse. 3. and has her put offs, I have put off my coat,
etc. Well, what is the issue, verse. 5. she arose to open to her beloved after
her heart smote her for not opening before. I but it was too late, for verse. 6.
See, how for want of obedience to the motions of the spirit, she quenched the
co^forts and joy of the spirit: Therefore take heed of this, How to save the
Spirit from quenching.
if we would save the spirit from quenching. Have a care of these two things:
The neglect of these will quench the Spirit. It is with the Spirit of God as
with the Spirit of Satan. It should be our care and endeavor to quench the
spirit of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.16. Wherewith ye shall be able to quench the
fiery darts of the wicked. The darts of the Devil are fiery ones, we must
look to quench them. Now how may one quench the fiery darts of Satan? The
only way to quench them, is to quench them in the first motions, when the
first motions come, mind them not, dis-regard them, slight them, yield no
obedience to them, and then that fire of Hell will go out and dye. Just so is
the spirit of grace also quenched* Therefore the way to keep it from
quenching, is to cherish it in the first motions.

2. Second means to kindle and keep alive this fire, and to keep it from
quenching, is to keep the graces and gifts of the spirit in action and
exercise. The gifts and graces of the spirit kept in action and exercise,
kindles and increases the fire of the spirit in us, it so keeps the flame from
quenching, that it increases and blows it up. It is as with our natural
spirits when a man sits still, and stirs not, walks not, works not, is not
in action, his natural spirits dampe, and he grows lumpish, and livelesse:
But let a man in such a case be in action, be in exercise, let him walk, or
work, and that raises, and recovers, and increases his spirits in him: So in
this case, the setting grace on work, the exercising of it, does so keep it
from decaying and dying, as that it increases and adds to it. Gal. 5.25. If we
live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. That Is sure, that the life
of the spirit is to be evidenced by the works of the spirit, the life of grace
by the works of grace. And what if a man do so? Then it may be said as truly,
If we walk in the spirit, we shall also live in the spirit, and the spirit
live in us. Walking in the spirit, acting and exercising the gifts and graces
of it, will cause the spirit to live, and keep it from quenching in the gifts
and graces of it.

And this is that which Paul wishes Timothy to do, 2 Timothy 1.6. to stir up
the gift of God that was in him. He speaks of his Ministerial gifts. Now how
are they to be stirred up, and to be kindled and increased? Amongst other
ways this is one, to be in action, in exercise of them, and not out of sloth,
or out of fear, verse. 7. to let his gifts lie idle. Use legs, says our
Proverb, and have legs; and use gifts and graces, and have gifts and graces.
We shall see it true in particulars.

The way to keep the gifts of the spirit from dying and decaying.
1. First, for the gifts of the Spirit in knowledge and utterance. The way to
keep them from dying and decaying, is to be in action in the exercise and
communication of them. It heates, keeps them alive, and increases them. See
Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self, etc. as if he should say, Take heed of
quenching the Spirit: When a man forgets that which God has taught him, and
knowledge of God departs from a man's heart, that is a flat quenching of the
spirit. It is the putting out of the light of the fire of the Spirit. Take heed
of that, says God: Well, but what course may be taken to keep these gifts, to
keep a man from decaying in his knowledge? Teach them thy sons, and thy
sons sons. The exercising of those gifts in teaching others, should keep
alive their gifts in themselves. He that in that kind endeavors to kindle
Gods Spirit in others, does at the same time, and in the same action kindle it
in himself.

There be lips, that Solomon calls, Lips of knowledge, Prove. 20.15. and he
says, that they are a precious Jewel. Now a man if he have such lips,
should be as careful to keep them, as he would be to keep a precious Jewel.
How careful is a man to keep a precious Jewel, he would not by any means
lose such a Jewel: As careful should a man be to keep the lips of
knowledge. And what are lips of knowledge? when they are such as Prove. 5.2.
that thy lips may keep knowledge. Those lips are lips of knowledge,
those lips are a precious Jewel, that keep knowledge: Well, but how should
a man come to have his lips keep knowledge? When he does, as Prove. 10.21.
The lips of the righteous feed many. When a man uses and exercises his gifts
of knowledge, and communicates them to others, by feeding others with the
knowledge he has, his feeding lips shall prove keeping lips. Communication
of knowledge and truth, is the preservation, and our keeping of it, and the
keeping our selves from losing it.

It is in this as in that case, Genesis 22.16, 17. Because thou have done this
thing, and have not with held thy son, in blessing I will bless thee, and in
multiplying I will multiply thy seed: So if men withhold not their gifts, but
use and exercise them in instructing others, and teaching others, God will in
blessing bless our gifts, God will in multiplying multiply our gifts, and
exceedingly increase them. The loaves did not multiply whilst they were in the
basket, nor whilst they were whole, but when they were breaking and
distributing; under the breaking and distribution it was they multiplied. Gifts
of knowledge are not spent in distribution, but increase and multiply thereby.
It is true here which Solomon speaks, Pro. 11.24.25. The scattering of knowledge
makes it increase, and watering others with those waters, will but make way for
the more abundant watering of himself.

The gifts that God gives men are pounds he gives them. And he gives a pound
to a man not to be put into his purse, but to be put into the bank. He gives
men a pound with a command to trade, Luke 19.12. Trade till I come. And what
was the issue? Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds. Lord thy pound has
gained five pounds. Trading therefore with the gifts of Gods spirit, is the
increasing of the gifts of the spirit. On the contrary, the want of exercise of
gifts, the not employing them in communicating our knowledge decays them, and
quenches the Spirit. In the former parable we find some servants trading with
their pounds, and another servant lays up his pound in a napkin. Now one would
think that this servant had took the only sure course to have kept his pound
Trading we see often proves hazardous, and uncertain, and many a man trades
away his stock, and loses al^ he has by trading, but when a ma^ties his
money up in a napkin and binde^ it, he seems to take a sure course for keeping
of it. But yet not so in thi^ trading in the gifts of the spirit. They that
traded, gained more pounds, kep^ and increased their gifts, he that trade^ not,
he lost his gifts, verse 24. Tak^ from him the pound. He has quench the
Spirit, he lost his gifts. And how comes he to lose them? because he^ employed
them not, because he lap^ his pound in a napkin. We see 2 King. 4. that the
oil ceased and stayed not till for want of vessels the widow powered not out.
It is not pouring out, but want of pouring out tha^ dries up the streams and
fountains o^ grace. And the oil stayed says the text, verse 6. When stayed
the oyle^ not when she was pouring, but when she stayed pouring, she first
staye^ pouring, before the oil stayed running. No man when a candle is light
puts it under a bushel. The putting of a candle under a close bushel or any
other close vessel may quench the ^ight, and put out the candle which would
have continued burning if it had been set upon the table. The Mothers milk
dries not up with drawing out her breast, and giving suck, but it dryes up with
being kept up, with not giving suck; quench not the spirit. Fire is quenched not
only by water, but by want of vent. If fire be shut close up ^n an oven, or a
still, it dies and goes ^ut, but if it has air and vent, then ^t lives and
burns. And what is it that more quenches the spirit in this kind, then our
not using and exercising of men's gifts. No man when he lights a candle puts it
under a bed, or under a bushel. The spirit of God ^ights many a man's candle,
gives him much light, he has a fair burning lamp, and yet the same things
befalles him that is threatened to him that curses Father and Mother, Prove.
20.20. His lamp or his candle is put out in obsc^^ darkness. His lamp go out,
and then f^lowes not only, darkness but obsc^^ darkness. He not only
grows ig^^rant, but sottishly and grosely ignora^^ But how come this candle
and this la^ to be quenched, and to be put ou^ obscure darkness? He has
pu^ under a bed, or under a bushel, (...) has had more mind of his bed, a^
his bushel, of his ease and profits the of giving and communicating his lig^
to others. Sloth and coveteousnesse ha^ made him neglect the use and exer^^ of
his gifts, and so the bed and the (...) shell have put out his lamp in obsc^^
darkness, these put out their can^ and make them go out like the snu^^ of
the candle with a stink, and an^ savor. A candle may be put (...) though it
be not blown out, thou^ water not cat cast into it, by the p^ting of an
extinguisher over it. Negligence, and slothfulness in not exc^cising the gifts
of the spirit is an e^tinguisher put upon the candle a^ flame of the spirit,
that quenches a^ puts it out. Zech. 11.17. Woe to the Idol shepherds. And who
is the Idol shepherd! That leaves his flock: Therefore an Idle shepherd
that does not exercise his gifts with his flock, he is an Idol shepherd. And
what is the woe that shall befall him? A sword upon his Arm, and upon his
right eye. He did not stretch out his arm all the day long to gather in his
flock, therefore his arm shall be withered. He did not use his eye, would
not be a seer to instruct his people, therefore his right eye shall not be
dimmed, but utterly darkened. The spirit should be quenched in him. He had
made himself an Idle shepherd, and therefore God makes him an Idol shepherd.
Of Idols it is said, Psalm 115. Mouths they have, and speak not, eyes they
have and see not. He made himself an Idol, a mouth he had and spoke not,
gifts he had and used them not, he leaves his flock; and therefore God will
make an Idol of him too; eyes he shall have and not see, his right eye shall
be utterly darkened. He leaves his flock, and Gods gift^ leave him: So
dangerous a quenche^ of the Spirit is the not using of gifts, whether by
Ministers or others.

2. Secondly, in the gift and grace of faith. The way to keep faith in vigor,
in life, to keep it from quenching in the desire, to make it grow and
increase, is to put faith to it, to keep it in action, to keep it in
exercise, and to make it put forth it self in frequent acts. So long as faith
is on the increasing hand, so long no fear of its quenching or decaying; so
long as faith is acted and in exercise, so long it is on the increasing hand;
every new and fresh act of faith adds growth and increase to it: the use of
faith increases faith; and the more fresh acts of believing, the more the habit
of believing is increased: Many acts strengthen and increase habits. Mark how
that man speaks, Mark. 9. Christ tells him, if he can believe, he can heal
his child: Lord says he, help my unbelief; as if he should say, Lord I
would feign believe, I find much unbelief, help me to overcome it. I but
first, says he, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. That act of his in putting
forth his faith to believe as he could, was the way to overcome his unbelief,
and to come to believe as he would. The way to have the faith we would have, is
to use and set on work the faith we already have. See John 1.48, 49, 50, 51.
as if he should say, Since thou art so ready to believe upon so small a ground,
therefore thou shall see greater things then these. Great matters shall be
revealed unto thee, that shall set thy faith on work in a great measure. The
way then to keep faith in vigor and in life, is to set faith frequently on
work, and to have it ready and forward to believe. Take the promises, and set
them before thee, and put thy faith on work upon them, and stir up thine
heart to believe them strive to act thy faith in believing them, and this will
keep thy faith lively and vigorous. When faith is not exercised, and set, and
kept to work, it breeds a spiritual torpor in ou^ faith, and so quenches it,
that when w^ may have most need of it, it can do u^ no service nor comfort,
Lu. 24. O fool and slow of heart to believe. God would have men quick and
ready, forwar^ to believe. Now when faith is no^ held to it, and kept in
action, then is (...) slow and backward to do that worl^ which God requires of
it.

3. Thirdly, in the gift of praye^ The gift of prayer, when a man c^^ power out
his heart to God, it is a^ excellent gift and grace of the spirit And a man
once having obtained the grace, should have a care to keep up, and increase
it; and no better wa^ to do it then to be frequent in the ^^ercise of it, and
to be often in t^^ work. Hezekiahs phrase to Isaiah, (...) that he should lift
up a prayer, Isa. 3^ 4. A man that would be good at li^ting, must often use
himself to liftin^ and the oftener he lifts, the easilier he^ lifts: Lift up a
prayer says Hezekiah. lift up mine heart, or my soul, un^^ thee, says David.
A man that do^ not use to lift heavy burdens, how hardly does he lift? what
ado has he to get up an heavy burden when he comes to it: But he that uses
every day to be exercised in lifting, it is an easy thing to him, he has by
his frequent use gotten a dexterity, an handinesse at the work. To lift up a
man's soul to God, to lift up a man's heart so high, as heaven is from the
earth, is an hard matter. Oh how heavy a man's heart is by nature! and how hard
to lift it up, to lift it up so high! If a man be not practiced, and daily
exercised in it, a man will as soon lift up a mil-stone, yea a mountain, unto
Heaven: But a man that is every day, and upon every occasion at the work, he
will find the work thereby facilitated, and will get up his heart with much
readiness. Prayer is a running to God. A man that is to run, must be in
breath, have his wind at command. He that runs every day, is every day the
fitter to run: yesterdayes running prepares for to day, to days running for to
morrow: But put a man to run that has not done for many years he is so
pursey, and so presently out o^ breath, that he is feign presently t^ give out.

There is nothing so quenches the Spirit of prayer, as dis-use of the duty I
cannot go in these, says David, for I am not accustomed to them: And s^ want
of accustoming and exercising o^ themselves in prayer, makes men utterly to
seek in prayer, when their necessities are most urgent. Many a^ their death
beds, and upon other urgent occasions, would feign pray, and alas, when they
try to drive, they draw^ heavily, they want Chariot wheels, they never
wheeled their Charriots nor oyled their Charriots. As therefore men would keep
up a Spirit of prayer, so let them be often and frequent in the exercise of it.

4. Fourthly, in the ability and power of giving God obedience: The more we
obey God, the more able we shall be to obey God; our ability to obedience is
from the spirit, Eze. 36. I will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk
in my Statutes. When a man has got some ability to walk in Gods Statutes, his
care should be to maintain and increase that ability. The way to do that, is
to set our ability on work, and to exercise it: That will both keep and
increase in us a spirit of obedience, Psalm. 119.55, 56. I have kept thy Law.
How came he by this ability? This I had because I kept thy precepts. A strange
reason one would think, I kept it because I kept it: And yet a true reason,
for every new act of obedience fits for a following act, and the use of
spiritual strength increases spiritual strength, Romans 6.19. As in sin, so
in grace, Mar. 4.24. Certainly, the not exercising, and putting forth of our
ability and power of obedience, quenches the power we had, and so enfeebles it,
that when we would at another time do it, we cannot. Samson when his locks
were cut off, thought he would go out and do as at other times, but the
Spirit was quenched, and the Lord was departed from him; and therefore he could
not do as he had done at other times: So when God calls us to do duties of
obedience, and has given us his Spirit, and some ability from it to do such
duties as we have formerly done; and when God calls us to it, we will not put
forth our ability he has given us, then we quench his Spirit; and when at
another time we think to do such duties, we cannot do them, because by not
exercising our ability we lose our ability. I kept not thy precepts, This J had
because I kept not thy precepts.

3. Third means to kindle, and keep from quenching, is the use of those holy
ordinances that God has appointed for this end: They are these:

Hearing the word a special means to keep the spirit from dying.
1. First, Hearing the Word, and attendance upon the Ministry thereof. They that
would keep alive, and increase the fire of the Spirit, must wait upon the
Ministry of the Word: The Ministry of the Word is fire, fuel and bellows and
all. It is fire, Jer. 23. Is not my word as a fire? As the Spirit is fire, so
the Word is fire, and one fire kindles another, Pro. 26.21. As coals are to
burning coals, etc. so the Word is coals to burning coals, these laid
together make the fire greater: And the fire of the Word kindles the fire of
the Spirit in our hearts, and when it is kindled, kindles it more, and makes it
flame the more; Did not our hearts burn within us? Luc. 24. There was a fire
kindled, and burning in their hearts. I but how came it to kindle, and when did
it burn? Did not our hearts burn within us, whilst he opened the scriptures
unto us? He kindled that fire in their hearts by the preaching of the Word: As
Jeremy speaks of the Word in another case, Ier. 20.9. His Word was in mine
heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones: So it is true of the Word preached
in the hearts of the godly, it is a burning fire in their hearts that kindles
in them the fire of the Spirit. There is no grace of God that is not wrought
and increased in the hearts of Gods people, by the Ministry of the Word. The
Holy Ghost falls down from heaven upon men in the Ministry of the word. Acts
10.44. It is said of the Manna. Numbers 11.9. that it fell with the dew in the
night. My doctrine says Moses, shall drop as the rain, and my speech distill
as the dew. The Ministry of the word is a dew that distills from heaven. Now in
the dew of the word, and with it, this Manna, Christ and his Spirit falls down
from heaven, according to that, 1 Pet. 1.22. by them that preached the Gospel
unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. See then that Manna came
down from heaven in the dewes of the Ministry of the Gospel. So much does
Paul's question to the Galathians implie. Gal. 3.2. This only would I learn of
you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
faith; therefore by hearing the doctrine of faith preached in the Gospel the
spirit is received, not only for the beginning, but for the increase and
continuance of it. The Ministry of the word, that is the fire that kindles this
fire in our hearts. It is also the fuel that feeds this fire. The Lamps of
the Temple must burn always, Exodus 27.20. But then there must be somewhat to
feed, and maintain it burning: therefore see what is commanded. Command the
children of Israel to bring their pure oil olive to cause the Lamp to burn
always. There must be oil to feed the fire, and to cause it to burn. The
word is the oil olive that causes the Lamp of the Spirit to burn always,
that feeds and maintains it that it quench not. The fire upon the Altar must
ever burn, and not be put out, Levit. 6.12, 13. but verse 12. middle And the
Priest shall burn wood on it every morning. There must be a care had that
there should be fuel to keep the fire burning, Prove. 29.26. where no wood is
(though there be no water) the fire goes out, but verse 21. wood kindles fire.
As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire, so is a contentious man to
kindle strife, so is the word to ^indle the spirit and to keep it from
Quenching. The word is the wood and the fuel that keeps the Spirit from
quenching. Therefore mark here the Apostle having said, quench not the spirit,
they might happily ask what must we do that we may not quench the Spirit:
see what the next words are, Despise not prophesying, the preaching of the
word, as if he should say, the way not to quench the spirit but to kindle it,
and to keep it alive in you is to make much of, and to attend upon the Ministy
of the word. If once you despise and sligt that, ye will quickly quench the
Spirit. And to the same purpose is that, Isa. 30.20, 31. Thine eyes shall see
thy teachers, and thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee saying, etc. The
way then to have our ears open to hear the words behind us, is to have our
eyes open to see our teachers before us. If our eyes see not our teachers, we
cannot expect we should hear the voice behind us. The way to have the spirit
follow, us with his motions, and work of grace, is for us to follow the word.
The hearing of the word then is a special means to cherish the spirit of
grace in our hearts. It is the oil, and the wood that keeps this fire burning.

It is also the bellows that blows and stirs up this fire in our hearts.
When a man would kindle a firc he takes the bellows, and by their help he
makes the fire burn with a great flame, and heat, that before burnt little or
nothing. When a fire is quenched, and is almost out, the bellows will quickly
raise the flame again. The ministry of the word is the bellows that blows up
and kindles the fire of the Spirit in us and makes it flame. Ier. 6.29. All the
preaching of the Prophets is in vain, it will not prevail with them:
Therefore when the word is preached, then the Bellows blows to kindle the
fire. Now when there is fire, and fuel, and bellows blowing, there is no
danger of the fire going out, there is no question but that the fire will burn
and be kept alive. And the ministry of the word being fire, fuel, and
bellows, it must needs be a special means to keep the Spirit from
quenching, to kindle and keep it alive in us. And therefore such as would take
heed of quenching, as would kindle and preserve this fire burning, they must
come to this fire, and catch fire at it, must lay on this wood, must come under
the blast of these bellows: that is, they must come to, and attend upon the
ministry of the word. And what is it that more and sooner quenches the Spirit
then the want, and neglect of the ministry of the word. Many that have had
fair lamps blazing, fair fires burning, yet it comes to pass that it may be
said of them, as Isa. 43.17. They are extinct, they are quenched as towe. When
wood burns, and after quenches yet for some good time after there remain some
coals, and some fire still, but when burning towe quenches it leaves no fire
or heat at all, it goes suddenly quite out. So many, not only quench in
degree, but quench altogether, quench as towe. Quench so as God in another
sense threatens to quench the wicked, Job 18.5.6. Their light is quenched, and
the spark of their fire does not shine. So quenched, that all sparks of
goodness are quenched in them. Now whence came this mischief, and where began
this evil? let it be considered if it had not its first rise from the neglect
of the ministry. The taking away and the loss of the ministry must needs be
a great cause of Quenching the Spirit in men's hearts When the lamps in the
Temple are quenched. 2 Cron. 29.7. the lamp of the spirit must needs quench in
men's hearts. Heb. 30.20.21. Thy teachers shall not be removed any more into any
corner, but thine eyes, etc. and thine ears, etc. Therefore when teachers are
removed into corners, then no voice of the Spirit is to be heard, then the
spirit is quenched. As the quenching of the spirit is the cause sometimes of
the quenching the fire of the word, Apoc. 2. Thou have left thy first love, I
will remove the candlestick. Thou have left thy love. There is quenching of
the Spirit. I will remove the candlestick, there is the quenching of the light
of the Gospel. Thou have quenched the fire of thy zeal; I will quench the fire
of the Gospel, I will remove the candlestick and quench and put out the
candle, the striving and burning light of the Ministry. So also the quenching
of the candle and light of the Ministry is infallibly a cause of quenching the
spirit in men's hearts. When once Preaching is taken from men, there must needs
be a decay and a languishing of grace: without wood the fire must needs go
out. The want or loss of the means is a quenching. But now when men shall
voluntarily of themselves through negligence, and disrespect of the means,
slight them, this is a far more dangerous cause of quenching the spirit: for
then there is a double cause of quenching. First, The want of fuel, the
withdrawing of the wood. And Secondly, Gods Justice, who when he sees men
begin to neglect and shift the means, he will in his wrath smite them with
the loss of those gifts and graces they had. As ever therefore thou would
keep the Spirit from quenching, as ever thou would kindle it, and keep it
flaming and burning, so diligently and conscionably attend upon the Ministry of
the Word.

2. Communion of Saints, Communion of Saints a means to keep the Spirit from
quenching
and the exercise of the duties of that Communion in mutual exhortation,
mutual provocation to love, and good works, mutual quickening, and exciting
each other unto good.

This is a special means to keep the Spirit from quenching, to keep the
spirit burning and flaming, and to increase the gifts and graces of the Spirit
in us. As of contentious men, so is it true of gracious men, and godly men in
this sense, Prove. 26.21. As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire: so
is a godly and gracious man to kindle the spirit. Coals laid to burning coals
do mutually communicate heat each to other, and make each others heat the
greater. A few sticks laid on the fire, and that lie asunder too, they make
but a poor fire, it gives but little heat; but when a good company of sticks
are laid on together, and laid on close, then the fire burns to the purpose.
We see that small sticks will kindle great ones. In blowing of the fire, the
smaller wood takes fire first, and that being fired, it fires the greater wood.
Many times men that have greater measures of gifts and knowledge, may want heat
and be short in their fervor and zeal, and they by their communion with
Christians of meaner rank, and meaner gifts than themselves, may be warmed,
and heated, and have the fire of love and zeal kindled in them. We see that
green wood will hardly burn alone; lay that on the fire alone, and what a
deal of blowing and stirring must there be ere it will take fire; and if it
do take fire, it will hardly burn any longer than it is blown, and but
poorly then neither: But now lay green wood on the fire with dry wood, and the
dry wood not only burns it self, but sets the green wood on fire also, and
makes it burn to the purpose. Some men's hearts are exceeding dead and cold,
and it may be they use all private helps by themselves, and blow what they
can, but their solitary endeavors will not do it. If once they do but join
themselves in society with such as are godly, and hold communion with them,
that will get heat into their hearts, and those burning coals will set them
on fire.

A live cole thrown out of the fire dies and quenches presently: A dead cole
cast into the fire amongst coals that are alive, presently is on fire: And
this very thing Solomon intends, Eccl. 4.11. If two ly together, then they have
heat. There is a mutual contribution and communication of heat from each to
other: One gives heat to another, Alter caelidus, alter frigidus. Calidus
frigidum accendat, and qui parum ardet, optet augmentu. Aug. de divino sermon.
ser. 87.
and one receives heat from another, each are the better and the warmer by the
others society. But how can one be warm alone? especially if he be naturally
cold, and withal, the weather and the time be cold. A man that is then alone
must needs be cold. We see when David grew old, his natural heat abated, and
decayed, and he grew cold withal, 1 Reg. 1.1. And they used means to make
him hot, they covered him with clothes, but yet he gat no heat, clothes must
be first heated from a principle of heat in the body, before they can heat
and warm the body. But verse. 2.3. Abishag lying in David's bosom, he gat
heat and warmth. Clothes were dead cherishers, they could not warm David; but
Abishag having natural and living heat, this helped David to warmth: So here,
if men do use means in private by themselves, and have not exercise, nor
communion with others, all means so used will be but covering with clothes, by
which we shall neither get, nor keep heat. Holy conference a duty of this
communion: It kindles and stirs up the spirit, it refreshes, it cheeres the
spirit in us, Ephesians. 4.29.30. Corrupt communication grieves him: And whatsoever
grieves does quench the Spirit. Now as evil speech and communication grieves
and quenches, so holy speech and conference it cheeres, and so kindles the
Spirit in us. But if a man have communion with such as have spiritual life in
them, the fire of the Spirit in them, the vigor and warmth of Grace in them,
have society with them in prayer, conference, mutual excitations unto God,
this will be an excellent means to keep our heat from cooling and quenching,
yea to increase and add to it. Me thinks there is somewhat in that, Act. 2.
If we consider when the Holy Ghost came upon them, and that there were cloven
tongues of fire upon them. And when was it? verse. 1. they were all with one
accord in one place, met together in an holy communion, and about duties of
holy communion. And then followed that verse. 2, 3, 4.

How much mutual communion of Saints quickens the life of Grace, and the heat
of it, we may see in one particular, 2 John 12. That our joy may be full. An
Apostles graces furthered, and quickened by the graces of a woman. When such
Grandies in grace have benefit by communion of Saints, how much more may they
whose measures are less! It is certain, that the neglect of this communion
and the duties of it, is a great quencher of the Spirit. When men fall off by
Apostacy, that is a quenching of the Spirit. The highest degree of quenching
the Spirit, is in the great sin against the Holy Ghost. And it is a clear
case that the letting fall of this communion, and the neglect of that, is one
of the first steps to Apostacy, and the sin against the Holy Ghost, Heb.
10.23, 24, 25, 26. By which he implies that as a special means to keep men
from such a quenching of the Spirit, as makes way to the sin against the Holy
Ghost, is to uphold the practice of the duties of the communion of Saints: so a
special cause of such quenching as makes way unto that sin, is the neglect
and throwing up of the practice of the duties of the communion of Saints.

3. Thirdly, the duty of meditation. Though there be wood and fire, yet if they
be not laid one to another, there will be no flame nor heat, but when they are
laid and applied each to other, that kindles and makes the fire burn,
especially when the fire is blown upon the wood being laid on. Meditation
lays wood and fire together, it blows the fire also, and raises the flame.
All the prodigal sons graces began at this, I will arise, said he; (he said
it in his heart, in his thoughts, in his meditations) and go to my Father: He
was in serious meditation, what a great man his Father was, what an excellent
house he kept, what a miserable case he himself was in; and this meditation
quickened his heart to this, I will arise and go to my Father: So men's
bethinking themselves is made an excellent help unto repentance, 1 Reg. 8.47.
That is when men seriously use to meditate, and use to think with themselves
what they have done, how God is offended with them, how great their misery is,
where remedy is to be had, etc. This is an excellent help to make way for the
spirit of repentance. It is a great measure of grace the godly man attaines to,
Psalm. 1.3. But mark what is a great means conducing to these measures of
grace, and the spirit, verse 2. To be spiritually minded is life, Romans 8.6.
This is in one sense to be spiritually minded, when the mind is employed in
spiritual meditations, and this is life also in this sense, in that it breeds
and maintains the life of grace and the spirit in us. The want and neglect of
this duty, does exceedingly chill, and cool, and danger the graces of the
Spirit in us, therefore as we would not quench, but keep alive the graces of
God in us, so exercise we our hearts often in the duty of meditation.

Prayer a means to keep the spirit from quenching
4. Fourthly, the duty of prayer. It is a special means to keep the Spirit
from quenching, ye to cause the spirit to kindle and increase in us, to be
frequent, and fervent in prayer. It is that by which we get the Spirit
increased in us, Luke 11.17. how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy Spirit to them that ask him? which is not to be understood so much of
the first infusion and gift of the Spirit, as of the increases of the graces of
this Spirit. For a man (to speak properly) cannot pray till he have the
Spirit, and then when a man has the Spirit, and sets that Spirit on work in
the duty of prayer, then the spirit which was given before, is given in a
larger measure, in greater abundance in the graces thereof. The Apostles had
the spirit of God in them before Christ's death, and after his resurrection,
John 20. he breathed upon them and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. And yet
after this it is said that they were filled with the Holy Ghost: that is, at
that time the Holy Ghost came upon them afresh. But when was it that they were
afresh filled with the Holy Ghost? Prayer brought down a fullness of the
Spirit. That speech Cant. 4.16. is conceived to be the speech of Christ, as if
he should say, oh my spirit blow upon the hearts of my people, that their
graces may abound in them, and increase in them, work abundance of grace in
them. It is sure, that the spirit of God must blow upon the garden before the
spices thereof can flow out, before the graces can increase and abound. But yet
there must be somewhat done before the North wind does awake, and this South
wind blows. Not only the voice of Christ must stir up, and raise this
wind, but the voice of prayer on our parts must raise the wind. The spirit
blows where it lists, but yet there is a way to raise this wind so to blow,
that spices may flow out. Then when we are frequent and earnest in prayer, then
when our hearts are enlarged in prayer, then Christ stirs up his spirit to
blow, then he raises that wind to make the spices flow out. If spices flow
not out, if graces abound not, it is because the North and South wind blows
not. If they blow not, it is because Christ stirs not, nor awakens them. As
he rebuked the winds, and they were still, Mar. 4. so when he commandes
these winds, they blow. And if Christ awake not this wind, it is because we
awake not him by prayer: when they awakened him Mar. 4. he stilled those
winds, and when we awaken him, he will Awaken, and stir up this wind to
blow so, as the sweet spices of his graces may flow out. All rises to this,
that the more we have our hearts enlarged in prayer, the more will the Lord
enlarge his hands in the graces of the Spirit. Open thy mouth wide, and I will
fill it, Psalm. 81.10. The wide mouth proves the full mouth, the wider the
fuller. The more our hearts and desires are enlarged in prayer, the fuller of
the graces of the spirit shall our hearts be. Prayer will help us to every
grace, and cause every grace to increase in us. It will help us to a spirit of
knowledge, and understanding, Dan. 9.21.22. John 16.25, 26. It helps to a
spirit of Repentance, and godly sorrow Zech. 12.10, 11. They should power out
their souls in mourning for their sins. There should be a great mourning,
great measures of the grace of the spirit: but how should they come to such
measures of the spirit of Repentance! I will power upon them the spirit of
grace and supplication. He would power a spirit of prayer upon them, and then
should that spirit kindle and increase the spirit of Repentance. It is that
which helps to spiritual wisdom, James 1.5. and to the increase of faith.
The Apostles Luke 17. took a right way for the increase of faith, whilst they
prayed, Lord increase our faith. It was we saw before a great means of
kindling, and keeping the Spirit from quenching, to keep the graces of the
spirit in action. Now prayer that keeps grace in action, it sets the graces of
the spirit on work, exercises them, and so keeps them in vigor. It sets
faith on work, love on work, humility on work, hope on work, and so keeps
and increases life in them all. As therefore we would keep the spirit from
quenching, as we would keep it alive, and increase it, so we must be frequent
and diligent, and fervent in the duty of prayer: grace cannot abate, nor decay,
or dye, so long as we keep alive a spirit of prayer. The neglecting and
letting fall this duty, has been it, that has quenched many a man's graces,
that lets them dye and come to nothing: lay the seventeenth and the ninteenth
verses together; Pray without ceasing, Quench not the Spirit. As the way to
pray without ceasing, is not to quench the spirit, so the way not to quench the
spirit, is to pray without ceasing: As when the spirit ceases burning, men
cease praying; so when men cease praying, the spirit ceases burning.

2. Point. Such things as quench the Spirit, we must be careful to avoid.
And they are these.

1. First, Sin in general, Sin a means to quench the spirit.
the committing of sin against knowledge, and light: this quenches the
Spirit, as water quenches fire. There is a quenching of fire by subduction of
fuel, Prove. 26.20. But it is a worse quenching of fire by casting on water, it
is a more sudden, and a more sure quenching, and such a quenching as gives not
way so soon to kindling again. Foul sins committed against conscience, they
are like the casting of water upon the fire. (...), says Chrysostom upon this
place; and he illustrates it by a similitude taken from the Lamp that he was
preaching by: As, says he, if a man should take water, or earth, and put upon
the light of this Lamp, he quenches the light thereof, etc. His similitude is
so much the more worth noting, because it lets us see, that it was Chrysostomes
practice to preach in the afternoon, and by candle light though he were a
great Bishop. It is no new thing to have afternoon Sermons, it was an ancient
and great Bishops practice. Well then, sin to the Spirit of God is as water
cast on fire: It quenches the Spirit. Sin committed against conscience quenches
the Spirit in the sparks of it. A man has had many motions and solicitations
against a sin from the Spirit of God; a man against these commits the sin.
The Spirit of God upon this, is sadded and grieved, yea quenched, he lets a
man alone, and leaves him a long time ere he shall hear of him again. No
question, but when David was in that tentation to adultery, but Gods Spirit did
his part, and plied him with many solicitations to the contrary, yet David
does it: And what followed but a long and a sad silence of the Spirit, and a
suspension of that work? he lies almost a year in that sin (till Nathan
comes to him) and never hears more of the Spirit of God, no solicitations nor
motions to repentance; for surely had the Spirit of God followed him, he would
have been awakened ere that time. And therefore no marvel that David not
only prays, Psalm 51. Restore unto me the joy of thy Spirit, but Lord take not
thine holy spirit from me, Lord uphold me with thy free spirit, verse. 11, 12.
He had found so long a silence of the spirit after his sin, that he began
to fear the loss of the spirit it self, and that God would take it quite
away.

It quenches the flame of the Spirit. So David after his sin, twice prays,
verse. 8.12. Make me to hear joy and gladness; Restore unto me the joy of thy
Spirit. Before his sin, the Spirit flamed in him; O what joy and peace! what
sense and assurance of Gods love! but now that he had adventured to commit that
foul sin, he had cast water on this fire, had put out the flame: Now his joy
was gone, his peace was gone, his assurance of Gods love was gone; now he felt
no other flame, nor fire burning in him, but the flame and fire of hell
scorching and burning his conscience. It quenches the Spirit in the degrees of
grace, so as a man after sin, cannot do as he did before. See Judge. 16.20.
He thought to do as at other times. Poor man he was deceived, he rises from
Delilahs knees, and communicates the secrets of his heart to her, and now he
has quenched the Spirit, and cannot do as at other times: So with men have
committed some foul sin, they will go to prayer, to hear the Word, to
receive the Sacrament, and they think to do as they have done in former
times, to pray, hear, and receive as at other times, but the Spirit of God
that was wont to help and assist them, that is quenched and departed, and they
cannot pray as they were wont, nor hear, nor receceive as they were wont to
do. Their strength and graces are so decayed in their degrees, that they are
nothing the men that they were. David went to the Temple no question, and to
the Sacrifices all the while that he lay in his sin, but what a difference
did David find in himself? How far did he find himself from being able to
do in prayer, and other holy duties as he was wont to do? Sin quenches the
heat and warmth of the Spirit. They that will quench the light of the Spirit,
in sinning against the light of it, shall quench it in the heat and warmth of
it. Such a man may pray, hear, receive, but alas! how coldly, and with what
deadness they do these things? Their hearts that were wont to burn, and to
be heated, and thoroughly warmed in these duties, are now key cold, no heat nor
warmth at all: They do these duties, as the poor man gave thanks, that gave
thanks for his stolen mutton. With what affection, life, heat and warmth of
Spirit could he give thanks for that meat he had stolen? Just such is the
case of such as commit gross sins, against conscience and the light of the
Spirit. Sinning and praying cannot stand together: If praying do not hinder
from sinning, sinning will hinder from praying. And as we see it true in
David's foul sin of adultery; so it is in other foul sins, they are all
water cast on the fire. The sin of drunkenness it is a swinish sin: a man
that commits that sin, casts water upon the fire of the Spirit; it quenches
the Spirit in the gifts of it. The Prophet complains of the Priests and
Prophets in his time, that they had lost the knowledge of the truth, that light
was quenched: But how came it so? Isa. 28.7. they were a company of drunken
sots: So Isa. 57.10.12. They were a company of pot-companions, fitter for a
cellar and a pot, then for a Church and a Pulpit; therefore their gifts were
quenched; therefore they were blind, ignorant, etc. Some Prophets spirits are
spirits of the cellar, of the Tavern, they be pot-Divines, Mic. 2.11. and the
spirit of God quenches and dies where there is such a spirit. And so it is in
other men as well as Prophets, the spirit of the Alehouse and the spirit of
God will never sort together. And we see many whose Apostacy has had its
beginning at the pot, there began their first quenching of the spirit. And this
is that the Apostle points at, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine, but be
filled with the spirit: As if a man must needs be empty of the spirit, that
will be filled with wine. Drunkenness we often see quenches the very spirits
of nature, and makes men sodden-headed sots; therefore no wonder if it quench
the spirit of grace. Gods spirit will not dwell in a Beer or Ale-barrell. As
therefore we would not quench the spirit of God, so take we heed of committing
any sin, but especially of sins against knowledge, and conscience, of foul
gross sins. Water must needs quench fire.

But though all sins are quenchers of the Spirit: yet there be some special
sins that are not so gross and scandalous, that a Christian may be subject
to and have creeping upon him, and are dangerous quenchers of the Spirit. And
they are these.

Worldliness though no scandalous sin, yet it is a dangerous quencher of the
spirit.
1. First, Worldliness, an Inordinate desire of, and affection to earthly
things: The inordinate love of the world is a dangerous quencher of the Spirit.
Demas quenched the Spirit, he had made zealous profession of the Gospel and
Religion, but he fell off from the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and hence
came Demas to quench the Spirit. Demas has forsaken us, and has embraced (or
he loved as he made it) this present world. It was Demas his worldliness, and
earthlinesse that quenched the Spirit, see 1 John 2.16. Love not the world, nor
the things of the world. But why not? If any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him. The love of the world quenches the love of God, and
so the Spirit, for the love of God is a grace of the Spirit. The love of the
world quenches the love of the word, Mat. 13.22. The world choakes the word.
Worldliness is a choaker, and a quencher of the Spirit. A man may put out and
quench fire not only with water, but with earth; earth cast upon a fire (though
dry earth) will quench fire.

It is with the love of the earth, as it is with the Dampe of the earth. They
that work in Coale-mines, and in the earth, observe a dampe to rise out of the
earth, and when the dampe rises it will quench and put out their candles. They
burn dim at first, and so by little and little they quench, and go quite
out with the dampe. So is it with the love of the world, when it prevails in
the heart, it dampes the spirit of grace and quenches the spirit of God in the
heart of a man. And our Savior having spoken against worldliness, Mattew
6.19, 20, 21. he comes verse 22, 23. to show the mischief of it, and the
mischief and danger of it is, that it is a Dampe that puts out the candle,
quenches a man's light, and so leaves him full of dangers. Mark that
description of the Church, Cant. 3.6. Who is this that ascends out of the
wilderness with pillars of smoke [Elationibus fumi?] A christian therefore is
a man ascending out of the wilderness with pillars of smoke. By the
wilderness is meant the world, a Christian is a man not descending into, but
ascending up out of the wilderness, a man that is coming up out of the world.
And he comes up like pillars of smoke. His affections, his desires, his
thoughts they are the pillars of smoke; now smoke goes upwards, it rises and
goes toward heaven. So his thoughts, affections, desires, they reeke and rise
upwards, they smoke heaven-wards. Now we know there is no smoke, but there is
some fire; what is then the fire from whence these pillars of smoke come?
There is in a Christians heart the fire of Gods love, the coals of it are as
coals of fire, the flame of Jah. Cant. 8.6. The fire of God, the fire of the
spirit. Now mark then, where the fire of the spirit is, and the fire of the
love of God, there will be pillars of smoke, there the Affections, Desires,
Thoughts of the heart will be rising and reeking heavenward. This a
description of a Christian, he is one cum elationibus fumi. But yet mark when
these pillars of smoke rise, and so mark when the fire of Jah burns. Who is
this that comes up, that ascends out of the wilderness? therefore then this
fire burns, and this smoke ascends in pillars, when a man comes up and
ascends out of the wilderness. Then the spirit of God, and the fire of God
burns, when a man has his heart coming out of the world, forsaking and
renouncing the world. If then a man descend into the wilderness, the pillars
of smoke fall, because then the fire goes out. A descent into the wilderness
takes away the pillars of smoke, puts out the fire. Cant. 8.3. much waters,
etc. that is, many afflictions, tribulations, and persecutions cannot quench
the love of God, nor abate it. That is meant often in Scripture by waters. But
yet many times a little earth may do that, which many waters cannot do. A
little inordinate love of the World may do more mischief in abating, cooling,
and quenching the love of God, then all the malignity of the world can do. The
hatred of the world against a Christian, is not so dangerous to quench the love
of God, as is our own inordinate love of the world. Persecutions kindle the
spirit. Whilst the persecutors in Queen Mary's days kindled the fires, it did
withal kindle the fire of the Spirit in love and zeal the more in their
hearts. But the loving of the world, that damps and extinguishes this fire. As
therefore we would take heed of quenching the Spirit, so take we heed of the
love of the world, if once that creep upon you and get hold on you, you are in
great danger of quenching the spirit. What is the reason that it is with many
Christians as it was with Nebuchadnezzars Jmage? Dan. 2.32.33. This Jmages head
was of fine gold, his feet part of iron, part of clay: a great deal of
difference between the head of the Jmage, and the feet of it. So you have
many in their young time, in their first beginnings, that seemed to be golden
Christians, full of life, full of zeal, full of good; But in their elder age
are cold, dead, brazen little life or vigor in them: their feet part of iron,
part of clay. What is the reason that they that began with a golden head have
feet of clay? Because they came to have hearts of clay, and they did load
themselves with thick clay, Hab. 2. They by degrees suffered the earth, and the
love of it, to creep into their hearts; And so having clayie hearts, their
golden heads have had clayie feet. The love of the world being therefore gotten
into their hearts, has quenched the Spirit of God in them, and they have grown
cold, and dead hearted in their old age, in which the trees of Gods plantation
use to be most fruitful. Therefore as we would take heed of quenching the
Spirit, so take we heed of an earthly heart, of the besotting, and bewitching
love of the world.

Formality in Religion a quencher of the spirit.
2. Secondly, Formality in Religion, and holy performances. God requires in all
duties of religion and holy performances, that we do them as David danced
before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.14. And David danced before the Lord with all his
might. If in such a service David put forth himself with all his might, how
much more, think ye, would he do it, in other cases. If he danced before the
Lord with all his might, how much more, think we, did he pray unto the Lord
with all his might. He that sets all his limbs on work, and puts forth the
utmost of his strength in dancing before the Lord, how much more would he set
all the powers and faculties of his soul on work, and put out the strength of
them all in praying, in hearing, etc. So should men pray, hear, receive the
Sacrament: do duties of obedience to God as Sampson bowed himself in pulling
down the house, Judge. 16.30. He bowed himself with all his might. So when men
pray, they should pray with all their might, Psalm. 119.58.145. So when men
hear, they should do it with all their might, Ezech. 40.4. And of all duties
of Religion and obedience, that may go for a rule, Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever
thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might. Though it be spoken in an ill
sense of the Epicure, yet it is a good rule to live by in holy performances,
what ever duties we have to do, do them with all our might. And that is a
special means to make the Spirit kindle, glowe, and burn in our hearts: that
preserves and keeps alive the vigor of the Spirit in us. Judge. 5.31. Let them
that love the Lord be as the sun when he goes forth in his might. When the
sun breaks forth, and shines in his strength and full force, what a deal of
heat there is? And so they that love the Lord, they are like the Sun shining
and going forth in his might, because they do all they do, with all their
might, and that fills them with heat: But on the other side, when men pray,
hear, etc. and do duties slothfully, sluggishly, and with formality of
Spirit, that quenches, and damps, and cooles the spirit of grace in a man.
Formality is slothfulness, and slothfulness is a quencher, Romans 12.11. Not
slothful in work, fervent in spirit. Fervency of Spirit, and slothfulness in
holy business stand in opposition, and it implies thus much, That where men
are slothful, there will not they be fervent in spirit, that slothfulness
will quench the spirit, and where men are formal in duties, they are
slothful, for formality is spiritual slothfulness.

The Apostles counsel to Timothy is, to stir up the grace of God that was in
him, 2 Timothy 1.7. so long as it is stirred up, it is out of danger of quenching
and dying. There is a complaint Is. 64.7. There is none that calls upon thy
Name, and that stirs up himself to lay hold upon thee. There were that did
call upon God, but did not stir up themselves in the performance of the duty:
They prayed, but they did it sluggishly, and formally: Now when men do pray,
and stir not up themselves to prayer, they pray formally: And when men pray
and do not stir up themselves, and stir not up their affections, they
stir not up the grace of God in them; and when they stir not up the grace
of God in them, they quench the Spirit. Fire stirred up gives the greater
heat, but fire not stirred up, cooles and quenches. There is no stirring in
formality, and so (for want of stirring the fire) formality quenches the fire
and lets it go out, if it puts it not out.

There be two several paces in Religion and performance of religious duties,
and we find them both together, Prove. 4.12. When thou go thy steps shall
not be straightned, and when thou runnest thou shall not stumble. There is a
going pace, and there is a running pace: A man must first go before he can
run, and when a man begins with a going pace, and rises to a running pace,
that is commendable. When a man begins to practice and perform duties, it is a
going, but when he comes to be zealous, and fervent in duties of obedience and
service, that is running; running is the pace of zeal: Now so long as a man
keeps running, so long he keeps warmth and heat in him, though it be cold
weather: So long as a man is zealous in the profession of Religion, and
performance of duties, so long the fire of the spirit burns, and is not
quenched: But if a man leave running, and slacks his pace, and contents
himself with a going pace, his spiritual heat abates, and is cooled, and
quenched. And when a man has been zealous in profession, and zealous in
performances, and afterward falls to formality, that is to turn running into
going, and that is the way to cool and quench the spirit. It is formality in
Religion that undoes men, that is the cause the spirit kindles not in some, that
the spirit is quenched in others. Men content themselves with a form of
godliness, but deny the power thereof; men come to Church, hear, pray,
receive, but there is no life, no zeal, no heat in their profession and
performances, and therefore the spirit kindles not, and therefore the spirit is
quenched. We know what Isaac said to his Father as he was going to mount
Moriah, Genesis 12.7. My father, behold the fire and the wood, but where is the
Lamb for the burnt offering. But we may say to many, Behold the wood, and the
Lamb, but where is the fire? Here is profession, and here is praying, and
hearing, and receiving, but where is the fire? where is the zeal, the heat,
the life, that these duties should be done withal? God was displeased with
Nadab and Abihu, because they offered with strange fire: It is a provocation to
God to offer with no fire as well as with strange fire: And because men come to
offer without fire, because they perform duties formally, Et solent non de
pietate, De diversis. Sermon. 120.
sed de solennitate concurrere, as Austin speaks; therefore is the spirit of
God not kindled, therefore is the spirit of God quenched. As therefore we would
fear to quench the spirit, so take we heed of formality in holy performances,
bring fire with your offerings, bring fire with your incense: what is fire
without incense? and what is incense without fire? If you profess, profess
powerfully. If you pray, pray earnestly, pray with your whole heart. If we do
perform holy duties, stir we up our selves to do them with all our might:
But if we do holy duties only for form, and satisfy our selves in the bare
ceremony of the work done, we shall never kindle the Spirit if it be not
kindled, and we shall quench the spirit if it be kindled. He shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, Matthew. 3. We are all baptized with water,
but yet a Christian should look to it, that he be not only baptized with
water, but with fire also: And all that are truly baptized, are baptized with
fire as well as with water. How many are baptized with water, that were never
baptized with fire! Their coldness and formality in Religion shows that they
were baptized with water alone, that there was not a spark of fire in their
baptism: Nay, were it that men were baptized with fire, yet coldness and
formality in Religion, and holy performances, would make their baptism a mere
watery baptism, nay it would prove water, to quench and put out that fire with
which they had been baptized. Formality is water that will quench the fire of
the Holy Ghost.

3. Thirdly, An opinion of sufficiency of grace, is a quencher of the Spirit.
a conceit and an opinion of sufficiency of grace and godliness. When men
once say of grace, Religion, and godliness, as Esau said of his goods and
wealth, Genesis 33.9. And Esau said, I have enough my brother, etc. As profane a
person as he was, there be but a few that are of his mind, and that can tell
when they have enough. It was well said of Esau in that kind: But when men
come to say so of grace and godliness, I have enough, and entertain a conceit
of a sufficiency of grace, that they have knowledge enough, they have faith
enough, zeal enough, and that they need trouble themselves no more to increase
their knowledge, faith, zeal; they are in a direct and a dangerous course of
quenching the spirit.

The next way to quench the spirit is to quench a man's cares, desires, and
endeavors after more grace. When a man desires no more grace than he has,
endeavors and labors for no more than he has, grace will dye and decay, and
so the spirit will quench. Now there is nothing so quenches a man's cares,
desires, and endeavors after grace, as the conceit and opinion that a man is
well, that he has enough, and that more, is more than needs.

If a man have a good estate, yet if he thinks that he has not yet enough, but
he yet wants so much and so much, that very opinion that he has not enough,
quickens his cares for, his desires of, his endeavors after more, and so makes
him ply his trading, ply his Markets yet to get more. And his desires and
endeavors quickened by that opinion, makes the man's estate grow, makes him
thrive and increase his wealth. So a man that has good measures of grace
already, yet if he think that he is short of that he should be, and have,
he has not yet those measures of knowledge, faith, zeal, etc. he should have;
that very thought quickens his cares, desires, and endaavours to get more, and
these endeavors increase his stock.

Paul, Phil. 3. pressed hard forward to the mark that was set before him, and
so run on still, desired yet to go further in grace, and Religion: But what
made him do it? I forget the things which are behind. He did not look at
what he had already done, as if he had done enough, he did not think he had
enough, or had done enough, and therefore he desired to have more, to do more.

When a man thinks he has enough, goods and riches enough for him and his,
he cares not for any more, he will not ride and run about, and be early up
and late down, he will not be so eager in his trading, but give it quite up,
Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, plod no
more, bustle about no more: And so when a man ceases his pains and endeavors,
sits still and takes his ease, then his goods come not in and increase not as
they did before; but he spends of his stock: Just so here, when a man thinks
he has grace enough, he will not do as they, Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Indeed when men find a want of
knowledge, and so of other graces, they will run to and fro for it, and take
pains for it, and these pains shall not be in vain, their knowledge and
their grace shall be increased: But when men think they have enough, they
will not run to and fro, they will sit still, and let fall all endeavors, and
then knowledge and grace shall not be increased, but be decreased, the stock
will waste, and the spirit will be quenched.

The Church of Laodicea had questionless been zealous, and had the spirit
kindled in a most goodly measure: but yet see to what a temper she was come,
Apoc. 3.15, 16. Thou art neither hot nor cold, thou art lukewarm. To have
been hot, and to come to this not to be hot; to have been zealous and
fervent, and to come to be lukewarm; this is a quenching of the spirit:
Lukewarm Christians are quenched Christians; lukewarm Christians are
quenchers of the spirit: thus had Laodicea quenched he Spirit. But how came
Laodicea to quench the spirit? Thou art neither hot nor cold, thou art
lukewarm, verse. 15, 16. But when came this luke-warmnesse? see verse. 17.
Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing. Here was an opinion of sufficiency, I have enough, and this quenched
her endeavors of increasing grace, and this brought her to luke-warmnesse, and
so to the quenching of the Spirit.

Prove. 10.4. He that deals with a slack hand, becomes poor: He does not
say, he shall not be rich, but becomes poor, though he had a good estate
before, yet he becomes poor. It stands in opposition to the latter part of the
verse, The hand of the diligent, not keeps riches, but makes rich, though
otherwise at first but poor: So a slack hand makes a man poor that was rich.
Now when a man has had spiritual riches of grace, and sinkes in his estate,
and decays, that man quenches the spirit. Now, what brings a man to decay, and
to become poor? when a man deals with a slack hand. He remits of his
diligence, and of his pains in using means to increase his spiritual riches.
And what is a maine thing that makes a man slack his hand? No one thing more
then a conceit that a man has enough, a sufficiency of grace. Once admit an
opinion that thou have enough, and then thou will deal with a slack hand, and
wilt abate of thy pains and endeavors for grace. And pains abated, grace
abates, and grace abated, the Spirit is quenched. Once think thou have grace
enough, faith, knowledge, zeal enough, and it will quickly come to pass, that
thou thou shall be sure to have little enough.

No sooner is the Moon come to the full, but it presently decreases, and
abates of her light: And no sooner is a man come to be full, to a fullness in
his conceit, but he presently inclines to the wane, and is on the decreasing
hand. Therefore as we would fear to quench the spirit: so take we heed of
nourishing, yea of entertaining such a conceit of a sufficiency of grace.
Remember the Spirit is here compared to fire, and fire is one of the four
things that never says, It is enough, Prove. 30.16. It is a fire on the
quenching hand, and a fire that will soon be quenched, that says, It is
enough. There is nothing that so speedily, and so dangerously beggars a
Christian, and decays, Abrupt and over-sudden breaking off from holy duties a
quencher of the Spirit.
and decreases the Spirit of grace in him, as a conceit of riches, and
sufficiency.

4. Fourthly, an abrupt, and over-sudden breaking off from holy duties in which
we have found our hearts heated and enlarged. When a man in prayer, hearing,
or receiving, has found spiritual heat raised, and fire kindled, he should
have a care to keep up that heat warming him, and that fire burning in him so
long as may be. It is not possible after holy duties be ended, to keep the fire
in that heat, and the heat in that frame it had in the performance of the
duties, but yet a man should keep it up so long as may be, and though that
fire go out, yet it should not suddenly be quenched and put out, so soon as
the duty is over, but it should go out leasurely, gradually.

When David found that holy and good frame of heart in the people, 1 Chronicles.
29.18. See how he prays for them. He finds in them a float of good affections,
and he desires that this frame of heart may be upheld and kept in them for
ever. Not that that flame and float of good affections should always be in
that heat and height that then they were in, but that such a frame of heart
might always habitually be in them, that upon all good occasions the like good
affections might be raised, and the like fire might flame. Now the way to do
that, is to keep them up so long as may be, and when they do sink, yet to
let them sink so gradually, that they may leave in the heart an habitual
disposition and inclination to the like frame again when occasion shall be.
The string of a Lute or a Violl, if it have been wound up to an high note, if
afterward it be let down a note or so, yet it will of it self be rising
again: so when our hearts have been enlarged in prayer, hearing, etc. and our
affections have been wound and skrewed up to a good height, when we go off
from the duty, yet should we go off with a bent of the heart to the duty
still, and we should do our best to keep our hearts as long as may be in
that holy and good frame, in which holy duties left them. And when this frame
goes down leasurely and by degrees, it will leave in the heart an habitual
disposition and preparation for these duties again. And this is that which
causes a great quenching of the Spirit. Men it may be have their hearts sweetly
enlarged and heated in prayer, hearing, receiving, and as soon as prayer is
done, the Sermon and Sacrament is done, they chop suddenly off from these
duties, break then off abruptly, and fall to talk of the world too too
suddenly, so as the holy frame of heart got in these duties, is suddenly gone,
and the fire immediately quenched.

When a man is very hot, if he presently strip himself and throw off his
clothes, he is in great danger to take such a cold as may quench the very life
of him: So such a sudden and immediate chopping from holy duties to matters of
the world, especially to matters of vanity, it quenches, not only the fire and
heat, but quenches the frame of heart, so as it is not easy to bring it to
such a frame again; it exceedingly indangers the quenching of the life of
grace. When a man has bin at a Sermon, and has had his heart affected with
it, and he presently goes from the Sermon, and holds not his heart in any
thoughts of it, no nourishing of his spiritual heat by meditation, prayer, or
conference, but he falls instantly upon the world, is instantly up to the ears
in the business of the world; it brings a mighty dampe upon the Spirit. It is
as if a man should fetch fire out of the Sanctuary, and as soon as ever he
comes at the door should cast it into water, Psalm. 5.3. I will direct my
prayer unto thee, and will look up. That when his heart had done praying, yet
his eyes were praying, he was still looking up, the bent of his heart still
stood heavenward: But when we pray, and presently look down, scarce up from
off our knees, but our tongues are running upon the world, or our vanities;
when we hear we are scarce out of the Church doors, but sheep and Oxen, and
such things take up our thoughts and discourses, we do take water and flash it
upon the fire that was kindled in our hearts in holy duties. Take heed
therefore of such a chopping off from holy duties, and keep a bent of heart
still to them for a time after we come from them.

3. Point. The danger of quenching the Spirit. There is a great deal of danger
in quenching the Spirit, so great, as may make any wise man fearful how he
does it. David being in battle with the Philistines, and being in danger of
being slain by Ishbi-benob the Giant, was rescued by Abishai, which danger
being escaped, The men of David swear unto him, saying, Thou shall go no more
with us out to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17.
It had been a sad, and a dangerous thing to have had the light of Isfrael
quenched, and therefore they would provide wisely another time against that
danger; And it is no little danger that follows upon the quenching of the
Spirit: It is good therefore to know the danger of it, that the danger of it
being known, we may take the greater heed thereof, and fear the more to
quench the Spirit.

The danger of quenching the Spirit in the motions and solicitations of it,
that is twofold.

First, Quenching the Spirit deprives us of Gods help and assistance.
when a man quenches the Spirit in the motions of it, either by not observing
them, or not obeying them, that he does not mark them, and yield a present
obedience to them, he then looses the help and assistance of the Spirit which
he might have had in the doing of those things he was moved to, which help he
might have had, if he had then listened to the motions of the Spirit. This is a
sure truth, that whenever the Spirit of God moves a man to any good duty, as
to believe, to repent, to pray, to hear, to perform any difficult duty of
obedience, that whenever he moves to such duties, he also offers his help
and assistance so as to enable us unto them, and to carry us through them; as if
he should say, Do that which I move you to, set upon it, and go about it now
I call upon you to do it, and I that move you will also help you. Hearken to
my counsel, and you shall have mine help to carry you through the work, though
it be an hard work. If you will close with me in my motion, I will close with
you in the action. The motions of the Spirit are not bare motions, but there is
always annexed to them offers of help, and the motions being hearkened to, the
help of the spirit goes along with them. Motions of grace have offers of
grace, motions of the Spirit have the help of the Spirit offered with them.

The Spirit of God moves a man to believe, repent, to pray, etc. Now when he
moves thee to do these things, at the same time he offers his help for the
doing of them, he offers his help and assistance to believe, to repent, to
pray. And a man that takes the advantage of the motions of the Spirit, has
also his help, and is enabled by him to do these things.

As in that case Luke 5.17. As he was teaching, the power of God was present to
heal them: So it is in the motions of the Spirit, as he is teaching, urging,
pressing us to any duty, the power of the Lord is just then present to help a
man, and the man that hearkens to the counsel of the Spirit, shall be sure to
have that help of the power of God that is then present. As there in that
case, The power of the Lord was present then to heal them, as he was teaching:
And see what followed upon it, verse. 18. And behold men brought in a bed a man
taken with the palsy: When did they bring him? Just then when the power of God
was present to heal. They took the very inch of time: And how sped they? He
that was brought in his bed, walks away with his bed, and goes away whole. So
happy a thing it is to take the advantage of Gods help when his power is
present to help. Just so it is in the motions of the Spirit: when he moves to
repentance, his power is present to help a man to repent. And let a man then
bestirre himself, and though he have as little power to repent as the palsy
man had to walk, yet the power of God, which is present at the motion made,
will do as much for his soul, as it did for that man's body.

See 1 Chr. 14.15.16. When David should hear a sound of going in the tops of
the Mulberry Trees, then he must go out to battle, for then God was present
with his power to smite the Philistines. Well, David did so as God commanded
him, just when he hears the sound of goings he goes out, just then; and what
was the success? And they smote the Host of the Philistines. He took the
advantage of Gods presence and power that was then present to help him, and so
he did the deed, went through happily with the work. When we have motions
from Gods Spirit to believe, repent, pray, these be the sound of his goings,
why then set upon these duties. But alas! they be hard things; alas! I have no
power to believe, no power to pray, to repent. I but when thou hear the
sound of the goings of the spirit in his motions, then is the Spirit of God
going out before thee, to help thee against thine hardness of heart, to smite
thine hard heart, and to soften it, and then is the time to set upon the work
of repentance, prayer, etc. Do therefore as the spirit of God moves thee, and
commands thee, and thou shall have the victory over thine unbelief, over thine
impenitency, etc. then thou shall be sure to have the help of the Spirit, if
thou will instantly hearken to the motions of the spirit. See how David speaks
to Solomon about building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise, and be doing,
and the Lord be with thee. Arise Solomon, and be building and doing, and the
Lord help thee. It is most certain, that when the Spirit of God does say to
men, Arise, and be doing, that then if men will arise and be doing when he
calls them to be doing, that the Spirit of the Lord will be with them to help
them and assist them.

But now when men quench the spirit of God in these motions, and do not regard
them, nor hearken to them, and yield a present obedience to them, here is the
danger of it, that they lose this help and assistance of the spirit which then
was to be had, and so when after they would do these things they cannot do
them, because now they must do them alone, and by their own strength; and
their own strength is too weak.

David went out against the Philistines just when he heard the sound of goings
in the top of the Mulberry trees, and so he smites the Philistines; and why so?
Because when the sound of the goings was, then God was present to help him: But
now suppose David when he had heard that sound of the goings had sat still, and
had said with himself, There is no such haste of going out against the
Philistines, suppose he had put it off till next day, or for a matter of 3. or
4. hours; what would have been the issue? Assuredly David had not beat the
Philistines, he had lost the day if he had but put it off but one day, an
hundred to one but if he had delayed his going out some few hours, but the
Philistines had beat him to clouts.

And this very thing is that which undoes men, and a maine reason that they
never come to believe, repent, etc. Gods Spirit moves to these things, and when
he makes the motion, he offers his help; and men they put off these motions,
they will set upon faith, repentance, obedience, and they will pray, but at
this time they cannot so well do it. At such a time they will do their
things: And when they come at these they cannot for their lives repent or pray,
they find the work utterly impossible, which might have been possible, if
they had set upon it when Gods spirit counseled to it, because the^ was the
time in which God help was to be had: So that the quenching of the Spirit is
the losing of Gods help and assistance in duties.

Behold I stand at the door and knock, Apoc. 3. If any man will open. Alas!
we cannot open the door, it is so locked, and barred, and bolted, that it is
impossible for us to open it. True, it is so, but yet there is a way to open,
and that is to be opening when God would help us to open. When God offers to
help thee to open the door, then set upon opening the door, and what ever
the bolts, bars, and locks are, thou shall be sure to have it open.

I but when does God offer to help us to open it? Then when his Spirit knocks,
when in the motions thereof he sollicites us to open, then God offers his help
to help us to open. Take that time, and then set on the work, and the door
shall be opened. But if that time be neglected, we may strive to open but
cannot open, because then that power is gone that would have helped us to open.
See Eccles. 9.12. Man also knows not his time. This is one cause of man's
misery, that he knows not his time, that he misses the time of doing himself
most good. Not to strike in and close with God when he offers his help, is to
miss our time, and this makes us miserable. And this misery of missing our
time is the fruit of quenehing the spirit. The time of Gods help is the time
of his Spirits solicitations. They that neglect the time of the Spirits
motions, they neglect Gods time of help; they that lose the time of Gods
help, lose ability and power to do Gods work. To day if ye will hear his
voice, etc. What then? Hear his voice to day, and then to day he will help
you. But when men hear not his voice to day, but will stay till to morrow, and
next day, and I know not how many days, and so put off Gods Spirit, they do
thereby put out Gods Spirit, and so lose that help and assistance of the
Spirit they might have had. This is that one danger of quenching the Spirit in
the motions of it, we thereby lose the help and assistance of the Spirit in
holy duties of obedience.

2. Secondly, A second danger in quenching the spirit in the motions thereof.
a man's quenching the Spirit in the motions thereof may prove the silencing of
the Spirit for a long time after, if not for ever. The Spirit in this kind
quenched, will hardly be kindled again, if ever kindled, and it may be never
kindled again, but so quenched as quenched for ever.

1. First, it may prove such a quenching as it will be very hard to recover
that Spirit again. Recovered it may be, but with so much ado, with so much
difficulty and toil, as could a man consider it before hand, he would fear,
and take heed how he quenched the Spirit. We saw before how the Church
quenched the Spirit in this kind, Cant. 5.2. There were the solicitations and
motions of the Spirit. It is the voice of my Beloved that knockes, open unto
me, etc. But verse. 3. she has her put-offs, I have put off my coat, she does
not yield present obedience to the motions of the Spirit. And the issue was,
she had thereby quenched the Spirit, verse. 6. My Wel-beloved had withdrawn
himself, and was gone. There is the Spirit quenched. It is true that she
recovers the Spirit again, as appears in the chapters following; but yet it
cost her full dear first. It was not so easily kindled, as quenched; not so
easily recovered, as lost. See verse. 6. My soul failed me, (or my soul went
forth) my soul was gone. Her Wel-beloved had withdrawn himself, and was
gone, and now her soul was departed and gone, she was as a dead woman through
fear and grief. See what a dangerous thing it is to quench the Spirit; sad
things follow upon it. Well, but then why does she not seek to recover all
again? She does seek it, but alas to her little comfort. I sought him, but I
could not find him. I, but why then does she not call to him, and cry after
him? I called him, but he gave me no answer. This is a sad and a pinching
tentation. Does not Christ say, Knock and it shall be opened unto you? True,
but Christ before had knocked by his Spirit, verse. 2. It is the voice of my
Wel-beloved that knocks, open unto me. Christ knocks, and she opened not, the
Spirit is quenched upon it, and now she knocks, and Christ opens not: She is
paid with her own coin, served in her own kind: She shall be taught to her
smart and sorrow, what a dangerous thing it is to quench the Spirit, she shall
find to her grief, that being quenched it will not so easily be kindled
again. It shall cost her seeking and calling, much pains, much prayer, and
yet not presently recover it neither. They that do not open when the Spirit
knocks, and so quench the Spirit: They shall knock, and knock hard, and
knock long before they recover the Spirit, if ever they do recover him. I
sought him, but I could not find him, I called but he gave me no answer. Here
was a deep silence, no answer: Nay that is not all but verse. 7. she is yet
brought into further straits, she is smitten, and she is wounded by the
Watchmen, and her veyle taken from her by the Keepers of the Walls. Thus
though at last she recovered the presence of Christ and his Spirit again, yet
we see after her quenching the Spirit with what ado, with what toil and
difficulty it is recovered. Such a danger is there in quenching the Spirit in
the motions of it. Take heed of it. The Spirit quenched in the motions thereof
is not recovered without much tugging and toyling, it may make every vein in
thine heart ache again or ever thou recover it, many a bitter tear, many a
wrestling prayer, many a sad sigh, many a strong cry, many a drooping day, many
a disconsolate night may it cost thee, before thou may recover that gracious
work of the Spirit again. This is sad, but there is a more sad thing yet
behind. Therefore,

2. Secondly, The Spirit que^cht in the motions thereof, may be quenched for
ever.
the Spirit of God quenched in the motions thereof, may be quenched for ever. The
Spirit of God moves in thine heart, and sollicites thee to believe, to repent,
etc. Thou putst him off as Foelix did Paul, When thou have more convenient
leisure thou will hear more of him, thou neglectest and disregardest his
counsels, and motions, and so thou have quenched the Spirit. Well, what can
thou tell whether ever he will come to thee any more, whether ever thou shall
hear that voice behind thee any more? It may be that he will never solicit
thee more. A neglected motion may be the last motion that ever he will make,
The Angel moved at a certain season, Joh. 5.4. and whosoever took the
advantage of the motion was healed of his disease, he that stepped in presently
upon the Angels motion of the water, had cure infallibly. Now suppose a man had
neglected to take the advantage of the present motion, and had said with
himself: Now indeed the Angel moves the waters, but yet I will not step in
now, he will move again ere long, it may be to morrow he will move again, and
I will come again to morrow, and I will step into the water then, when he
moves next time. Now, how could such a man tell whether ever the Angel would
move again or no? There was a time when that miracle ceased, there was a
motion of the Angel which was his last motion; There was a motion after which
there was never any motion more. Now then, how could such a man tell, but that
motion which he neglected might be the last? For ought he could tell, the
Angel might never descend into the Poole more, might never make a motion in the
waters more: So when we neglect and quench the Spirit of God in the motions
thereof, who can tell whether ever the Spirit of God will do him that favor
any more? whether he will ever dart any of those sparks of that heavenly fire
into his heart or no? when he has so foolishly quenched them. The quenching of
the spirit may justly provoke him to cease his work, and to stir no more.

It is a sure thing, that the Spirit of God unkindly used will forbear, and
will be gone, Isa. 30. Ye shall hear a word behind you, etc. The stopping of
our ears against his motions, will at last prove the stopping of his mouth. As
in the case of the Ministry, so God deals in this case, Eze. 3.26. J will make
thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall
not be to them a reproof, for they are a rebellious house. Deaf hearts make
Ministers dumb, and rather then disobedient people shall have the Ministry of
the Word, God himself will silence his Ministers, as in Jeremies case, God did
not only forbid him to pray for that people, but he forbad him to preach to
that people, Jer. 36.5. Just so will God deal in this case; When he sends his
Spirit to direct us, reprove us, and he comes and woes us, allures us, urges us
to this and that duty, and we slight his motions, dis-regard and disobey them.
God when he sees us deaf, he will make his Spirit dumb, and he will stop his
Spirits mouth when we stop our ears. He shall no longer instruct us, direct
us, reprove us, but he will suspend and silence his Spirit from doing these
offices.

It suites just with that, Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always strive with
man; As if he should say, My Spirit has striven with them for a long time,
has striven in the motions thereof to bring them to repentance, but he shall
not always strive with them, there shall come a time that he shall strive no
longer. So then, God would have his Spirit at last to forbear striving. And
what was the cause of it? That we shall see by that place, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.
The Spirit of Christ went along then with the Ministry of Noah, and seconded it
by his solicitations. How were his solicitations entertained? They were
disobedient. They listened not to the gracious motions of the Spirit, and so
they quenched the Spirit. And how did they quench it? My Spirit shall not
always strive. They so quenched it that it should not only cease striving,
but it should cease for ever, he should never strive more with them, but give
them up for ever; go your ways, do as you will, ye shall never have a good
motion from my Spirit more.

See how Christ speaks to the Pharisees, Joh. 7.33.34. Yet a little while J am
with you, and then I go unto him that sent me. And what then? Ye shall seek
me, and shall not find me. Christ was with them a little while, striving with
them to do them good: But they rejected the counsel of God, and would none of
him: Well, says Christ, I am a little while with you, and then I go, etc. and
then ye shall seek, etc. ye shall not find me though ye would never so feign,
though ye would give all the world for it: So I may say of Gods Spirit, yet a
little while he is with thee, yet a little while he is striving with thy
conscience, and urging thee seriously to labor for grace, yet a little while
he is with thee knocking and rapping at the door of thine heart, yet a little
while he is with thee to woe thee, to allure thee, to work on thee in the
Word, and the rest of the ordinances. But if thou quench him in these his
gracious dealings with thee, he will go unto him that sent him: And then thou
shall seek him, oh that I had but one of those gracious motions I was wont to
have! that I might but once more, once more hear the voice of Gods Spirit!
thus shall thou seek him, but shall not find him for ever, a world (if thou
could give it) shall not purchase one whisper more, not a syllable more, from
the Spirit of grace so unkindly quenched. Consider now how dangerous such a
case will be, and as thou would fear it should be thy case: so fear to
quench the Spirit. It is a great mercy of God to give us his Spirit in this
kind to have these Eagles wings fluttering over us, Nehem. 9.19, 20. Why then
for God to call home his Spirit, and to forbid him to strive with us, to call
upon us, to instruct us, how heavy a judgment is it! It is a judgment to
have a good Minister silenced; what is it then to have the Spirit of God
silenced! It is a sad thing to have Ministers mouths stopped; what is it then
to have the Spirits mouth stopped! Quenching the Spirit, will prove silencing the
Spirit; Quenching the Spirit, will prove the stopping of his mouth. So much for
the danger of quenching the Spirit in the motions

2. Second danger of quenching the Spirit, The Spirit being quenched in the
graces thereof, is quenched in the offices thereof.
is in quenching the graces of the Spirit: And the dangers of quenching in this
kind, are many.

1. The Spirit quenched in the graces thereof, is que^cht in the offices thereof.
The spirit of God does us many good offices, which he will cease to do, if
he be quenched.

1. First, the Spirit of God is a spirit of prayer. He is called the Spirit of
grace and supplications, The Spirit helps to pray.
Zech. 12.10. Jude 20. praying in the Holy Ghost, and Romans 8.25, 26. It helps
our infirmities, it makes intercessions for us with groanings, etc. Prayer is a
work which cannot be done without help, not without the help of the Spirit.

1. The Spirit affects our hearts with the sense of our own wants. 2. It sheds
Gods love into our hearts, that so with boldness we may appear before him.
3. It excites and confirms those graces in us which are required in prayer, as
faith, humility, fervency, zeal, and by this his work and assistance, inlarges
our hearts. 4. He suggests holy meditations, and kindles holy desires, in the
act of praying. 5. It restraines Satan and the flesh, that they molest,
interrupt, and distract us not. All these helps we have from the Spirit of
God in prayer: Therefore saying, v. 17. Pray continually, he adds verse. 19.
Quench not the spirit. Now quench the spirit and all this help is lost, and
this assistance is lost. He is a spirit of grace and supplications, Zech. 12.
Quench him as a spirit of grace, and you quench him as a spirit of supplicaon.
Quench him, and you quench him from making intercessions; quench him, and you
quench him from crying Abba father, and stop his mouth from crying: And if he
cry not, we cannot cry; and if we cry not, we pray not. So dangerous a thing
in that respect it is to quench the spirit.

2. Secondly, The Spirit assures us of audience and the acceptance of our
prayers.
the spirit of God does not only help us to pray, and do us that good office,
but he does us another gracious office in assuring us of audience and the
acceptance of our prayers, 1 John 5.15. Therefore Gods people may know that God
hears them, and accepts their services. David, Psalm. 6. begins it with a sad
complaint, but yet see how on a sudden his heart cheeres, verse. 8, 9. and that
upon this, that he knew God heard and accepted his prayers. So then men may
come to know that God accepts their prayers. Now, how come men to know it?
Answ. I find that God has assured his servants of the hearing of their
prayers these several ways.

1. First, sometimes by the testimony of an Angel sent from heaven, Luc. 1.
Zachary, thy prayers are heard, Acts 10. Cornelius, thy prayers are come up in
remembrance, etc.

2. Secondly, sometimes by the testimony of a Prophet, Isa. 38.5. Go and say
to Hezekiah, J have heard thy prayer.

3. Thirdly, sometimes by a visible sign, as Act. 4.31. And when they had
prayed the place was shaken. That was a sign from heaven assuring acceptance
of prayer. And so God did assure by fire coming down from heaven. So God gave
evidence of acceptance when the first sacrifice was offered on the Altar in the
Tabernacle, Levit. 9.12. And thus it is thought that God by fire from Heaven,
did show his acceptance of Abels offering before Caines. And to that former
alludes that prayer for the King, Ps. 20.4. The Lord turn thy burnt offering
into Ashes, which is translated The Lord accept, etc. because God had sometimes
witnessed his acceptance, by sending down fire to burn the Sacrifice. Now we
must not think, that God deals not as well with his people now as he was
wont, he is still as gracious as ever in assuring his people of his
Acceptance. Now look what God was wont to do by Angel, Prophet, or visible
fire, he now does the same by his spirit. His Spirit says as the Angel, and
the Prophet, thy prayers are heard. God says to his Spirit, Go to such a man,
and say, I have heard thy prayer. God assures men of his acceptance of their
prayers by fire sent down from heaven.

When a man in prayer feels his heart mightily enlarged, when he feels his
heart set on fire with fervency of holy affections, this is the fire of the
spirit: And this fire, this fervency and heat of the spirit with which the
heart burns in prayer, is fire that comes down from Heaven, a sensible
testimony of Gods acceptance, thus God turns our Sacrifices into ashes. And
when it is thus with a man, how comfortable a condition it is? Thus David knew
that God heard him, Psalm. 6.8, 9. Fire came down from Heaven, and burnt his
Sacrifice, and by that inward fire in his heart, he as well knew that God
accepted his prayer, as Abel by that visible fire, knew that God accepted his
Sacrifice. Surely, when a man feels this fire burning in his heart in prayer,
well may it be said unto him, as Eccles. 9.7. But now on the other side, when a
man shall pray, and shall have no assurance that God accepts his prayers, alas
what a comfortless service is that? from such prayers may a man rise with a
sad Spirit. Go and eat thy bread with sorrow, and drink thy wine with a sad
heart, for God accepts not thy prayer, God answers not with fire. Now what is
it that brings a man into this condition? This is nothing else, but a sad fruit
of quenching the Spirit of Grace: Because men quench the spirit, therefore the
Spirit burns not in prayer, and so gives no assurance of Gods acceptance. What
wonder that fire burns not when it is quenched? Thou have quenched it in the
graces and degrees of it; and therefore it is quenched in the comfort of it,
and now it gives thee no testimony of acceptance; As therefore we would fear
to want fire to give us assurance of Gods acceptance, so take we heed, that we
beforehand do not quench the fire.

3. The Spirit makes our prayers accepabe.
The Spirit of God does us this good office to make our prayers acceptable.
Prayer is not acceptable unless it be fervent, Jam. 5. It is fervent prayer
that prevails, therefore it is fervent prayer that is acceptable. There is a
phrase, Am. 5.21. I will not smell in your solemn assemblies: What that means
see verse. 22. I will not accept.

When incense was offered upon the Golden Altar, if the Priest had laid
incense upon it, upon the cold Altar, if there had been no fire, there had
been no smell, it must burn before it could smell. For as in that case, Ex.
29.41. For a sweet savor, an offering made by fire unto the Lord; so this, it
must be fire that must make an offering of sweet savor: So all our prayers if
there be no fire, they have no smell, they have no acceptance. Now if we quench
the spirit, we quench the acceptance of our prayers, our incense is not
accepted if it do not smell; it cannot smell unless it burn, and how can we
think it should burn, when we have quenched the fire of the Spirit, by which
our incense should burn?

The Spirit gives us a comfortable assurance of our good condition before God.
4. Fourthly, the Spirit of God does us this good office to give us a
comfortable assurance of our good condition before God, Romans 8.16. The same
spirit bears witness, etc. yea it seals to us our adoption, 2 Cor. 1.21. ye
were sealed with the spirit: But now, if the spirit be quenched, where is that
comfort of Adoption? Can a quenched spirit be a witnessing spirit? Can a
quenched spirit be a sealing spirit? Can a quenched spirit be an assuring
spirit? Can a quenched spirit be a spirit of consolation? It is a dangerous
thing to quench the spirit, it is the quenching of his witness, it is the
blurring and defacing of his seal, it is the quenching of a man's own comfort.

5. Fifthly, The Spirit guides us in the way of truth.
the Spirit of God does us this good office to lead and guide us in the ways
of truth and life, Joh. 16.13. The Spirit will lead you into all truth; and 1
Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Spirit. It is he
that by his light guides us, and shows us what is truth. He is as the pillar
of fire, Exodus 30.11. to give light to go by day, and by night. We live here
in the dark, and if we have not the light of the Spirit, we cannot but wander
and go amiss. And this is a danger of quenching the spirit, that it being
quenched, we are in danger of being in the dark, and being in the dark of
miscarrying, of falling into dangerous and foul errors. It seems that
sometimes Israel did travel by night, by that place, Exodus 30.21. and there was
no danger of going out of their way, or falling into pits, etc. because they
had the pillar of fire to give them light to go by night. If they had gone by
night, and had not had the pillar of fire, in what danger had they gone: They
had been in danger of being wilderd, of losing their way, of falling into holes
and pits, into which they might have broken their necks: So here, so long as
we have the light of the Spirit to guide us, we are safe from such danger; but
if once we quench the spirit, we quench the light of it, and then are in
danger of being wilderd and losing our way, of falling into this and that
dangerous error: Experience lets us see the truth of it. We see some that
have been very forward in godliness and Religion, very Zealous and active,
and who but they: But after they have abated their zeal and fervor, fallen
off from good society and duties, they have quenched the Spirit. And what has
become of them? Why, not one odd opinion stirring in a Country, not any
dangerous error abroach, but they fall presently into it, and are ensnared.
And no wonder that such fall into the ditch, for the light of the Spirit is
quenched. And thus the Spirit is quenched in the offices thereof, when quenched
in the graces.

2. Secondly, To quench Gods Spirit kindles the devils.
a second danger of quenching the spirit in the graces thereof is this. The
quenching of Gods Spirit, is oftentimes the kindling of the spirit of the
Devil. Saving and sanctifying graces, though they cannot be quenched in their
habits, yet we saw before that they may be quenched in their acts and
operations, may be quenched in their measures and degrees. And the quenching of
sanctifying grace, though but in the act and degree, yet it makes way for the
kindling of the fire of the spirit of satan. We are counseled Ephesians. 6. to
quench the fiery darts of satan. Now, when we quench the spirit of God in the
acts and degrees of grace, we are far from quenching the spirit of satan;
nay, we do certainly thereby give so much the more advantage for the
tentations of satan to prevail, and the fire of them to kindle so much the
easilier. But now, when the spirit is quenched in the common gifts and graces
thereof (such as reprobates may have) then the quenching of the spirit of God,
is the kindling of the spirit of the Devil, so as he enters with so much the
more power, to carry men into all manner of sin with greediness. Mark that
passage, 1 Samuel 16.14. But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul. There was
the spirit of the Lord quenched. And what was the issue? Was that all? No,
mark the danger that followed upon it, And an evil spirit from the Lord
troubled him. Gods Spirit goes, and the Devils spirit comes: Yea, he came so
that Saul was carried into horrible and fearful sins: He proved
unreasonably malignant and malicious against David. He commits a most
barbarous and cruel murder, 1 Samuel 22.16. Thou shall dye Ahimelech, thou and
all thy Fathers house. It was a bloody act to put Ahimelech to death after so
just an answer made by him. But suppose Ahimelech were guilty, yet what had his
fathers house done? Suppose Ahimelech were guilty, yet what had all the rest of
the Priests done? why must the throats of 85. Priests be cut, verse. 18. why
must Nob, a City of the Priests, both men and women, children and sucklings,
Oxen, Asses, and Sheep, why must all these be so bloodily butchered? what a
fury and barbarous madness is this? All this showed that now the Spirit of God
was quenched, the spirit of the Devil was entered and kindled: For Gods Spirit
being quenched, the spirit of the Devil is so kindled, that it carries him to
monstrous, foul, and horrible wickedness, without all measure. Now the Spirit
of God was quenched in Saul, the spirit of the Devil is not only kindled, but
so kindled that he grows outrageous in his wickedness. And again, after this
he goes to consult with a Witch, he goes and seeks to the Devil himself.
When men once play the Apostataes and quench Gods Spirit, the spirit of the
Devil not only enters, but enters with a witness, so as he hurries them as
his slaves into all excess of wickedness. They do not sin the common
sins of men, Psalm. 53.3. Every one of them is gone back, they are become
altogether filthy. They not only grow dead and cold, careless and loose, but
become altogether filthy; filthy swearers, filthy adulterers, filthy drunkards,
notorious, malignant persons against godliness.

It is with such persons as in that case, Levit. 13.18, 19, 20. If a man had a
bile, and that was healed, and after the healing it brake out again, it proved
the plague of leprosy; It proved worse, a more filthy and loathsome disease
than before. A leprosy was a thousand times worse than before. Men that quench
Gods spirit, kindle the Devils spirit in them, and so kindle the spirit of the
Devil in them, that they who before were but bily persons, they after the
quenching of the spirit prove leprous persons, stinking and filthy, loathsome
lepers, they become altogether filthy. See 2 Pet. 2.20.22. they not only turn
swine, but filthy swine, swine wallowing in the mire, not besprinkled with
mire, not only falling into the mire, but swine wallowing and tumbling in the
mire: For when men quench the spirit, and fall off by Apostasy, not only the
spirit of Satan comes in, but there is a further matter. See Matthew. 12.43, 45.
where observe these things.

1. First, that in a case of Apostasy the spirit being quenched, the Devil does
not enter single, but he takes seven other spirits more wicked than himself.
Christ cast seven Devils out of Mary Magdalen, Mar, 16.9. these have seven
Devils enter with the former old Devil, and they be worse Devils than
himself. To teach, that when men quench the spirit by falling away, the Devil
not only comes again, but he comes so, that he makes them seven times worse
than ever they were before.

2. Secondly, those 7. Devils not only enter, but dwell there, not only lodge
there for a night and away, but they dwell there. It notes, that upon the
departure and quenching of Gods Spirit, the Devil is not only present in
their hearts, but has his abode and residence there, as in that case, Zech.
5.11. Where a man dwells, there is his settled abode and residence. And that is
not all, but that he also was there as a Lord and Master, as Esth. 1.22. So
that it teaches, that when the Spirit is quenched, not only the spirit of
Satan comes in his room, but he comes powerfully and efficaciously to reign
in their hearts, and so to make them baser vassals to himself than ever they
were before; so that their latter end shall be worse than their beginning, not
only in regard of their misery, but of their guilt and pollution. This is the
dreadful danger of quenching Gods spirit: It makes way for the re-entry of
Satan's spirit, yea for seven spirits worse than himself. As therefore we
dread such a condition, and such a danger, so let us beware of such a sin as
quenching the spirit.

A third danger of quenching the Spirit, we may do it finally and totally.
3. Thirdly, a third danger is, that a man quenching the spirit in the graces of
it, may quench it finally and totally; the quenching of the spirit may prove
total and final. Indeed the sanctifying Spirit and grace of God we saw
before, cannot be so quenched; but yet the flame of that fire may be so
quenched, that a man may sit a cold a long while after, and such a fire kindled
in his conscience withal, as may make him rue his folly that does it: Yea, the
acts and opperations of grace so damped, as not easily brought to life again,
and the degrees and measures of grace so quenched, as possibly never recovered
again, though the habits remain. And that is such a danger as may make any
wise man take heed of quenching the spirit so.

But now for common graces, they may be so quenched, as quenched totally and
finally. Totally, Psalm. 53.3. They are gone backward, they are altogether
become filthy. Altogether, they are altogether quenched, not a spark of good or
grace left in them. Luke 19.24. Take from him his pound, not part of his pound,
not half of his pound, but take the whole pound from him, Luke 8.18.

Finally, like the fire that came from Heaven, Levit. 9. after it was quenched
at the destruction of the Temple, it was finally quenched, it was never kindled
more. For as for that story about that fire, 2 Maccab. 1. it is but an
Apocryphal fable. They have made shipwreck of faith, 1 Timothy 1.19. When a
Ship wrackes at Sea, the goods are utterly lost, without all recovery. Goods
cast away at Sea, are lost for ever. As he of Saul, 2 Samuel 1.10. so here it is
a question, and it proves too sure that such live not after they are fallen:
Because they fall as Eli fell, 1 Samuel 4.18. he fell backward, and his neck
brake, and he dyed. When men fall backward, they break their necks and dye,
they fall fatally and finally.

4. Fourthly, the quenching of the Spirit makes dangerous way to the dreadful
and unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. Woe to that soul that commits
that sin, that man is past the help of prayer. His damnation is irreversibly
sealed up. There be diverse sins against the Spirit of God. 1. There is
quenching the spirit, as here 2. There is grieving of the spirit, Ephesians. 4 30.
(...). 3. There is resisting the spirit, Act. 7.51. (...) 4. There is a vexing
of the spirit, Isa. 63.10. 5. A doing despite to the spirit of grace, Heb.
10.29. And this last is that which we call the sin against the Holy Ghost.
And mark that the first step to this sin, is the quenching of the spirit.
Here that sin begins. Though every one that quenches the spirit sins not
against the Holy Ghost, yet every one that sins against the Holy Ghost begins
his sin at quenching the spirit. These five be the five stayres down to Hell
and to damnation unquestionable. And this sin of the quenching the spirit, is
the first stayre of the fire. A danger able to make our hearts tremble. Is it
not dangerous to step one stayre down toward Hell? If thou will adventure to
go down one step, what can thou tell but thou may go down the second,
the third, etc. If thou will adventure to quench the spirit, thou may come to
the sin of grieving the spirit, and when thou have urged it, thou may come
to despite the spirit of grace. And when thou art there, where art thou then?
As surely damned, as irrecoverably gone, as if thou were in Hell already. Would
we then avoid the danger of that sin of despighting? why then, take heed of
vexing; if not vex, take heed of resisting; if not resist, take heed of
grieving; if of grieving, take heed of quenching: He that keeps himself
from quenching, shall never come to a despighting of the spirit of grace. But
if thou will be too bold to meddle with the first, take heed that thou come not
to the last.

5. Fifthly, the quenching of Gods spirit and the fire of it, will prove the
kindling of the fire of GODS wrath.

1. First, it may kindle the fire of his wrath to bring temporal judgments.
As when a Nation and a Church shall quench the spirit, shall forsake the truth
of God, and the zealous profession of his Name, such a quenching will kindle a
fire that will not be quenched. See 2 Reg. 22.17. Because they have forsaken
me, and have burnt incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to
anger with all the works of their hands: therefore my wrath shall be kindled
against this place, and shall not be quenched. Gods Spirit you may quench; but
ye cannot so easily quench the fire of his wrath, that will consume a Nation
with temporal judgments.

2. Secondly, it may kindle the fire of his wrath to bring spiritual
judgments in the removal of his Ordinances, of his Ministers. Ephesus
quenched the spirit, Apoc. 2.4. I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy first love. Thou have quenched the spirit, in that thou have not that
zeal and fervency in the profession of the Gospel, etc. Well, what follows?
Lest I come and remove thy Candle-sticke, verse. 5. As if he should say,
Because thou have quenched the spirit, therefore I will quench the Candle, and
the light of the Ministry.

Hezekiah complains, that the Lamps of the Temple were quenched, 2 Chronicles. 29.
God does it often, he causes the Lamps and lights of the Temple to be
quenched, and people they complain of it, and find fault with it. But let them
consider whilst they complain of others, whether they have not most cause to
complain of themselves. Have not they quenched the spirit? have not they
quenched their love to, and zeal for the truth? therefore it is just with God,
to quench light, as you quench heat. You put out the Lamp of the spirit,
therefore God puts out the Lamps of the Temple. As you fear this, so look
that you keep the spirit burning, and you shall keep the Lamps burning: But
quench the spirit, and look for it, and be sure of it, God will quench the
Candles, and remove the Candle-sticke.

3. Thirdly, it may and will kindle the fire of his wrath in eternal
judgments. Did ye never read of a fire that shall never be quenched, that can
never be quenched? If not, see Mark. 9.43.46.48. into the fire that shall never
be quenched. Now then if ye will make no conscience of quenching the Spirit; yet
remember there is a fire that shall never be quenched. And that the quenching of
the fire of the Spirit puts you in danger of bringing you into the fire of Hell
that shall never be quenched. If you can quench the fire of Hell, then quench
the spirit, and fear not. But if when you have quenched the fire of the Spirit
you cannot quench the fire of Hell; then as you fear the unquenchable fire of
Hell, so fear the Quenching of the Spirit.

FINIS.
THE HEART-SMITTEN SINNER'S SVITE FOR PARDON.

By IER. DYKE Minister of Epping.

PSALM. 21.1. For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is
great. Rogandus est deus ut nos aspiciat: avertat autem faciem suam a peccatis
nostris ut deleat ea. Quae enim non aspicit, delet, and quae deleverit ea a
memoria sepelientur, Ambros. Lib: de Apolog. David. cap. 8. LONDON, Printed by
Tho: Pain, for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1640.

THE HEART-SMITTEN SINNERS SVITE FOR PARDON.
2 SAMUEL 24.10. And now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy
servant.
WE read in these two Books of Samuel, that David's heart twice smote him; once
1 Samuel 24. and another time in this 2 Samuel 24. there before, here after the
Lord had set him upon the Throne of his Kingdom; there for cutting off the
skirt of Saul's garment, here for the numbering of the people, And David's heart
smote him, says the Text, after that he had numbered the people: Which smiting
of David's heart here, is, me thinks, most like to the smiting of Moses when he
smote the Rock, Numb. 20.11. whereupon the water came out abundantly; so here
David's heart had no sooner smote him, but the water came out abundantly: he
thereupon,

First, confessing his sin, when he said unto the Lord, I have sinned
greatly in that I have done: Wherein you see;

First, peculiarity in respect of the object person to whom he made
confession, which was not Gad (though a Prophet, and his Seer) but the Lord:
And David said unto the Lord, I have sinned.

Secondly, Particularity in respect of the object thing, the sin he made
confession of, when he said unto the Lord, I have sinned in that I have done.

Thirdly, impartiallity toward himself the delinquent in the thing And David
said unto the Lord, (not I have sinned only, or I have sinned in that I have
done, but I) have sinned greatly.

Secondly, upon such his confession, And now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away
the iniquity of thy servant.

Where you see the substance of his deprecation is the taking away of his
iniquity. Take away, that is, Lord pardon and forgive the sin of thy servant.
His heart smites him, his conscience accuses and pricks him, and he falls to
begging of pardon and forgiveness. Whence learn;

First, That the only thing that can give ease and quiet to a smiting,
accusing, troubled conscience, is the pardon and forgiveness of sin. Nothing
can ease and quiet a troubled and a smiting heart, but pardon of sin. As
nothing can trouble and pinch the conscience but sin, so nothing can ease the
conscience but pardon. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven. Why is he blessed, and how appears it that he is blessed? He
answers to both, ver. 3, 4, 5. and shows the truth of it in his own
experience. All the while my sin was unpardoned I was in woeful misery: The
very marrow of my bones was dried up, I was so full of pain I could not
forbear roaring. And why? see Psalm. 38.8. J have roared by reason of the
disquietnesse of my heart. Yea, I was in continual misery, not only now and
then by fits had I pangs that made me roar, but I roared all the day long, I
could have no ease. But I acknowledged my sin, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. And then when thou pardonedst me I had present ease, then
the aches, pinches, panges and tortures of my spirit were presently abated: And
therefore blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven. For blessed is he
that has ease and quiet from the troubles of conscience: and pardon of sin
it is that will do that, as I can witness by mine own experience. All the
while my sin was unpardoned, I was as a man on the rack; but when my sin
was forgiven, then had my soul ease and refreshment. All implies that the
only thing that can ease the conscience, and discharge it of its trouble, is
the pardon and forgiveness of sin. Reasons are these:

First, the only way to remove and take away an evil, any pain, is to remove
and take away the cause and the ground of it. So long as the cause remains of
any evil, what ever courses men take, the evil remains still. If a man have
a thorn in his foot, it puts him to a great deal of pain, it swells, and is
full of anguish. Now let a man anoint his foot, let him lap it up, and keep
it warm, let him sit still and not walk upon it, yet all the while the thorn
is in his foot he has no ease, but it aches, and throbs, and vexes a man still
for all this. The only way to help a man to ease is to remove the cause of
the sorrow, to get the thorn plucked out, to get that drawn forth. So when a
man's conscience is in trouble, and disquiet, a man may use playsters of ease,
may seek to quiet his spirit with merry company, good fellowship, following
his pleasures, following his business, he may be padling with these playsters
and poulteyses that men in the world seek ease by; but yet so long as the
thorn is in the heart, so long as guilt is in the conscience, all these
slabberments will never ease the pain. There is no way to ease the pain of
the heart, but to pluck and draw the thorn out of the heart, to get guilt out
of the conscience. Now nothing can pluck the thorn out of the heart, but
only pardon of sin. Pardon of sin pluckes out the thorn, and so gives
ease. Mark David's phrase, Take away the iniquity of thy servant, and so Hos.
14.2. Take away all iniquity. Pardon of sin is the taking of it away, the
taking of guilt out of the conscience. And nothing can take away iniquity but
pardon: And therefore pardon taking away iniquity, that is the only thing,
that can give a smiting conscience ease: Then the conscience is at ease when
the weapon is taken away with which conscience smites. Now it is nothing but
guilt, that puts a weapon into the hand of conscience to smite withal. When
the weapon is taken away, then conscience cannot smite; and when the conscience
cannot smite, then a man's spirit is at ease.

Psalm 38.3. There is not any rest in my bones because of my sin; when a man
has a grivous ach and pain in his bones, it so afflicts and tortures him that
he can take no rest, lay him upon never so soft a bed, yet his aching bones will
not let him take any rest. But the way to bring a man to rest, were to take a
course to take away that pain out of his bones: If that ach and pain were out
of his bones, he might rest. So here, sin in the conscience makes the bones
full of restless pains, There is no rest in my bones because of my sin. It
breaks the bones, Psalm. 51. It not only dryes the bones, Psalm. 38. and puts
bones out of joint, but it breaks the bones, and so no wonder that upon sin
there is no rest in the bones: But now if sin were taken away, the bones would
soon be at rest. And therefore pardon of sin taking away sin, which causes the
restlesnesse of the bones, is the only thing to procure rest in the bones.

Psalm 38.4. My sins are as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me.
A man that has an heavy and weighty burden upon his back, can have no rest
till the burden be taken off his back, though he may seek to ease himself by
sitting down, by leaning, yet so long as the weighty burden is upon his back,
he can have no ease, still he is under the pinch, and pressure of it. But the
only way to give his back ease, is to remove the burden, and to take it off.
Sin is a heavy and a pressing burden, that is ready to break a man's back.
Now the only way to give a man's back ease, is to remove this burden, and to
take it off. Now pardon of sin is the removing of it, Prove. 30.8. Remove
far from me vanity and lies. and Psalm. 103.12. So far has he removed our
transgressions from us. And therefore pardon being the removing of the burden,
and the removing of the cause of the pain, it is the only thing that gives
the back ease. Matthew. 11. Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I
will ease you. How? I will remove and take off the burdens that lie so heavy
upon your backs. But how does Christ remove the burdens? By the pardon of
their sins; so that the only thing in the world to ease a burdened
Conscience, is the pardon of sin. Sin wounds the conscience. The body being
wounded is payned, and put to smart. But oil and balm powered into the wounds
ease their smart and throbbing. And pardoning mercy that is the balm of Gilead
that gives ease to a wounded conscience, that asswages the throbbings and smart
which is caused by sin.

Secondly, of wrath. The clouds that are in Gods face cause the storms that
are in the conscience. That as in that case he speaks, Psalm. 104.19. Thou
hidest thy face, they are troubled: So in this case, when God hides his face
and his favor, and men see nothing but anger and displeasure, yea it may be
see hell and damnation, then the conscience is troubled and disquieted. Then a
man suckes the gall of Aspes, and then the Vipers tongue slayes him, Job 20.16.
The trouble of conscience arising therefore from the dread and apprehension of
Gods anger and displeasure, the only thing that can ease the conscience, is
the hope and sense of Gods favor; let but God give a man a good look, but
smile lovingly upon him, and that favor of God eases the conscience of all
trouble, Prove. 16.14, 15. The wrath of a King is as the messengers of death; so
Gods wrath much more, and when messengers of death come, how is a man's heart
troubled and disquieted: But a wise man will pacify it. And what if it be
pacified: Then, in the light of the Kings countenance is life: So when God
lifts up the light of his countenance, then there is life, and then the
conscience is full of peace and ease. I but when is it that the light and
Sunshine of Gods face breaks out thus? That is done in the pardon of sin:
When sin is pardoned then comes peace and comfort, Matthew. 9. Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. That is the only thing that can comfort
the conscience, and ease it, because that is an infallible evidence of Gods
favor. Pardon of sin never comes but out of love and favor. Outward mercies
a man may receive from an angry God, but pardon of sin never comes but from
favor and love. And therefore pardon of sin being the evidence of a God
reconciled, showing a man the light of Gods countenance, is the only thing
that can ease the trouble of conscience.

Thirdly, sins are debts. And a man that is deeply in debt, cannot be
without much trouble of heart. It may be he may make a shift, and set a face
upon it before men: I but yet the thoughts of his debts give him many a secret
nip, many a close pinch. He may set up an high sail, and brave it out in
apparel, but yet for all this his debts vex him, and many a night he takes
but little rest, because still the thoughts of his debts trouble him. Now when
a man is in this trouble of heart, and disquiet of spirit with his debts, there
is no way for a man to have his heart eased, but either to get his debts paid,
or to get his debts pardoned. And if they be such, as he is never able to pay,
then no way to ease him of his cares and fears, but to have his debts pardoned.

Now a sinner is in debt to God, and when conscience is troubled about these
debts, what ever face a man may set upon it, yet his heart will be miserably
troubled about his debts; he will live in a continual fear of being arrested
by Gods anger, of being dragged by the throat to hell: For such debts they are,
as a man can never pay, Luc. 7. Two debtors that had nothing to pay: So
therefore there is no other way to give a man's conscience ease, but by the
pardon of his sins, because that is the pardoning of his debts: Therefore
pardon of sin is called blotting out iniquity, Psalm. 51. It is the drawing
cross lines over all our debts, it is the blurring out all our sins in Gods
debt-booke. Pardon of debts is the only way to ease a disquieted debtor,
pardon of sin is the pardon of debts, and therefore the only way to ease our
consciences.

To teach us in trouble of Conscience and under the smitings of heart, what
course to take for ease and peace, viz. to make out presently as David does for
pardon of sin, make have to God, and sue for pardon, and give God and thy self
no rest, till thou have got thy pardon. If thine heart smite thee, and thy
conscience pinch thee, fall presently to this course, I beseech thee O Lord
take away the iniquity of thy servant. As Solomon speaks in the case of
suretieship, Prove. 6.1, 5. So do thou, If thou have sinned, and thy conscience
have stricken thee with the hand, do this now my son, and deliver thy self
from the painful and smarting buffetings of thy conscience. So humble thy
self, and make sure thy friend, see and humble thy self by confession, and by
begging, and getting thy pardon, make God thy friend, and make him thy sure
friend, and do this quickly, as verse 4, 5. This is the only way to get ease,
this is the only way to get rest in thy bones. It is strange how men in pain
of Conscience will sharke for ease, and try all conclusions, before they will
take the right course to come, and sue to God for ease by pardon. The Prodigal
was in want, Luke 15. why does he not so soon as he is pincht go to his
Father? no, he will try other conclusions first. He joins to a citizen, it
may be he may find help that way: He will keep swine, it may be he may fill
his belly with the husks: But when he has done all, that will give him no
ease, he must come to this at last, I will go to my Father, I will go beg
mercy; And he never finds ease, till he be in his fathers Arms, in his Fathers
house, till his Father kisses him and clothes him. So men in trouble of
conscience are loath to make out to Gods pardoning mercy. Some will try what
company will do, some will try what pleasures will do, it may be they may
drink away their trouble, and drown it that way; it may be they card and
dice it away; it may be they may; it may be they may hawk and hunt it away;
it may be superstitious penance, a pilgrimage, a Popes pardon will do the
deed, it may be, multitude and variety of imployme^t may take off the heart
so, that it shall not beat leisure to trouble them with accusations and
torments. How vain are all these: This is nothing but arrand sharking: All
such courses will not do. It is in that case as in that, Hos. 5.13. When
Ephraim saw his sickness, and Juda saw his wound: then went Ephraim to the
Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb; yet could he not heal you, not cure you of
your wound. So when men see their spiritual sickness, and feel the wounds of
conscience, the smart and the anguish of them, then go they to this shift, and
that, to this sharking course, and that; they go to their merriments,
companions, sports, plays, employments, superstitions, and yet can they not
heal them, nor cure them of their wounds; their wounds bleed still, smart
still, their consciences throb with anguish still, and for all this, as with
them there, verse. 14. Conscience is as a Lion unto them, and roares and tears
still. Men must come to God for pardon at last if they will have ease. And were
not a man as good come at first, and save so much lost labor? Had not the
Prodigal as good have come to his father at first, as to go the furthest away
about?

Sin leaves a sting in the conscience. When a man is stung with an Hornet, it
afflicts the place with a great deal of anguish. And what will a man do in
such a case? The first thing he will do for his ease, is to pluck out the
sting, the Hornet has left behind: For if a man apply medicines for ease, yet
if the sting be still sticking in his flesh, medicines are in vain. So when
the conscience is stung, and throbs, and rages, the way is first to pluck out
the sting out of the conscience. Nothing can take away the sting out of the
conscience, but pardon: Pardoning grace only can fetch that out; therefore
when thy conscience is stung, and does pain and vex thee, let that be the
first thing, and let is be done speedily too, to seek to God for the pardon
and remission of thy sin. That will take out the sting, and when the sting is
out, there will follow present ease.

Secondly, mark what David's suite Take away, I beseech thee, take away the
iniquity of thy servant. Learn then, what is a maine thing that concerns
every sinner to look after, and labor for; A maine thing that above all
others a sinner should look after, and take thought, and care for, is the
pardon and remission of his sins. Our Savior in the form of prayer by him
prescribed, teaches us to pray but six petitions; and amongst those six, the
fifth is forgive us our trespasses, and observe with what petition it is
coupled, Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us. Two things may be
there observed. 1. First, he subjoynes petition for pardon to petition for
bread. 2. Secondly, he couples and conjoynes them. In the three first
petitions one petition is subjoyned to another, but not conjoined to the other.
Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, etc. he says not, And thy Kingdom
come, And thy will be done. But here these are coupled, Give us, etc And
forgive us. And this to teach us, that there is as great necessity of pardon
for eternal life, as of bread for temporal. That we stand in as much need of
a forgiving God for our souls as of a giving God for our bodies: So also that
we should be no less thoughtfull and careful for pardon of sin, than men
are for bread: That we should beg as hard, and toil as hard for the pardon of
sin, as for bread to maintain life.

The Lord, Hos. 24.2. prescribes his people a prayer, and that has but two
petitions, and this is not only one of them, but the first of them, Take away
all iniquity, and give us good. Agur put up but two petitions to God, and these
were the petitions that he meant to put up to his dying day, Prove. 30.7. Two
things have I required of thee, deny them me not before I dye, that is, two
things I have begged, and will not leave begging to my dying day; and one of
these two, and the first of these two things that he would beg to his dying
day, was the pardon of his sins, v. 8. Remove far from me vanity and lies:
As if he should say, Lord be merciful unto me in the pardon of my sins. So
that there is no thought nor care that should take up a man's time and pains
all his life long, as this, how to get the pardon of our sins. It is the
greatest mercy that can be shown us. It is true that we live wholly upon
mercy; that we have a being it is mercy; that we have any comfortable being it
is mercy; mercy that we have food to put into our bellies; mercy that we have
clothes to put upon our backs, mercy that we are freed from many sorrows,
sadness, and heavy crosses that others lie under; all is mercy: but yet lay
all together, and they are nothing to the mercy that is in pardon of sin;
that is the greatest mercy that can be showed: Psalm. 51.1. According to the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions. See then, that it
is mercy that must blot out transgressions, nay it is tender mercy; nay it is a
multitude of tender mercies that blots out and forgives sin. And therefore it
being so great a mercy, our cares should be suitable and proportionable to it.
The greater the mercy is, the greater should a man's care be to get a share in
that mercy.

great endeavor of our lives to get the pardon of our sins. It is woeful to
see our negligence and security in this point. What is there in all the world
that concerns men to look after more, and yet what is there, that men look
after less than the pardon of their sins? No care, no thought, no time, no
pains too much, or enough for getting goods, riches, and the necessaries of
this life, but how rare and infrequent are men's cares and thoughst for the
pardon of sin. All our cares are wasted, and expended upon these trifles, but
for this one thing that is necessary, scarce one serious thought in the whole
year. Who will show us any good? that string men harp upon. But who will show
us the way to get the pardon of our sins? that is a question rarely asked.

It is too true, that men have not that care for their souls they have for
their bruit beasts, for their very Hogs and Dogs, Luc. 14.5. Which of you
shall have an Ass or an Ox fallen into a pit, and will not straight way pull
him out: Nay, if it were a Swine, nay if a Dog, he should be pulled out, and
pulled out straight way. Such care and such compassions would we with haste
show unto these vile and base creatures. But how often do men's souls fall
into the pit, even into the pit of Hell and Death by their sins? and yet no
care nor compassion to pull them out, much less to pull them out straightway:
But for any care or conscience is taken there, their poor souls may lie and
rot in the pit. A miserable thing, that a man should show more care and pity
to his Swine, than to his soul. It being therefore the maine thing a sinner
should labor for, to get his sin taken away, be we exhorted in Gods fear to
make this our maine care: Spend less time and care upon the world, upon your
profits and your pleasures, squander not out your cares, time and pains upon
these vanities, these nothings. Spend some time, spend some care, some pains
upon your poor souls, in getting their sins pardoned.

Let Job's thoughts be ours, Job 7.20, 21. So say we, Alas I have sinned, and
am a guilty person before God, What shall I do unto God? What course shall I
take that my sin may be pardoned? Oh Lord that I had an heart to seek out
for my pardon! Says Job, And why do thou not pardon my transgressions, and
take away mine iniquity. He speaks as if he had been thoughtfull and
painful about that business, and wonders that after all his endeavor, he
cannot get his pardon sealed; As if he should say, Lord what is the matter
that I cannot get my pardon. Now, if many of us should put Jobs question to
God, and say, And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away
mine iniquity; might not God answer us, And why do thou not seek for thy
pardon, and why do thou not labor for the taking away of thine iniquity.
Why should I pardon your iniquity, that take no care for your pardon? Why
should I forgive your iniquity, that seek not for the forgiveness of it: Let
us therefore make it a matter of greater care and thoughtfulness than ever yet
we have done.

Martha, Martha, thou cumbrest thy self about many things, but one thing is
needful; and thou take not the care for that thou should do. So it may
be said of most men: We cumber our selves with thoughts for food, for raiment,
for our selves, and for our children, for our backs and our bellies, for
wealth and for riches, and all these cares are but cumbers. But there is one
thing necessary, one thing so necessary, as that ye are undone, and perish for
ever unless you get it, viz. The pardon of your sin, and as if it were a
trifle, a matter scarce worth the looking after, as if it were that which hung
upon every hedge, you never mind it, nor once look after it.

That therefore men may be awakened out of this gross supine negligence, and
be stirred up to look after this so great a matter; Consider these motives
following:

First, our very life lies upon it. Every sinner in his guilt, having his sin
unpardoned, let him be what he will, he is no better than a dead man. That as
God spoke to Abimelech, Genesis 20.3. Behold thou art but a dead man for the woman
which thou have taken. So, behold thou art but a dead man, and a dead woman for
the sin which thou have committed, if thy sin be not pardoned. An
unpardoned sinner is but a dead man, Ephesians. 2.1.5. We use to say of a
condemned person, that he is a dead man: But now when a man's sin is
pardoned, then he has his life; as when the King gives a condemned man his
pardon, we say he gives him life. Our Justification is called Justification
of life, Romans 5.18. A maine part of our Justification is the pardon of sin:
So that pardon of sin it is our life. I said unto thee in thy blood, live,
etc. Ezekiel. 16.6. and Ephesians. 2.5. We which were dead in sins has he
quickened, made alive. How come we to be made alive? for by grace we are
saved: God of his free grace has pardoned us our sins, and thus are we
quickened that are dead. Now if our life lies upon our pardon, and we be no
better than so many dead men without it, does it not concern us to look about
us, and to get our pardon? Is there any thing of that concernement that our
life is? Therefore as Moses in that case urges them, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. And he
said unto them, set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you
this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do all the words
of this Law. For it is not a vain thing for you: because it is your life, and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land whither ye go over
Jordan to possess it. So in this, set your hearts upon this business, and
make it the greatest of all your care to get pardon of sin; it is not a vain
thing, nor a trifling business, it is your very life. If ye get not your
pardon ye dye, ye perish, ye are undone unto eternity. When a man is
condemned to dye, if he have any friends that can do any thing with those
about the King, he sets them all on work, and there is great mediation, great
and earnest suing, no pains nor cost spared, riding and poasting to and
again. Now what is the reason of all this ado? Because the man's life lies
upon the Kings pardon, if that business be not plied and effected, the man
dies, and is sure to be executed: And therefore life lying on it, no marvel
he bestirres himself, and sets his wits and his friends on work with all
their might. It is our case if sin unpardoned, we are but dead men, and
undone men, our life lies upon Gods mercy in our pardon: And our life lying
upon it, how does it concern us to bestirre our selves, and to give our hearts
no rest till we have prevailed with God for this favor, the taking away of
our iniquity. Our life stands in our Salvation, our life stands in our
Redemption, our life stands in our Reconciliation to God: And all these stand
in the pardon of our sins. Our Salvation stands in it, Luc. 1.77. Where the
end of John Baptists going before the face of the Lord is said to be, To give
knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins. As a
man is said to be saved when the Kings pardon comes. Our Redemption stands in
it, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins. We may talk of Christ's blood, and redemption by him, but redemption
we have none, and benefit of Christ we have none, till we have the pardon of
our sins. Our Reconciliation with God stands in it, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in
Christ reconciling the World, not imputing their sins. And therefore since
our Salvation, our Redemption, our Reconciliation stands in it, our life stands
in it: And since our life lies upon it, it ought to be our greatest care above
all things to get the pardon of our sins.

Secondly, it is the in let to all other mercy, and that which ushers in all
other good, Hos. 14.2. Take away all iniquity, and give us good. They must pray
for good to be given. I but your iniquities withold good things from you,
Jer. 5.25. Therefore their first petition is, Take away all iniquity: So that
we can look for no good to be given, till sin be forgiven: And when sin
is forgiven, then that is removed that withholds good from us, and then way is
made, and the passage cleared for the entrance of good. And therefore when God
intends any mercy or a special good to a people, he first makes way for it by
the taking away their iniquity: He prepares a way for his blessings by the
pardon of our sins: So when God intended the mercy of peace and liberty to
his Church, deliverance from the sorrows, see what he does withal, Isa.
40.1, 2. Speak comfortably to her that her warfare is accomplished, all her
troubles and afflictions shall have an end. I but alas, might they say, we
have so many sins, and so great guilt upon us, that we cannot hope to have
that comfort. Therefore see what follows, an answer to that objection, That
her iniquity is pardoned; As if he should say, I will take away your
iniquities, and so make way to that mercy; your sins shall be pardoned, and
so shall be no hindrance to you. And so when the palsy man came to be healed,
what was it that made the way to that mercy. So soon as Christ sees him, he
says not Son be of good comfort, thy palsy is cured, but Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee, and then when that is done, then Arise
take up thy bed, and walk: The pardon of sin made way for the cure of his
palsy And so David makes that the inlet of his bodily health, Psalm. 103.3.
Who forgives all thine iniquities, who heales all thy diseases. David's diseases
were healed, and what made way for the healing of them, who forgives all thine
iniquities. Pardon of sin makes way for this blessing. See Isa. 38.17. where
King Hezekiah confesses it had made way for the same to him; Behold, says
he, for peace I had great bitterness, but thou have in love to my soul,
delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou have cast all my sins
behind thy back. Nay, for health to an whole Land, Isa. 33.24. The inhabitant
of the Land shall not say, I am sick. The Land shall be free from contagious,
infectious, pestilentiall, epidemicall diseases. That Is a great blessing, but
what shall make way for such a mercy? The people that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquity. And therefore when David sets himself to praise God
for being a God that heard prayer, he makes this the ground of it, Psalm. 65.2.
Blessed be thy name that have heard my prayer. Oh, how could God hear thy
prayer when thou had many sins, which covered God with a cloud, that thy
prayer should not pass through, as Lam. 3.44. Answ. It is true, verse. 3. Mine
iniquities had prevailed against me, and they had kept good things from me,
and brought evil things upon me; but yet for all that God heard my prayer,
and to make way for hearing my prayer, As for our transgressions thou shall
purge them away, and so make way for hearing prayer, and doing me good.

This should be a strong motive to us, to get our sins taken away, and
pardoned. We stand in need of good to be given us daily. To have the Gospel
and peace continued, it is a wonderful great good and happiness, to have the
land healed, and the plague removed, and stayed from rising and spreading, it
is a good we beg of God, and feign would have it. There is a way to have it,
and to have God give us this good, but men do not, will not take the course to
get this good. If our sins were pardoned, God would give this good of the
continuance of the Gospel, and peace: If our sins were pardoned, God would
give this good of good and seasonable weather; would give this good of healing
the Land, and staying the plague. Now then, as we would have God do these
things for us, so let us get the pardon of our sins. We pray for these
mercies, if we would have them, let us take heed that our iniquities prevail
not against us: And as we would not have our iniquities prevail against our
prayers, so let our first care be to have them purged away, and pardoned. We
may pray for such mercies as we need, we may pray for the staying and
removing of the plague till our hearts ache, and we shall never prevail, so
long as our iniquities prevail against us: And they will prevail against us
to bring on the plague, and other judgments, if we do not get them pardoned.
So long as the people of the Land have not their iniquities forgiven them, we
cannot look for it that the inhabitants of of the Land, of the City, should
not say we are sick. But so long as we get not sin pardoned, so long as
that reigns untaken away, so long we shall say we are sick, that our Towns
and Cities are sick of the plague of pestilence; Behold, I will bring it
heatlh and cure, and I will cure them, and will reveal unto them the abundance
of peace and truth. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby
they have sinned against me: and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby
they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me, Jer. 33.6.8.
That Is the way to get health and cure.

Thirdly, it is that which seasons and sweetens all other mercies, comforts and
contentments we enjoy, which makes all mercies sweet, which makes all comforts
savoury. The want of pardon imbitters all comforts, and makes a man's soul
abhor them all. Look upon a man that is in distress of conscience, under
the sense of Gods anger, and in fear of condemnation; what joy and contentment
takes that man in any thing he has, wife, children, houses, lands, wealth,
riches, what comfort takes he in them all? It is with a man in this case, as
it was with that of Haman, Esth. 5.11, 12, 13. And Haman told them of the glory
of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein
the King had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the Princes, and
servants of the King. Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the Queen did let no
man come in with the King unto the banquet that she had prepared but my self,
and to morrow am I invited unto her also with the King. Yet all this avails
me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate. All
gave him no content so long as Mordecai sat at the Kings gate. So here, though
a man have all these comforts, and be up to the chin in them all, yet will a
man's conscience that wants pardon, be working and speaking thus if it be
awakened, I have such and such comforts, yet all this availes me not, so long
as sin lies before the door, so long as my sin lies unpardoned. I stand in
a state of guilt and wrath, and what know I but I shall go to Hell, and be
damned, and so long as my condition is such, what am I the better for house,
land, wife, children, what tell you me of riches, and wealth, and these
trifles, when Gods curse and vengeance hangs over my head, and is ready for
ought I know to fall upon mine head every moment, and to arrest me, and drag me
to hell, there to be in torment for ever? But then mercies are mercies indeed,
then they are sweet indeed, when they come swimming to us in the stream of
Christ's blood, when they come with a pardon in their hand. Behold, says David
to Ziba, Thine are all that pertained to Mephibosheth; Take thou all his lands;
and see how he answers, 2 Samuel 16.4. I humbly beseech thee that I may find
favor in thy sight, etc. As if he should say, I had rather have the Kings
favor than the Lands, what good will the Lands do me, unless I may have the
Kings favor. So in this case, it is the favor of God in the pardon of sin
that sugars all outward comforts. See Isai. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye my people,
etc. Say unto her that her warfare is accomplished. Is that all? No, And that
her iniquity is pardoned. It is a comfort to have peace, liberty, freedom from
enemies, molestations and oppressions; I but then it is a comfort indeed, and
then it is sweet indeed, when it comes with the pardon of sin. When the
conscience has peace with God, then there is comfort, great comfort in outward
peace. So when the palsy man came to Christ, he came for cure, and it had
been a great mercy to have had his health and recovery from that disease. But
mark, Christ says not, Be of good comfort, thou shall have thine health, that
he tells him after he shall have, but be of good comfort thou shall have thy
pardon. To teach, that then health and recovery is a sweet comfort, when a man's
sin is pardoned. Give us our bread, forgive our sins, teaching us, that there
is little comfort in having bread without pardon; and that, that which makes
bread comfortable and sweet, is when it comes with pardoning mercy. A man that
lies in prison and is a condemned man, cloth him with rich apparel, feed him
with delicious fare, let him have the sweetest Music, yet so long as he is a
condemned man, and looks every hour to be fetched out to execution, all this
gives him no content: His heavy heart puts the Music out of tune, takes away
the relish of his dainty food: But if now a pardon might but come from the
King to such a man, this would make the Music sweet, the fare pleasant
indeed: Nay, though he had nothing but bread and water, yet a pardon would so
rejoice him that he would think his bread and water good cheer, it would
turn his water into wine. This is the mercy that crowns all other mercies,
it is a crowning and the chief of all other. David, Psalm. 21. Had a crown of
pure Gold set upon his head. But when David comes to bless God for all his
benefits, Psalm. 103. Bless the Lord, etc. He says not, which has set a
crown of pure gold upon thine head, but verse. 4. Who crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies. He blesses God for crowning him with mercy,
tender mercy; for setting, not a crown of gold, but a crown of mercy upon his
head. But how did he set it on his head, verse. 2. Who forgives all thine
iniquity. Pardoning mercy is crowning mercy, and David more joy'd in that than
in his crown. A crown without pardon is but a crown of thorns. David's
greatest comfort is in his crown of loving kindness and tender mercies.

Fourthly, it is that which fits for duty, for the duties of praying, hearing,
Psalm. 109.7. Let his prayer become sin. But mark the ground of it, and how
it comes about. When he shall be judged let him go out guilty, and let his
prayer become sin. When therefore a man stands guilty, then his prayer
becomes sin; and every man whose sin is not pardoned stands guilty. The
person being in his sin, he turns his duties into sin. Not only the
plowing of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. but the praying of the wicked is
sin. Plowing is an honest work, and praying is an holy work; but sin
unpardoned marres both plowing and praying, turns the honest work of plowing,
and the holy work of praying into sin. It is bad enough, and sad enough,
that a man sins when he swears, that his oaths are sins, how much more
sad is it, that a man sins when he prays, that his prayers are sins. That
is the sad condition of every man who stands guilty, and has not his sin
pardoned.

The end of all duties is communion with God: And a man is never fit for a
duty, till he be fit to have fellowship and communion with God: And a man is
never fit for fellowship and communion with God, till his sins be pardoned,
and so never fit for duty, till sin be pardoned. There is no fellowship and
communion to be had with God, so long as there is a separation between God and
us. Now a man's sins unpardoned, set God and us at a distance, make a
separation between God and us, Isa. 59.1, 2. Behold the Lords hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save: neither is his ear heavy, that it cannot
hear. But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear. As if he should say,
therefore ye pray and God hears you not, ye pray and ye have no fellowship
with, nor answer from God, because your sinnns are upon you, and they being
unpardoned separate between you and God, and they hide his face from you; In
vain does a man seek communion with God, when separated from him: Sin
unpardoned makes the Lord a separatist, he will not join with us, nor have any
fellowship with us in any of our duties. Till sin be separated from us, God
will separate, and then sin is separated when it is pardoned, and when
pardoned then fit for duty, because then so qualified as God will have
communion with us.

We are never fit for duty till we can so do duty, that we may expect good
from duty: Then fit for prayer, the Word, the Sacrament, when so qualified as
that we may receive good from God in them, and by them: And that is then when
we have our iniquities taken away, Hos. 14.2. Take away all iniquity, and give
good. Why pray we but that God may give good by that ordinance? Why hear we
but that God may give good by that Ordinance? Why receive we the Sacrament,
but that God may give good by that Ordinance. I but if we will receive good by
these, we must be fit to pray, hear, receive, let us be qualified aright, and
God will give good. But what is that qualification? Take away all iniquity, and
give good. Therefore men do these, and no good is given them, because they
first take not a course to have iniquity taken away: Prayer would give good,
preaching would give good, and the Sacrament would give good, if we would come
fitted for these duties; and this is the maine thing that must first be had to
fit us, the pardon of sin.

No duty is accepted till a man's person be: No man's person is accepted so long
as he is in his guilt: he is in his guilt that has not sin pardoned; but
when sin is pardoned, then guilt is taken off; when guilt is taken off, then
a man's person is accepted; when a man's person is accepted, then his duty is
accepted: A man is never fit for duty till he be such an one as may be
accepted, and can never be accepted till his sins be pardoned. When a man
comes to God in any holy duty, and comes in his guilt, in his sins, Satan is
presently ready to put in a bar against him, and to lay his sins in his
dish, that God may not regard him. Lord here is a man prays, hears, receives,
Lord respect not his service, let him have no acceptance, nor answer from thee.
I but why Satan? Lord he is a swearer, a drunkard, unclean, covetous, he
has committed such and such sins, and the guilt of them yet lies upon his
soul: And will thou have communion with guilty sinners? Art not thou a God of
purer eyes then to behold iniquity? And this is a strong plea, and will carry
meat in the mouth of it, so long as sin is unpardoned. There is no way to
enervate Satan's pleas, but by getting sin pardoned; that is it alone which
will take off the edge of all his accusations. Our prayers will never be of
force, so long as his accusations be of force: His accusations will be of
force, and will enfeeble the prevailing of our prayers, so long as sin is
unpardoned: But when once sin is pardoned, then God has to answer Satan with
all. It is true Satan that this man that now prays, etc. has committed such
sins as thou accusest him, and those sins of his deserve that he should be
rejected, but yet those sins of his shall not prejudice his prayers, nor be
any stopping to my blessing, for I have pardoned all those sins of his, they
are all taken away and forgiven. Do but consider that place, Zech. 3.1. There
is Joshua standing before the Angel of the Lord, that is, before Christ;
standing, that is, ministering in, and executing his office, offering up
sacrifices and prayers for the people. And at the very same time Satan is
standing there also, and standing at his right hand to resist him, to be an
adversary to him, that is, he was there ready to hinder and frustrate his
prayers by putting in accusations against him. What was the ground of his
accusations? Wherein lay their strength? That appears, verse. 3, 4. Now Joshua
was clothed with filthy garments. That is, he was guilty of diverse sins, as
verse. 4. opens it, And he answered, and spoke unto those that stood before
him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said,
Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee
with change of raiment. Now Christ is willing to accept Joshua, and to regard
him in his service. I but, Lord, says Satan, he is in his filthy garments,
he is defiled with the guilt of his sin. Therefore that Christ may make way
for the prevalencie of Joshua's prayer, see how he answers, Take away his
filthy garments. And he says unto Joshua, I have caused thine iniquity to
pass from thee, etc. Joshua, thy sins are pardoned, and so thy prayers shall
speed, and shall prevail against all Satan's resistance and accusations: Out of
which passage we may observe these particulars:

First, that whenever man comes to pray to God, and perform that duty, Satan
will stand at his right hand to resist him. Joshua cannot stand before Christ,
but Satan will stand at his right hand.

Secondly, that the ^^ine strength of Satan's accusations lies in the guilt of
our sins. Sin unpardoned is that which puts validity into his resistances.

Thirdly, that when sin is pardoned, and filthy garments taken away, then a
man's prayer prevails, finds acceptance, and proves too strong for Satan's
resistances. A pardoned sinners prayers are too strong for all the devils in
hell with their accusations.

So that all this considered, what a motive should it be to make us get our
pardon. As we would not have all our duties to be turned into sins; as we
would have communion with God in them all; as we would get good by, and in
them all; as we would have our duties accepted, and prevalent; as we would
be fit to pray, etc. so get the pardon of our sins. What a sad thing is it
to lose all our endeavors, to lose our prayers, hearing and receiving; all is
lost, and is lost labor, if we come unfitted to them. Every man that is
unpardoned, is unprepared; every unprepared man does but lose his labor in all
his duties and performances.

Fifthly, it is that which exceedingly take one, but he must resolve to take
up the other. Now no man can suffer unless he be fit for it, and well
prepared for the service. It is not an easy thing to suffer, there is a great
deal of patience, of courage, of resolution and Christian magnanimity of
Spirit required in him that will suffer for Christ and the Gospel. A man that
is fearful, a coward will never suffer. He that will suffer, must be free
from cowardice of spirit. Now there is nothing so cowes a man's spirit as the
fear of Hell and damnation. Many a man could look death in the face, that
dares not look Hell in the face. Many a man that shrinkes not at dying, yet
shrinkes at damning, that quails the stoutest courage in the world. And there
is nothing that puts a man more in the fear of Hell than guilt, the want of
the pardon of sin. And nothing that makes a man fear Death more, then when
through death he sees Hell, when he sees the gates of death open into Hell;
and then a man sees Hell through death, when he apprehends his sin
unpardoned; and seeing Hell through death, he is so affrighted at the sight of
Hell, that if he can shift it he will not dye, but will redeem himself from
death upon any terms: He will do any thing, yield to any thing, be of any
Religion, of any faith, rather than suffer death for the true Religion, because
if he dye, his sins being unpardoned, he knows there is no way but Hell
for him. Thus does sin unpardoned unfit a man to dye for Christ, an
unpardoned sinner dreads the fire, because it may but prepare him for a worse
fire in Hell.

But now when a man's sin is pardoned, and his conscience discharged of the
guilt, his heart is quit of all fear of Hell and damnation: He sees the gates
of death open into Heaven, into happiness. And Death is not dreadful nor
terrible at all when the door opens that way. There is nothing so animates a
man, so sills his heart with courage and resolution, as pardon of sin does.
That is it which alone makes a Christian Soldier valorous, that takes
palenesse out of the cheeks, whiteness out of his Liver, cowardice out of his
heart; such have their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
as it is Ephesians. 6.15.

As therefore we would do God service, and his Cause honor, as we would be
able to be good Soldiers, and resolute courageous Champions for Christ and his
cause, which is the greatest honor in the world, so get that taken away that
takes away all courage, Take away the iniquity of thy servant, for that will
take away the courage and resolution of thy servant, get that off which will
cow thy Spirit, the guilt of thy sin. Get the pardon of thy sin, Get thy
feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. If once thine heart
have the peace of the Gospels working, have peace from thy pardon, it will make
thee look upon prisons, scourges, rackes, strappadoes, gibbets, stakes, fires,
as at so many flea-bitings: It will make a man have an heart like David, his
heart was as the heart of a Lion.

Sixthly, it is an excellent and special preparative for death. There is no
man but must die, and there is nothing so much concerns a man, as to be fit,
and prepared to dye. It is appointed to all men once to dye, and after death
comes judgment, Heb. 9. After death comes Judgment, and as a man's death is,
so is his judgment, As the tree falls so it lies: Such as a man's death is,
such is his doom. If a man dye with his sins pardoned, then he is judged to
life; if a man dies without pardon, then his judgment is without mercy, he is
judged to death, and sentenced to Hell. Inasmuch therefore as a man is never
fit to dye comfortably, and happily, till death shall make way for him into
Heaven, and a man cannot look for any entrance into Heaven till he be
pardoned his sin, therefore till a man's sin be pardoned, he is never fit
to dye. See how Job speaks, Job 7.21. Why do thou not pardon my sin, and
take away mine iniquity; As if he should say, Oh Lord be not hard to be
entreated, let me prevail with thee for the pardon of my sin. But why is
Job so earnest for the pardon of his sin? See what follows, for now shall I
sleep in the dust; As if he should say, Now Lord I am upon the point of death,
and look for no other but to dye; and alas, how sad will my condition be, if I
should dye without my pardon. Since I must dye, Lord fit and prepare me for a
comfortable death by the pardon of my sin.

Then is a man fit to dye, when the time after death shall prove a time of
refreshing: Times of refreshing come after the pardon of sin, Act. 3.19.
Repent, says Peter to the men of Israel, and be converted, that your sins
may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the Lord. And then the times after death are times of refreshing, when the
times before death are times of remission. He has prepared himself well for
death, that has taken order that the time after his death, shall be a refreshing
time; and that order only he takes, that before his death has taken order
for the pardon of his sins.

Then a man is fit to dye, and never till then, when the sting of death is
taken out, so as death can do a man no hurt, when death shall not be deadly to
him. There is a speech, Apoc. 2.23. I will kill her children with death. Some
men are killed with death, they do not only dye, but they are killed with
death, Death proves deadly to them. All men dye, but all men are not killed
with death. As a godly man said that he did agrotare vitaliter, so godly men
they do mori vitaliter: When a man can dye so, then he is fit to dye.

Now whence is it that death becomes deadly? 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of death
is sin. Sin only makes death deadly. That which arms death to do hurt,
is sin. It is as in that case, Apoc. 9.10. The Locusts there had a power to
hurt men with their Scorpion-like tails, and their stings in those tails, and
their power was to hurt men five months. So death has a power to hurt men,
but that power is from men themselves; Sin it is that gives this power to
Death to do a man hurt.

In Death there be two things:

First, the hand of Death, which is the power it has over all men, it has an
hand to lay upon all; good and bad. Hos. 13.14. I will ransom them from the
power of the grave: I will redeem them from death. Psalm. 49.15. But God will
redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall receive me. All
men must come into this hand of death. Now it is sin that gives Death this
hand: But yet this hand is not deadly, it but separates soul and body, and but
for a time. At the Resurrection that hand of death shall be cut off, Hos.
13.14. O death I will be thy plague: O grave I will be thy destruction.

Secondly, the sting of death. That is the power it has of delivering men over
to the curse of God and eternal wrath: And it is this sting that makes it
deadly. It may strike a man with the hand, as it does all godly men, and yet
not be deadly, but then deadly when it strikes with a sting, and makes way for
a man's separation from God for ever. And this power sin only gives death. It
is sin unpardoned and unforgiven that gives death this power to deliver a man
over to wrath, to carry him in chains to Hell. This is to be killed with
Death. Now a man can never be fit to dye, but when he is willing; And never can
he be willing, so long as he sees Death with a sting. The only way to fit a
man for death, so as to be willing to dye, is to get out the sting. The way to
get out the sting, is to get sin pardoned; pardoned sin makes death without
a sting, and then it is not terrible. A Fly makes as great an humming as a Be,
and yet we fear not a Fly as a Be, because a Fly has no sting. We are fit
to dye when we fear not Death.

This of all other should make us very sollicitous for our pardon. Death is the
King of terrors, and it is a sad thing at the time of death to have the heart
full of fears, the conscience full of horrors, to have death look gastfully
in our faces. Get pardon, and free from all this.

Dye thou must, that is once. Now if one should come and tell us, you shall dye
in a Jail, you shall dye in a ditch, we should think it a sad hearing, it
would sound dolefully in our ears. I but there is a speech of Christ's to
those, Joh. 8.21.24. that sounds more dreadfully then the former, Ye shall dye
in your sins. It is a sad thing to dye in a Jail, to dye in a ditch, but
this is the sad thing indeed, ye shall dye in your sins. In a Jail, in a
ditch a man may dye, and yet go to Heaven, but the man that dies in his
sins, a dead Dog is better then he, It had been good for that man that he
had never been borne. To dye in ones sins, it is to drop down right into
Hell. It is dangerous to live in ones sins, because a man may dye in them,
but it is more dangerous to dye in them, because no way but Hell with such a
man. Take heed what ever ye do, and look to it, that when you come to dye,
ye do not dye in your sins. And the way not to dye in your sins, is not
to live in your sins, but to get the pardon of them while ye live. This is the
happiness of a man whose sins are pardoned, that being once pardoned as he
will not live in them, so being once pardoned he shall never dye in them. It
is a sweet thing to dye as Stephen did, Act. 6.56.
to see Heaven opened, etc. to dye with the sense of Gods love and favor. Some
when they dye they see Hell opened, and the Devils standing about their beds
ready to drag them to the place of torment: It is hideous dying so: which of
these two deaths would we now choose? If ye would not dye the last, get sin
pardoned, that ye may not dye in your sins. None can at their death, with
Stephen, see Heaven opened, that have not first gotten their sins pardoned,

It is impossible that a man should have peace and comfort in his end, that
dies without sin taken away and pardoned. When death once arrests a man, then
conscience if it be awake will bring in and lay to a man's charge all his
sins, and Satan will be busy to lay on load, and to affright a man with
Hell and damnation. If a debtor be arrested and cast into prison, it is no
sooner heard of, but every creditor comes in and brings in his several
actions, and loades him with executions. Such is the case of an unpardoned
sinner at his death. So soon as death does arrest him, Satan comes in,
conscience comes in, yea and God himself comes in, all come in with their
actions against him, and what peace or comfort can there be in such a
condition. But if sin beforehand be pardoned, all this trouble is prevented,
and a man dies in peace. It is a rule that such as are about dying persons live
by, that when a man is dying, nothing should be done that might trouble him in
his departure, that there be no shrieking or crying out, none will offer to
pull off the clothes, to pluck away his bed from under him, because they will
have him dye quietly, we will not have a dying man disturbed and disquieted.
Now how much more should every one have a care, that when he comes to dye, he
may dye quietly, that he may not hear the cryings and shriekings out of
conscience, nothing will disturb a dying man as will they. If then men would
go quietly out of the world, let them get the pardon of their sin: If that
be not pardoned, there is little hope of departing in peace.

Quest. Since therefore it is a thing so much to be looked after; how may a man
get his iniquity taken away, and pardoned.

Answ. Two things must be done to get pardon.

First, we must be taken off from First, that it is an easy thing to be had
at pleasure, a man may have it with a wet finger at any time when we will,
that it may be had at the low rate of a Lord have mercy upon me, when there is
scarce breath enough in a man's body to speak these five words. Secondly, that
it is an impossibility to get pardon of sin, and that it is a thing cannot be
had. Both these principles, though contrary to each other, make men careless
in looking after pardon, and in taking pains to get iniquity taken away. Who
will be anxious, sollicitous, industrious? who will take care and pains all
the days of his life to be getting that, he may have when he will for five
words speaking? Who again will bestow time and pains about that which he
conceives impossible to be effected. No man will set a teame of horse to
remove a feather, because when he list he can remove it with a slight puff
of his breath: No man also will set a teame of horse to remove a mountain,
because he knows it is an impossibility: So that whilst men either conceive
it so easy to be had, or so impossible to be had, it lays a bed all cares
and endeavors after pardon. Therefore on the contrary we must know these two
things. First, that it is not so easy a thing to get pardon, as men imagine;
it is an hard thing to get pardon. Secondly, that, though it be hard, yet it is
possible and may be had. It is hard, yet possible; it is possible, and yet
hard; and hardness of obtaining and possibility, are the two quickners of
cares and endeavors, to obtain any good thing.

First, then we must learn that it is

That it is not so easy a thing as men dream of, to get the pardon of sin,
appears by that speech of Peter's to Simon Magus, Act. 8.22. Repent thee of
this wickedness, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.
He does not intimate an impossibility of getting his pardon, for then why
should he prescribe him a course to seek it; if he had meant it had been
impossible, in vain had he advised him to repent; but his meaning is to show
him that his pardon would not easily be had, but that it would bean hard, a
very hard thing, though a possible thing to be obtained; As if he should say, I
will not deny but it is possible, but yet if thou will ever have it, it will
cost thee tugging and sweating for it.

Simon Magus indeed was naught, and therefore his pardon might seem the
harder to be gotten, but yet if we look upon good men, we shall find that
they have found it hard enough to obtain. See how David labors and wrestles
for it, Psalm 51.1, 2. Have mercy, etc. blot out. Wash me. Cleanse me. This
iteration, and ingemination of his suite, that he thus pulls and tugs for it,
implies how hard he found it to get pardon. Less labor and contention of
spirit would have served the turn if it would so easily have been had.

See how difficult a work Job found it, Job 7.20, 21. I have sinned, and what
shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men! I have done what I can to get
my pardon, and I am willing to do any thing in the world, what shall I do more
than I have done? And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away
mine iniquity? He had done what he could, he had confessed, prayed, he had
labored and striven with all his might, and as yet he could not get his
pardon and the assurance of it. Job then found it not so easy a matter to get
pardon, as many do imagine it to be.

Prove. 30.7, 8. Agur would beg for his pardon, and labor to get that even to
his dying day. It is a thing, a work that will take up all a man's life, it
will find him business to his dying day, to get the pardon of sin. It is a
man's whole life time, well spent too, if he speed in that business. Alas, if
it were a work so easily done as many dream, what needed Agur have spent so
much time about it? why could he not follow the world, and follow his lusts,
and take his pleasure as he saw good, and then when he was ready to dye, when
he was at his last gasp, have fetched his pardon from Heaven, with a Lord have
mercy upon me? why says he not, One thing I would have of thee, which I will
beg when I dye, when I am dying, Remove from me all my guilt? No, Agur knew
that pardon was not so easily purchased, he knew it was a great work, and an
hard work and therefore would be sure to take time enough to do it; he saw it
was work enough for his whole life; and therefore would not make it his work
at his dying day, but till his dying day. This one thing shows the difficulty
of the pardon of sin, to consider what God does on his part. On Gods part,
for our pardon is required.

First, not only mercy and grace, but great and wonderful grace and mercy,
Psalm. 51.1. Mercy, tender mercies, multitude of tender mercies, Psalm. 86.5.
Ready to forgive. I but it is out of mercy that he forgives. And what will any
mercy serve the turn? No, ready to forgive and plenteous in mercy. So that
unto forgiveness is required, not only mercy, not any ordinary and common
mercy, but plenty of mercy. The Apostle speaks of the riches of Gods grace,
and Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and in
sins. But whence was it? verse. 4. From God who is rich in mercy. Therefore to
the pardon of sin is required not only grace and mercy, but riches of Grace,
riches of Mercy. And God in the pardon of a sinner, lays forth the riches of
his mercy, the riches of his grace. When a rich man gives a poor man an alms,
he gives him somewhat of his riches, but brings not out his whole riches,
lays not out his treasures upon him. Riches is an abundance of things
precious. But now God in pardoning a sinner lays out his treasures and riches,
Ephesians. 2.7. That he might show the exceeding riches of his grace. Now some
pence, some shillings are not so hard to be had, common mercies of food and
raiment, preservation, these be but penny mercies, shilling mercies, but pardon
of sin that is riches of Grace: And it is not so easy to get riches of mercy
in pardon, as it is to get the penny mercies of food and raiment. Is it think
we so easy a thing to get multitude of mercies, plenty of mercy, riches and
treasures of grace which are to be brought forth, and laid out in the pardon of
sin?

Secondly, not only power and Psalm. 99.8. Deus fortis, and, condonans eis, not
only is he a merciful God forgiving, but he is a strong God in forgiving,
not only his infinite mercy, but his infinite power is required, and has a
concurrence in the pardon of sin. And therefore see Psalm. 86.5.8. No God like
him, no works like his; as being of God, of that infinite power as to pardon
sin. And therefore hence that same Mich. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy. So that to pardon sin is as great a work as to shake heaven and
earth, yea as to make heaven and earth. Is it an easy thing to shake heaven
and earth? It cannot be done but by an Almighty power; because it cannot be
done but by an Almighty power: Therefore it is not an easy work; and therefore
by the same reason no easy work to have sin pardoned, because an Almighty
power is required thereto.

So then, we see that it is no such easy thing to get pardon. Now these
things are not spoken to discourage and dishearten men from seeking pardon, but
to quicken and awaken men to take pains for it. Slothful and lazy endeavors
will never get things that be hard and difficult. The harder things are to be
gotten, the harder must men labor to get them. There is no discouragement in
the difficulty of obtaining pardon, because though it be hard, yet,

Secondly, it is possible, and the work will not effect impossibilities. But
though things be hard and difficult, yet so long as possible, there is room
for, and encouragement to endeavors. There is therefore a possibility of
pardon. David that so struggles for it, Psalm. 51.1, 2. He elsewhere blesses
God for it, Psalm. 103.2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, (says he) and forget
not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy
diseases. And so that iniquity for which he had begged pardon so hard, Psalm.
51. was then forgiven: So that the work was done hardly, but yet it was done.
Pardon came hardly, but yet it came. There was a time when David roared was
disquieted in his spirit, and he could have no quiet, Psalm. 32.3, 4. But yet
there came a time when David could say, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin, verse. 5. Hezekiah chatters like a Crane, or Swallow, mournes as a Dove,
his eyes fail with looking upward, Isa. 38.14. But verse. 17. Thou have cast
all my sins behind thy back. David here prays that God would take away his
iniquity. It is idle to pray for impossibilities, if it had been an impossible
thing, it had been weakly done of David to have prayed for that which could
not have been. Prayer is grounded upon promises, all things promised are things
possible. So then, though it be an hard thing, yet being possible, it being a
possible thing, yet an hard thing, Let it make us shake off both all
slothfulness out of a conceit of easiness, and all despondencie of spirit out
of a conceit of the impossibility of obtaining it.

Secondly, these false principles removed,

First, Faith in the blood of Christ. There is no pardon to be had without Heb.
9.22. Almost all things are by Law purged with blood, and without shedding of
blood is no remission. And it is not any blood that will serve the turn, not
the blood of Bulls and Goats, Heb. 10.4. It is not possible that the blood of
bulls and goats should take away sins. David then might under the Law have
soon had his iniquity taken away: nor yet the blood of men. God never
appointed men to be sacrificed as the Heathens did, and as the Idolatrous
Israelites did, Psalm. 106.37, 38. because as impossible for man's blood, as
goats blood to take away sin but it must be the blood of God. Act. 20. that
is the blood of the Lord Christ who is God. Remission of sin is to be had alone
by the blood of Christ. It is his blood that washes from sin, Apoc. 1.5. yea
it is his blood that washes white, Apoc. 7.14. God promises to give a white
stone to him that overcomes, Apoc. 2.17. to give the pardon of sin. A man
must be washed in Christ's blood, and washed white in that before he can have
that white stone given him. It is then Christ's blood that takes away iniquity.

But now this blood takes not away unless this blood be applied. It washes
white, but yet there must be washing before there can be whiteness. Therefore
the Apostle speaks not only of blood, but of the sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1, 2. It is not enough that there be the blood of Christ,
and that he has shed it, but there must be besides the shedding of it, the
sprinkling of it. Christ's blood was shed upon the Cross, and yet all men's
sins are not pardoned; and what is the reason? Because though his blood were
shed on the Cross, yet that blood is not sprinkled upon their hearts and
consciences: And pardon must be had, not only from blood shed, but from blood
sprinkled. Therefore David prays, Psalm. 51. Purge me with hysope; it was the
blood that purged, but yet it was the hysope that sprinkled the blood: It must
be sprinkled blood that must be purging blood: So it must be Christ's blood
sprinkled upon the conscience that must take away iniquity. Well, but how comes
Christ's blood to be sprinkled upon the conscience? It is true that Christ
sprinkles his blood upon a sinner, Eze. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and ye shall be clean; and Isa. 52.15. So shall he sprinkle many
Nations: but yet it is as true, that a sinner must besprinkle himself also.
We must not shuffle off all to Christ, and say, It is he that must sprinkle
us with his blood, and if he will but sprinkle me, then my sin shall be
pardoned. But if we will have our iniquity taken away, we must besprinkle our
selves. Lay these two Texts together, Apoc. 1.6. He has washed us from our
sins in his own blood. Apoc. 7.14. They have washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the Lamb. So that not only Christ washes, but they
also themselves wash with Christ's blood: And therefore it is that men are
called upon to wash themselves, Isa. 1.15. Wash you, make you clean. It is
clear therefore that some way men must have an hand in washing and sprinkling
themselves with Christ's blood, if they will have pardon.

But now, how may a man wash and besprinkle himself? That is done by faith and
by believing in Christ. Therefore Romans 3.25. through faith in his blood. Faith
is the hand of the soul, and the soul by faith puts her hand into Christ's
blood, puts her hand into the wounds of Christ, takes there of his blood, and
besprinkles her self, and washes, and wrinces off her guilt and defilement.
Faith taking Christ's blood, and besprinkling the soul with it, applying it
unto the conscience, thereby is iniquity taken away, and pardoned.

Zech. 13.1. Christ's blood is a fountain opened for sin, viz. to take away
sin and iniquity. God opens that Fountain, and there is an healing virtue in
that Bath to purge and cure the soul from guilt. But now though there be an
healing virtue in the Bath, yet a man cannot be healed unless he will go
into the Bath. When the Angel moved in the waters at the poole of Bethesda,
there was some healed, but not every one that was diseased, but he that first
stepped in. Men might have lain long enough in the porches of Bethesda, looking
on the water and motion and still have been as leprous and filthy as before,
but he that would be healed must step in, must plunge himself into the poole.
So Christ's blood that fountain is opened to take away sin, but it is not
lying by the fountain, nor looking only upon the fountain, but it is
stepping into the fountain, and wrincing, and washing in that fountain that
takes away sin. Now faith is that by which a man goes into that fountain, by
which he washes and wrinces himself in that fountain, by which he plunges
and douzes himself in the poole, and so gets off his guilt.

Hence it is that in Scripture we are said to have pardon by faith, Act. 13.38.
Through this man is preached unto you, and so offered unto you, the
forgiveness of sins. I, it is offered to us in him, but how shall we come by
it? verse. 39. And by him all that believe are justified from all things, etc.
Matthew. 9.2. he seeing their faith, viz. The palsy man's as well as the other,
said unto the sick of the palsy, Son be of good comfort thy sins are
forgiven thee. Luc. 7.48, 49, 50. And he said unto her, thy sins are
forgiven. And they that sat at meat with him, began to say within themselves,
Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the Woman, Thy faith
has saved thee, go in peace. There is then the way to get iniquity taken
away. Faith lays every believers sins upon Christ, as upon the escape goat,
and he as the escape goat bears and carries them away into a land of
separation. Thus then remission is had by blood, by the blood of Christ, by his
blood shed, by his blood sprinkled upon us, by faith in his blood, by faith
sprinkling and washing us with the blood, by faith applying his blood and merit
to our selves. So then, if we would get sin taken away, we must get faith in
Christ's blood, and strive, and wrestle hard to believe. It is a very hard thing
to believe in Christ's blood. A great many think it easy to believe in Christ,
and the truth is, that it is easy to believe as they do, they come easily by
their faith that it may well be questioned whether they come honestly by it or
not. As therefore we ever desire to have our sins pardoned, so never give
we our souls rest till we have gotten true faith indeed. So long as you live
and go on in your unbeleefe, it is impossible to have the pardon of sin. He
that believes not the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. ult. There is no
pardon so long as under wrath. So long as in unbeleefe, so long under wrath,
Tit. 1. To the unbeleeving all things are unclean, their consciences being
defiled. So long then as a man is in unbeleefe, so long he is defiled, because
sin being not pardoned the guilt thereof defiles his conscience and his
person. How many be there that have had the pardon of sin preached to them,
and offered to them in the Gospel in the Name of Christ, and yet to this day
their sins are upon them, and not taken away? And what is the reason of it?
Because they are not sprinkled with Christ's blood. And why not? Because they
want an hand of faith to take the blood of Christ which is shed, and to
sprinkle it upon their own consciences. And so for want of faith they have all
their sins lie unpardoned upon their souls.

Secondly, repentance for sin. There Joh. 6.47. He that believes on me has
life: And a justification of life, Romans 5.18. So there is a repentance unto
life, Act. 11.18. And as the Lord Christ is a Savior, so he is a Prince, Act.
5.13. And to what end is he both? A Prince and Savior for to give repentance
to Israel and forgiveness of sin. He indeed gives forgiveness of sin,
but he also gives repentance, yea and he gives repentance that he may give
pardon: And where he intends the latter, he works the former. David begs to
have his iniquity taken away. God he promises to take away another thing,
Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh. It is a sure
thing that they that will have iniquity taken away, must have the stony heart
taken away; they that will have the sting taken out of their heart, must have
the stone taken out of their heart, he gives repentance and remission of
sins, when he gives remission he takes away the sting, when he gives
repentance he takes away the stone; and he first takes away the stone before
he removes the sting. And therefore Christ joins both these together in the
commission he gives his Apostles, Luc. 24.47. And that repentance and
remission be preached in his Name. They that preach remission in Christ's Name,
and preach repentance in his Name, they must first preach repentance before
they preach remission. All to teach that they must have repentance that will
have remission, and that repentance is a special means to get the pardon of
sin.

And therefore we shall see that the promises of pardon are made to
repentance, that when God promises to give pardon of sin to any he promises
it to such as are so conditioned and so qualified with repentance. Zech. 13.1.
There is the promise of a fountain that shall be opened for sin, that is, to
take away the sin of Judah and Jerusalem. I, but that fountain is yet unto
the Jews a sealed fountain, their iniquity is not taken away, they yet lie
under their guilt: But yet there is a promise of a day when that sealed
fountain shall be broken up, and shall be opened. But what day is it? In that
day. In what day? It has reference to that which goes before in the former
chapter. See verse. 10, 11. etc. They shall look upon me whom they have
pierced, that is, they shall believe in Christ whom they crucified, And upon it
they shall mourn for him, etc. They shall repent for that sin of the
rejection of Christ, and the murder of him, In that day there shall be a great
mourning in Jerusalem, etc. And in that day shall a fountain be opened to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. In that day then that Jerusalem shall mourn, in that
day shall the fountain be opened to Jerusalem for sin. Oh that mine head,
says Jeremy, were as a fountain of tears. When their heads and hearts shall
be opened as a fountain of tears to mourn for their sins, then shall the
fountain of Christ's blood be opened for their sins. When they shall wash
themselves in the fountain of tears of repentance, in that day will God wash
them in the fountain of Christ's blood. The day of repentance is the day of
pardon, in that day a sinner repents, in that day God pardons, and takes away
iniquity.

There is no question but the Lord lives by his own rule which he gives us to
live by. The rule he gives us to live by is that Luc. 17.3, 4. If he repent
forgive him, if he trespass against thee seven times, yet if he say, I
repent, you shall forgive him. As upon a brothers repentance we must forgive,
so upon our repentance God will forgive: Repent and thy brother must forgive,
and repent, and God will forgive. Alas what are our mercies to the mercies of
God? Gods mercies are an Ocean, a boundless bottomless sea of mercies, our
mercies are but small drops out of this Sea. Now if God do bind us that have
but poor, small, and a few drops to be thus merciful, as upon repentance to
forgive them, then surely the Lord whose mercies are as the waters of the Sea,
that cover the earth, upon our repentance will give us pardon, or else our
drops should do more than his Sea, and he should bind us to do more with our
drops of water, then he will do with his whole Sea. Surely as man's power,
wisdom, justice, cannot exceed Gods, so neither can man's mercies and
compassions go beyond his. He that will have a trespasser against man pardoned
upon his repentance before man, he will pardon a trespasser against God upon
his repentance before him.

To this purpose also are those promises, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Come now, etc.
Now: When? Wash you make you clean, etc. and then come, and though your sins
be as Scarlet, etc. Scarlet is a deep dye, a dye that will hold, a dye that
will not easily be fetched out, not easily made white: And yet God promises to
turn scarlet color into snow color, scarlet into white. It is easy to turn
white into scarlet, but not so easy to turn scarlet into white. And yet God
will do it. He will wash them with the scarlet blood of Christ, and that
shall turn their scarlet into white. Other blood dies and stains what is
washed in it, but Christ's blood takes out stains, and makes white, Apoc. 7.14.
These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. I, but when will God thus
change their scarlet white, when will he take away their iniquity? Then when
they were washed and made clean, etc. Upon the condition of their repentance
he would give them the pardon of their sins. And upon the same condition is
the same promise; Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon; he will
multiply to pardon.

And we find that God upon such condition has made good his promise, Psalm.
32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee: and mine iniquity have I not hid: I
said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. That is, I did repent and humble my soul in the
confession of my sin, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: Not that
repentance fetches in pardon by way of merit, as money buys pardons at Rome,
nor yet that repentance lays hold on pardon, which is the work of faith
alone. But for two reasons pardon follows upon repentance.

First, Because the faith that looks on Christ's blood, looks at the same time
on its own sin, and every believing sinner is at the same time a repenting
sinner, Zech. 12.10. They shall see him whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn. So that faith not only sees Christ, but sees him pierced, pierced by
its own sin. They not only see Christ pierced, but Christ who they
themselves have pierced: They see him, and mourn: Faith looks upon him with a
mourning eye. The faith that looks upon Christ is a repenting faith, and never
repents and mournes more, then when it looks most on Christ. So that
repentance being so necessary attendant upon faith, therefore the promise of
remission is made to repentance.

Secondly, the want of assurance of pardon does no less disquiet the heart
then the want of pardon it self. Now suppose a man upon his faith have his
pardon, yet he cannot be assured of it till he do repent. Upon repentance
God gives the assurance, and seals it to the conscience: And therefore upon
repentance it is that pardon is promised.

So then, would we have the pardon of sin, would we have iniquity taken
away? See then what is to be done. As thou would have pardon, so fall close
to the task of repentance: So humble thy self for thy sins, mourn and be
in bitterness of spirit; judge thy self and turn from thy sins, and God
will then show mercy to thee in thy pardon. So long as thou live and lie in
thy sins, and go on in thine impenitency and hardness of heart, thou
can not have the pardon, nor the hope of pardon of thy sin.

You have many that hope their sins are pardoned, and that God has taken away
their injquity; and why so? Why they thank God they believe in Christ, and
that with all their hearts. It is well if they do so. But yet they that will
have pardon must repent as well as believe: You thank God you believe, but in
the mean time where is your repentance. Though I had all faith so as I could
remove mountains, and yet have not love, I am nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2. So in this
case, though thou had all faith so as thou could remove mountains, yet if
you want repentance, in this case thou art nothing; thou have not, nor can
have any pardon at Gods hand. Thou say thou beleevest, and therefore thou
hopest thou have thy pardon. I, but the faith that helps to pardon, is a
repenting and a mourning faith. Thy faith is no such faith. Thou say thou
beleevest; I, but yet thou art a drunkard, a swearer, an unclean, a covetous
person. Thy faith is a swearing faith, thy faith is a drunken faith, thy faith
is a whoring faith, a covetous faith. Now do thou think that a whoring,
drunken, swearing faith, is a faith that will help thee to the pardon of thy
sin? No such matter. In that day a fountain shall be opened for sin, Zech.
13.1. But in what day? They shall see him whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn and be in bitterness. Not simply in that day when they have a
faith to see him, but in that day when they shall see him, and mourn for him;
the promise is not made to any faith, but to a mourning faith, to a repenting
faith. Do but mark that passage, Act. 8.13. Then Simon himself believed
also, yea and was baptized, and continued, and kept company with Philip. Here
was a faith that Simon Magus had: But see verse. 22. Repent thee of this thy
wickedness, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee, and
verse. 23. Therefore there is a faith that men may have, and yet they may be
guilty of wickedness, there is a faith that men may have, and yet be in the
gall of bitterness, yet be in the bonds of iniquity: And such a faith will not
serve for pardon, but if men will have pardon, they must repent of their
wickedness: The faith that must help to the pardon of sin, must be a
repenting faith. And though thou talk of faith, whilst thine heart aches, yet
if thy faith be not a mourning, repenting faith, thy sins are not pardoned,
thine iniquity is not taken away, Apoc. 2.17. To him that overcomes I will give
a white stone, that is, I will give him the pardon of his sin, as a white
stone was a token of absolution and discharge to a man questioned for his life.
So long as men live in their sins, they are all black and filthy, they are
Ethiopians in their black skins. Do you think that God will give the white
stones to such as have black souls? They must be white that will have the
white stone. How shall men become white? Dan. 11.39. They shall be afflicted,
that they may be brought to repentance, and so be made white. Repentance makes
white, and when men are made white by repentance, then God gives them the white
stone, seals to them the pardon of their sins. Therefore as ever we desire
to get the pardon of sin, so be we humbled, and repent for sin.

Secondly, if pardon of sin be a thing so much to be looked after, and of
such concernement, then give thy soul no rest till thou have gotten assurance
of the pardon of sin, and till thou know that thy sin is taken away. For
God does not only pardon sin, but God assures a sinner of his pardon, not
only gives but seals a pardon, and this is properly the white stone, the
seal and token of absolution and pardon. What is a man the better for a pardon
if he know it not? A condemned Malefactor may have a pardon, but so long as he
knows it not, he is in as much fear and perplexity of spirit, as another
Malefactor that has none: There is no difference between them in regard of
quiet and peace of spirit. Therefore the Lord not only pardons sinners, but
when he pardons them, he makes it known unto them, and assures their
consciences of it, that so they may not only have pardon, but peace and joy of
spirit. Do but consider that Text, Zech. 3.3, 4. Joshua was there clothed
with filthy garments, and stood before the Angel, before Christ; and verse. 4.
Christ speaks twice, he speaks to them that stood by, and to Joshua
himself. To them that stood by, he said, Take away the filthy garments from
him. It is my will and pleasure that Joshua's sins be taken away and pardoned.
That Is happy for Joshua: But is that all? No, he speaks a second time. And
unto him he said, not only unto them that stood by, but unto him, unto Joshua
he said, Behold I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee. So that
Christ does not only pardon a sinner, but gives the pardoned sinner assurance
of it. There is not only a sentence of absolution pronounced in the Court of
Heaven before those that stand before Christ, but a sentence of absolution
pronounced in the Court of Conscience. He not only says to them that stood
before him, Ioshuaes sin is pardoned, but he says to Joshua himself, and
unto him he said, Joshua thy sin is pardoned, as to the palsy man, Be of
good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. Therefore should we not only
labor for pardon, but for the knowledge of it, for thereupon lies our peace
and comfort.

Quest. How may a man know then that his sin is pardoned.

Answ. Besides the secret testimony and witness of Gods Spirit sealing a man's
pardon to him in the very acts of holy duties and Ordinances, it may be known
by these things:

First, by the mortification of sin, power: There is a condemning power, and
there is a commanding power, by which it rules and reigns in a man's heart, so as
he is under the obedience of it. There is the guilt of sin, and there is the
dominion of sin, that by which it rules in the hearts and lives of men: of
the first ye have mention, Romans 3.19. That all the world may become guilty
before God. Of the second, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you.
The guilt is the damning power, and the dominion is the reigning power. Now
David here prays, Take away the iniquity of thy servant; that is, pardon my
sin. Now pardon of sin stands in the taking away of the damning and
condemning power, and when a man knows that the damning and condemning power
of his sin is taken away, then he may know that his sin is pardoned. But
how shall a man know that the damning power of sin is taken away? Then is the
damning power taken away when the reigning power is taken away: Then is the
condemning power taken away when the commanding power is taken away: Then is
the guilt taken away, when the dominion is taken away. Wheresoever sin is
pardoned, it is sin subdued, it is sin mortified, it is sin forsaken, and
cast off: So that if a man know his sin to be mortified, subdued, and know
himself delivered from the reigning and commanding power of it, he may be
confident in it that he is delivered from the damning power of it.

Justification is called the Justification of life, Romans 5.18. As it is a
Justification of life, so it may be called a justification of Death. A
justification of life to a man's person that is pardoned, a justification of
death to a man's sin when he is pardoned, because upon the justification of a
man's person follows necessarily the mortification of a man's lusts: And so
pardoned sin is deaded sin. Sin no sooner loses the Sword to kill, but it
loses the Scepter to rule: and therefore if the Scepter be lost, the sword is
lost. If the dominion be mortified, the guilt is certainly pardoned, for all
dominion flows from guilt, and it is the condemning power that enables sin
with a commanding power: So that if the commanding power be taken away, it is a
sure sign that the condemning power is taken away, for otherwise the
commanding power would remain in full force and strength.

See Mic. 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he
will have compassion on us: he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast
all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Mark then where God pardons
iniquity, and casts sins into the depths of the Sea, there he always
subdues iniquity: And therefore where iniquity is subdued, there iniquity is
pardoned.

Lay together those two Texts, Romans 11.26. He shall turn ungodliness from
Jacob, that is, he shall take away and pardon the sin of Jacob. But now Isa.
59.20. the words lie otherwise, Unto them that turn from transgression in
Jacob. This diversifying of the words teaches thus much: That where
ungodliness is turned from men, there men are turned from ungodliness; where
men's persons are justified, there men's lusts are mortified; where God gives men
pardon of sin, there God gives power against sin: And so also where God
has given power, there God has given pardon; and where men are turned from
transgression, there ungodliness is turned from them.

Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the
Law, and so under guilt, but ye are under grace, you have your sins pardoned
through the grace and mercy of God. See then, that so long as under the Law,
and under guilt, so long under the dominion of sin. That when under grace and
sin pardoned, then sin has no dominion. And that therefore when men are
not under the dominion, under the commanding power of sin, that that is a
sure sign they are under Grace, their sins are pardoned, and they are freed
from the condemning power of them.

Do but mark that Text, Levit. 13.22, 23. If it spread much abroad in the
skin, then unclean, it is a plague. To teach, that if sin reign, then a man
is not pardoned, he must be pronounced unclean. But in the next verse. If the
spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is a bile, and the Priest shall
pronounce him clean. Strange that a man should have a spot, and a burning
bile, and yet be pronounced clean. Why so? Because it stays in its place,
because it spreads not. To teach, that though men may have lusts and
corruptions, which are spots in the soul, yea burning biles, yet if they
spread not, reign not, they are not imputed, they are pardoned. Therefore
where the reigning, spreading, commanding power of sin is gone, there the
condemning power is also taken away.

Would thou then know whether thy sins be taken away or no? Look into
thine heart, into thy lusts, into thy life. Are thine iniquities subdued: Art
thou turned from transgression: Art thou free from the dominion of thy lusts?
Lusts thou have, but yet they are but burning biles, they be spots, but they
stay in their place, they do not spread: Are thy lusts mortified? be of good
comfort, thy person is justified. Is the commanding power taken away? be of
good comfort, the condemning power is taken away. This says unto thee, as
Christ to Joshua, I have passed by thine iniquity. But by this may many see
that their sins are not pardoned. If pardoned, why under the power of
habitual covetousness, drunkenness, uncleanenesse? How is it that thy loose
lusts have such command over thee. Thy lusts subdue thee, they are not subdued,
therefore not pardoned. The spot spreads much abroad in thy skin, it is not a
large bile, it is a plague. Thou art undone, thou art in thy guilt, thy sin
is unpardoned.

Apoc. 1.5, 6. They who are washed in Christ's blood are made Kings and Priests.
They that are pardoned, have their iniquities so subdued, that they reign over
as Kings, and sacrifice the bed of sin in mortification as Priests. But now
if sin and lust be the King, and that reign over thee, that be the King and
thou be the slave and the drudge, then art thou not washed in Christ's blood,
then are not thy sins pardoned. Take it for a sure truth, that sin
unmortified is sin unpardoned. Sin in the throne is sin unforgiven.

Secondly, By the sanctification of a Zech. 3, 4. I have caused thine iniquity
to pass from thee. There is the pardon of sin, And J will cloth thee with
change of raiment, I will furnish thee with the graces of sanctification. That
as Ezekiel. 16.9, 10, 11. Then washed I thee with water: yea, I thoroughly washed
away thy blood from thee, and anointed thee with oil. I clothed thee also
with broidered work, and shod thee with Badgers skin, and I girded thee about
with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk. I decked thee also with
ornaments, and J put bracelets upon thine hands, and a chain on thy neck. So
in this case. So that wheresoever a man finds true sanctifying grace in his
heart, it is an evidence that his sins are pardoned. The love of Christ, and
the love of God it is a grace of sanctification, and therefore it is a sign of
pardon of sin. See Luc. 7.47. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins which are
many, are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the
same loves little. Where the particle, for, is not causall, not showing the
cause of her remission, but only a sign of her remission, verse. 39. The
Pharisee finds fault with Christ for suffering a sinner to be so familiar with
him. Christ's answer is, she is no sinner. He proves it, because her sins
were forgiven her; but how proves he that? For she loved much: As if he
should say, This grace of love is an evidence that declares her sin is
pardoned. So 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor,
and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbeleife.
And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love, in
Christ Jesus. Therefore as love to God, so love to our brethren, and delight in
their communion and society is made a sign of pardon.

Zech. 3.9, 10. I will take away the iniquity of that Land, in one day. The
iniquity of that Land, that is, the guilt of the Churches iniquities, for by
the Land of Canaan was typified the Church or people of God; and this I will
do in one day, that is, by the alone and all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ
offered up once for ever. In that day, says the Lord of Hosts, shall ye call
every man his neighbor under the Vine, and under the Fig Tree. In that day,
namely, when as the people of God should by that only sacrifice so offered up
to God for sin, through the alone justification of faith, come to enjoy the
true spiritual and inward peace themselves, then should they express so much
love and charity toward others, as to call in them who were unconverted, to
come and partake of the same good with them.

By this try: Is thy love to God, and to Christ, and to his Saints? A good
sign. But on the contray, the unholinesse of men's hearts and lives, argues how
it is with them. To have sin pardoned, is to be under grace, Romans 6.14. For
ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. Can a man be under Grace, and have
no grace? Can a man be under Grace, and graceless? Certainly, graceless
persons are not under Grace, have not their sins pardoned. Such have never
yet aright sought for, much less obtained the taking away of their iniquity.

FINIS.
THE RIGHT EATING AND DIGESTING OF THE WORD.

By IER. DYKE Minister of Epping in Essex.

HEB. 4.2. The Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in
them that heard it. ROMANS 6.17. But ye have obeyed from the heart that form of
Doctrine, which was delivered you. August. in Psalm. 141. Enarrat. Unde
admoneamus charitatem vestram, ut ea quae audiendo tanquam ventre memoria
conditis rursus revolvendo and cogitando quodammodo ruminetis. LONDON: Printed
by Tho. Pain for L. Fawn and S. Gellibrand at the brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1640.

THE RIGHT EATING AND DIGESTING OF THE WORD.
JER. 15.16. Thy words were found by me, and I did eat them, etc.
THE Prophet complains verse. 10. of the course entertainment that he had
amongst the people; that he was a man of contention to the whole earth, he
was counted a contentious fellow, and so hated and cursed as a man contentious.
That has always been the lot of Gods servants, and Saints, to have that
imputation laid upon them. A man may strive in his Ministry to bring men to
repentance, Genesis 6. My Spirit shall strive no longer with man. Therefore Gods
Spirit strives in the Ministry of his servants whilst he sets them on to
make them strive to bring men to God. And men may strive, and contend earnestly
for the faith once given to the Saints, Jude 4. And yet this makes not men, men
of contention in an ill sense. Indeed the world counts such contentious men:
But who they be that truly deserve that censure we see, Romans 2.8. But unto
them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath. Therefore such as do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, they are the contentious persons. Well, but
yet the Prophet must go for a contentious man, and so a man odious. What Is the
matter? It may be he was an usurious oppressor, and therefore contentious and
cursed. He purges himself from that, verse. 10. I have neither lent on usury,
nor have men lent to me on usury. Therefore it must be some what else. He
therefore lays down the true cause why he was so judged, and so hated: And
that in these words, verse. 15. latter end, Know that for thy sake I have
suffered rebuke. What ever is pretended, yet Lord this is the true cause. It is
for thy sake alone that I am thus odious. And that he opens more particularly,
verse. 16. for thy sake it is, for thy words were found by me, and I did eat
them. I have been faithful when I found what thy word and will was, to
disperse and practice it, and hence is all this ado, therefore the clamours
and curses are against me. Because I eat thy Word, therefore it is that they
are ready to eat up me, and to devour me. That is the dependence of these
words. And we may take this by the way from it. That the true ground of all
clamours, curses, reproaches against Gods servants, is nothing else but this,
tbeir conscientious and close walking with God, and walking by the rule of his
Word. Psalm. 69.7, 8, 9. For thy sake I have borne reproach: shame has covered
my face. I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alient unto my mothers
children. For the zeal of thine house has eaten me up: and the reproathes of
them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me. Because the word is eaten by
them, or they eaten up with zeal for God and his Word, therefore is the world
ready to eat them.

For the words themselves, and their sense. Thy words were found by me, that
is, thou did reveal and make known thy Word and will to me. And I did eat
them. It is a metaphor by which he expresses with what readiness and
forwardness he received the Word either to disperse it to others, or for his
own practice and obedience, viz. with such readiness and affection, as an
hungry man would do his meat, I was as willing to disperse, and obey thy
Word, as if thou had commanded me to have eaten meat when hungry.

And so the point is.

That the Word of God found by us, made known to us, must be eaten of us. It
is not enough to hear the Word, to read the Word, but we must eat the Word.
That which Ezekiel and John did in a special case peculiar to them, that must
we all do; Eze. 3.1, 2, 3. Moreover, he said unto me, Son of man, eat that
thou find: eat this roll, and go, speak unto the house of Israel. So I
opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll. And he said unto me,
Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that
I give thee. Then did I eat it, and it was in my mouth, as honey for
sweetness. So John, Apoc. 10.9. And J went unto the Angel, and said unto him,
Give me the little Book. And he said unto me, Take it and eat it up, and
it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth as sweet as honey.
So we, when we find the Word must eat it. There must be a manducation, a
comestion of the Word.

As the body has its food, so the soul also. Now for the body, it is not
enough to see food, and look upon it, nor to feel food, and to handle it, nor
to smell food, but if the body will be nourished and maintained in life, it
must eat food, and take it in; so likewise the soul having its food, and the
Word being its food, it is not enough to hear it, and receive it in at the
ear, but it must also eat it, and take it in at the mouth.

The Word is milk, 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Cor. 3.2. I have fed you with milk: Therefore
not enough for men to have milk amongst them, but they must be fed with it,
and they must feed upon it. And how can men feed unless they eat?

The Word is bread, Amos 8.11. A famine not of bread, but of the Word, that is,
a famine not of bodily, but of spiritual bread: Therefore it is sprituall
bread. And what more usual then this Scripture phrase of eating bread. Bread
is appointed, and made for that use and end to be eaten. Bread may be in the
house, may be on the table, may be in a man's hand, and yet if a man eat it
not, he is never the fatter, nor fuller, nothing can satisfy a man's hunger,
or keep life up, but the eating of bread.

The Word is honey, Psalm. 119.103. And of this honey may it be said as Prove.
25.16. Have thou found Honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee: or as Prove.
24.13, 14. My son, eat thou honey because it is good, and the honey comb, which
is sweet to thy taste. So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul:
when thou have found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation
shall not be cut off. As we see Samson, Judge. 14.8, 9. When he found honey in
the carkeyse of the Lion, he took thereof in his hands, and he went on eating.
So when we find this honey, it is not only to be looked on, gazed on, wondered
at, talked of, but to be eaten.

Ier. 3.15. That shall feed you. Therefore the Word is to be fed upon, and to
be eaten, else how fed? See Isa. 55.1, 2. Buy and eat: what is that? verse. 2.
hearken and eat. Therefore the word must be so hearkened unto as must be eaten.
When God gives the Ministry of the Word he makes that good. Hos. 11.4. I laid
meat unto them. And when he lays meat to us, he looks we should eat that
meat. And that which wisdom speaks, Prove. 9.5. Come and eat of my bread,
may without any great forcing be applied unto this particular, for that bread
there spoken of is offered in the Ministry of the Word.

Now for the better conceiving of this duty, consider such particulars as this
metaphor implies. Consider wherein this eating stands. It stands in these
things.

First, in an appetite unto, and a desire after the word. Unto eating is
required an appetite and a stomach, it is men's appetites and hunger that sets
them on eating: A man cares not for eating unless his appetite and stomach be
up, unless he be hungry. So this eating of the word implies an appetite and a
stomach to it. When God sets this food before us, we should have our
spiritual appetite, and come to it with sharp set stomachs, 1 Pet. 2.2. As
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word. And such an appetite had
Job to the Word, Job 23.12. I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my
necessary food. He had it in such esteem that he desired it more, and had a
stronger appetite to it then to his necessary food, not only then he had to
his dainties and superfluities, but more then to his necessary substantial
food, without which he could not well live and subsist. Such was David's
appetite, Psalm. 119.20. Mine heart breaks for the longing, etc. and that not
at some fits, but at all times. This good cheer never came amiss to him, his
stomach was ever good, he could at any time eat, and fall heartily to.

And thus did they eat the Word, Mar. 3.20. when they had such an earnest
appetite to eat the Word that Christ and his Disciples had not leisure so much
as to eat bread.

Secondly, In a taste and relishing of the Word. Men eat to be nourished, now
those things that have no taste in them they nourish not, chafe, straw,
sticks have no taste in them, and therefore we eat them not, because they
will not nourish us. Is there any taste in the white of an egg? Job 6.6. And
therefore having no savor or taste in it, of it self yields little
nourishment. Yea though a man do eat savoury meat, yet if his taste were
gone, would it do him good? In Philosophy some senses are of commodity, as
hearing, seeing, smelling, a man may be without these, but not so commodiously,
some are senses of necessity, as tasting and feeling, without these a man
cannot live at all. Indeed in Divinity all senses are senses of necessity.
Seeing the Word a sense of necessity, Jer. 2.31. O generation see the Word of
the Lord. Hearing a sense of necessity, Romans 10. Faith comes by hearing. And
specially tasting, 1 Pet 2.2, 3. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby, if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious. Heb. 6. If they have tasted the good w^rd of God. And this tasting is
comprehended under eating, for then does a man taste his meat when he eats
it. There is a question, Job 12.11. Does not the ear try words? and the mouth
taste his meat? And an answer to it, Job 34.3. The ear tries words, as the
mouth tastes meat. Look as in eating the mouth tastes meat, so in hearing
the word, and in eating of it, the soul takes the sweetness of it. Thus David
eats the word, Psalm. 119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste, sweeter
then honey to my mouth. David did eat the word, and in eating tasted the
sweetness of it.

Thirdly, In a delight and pleasure in it. There is a natural and lawful
delight and pleasure that a man takes in eating, which arises from the taste of
his meats. The sweetness and goodness of meat tasted in the eating of it,
does give a man a great deal of contentment and cheering, Nehem. 9.25. They
did eat, and delighted themselves in thy great goodness, viz. that goodness
of Gods which they tasted in the goodness of the creature: That goodness of
the creature which caused a gladness in their hearts, Act. 17. He fills our
hearts with food and gladness. So when we are commanded to eat the word, it
is required that we hear, receive, and obey it with a delight and gladness
of heart. So did the Prophet eat it here, J did eat them, and thy Word was
unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart. No man takes more joy and delight
in eating his food, then I do in the hearing and doing thy Word.

Fourthly, in chewing the Word by The beasts that did not chew the cud were not
clean. In the eating of the Word, this chewing of it by meditation is a
special thing required. There is a threefold use of chewing our meat in
eating of it.

First, the grinding and chewing of David's blessed man, Psalm. 1, 2. Whose
delight is in the Law of the Lord, etc.

Secondly, grinding and chewing the meat fits it for digestion and concoction:
Chewing facilitates concoction. Chewed meat is sooner and easilier digested
then meat swallowed whole. Meat swallowed whole is unwholesome, it makes the
breath unsavory, it makes concoction the harder and the slower. And so
meditation prepares the word for spiritual digestion. The word chewed when it
is eaten, is the easier brought into practice.

Thirdly, chewing meat prevents dangers, there may be pinnes, stones, yea
poison in a man's meat, and when a man swallows his meat whole, all these may
go down undiscerned, but when a man chewes his meat, he presently finds
such offensive things, and puts them out, and so saves the choking and
poisoning. Nay, though neither pinnes nor poison in a man's meat, yet the
swallowing of his meat whole, may choke him, and make him miscarry. When men
after hearing do chew the cud by meditation, they come to discern, and find
out many things, which if they were let down, might choke and poison the
soul.

This then is a maine duty in the eating of the word to chew it. The word is
not rightly and kindly eaten when it is not chewed: Therefore is not the
sweetness of the Word tasted, therefore is not the Word so kindly digested,
therefore are many choked and poisoned, because it is swallowed whole without
chewing. One of the Symptoms, or in commoda senectutis, Ecclcs. 12.3.16. The
grinders cease because they are few, was the margent rules, the grinders fail
because they grind little. And so in this case, a great deal of miscarriage
is in this kind, because men altogether use their ears, and not their teeth,
the grinders fail, and they grind little, their is much hearing, but there is
little meditation.

Fifthly, In swallowing and letting meat into his mouth, and chew it, yet if
he swallow it not down, but put it forth again, he cannot be said to eat.
Neither chewing without swallowing, nor swallowing without chewing is properly
eating, but in eating there must be both chewing and swallowing. So in the
eating of the word, it must not only be heard, tasted, chewed, but it must be
let down and swallowed, Luc. 9.44. Let these sayings sink down into your
ears, and so down into your hearts. So must the Word be eaten, as Ezekiel was
to eat the roll, Ezekiel. 3.1. Son of man eat that thou find, eat this
roll. I, but how must he eat it? would it serve to take it into his mouth?
verse. 2. So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat the roll. Well, but
would the opening of his mouth, and eating it with his mouth serve the turn?
No, verse. 3. Son of man cause thy belly to eat, fill thy bowels with this
roll that I give thee. So in the eating of the Word delivered to us, it is not
enough to take it into our mouths, but we must swallow it down, cause our
belly to eat it, and not only fill our ears, our heads, and memories, but we
must fill our bellies, and our bowels with it. This is done when we not only
hear and meditate upon it, but when it is so digested, and concocted by us,
that we by obedience and conformity to it even become one with it; As when
meat is eaten and digested, it becomes one with the substance of the body.
This point of eating is that, Romans 6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart that
form of doctrine whereunto ye were delivered. That look as meat eaten
becomes one with the body, and takes the same form with it; so then is the
Word eaten when we yield such obedience to it, as that we are delivered into
the form of the Word. And this is indeed the maine and principal thing in
this eating: And till this be done the Word is not eaten. Many have a conceit
that they eat the Word, because they hear, take some delight in it, etc. but
in the mean while they yield not obedience to it, bring it not into practice,
it is in their ears, it is in their mouths, it is in their note Books, but
it is not in their bellies, and bowels. It is just with them as in that case
with those. Jsa. 29.8. As an hungry man dreams, and behold he eats as in his
dream, he dreams he eats, but he awakes, and his soul is empty. And so
many, they dream they eat, because they hear, etc. but yet their soul is
empty, and their belly is empty, because they never caused their belly to eat,
they never filled their bowels, the Word never yet sanke into their hearts to
work them to obedience to it.

And thus in these things stands this duty of eating, and this is the duty that
we are to do. And that we may be stirred up to it, consider these motives:

First, eating the Word, it is both the means and the sign of spiritiuall
life. It is the means of life. Eating maintains life, let a man give up
eating, and he must give up living; no eating, no life. Genesis 47.15. Give us
bread, for why should we dye in thy presence? And if they had bread, yet if
they did not eat it, if they had kept it in their cupboords, laid it by, and
looked on it, they had dyed nevertheless. It is not the having but the eating
of bread that makes men live, Nehem. 5.2. We took up corn, that we may eat
and live. Men may have meat, and may have bread, and yet if they eat it not
they may dye. And when once men leave eating, it is a sign they are near
dying, Psalm. 107.18. Their soul abhors all manner of meat: and they draw
near to the gates of death. It is a sign men are in a dying condition when
once they are past eating, because eating is the means of preservation of
life. So it is here, eating the Word is the means of spiritual life. The Word
is called the Word of life. It is called our life, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. and so
eating the Word is the eating of that which is life, and eating of life the
means of life. There was an eating by which death entered into the world, Genesis
2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof surely shall thou dye. But this
eating is that by which life comes to us, and in the day that we ear the Word
living we do live, we have hereby the life of grace, and shall be assured of
the life of glory. They that eat of this bread shall live for ever, and not
dye at all: That as Joh 6.48, 49, 50. I am that bread of life. Your Fathers did
eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which comes
down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye: So in this case.
And look as Christ again speaks of eating himself, Joh. 6.53, 54. Then
Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats
my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, and I will raise him up
at the last day. So here also, for Christ is eaten by eating the Word, Isa.
55.1. Buy and eat, verse. 3. Hear and you shall live. Blessed are they that
eat bread in the Kingdom of God. No eating bread in Gods Kingdom, unless
fitst we eat the Word here. And so blessed are they that eat the Word, for
they shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God; They shall eat, and live for
ever. And as it is a means, so a spiritual life. When men do eat the Word,
it is a sign they are alive, and and in spiritual health. A dead man cannot
eat, only living men eat, and when men eat and fall hard to their meat, it
is a sign that they are alive, and their health good. When men can eat, and
fall hard to the Word, it is a sign that they are in life and health.
Therefore as ye would use the means, as have a sign of spiritual life, so
eat the Word.

Secondly, That which moved Eve to Genesis 3.6. And when the Woman saw that the
tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be
desired, to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and
gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat. So here, the word is
good, good for food, it is that which is to be desired to make one wise,
therefore let us take thereof, and eat heartily of it. The goodness of the
Word is that which should move to eat. Good meat tempts men to eat, and
though men have no great stomach, yet if they hear meat commended for good
meat, they will eat of it, Isa. 55.2. Hearken, and eat that which is good.
And it is Salomons argument, Prove. 4.1, 2. Hear ye children the instruction
of a father: and attend to know understanding. For I give good doctrine. Yea
and he presses this duty of eating upon this ground, Prove. 24.13, 14. My
son, eat thou honey because it is good, and the honey comb, which is sweet to
thy taste. So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou have
found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut
off. The sum is, As when men find honey, they do not forbear, but will
fall to and eat, because they know it is so sweet and good: So when thou
find the Word, fall to and eat that also, for that is good, and that will
be as good and sweet to thy soul when thou ea^est it.

Thirdly, Men stand much upon the Word not first received, believed, and
obeyed, a man has no right to, and shall have no benefit by eating the
Sacrament, for he that eats not the word cannot eat Christ in the Sacrament;
and what is a man the better for eating the Sacrament, if he eat not Christ?
They did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and yet with many of them God
was not well pleased. And why so? because though they did eat Manna a
Sacramental bread, yet they did not eat the Word, and yield obedience from
the heart to that, 1 Cor. 10.3, 5.

Fourthly, that which David did, we ought all to do, Psalm. 119.11. I have hid
thy Word in mine heart. It is to be hid and kept safe. There is no such way to
hide it, and lay it up safe indeed, as to eat it. Bodily bread, as Bernard
says, when it is in the cupboord, it may be taken away by thieves, eaten of
mice, may mould, and be wasted, but when it is eaten it is safe from all such
danger: So the Word is never so safely hid as when once it is eaten. After the
miracles of the loaves, our Savior bids gather up the fragments, and see,
says he, that nothing be lost. The only way to see that nothing of this bread
be lost, is to eat it. It is never lost that is eaten.

First, for Ministers.

First, if people must eat the Lam. 4.4. The young children ask bread, and no
man breaks it unto them. In such a case they might ask bread, but they could
not eat bread; where bread was not given, bread could not be eaten. Many would
eat bread if they had it. And that people have it not, and eat it not, it is
the fault of such Ministers as give it not, and break it not. Many keep their
people at such short commons, that they have not to eat, so far from having
their bellies full, that they get not so much as a mouthfull.

Secondly, if people must eat, then so they must give them such as they may
eat. A man may give bread and meat to be eaten, and yet it may be such stuff
as cannot be eaten, Luc. 11.11, 12. If a son shall ask bread of any of you
that is a father, will he give him a stone? That were the way to choke him,
and not to feed him: Or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a
Serpent? That were the way to poison him, and not to cherish him. Men cannot
eat stones, men's teeth are not able to chew and grind them, nor their
stomachs able to digest them. A man may preach, and yet preach so as people
can find nothing in it that they may eat. School points, and quiddities that
transcends vulgar capacities are stony food, not stones turned into bread, as
Satan would have Christ have done, but rather bread turned into stones. Jer.
3.15. That shall feed you with understanding. Therefort that which must be
eaten must be understood. Men dare not eat Serpents and Scorpions, who can
blame them if they fear to be poisoned. See how Christ was used, Psalm. 69.21.
They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink. And therefore when it was tendered unto him, Mar. 15.23. They gave it
him, but he received it not. And what wonder if people receive not, and eat
not meat mingled with gall, when they are fed with bitter invectives. Hold
fast the form of sound, or wholesome words. Now many do set before people such
rotten and unwholesome food, such trash and unsavory food, and such poisonous
stuff, that it is with people as it was with them, 2 King. 4.40. As they were
eating of the pottage, they cried out, O man of God, Death is in the pot. And
they could not eat thereof. So it is here, there is coloquintida and wild
goards in the pot, many times a whole lap full, and when there is death in the
pot, what wonder that people cannot eat thereof.

Or if men preach truth, yet it is done with such unbeseeming levity and
vanity, after such a stage fashion, that there is no nourishing substance in
it, Jer. 3.15. shall feed you with knowledge, with that which shall edify and
build you up in knowledge, not with husks as the prodigal was fed.

Or if truth propounded, yet it is meat so negligently dressed, so sluttishly
cooked, that the very sight of it takes away men's stomachs, that as Hophni and
Phineas in another case made the people abhoorre and loath the Lords offerings;
so many so mar the meat in the dressing, that men can have no stomach to
eat it. So that it may be said of many Sermons, as the Prophet speaks of
those Figs, Jer. 24.2. And the other basket had very naughty Figs which
could not be eaten they were so bad. And as your proverb is, God sends meat,
and the Devil sends Cooks. So it may be more truly said in this case, God
sends meat and gives his Word, but there be many Cooks not of his sending,
that make such rotten meat, such slovenly meat, such trashy meat, such bitter
meat, such unsavory loathsome meat, that it cannot be eaten for badnesse.
Therefore since people must eat, let us be careful to give them to eat, and
to give them that they may eat, sound and savoury food, and well and
handsomely dressed.

Secondly, For people.

And so the use is diverse.

First, to condemn people for the Mal. 1.12. Ye say, as you, the Table of the
Lord is polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible. God he
deals bountifully with men; it may be said here, as Psalm. 68.11. The Lord gave
the Word, great was the company of them that published it. We have had
preaching, and Preachers, and this spiritual food, Gods plenty, wisdom cries
out to men, as Prove. 9.5. Come eat of my bread. And Christ calls upon men, as
Cant. 5.1. Eat O friends, and fall to, and take your filles. And yet men sit
and look on, and regard neither this food, nor these invitations, but deal
with the Lord as Solomon wishes men to deal with a churl, Prove. 23.6, 7. Eat
not the bread of him that has an evil eye, neither desire his dainty meats,
eat and drink says he, but his heart is not with thee. Just so deal men
with the Lord, when he calls upon them to eat the Word, as if God had an evil
eye, as if his heart were not with them: whereas, as the Word and food is good,
so also is his eye good, and his heart is with us, and it would be meat and
drink to him to see us fall to, and eat heartily. Such carriage at our
Neighbors Tables would be construed a discurtesie, and men would force
themselves to eat against their stomachs, rather then to give their
discontent at his Table. And yet we stand not upon giving the Lord such gross
disgusts, as not to eat when he lays and sets meat before us. There is much
preaching, and yet but little eating. Many instead of eating the Word, could
find in their hearts to eat the Minister.

And what think we is the reason that men eat the word no more then they do?

It is from these three causes.

First, from fullness. The full soul 27.7. When a man's belly is full, he has
not only no mind to eat, but he loathes to eat, and that not only course
and common food, but the daintiest and sweetest food, he treads under foot
the honey comb. The Word is honey, and this honey is to be eaten when it is
found, Prove. 24.13. And yet when men find it, they eat it not, but loath it,
and tread upon it. And the reason is because they are already full. Such a
fullness as that, Romans 1.29. Being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity, wh^sperers. Their hearts are crammed full of their
lusts: And their hearts being already filled with carnal and worldly lusts,
they loath these honey combs. Some feed so full upon that honey, Pro. 5.3. The
honey which drops from the lips of a strange woman, that they tread this honey
comb under foot. There be a great many that eat as the Serpent does, Genesis
3.14. Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. All worldly hearts are of
the Serpents diet, they eat dust, and so fill themselves with the dust of the
earth, that they loath to eat the Word. Because men's hearts are stuffed with
this baggage and base food, therefore will not men eat this Angels food, this
bread of Heaven.

Secondly, from lingering and hankring after some other food. Such a disposition
takes off the stomach from wholesome food. The Israelites had Angels food, the
bread of Heaven, and yet at last this food would not down with them, nay they
loathed their Manna: And a man will not eat what he loathes. But what was the
cause that they cared not to eat manna? See Numb. 11.4. They fell a lusting
(or they lusted a lust) and said, who shall give us flesh to eat? and verse. 5.
fish to eat, and they long after the garlic and onyons of Egypt; and
therefore now this Manna will not down with them. So men, when once they begin
to lust a lust after novelties in doctrine, the wholesome savoury truth of God
they begin to loath, they are weary of it, quite cloyed with it, then no wonder
it is not eaten. When once men's lips hang after Egyptian food, popish and
corrupt doctrine, then truth will not down by any means, Isa. 44.20. He
feeds on ashes. That is but strange food, a mad diet for a man to live and
feed on ashes. But what makes him feed so fondly? A deceived heart has turned
him aside. So with many. deceived heart has turned them aside, and then they
fall to eating of ashes, and therefore, like those that have the green
sickness, their minds hang after ashes, and such trash, and so no mind to the
wholesome food of sound Doctrine. See the case clear, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. They will
not endure it, therefore not eat it, not endure it, as a man cannot endure the
meat he loathes. But why not endure it? They have itching ears, that itch
after novelties, and therefore shall turn away their ears, etc.

Thirdly, from sickness, or if ye will from deadness. Sick men forsake
their meat, and refuse their meat. Men are spiritually sick, and have some
diseases upon them that make them eat nothing at all, or else they do but
piddle, and trifle, as good never a whit, as never the better. Nay, men are
dead, void of the life of God, and that is a maine reason that they eat not.
Dead men cannot eat.

Secondly, since it is a duty that must be done, therefore let people examine
themselves whether they do it or not, whether the Word be eaten by them or not.

Quest. How may one know whether he eats the Word or not?

Answ. By these things:

First, By spiritual cheerfulness, Act. 14.17. He fills our heart with food
and gladness. A man when he has fasted, and long forborne his meat, his
spirits waste and decay; but when he eats, that repaires his spirits, and
renewes them, and so makes a man come to himself, and makes him fresh and
lively. See Jonathans case, 1 Samuel 14.27, 29, 30. He was faint and his spirits
spent so, that his eyes began to grow dim through faintness and want of
spirit, and he does but eat a little honey, and his spirits are refresht, and
repaired, that his eyes were enlightened. And if but a taste of the honey did so
much, How much more says Jonathan, if the people had eaten freely, had they
been cheered, and repaired. We find a man, 1 Samuel 30.12. that had eaten
nothing in three days and three nights, by reason of which his spirits were
quite gone, and he was even a dead man: But see verse. 11. 12. And when he had
eaten, his spirit came again unto him. It was in a manner gone from him
before, but now he had eaten he was so refresht and cheered, that he was
alive again, his spirit came again.

So it is in this eating, it fills the soul with cheerfulness and
liveliness. A man that eats the Word indeed finds his heart finely cheered,
filled with spirits, Thy words were found by me, and I did eat them. How did
that appear? And it was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: Oh how
mine heart was cheered within me, oh how my spirit was refresht! Prove. 24. My
son, if thou find honey, as Jonathan did, eat it for it is good. So eat
this honey for it is good. Why what good will follow upon it? If thou be faint,
lumpish, spirits down, dim sighted, it will enlighten thine eyes, it will so
cheer thy spirits, that it will recover thy deadness, and dimnesse, it will
enlighten and enliven thee. When that man had eaten, his spirit came again: If
before thou were dead, and heavy, and lumpish unto good duties, yet if thou do
eat the Word, one good meal of it will recover thee out of that deadness,
and make thee lively and cheerful in duties of worship and obedience. By this
try thy self. If thus it be with thee, thou have eaten the Word, but the
little quickening, refreshing, the little enspiriting of men after the Word
heard, argues how little men do eat it.

Secondly, by spiritual satisfaction. Nehem. 9.25. They did eat and they were
filled. And so in the miracle of the loaves, it is said, they did all eat and
were filled, their hunger was allayed and satisfied. So it is here: The heart
of man is full of cravings, and hungrings after profits, pleasures, vanities,
lusts, and though a man eat of these never so much, these satisfy not the
hungry cravings of the heart, nay the more they are fed upon, still the heart
craves them more: But now when a man eats the Word, all these cravings of the
heart cease, and are satisfied. A man upon eating the Word finds such
satisfaction in it, and his heart so fitted, that it is at rest from those
troublesome and inordinate cravings, these unnatural dogged appetites are
quenched. The soul that eats the Word finds it self so abundantly
satisfied, that it lingers not after the profits and pleasures of the world.
He that eats this Manna lingers not after the fleshpots, the onyons and
garlic of Egypt. Isa. 55.2. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? hearken diligently
unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self
in fatness: though these things then satisfy not, yet the Word it satisfies,
and fills, and feeds, and fattens.

By this may men try themselves, if they have so received the Word, as that
their hearts are weaned from their carnal and worldly lusts, those insatiable
cravings are at an end, such satisfaction is a sign that a man has eaten: But
the contrary shows how few have eaten. Many would seem to eat, and profess
they have eaten, but yet their hunger after the world, their profits and
pleasures, are as keen and as eager as ever. Their hearts do restlesly crave
these things. Thine heart is not filled, therefore thou have not eaten.

Thirdly, by spiritual strength, King. 19.8. And he arose and did eat and
drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights,
unto Horeb the mount of God. Upon eating follows fatness, Nehem. 9.25. They
did eat, and they were fat. Upon eating follows goodness of complexion, Dan.
1.13. upon the eating of this pulse, their countenances were fair and fat. And
thus is it upon eating the Word, men have strength in their souls to walk in
the ways of God, men grow fat, grow up as calves of the stall, full of good,
Romans 15.14. they are fat, and flourishing, Psalm. 92.14. They have fair and
good complexions, their wisdom and other graces cause their faces to shine,
their lives and carriages are fair and lovely. And by this may men know
whether they have eaten the Word or not. If it be thus with them, that they
have strength against their lusts, if they have strength to walk in obedience,
etc. a sign they have eaten the Word. But this shows that few have eaten and
do eat the Word.

Many say they do, but how is it they be so weak and so feeble, that they
cannot walk and work? How is it that they be so lean, that there is such an
emptiness of grace and goodness? 2 Samuel 13.4. Why art thou, being the Kings
son lean, or thin from day to day? so how is it that thou eating the Kings
diet, the bread of heaven, art thus thin and lean? How is it that thy life,
thy complexion mends not, but thy complexion and conversation is so ill? It
fares with many as in that case, Genesis 41.18.21. When the seven lean kine and
ill-favored had eaten up the fat, It could not be known that they had eaten
them, they were still as hadgeld hildings and carrion-like scroyles as before.
So here, men say they have eaten, but look on their lives, and it cannot be
known, as arrant scroyles as ever, as very swearers, drunkards, as ever, as
proud, covetous, loose as ever. A clear sign that such do not eat the Word.

Fourthly, they that eat the word Eve did when she did eat the forbidden
fruit, Genesis 3.6. Who gave also to her husband, and he did eat; so ever here.
There is no such good fellowship as in this eating, where there is no man that
would eat alone, As Job 31.17. where that holy man professes, That he had
not eaten his morsel himself alone, and the fatherless had not eaten
thereof: so here, none that eats the Word of God eats his morsel himself
alone, and gives not the fatherless and needy soul to eat thereof: But as
in Samsons Riddle Out of the eater came meat: so here out of the eater of the
Word comes meat to feed others, judge by this.

Thirdly, if the Word must be eaten, then it teaches us to be frequent in
hearing, and diligent in taking all opportunities. Some men can content
themselves, if need be, with one Sermon in a year, and it is enough a
conscience if well followed: One meal in a year were short commons. A man
desires to eat every day twice, some thrice a day. There is a necessity of
eating frequently: so here, take all opportunities of hearing and reading the
Word, some morsel every day, and miss not public meals. See 1 King. 19.5.
and 7. where the Prophet Eliah was by the Angel bidden to eat, and he did so;
yea though he had eaten but just before, yet he goes to it again the second
time, being bidden a second time. If thou have eaten in the morning, yet, if
God call to it a second time, eat again in the afternoon. If thou have eaten
on the Sabbath, yet if God give opportunity and liberty, eat also on the week
day. The Word is to be eaten, and eating must be frequent and often.

FINIS.
THE PVRCHASE AND POSSESSION OF THE TRVTH.

By IER. DYKE Minister of Epping in Essex.

MATTHEW. 13.45, 46. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man, seeking
goodly pearls:

Who when he had found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that
he had, and bought it.

August. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 5. Laudas mercatorem qui vendit plumbum and
acquirit aurum: and non laudas mercatorem qui erogat pecuniam, and acquirit
justitiam? LONDON: Printed by Tho. Pain for L. Fawn and S. Gellibrand at the
brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

THE PVRCHASE AND POSSESSION OF THE TRVTH.
PROVE. 23.23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not, etc.
FRom the 19. to the 29. verse of this chapter the Prophet endeavors to fence
men from the danger of two common and foul sins, drunkenness and whoredom:
Against drunkenness, verse. 19, 20, 21. Against whoredom, in the residue. In
which passage this one thing may be observed. Dehorting from drunkenness he
prefaces thereto only in one verse, verse. 19. but dehorting from whoredom he
prefaces to that counsel in five verses, verse. 22. to 26. It is the more
heinous evil of the time, and of more mischievous consequence. It is a sin
to which our nature is more prone and inclinable; and therefore to keep men
off from it, he makes the hedge the stronger.

In this Preface he gives such counsels, as being listened to, may prove
strong preservatives against the poison of that pestilence. One is that, verse.
22. Respect and obedience to parents holy counsels. Those hearkened to would be
special means to save men out of those snares. Another in this verse, which
is an exhortation to the study and acquisition of godliness, grace, and
Religion, with which the heart being effectually seasoned, it would in special
manner save a man from that sin. And so it suites with that, Prove. 2.10, 11,
12, 16, 17. When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant
unto thy soul; Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee:
To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks
froward things. To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger
which flattereth with her words: Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and
forgets the covenant of her God. Wisdom and truth, godliness and grace
will preserve both from the evil man, and the evil woman. Thus this verse
stands in coherence with the others.

Take the words now in themselves considered, and they are an exhortation to
stir up men to bestirre themselves with all pains and diligence, to get
knowledge, godliness, grace, etc. for that is comprehended under truth,
wisdom, etc. As if he had said, Let it be your maine care and labor, to get
the knowledge of the truth, to get grace and Religion into your hearts. And
this counsel is laid down under a metaphor, Buy the truth, by which he
implies with what desire and affection, and cost, it should be sought, that men
should so look after it, and seek to compass it, as men use to do after
commodities of use and worth. Those men will buy, for those men will trade, and
lay out their money that they may get the possession of them. So here he would
have them so affected to the truth, that they should trade for it, be at pains
and cost for the compassing and getting of it. And when they have once gotten
and purchased this commodity, they should by no means part with it again, but
hold and keep it fast, sell it not. When once men have made the bargain, and
gotten this good pennyworth, by no means part with it again, part with it
upon no terms what price soever is offered for it.

So then here be two things in these words: 1. A precept, Buy the truth. 2. A
prohibition, Sell it not.


First to to begin with the precept, Buy the truth, also wisdom, instruction,
and understanding, or as some translate, Buy the truth, of wisdom, etc. Buy
the truth. I, but what truth, or what do you mean by truth? That truth which
is of wisdom, of instruction, of understanding, the truth that is in piety,
godliness, religion, Tit. 1.1. and the acknowledging of the truth which is
after godliness.

That truth, wisdom, understanding, godliness, grace and religion are not to
be had for nothing.

It is the duty of every one to use all means and diligence to get the truth,
to be willing to be at the cost of all pains and diligence for the buying and
compassing the truth, wisdom, godliness, etc. These are commodities which
will not be had without cost. They are commodities that will not fall into men's
mouths, but they must be bought. He says not, Take the truth, as if it might
be had for taking up, but buy the truth; there must be a price given for it,
and men must be at cost before they can have it.

See how Araunah speaks to David, 2 Samuel 24.22. Let my Lord the King take, and
offer up what scemes good unto him, etc. and see David's answer, verse. 24. Nay
but I will surely buy it of thee at a price, neither will I offer of that which
does cost me nothing: So here, many it may be would be content to have these
things, if they might have them for stooping and taking up. Nay, but they must
buy it at a price, God forbid that we should think to have truth for that which
does cost us nothing. It must cost men a price, and a good round price too, Buy
the truth.

And this is that we have elsewhere, Prove. 4.5. Get wisdom, get understanding,
and verse. 7. With all thy gettings get understanding. It is the selfsame word
that is used here, and may be, as it is by some translated, Buy wisdom, buy
understanding, and with all thy gettings buy understanding. Get it, say some;
Buy it, say others, it all comes to one, for it is to be gotten with buying.
The way to get it, is to buy it. It is not a commodity that goes a begging; it
must be bought before it can be got. It is the counsel that Christ gives,
Apoc. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire. Could not
Christ give it as a matter of Alms? No, he will have it bought, or they shall
go without it. He does not say, I counsel thee to take gold of me, but to
buy gold of me, he will have men draw, and draw deep too before they have it.

It is that is called for, Isa. 55.1. Come ye, buy and eat, buy Wine and milk.
It is not enough to come and look and gaze upon this commodity, to praise and
commend it, no not enough to bid for it, and offer for it, but we must strike
through the bargain, and buy it. A man may bid and not buy, but we must bid
and buy both. So Matthew. 13.44. The man that finds the treasure in the field,
goes and buys the field. He does not wish he had the field, he does not bid
money for the field, and then leave it, but he goes through with the bargain,
he buys, and purchases the field. And verse. 45, 46. The Merchant when be
finds a pearl of great price, he buys it. Christians should be Merchants,
men that drive a trade. When commodities are set forth in Marts and Fayres, ye
have many country people will come and gaze upon them, and will cheapen, and be
asking the prices, though they never mean to buy them: They will cheapen
pearls and jewels, etc. only to know their worth and prices; but now when a
Merchant comes, he cheapens and buys: So Christians driving a trade for
Heaven, and being Merchants, they must buy those pearls, buy those commodities
that are set to sale.

There be four things that may make a man willing to buy the truth. The same
things that make men willing to lay out their money for other commodities.

First, it is a necessary and useful commodity. Indeed things that a man has
no need of, no use of, he has no mind to buy, or to lay out his money for
them. It is no providence nor good husbandry, to buy such things as he has no
need or use of, Joh. 13.29. Buy those things that we have need of. If a man
want bread, want clothing for him and his, he is willing to lay out his money,
and to buy them, because these things he has need of. Necessity forces him to
buy these: So here, the truth is a necessary commodity, an useful commodity.
It was when Christ was dispersing, and many hearing the Word of truth, that
Christ spoke that speech, One thing is needful: As if he had said, Thou
think much at Mary, that she is at this market, that she is buying this
commodity, but blame her not, it is a needful commodity, and therefore she
does well to buy it. It is as necessary as Heaven and salvation it self, 1 Timothy 2.4. Who will have all men to be saved. I, that men like well, but mark
what follows, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. Mark then, there
is no coming to salvation, till men come to the knowledge of the truth. The
Truth must be had before Heaven can be had. Truth therefore being so needful
a commodity, and so useful, there is great reason we should be forward to buy
it, and to be at cost for it. There is a necessity of buying it, and of being
at cost for it, Apoc. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me white raiment that
thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear.
There is a necessity of clothing, a necessity of covering ones nakedness,
therefore a necessity of buying knowledge, grace, religion, godliness, being
things of such necessary use, men must be at cost and charges for them, men
ought to buy them.

Secondly, it is a profitable commodity, a gainefull commodity, there is much
to be gotten, and gained by the buying of it. He that trades in this commodity
shall never be a loser by it, nay he shall be a great saver and gainer by it.
1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness is great gain. If it were but gain it were somewhat,
and it were enough to cross the conceit of the world, that counts godliness
loss and hindrance, but that is not all, it is great gain, it brings in great
returns, rich returns, it brings in such advantage as makes a man.

Thirty and forty in the hundred are counted great gains in trading, but this
buying and trading brings in greater by far, Matthew. 19.27, 29. Then answered
Peter and said to him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee: what
shall we have? And whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my Names sake, he shall
receive an hundred fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life. As if he
had said, Lord we have been at great cost, and great charges to buy the truth,
what shall we have? what gain will our adventure bring us in? what shall we
get by the buying of this commodity? Christ answers, Every one that has
forsaken, etc. shall receive an hundred fold. Where mark, that the gain is
not one for an hundred, but an hundred for one, as if a man should lay out a
pound, and gain an hundred pound by laying out one. The gain of buying this
commodity, is like the gain that Isaac had by sowing, Genesis 26.12. Who received
in the same year an hundred fold. And mark again, that it is not in this
trading and buying, as it is in buying and trading in other commodities. We see
in other trading in the World and buying, that some men grow very rich, gain
great estates, but yet many get little, many lose and are undone by trading.
But now it is not so here: And every one, says Christ, that has forsaken,
etc. shall receive an hundred fold. This commodity bought makes all gainers,
gainers an hundred fold in in this life. Every Merchant of this Company is a
gaining Merchant.

There is a threefold profit or gain to be had by buying the Truth.

First, a man's spiritual freedom Joh. 8.32. Ye shall know the truth. Know
the truth? And what shall we get by that truth? And the truth shall make you
free. We see that many will give good sums to buy the freedom of the City.
As Act. 22.28. With a great sum bought I this freedom, viz. of the City of
Rome: So that he that buys the truth, buys his freedom, he gains his
freedom by the bargain, his freedom from the thraldom of his lust, his
freedom from the slavery of Satan: See 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. If God at any time
will give them repentance, that they may know the truth, And that they may come
to amendment out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of him at his will.

Secondly, Riches. The buying Prove. 3.13. Blessed is the man that finds
wisdom, and the man that gets understanding. Happy is he that buys this
commodity. But why? verse. 14. For ^he merchandise thereof is better than the
merchandise of silver, and the gain there^f is better then gold; and verse. 16.
Ri^hes are in her left hand. It many times ^ings in earthly riches, for
godliness ^ath the promises of this life, and the life to come. But that
matters not. To be sure, it makes spiritually rich, Apoc. 3. The Church of
Laodicea thought she was rich, but she was poor. Well, Christ will teach her
a course to become rich. But what course is that? She must fall to trading,
and to buying, to the buying of truth, of grace, verse. 18. I counsel thee to
buy of me gold. But what shall we be the better for buying it? It is a
commodity, if ye buy it, will enrich you, will make you; to buy of me gold,
that thou may be rich: So that the way to fetch in the gain of spiritual
riches, is to be buying this gold. It is a trading then we see that is
gainefull, it will gain spiritual riches.

Thirdly, Life and happiness, Pro. She is a Tree of life to them that lay
hold upon her.

So that here is that should make us willing to buy the truth, and be at cost
for it, and to come off roundly for it too, in that it is so profitable and
gainefull a commodity. If a man sees a commodity in the Market that will yield
profit, that will bring him in gain, he need not be entreated to buy it, he
will be sure to lay hold on it, to fasten upon it, he will have it though he
borrow the money to buy it. Gainefull commodities use not to hang in hand, but
they are presently snatched up, there is catching at such commodities to buy
them. The truth therefore being a commodity in which there is gain and
advantage to be had, what ever it cost, what ever be the price, buy it, lose
not the buying of a gainefull commodity. What shall it profit a man to gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul? He that makes such a bargain, makes
but a losing bargain: And so, what shall it endammage a man to lose, to give
the whole world, and to gain his own soul? He that makes such a bargain,
makes a saving, a gaining bargain. He that buys the truth, though he give
the whole world for it, makes a gaining bargain, because he gains his soul,
and Heaven by it.

Thirdly, it is a precious commodity, of great worth and excellency, Prove.
3.13, 14, 15. Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding. For the merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof is better then gold. It is more precious then
pearls: and all things that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto
her. See Job. 28.12. 16, 19. But where is wisdom found? and where is the place
of understanding? It shall not be valued with the wedge of gold of Ophir, nor
with the precious Onix, nor the Saphir. The Topaz of Ethiopia shall not be
equal unto it, neither shall it be valued with the wedge of pure gold. Matthew.
13. The Merchant seeks pearls, and he finds one pearl of great price, of
great value and worth. It is no vile and paltry commodity, but a commodity very
precious: And therefore worth the buying. Things that be vile, who will buy
them? refuse stuff none will lay out money about them. But when things are
precious and excellent, their excellency tempts men to buy. What made the
Merchant in the Parable to sell all that he had, and to buy the pearl? It was
a great price to give all that he had, it seems to cost exceeding dear. To
have given half that he had one would think had been enough, but he gives all
that he has to buy it. And what was the reason? It was a pearl, and it was a
pearl of great price: so Truth being a pearl, and a pearl of great price,
lose not the buying of so precious a commodity.

Fourthly, It is a commodity we can Genesis 23.15. The land is worth four hundred
shekels of silver. So long as the land was worth it, Abraham could not have an
hard bargain, could not be over-reacht in it, could have no cause to repent
him, though he gave four hundred shekels of silver. The land was worth it: so
here, in buying the Truth a man shall be sure not to be overreacht, he shall
be sure not to be pincht with an hard bargain, because let it cost what it
will, let the price be never so high, let a man give what he will, yet the
truth is worth it, and a man shall be sure to have a pennyworth for his penny.

Prove. 3.15. All the things thou can desire are not to be compared to her.
Prove. 8.11. For Wisdom is better than precious stones, and all pleasures are
not to be compared unto her. The highest price that can be set is
disproportionable to the worth of it, is beneath the value of the commodity.
Job 28.17. Though it be a necessary commodity, a profitable, gainefull
commodity, a precious commodity, yet at any price it is set at, it is a cheap
commodity, and the price is low. A man cannot be over-reacht when the commodity
is necessary, profitable, precious, and yet the price low. How can a man be
over-reacht where the commodity is profitable, and cheap both? Now this
commodity as it is well worth all our pains, endeavors, costs; so all we can
do and give, it is but cheap, it is but an easy low price. Is. 55.1. Come
buy wine and milk without money, and without price, that is, without any
meritorious price, as he that gives the money, and the price that a commodity
is worth in point of commutative Justice deserves to have the commodity, and it
is Injustice to hold it from him. Thus we must buy without price, because no
man can give a meritorious price to God for Grace and Heaven. Buy without
price, that is, without meritorious price; or else thus to our present purpose.
It is true that Truth must be bought with a price, and with a great price, but
yet the greatest price that is, is so beneath the commodity, that it is no
price. As we say of a cheap commodity that is bought for little, that it is no
price. Ten thousand pound is a great sum of money, an huge sum, but for a
man to buy ten thousand pound a year for the price of ten thousand pound, it is
but one years purchase, it is no price, ten thousand pound is no money, no
price to ten thousand pound a year. It is a great deal of pains, and cost
that a man must be at to get the Truth, to get Christ, and Grace, but the
worth of the commodity considered and the transcendency of the value of it
above cost and pains, all our cost and pains is no money, is no price. And
how can a man be overreacht, or have an hard bargain, when he has a good
bargain for no price. Here is that then which may draw us on to strike through
this bargain, and may encourage us to trade, and buy, we shall be sure to have
a pennyworth for our penny, we shall not be pincht with a dear pennyworth.
Many a man has a great mind to such an house, and land, he would feign buy
it, he beats the price, and bids fair for it, but yet as good a mind as he
has to it, he buys it not, he fears it is to dear, he fears he shall
repent him of his bargain, and wish his money in his purse again, and
therefore falls off. But now here is no such fear, what ever the Truth cost
thee, suppose it cost thee much pains, and labor, suppose it proves matter of
great charge to thee, suppose it cost thee thy credit and respect in the world,
thy liberty, thine estate, thy blood, thy life, yet thou buyest it not too
dear; it is well worth all thou can give for it. A man may buy house and
lands, good house and lands too dear, a man may buy Gold too dear, as the
Proverb is, but yet he cannot buy Truth, nor Grace, nor Christ, nor Heaven too
dear. The Land is worth four hundred shekles, and Heaven, and Christ, Truth,
and Grace is worth all that ever. God shall ask for it.

A man may buy a good purchase of land, and yet have no cause to rejoice in it,
may wish he had never meddled with it, but had kept his money in his purse.
Ezekiel. 7.12. The time is come, the day draws near, let not the buyer rejoice.
Such times may come, as a man may have but little joy in buying a a purchase.
But a man that buys the Truth shall never repent him of his purchase, but let
such a buyer rejoice. Come what times will come, yet he may rejoice, yea the
worse the times may be, the more cause may he have to rejoice in his purchase.

Thus being convinced that this duty is to be done, that Truth is to be
bought, come we now to show how this duty is to be done, and wherein this
buying stands.

This buying then stands in diverse things.

First, In giving a price, and paying a price for it. In trading in the world,
when a man gives the price for a commodity, he buys it, and a man cannot be
said to have bought a commodity till some price be given for it, that is
contracted for, ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. therefore in buying
there is a price given. When Abraham bought the fields of Ephraim, he gave him
the price of four hundred shekels, and when he gave that price then he
bought it. Deuteronomy. 2.6. ye shall buy meat of them that ye may eat, and ye shall
buy water of them that ye may drink. But how must they buy? ye shall buy
meat of them for money, and ye shall buy water of them for money. That which a
man has without money, or some valuable consideration; it is not bought, but
is given freely, or taken unjustly. But when a man gives money for bread, gives
money for water, then he buys it. So in this case, he that would buy Truth
must give a price for it, it will not be had for nothing, that which a man
has for nothing is not bought. The price that men must give for Truth and
Grace, is the use of all such means by which Truth and Grace is to be gotten.
So buy the Truth, that is, use all means by which it may be had; God has
appointed certain means in the use of which he will give Grace, and the
knowledge of the Truth, and they that will have this commodity must give this
price, must use such means as God requires to be used to this end.

This price that God sets is not a matter of money, Simon Magus would have
bought that gift for money. Act. 8.18. He offered them money. But thy money
perish with thee, says Peter to him. We our selves are bought with a price. 1
Cor. 6. but yet 1 Pet. 1. are not redeemed with Silver, and Gold, and
corruptible things, so Truth, and Grace must be bought, but yet it is not gold
that will buy this Gold. But there is another price with which Truth must be
bought. The use of those means which God has appointed, that is the price;
that look as by the giving of a price an earthly commodity is bought, and
obtained, so by the use of the means, Truth, and Grace is gotten, and
obtained. And what then are those means?

First, Prayer, Buy the truth, pray Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom.
Shopkeepers as men pass by their doors, ask them, What do ye lack? what
is it that you want? So the Apostle here seems to say, what is it that ye
lackc? what is it that ye want? Do ye want grace? Do ye want knowledge and
wisdom? Well, what if we do? How may we come by it? Buy it, says the
Apostle. I, but what is the price that must be given for it? If any man lack
wisdom, stand in need of this commodity, let him ask of God. And it is the
price that Christ sets upon grace, Matthew. 7. Ask and ye shall have. The price
that the Lord sets upon the knowledge of the truth. Jer. 33. Call upon me, and
I will answer thee, and show thee great and hidden things which thou know
not. God highly befriends us, he sets the commodity at a low price. It is
little worth that is not worth the asking. The way then to buy, is to beg;
begging is buying, and praying is paying. And therefore how often find we
David in those suites, Teach me thy truth, teach me thy Statutes, etc. David
knew the commodity would not be bought without this price, and therefore he
sticks not at it, he gives the price, and seeks grace, and the knowledge of
the truth by prayer.

Secondly, hearing the Word, and attending Paul speaks of Christ, Romans 15.8.
That Jesus Christ was a Minister of the circumcision for the truth of God: So
it may in another sense be said of the Ministers of the Gospel, That they are
Ministers of the Gospel for the truth of God, to make known the truth of God,
to offer and tender it unto people. And Mal. 2.6. The Law of truth was in
Levi's mouth. God sends them to set his truth to sale, they bring this
commodity to Market: So that if we would buy the truth, we must attend upon
them whose work is to dispense the Word of truth, as the Gospel is called,
Ephesians. 1.13. And it is a part of the price that is to be given for it, to come
to, and attend upon their Ministry. See Mal. 2.6. The Law of truth was in his
mouth, and verse. 7. They should seek the Laws (of truth) at his mouth. So
then, they that would get the truth, must seek it at the mouths of Gods
Ministers, and that is the way to get this commodity. This is part of the
price, to come to the public means, and to attend upon them. Come and buy,
Isa. 55.1. Even coming is a part of buying. If Jacobs sons would buy Corn,
they must not only give money, but they must go into Egypt, and their going
into Egypt was one part of the price of it. They could not buy unless they
went into Egypt, where it was to be bought. They that will buy a commodity,
they must go to the Market, and the shops where the commodity is to be bought,
Matthew. 25.9. Go to them that sell, and buy for your selves. So if men would
buy the truth, they must go to them that sell, and there buy. Now Gods
Ministers are they that in a good sense sell, and therefore to them, men must
go and buy. The Sabbaths are the Market days, the public assemblies are the
Market places, and the shoppes where this commodity is to be bought. And if
men would buy, thither they must go, there they must wait. And this going to,
and attending upon the ordinance of preaching is a part of the price that must
be given to buy this pearl. Buy the truth then, that is, go to the Word, and
attend upon the preaching of the Word, go to the Market and wait upon that
Ordinance.

Thirdly, reading the Scripture, and other Books, that may help us to the
knowledge of the truth, and build us up in grace, mutual conference, and
meditation. This is a price that must be given for truth. It is not enough to
use public helps, but we must use private helps also, we must trade and
traffic in private, as well as in public. Thus in the use of the means that
God has appointed, we must buy this pearl of Truth and Grace. God can infuse
grace and knowledge into us without our endeavors in the use of the means,
but God will not do it. His way is that the means shall be used, and the use
of the means is the price he will have for this commodity. God gives grace,
and the knowledge of the truth, as Boaz gave Ruth corn, Ruth 2.15, 16, 17.
Could not Boaz have given her at once as much corn as would have yielded her
an Ephah of Barley, and so have sent her home without any more ado? Yes
surely, he could have done it, and it had been no more charge for him to have
done so: But yet he would have her use her endeavors, to gather and to gleane
it, and beat it out to, when she had gleaned it; and that labor of hers should
be the price she should pay for it. So God can give us knowledge by immediate
revelation, and grace by immediate infusion, but yet he will have us use the
means in praying, hearing, reading and conference, and our labor and
endeveavour in the use of those means shall be the price with which the truth
must be bought.

Secondly, in giving and paying the full price for it. A man that will buy a
commodity, must not only give a a price for it, but he must give the full
price that is asked for it. When Abraham was to buy the field of Ephron, I will
give thee money for it, and Ephron tells him it is worth four hundred
sheckels: Now if Abraham will buy it, he must give him his price: And so he
did, Genesis 23.16. He weighed unto him the silver which he had named, he gave
him the price which he asked, and so bought the field. If Abraham had offered
him three hundred and fifty or three hundred and ninty sheckels, he had
offered him a price, but not Ephrons price; he had offered him silver, but not
the silver he named; he had offered a price, but not the full price; and so
the bargain had not been struck through, the field had not been bought. Genesis
23.9. for as much money as it is worth, for full money, that is, as in the
Hebrew, for the full price.

So it is here in the buying of the truth. Not only must a price be given,
but a full price, Gods price that he asks and sets. I may allude to that
speech of Christ's, Zech. 11.12. If ye think good, give me my price, and if
not forbear. So the Lord in this case says to us, If ye think good of my
commodity that I offer to you, ye shall have it, but then you must not think
to have it at your own price, but you must give me my price, the price that I
ask and set you. The seller sets one price, and the buyer offers another, but
if the buyer offer too low a price, he must rise and come to the sellers price
if he will have his commodity. It is not enough then if we will buy the truth
to offer a price, and give a price, but we must give Gods price, that is, the
full price. Now Gods price, the full price is this, it stands in these two
things:

First, in an industrious, painful, use of means is a price, but the full
price is the serious, industrious use of the means, the using of the means
with all our might, Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know if we follow on to know the
Lord. Many pray, hear, read, etc. and yet buy not the truth, nor get
knowledge, nor grace, they indeed give a price, but it is not Gods price, not
the full price, and therefore they have not the commodity. The Apostle says of
those women, 2 Timothy 3.7. They were ever learning, and came not to the knowledge
of the truth. They were cheapning and offering for it, but they never bought
the truth, and all because they came not to Gods price. There be some that are
ever praying, ever hearing, ever reading, and yet never come to the knowledge
of the truth, never get true grace. Here indeed is a price given, means are
used, but the full price is not given, means are not used in good earnest,
seriously, industriously with all their might. It is not enough to pray for
grace and the truth, but men must pray so as God would have them pray, Jam.
1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. Well may one say,
if that be all, I will soon ask it, I will give that price willingly for it.
I, but mark verse 6. But let him ask in faith: That teaches thus much; That
asking is not enough, unless men ask in that manner, for faith, and so for
all other qualifications, as God requires. It must be faithful, and fervent,
earnest prayer which is Gods price. See Prove. 2.3, 5. If thou cryest and
liftest up thy voice, then, etc. He says not, If thou prayest, that is to be
done, that is part of the price, but if thou cryest. That Is Gods price, to have
fervent prayer, full of earnestness and contention of spirit. Cold, formal,
dead-hearted prayer is not Gods price, it is too low a price to fetch so rich a
commodity. What must I give you, say we, when we come to buy a commodity? So
if we would know here, My son, give me thine heart. In prayer for grace,
give God thine heart. The tongue, the lips, the voice, is too low a price,
God must be prayed to seriously with the heart. Is that all? No, there is more
yet; that same, Psalm. 119.145. I cried with my whole heart. That Is the whole
price, and full price in the point of prayer. Not some of the heart, but the
whole heart must be given to God in this duty. It is not enough to hear the
Word, to get grace and the truth, but men must so hear as God requires, with
such preparation, with such affection, with such attention, with such after
endeavors as God commands. Ezekiel. 40.4. Son of man, behold with thine eyes,
and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall show
thee. Eyes and ears, and heart, must all be set on work in the duty. Those
Ezekiel. 33. heard the Word, but they gave not the full price, the price that God
asked, Their hearts were running after their covetousness. It is not enough to
read, but it must be such reading as God requires that will help a man to the
truth, and to grace: It must be reading with industry, diligence, heedfulnesse,
and much paines-taking. Therefore Christ bids us not barely, Read the
Scriptures, but to search the Scriptures. A man must set his head and his heart
on work both in reading the Word. Prove. 2.4, 5. If thou seek her as silver,
and searchest for her as for treasures: Then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. There is the full price. What pains
do men take to seek and search for treasures hid in the earth, for silver in
the Mines: They dig through rocks, dig wonderful deep, follow every vein,
and search every cranny where the silver lies; It costs a great deal of pains
and labor, in searching, and digging for silver; and so it must cost a great
deal of pains and industry in the reading of the Word and searching of the
Scriptures, that is Gods full price in this particular, if we will buy the
truth. Slight and overly formal use of these means, are not price enough to
buy the truth.

If a man ask ten pounds for a commodity, and one bid him but ten pence, he
cannot buy that commodity: The buyer and seller will never meet at such a
distance. God he asks diligence, painfulnesse, industry, and labor of spirit
in the use of means: Now if we come with our dead and cold formalities, and
make prayer but a lip-labor, hearing but an eare-labour, reading but an
eye-labor, this is to offer God but ten pence, nay but ten tokens, when he
sets the price ten pounds: And they that come so short of Gods price are never
like to buy: God must have his full price, his whole price, and they are never
like to buy that do not give him his whole price, that offer him not half his
price.

Here is that which keeps men off from buying, because they are loath to go to
the full price, to be at all that pains that must be taken in the use of the
means. If prayer, hearing, reading, would do it, they would not stick at
that, but if so much pains and labor must be taken in these, they think it
too dear at such prices and rates, they will forbear. See Prove. 24.7.
Wisdom is too high for a fool. It is too high prizd in a fools conceit, and
therefore he buys it not. The Wiseman speaks in the fools language,
Wisdoms in the plural are too high. As if he had said, fools when they look
upon this commodity of wisdom, Oh say they, it is Wisdoms, oh what a
multitude is there of these truths! what a deal of pains will it require to
know all these things! and besides, They be high points, deep matters, what a
deal of study, what beating of a man's brains will they ask, what a deal of
striving in prayer before we shall attain to them! there is no meddling with
them, as good go without them, as take them at such a dear price. And thus
fools lose a good bargain because they think it too dear upon those
terms, because they will not give the full price. It is otherwise with an
understanding man, that understands the worth of Truth. Prove. 15.14. The heart
of him that has understanding seeks knowledge. He seeks or pursues it.
There be many difficulties to be overcome, ere he can have it, it will cost
much pains, but he yet for all that seeks and pursues after it, he sticks
not at that price. And again, The heart of him, etc. seeks. He does not
only speak of it, or hear others speak of it, but his heart, and his mind
is upon it. And though a commodity be dear, yet if a man have a mind to it,
he will have it though he pay the price. A man that has an heart, and a mind
seeking Truth, though the price of it be so much pains, labor and industry in
the use of means yet he will buy it at that price, he will give the full price
of it. So that when he bids us Buy the truth, he bids us not only pray, but
pray hard, pray earnestly with thy whole heart, not only hear, but hear with
all diligence, attention, and intention of spirit: not only read, but read
searchingly, diligently. This is Gods price, this is to give the full price.
Give that and then we buy.

Secondly, in a cheerful parting

First, our lusts, and corruptions which are dear to us, which we count so
dearly of as our right hands, and our right eyes. And yet as dear as they be
to us these must be given, and parted with for the getting, and buying of the
truth; Gods full price is that these must be given, and be all sold, and made
off to buy this purchase. So the merchant that finds the pearl of great
price, Matthew. 13.46. he goes and sells all that he had, and bought it. All
that he had was the full price of the pearl, and he came to the full price,
parts with all that he had, and so bought. He sold not some of that he had,
that was but a pin of the price, not half that he had, that was but half
the price, but he comes to the full price, All that he had, and bought it. A
man that will have Christ, and buy his Truth, must part with all his lusts, and
give them all for this bargain. Some man likes Christ and the Truth so well,
that he could be content to part with this and that lust, he could as Herod,
be content to do many things, and part with many things for the truth, but
Herod has one jewel, his Herodias, he is loath to buy truth so dear as to
give her for it: It is too dear a price to buy truth at, to part with one so
dear to him. I, but if Herod will have the truth, he must come to Gods full
price, not doing of many things, not the parting with some lusts and vanities,
but the parting with all, Herodias and all, is Gods price. Bid we, and offer
we what we will, use means and endeavors, and go on in them, yet if we
will not part with our lusts, we shall never have the bargain, nor buy the
pearl. It is a pearl of great price, and therefore a great price, the selling
and putting off all our lusts, must be given for it, or else bid as often and as
fair as we will, it will not do. See 2 Timothy 3.7. Ever learning, and never
come to the knowledge of the truth. They bid fair for the truth. They were
content to learn, and to be at some pains to get the knowledge of the truth,
which is more then a great many will bid for it, nay they do it not for a fit,
but are ever learning, they seem to follow it with some closeness, and yet
for all this never come to the knowledge of the truth, ever bidding, but never
come to buy the truth. Why? what is the matter they buy it not? Because though
they seem to bid fair, yet they come not to the full price. They would sell
somewhat to buy the pearl, but not sell all, not part with their sinful
lusts, and therefore God denied them the knowledge of the truth, verse. 16. They
lead captive simple women laden with diverse lusts, which women are ever
learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth. Prove. 14.6. A scorner
seeks wisdom, and finds it not. He bids, and buys not, he will not give
the full price, he scorns at such a dear price as to part with all his
lusts. There is no reason or equity that the buyer should have a man's commodity
at the price he will set: The seller is to set the price, and if he cannot
have his price, he wrongs no man to keep his commodity to himself, specially
when it is richly worth the price he sets. If therefore we would buy the
truth, sell away and part with all thy lusts, that is Gods full price, of which
he will not abate any thing. It is but a folly to hucke, and to hope by
hucking, to fetch down the market. If ye think good, give God his price, if
not, forbear. Either all, or nothing at all. As men say to such as offer short
of their price, I had as live ye offered me nothing.

Secondly, Our money and means in Simon Magus would feign have been trading.
And yet in one sense we must buy the Truth with our money, and temporal good;
That is, we should be willing to be at costs and charges, and to spend money
for the maintaining of those means, and those Ordinances in the use of which
the truth is to be gotten. Though we cannot buy grace for money, yet with our
money we may buy preaching, maintain the Ministry, we may buy Bibles, buy
good Books, by all which we may come to get the knowledge of the truth. And
so in this sense, we must buy the truth with our money, and it is a part of
Gods full price, and such a price as must be given if men will buy the truth.
Prove. 4.7. If need be part with any gettings to get the truth.

Though our money cannot buy grace, yet it can procure and mainetaine the
Ministry of the Word and preaching of the Gospel, by which the knowledge of
the truth and grace is to be gotten. And therefore it is well noted by some on
that place, Matthew. 13.44. That the Merchant finding a rich treasure hid in the
field, is said to sell all and buy the field. He does not buy the treasure, but
the field, and so in buying the field he buys the treasure therein. The field
is the Ministry of the Gospel, in which the treasure of grace is hid. And so
some expound those words, Col. 2.3. (...); in which Ministry of the Gospel,
verse. 2. are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge. Now though our
money will not procure grace and knowledge, yet it will purchase that field,
the preaching of the Gospel, in which these treasures are to be had. And this
price God requires, a part of his full price, Gal. 6. Let him that is taught
make him that teaches him partaker of all his goods. God will not have the
Ministry of the Word eleemosynary, to be matter of mere alms, but he will
have not only men's pains to hear the Word, but men's purses to maintain the
Word, and his Ordinances, by which the truth is to be had. God himself would
not have the doors of the Temple shut for naught, nor fire kindled upon his
Altar for naught, Mal. 1.11. And would he then have his Word opened for
naught, and the fire of the word kindled for naught? No, but Numb. 35.8. Every
one shall give of his Cities to the Levites according to his inheritance which
he inherites. And will have him that keeps the Fig Tree, eat of the fruit
thereof, Prove. 27.18. and will have the Oxes mouth unmuzzeld that treads out
the corn. So buy the truth, that is, be at cost, and let your purses walk for
the maintaining of the Gospel. Though our money cannot buy grace and knowledge
of the truth, yet our money may buy Bibles, and good Books, by the reading
whereof we may come to get knowledge and grace So that when he says, Buy the
truth, he says, Buy Bibles, buy good Books, and stick not at the cost and
charge of them, but willingly be at such charge for the getting of the truth.
It was a great price those Books came to which they burned after they came to
the knowledge of the truth, Act. 19.19. They brought their Books together, and
burned them before all men, and they counted the price of them, and found it
fifty thousand pieces of silver. Surely they that in honor of the truth burned
Books of so great price, would not have stuck in desire of the truth to have
bought Books of great price. And thus our forefathers, godly christians,
before Luthers time here in England, when there was some glimpse of the light
of the Gospel, they bought the truth, though at an high price. It is memorable
which Mr. Fox speaks of them. They did sit up whole nights in reading, and
hearing good Books read. That was one part of the price they gave. But they
did not only buy with their pains, but with their purses, with their goods,
being at great cost and expenses in buying Books in English. They gave
sometimes five marks and more for a good Book; they gave a load of hay for a
few chapters of Saint James, or Saint Paul in English. It was more money, five
marks then, then ten pound is now. What a deal of cost was it to buy such
books. I, but it was to buy the truth, and good men they thought truth dear
at no price, nor the means of truth too high at any rate. It was Gods price
then, and they shukt not at it. Thus is truth to be bought.

Buy the truth, lay out money and stick not at it, to maintain preaching, to
buy a Bible, etc. Alas I want money, I have so many occasions, and the world so
hard, I cannot be at the charge of maintaining preaching, buying Bibles, etc.
Those be the shuckings of earthly hearts, that are of Judas mind, that the
ointment was wasted that was bestowed upon Christ. But suppose there be truth
in it, yet I say buy the truth, and rather then not buy it, do as our Savior
advises, Luc. 22.36. He that has no sword, let him sell his coat and buy one.
So sell thy coat, and purchase a Preacher, sell thy coat, and buy a Bible:
Thou must come to Gods price, if buy.

Thirdly, Our comforts of this life, Sometimes truth is at dearer rates then at
other times. God sometimes raises the price, that truth cannot be bought nor
had but at these high rates, That if a man will have it, it may cost him his
dearest comforts, his very blood and life it self. Truth was very dear, at
very high prices in Queen Mary's days. It pleased God that by the raising up
Queen Elizabeth, a nursing mother in Israel, that the prices fell, and truth
was had at easier and lower rates. But yet when truth was at these dear prices
in Queen Mary's days, we see the servants of Christ did not stick to give
the price of their blood for it: And though it were as much as their lives were
worth to be meddling with the Truth, and the Gospel, yet they were content to
come to Gods full price, to the very highest price of all, to part with all the
comforts of this life, and life it self for the truth, when God pitched that
price. And though it be sometimes at lower prices, yet that is a price that
must be pitched upon, and we must be willing to give it, if God call for it.
Joh. 8.31, 32. Ye shall be my Disciples, and ye shall know the truth. The
knowledge then of the Truth, and being a Disciple are both of a price. Look
what it will cost to be a Disciple, that it may cost to get the truth. At what
price then is it to be a Disciple, Matthew. 16. If any man will be my Disciple,
let him take up his cross and follow me. So that he that will be a Disciple
must reckon upon the price of the Cross, and so must he that will buy the
truth, for a man must be a Disciple that will have the truth. I confess this
is a sharp price when God calls for it, and yet this price must then be given.
We saw before that it is a commodity royally worth what ever God asks for it.
This men count too high a price and so start at it that they let the bargain
go. They deal just in this case as Boaz his kinsman did in the buying of
Naomies land, Ruth 4.3, 4. He said, I will redeem or buy it: I, but verse. 5.
Boaz tells him of a condition that goes with the bargain, What day thou buyest
the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must also buy it of Ruth, etc. thou must
take her to wife, etc. The man had a good mind to buy the field, but when he
hears of that condition, he starts at it, verse. 6. by no means can I buy it,
lest I mar mine inheritance. So when truth is offered unto men to buy it; God
offers to sell truth to you, say his Ministers, Buy it therefore, and let not
such a commodity go. Oh say men, we will buy it with all our hearts. I, but
what day you buy the truth you must make account to take up the cross, make
account of loss of liberty, etc. when men hear that, and see the price so
high, oh say they, we cannot buy it, lest we mar our credit, our liberty,
our houses and lands, and our very lives. This price is thought too high, and
thereupon men break off. Those in the parable, the stony ground, seemed to be
very forward to buy the truth, but when persecution and tribulation arises
because of the Word, they are offended, they cease trading any longer, they
like not the buying truth at such smart rates as those. If men might have the
truth, and their credit, the truth and their peace, ease, liberties, they could
be well content to buy it, but if it cannot be bought but upon such hard
terms, they will none, they will stay till it may be had better cheap. And
this is the second thing in which is the full price of Truth, a willingness
for truths sake to part with any thing that is dear and precious.

The third thing in which this buying Abraham bought the field of Ephron the
Hittite, Genesis 23.16. He weighed him four hundred shekels of silver current
money with the Merchant. So must God be dealt with all, men that will buy his
commodity, and trade with him must pay him current money. Now money that is
current, must first be good metal; secondly, it must be weight. If a man
pay gold the metal is current, but if gold want weight, and be light, it will
not pass, and proves not current for want of weight. If money be weight, yet
if it be not good metal, be false and counterfeit coin, be brass and
copper, be gilded or silvered brass, that is not current: But when money is
good for the material, is true silver and true gold, and when it is good for
the weight, then it is current money. And such money must they buy withal that
will buy truth, and will trade with God for this commodity. Now this current
money is not only to use the means, and to use them with industry, but to use
the means with industry in sincerity, out of a love and with a love of the
Truth for it self. To use means and use them industriously for the getting of
the truth, and not sincerely out of a love of the truth, but for other ends,
this is to offer copper, and counterfeit coin, and God will not part with his
commodity for such coin: He will not part with it but for current money: He
will buy, and weigh every piece of our money, and when he finds that men go
about to cheat him with false and counterfeit coin, they shall none of his
commodity. I consell thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire. We must not
think to buy gold with copper and brass, but men must give good gold for this
gold if ever they mean to have it. As he offers gold tried in the fire, so
he requires gold tried in the fire, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2. To stir up your sincere
minds, that ye may be mindful of the words, etc. And so men must come with
sincere minds, if they would understand the words of the Prophets, and come to
the knowledge of the truth in the Scriptures. Yea, when men will be buying with
false coin, they shall not only not buy what they would have, but they shall
forfeit, and lose what they seemed to have bought, Matthew. 13.12. that which he
had seemed to have bought. They shall miss of what they would buy, and they
shall lose what they have bought. And therefore David desires of God that he
may have the Truth, and the knowledge of it, because he dealt honestly with
him, paid him current money, Psalm. 119.10. With my whole heart, that is, with a
single and sincere heart, have I sought thee, and thy truth, Oh let me not
wander from thy Commandments, let me not miss of the knowledge of thy Truth:
Lord here is current money, let me have the commodity. Simon Magus offered
money for the gift of the Holy Ghost. He is denied it, because he thought to
buy it that way: But if he had offered to buy it another way; he should have
been also denied it upon that ground, Act. 8.21. Thine heart is not right in
the sight of God. He would have had that gift only to have made an advantage
of it, to have brought him in money, and therefore he offered money, therefore
he desired not that gift sincerely for the gifts sake. So when men's hearts are
not right in the^, they use means, and take pains to get knowledge of the
Truth, not for the love of the Truth, but for other by, and base ends, that
they may have credit or advantage by it, this is to offer false coin, and
their heart is not right, and Gods Truth and Grace shall never be bought for
false coin: But when the means are used, used industriously and sincerely, it
is much to see how freely God will part with his commodity to such, sincerity
will bring in great increases of the knowledge of the Truth, and all other
graces. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25. When God
sees men's hearts sincere in the seeking of the Truth, he will liberally
communicate his gifts and graces to them; nothing helps a man to buy such
great penny worths as sincerity does: For as men, so God loves to trade and
deal with such as will deal honestly, and will be current pay-masters, will
pay current coin.

The fourth thing in which this buying stands, is, To buy in time, and whilst
sure to be at the Market, and the fair, when the commodity is to be had. A man
that means to buy, will not miss nor lose the Market day, nor the market
time. He will make haste to the market, and be sure to take his time, because
if he come too late the commodity will be gone, and then he cannot buy that
he wants. If a man come the day after the fair, and the morrow after the
market, he may go home as wise as he came. Nay, if a man come to the market
to buy, and walk up and down, talk with this body, and that: If he go and
sit and talk away the market time in the Alehouse, bibbing, and twatling with
this and that idle companion, before he minds it the market is over, and
done, and he cannot buy because the commodity is all gone. He cannot buy
because through negligence and idleness he lost this market time. But he
that means to buy will do that first, will wait upon his market time, will
do that business first, and then if he have any spare time, he can spend it
upon other less necessary employments. So here, he that will buy truth, must
watch and take his market time, must be buying truth whilst truth may be
bought. There is a buying time, and a trading time for truth, Eccles. 3.1. To
every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven. And
there is a time, and a season, in which God offers Truth to be sold, in which
men may buy it, and obtain it, Luc. 19.42. If thou had known, at least in
this thy day, etc. verse. 44. Thou know not the day of thy visitation. This
thy day, that is, this market day, in which truth and grace might have been
bought. The time of thy visitation, that is, the market time of Grace. There is
then a day, and a time, a market day, and a market time, a day and time in
which Grace and Truth are to be bought. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. We then as workers
together with him, beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.
For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: behold now the accepted time, behold now the
day of salvation. Now then they that will buy the truth must be buying whilst
it is market time, must be trading for Truth and Grace whilst they may be had,
must ply their market whilst the market lasts. To day if ye will hear his
voice. Luc. 12.56. Ye can discern the face of the sky, how is it that ye
do not discern this time? This buying time, this selling time, this market
time. It must be a man care that will buy, to discern the buying time, and to
lay hold upon that time, and to follow his market close whilst it lasts. If
men will buy the truth, let them not neglect buying whilst God offers to sell,
do not trifle away the market time of Grace, in following the world, and thy
lusts: First make thy market, and when thy market is made, and thou have bought
this commodity, that spare time thou have bestow that upon secular business of
less moment. A man that will buy the truth, when he sees it is market time,
must do as he speaks, Ezra 7. 16, 17. And all the silver and gold, etc. That
thou may buy speedily with this money, bullockes, rams, etc. So when we
see it to be market time, and the good penny worths of the Gospel are stirring,
then all the time, all the pains, all the labor you can find in all your
course, offer it willingly as a price, that you may buy speedily with your
pains and diligence in the use of the means, knowledge of the truth, grace,
and godliness. When Christ bid Judas, That which thou do, do quickly, the
Disciples thought he had meant, That those things were necessary to be bought,
he should buy quickly, Joh. 13.29. Surely so it must be in this case with all
that will buy the Truth. That which ye do, do quickly: that which ye buy,
buy quickly. So long as the Gospel is preached to us, so long it is market day,
buying time: Therefore if ye will buy the Truth, now, now is the time, put it
not off, I will buy to morrow, or next week, or next year, or at my lives
end, but buy speedily, and buy presently: If ye lose the market day, and
market time, ye shall not then buy though ye would. The market may be done to
morrow, the market may be past in another year, and it will be too late to buy
when the market is done. See Matthew. 25.9, 10. etc. The foolish Virgins had
their oil to buy when they should have had greatest use of it. It was no time
to go to buy oil when the Bridegroom was come, it was too late then, whilst
they go to buy then, and furnish themselves, then the Bridegroom comes, and
they are shut out of doors. Had they bought their oil when the time of buying
was, then they had entered. Press men to get grace, the knowledge of the truth,
to be trading now whilst the market time of the Gospel, and their life lasts;
and their answer is, all in good time, hereafter may serve, at the hardest at
their death. I, but then it is no buying time. Alas, it is an ill time to be
catechized in, and to be learning the knowledge of the Truth when a man is upon
his death bed. That Is the time to spend oil, not to buy oil. It is then dying
time, not buying time, it is ill buying when a man is dying. If a man be to buy
then, the door of heaven will be shut upon him before he can return from the
shops. In vain shall men seek the truth, and grace, and to be taught when the
day of grace is past, that would not take and buy it whilst the market of the
preaching of the Gospel was on foot. See Joh 8.21. When the market is done, and
over, then ye shall seek to buy, and all the world if ye had it, ye would
give to buy the Truth, and ye shall not buy but ye shall dye, and dye in your
sins. It is not in the markets of the Gospel as it is with other markets. We
see many will put off buying in other markets, till toward the end of the
market, till men have some commodity lie upon their hands, and there be but few
left to buy, and then they make account at the latter end of the market to buy
at lower prices, to get better penny-worths: And so it often proves. But it will
not prove so here, the best penny-worths here are to be had at the beginning of
the market. At the end of the market it is a great venture if any thing will be
to be bought at all, or if it be to be bought, it cannot be had but at far
dearer prices then it might before. If thou do get any thing it will cost thee
double, and trebble the price it might have been had for in the prime of the
market. If thou get any grace and mercy at thy death, that have neglected it in
thy life time, and in the time of grace, it must be had with far more
struggling, sorrowing, weeping, lamenting, repenting, then it might have been
had for before. God is ever deerer, and his prices higher at the latter end of
the market, then at beginning.

the markets are grown, and how this commodity hangs in our hands that God
has betrusted us with the sale of. That shall be a good time when it comes,
Apoc. 18.11. that no man shall buy Romish merchandise any more, when Romes
markets shall go down, and the Whores trading shall decay, when men shall buy
Pardons, Relics, Masses, Dirges, Agnus Deis, hallowed Graynes, and such
trumpery no more. When men shall buy lies no more. An happy thing when the
Popes Merchandise shall no more be bought, but a sad and woeful thing, when men
will not buy Gods Merchandise any more. As 1 Cor. 7.3. Let them that buy be as
though they possessed not, as though they bought not. That Is commendable in
worldly mercature: To be sure so men deal here, Buy as if they bought not, as
if they cared not whether they bought or no; that is a miserable thing in
trading with God. It was made a cause of public fasting and humiliation
amongst the Jews when trading decayed, and grew dead. And what is it then when
this trading grows dead? Prove. 17.16. Wherefore is there a commodity of Truth
and Grace in Gods hand, and a price, a means in a fools hand to get wisdom
and truth, and he has not an heart. Here is a rich commodity, men see the
price, and have the means in their hand, and yet have no heart to buy, no
mind to trade, slight the commodity as if not worth looking after?

When God offers this commodity to buy, they shuffle it off, they have farms
to buy, yoakes of Oxen to buy, Luc. 14. they have so many things to buy, that
they will not buy the Truth, I pray thee have me excused, I must lay out my
time and pains for other things, I have not wherewith to buy this Truth. It is
miserable to see how cold men's desires are after the Truth. Just as Pilate,
Joh. 18.38. What is Truth? A good question, but asked with a base oscitancy of
spirit, he cares not to know what Truth is, but before an answer can be given
he goes his way out, and turns his back upon Christ. Just such respect give
me not the Truth. Press them to buy the Truth. Why, what (say they) is truth?
but they care not so much as to hear what the Truth is, they ought to buy.

Some it may be could be content to buy it, so it might be at their own price,
if now and then a Sermon, a Chapter, reading a good Book in a good fit, would
help them to it, they would not greatly stick at it. But as Zech. 11.12, 13.
They weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said cast it to
the Potter, a goodly price that I was prized at of them: So a goodly price that
Truth is prized at of men, as if God offered trash, when he offers Truth. The
Devils commodities go off roundly, men will buy their lusts, though it cost
them the price of their soul, and men will buy toys, buy Play-bookes,
ballads, Dice, Cards, fall to buying. Consider but two things to quicken us.

First, It is a commodity that is like Elies time, 1 Samuel 3.1. And the Word of
the Lord was precious in those days there was no open vision. The Truth rose
to an high price, no public prophesying. We have no charter for the
perpetuity of the Truths abiding with us. What know we but it may grow as
precious, to as dear and high prices as it did in Elies days? There is a time
when running to and fro will increase knowledge, and help to buy the truth,
pains are to the purpose, Dan. 12.4. And there is a time when running to and
fro will do no good, when for no price nor pains Truth will be had, Am. 8.12.
And who knows but he may see such days? And is it not better to run to and
fro, to take pains when good will be done upon it, then to run to and fro,
when all the pains in the world will not help us to this bargain? We see
how dear, extraordinary dear one kind of grain is now with us. Had a man
foreseen it a year before, what a deal might he have saved, and gained by
buying good store of that grain then! When Joseph foresaw the seven years
famine in Egypt, it was his wisdom and providence to buy all the Corn that
ever he could lay his hands on, and what a world of advantage did it bring in
to the King of Egypt! If he had stayed buying till the famine came, he could
have had Corn for no money, none was to be had, and Egypt had starved for it.
So wisely he did to buy Corn whilst Corn was plentiful.

Secondly, Buying the truth will keep the Truth and the Gospel amongst us, and
will not leave coming to the market: But if once his takings fail, and men
cease to buy, he may come a while still to try if his markets will mend, but
if he sees they mend not, and men buy not, he goes quite away and carries his
commodities to some other place, where he may find better trading. Just so
here: Buying will keep God and the Gospel with us, keep the market going, and
the Gospel will never go; but once slight Gods Truth, and regard not the
buying of his commodity, God will pack up and be gone, and try a new place for
trading. He cast those out of the Temple that bought and sold, Luc. 19. he
cast them out for trading in the Temple, but here he will cast men out of the
Temple, will unchurch them, will take away Church and Gospel, because men do
not buy in the Temple. If ever ye lose the Gospel, and Truth, be assured that
ye lose it because ye make no more regard of buying the truth. Ye see many
places that were great market Towns, that now their market is down and quite
decayed. Why so? because men come not in to sell commodities. And why came they
not in to sell? Because men came not in to buy. So here: If we will not buy
the Truth, God will take his Truth away, our markets shall down, and God will
carry his Truth to Turks, Indians, Jews, and there God will have great and
goodly markets. God will not stay long where once markets grow dead.

Secondly, the prohibition follows, Sell it not. When once thou have gotten
thus he prohibits the selling of the truth. Do not sell it when once thou
have it, part not with Truth, Grace, Religion upon any terms whatsoever.

That the Truth of God once bought, must never be sold; once gotten, and
obtained, must never be parted withal.

It is not with this, as with other worldly commodities. Other commodities a
man may buy, and may sell again. A man may buy an house, and sell it again,
may buy land and sell it again: Yea men do buy other commodities on purpose
to sell them, as Merchants and Tradesmen. In this kind men may buy and sell,
but for this commodity of Truth men must only buy and not sell. Other trading
lies in buying and selling both, but a Christians trade lies only in buying:
Buy they must, and buy they may as much as they will, but sell they may not at
any hand. Buy the Truth and sell it not.

Prove. 4.5, 6. Get, that is, Buy, the same word: And not only buy, but when ye
have bought, sell it not, that is expressed in the words following, forget it
not, decline not, forsake her not. And therefore, Prove. 19.8. He that gets
wisdom loves his own soul, he that keeps understanding shall find good.
Mark then, it is not all that God requires of us to get wisdom, but he
requires that when we have gotten it we keep it. He that sells it keeps it
not. A man keeps not that which he sells, but parts with it. He that gets,
and he that keeps. Christians must be keepers, as well as getters. Buy the
truth, and keep the Truth, keep it fast and sure, never to part with it more.
2 John 2. for the Truths sake which dwells in us. Truth must not only lodge
with us, and be a guest with us for a night or so, must not sojourne with us,
be with us for a year or so, but it must dwell with us. I, but a man may dwell
a long time in an house, and yet be turned out for all that. I, but it must not
be so with the Truth, The Truth which dwells in us, and shall be with us for
ever. Truth once bought must be bought for ever, must never be sold more nor
parted with. It is with Truth as it was with the Land of Canaan, Levit. 25.23.
The Land shall not be sold for ever, or to be quite cut off. As that which a
man sells he sells for ever, and a man quite cuts off all future claim and
right to it. The sale quite cuts it off from him. The land of Canaan, and men's
inheritances therein might not be sold, and a perpetual alienation of it be
made from the owner. All they might do was but a kind of lease, which must
determine too at the year of Jubilee. It is mine says the Lord, therefore must
not be sold. And so, the Truth must not be sold, no not leased out neither. The
Jews might sell their land for a time, but not for ever. But the truth may not
be sold though but for a time, a little time. The Land shall not be sold for
ever. The truth must not be sold at all, Apoc. 3.11. Behold I come quickly,
hold fast that which thou have. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Hold fast that which is good. Prove.
7.2, 4. Would a man sell his eyes, or sell his sister, and kinswoman, the one
were madness, and the other barbarous inhumanitie.

First, It condemns such as are not for thirty pieces, the price of a servant:
A vile price, to sell a boy for an harlot, and a girl for wine, Joel 3.3. To
sell the poor for a pair of shoes. At baser rates do too many sell the
truth.

Secondly, Let it teach us then, upon no terms to part with the truth of God,
to sell it for no price. Though we may be offered ever so fairly, yet be sure
to hold and keep the truth, Psalm. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as an
heritage for ever. Hold them and keep them as thine inheritance. No wise man
will sell his inheritance. It was a fair offer that Ahab made Naboth for his
vineyard, either a better vineyard, or give him money for it. God forbid, says
Naboth, that I should give thee mine inheritance, that he should sell it him
for his money. So let us make the truth our inheritance, and let us not be
like prodigal dingthrifts, that sell their inheritance and patrimony, and then
must thieve, or beg. Do not for profits, ease, liberty, etc. sell and part
with the truth. We are borne to bear witness to the Truth, Joh. 18.37. and
we ought not to be sellers of, but fellow helpers to the Truth, 3 John 8. Men
must be valiant for the Truth, Jer. 9.3. If such sad times should come, as Isa.
59.15. that Truth should fail, and Dan. 8.12. That truth be cast to the
ground, yet then sell not the truth, but stand for, and stand to the truth. And
that we may be the better resolved to cleave close to the Truth, and never to
part with it, and sell it, consider well these motives following.

First, to sell the Truth at what price impossible to sell the Truth, but a man
must needs sell it under foot, impossible to sell it for any thing that comes
near the worth of it. See Prove. 3.13, 14, 15. All the things thou can desire
are not to be compared to her. Job 28.16, 17, 18. It cannot be valued with the
gold of Ophir, with the precious Onix, or the Sapphire. The gold and the
Crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it shall not be for fine gold.
No mention shall be made of Coral, or of pearls: for the price of wisdom is
above Rubies. Houses lands, liberty, wife, children, life it self, they are
all too cheap, too low a price to take for Truth, and to part with Truth for.
It may be by selling the truth, and parting with it, thou have got preferment,
and it may be when thou have sold the truth upon such terms thou art ready to
bless thy self, and to say as they did that sold their flocks, Zech. 11.5.
They that sell them say, Blessed be God for I am rich. It may be thou growest
rich by selling the Truth, have gotten such preferment, and promotion, in
recompense of thy falling from the Truth and Religion. It may be thou have
gotten liberty out of trouble and prison, have saved thy lands and thy life, by
the sale and forsaking of the Truth, and thou think thou have sold it well,
to get and save all this by it. As well as thou have got, thou have made a
fools bargain, thou have sold it for trifles, thou have not gotten the tenth
part of the price Truth is worth. Esau sold his birthright for a mess of
pottage. All thou have gotten, be it what it will, is but as a mess of
pottage to a precious jewel. If a man will sell the Truth, let him sell it and
spare not, if he can sell it for that which is better then it, nay if he can
sell it but for that which is but as good as it: But inasmuch as there is
nothing in this world that can come near the worth of it, it is a childish,
and a foolish thing to part with it. If a man have a mind to sell his house
and land, yet if when he has offered it to sell he cannot get the worth of
it, but if he sell it, he must part with it upon low terms must take an
hundred pounds for that which is worth a thousand, he will rather keep it
still, and never sell it rather then sell it so under foot, then sell it so as
all the world shall laugh at him for a fool and a silly fellow: So here, if
the world can give thee according to the worth of Truth, sell it, and put it
off, and spare not; but inasmuch as the world cannot give thee the hundredth
part of the worth of it, sell it not, but keep it still rather then make a
fools bargain, and to be made the laughing stock of men and Angels.

Secondly, to sell the Truth, it is to make a profane bargain, and it is a
manifest evidence of a profane heart. Heb. 12.15. Look diligently least any
man fall from the grace of God, that is, lest any man sell the Truth, they are
the same thing. What if any man do sell the truth, and fall from the Doctrine
of Grace? Lest there be any profane person as Esau was, who for one morsel of
meat sold his birthrights. Mark then, that that man that sells the truth and
falls off from it, is such another profane person as Esau was, and is guilty of
the same profaneness that he was. Esaus profaneness what was it? not only in
this that he sold such a privilege at so despicable a price (that indeed
aggravates his profaneness) but in that he sold spiritual things for
temporal things. The selling of his birthright was the selling of his title
to, and hope of Heaven. This to do is profaneness, and this they do that
sell the Truth for ease, preferment, liberty, life, etc. They sell spiritual
things for temporal ones; they sell their right to, and hope of Heaven for
outward things. And thus are they guilty of making a profane bargain. Thou
that sellest the Truth thou make Esaus bargain, and show thy self as
profane a wretch as Esau was.

Thirdly, to sell the Truth, it is to Ezekiel. 7.12. Let not him that sells
mourn, but no man has more cause to mourn then he that sells the Truth, that
man may come home by weeping cross. That as Solomon speaks in that case,
Prove. 11.26. He that withholds Corn, the people shall curse him: but
blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. So here contrarily. He
that holds, and keeps fast the truth, God himself shall bless him, but
cursing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. It is that which will
bring a curse with it, and therefore a dangerous sale. Dangerous in these
respects.

First, Such as do make Merchandise of the truth, and sell it, and once part
with it, they seldom or never recover it again. That Is Gods curse upon them
for selling, that they shall never redeem or buy it more. A man that sells his
inheritance, it is seldom seen that ever he comes to buy it again. And yet
it is possible, and falls out often in the World, that a man sells his house and
Land, and lives to redeem and buy it again: But when a man has sold the
truth, and has played the voluntary Apostata by falling from Religion; whose
experience can give an example of any one that ever recovered again, and
repented, and received, and embraced the truth again. That Is commonly Gods
curse upon such, since ye have sold it, ye shall sell it for ever, you shall
never have the commodity again. That as in that sense the Prophet speaks,
Eze. 7.13. The seller shall not return to that which is sold: So in this case,
God in wrath makes it good upon the sellers of the Truth, such sellers shall
not return to that which they have sold, but as they have parted with the
truth, so they and the truth shall be parted for ever. They are irreducible,
irrecoverable by the Ministry of the Word, Hos. 11.7. And my people are bent
to backe-sliding from me; though they called them to the most High, none at
all would exalt him.

Secondly, Such as sell the Truth,

First, They shall be sold over to sin, sold to be bond slaves and servants
to all wickedness. That as it is said of Ahab, 1 Reg. 21.25. He did sell
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord. There was none like
unto him: So it is true often of the sellers of the Truth, that when men have
once bought the Truth and then sell it again, they have once professed the Truth
and Religon, and then decline, and fall off, they grow so wicked, so vile, so
base in their courses, that there are none like them, they be men sold over to
sin, to commit wickedness with greediness. The house fell, says Christ,
and the fall of that house was great. If these men, says Moses dye the common
death of men, etc. So these men fall not the common falls, sin not the common
sins of men, but prove the most transcendent, outrageous sinners of all other
men. None so loose, none so notorious drunkards, adulterers, non so bitter and
pestilent persecutors of the Truth as they. Dan. 11.30. There were forsakers of
the Covenant, sellers of the Truth, and what proved they, verse. 32. wicked
doers against the Covenant. Psalm. 53.3. Every one of them is gone back, back
from the truth, were sellers of the truth. And what proved they? they are
altogether become filthy. They prove filthy fellows, filthy drunkards, filthy
adulterers, filthy scoffers, filthy persecutors. Thus men that have sold the
Truth, are sold to work wickedness in the sight of God and men.

Secondly, they shall be sold over into the hand and power of their enemies.
When men sell Truth, they sell Psalm. 44.12. Thou sellest thy people for naught.
We shall never find God threatening to sell his people, or selling them, but
when they had first sold the Truth. He threatens to sell them, Deuteronomy. 28.6, 8.
There ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and bond-women. But this
threatening is upon their forsaking God, and his truth, and the purity of
Religion, and their falling off to superstition and Idolatry. And when he did
sell them, why was it? but because they had first sold the Truth, Deuteronomy. 32.30,
32. How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except
their rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up? For their vine is of
the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of
gall, their clusters are bitter. And so Judge. 3.7, 8. And the children of
Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgot the Lord their God, and
served Balaaim, and the groves. Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against
Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Cushan-Rishathaim King of
Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Cushan-Rishathaim eight years.
And Judge. 4.1, 2. And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of
the Lord, when Ehud was dead. And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin
King of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor, the Captain of whose host was Sisera
which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles. It is an heinous thing to sell a
righteous man for silver, the poor for a pair of shoes, Am. 2.6. And that
which brings heavy judgments upon a Nation, how much more will it bring heavy
judgment upon a Nation when they sell God, and they that sell truth sell God.
See how God threaens Tire and Zidon, Joel 3.6, 7, 8. The children also of
Judah, and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians, that ye
might remove them far from their border. Behold I will raise them out of the
place whither ye have sold them, and will return your recompense upon your
own head. And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the
children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far
off, for the Lord has spoken it. It was an heinous sin to sell the children
of Jerusalem to the Grecians, God would be quit with them for it. And how
heinous is it then to sell truth which is the Daughter of God? Surely when men
do sell truth, and a Nation does apostatize from God, God will be quit with
them, he will sell them into the hands of their enemies, they and their
children.

Thirdly, such as sell the truth sell their own souls. Get what ye can by
selling the truth, yet what shall a man give in exchange for his own soul.
What if by selling the truth a man could gain the whole world, yet what shall
it advantage a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul. It is ill
selling when a man shall sell to loss, but specially it is ill selling when a
man shall lose his own soul by the bargain. He loses his soul that sells
it, he sells it that sells the truth. See Prove. 19.8. He that gets wisdom,
that buys the truth, loves his own soul. I, but a man may buy truth and sell
it away again, may get wisdom and lose it. And what then is his soul the
better for it? Therefore mark what follows, He that keeps understanding
shall find good: As if he had said, He that gets wisdom, and keeps it, he
that buys truth, and sells it not, he loves his own soul, he saves his
own soul: therefore he that gets it, and keeps it not, that buys it and
sells it again, he hates his own soul, he loses, he damnes his own
soul. Judas he sold Christ for thirty pieces, it was the dearest bargain
that ever man made, in selling of Christ, he sold his own soul, he damned
his own soul by that sale. It is the case of every man that sells truth, he
that sells truth, Iudas-like he sells Christ, and Iudas-like he loses his
own soul. It was death by Law to sell some things, as to steal a man and sell
him, Exodus 21.16. and Deuteronomy. 24.7. And it is death, eternal death to sell the
truth. They that sell the truth, sell God, sell Christ, and so sell their souls.
They sell Heaven, and buy Hell.

Quest. How may a man keep himself from selling the truth?

Answ. First, get the love of the truth into thine heart. That man that loves
the truth will never sell the truth, and the truth is never sold but it is sold
for something that is loved better than the truth. A man that sells it for
preferment and gain, loves gain, and preferment better then the truth, that
sells it for life or liberty, loves these better then truth. Now let a man
learn to love the truth better than all worldly things, and he will never
sell it for them, Psalm. 119.127. I love thy Commandments above gold, yea above
fine gold. Therefore to be sure he would rather sell gold for truth, then
truth for gold. Therefore they sold the truth, and believed lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Because they received not the truth in love. A man that is in love with his
house, with his land, no price will tempt him to sell it. If a man have but an
horse that he loves, though he be offered more then he can be worth, yet
because he loves him, he will not part with him.

Prove. 7.4. Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, and call understanding thy
kinswoman. A man will not sell his sister because he loves her. Say in in this
case, as Nehem. 5.8. We after our ability, have redeemed our brethren the
Jews, which were sold unto the Heathen; and will you even sell your brethren?
Our forefathers, the Martyrs, after their ability bought the truth, and gave
their lives to buy and redeem the truth, and we will even sell the truth which
should be as dear to us as our brethren, as our sisters?

Secondly, take heed, and make conscience

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 22. for this read that. p. 11. l. 26. r. the joy of thy
salvation. p. 18. l. 20. f. both r. holy. p. 21. l. 9. f. prayer r. Christ. p.
ibid. l 24. f. of r. by. p 25. l. 25 f. the r. your. p. 26 l. 25. f. our r.
the. p. 31.22. f. these r. this. p. ibid. l. 25. f. where r. when. p. 36. l.
2^. dele for. p. 38. l. 9. r. to do some good. p. ibid. l. 10. f. know r.
leave. p. 52 l. 8. f. desire r. degree. p. 53. 14. and 16. f. great r. greater.
p. 57. l. 18. f. certainly r. contrarily. p. 65. l. 14. f. Heb. r. Isay. p.
74. l. 14. f. danger r. dampe. p. 86. l. 23. f. he made it. r. as the word is.
p. 91. l. 11. f. brazen r. barren. p. 117. l. 8. f. their r. these. p. ibid. l.
9. f. these r. their times. p. ibid. l. 16. f. God. r. Gods. p. 119. l. 14. f.
that r. then. p. 147. l. 20. f. fire r. five. p. 148. l. 2. f. urged r.
grieved. p. 157. l. 18. f pricks r. pinches. p. 165. l. 26. r. is in debt. p.
168. l. 7. f. so r. go. p ibid. l. 8 f. see r. go. p. 169. l. 1. f. that r.
all. p. 185. l. 14. f Oh. r. Object. p, 188. l. 19. f. with that of Haman r. in
that with Haman. p. 203. l. 22. f. the r. his. p. 208. l. 1. r. to lay hold. p.
215. l. 9. f. learn r. know. p. 242. l. 8. f. verse. 39. r. 35. p. 250. l. 26.
f. loose r. base. p. 251. l. 11. r. reign over them. p ibid. l. 12. f. bed r.
body. p. 261. l. 18. f. disperse r. dispense. p. 273. l. 17. f. was r. or as.
p. ibid. l. 18. f. rules. r. reads. p. 276. l. 7. f. as r. that is. p. 279. l.
5. r. so a sign of spiritual life. p. 282 24. f. wasted. r. marred. p. 284.
l. 11. f. cherish r. nourish. p. 287. l. 10. r. men say as they, Mal. 1.12. p.
291. r. a deceived heart. p. 296. l. 2. f. fitted r. filled. p. 297. l. 17. r.
long coopt. p. 306. l. 9. f. time r. two. p. 307. l. 26. r. the knowledge of
the truth, the love of the truth. p. 313. l. 13. f. dispersing r. dispensing.
p. ibid. l. ibid. f. many r. Mary. p. 343. l. 14. f. pin r. piece. p. 347. f.
good r. goods. p. 348. l. 20. f. elleemisynary, r. eleemosynary. p. 50. l. 2.
f. go r. goes.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes.
September 12. 1639.

