THE CHRISTIAN'S THE ORICO-Practicon: OR, His whole Duty, consisting of
Knowledge and Practice.

Expressed in two Sermons or Discourses at S. Maryes in Oxon.

By ROBERT DYER, Mr. of Arts, Late of Lincoln College and Hart-hall in Oxon,
now Lecturer at the Devizes in Wiltshire.

woodcut of angel standing over death near a cross

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for Walter Hammond, and are to be sold by Henry
Hammond Bookeseller in Salisbury, 1633

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, my much honored friends, ROBERT DREVV Esquire, one
of his Majesty's Justices of peace and Quorum, for the County of Wilts: and to
the right worthy and virtuous, Mrs. JANE DREVV, his Wife.
Right Worshipful,
IT is not any affectation of public notice, or vainglory, that has cast
me on the censure of these over-cryticall times, in the publication of these
mean endeavors: No, my record is on high, how conscious I am of my own
weakness and defects. But, that I may render some reason of this my action:
First (I confess) the good will, which (according to my bounden duty) I have
to Sion, the Church, whereof I am an unworthy member, moved me hereunto: that if
it shall please the all-disposing LORD of Heaven and Earth, to gather me
shortly to my fathers (as my crazy body continually minds me of my no long
continuance here) I may leave behind me some testimony of mine affection and
study of doing what good I may to my fellow members. Next, I profess, that
deserved respect, and those manifold engagements, wherewith I stand obliged to
your Worthy selves and all yours, require some testimonial of mine unfeigned
thankefullnesse: which should have been (indeed) more really manifested in some
present of far greater value: But that I am constrained to use the Father's
Apology, Nazianz.
(...), etc. and to say with the Poet (though in another sense) Sunt verba and
voces: Horat.
Papers and prayers are the best requital poor Ministers can make to their
best deserving friends, for their best and greatest favors.

How much I stand engaged for your many and more then ordinary courtesies, I
could here willingly (though not sufficiently express; but that I know, your
noble disposition as free from vainglory, as I desire mine should be from
flattery: These (I acknowledge) have enforced me to hazard the censure of
ambition rather then ingratitude, and to show my self rather a weak man in
print, then altogether unthankefull. Be pleased therefore (worthy Sir, and you
Religious Matron) to accept of these my worthless labors, (being a pair of
plain Sermons, delivered some few years since, before a most Learned and
judicious Auditory,) in liew of all your well-deserving courtesies: And
withal, to add this one to the former; Vouchsafe to shelter this poor
abortive with your Patronage; whereby it may perhaps find better entertainment
abroad, and the parent less fear the censures or sarcasmes of whatsoever
malevolent Zoilus. For which (as for all other your favors) I shall never
cease to pray for the welfare and felicity, temporal, spiritual and
eternal, of your most worthy selves, and of all those flourishing branches and
hopeful plants derived from you, nor shall I desire longer to be, then to be

Your Worships in all duty, service, and gratitude, most obliged: ROBERT DYER.

THE CHRISTIAN'S THEORICO-PRACTICON.
JOHN 13.17. (...).

If ye know these things, Happy are ye if ye do them.


HVmility is fitly compared by S. Aug. de verb. Dom.
Austen, to an edifice, where, the lower the foundation, the higher and surer
may be the structure: And as fitly may this building type out unto us the
mystical body of CHRIST: where CHRIST JESUS (by the confession of the Apostle,
1. 1. Cor. 3.11.
Cor. 3.11.) is the Foundation, and we by many joyntures and couplings make up
the whole structure of his Church: Now how low this foundation was laid, how
far he humbled himself, and became of no reputation, is evident by his
Incarnation, Birth, Passion, and the whole course of his life. Among other acts
of his humiliation, please you to cast your eyes on one in the precedent verses
of this Chapter; where you shall find him (under whose feet, the earth and
the inhabitants are but as a footstool) washing the feet of his Disciples;
not out of any theatricall vainglory, or Customary Ceremony, but from a
sincere affection of lowliness and Humility. Where in performing so mean a
service to the most servile and dishonorable parts of his own servants, yea
and among the rest of his Betrayer, he gave them a rare example of mutual
Charity, Benevolence, and Humility. Does Majesty so far stoop to misery,
heaven to earth, GOD to man, the LORD to his Slaves? whither then shall
miserable Man humble himself? Dust, dung, nothing, are terms suitable enough
to his frail condition. How vile then is a proud man, how dissonant from the
temper of his Savior? Qui sedet super Cherubim proditoris pedes lavit, tu homo
terra and pulvis effereris and intumescis? it is the meditation of an ancient
Father on the place: Chrysostom.
Calv. in loc.
And it is Mr. Calvin's censure, that he which submits not himself to the
meanest of his brethren, denies CHRIST to be his LORD and Master.

The Disciple's Intellects were now sufficiently informed about this virtue of
Humility, both by their Masters example to verse 12. and Precept in the 5
subsequent; there wanted nothing now but the reducing of their knowledge to
practice. They could not be ignorant that all moral virtues are seated in the
Will, the practical faculty of the soul to know them therefore and not do
them, would be no more beneficial, then to see a treasure and not possess it:
their doing must proceed as far as their knowledge: Dwell they may not in
Aerie speculations, their actions as well as his must be exemplarie: their
Savior had joined his precept and example together, and they must exactly
observe his method, (for imitate him they may in his moralls, though not in his
miracles:) They have now their Commission, up they must and be doing, If ye
know these things, happy are ye if you do them.

My Text is the perfect Idaea of a Christians life, (...), his whole duty
consisting both of knowledge and practice, and therefore fitter to be
compounded then divided: for so you see them here conjoined by our Savior,
'twere impiety to sever them, quae Deus conjunxit nemo separet; let their
league remain inviolable, and let heaven and earth be dissolved, before their
union in a Christian's profession: Howsoever, I shall crave pardon to salute
them severally in my discourse, though in my Conversation I may not. The words
(you see) are an implicit kind of Argumentation, whose both ground and summary
Illation is this, They that know and do are happy.

The parts rank themselves naturally as the material terms; whereof the
first is Knowledge, (...), if ye know these things] the second, Practise]
(...), if ye do them] the third, the issue and benefit of both, Happiness,
(...), happy are yee] The first is the only ornament of the understanding,
Knowledge] The second the whole employment of the Will, Practise] The third the
consummate perfection of the whole man, Happiness. Of these in their order,
and first of the first, the Ornament of the Understanding, Knowledge, (...), if
ye know these things.

If I might not seem to trifle before so Judicious an Audience, I. Part.
the first particle (if) should not escape me, which is not here dubitative,
but (as in many other places) suppositive: For the lesson taught was easy
enough, especially to the apprehension of an Apostle or Disciple of CHRIST's,
laid down so evidently by the precept and example of their Master; so that he
could not but conceive them sufficiently informed, and consequently this [If
ye know these things] is the same with [yee know them]: But I may not insist
on words, when the place and my scantling calls for real observations.

Knowledge is the maine difference between living and inanimate, sensible and
insensible creatures; distinct and rational the only distinction between man
and beast: to reject knowledge then were to abandon humanity, to affect
Ignorance were to put off man, and become either a beast or a dead Carkas:
Laert. in vita Aristot.
for so the Philosopher in Laertius puts the difference between an
understanding man, and an ignorant, affirming that the one differs from the
other as much as a living man from a dead. It Is that Image of GOD, in which man
was created, witness the Apostle, Col. 3.10. Col. 3.10.
admonishing us to put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge, after the
Image of him that created him: Would we recover this decayed Image? Knowledge
is the means; Would we fructify in grace? the seed and root must be sown
and grounded in knowledge. That this knowledge is the first part and act of
faith is denied by one, but such as keep their proselytes in perpetual
Ignorance: though their own Peter Lombard (as they challenge him) long since
averred the contrary: Lomb. lib. 3. Sentent. did. 24.
lib. 3. did. 24. where he excludes not knowledge from the most difficult
point of faith, the doctrine of the Deity: Nemo potest credere in Deum (says
he) nisi aliquid intelligatur. No man can believe in GOD, unless the knowledge
of him be in some measure obtained. And the Angelical doctor in his ma.
1.2.76. Quaest. 2. Art. distinguishing of in vincible and vincible ignorance,
acknowledges the latter to be a sin, if it be in those things which we
ought and are bound to know: and what those are in his opinion, please you
hear him speak for himself: Illa scilicet sine quorum scientia non potest
quispiam debitumactum recte exercere: vnde omnes tenentur communiter scire ea
quae sunt fidei, and vniversalia juris praecepta. Thus far are the Schoolmen
(whom they challenge as their own) the Patrons of knowledge, so that even in
their judgment we cannot be faithful practitioners in the Church of CHRIST,
unless we be first competent Gnostics in his Shoole.

The ancient Fathers and our Orthodox Neotericks have been more plentiful
abettors hereof: that I may not darken so clear a matter with a Cloud of
Witnesses, Saint Chrysostom and August. Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Romans
shall serve for all; the former of whom, Hom. 26. in Romans affirms that our
Ignorance is not a sufficient Apology for our errors: erit enim quando and
ignorantiae poenas dabimus, quando scilicet ipsa ignorantia veniam non habebit;
The time shall come when we shall suffer for our Ignorance; when Ignorance
shall not patronize it self, much less any other obliquityes. Sr. August. de
Gratia and Lib. Arbitr. Cap. 2.
The later, in the 2 Chapter, lib. de great. and lib. Arbitr. is very plenary
and punctual, please you to hear him somewhere a little Epitomized. Sed nec
ipsi sine poena erunt, qui legem Deinesciunt, etc. Neither shall they be
without punishment which know not the Law of GOD: for as the Apostle, they that
have sinned without the Law, shall perish without the Law, but they that have
sinned by the Law, by the Law shall be judged: and a little after: Gravius
peccat homo sciens quam nesciens, nec tamenideo confugiendum est ad ignor
antiaetenebras, ut in ijs quisque requirat excusationem: Aliud enim est
nescisse, aliud scire noluisse, etc. True it is that he offends more hainously,
that sins through knowledge, then he that slips through Ignorance: but we may
not therefore fly to Ignorance for an excuse: for it is one thing to be
nescient, another to be wilfully Ignorant; this proceeding from the
perverseness of the Will, that from the defect of the faculty or means of
knowledge. the perverse will indeed is most to be reprooved, but yet is not
simple Nescience excused from the guilt of eternal punishment: Thus for Saint
August. Neither is the infallible Touchstone of all such differences, less
copious in the confirmation hereof. We are expressly commanded to increase in
knowledge, Col. 1.10.
Col. 1.10. And to that intent, the Law (the only means of knowledge in it is
time) was often proposed by GOD himself, to the diligent search and meditation
of his people the Israelites. Witness, Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, etc.
6.6, 7, 8. and 9. verses. These words shall be in thine heart, and thou shall
rehearse them continually unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou
taryest in thine house, Josh 1.8.
etc. and again, Ios. 1.8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy
mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night. David petitions GOD for
knowledge, Psalm. 143.9. Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I
lift up my soul unto thee: And gives it in especial charge to his Son
Solomon, to know the LORD, 1. Chr. 28.9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou
the GOD of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, etc. Which the Wise
King did no way neglect, but left sufficient testimony of his abundant
knowledge, both by his unparalleld example in it, his large Encomiums of it,
and manifold precepts to his son (and with him to all the sons and children
of GOD) to search and labor diligently for it: you cannot miste of them in his
Proverbes; as in Proverbs the 2.2, 3, 4, and following verses: See that thou
incline thine ear to wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding, etc.
Wise men lay up knowledge, pro. 10.14. A prudent man deals with knowledge,
Pro 13.16. The heart of the prudent gets knowledge, and the ear of the wise
seeks knowledge, Pro. 18.15. The lips of knowledge are a precious Jewel,
Pro. 20.15. And in the 11. Chapter verse 9. Through knowledge shall the just
be delivered: As if knowledge were the only means of deliverance from
affliction and judgment.

I might be over-copious, but I hasten. Our blessed Savior himself affirms
that eternal life consists in this endowment of knowledge, Ioh. 17.3. This is
life eternal that they might know thee, the only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST
whom thou have sent: and the Prophet Isaiah in that sublime testimony of God
the Father concerning his Son, makes it equivalent to, and of the same nature
with true and saving faith, Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many. See here, that happy work of our Justification
attributed to knowledge, which the Prophet Habakuk (Chap. 2. v. 4) and the
grand Apostle of the Gentiles (in more then a full Jury of testimonies)
assigns only unto saving faith. Vid. Romans 1.17. Cap. 3.28. Cap. 4.5.13. Cap
5.1. Gal. 3.11. and 5.6.
You have the LORD himself often complaining of the defect of this Habit of
knowledge in his people; 2. Cor. 1.24. Ephesians. 2.8. Heb. 10.38. and many other
places.
Isai. 1.3. Israel (says he) does not know, my people does not consider: and
then follows that severe commination of the Almighty, Ah sinful Nation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, etc. Intimating, that all
their impieties proceeded from the want of knowledge of their spiritual
estate, and consideration of their ways. And in the 5. of Isai. verse 1.
therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge. So
likewise, by the Prophet Jeremy, Chapter 4. ver. 22. My people is foolish, they
have not known me, they are foolish children, they have no understanding,
etc. and by the Prophet Hosea, Chapter 4. verse. 6. My people are destroyed for
lack of knowledge; because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee, etc. as if all the afflictions and judgments of the Jews, their
Captivity, rejection and utter desolation, had proceeded only from this defect
of spiritual knowledge. But what need I light a Candle to the Sun? The
Scripture condescending to the Capacity of the meanest, does almost every where
implicitly compare the understanding to the Eye, the Will and affections to the
feet; that directing, these walking; that conferring the Insight of good,
these the prosecution. Now, how vain it were for a blind man to undertake a
journey; how many dangers he must needs sustain by the way, yet never attain
his journeys end, none can be ignorant. Pray we therefore with David, that the
LORD would enlighten our eyes, that we may see the wonderful things of his
Law: that he would make us to understand the way of his precepts, and then we
may add, we will run the way of his commandments: for if we run without this
light of knowledge we cannot but fall into the ditch of Errors, if not into the
pit of perdition. Ignoti nulla cupido, was the Thesis of the Poet, and it is
true in Divinity: No man can affect the good he knows not, nor fear the evil
whereof he is ignorant. Arist. 3. Ethic.
The Philosopher in the third of his Ethics assures us that that can be no
virtuous action, which is not done, Volenter, scienter and constanter: so that
if it be casually performed, and not out of the ground of praeelection and
knowledge, the action perhaps may be good for the substance, but the agent no
more conscious to the goodness thereof, then Baalams Ass of what she spoke
to her Master, or Pilate of the salvation of mankind by delivering our Savior
to be crucified. In a word, Scientia conscientiam dirigit, conscientia
scientiam perficit: Our knowledge must be the directory of our conscience in
it is practice, and our practice the perfection of our knowledge. We must know
to do, before we can do what we know.

Blush then ye grand Imposters, startle ye merciless seducers, who are not
ashamed to take away the Key of knowledge from your silly flock, to pluck out
the eyes of your Proselytes, and withdraw the light of the Gospel from them,
and then send them that long and difficult journey to heaven. How can the
choose but err, who are thus extruded into more then Egyptian darkness? and
like the Sodomites, Genesis 19. who were stricken with such blindness, that they
could not find out Lots door, so are these silly ones so blind in Ignorance,
that they cannot find the gate of the heavenly palace, or new Jerusalem.

Ignorance with them is the mother of devotion, but Saint Augustine sticks not
to call her, pessimam matrem, a very bad mother, and that of two as bad
daughters: August.
Pessimae matris Ignorantiae pessimae itidem sunt duae filiae, falsitas
scilicet, and dubitatio; falsehood and doubting are the best offspring that she
procreates. Scripture (the only means of saving knowledge) with them is Inky
divinity, obscure, a Nose of wax, Albert. Pighius lib. 1 Eccles. Hierar.
a shipmans hose, the cause of many schisms, errors and heresies; and
therefore the knowledge or perusal thereof forbidden the people: This perhaps
it may be to them that perish, but to us it is the savor of life, and power of
GOD unto salvation. But o the blasphemy of these miscreants! good GOD, that any
wretch should be so audacious, thus to revile that word of his Maker, by which
at the last day he shall be judged, to make his GOD a Liar and that word of
his the cause of schisms errors and heresies which as the Sun in the midst
of his glory dispells the mists of all errors! And here, I might observe a
pretty but lamentable contradiction of theirs. The Scripture (say they)
contains not all things necessary to salvation, unless they add traditions;
and yet an Implicit faith shall serve turn for the multitude, without the
knowledge of either: what is this but flatly to deny them the means of
salvation, and to be more merciless to their own people then the Devil
himself? for he but allures, they by a consequence compel them to their
destruction. Great cause have we (beloved) to praise the mercies of our
gracious GOD, who has freed us from their tyrannical Injunctions.

Saint Peter would have us be ready to render a reason of our faith, 1. Pet.
3.15.
and of the hope that is in us, but (maugre their prime supposed founder) this
is no more regarded by them, then the perusal of the Scripture: an Implicit or
infolded faith will content them, if they believe with the Church, though they
know neither what the Church nor themselves believe, they imagine they are in
the right way to Canaan, when they are led blindfold to Egypt.

I deny not but that there are in the Church many (...), Babes in CHRIST, and
Children in faith and knowledge: I confess that an implicit faith may be in
some cases tolerated, so it be not imposed by a peremptory determination of the
Church, but grounded on the general truth of Scripture, when we want either
faculty or means for the attaining of that knowledge which affords us a
distinct explication of the particulars. But yet were this distinct knowledge
far more comfortable and beneficial to a Christian, and would make his faith
both more apparent and real: Simil.
Fire may be in the flint, yet is it both indiscernible and improper till it be
stricken out with a steel. Aromaticall odors, while kept close together, have
little or no smell at all, but pounded or beaten, fill a whole room with the
fragrance. Costly Merchandise wrapped up in a bundle affects not the buyer, but
unfolded, invites him to the procurement. I need not make the Illation, the
slendrest Intellect may supply thus much for an Antapodosis, that the gross
knowledge of this Implicit faith, is very imperfect, and hardly sufficient to
impose the name of faith upon it, unless it be unfolded by a more evident
view of it is particular objects.

Let their gross Ignorance then (who affect it) reside within their own
territories, never approach it our Sion; let their confused knowledge, be
their own confusion; but let us endeavor to cherish and perpetuate that
light, which is so happily sprung up, and has been so long maintained among
us; And happy may we esteem our selves in the fruition of so inestimable a
benefit: for so our Savior would have his Apostles account it, Matthew. 13.
verse 11. when he tells them, to you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven: Mat. 13.11.
thus inviting them to gratitude by a commemoration of their gracious
endowments; And as severe a judgment was it for the unbeleeving Jews to be
blinded with Ignorance, Isay 6.9, 10.
that seeing they might see and not perceive, and hearing they might hear, and
not understand, Matthew. Mat. 13.13.
13. Aeschylus in Prometh.
consonant to that of Prometheus in the Tragedy: (...), etc. So ignorant were
they, as if the faculty of their understanding and knowledge had lost their use
and function, and were now become rather privations then habits. 'Twas the
greatest benefit of Christ's prophetical Office, to give knowledge of salvation
to his people for the remission of their sins, Luke 1.77. shame be it for us
to reject this knowledge, and frustrate the coming of our Savior. Increase
we then daily in knowledge, and since we have a triple portion of his grace
offered us, let a triple portion of his spirit be multiplied in us. It Is
reported of the Inhabitants of China, that they were wont to boast, that they
saw with two eyes, and all other nations but with one, but we have a third
super-added, which they were destitute of, (to wit) the eye of Faith and
Religion: For bruit beasts have the use of one, the eye of sense, the natural
man of two, the eye of sense and reason, but the Christian of three, the eye of
sense reason and faith.

And here might I enter into a perplexed controversy, whether that eye of
reason in a natural man destitute of the light of spiritual knowledge of
faith and religion, be sufficient to direct him the way of eternal
happiness? Dr. Prideaux Lect. 8. de Salute Ethnicorum.
But that I am saved a labor by our Learned Professor, to whom I refer you
for satisfaction: only give me leave to add two or three words, from those
places of the Fathers before cited, and I shall not be tedious; Saint Augustine
without any scruple, is bold to affirm, August. vbi supra.
that simplex and mera inscitia, neminem sic excusat, ut sempiterno igne non
ardeat, (si propterea non credidit, quia non audi vit omnino quod crederet) sed
for tassis ut mitius ardeat etc. Simple Nescience does so far excuse no man
(no not though he never heard that he might believe) that he should not burn
in eternal fire, but only perhaps that his torment there may be somewhat
mi^igated: for that of the Psalmist was not spoken without cause, Psalm. 79.6.
Power out thine anger upon the Nations that have not known thee; nor that of
the Apostle, 2. These. 1.8.
When the LORD shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance
of them that know not GOD. And Saint Chrysostom questioning whether spiritual
knowledge be to be required of a rustic or Barbarian, makes this answer: Non
solum ab Agricola and Barbaro, sed si quis barbaris ipsis barbarior: so that if
it be not in the Counsel of the Almighty, to supply him with spiritual
knowledge, neither is it his pleasure to bring him to his spiritual Canaan,
the place of eternal rest. The 18. Article of our Church (which is not usual
with her) proceeds against the oppugners of this opinion with an Anathema,
holding them as accursed, who hold that every man shall be saved by the Law or
sect which he professes, so he frame his life according to that Law, and the
light of nature: For holy Scripture sets out unto us, only the name of JESUS
CHRIST whereby men may be saved. Act. 4.12.
But I affect brevity: that knowledge is the first act of faith ye have heard,
and I suppose none doubt's it, that without faith it is impossible to please
GOD; Heb. 11.6.
that he that believes not shall be condemned: that whatsoever is not of
faith is sin, Romans 14.23
is as questionless, as the authority of the Penmen is infallible. We may as
soon go to the Indyes without a viaticum, as to heaven without saving
knowledge and faith in the only Mediator between GOD and man: This is it
which seasons all our actions and makes them pleasing to the Almighty, with it
our greatest sins may be remitted, and without it our meanest cannot: Nay our
best actions without this, are turned to sin, and are but splendida peccata,
sins gilded over with the show of virtue; for as excellently that divine
Poet, Omne probitatis opus nisi semine verae
Exoritur fidei, Prosper.
peccatum est, inque reatum
Vertitur, and sterilis cumulat sibi gloria poenam.


If sin be an impediment to salvation, moral honesty or civil Justice
(which is naught else without faith) can no whit further us in the acquisition
of felicity; formally (I say) it cannot, though perhaps dispositively it may,
for as the golden mouthed Father affirms; that when we endeavor the constant
practice of moral virtue and diligently perform what we can, Chrysostom. in
Roman.
GOD often in mercy supplies what is wanting, and so brings us to the knowledge
of his truth; as he did Cornelius and the Eunuch in the Acts: and whether
Plato and Seneca with other Philosophers may not be examples hereof, I will not
determine; though there want not authority to uphold it: But I fear, their
Ignorance in divine affairs, especially concerning saving faith, countervailed
both their knowledge and practice in moral; so Ignorant were they in the midst
of all their knowledge.

This ushers in another Corrollary, and leads me the trodden path of that
common question, how far forth Ignorance excuses an offense: which because
every smattering Sophister can resolve with two or three distinctions, and for
that I have partly touched it before, I pass it over with this brief, and
vulgar Thesis of the Schools; Vid Thom. Aquinat. 1ma. 2de. Quaest. 76.
that if it be, simplex, nativa, vel, invita, juris divini, vel humani, seu
positivi, Alex. Halens. Biel. Gerson. etc.
it may in some measure excuse it, a tanto but not a toto: but if it be gross
or affected, and of those things after which we are bound to enquire, it
augments more then diminishes the fault, and accuses rather then excuses the
delinquent; making him (with the drunken man in Aristotle) liable to a double
punishment; First, for his fault, Lib. 3. Ethic.
and then for his proud and scornful Ignorance, for so may it justly be
called, it being rather a contempt then a privation of knowledge, Greg. in
Moral.
for there wanted not inveniendi facultas, si fuisset quaerendi voluntas, as
Saint Gregory. Now how lamentable their case is, who with those desperate
wretches in Job, thus reject their GOD and his knowledge with a Discede a
nobis, Job 21.14.
Depart from us, for we will not the knowledge of thy ways, none (unless thus
wilfully blinded) can be ignorant: no doubt this discede shall one day be
requited with another Discedite, Mat. 25.41.
depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels.

And yet (B.B. see, and compassionately deplore, that there are many thousands
in the rural parts of this kingdom (some of them indeed for want of the
means, but most for want of Will and affection to spiritual knowledge) that
are as blind and ignorant in divine affairs (even in this clear Sunshine of
the Gospel) as their grossely-misguided forefathers were in the time of their
necessitated ignorance and superstition, imposed on them by the tyranny of the
Romish Beast. What do these Moles else, but shut their eyes against the divine
rays of this glorious Sun, affect darkness more then light, and like so
many Mucke-wormes, confine themselves to their dunghill, rather then
contemplate the Almighty in his works and word? They will not understand nor
seek after GOD, but say (at least in their Hearts) as those obstinate
Idolaters, Ier. 44.16. The word that thou have spoken in the name of the LORD,
we will not hear it: But our Savior has pronounced their doom, John 3.19.
This is the condemnation, that Light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness more than light. The condemnation] (...), as if it were the
greatest, severest, and that which makes men most inexcusable in the sight of
GOD.

But I trust you have not so learned CHRIST, knowledge, ye are not only the
Israel, but the Priests of the living GOD, and have both the Intellect and the
tongue of the Learned, Isa. 50.4.
knowing how to minister a word of comfort in due season to him that is weary.
let me now be bold to advise you to the performance: lay not up the Talent of
your knowledge in a Napkin, but employ it to your own and others advantage:
Hide not your light under a Bushel, nor tread your savoury salt on the
Dunghill; but enlighten the dark corners of the Church with the one, and
season the unsavory consciences of the putrified world with the other: For as
they shall shine as the stars in the firmament, Dan. 12.3.
who convert many to righteousness, so shall they be no less accursed, Ier.
48.10.
who do the work of the LORD negligently. Paulum sepultae distat inertiae
Caelata virtus -- Little difference is there between a dead man, Horat.
and him that has no energeticall actions of life, and as little difference
between him that buries his knowledge in the closet of his own bosom, and
him that has none at all. Not that I would have every Capritious Novellist
adventure to come to Bethell, before ever he saw Najoth, to rush into the
Sanctuary, before ever he saluted the University, to make a Sermon, before he
can make a Syllogism, and read Scripture, perhaps before he has thoroughly
read his Grammar: No, this is as pernicious as it is preposterous, and
deservedly cried down among us; but that you, who are educated among the
Prophets, and are for the most part Prophets your selves, vocati sicut Adron,
endued with a full maturity of Knowledge and Judgment, would not stifle those
gracious (...), nor envy your Church or Commonwealth the benefit of those
gifts, which your GOD has so freely conferred. The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, (says the Prophet) Mal. 2.7. where Peter Martyr's
observation is, that the Prophet says not that the Priests breast or his heart
should preserve it, (though that be also presupposed) but his Lips,
intimating that he should be ready to communicate it to others, as not being
borne so much for his private good, as the public: In a word; ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye faithfully dispense them.

If this were duly performed; perhaps some of the curiosity of our knowledge
might be spared and yet our selves never the less happy. 'Twas the royal
censure of his late learned Majesty, that he thought not the greatest Clerks
nearest heaven, K. James in Aphoris.
for that much of their knowledge is superfluous: he exemplifies in the great
Cardinal, who makes 400. Questions of Faith, and scarce ten of them which
concern our salvation to understand. Saint Chrysostom indeed wills us to
ascend to heaven in our contemplation, Christ. Hom. 4. de Natura Dei.
but (...), without fantastical curiosity; but that by the meditation
thereof we may better both our selves and others in hope of the fruition.

You know how many of the Bethshemites were slain, 1. Sam. 6.
for prying too boldly into the Arc: how dares then presumptuous dust and
ashes search so curiously into the secrets of the Almighty, and neglecting the
knowledge of more necessary duties, examine the Counsels of the LORD of hosts;
as if he meant to expostulate with his Maker, and extract a reason of his
actions? Mistake me not, Beloved: I am not ignorant of the diversity of persons
and callings, neither dare I debar those who are endued with more eminent
gifts, whether by nature, Industry or divine bounty, to sound the depth of
those mysteries which are contained in the large sea of his revealed Will: but
for vulgar capacities to proceed so far as the boundless Ocean of his
secrets, were to attempt an enterprise (like the fabulous Giants which
assaulted heaven) infinitely beyond the sphere of their Capacity, and would
prove as dangerous as it is presumptuous: do not these men puzzle their
understanding in steed of enforming it; and presuming to to be wise beyond
sobriety, verify that of the Comedian, Nenimium intelligendo faciunt vt nihil
intelligant; Terent.
which we may English in the Apostles phrase, 1. Cor. 8.2. While they think
they know any thing, they know nothing yet as they ought. 'Twere good for these
men to take the counsel of that elegant Father, Hom. 26. in Romans Chrysostom
Ne vocemus Deum in judicium, etc. Let us not call GOD into judgment, nor
enquire why he left this man and called another, for this were nothing else,
then if the servant rejected by his own fault, should curiously sift the whole
Economy of his Master: Miser cum te rationum tuarum solicitum esse oportet, a
Domino rationem exigis, tanquam rationem non redditurus: Miserable man, when it
behooves thee to care for thine own accounts, and how thou might reconcile
thy Master to thy self, thou requir'st an account of him, as if no account
were by thee to be rendered.

Ask Philosophers and they will tell you that, Vehemens sensibile tollit
sensationem, laedit sensorium; let such curious Inquisitors then beware that
this too glorious object dazzle not the eyes of their Intellects, and burn
them, while they think with the Fly, but to hover about this light.

Gerson (though himself a Schooleman, and you know how many unnecessary
Questions they usually propose) in his second part, de Natura and Qualitate
Conscientiae, very moderately distinguishes of a three fold knowledge, the
first of things profitable, the second of things necessary, and the third of
things impertinent to salvation: For the first, Scripture, as the Epistles of
Saint Paul, the History of the Evangelists, etc. wherein though he fall
somewhat short of us, and the truth (who constitute the necessity of this
knowledge in some competent measure) yet goes he beyond his modern
Successors, who (as you have heard) make the knowledge of Scripture not only
unnecessary for their Laity, but many times hurtful and pernicious. Decalogue,
the Articles of our faith, the doctrine of the Sacraments, without which (if
sufficient age and means be affoorded us) salvation is hardly obtained. are
many humane arts and sciences, as Geometry, Arithmeticke, and the like; and
whether the multiplicity of our over inquisitive (...), even in divine
affairs, may not hither be referred, I refer it to your censure. Sure I am
that the revealed will of GOD is the rule of our Actions, and to be ignorant of
this, argues either great contempt or negligence, ^ approve it not, I
altogether condemn it; but for those secrets which GOD has reserved to
himself, they are too wonderful for our knowledge, we cannot comprehend
them; and we may not make our selves his secretaries, nor press too
irreverently into his Chamber of presence; sufficient be it for us that we are
of his Court, though we be not of his Counsel. Aug.
Ignorare velle quae summus magister docere noluit erudita est inscitia. We
may not soar too high with the weak wings of our slender contemplation, least
with Icarus, our wings by over near approaching to his glory be melted, and
we precipitated into a Sea of miseries if not into the gulf of fire and
brimstone.

To sum up all in a word, and that in the phrase of a learned Father:
Prosper. de Provid.
Quae Deus occulta esse voluit, non sunt scrutanda, quae autem manifesta fecit
non sunt negligenda; ne in illis illicite curiosi, and in his damnabiliter in
veniamur ingrati. The things which GOD would have secret, are not by us to be
searched into, neither are those which he has manifested unto us, to be
neglected; that we be not found unlawfully curious in the one, or damnably
ungrateful in the other.

Our Saviors phrase is, (...), if ye know these things: and these (as you may
perceive by the precedents) are but our duties of Charity and Humility, Lessons
easy enough: Why do we then affect the knowledge of things so Infinitely
above our reach? let us rather descend into our own bosoms, and endeavor to
know our selves: de Coelo descendit (...). Iuvenal.
Let us search out every man the deceitful wiles of his own heart:] this is
most truly divine knowledge; and we shall find difficulty enough in this, yea
so much, that we may say of it, as Caesar once did of the Scythians, Caesaris
Comment.
Difficilius est invenire quam interficere; it is harder to know our selves and
find out the manifold Meanders of our exorbitant affections, then to overcome
them. Let this then be our study, this our endeavor; For whereas other
speculations only inform our Intellects, and teach us to know, this reformes
our Wills and teaches us to do; those may perhaps please our fancy, but this
directs the course of our actions, and is the only rule of our practice; Which
is my second part, the employment of our Will, and follows now to be
considered.

THE SECOND PART, Reserved for, and prosecuted in a second Sermon.
JOHN 13.17. MA(...), Happy are ye if ye do them.


The place (if Musculus be in the right) is chiefly objected against them, The
second Part. Musculus in loc.
who are much conversant in hearing and understanding the word, but little in
observing; including both a positive and negative proposition, that as those
who know and do are unspeakeably happy, so are those who know and do not,
beyond expression miserable: The ground whereof is the absolute necessity of
practice to Salvation, and as great insufficiency of Knowledge without it:
together with the necessity of joining each to other in it is due measure and
proportion.

For the necessity of our practice, Nature it self reads us a visible
Lecture, and points out this way unto us. Every Creature (we see) endeavors to
reduce it is operative power into act, and to perform those actions, which
Nature (it is benign parent) has conferred: The Fire is always propense to
heat, the Sun to illuminate, the Earth to fructify, and the Soul of man to
think or meditate on some one of it is various objects: Thus are they always
busied in the end and scope of their Creation, convincing man their temporal
governor of Idleness and folly in the fruitless expense of his time.

But were Nature silent, Scripture, (our infallible rule and directory) is as
copious for this as authenticke: Please you peruse the fourth and four
subsequent Chapters of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 4. etc.
you shall find them replenish't with nothing but precepts and exhortations to
do the will of the LORD, to observe his Laws, to keep his statutes,
ordinances and Commandments, etc. Yea so often are these Injunctions
inculcated, as if this lesson were never thoroughly learned, till repeated in
the obedience of their actions.

If you ask the LORD with the Psalmist, who shall dwell in his Tabernacle or
rest on his holy hill, you shall receive this Answer; Psalm. 15.20
the man that walks uprightly and does righteousness, Psalm. 15.2.

If you ask our Savior, who shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven, he will
answer you, Not every one that says unto him LORD LORD, but he that does the
will of his Father which is in heaven, Mat. 7.21.
Matthew. 7.21. Ask him again with the young man, how he may gain eternal
life, Mat. 19.17.
he bids you keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19.17. Inquire of him yet again,
who are blessed, he tells you, Luke 11.28.
those that hear the Word of GOD and keep it, Luke 11.28.

If any doubt of the possibility of keeping the commandments, Dub.
for that in many things we offend all (as Saint James) we are all gone out of
the way, Iam. 3.2.
we are altogether become abominable, Psalm. 14.3. Pro. 24.16.
(as the Kingly Prophet.) And the Just fall seven times a day (as the wise
King) I confess that in the exact rigor of Justice, Rome would feign have it)
fully to observe them, yet in a moderate sense, (...), they may be truly
though but imperfectly kept. For there is a threefold keeping of the
Commandments. 1. True and perfect thus no man (CHRIST JESUS only excepted) is
able to observe them. 2. Neither true nor perfect: thus Hypocrites seem to
keep them, but do nothing less. 3. Lastly, true but imperfect, thus true
believers may and must keep them: in this sense Zacharias and Elizabeth walked
in all the Commandments and Ordinances of GOD blameless; Luke 1.6.
though not sine Culpa, yet sine querela, (as does also every elect Child of
GOD,) willingly, uprightly, faithfully, and constantly, and so after a sort
perfectly too, by a perfection of parts, though not of degrees. But I return
to the path, from whence I have a while strayed.

Ask the grand Doctor of the Gentiles (once for all) who are justified, he will
inform you, not the hearers, but the doers of the Law, Romans 2.13. Romans (...)
I might be infinite in this subject: You have the same doctrine often repeated
by the same Apostle almost in every Epistle of his, seconded by his
Fellow-Apostles, James, Peter, and John, and preached by an Angel from heaven,
in the Apocalypse. Apoc. 22.
But I may not be tedious in a matter so unquestionable. This is the Epitome as
well of GOD's Word as man's duty: scarce shall you read any part of Scripture,
where it is not either enjoined by precept, confirmed by prophecy, or commended
by example; neither should there be any particle of our lives inconformable to
it by obedience.

What Seneca said of his Philosophy, is more truly verified of Religion: Sen.
Epist. 15. and 20.
Philosophia (says he) non est populare arti ficium, nec ostentationi paratum,
non in verbis sed in rebus est, nec in hoc adhibetur ut aliqua oblectatione
consumatur dies, vel ut dematur otio nausea, sed animum format and fabricat,
vitam disponit, actiones regit, etc. So neither is Religion ordained for a
Subject of our discourse, a remedy for Idleness, or an employment rather of
recreation then labor, as too many in these loose times make it: No, it must
be the rule of our actions, the Cynosure of our Conversation, and the Steer of
the whole Course of our Pilgrimage. So the vulgar translation reads it.
Vita hominis militia super terram, says holy Job, Job 7.^. the life of man is
a warfare upon earth: this is the truest Emblem of our Christian profession:
which the Apostle most divinely amplifies (in the 6. of the Ephesians.)
prescribing a complete form both for our Armor and Combat; Ephesians. 6. ver
14.15, 16, 17.
Put on (says he) (...), the whole armor of GOD, the Girdle of Truth, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation,
etc. Neither, in this war, may any of us be idle spectators: the power and
vigilancie of our grand enemy (being no less then the Prince of the Aier,
Ephesians. 2.2.1. Pet. 5.8.
and as a roaring Lion, which walks about continually seeking whom he may
devour) requires our exactest care and greatest diligence to withstand him:
It Is not sufficient, only to sift out his wiles and know his stratagems, we
must also bestirre our selves to countermine him and by our indefatigable
industry, strive to give him the repulse and overthrow. The life of a Christian
(then) must be militant and practical, and by how much the more he bestirres
himself, so much the nearer is he to his triumphant recompense: Merces non
datur nisi operantibus: He may not expect his Harvest without the Labor of
Sowing and Reaping, it is the frequent Metaphor of the Schools in their own
terms, he must be, messor in via, before Comprehensor in patria, operative
before rewarded, and doing before he can be happy: If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them. (...), Epictetus.
the practice of wholesome precepts (says the Stoic) is the first and
especial part of Philosophy (of divinity, say we.) Neither is he a fit auditor
of the former (says the great Peripatetick) who is only an auditor, who by
reason of his Inexperience, or violence of Passion, is wholly unfit for, or
diverted from action: Arist. 1. Eth. Cap. 3.
(...). Well may these Heathens rise up in judgment against us, who from the
glimmering light of nature, or the opinion of moral honesty, gave precepts for
the doing, yea and performed more and better actions for substance then
Christians from the Light of divine truth, or the assured confidence of an
eternal reward. Good GOD, how do we thwart our profession by the obliquity of
our actions, appearing outwardly as fair as Helena, but are within as deformed
as Hecuba, like a Mountibankes Gallipot, which containing poison within, has a
title importing a preservative.

May not that be objected against us, which was once against the Athenians,
Athenienses sciunt quae recta sunt, sed facere nolunt: We know the truth, and
only truth of our faith and profession, we are many of us more then covetous of
knowledge, insatiable hearers, and as frequent in the discourse hereof, as
seeming zealous for the defense, and yet how do our actions (like the hand of
a false dial) point a contrary way? as if our tongues, which were given us to
express the abundance of our heart, had been made of purpose to contradict
and belie it; or, that our whole duty consisted in hearing, knowing, and
talking of Religion, but it concerned not our profession to practice it. What
an incongruity and folly is it (as Lactantius speaks) non in pectore sed in
labijs habere bonitatem? to reserve goodness only in our lips, not in our
hearts or affections? how little this will profit us, 1. Cor. 13. ver. 1, 2.
let the Apostle speak, 1. Cor. 13. Though Ispeake with the tongues of men and
angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, etc. And though I
have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge,
and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
charity I am nothing; nothing in my self, and worse then nothing in the eyes
of the Almighty.

Be not deceived then, GOD is not mocked with, where he has bestowed a Talent
of knowledge, he requires it with advantage in our obedience, where he has
conferred a large measure of understanding, he expects the like measure of
practice: The servant that knows his masters will, and does it not shall be
beaten with many stripes, says our Savior, Luke 12.47.
Luke 12.47. Pluribus and gravioribus supplicijs puniotur, quia gravius and
iniquius peccavit: as Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 27. in Mat. Chrysostom. Hom. 2^. ^n
Math.
Seconded by Saint Austin, Stella, Calvin, Marlorat, and the whole Current of
ancient and modern Expositors. He that sins against his own knowledge,
sins with a witness. For, as the Apostle, Scienti bonum facere and non
facienti, illi peccatum est, James 4. and the last. Iam. 4. vlt.
To him that knows to do good and does it not to him it is sin: sin, and
that (...), sin with an high hand. Pray we then with the Psalmist, that the
LORD would keep us from presumptuous sins, from premeditated, malicious, and
known offenses; otherwise our knowledge will tend but to our greater
confusion, and make us so much the more inexcusable, as we have been
defective in the equivalence of our practice: For, better were it not to have
known the way of righteousness, 2. Pet. 2.21.
then after we have known it, to turn from the Commandment delivered unto
us, 2. Peter 2.21.

But I trust we have not so learned CHRIST: it is a praecognitum with us, that
that Theology which we profess, and that knowledge we have out of the Word
of GOD, is rank't among practical disciplines, Aquin. Part. 1. Quaest. 1. Art.
4.
whatsoever the Angelical Doctor object against it, in his first Quaest. and
4. Artic. But well may his Theology be more theoricall then practick, being
stuff't with so many no less elaborate and Metaphysicall, then sublimated and
superfluous speculations: Yet do his more moderate successors, partly join
issue with us, and acknowledge it a Sapience: Sapientia vero dicit Intellectum
cum operatione, as Gerson, Iacobus de Valent. and others of the Schools.

If M. Calvin may be heard among them, his judgment is (and ^ suppose it
little inferior to theirs) that this Science is not Linguae doctrina sed
vitae, Calvin Instit. lib. 3. Cap. 6. vid. etiam D. Pareum Com. in Iac. 1.22.
nec intellectu memoriaque duntaxat apprehenditur (ut reliquae disciplinae) sed
tum demum recipitur, vbi animam totam possidet, fidemque receptaculum invenit
in intimo cordis affectu. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 6. This knowledge is seated in
the Will and Affections, filling the Heart and Mind with a desire not so much
of Contemplation as Action: Yea this knowledge it self, in the HOLY GHOST'S
phrase, is Action: For as CHRIST is said, 2. Cor. 5.21.
by the Apostle, to know no sin, because he did it not, Aug. in Psalm.
sic and justitiam ille vere dicendus est nosse qui facit; so is he also said
by the Psalmist to know the way of the LORD, Psalm. 1^9.
who walks constantly in it, by a conscionable keeping of his Commandments.

It is observed, Ezekiel. 3. Apoc. 10.
that when GOD had delivered those mystical books to the Prophet Ezechiel and
Saint John, wherein his Word was contained, it was commanded them, not that
they should read or learn them only, but that they should eat and devour
them: intimating that this Word is so to be taken and digested of us in our
practice: that (as our daily bread) it may strengthen our hearts, and (as our
ordinary food) maintain our life of grace, and preserve us for that of glory.
If this be not the end of our knowledge, what a miserable contradiction must
there needs be in our conversation? We should seem herein to resemble C.
Gracchus, in the Orator, Cic. 3. Tuscul.
qui cum largitiones maximas fecisset, and effudisset, aerarium, verbis
defendebat aerarium; when he had rubbed and exhausted the treasury, made an
Oration in it is defense: Lamentable hypocrisy; so much condemned in a Heathen,
how odious and detestable in a Christian? As if a professed Grammarian should
speak nothing but Barbarismes, or a noted Logician be altogether unable to
dispute, or compose an argument. Let me expostulate with the same Orator, Quid
verba audiam, cum facta non videam? If I hear only words and see no deeds,
if thy hot profession be seconded but with cold actions, thou art at most but
a verbalist, and superficial counterfeit. Simil.
Thou have a Sword, the Sword of the Spirit, but so rusted for want of Use, and
kept so close in the cankred scabberd, of thy polluted heart, that thou can
neither draw nor use it, for thy own safeguard, or profligating of Satan, thy
no less dangerous then malicious enemy. Thou have a Perfume, but so close
kept in the pocket, of thy Corruption, that neither thy self nor any other is
benefitted by the fragrance. Instrumenti tota vis in usu consistit, as
Logicians: Thy Faith and Knowledge are useful Instruments of thy Christian
profession, frame with them the works of Charity, Repentance, and
Mortification; or I shall think thy faith as dead in thee, as thou in thy
sins and trespasses.

In a word, Pietatis laus omnis in action consistit, Doing is questionless
the Badge of a true professor, the Practice of Piety is his proper cognizance;
as knowing that he shall not be judged at the last day, so much by his
knowledge as actions, when it shall not be demanded of him, quantum sciverit,
but, qualiter fecerit, not how learned he has been, but how good. This eggs
him on in a constant resolution of keeping his LORDS Commandments: and if he
desire knowledge, it is that he may refer it only to this end or terminus,
that he may reduce it to practice: For which end he often prays with that
religious Father, Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 119.
Praebe mihi Domine lucem and intelligentiam, ut intelligere valeam mandata
tua, intelligendo servare, servando in aeternum vivere. He Is not so curious in
his Theory, as careful in his practice, which he knows to be the better
part of his profession. Yet does he not any whit neglect his proficience in
knowledge as well as practice; as knowing that this without that is either
blind or frantic devotion, and that without this bare and fruitless
speculation: Simil.
this being as a Ship without a Pilot, in danger every moment, to be
gravel'd in the sands of superstition, or split on the rock of (...); that, as
an expert Nauticke, but in such a torn vessel, that he dares not commit
himself to the Sea, or make use of his faculty: This, as an untamed Horse
without a Rider, that as a fair Steed, but unserviceable for war or travel.
Each therefore must be linked to other, and become such inseparable mates,
that nothing may divorce them, but the dissolution of the subject.

-- Alterius sic
Alteraposcit opem res, Horat. in Art. Poet.
and conjurat amice.
What Poets, Mariners, and Naturalists have observed, of those two Meteors,
Castor and Pollux, is no less useful for us all; if either appear single
they presage a tempest or shipwreck, but it both together, serenity and
safety. So if both these concur in the life of a Christian, they are an
infallible Symptom of his eternal happiness, but if severed, they foreshew
his ruin and destruction. Hippocrates twins were never so nearely united
either in birth, natural disposition or affection, as these two ought to be
to make up a perfect man of GOD, wise unto salvation.

Yet, I know not how it comes to pass, but so it is (and it is a truth no less
lamentable then strange) that these two, which ought to be so individually
united, are such Strangers each to other, and they which should be such entire
brethren, stand at such distance that they prove like Eteocles and Polynices,
living and dying in perpetual enmity: as if they had shaken hands, and took a
perpetual farewell at the Fall of Adam, vowing never afterward to see one
another face. For, see we not the most unlearned (or at farthest, not very
expert in any kind of learning) most employed in the practice of moral good
duties, and (as they suppose) the true worship of GOD, whereas the greatest
Clerks are so filled up with with aerie speculations, that they have little or
no room left for practical obedience. This made Saint Austin exclaim against
himself and his Accomplices, Aug. lib. 8. Confess. Cap. 8.
a little before his Conversion, with a Surgunt indocti and caelum rapiunt and
nos cum doctrinis nostris, ecce vbi volutamur carne and sanguine: The unlearned
press into Heaven by violence, but we (for all our learning) continue in the
filth of our sins, and wallow in the blood of our iniquity. I would this
gravamen were not too apposite for these times, when School nicities, verbal
difficulties and perplexed Logomachia', (...)
thrust out all serious meditation of practical duties: Dum in verbis pugnd
est, Hilar. ad Constant.
dum in no vitatibus quaestio, dum in ambiguis occasio litis, dum in consensu
difficult as est, jam nemo Christiest, was the complaint of another Father,
fitted (I fear) of purpose for us of these times; who are more nominall then
real, superficial then Solid Christians, and with Aesop's Curre, catching at
the shadow, we lose the substance of Religion. 'Twas the observation of his
late learned Majesty, K. James in Aphor.
(and beyond exception true) that the Devil, where he cannot have the whole,
seeks ever to have one part of the soul, which he may come easyest by; in
Protestants the Will, in Papists the Understanding, they being ignorantly
practical, we sciently idle or perverse, neither perfect Christians, while we
want an essential part of our profession.

The like may we observe in the infant age of the world: After the true worship
of GOD (by Caine's wicked seed long suppressed) was restored by Seth and
Enosh, Genesis Genesis 4. vlt.
4. vlt. Corruption of life crept in, and brought a Deluge on the Primitive
world, Chap. 6. So, after the truth of Christianity was by laws established
under Christian Emperors, open persecution ceasing, Depravation of manners
crept in, and brought a Deluge of miseries on the Visible Church: as the
Centuryes may more fully inform you.

And now, even now, (to our grief and shame be it spoken) when the light of
the Gospel shines at the highest in it is full glory and splendour; how great a
Defection is there in the Course of our lives? as if we endeavored of purpose
to talk in darkness in the midst of light, and affected to grope at
noonday, when we rather might and ought to run the way of his
Commandments. So truly may that Complaint of Tertullian, be taken up by us;
Iuel Apol. ex Tertul.
O miseros nos qui Christiani dicimur hoc tempore, Gentes agimus sub nomine
Christi! We profess Christianity, but live like Heathens, we would seem
Saints but our actions beseem Devils.

It Is not unworthy your notice, to observe the triple plea of the most part of
men among us, and those of different professions: the mere formal and
ignorant Protestant, pretends his good meaning, the stricter and preciser his
good Faith, and the Papist his good works: But till all these concur, they
are not sufficient severally to make a good Christian. A true and lively faith
is that on which the most of us build the assurance of our salvation, but if
this be as true and lively as supposed, it cannot be but operative, good
works and actions proceeding as necessarily from it, as heat from the fire,
light from the Sun, or wholesome fruit from a good tree: and so much does the
very Etymology of the word import, Fiat quod dictum est, dicitur inde Fides.

True it is we put neither merit of Condignitie nor Congruitie in good works,
nor make them the Cause either of Justification or Salvation, as we shall anon
manifest; yet do we maintain (contrary to the no less impudent, then unjust
calumniation of our adversaries) their Necessity both to Sanctification, and
eternal happiness, (so the subject be capable of, and disposed for the
performance:) and affirm, that though by good works causative no man is or
shall be, yet without good works consequutive no man can be justified. We
willingly embrace the wholesome advise of their primesupposed founder, in his
2. Epistle, Chap. 1. verse 10. 2. Pet. 1.10.
to make our Calling and Election sure, and that (...), by good works: So
far are we from teaching the people a licencious course of life, or rejecting
works of Piety and Religion, that we make it the sole testimony of the
livelie-hood of our faith, and the assurance of our calling, and eternal
inheritance. If they require a more particular view of those reasons which we^
allege for the necessity of works, I refer them to any of our Neotericks,
where they may both see and blush at their as false as malicious scandal.
Briefly, (that I may at once stop all their clamorous mouths) we affirm
the necessity and injoyne the performance of good works, both in respect of
GOD, our selves, and others.

1. glorify him as our Father, Matthew. 5.16.
obey his will as our King, 1. These. 4.3.
and testify our gratitude to him, Romans 12.1.
as our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier.

2. Selves, that we may discern the truth and livelie-hood of our Faith; Mat.
7.18. Iam. 2.17.
as also, that it may be exercised, Romans 8.13.
nourished and corroborated thereby; that we may ascertaine our selves of our
Election, 2 Pet. 1.10.
and remission of sins; that we may avoid punishments both temporal and
eternal, Mat. 7.19.
1. Tim. 4.8.
and obtain those rewards of our obedience, both corporal and spiritual,
which are annexed to good works, by GOD's free and gracious promise.

3. In respect of others, edify them by our pious example, 2. Cor. 4.15.
that we may gain unbeleevers from their infidelity, 1. Pet. 2.12.
and lastly that we may avoid all scandal, Romans 2.24.
to which our profession is or may be liable. I might instance in all, and
spend my self in the prosecution of each of these particulars, if either
necessity required, or time would permit, but I must be compendious. These are
the true ends and genuine Causes of our good works, which although they
produce nor such effects or so frequently as could be wished, yet do they
leave behind them more testimonies of Charity and pious munificence, then
their doting fancies of merit and satisfaction: Witness our Hospitalls,
Colleges, Libraries, Schools, etc. newly built or augmented: which for the
short time of reformation, and the shorter means of well-devoted Benefactors,
especially those of the Clergy, are more then they can exhibit in a far
larger space: So that now (thanks be to the first mover of their faithful
hearts) our Catalogue of charitable Worthies is daily increased, and the
Preachers memory extended in the rehearsal.

But leave we them to the glorious reward of their magnificent works; Let our
care be that we abuse not their well-intended bounty, by our ill-applying
behavior; by bribery or perjury in our entrance, by voluptuous luxury in our
continuance, by disdainefull Ingratitude, or haughty ambition at our departure:
but remember that precept of our LORD, Deuteronomie 6.11, 12. Dent. 6.11, 12.
Now that we enjoy houses full of good things which we filled not, wells
which we dug not, vineyards and Olive Trees which we planted not, now that
we have eaten and are full, beware we, least we forget the LORD our GOD, who
has dealt thus graciously with us.

I affect not to be an Ibis in defiling mine own neast, or a Cham in
revealing the shame of so indulgent a parent, yet give me leave to add a
well-wishing Caution or two in a word and I have done.

And first let me advise those who have the oversight or education of our
(...), young and tender plants, the Sucklings of our Academy, that they neither
seduce them by their own example, nor suffer them to be misled by pernicious
Accomplices; that they may not suck poison in steed of milk from their mothers
breast, and purchase a little smattering of knowledge at so dear a rate as a
total depravation of manners: and so, be driven to scandalize, if not revile
her after their departure. Let not that be said of our Helicon, which was once
of the Pope's Court, Aula tua bonos recipit non facit, mali ibi proficiunt,
boni deficiunt; but let our diligence in their nurture make us hear well
abroad, and redeem that scandal and part of our lost esteem, which now flies
in the tongues of the heedlesse multitude.

Next, for you of riper years; Nero-like, tear out the bowels of so gracious
a mother, by faction or division, but consider, How good and joyful a thing it
is for us brethren to dwell together in Unity. Psalm. 133.1.
You know how near a tie of Brotherbood we have, super-added to that common
bond of Christianity; we have not only one GOD for our Father, and one Church
for our Mother, but one Academy also, and many of us one College for our
Nurse. Let us not then be so factiously contentious, nor let there be such
strife between us, for as Abraham said to Lot, We are Brethren. You know the
distinction of Philosophers between Action and Faction, (...) and (...), this
being the employment of an art that of a prudence; so may this Faction of ours
well vent it self in artificial scoffs, or some ingeniously wicked Libell,
but shows in us little prudence or discretion: Let us rather be conversant in
prudent and religious actions, and if any difference arise among us, for
Office, Dignity, or Pre-eminence, take Ajax his trial in the Poet: Ovid. 13.
Metam.
-Spectemur agendo: or that decision for the golden Apple between the three
goddesses: -- detur digniori; let the worth of our actions challenge the worth
of our esteem, and the dignity of our indowments merit the dignity of our
place.

Lastly, for those among us of the Ministry; that we would inform the
people as well by our Actions as Elocution, our Example as our precept, and
preach to them viva voce, which (as one wittily) is, vita and voce; least what
we build with with one hand, we pull down with another, and verify that
Romanist's invective, Quod dictis comprobant factis improbant, quod dictis
monent ut faciamus, factis monent ne faciamus. True it is, we are to live by
precept not example, yet is this a more compendious way to finish a Minister's
work: for, as the divine Philosopher, Longum iter per praecepta, Seneca.
breve and efficax per exempla. Our examples are usually more powerful then
our precepts; whether it be that the Eye works more on the mind, and stirs
it up sooner to action, then the Ear, according to the Poet, Segnius irritant
animum dimissa per aurem
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, etc. Hor. in Art. Poet.



Or, that we have the actions of men always before our eyes, but their
Sermons only one hour in a week, or it may be in a Month, or a Quarter, or
a Year, or perhaps more seldom, so well are many of us affected to the duties
of our Calling.

But beware we (B.B.) that our Salt be not unsavourie, Matthew. 5.
and cast out on the dounghill, that our light be not extinguished and
ourselves excluded into utter darkness: least like Cooks, we be employed
only in handling, dressing, and preparing this food of our souls, but taste
not the least morsel of it our selves; or like those builders of Noah's Ark,
who made an Arc for the safety of others, but perished themselves in the
waters; so we, when we have preached to others our selves become Cast-awaies.
1. Cor. 9.27.
Let us (then) place in our hearts, as Aaron on his breast the Vrim and
Thummim, revelatum and perfectum, join integrity of life with solidity of
knowledge: Let us endeavor to be as so many burning and shining Lamps,
burning with the fire of Zeal in our selves, and shining with the light of
wholesome instructions to others: let the splendour of our lives shine in the
faces of the world, and dazzle the eyes of them, whom it may not guide. Then
shall we with authority speak what we do, when we do what we speak;
Dan. 12.3.
then shall we one day shine as the stars in the firmament if we have here
shined in this inferior orb amongst our brethren, and by our righteousness
converted many to righteousness: Thus when we do what we teach, and
practice what we know, then and then only shall we be happy; which is my
last particle and follows in a word to be considered, If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them: (...), happy are ye.

To omit the manifold Scholasticall distinctions of this Happiness or
Beatitude: The third Part. Gabr. Biel, Lect. 66. Occam, part. 2. Dialog.
Biell and Occham have thus abridged them: Felicity (say they) is either
temporal and seeming, consisting only in worldly prosperity, or else
spiritual, true and real: this again is either viae or patriae, of our way
or country; the former being an operation or perfect disposition fitting us for
the later; the later again is either of the Intellect, or Will, the first is
the intellectual vision or contemplation of the Almighty, the second is that
which fills the Capacity of the Will, and excludes all desire of any farther
perfection, joy, or delight: Either of these (the first only excepted) may in
a different manner, be understood in the words of my Text: So happy are they
that do the Will of GOD, that they are here heirs apparent to the kingdom of
heaven, and shall hereafter be invested, and put in actual fruition of it;
here they are filled with grace, there crowned with glory. Blessed Reward, for
such small pains, Wonderful recompense for such momentary service! But what
said I, Reward, and Recompense? Ob.
Here may our adversaries of Rome take occasion to insult, and proclaim their
doctrine of merits, as if this happiness were theirs by the rule of
commutative Justice, and that they might challenge GOD of injustice if he
withheld it: and so much is the Cardinal bold to affirm, lib. 5. de
Iustificat. Resp.
Cap. 1. But let me tell them, that there is, merces gratuita as well as
debita, a reward of free grace and bounty, as of due debt or desert: Simil.
As an indulgent father may give his Child a great sum of money or large
revenewes, as a reward for a pleasing letter or well-penned Epistle, which in
commutative Justice deserve not the thousandth part of his largess: the
application is so facile, that I may not spend time in the rehearsal. The
necessity and benefit of good works I acknowledge, and you have before heard
it, but I deny the sufficiency of their merit: please you hear the Reasons in
a word, and I conclude.

1. imperfection both of parts and degrees deny them the privilege of desert:
For the imperfection of parts, how much good enjoined by GOD's law is omitted,
how much evil prohibited is committed, even by the most sanctified and
regenerate, (and consequently how insufficient for merit) the Scripture is as
copious as evident: peruse (if you please) Iam. 2.10. and Chap. 3.2. Rom 7.23.
Deuteronomy. 27. vlt. with many other places, which I forbear so much as to name that
I may not trespass on your patience: that they want many degrees of perfection
is no less evident, for the best works of the best and holiest men are as
unclean as a menstruous Cloth or polluted rag, as it is, Isay 64.6.

2. due debt to the Almighty, and therefore not meritorious; the neglect of
them may cast us into hell, but the performance cannot challenge heaven, in as
much as we give him but part of his own and when we have done all that is
commanded us, we may say (as our Savior has informed us, Luke 17.10) we are
unprofitable servants, and have done only what we ought; happy we, if so
much.

3. own, and therefore can merit nothing for us: for GOD works in us both
the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. neither have we any thing which we have
not received, 1. Cor. 4.7. and if the LORD vouchsafe to confer any reward on
us for them, it is for his own gift's sake, more then our merit: August. de
verb. Apost. Sermon. 15.
Non meritis nostris retribuit, sed dona sua coronat, as Saint Austin.

4. meritorious, the work and reward should have some equality of proportion,
but, inter finitum and infinitum nulla est proportio, as Philosophers tell us:
What equality then can there be, between our poor, defective, maimed works,
and that Crown of infinite glory?

Lastly, Justified (and consequently past all merit) before the accession of
works. GOD'S grace causes whatsoever merit is in us, but our merit is neither
the cause of grace nor glory: Nor do our good works otherwise avail us, then
as he accepts them in our only Mediator CHRIST JESUS, and that for his merit
and satisfaction imputed to us by faith, and his continual intercession for us
at the right hand of his Father. In a word, they are no antecedent cause, but
consequent Condition of our Justification and Salvation; non praecedunt
justificandum, sed subsequuntur justificatum, in Saint Austin's phrase, and in
Saint Bernard's, they are via regni non causa regnandi. Thus and thus only are
they prevalent and efficacious to bring us to this Happiness mentioned in my
Text and purchase for us the Kingdom prepared from the beginning of the world.

Should I now enter into a serious discourse of this kingdom and happiness,
and endeavor to describe it in it is proper colors, I should rather display
mine ignorance then increase your knowledge in this unsearchable mystery, and
puzzle mine own, rather then inform your understandings. I might herein
wisely imitate that Philosopher, who after a long and serious contemplation of
the nature of GOD, returned answer, that he could tell what he was not, but
what he was went beyond his expression or conceit; So must I ingeniously
confess in the language of the Father, Augustine.
Facilius possum dicere quid ibi non sit quam quid ibi sit; non est ibi mors,
non est ibi luctus, non est ibi lassitudo, non est infirmitas, non est fames,
nulla sitis, nullus aestus, etc. In brief, there is an absolute freedom from
all evil both of Sin and Punishment, and a full fruition of all good both of
grace and glory, and above all of the chiefest good, GOD himself. For a more
particular discovery and information, I refer the Curious (if any be) to the
nice Metaphysicall scruples of the Schools; where they may perhaps sooner
wind themselves into a perplexed Labyrinth of difficulties, then any way
satisfy their over-daring curiosity: But for the more moderate, I suppose that
of the Apostle will give them reasonable satisfaction: Neither eye has seen,
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, what joys GOD
has prepared for those that love and fear him, 1. Cor. 2.9. Now since it
cannot enter into us, pray we, that we may enter into it, that by continuance
in well doing, we may both seek and obtain glory, Romans 2.7.
and honor, and immortality. And do thou o LORD, vouchsafe to prepare a place
for us in those heavenly Mansions, that we with the Saints and Angels already
there, may sing perpetual Hallelujahs, and praise thy glorious Majesty for
all eternity, and that for the merits of thy dearly beloved Son, JESUS
CHRIST; to whom with thee and the blessed Spirit, be all Praise, Power,
Majesty, Dominion and Thanksgiving, from this time forth and for evermore Amen.

(...).
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 10. line 2. for one read none. and line 17. ibid. ma. 1. for 1ma or
prima. Page 14. l. ^. for for read far.


