A BRIEF REPORT OF THE MILITARY SERVIces done in the LOW COUNTRIES, by the
Earl of LEICESTER: written by one that served in good place there in a letter
to a friend of his.

Imprinted at London, by Arnold Hatfield, for Gregory Seton.

1587

Note that the account of the days, months, years, and miles, is to be made
always in this letter after the style and measure of ENGLAND.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MY ESPECIAL GOOD FRIEND SIR I. A. KNIGHT.
SIR, to satisfy your often earnest requests, I have taken time these
holydaies to set you down a brief report of the military services done in
the low Countries, by the Earl of LEICESTER, and his armies, during the time
of his abode and government there: reckening from the 22. day of January 1585.
on which day he was received Governor of those Countries; till the 23. of
November 1586. when he embarked at VLVSHING, in his return for ENGLAND. I
entermeddle not with the estate of Religion, justice, or civil policy,
because your letters demand it not, and I willingly deal not further in
reports, then is by some kind of duty required of me. You expect not I hope
but the substance of things done with brevity: the circumstaunces, I know, and
particularities, will require a reasonable volume. Of one thing I must entreat
you to be especially excused. I will not meddle with the particular services of
private men: because if I should rehearse them all, and speak of them as
indeed they have deserved, it were above my skill, and I should be longer then
my leisure suffers. And if I should touch some, and conceal others, the just
offense would hardly be endured. For truth of the things I write you of, this
be assured: what I write as done of our party, either I saw, and am witness of
it my self, or I have it by the credible report of those that were the doers.
What I set down of the enemies doings, I either take it from their own
intercepted letters, or I do it upon the aduertisements of our best
intelligencers: who in circumstances may err, but swerve not much from truth,
I think, in any material point: howsoever it is, I trust you will be
persuaded, that I willingly speak no untruth: And then as I conceive of these
things, if so it please you to accept of them, they have been done, as I take
them, in manner as follows.

After long and humble suite of the Estates general of the united Provinces of
the low Countries, it pleased the Queens Majesty our Sovereign to grant
unto them a large and bountiful aid of men and money, in such sort, and upon
such Articles and conditions, as in the treaty concluded between them,
bearing date the fourth day of September, in the year 1585. it more at large
appears. To speak of the magnanimity, wisdom, bounty, and singular
goodness of her Majesty in yielding so great and chargeable a succor: with
consideration against whom, upon how necessary and most urgent causes, and for
how greeuouslie oppressed a people and countries, it was intended, were a
matter beside my purpose at this time, and above the reach of my pen and skill.
The fact is, and will be approved, and renowned in the world, so long as the
memory of wise and good Princes, and of true princely actions shall endure. But
in the Treaty named, there is one Article amongst others, whereby it is
especially required, That it might please her Majesty to send with her forces
into those parts, a personage of nobility, valor and wisdom, of the
English Nobility, as well to govern her people, as also to direct and to
deal otherwise, and to use such further preeminence and authority, as is
specified in the Treaty. The man for this purpose most desired of the Estates,
and especially chosen by her Majesty, was the Earl of Leycester, who being
accordingly appointed for this service, after his commission received, and view
taken of such as were then to go with him, leaving whatsoever the singular
blessings of God most happily many ways, and the especial favor of a mighty
Prince had of long time yielded him in his own Country; took leave at the
Court, and departed toward Harwich in Essex, there to embarque in the
beginning of December following. There accompanied him in this voyage, the
Earl of Essex, the Lord Awdeley, the Lord North, with diverse Knights, and
many Esquiers and Gentlemen, to the number of six or seven hundred horse,
bravely and soldier like appointed, all voluntaries and of his own friends,
followers, and servants. He departed from Harwich with the most part of his
train the ninth day of December, and on the tenth of the same arrived at
Vlushing in Zealand, where, and at Middleborough he was received with great
concourse and joy, and after two days stay there by sundry iournies came to
the Hage in Holland. Here after many days treaty: upon the 22. day of
January 1585. he received the government of those Countries, with title of
Governor and Captain General of Holland, Zealand, and of the united
Provinces, and of their associates. The united Provinces, and their associates
were then accounted the Duchy of Gelders, with the County of Zutphen,
Holland, Zealand, Vtricht, and the countries adioining of Frizeland, between
the river of Emes and Lawers, Flaunders also and Brabant, for the towns of
those countries, that then held with the other united Provinces. And the
estate of them all was then this. In Holland, Zealand, and Vtricht the enemy
had clearly nothing: in Frizeland also nothing, saving that the city of
Gronningen and that part of the country called Omelandes were wholly his: in
Gelderland and Zutphen he had a good part: in Brabant the Estates had but
Bergen apzome, Saint Ghertrudenberg, Huesden, Grave, and Wowe castle, with the
Forte of Lillo: in Flaunders they had Sluice, and Oostend, and the fortes of
Terneuse, the Dole, Lyskenshooke, and Saint Antonies hook: all the rest were
the enemies, together with all the other of the seauenteene Provinces, except
the whole almost of the country of Ouerissell, which in a kind of
newetralitie, seemed to favor the Estates party, and rather to incline to them:
but indeed did greatly aid the enemy with victuales and provisions, and had
many secret intelligences with him.

These Provinces, their estate, and the people of them did the E. of Leicester
at this his first arrival, and acceptance of the government find in great
confusion: The common people without obedience, The soldier in misery and
disorder for want of pay, The Governors weary, and tired, for lack of good
assistance, and due obedience, The Provinces themselves staggering in their
union, and every Town next danger ready to seek new means for their
safety: such was their fear of the enemy triumphant now with continual
victories, and especially with the late recovery of Anwarpe: so little was
their hope of their own ability to resist, and so many were the enemies deep
and secret practices, even in the very bowels of them.

The estate duly considered, and such remedies to every member aptly applied,
as the present time would then permit: the civil government being first in
some good sort well settled, the Earl applied himself forthwith to the
military service, the first occasion being offered for the relief of Grave.

Grave is a Town in Brabant, belonging to Count Mourice of Nassau, second
son to William Prince of Orange deceased. But it was then in the government
of Count Philip of Hohenloe or Hollocke a German, who had long served the
Estates, and had placed governor in this Town Mounsieur Hemart, a Baron of
these low Countries with garrison of about eight hundred Dutch and Netherlande
soldiers. The Town is not great, but fortified of late, and made very
strong by the Prince of Orange, whose patrimony it was. It is of some
importance, because standing upon the river of Mase, it hinders the free
passage of that part of the river near it. Otherwise for trade, territory,
wealth, or any other commodity, it is not to be much accounted of. Alexander
Farnese, Prince of Parma, governor then for the king of Spain in Brabant,
Flaunders, and those parts of the low Countries that acknowledge the king of
Spain, had sent the Count Charles Maunsfelt, to beleaguere this Town, and to
besiege it somewhat a far off, which he accordingly did, by erecting round
about it four fortes, with fifteen hundred soldiers in them, and having
near him within one english mile all the spanish Regiments, to the number of
five thousand footmen. He had now lien there from December till about the
beginning of March: at which time the E. of Leycester understanding the Town
was brought into distres for lack of men, victuals, and other provisions,
minding to relieve it, and for the ready answering of all incident occasions
to be more near it, departed from the Hage by Harlem, and Amstelredam, to
Vtricht. From thence he presently sent his horsemen being in number about
thirteen or fourteen hundred, to encampe at Nyekircke in the province of
Vellowe in Gelderland: as well to unburden the Towns of them, as also by their
lieng there to deteine the enemies forces of those parts from Grave. He
appointed to Count Hollock, and S. John Norris Coronell general of the English
infantery, about two thousand footmen, without horsemen, because the place was
not for them, with direction to victual and to supply and furnish Grave, with
all necessaries. These Gentlemen marching with their troops, took first by
assault a little fort of the enemies about four miles from Grave, called the
Mill forte, and then meaning to fortify themselves as near the Town as they
might, and from their fortification to take such order as occasion should
minister, for atchieuing their intent began to entrench upon the bank of the
Mase on Gelderland side, about two english miles from Grave, between it and
Battenbourge castle, and within half a mile or thereabouts of the enemies
bridge, and fortes on that side. They began their work with about three
hundred soldiers, and some pyoners on Tuesday at night in Easter-weeke the 5.
of April, and in the morning had raised it a yard high, when the enemy
having had intelligence of their meaning, sends to hinder the same three
thousand Spaniardes: who after two or three attempts put our men being but few
from their work, and caused them to retire. But other of our troops to the
number of eight or nine hundred, presently meeting them, our men made stand
again, gave a fresh charge upon the Spaniardes, drove them over the
fortification, where they fought before, even to their own forte, slaying on
the ground five hundred of them all Spaniards: amongst whom seven special
captains, and two others of greater account, and wounded about two hundred
which were carried to Bolduke, and other places. They took also one piece of
the enemies ordinance, brought to beat our boats and fortification. Of our
men six or seven score were slain, but not one man of name. Sir John Norris
was hurt in the breast with a pike: sir John Boroughes had a finger stricken off
with a musket shot. After this fight, the Count Hollocke battered and took
Battenbourge castle, and the forte de Guanden,, and the strong house of Empell,
and then his victual being come he victualed Grave by water twice, went
himself into it, supplied the garrison with new men, and left it furnished
with all provisions sufficient by acknowledgement of Hemart the captain
himself for nine months. And having done that he came for, in the very
view and face of the enemy, he dissolved his camp, and came away with great
honor.

A liftle before this time fell out the surpryse of Wearle a great Town in
Westfalia by coronell Skenck, and afterward a sharp fight by the same Skenck,
with three or four thousand of that country, where he slew and ouerthrewe
above two thousand with great valor, and brought away rich spoils: but being
in the diocese of Colloigne, and without the jurisdiction of the united
Provinces, and not directly against their chief enemy. I will enlarge no
further of these exploites.

The prince of Parma (as it was reported to us) was much kindled with this
overthrow at Grave, with the taking of the castles and victualing of the Town:
and his former winter preparations being now in readiness, about the beginning
of May he began to march toward Grave, but so, as that he was first assured
by Count Maunsfelde (as by our intelligences and letters intercepted it
appeered) that the match for the town was fully concluded before he would set
out to it. Thither he came with his camp now of twelve thousand footmen, and
about four thousand horse. He battered the Town for show, and upon battery,
had it presently yielded without assault. The E. of Leycester hearing of the
princes preparations toward Grave, being as yet unready and destitute of all
means to furnish a camp sufficient to meet with him on equal ground in
field, yet to the intent to be near at hand with the forces he had, and to
wait such advantages as occasion might offer, with a small camp of about
three thousand foot, and one thousand horse, he passed in person the river of
Rhyne at Arnham in Gelderland, into the province of Bettowe, with intent from
thence to pass the river of Wale also, and so to approach to Grave it self.

The Bettowe is a province in Gelderland, lying between the rivers of Rhyne and
Wale, very fertile, and then wholly held by the enemy, or at least infested
by him, with his fortes of Luytesforte, and Berckshoofe and the two castles of
Alon and Bemell. It was first thought expedient to win these fortes and castles
before further passage: but they were very strong, well manned, and
sufficiently provided of all necessaries. The great city of Newmegen was but
over the Wale on the other side very near them, and the enemy with his camp
at Grave, not eight english miles from them. These good helps so near,
encouraged greatly the soldiers within, who with all warlike skill omitted
nothing that might be required in soldiers for defense. But the resolution
was to attempt them, which was done with such valor of our soldiers, his
Excellency himself ordering the batteries at some of them, and without
respect of travel or danger, putting his own hand to the trenches, and other
works to be made for the approches, as at length at several times they were
all yielded.

Another thing of good importance was then to be done also. A little above the
Towlehuise in Cleueland is a small Islande in the river of Rhyne, in place
where the Rhyne dividing himself, takes the right hand course down to
Arnham, and retains still the name of Rhyne, and on the left hand passes to
Newmegen, and is in Latin called Vahalis, in vulgar Dutch the Wale. The Islande
is called Grauenswert, and being fortified might command both the rivers of
Rhyne and Wale from that place downward, that nothing could pass to Arnham or
Newmegen. It was thought very important to surprise this Islande, and to
build a forte in it: but the matter required celeritie, secrecy, and good
strength of men, because the enemy was near. It was committed to be done to
sir Martin Skenck, (he was now knighted before at Vtricht, and had given him by
his Excellency, at his receiving of knighthood a chain of gold of a thousand
crowns) sir Martin whiles his Excellency was occupied in winning the forts
and castles, took the Island, built the forte, and having left it defensible
and well manned, returned again to his Excellency: who having now gotten the
fortes and castles, and so cleared the whole province of Bettowe, and left not
one enemy in it, thought fit to proceed in his principal intent of drawing
near the enemy at Grave. He had first to pass the river of Wale, and then to
march eight english miles in the enemies countries, to the Mase and Grave,
where the prince and his camp lay. As he began to provide his passage over the
Wale the news were suddenly brought him that Grave was yielded. This seemed so
strange that it was not at the first believed, as well because it was known to
be of great strength, and victualed, and thoroughly provided of all necessaries
for nine Months, as also and more specially for that his Excellency had
received two letters from Baron Hemart, captain of Grave, the one the day
before, the other the same day: wherein Hemart wished his Excellency to do
what else he thought convenient, and to have no care of Grave, for he was well
able to defend it against all men, for one half year. These letters were sent
to the Q. Majesty: but in the end the news were found true. The Town was
yielded; and his Excellency bethinking him what was fit to be done, and seeing
his army nothing equal to the enemies, the numbers being so far different, as
is before rehearsed: understanding also that almost all the Towns near about,
as Bomell, Arnham, Amersfort, Deuenter, and the rest of Guelders and Ouerissell
stood in tickle terms likely to yield if the enemy came near them: and
finding indeed that the prince had already sent part of his army toward
Bomelsverte: he sent forthwith strong garrisons into the next frontire Towns,
and Bomell being thought to be then in some danger, himself went thither, with
fifteen hundred footmen, and five hundred horse, where he assured that Town,
and the Island being of great importance, and took such order for the rest as
that time and the small means he then had would permit. Hemart for his sudden
yielding of Grave without good cause, being sufficiently furnished of all
necessaries for defense and contrary to assurance of it, given by his own
letters but the same day, and the day before, coming to Bomell was there
apprehended and carried to Vtricht, his process drawn, and in solemn assembly
by Co. Hollock himself and all the rest of the Coronels and Martial officers,
of the Dutch, English, and diverse other nations adjudged to die, and was
publicly executed accordingly, with two others of his captains. I will not
speak of what difficulty the matter was thought to do this execution: the
party being a baron, of a Barons living, and great by birth and alliance in
those parts: his Excellency, a stranger: the Estate in broken terms: and the
example there scant seen before. But the fact fell out so plain, that his
Excellency would not be entreated but that justice should proceed: the
judges could not but condemn him, and the people though sorye for the man yet
much reioiced to see the justice done. Amongst diverse others now sent to
strengthen the garrions in sundry places, sir Martin Skenck, and sir Roger
Williams were appointed with certain horse and footmen, to see if they might
enter Venloe, whither it was thought the enemy would make his next journey.
Venloe is a Town of the Duchy of Gelders, situate upon the river of Mase,
seven or eight english miles from Grave, and then in the government of sir
Martin Skenck, who had garrison in it of seven hundred dutch soldiers: but
himself was absent, and attempting to get into it went as I say with sir
Roger Williams, and about a hundred horse, But they found themselves
prevented, and all the passages taken by the enemy. But yet minding to assay
if with their horsemen they might possibly break through the gardes, they
gave in the night a sudden most valiant attempt, upon the whole camp, and
slew many even near to the princes own lodging. But directing themselves
toward the Town, and finding the turnpikes shut, and guarded with strong
watch of Muskeyteires, and the camp now all up in arms, and the day drawing
on: they turned their course toward Wachtendoucke, a Town of the Estates,
seven or eight miles of, where themselves and many of their company entered,
and saved themselves from the whole cauallarie of the enemy, now pursuing
them, some thirty or forty of their company were slain, and taken. The
prince then planted thoroughly his siedge of Venloe, which the towns men in
short space yielded to him, whiles the soldiers stood at defense of the
walls. Whiles these things were thus in doing in those parts the L.
Willoughbie Governor of Berghes apzome in Brabant, having intelligence of a
great Conuoy of victual, and other provisions to be brought out of the further
parts of Brabant, next Cleueland, and Lukeland, into Antwerpe: and having good
advertisement of the time of their coming, upon the 23. of May, he met with
them in their way about eight or ten english miles from Antwerpe: himself had
with him three cornets of horse, and three companies of foot: the conuoy was
four hundred wagons, and guarded with soldiers, and of the country people,
to the number of a thousand. He set upon them, slew, and put to flight all the
people, burnt and spoiled almost all the wagons, and provisions, and some
mares, wagons, and such other things as he thought fit he brought away with him
to Berghes.

The E. of Leycester in the mean time having placed strong garrisons in all his
frontiers, began to employ himself wholly to the gathering of a sufficient
army to meet with the prince in field: footmen in good numbers were gotten
out of England, with some from Scotland: two thousand German horses were
appointed to be brought by Count Mewres, with a regiment of Almaine footmen,
and a thousand pyoners. But that the forces now ready might be doing, whiles
the others to make up the full army were in providing, his Excellency sent
into Flaunders, under the conduction of Count Mourice of Nassau, and of his
Nephew sir Phillip Sidney, about two thousand footmen, which with great
secrecy and valor surprised the Town of Axell, with four strong fortes
near about it, slew and put to flight four bands of footmen in the Town,
had rich spoil, brought away five Ensigns of the enemies, left coronell
Pyron, with eight or nine hundred soldiers in garriso^, and came their way,
to the intent to attempt Graueling in Flaunders, which by a deceitful train
laid for him by La Mote, was promised to sir Phillip Sidney, who came thither,
but finding the fraud, returned with the loss of about thirty common
soldiers. Those of Axell had by this time cut the dikes, and by letting in
the sea, drowned the country to the walls of Axell, and Hulst, and thereby
added great strength to Axell.

Shortly after this, the Count Hollock, and sir William Pellham, L. Marshall of
the field, made a road into Brabant, where having wasted and spoiled Lange
Strate, and a great part of the country, they returned without hearing of any
enemy to resist them.

The prince after the yielding of Venloe marched to Nuyse, a Town of the
diocese of Colloigne, held for the elector Trucses, by a valiant young
gentleman, called Clowte. After some skirmishes, and a little battery, and
Clowte wounded, this Town was lost, by the cowardlines of Clowtes soldiers,
and Clowte taken out of his chamber wounded, and hanged out at the window with
some note of vnsoldierlike usage.

From thence came the prince to Bercke, wherein were sir Martin Skenck and
coronell Morgan, with twelve hundred English, and seven or eight hundred other
soldiers. This Town is also of the diocese of Colloigne, and held for the
elector Trucses. And though being without the limits of his Excellencies
jurisdiction, it may seem it appertained not to his charge, as in like sort
Nuyse also: yet for the importance of the place to the united Provinces
standing upon the river of the Rhyne, and for the community, and near
conjunction and dependencie of both causes one on the other, vz. of the elector
Trucses, and of the Estates of the united Provinces, it was thought expedient
that the Town should be defended with common aid, and therefore such garrison
before rehearsed was put into it. The Town at the beginning when this garrison
came in about the time of the loss of Venlo was very weak, and through a
contention for it between the Prince elector Trucses and Adolphe Count of
Meurs, unprovided almost of all necessaries. But his Excellency having a
little before quieted the strife between those two, it was now somewhat
supplied of provisions by the Estates, and repaired by the industry and
travel of Sir Martin and his soldiers. The siege began in the end of July, and
was continued on without great effect, partly through the valor of the
captain and soldier within it, who made diverse salies, and often intercepted,
and slew sundry of the enemies soldiers: but especially by reason of the many
continual aduertisements brought daily to the Princes camp of a great army
of his Excellencies now gathered and in readiness to march. And indeed about
this time had the Earl of Leicester collected his forces, and prepared his
provisions, and about the 14. of August, sent sir John Norris, and sir Thomas
Cecill with the vantguard to pass the river Yssell on his bridge of boats, at
the foot of Yssellort a mile above Arnham, with direction to encamp 6. or 7.
miles into Cleueland, at a place called S. Seuenter upon the bank of the
Rhine. On the 17. of August was sent thither to him sir William Pelham L.
Marshall of the army with another troop, and on the 19. his Excellency
departed from Vtricht to Rhenen, and so to Arnham, where he stayed till the
troops of Brabant and Zealand with Co. Hollock, and those of Frizeland with
Count William of Nassau met him there. And when they were all come together, on
saturday the xxvij. of August he departed from Arnham, accompanied with the
Prince of Portugal Don Emanuell, the Prince elector of Colloigne Trucses, Co.
Mourice of Nassau, Co. Hollock, Co. William of Nassau, Earl of Essex general
of the English horsemen, Count Phillip of Nassau, Count Solmes, Count
Ouersteyne, L. Willoughbie, L. North, S. Phillip Sidney, and diverse others,
noblemen, knights, and gentlemen, and with the rest of the army marched that
night to Elten in Cleueland. At Elten his Excellency thought expedient
himself to take view of his army, which he did on sunday the 28. of August,
and finding the bands of English and Irish not to fill the number of five
thousand footmen: the rest of all nations not to make 2000. the Cauallerie of
all sorts not to exceed the number of 1400. knowing the enemy to be 12000.
strong on foot, and 3500. horse, experienced soldiers, he fell into
consultation what were fittest to be done. To relieve Berck was the principal
intent, or at least to get the soldiers safe and honorably out of it. This was
to be effected by one of two means. Either by assailing or diuerting the
enemy. The first was full of difficulties. The enemy was strong, he was in
his place of strength, he had his retraits at hand. Our camp was fewer in
number, we should come a long march into a strange place, we had no retrait
within twenty miles. And which took away all deliberation: our victuals
insufficient, either for maintenance of the army, or for relief of the town,
must needs have failed us. Diuersion therefore was thought to be the way, and
that to be done by the siege of some place that might force the enemy to arise
to succor it. And that place was reckoned fittest, to be Duisbourge.
Duisbourge is a town of the County of Zutphen, situate at the confluence of
the river called old Issell, with that piece of the Rhine, that separating
himself from the body of the Rhine a little east of Arnham, was anciently
called Fossa Drusiana, as a ditch cut and made by Drusius from the Rhine into
Issell. The Town was also called Drusii burgum. It was and is now the chamber
of the County of Zutphen: well peopled and reasonably rich, walled round with
a high and strong wall, and watered of good depth and breadth round, and in the
greatest part double: so that in the opinion of soldiers it was thought of good
strength.

This Town besides that being of importance, it was like to draw the enemy
from Bercke to succor it, it was perilous also for our army to be left
vngotten behind us, for that lieng almost in the way of our passage between
Arnham and the camp, we must have been constrained, if we had proceeded to
Bercke to have left good forces for the assurance of that passage. There was in
it captain Sampson, a valiant old soldier, a Wallon, with 300, soldiers, and
about 500. Burgers that bare arms. The resolution being taken for the siege of
this Town, the army not knowing but they should pass on to Bercke: upon the
sudden his Excellency appointed Count Hollocke with the Earl of Essex, sir
Phillip Sidney and others, with seven or 800. foot, and 500. horse to march
by night, and taking the passages of the town to begin the siege by the break
of the day on twesday the 30. of August. His Excellency with the whole army
that day followed marching back thither from Elten in an order worth the
noting, for that the bands extended to the uttermost made show of fourteen or
fifteen thousand, whereas indeed horse and foot both were not complete eight
thousand. He came early that afternoon to Duisbourge: and himself in person
within arcabuze shot took view of the walls, on all the east side, and that
night set pyoners and soldiers to intrenching within half arcabuze shot. Our
ordinance was not yet come. The next night his Excellency understanding that
our pyoners had left their work at the trenches: himself between eleven and
twelve of the clock at night, went with sir William Pelham and some few of his
guard to see what was doing, and being within threescore yeardes of the Town
ditch, both going together, a musket shot from the wall stroke sir William
Pelham most dangerously in the belly, but pierced not his entrails, so that
he escaped death, and was abroad again within two days. The next day came
our ordinance, and the morning after it was planted. Then had we also news
that the prince of Parma, being certified of our sitting down here, would be
with us within four days. Wherewith the former opinion of his Excellency for
the levy of the princes camp by this diuersion was fully confirmed. The
ordenance being ten pieces played on Friday the second of September, from the
break of day till two in the afternoon, his Excellency being continually
hard by them in the trenches, and had made two breaches reasonably
assaultable, but yet so filled up again by those within, with logs, earth,
bedding, and such other trash, that the assault was difficult, especially a
water of a yard and more deep and threescore foot broad being between the
assailors and the wall. But such was the courage of our men of all nations,
that without further battery they extorted with great importunity from his
Excellency being in the trenches, a resolution for a present assault. And the
contention being great between the leaders to whom the honor of the assault
should be given, it was ordered by his Excellency that Count Hollocke with
the Dutch and Scots: sir John Norris with the English and Irish, should each
attempt one breach. They forthwith ordered their squadrons accordingly, with
so general courage and joy, as was marvelous to behold, and did indeed daunt
the enemy more (as themselves afterward confessed) than any thing else that
was done. Great also and many and most earnest were the particular suites of
private noble men, and gentlemen, for leave to go to the assault: which his
Excellency would grant to very few of them. The squadrons standing at the
water side ready to pass to the assault, the enemies within having hitherto
valiantly and soldierlike carried themselves, and now laboring to repair the
breaches, and standing in arms to receive us, yet seeing presently before
their eyes their own imminent danger, and especially moved with the
resolution of our people, they offered first an accord upon conditions, which
his Excellency refused, and thereupon they yielded simply, with grant of life
to the common soldier only. Which being accepted the town was rendered, and
sir John Boroughes and sir William Stanley appointed to the guard of it, till
further order. This Exploite being happily atchiued without loss, upon advise
it was resolved to stay there a while, as well to take order for the safe
keeping of the town, as also to abide there the princes coming with his
camp, if he had meaning to seek us: and especially for that neither victuals
nor furniture for our ordinance were then come sufficient for any further
present attempt. There were two or three english miles from Duisborough somewhat
toward Zutphen, a castle called Voerdon, and a strong place called Hackfourd
house, held by the enemy, which greatly annoied those parts. It was thought
expedient in the mean time to take in these castle and house, for which cause
certain companies were sent thither. They answered at the first stoutly. But
afterward being made believe the cannon was at hand they yielded. Our news
came often to Duisboroughe, that the prince with his camp was risen from
Berck: That he had laid his bridge over the Rhyne with intent to pass
toward us: and indeed he was whiles we lay there, passed with his army,
and, as we learned, minded to have assaied the succouring of Duisbourge, if it
had not been taken sooner then he expected. But hearing it was gone, and
understanding that our camp lay (as indeed it did) very strongly, he stayed
on this side the Rhyne near Weesell, about thirty english miles from us, with
intent to return, and to proceed in the siege of Berck as we were very
credibly informed. The E. of Leycester having now set full order in the town,
his provisions being come, and finding that the prince made no haste toward
him in that place, though he might have seemed to have attained his principal
intent, in raising the siege of Berck, with some overplus of advantage in
getting Duisbourge, yet to draw the prince further away from Berck that it
might be wholly relieved, as also for diverse other good reasons, he resolved to
depart thence toward Zutphen, and accordingly on the thirteen of September,
marched thither with his whole camp, and there sat down, about an english
mile from the town, on the river side next Zutphen, and the princes camp.

Zutphen is the chief town of the County of Zutphen, situate on the east
bank of the river Yssell, about equal distance of six or seven english
miles from Duisbourge on the south, and from Deuenter on the northeast quarter.
It is of it self strong: but important in this only, that it hinders the free
passage of the Yssell in the places near about it. But on the north west side
of the river right over against Zutphen, and within musket shot of the Town in
the province of the Vellowe, in the Duchy of Gelders, were two forts, called
the forts of Zutphen, such of importance, as they spoiled the whole province of
the Vellowe, and made the country yield them large contributions even from the
ports of Vtricht, Amsterdam, and Leiden in Holland, being 50. miles from them.
For strength they were accounted impregnable, and might be supplied from the
Town by great passagde boats with all necessaries. The Estates camp two
years before had lieu at them ten months, with eleven thousand footmen, and
3000. horse, and departed with loss without them. Taxis a soldier of account
with the enemy, lieutenant to Coronell Verdugo governor of Frizeland for the
king of Spain, commanded in the town and forts. After advise taken, upon good
view of the place, it was resolved, that the forts as of more importance for
us, and not the town, should be besieged. Our bridge of boats was appointed to
be laid over the river about an English mile from the Town, and the camp to
be placed on both sides the water: that the prince if he came and thought fit,
might see that we would give him the opportunity to attempt us. Order being
taken for these things, whiles they were in doing: his Excellency
understanding the tickle estate of Deuenter, thought fit himself in person to
go thither, leaving straight charge to be speedily advertised, if at the camp
they should understand any thing of the Princes moving.

Deuenter is the chief city of the province of Ouerissell. One of the Haunse
towns, large, strong, rich, and directing indeed Swowle and Campen, and the
rest of the cities and towns of that country, which in a manner depend wholly
upon it. It is seated upon the northeast bank of the river Yssell. It then
stood in a kind of newtrall terms inclining more in show to the Estates
party, but yielding no contributions to the war, and indeed aiding the enemy
with victuals and provisions, and some of the town having secret and strict
intelligences with him. That was the cause of his Excellencies so speedy
repair thither: the case being taken to be such, as that who had come first of
the prince or him with forces, should have been received. And indeed the
prince as we after understood, hastened al he could thither. But his
Excellency was first entered, and with him about four hundred footmen, and
two or three cornets of horse, and no more at this time. He dealt in courteous
and gentle sort with the townsmen, and they likewise used him and his well:
but yet so, as they would not lodge as in garrison any of those he brought
with him. He had not been there full two days when certain advertisement
came to him from the camp, that the prince with his whole army was risen from
about Weesell, and come to Burckloe, a town of the territory of Munster,
about eight english miles from our camp. Whereupon his Excellency departed
presently with his own train to the camp, leaving the four hundred
footmen, and two cornets of horse in Deuenter, and finding in the camp the
trenches upon Zutphen side not fully finished, he commanded all diligence to be
used therein, so as in one day they were sufficiently made up, and well furnished
with soldiers, and al necessaries ready for defense. The next night the prince
came to Zutphen, with 1500. horse, and the morning after departed, leaving part
of his horse men there, and returned to his camp at Burckloe, where whiles he
stayed providing victuals as we understood for Zutphen, and the forts, our men
spent the time in intrenching and fortifieng about the two forts, where, as
also upon the town side happened diverse light skirmishes almost every day,
till upon the 21. of September in the evening his Excellency having
intelligence that the Prince would the next morning send a conuoy of victuals
into Zutphen, sent out good scowt that night, and gave order to sir John Norris
to draw out sir William Stanleies, and some other bands of footmen, and
appointed some horsemen withal to encounter the conuoy in the way between the
enemies camp, and Zutphen. In the morning the 22. of September fell a great
and thick mist, that you might hardly discern a man ten paces of, at the
breaking up whereof the enemies appeered so near our companies, having planted
all their muskets and arcabuzes being 2000. and their pikes being a thousand,
very strongly on the high way, as our men, specially the noblemen and
gentlemen, as the Earl of Essex, the Lord Willoughbie, sir Phillip Sidney, sir
William Russell, sir John Norris, and the rest, in number seven or eight score,
who were in troop together in the face of the enemy before our footmen,
received the whole volie of the enemies shot, and passing the very fury of it,
gave charge upon the two foremost troops of the enemies horsemen, and drove
them back over their own trenches, and within their pikes at two several
times, in such sort, as Count Hanniball Gonzaga a man for nobility and service
of special account amongst them, was there slain, and many others with him.
Captain George Cresier an Albanese of singular valor and skill, was taken
prisoner, and two of their cornets brought away. We lost about thirty, one and
other, slain, and dying after of hurts, but not any of name, save only sir
Phillip Sidney, who first having one horse shot under him, and mounted upon a
second was shot with a musket in the left thigh, but came home on his horse,
and died the 25. day after. His Excellency having been in the field giving
order from the beginning, and now receiving the news of this good success,
was somewhat of opinion to have brought down the whole camp, and to have set
upon the enemy with all our forces. But upon better consideration by advise of
all the chief officers of the field, we being not past 300. horse, and 16. or
17. hundred footmen, that might presently come to fight, the rest being
employed at the forts, and in other necessary services at that time: the
enemy being three thousand footmen strong in place, and 12. or 14. hundred
horse, and we doubting least his whole army had been there, which it might
well have been, being the night before but five miles of, it was resolved that
our troops should stay, and not to commit the whole to the fortune of that
day. So this hot skirmish ended, our men content with their victory returning,
and the enemy marching quietly away.

After this fight we heard no more of the Prince in 10. or 12. days. But our
certain intelligences gave us, that he was gone to meet with our Reyters and
Almaines, (now thought to be ready to march,) with intent to stay them either
by stopping their passage, or by fight, or otherwise, as also to provide more
victuals, powder, and shot for Zutphen. His Excellency still applied his
principal purpose in besieging the forts. There is a piece of ground on the
side of the river that Zutphen is, and within sixty yards of the town, called
the Island, but it is dry toward the town. The taking of it was accounted of
great importance for the winning of the forts, but full of danger, lying so
near the town, and the enemy having a sconce in it fortified and manned with
thirty men. His Excellency was sundry times promised the surprising of this
Island by some, but performance not following, one night himself imparting his
purpose to two captains only, went out at ten of clock in the night, (the
prince elector Trucses, the Earl of Essex, and the L. North being with him) and
gave order for a present surprise of it, which so happily succeeded, that the
place and sconse were suddenly taken, the men within, two or three taken
prisoners, some slain, the rest fled, or were drowned in the water, and not a
man of ours lost or hurt. Now to keep this place was great danger, and some
would needs persuade to have it left. His Excellency would not so, but fell
forthwith in hand to intrenching, and having made it defensible, he then
abandoned the former seat of camp, and brought the bridge down to this
Island, and the whole camp nearer the forts, now indeed seriously attending
by all military arts and devices to win them. The hope of all our leaders both
English and others, was small for the obteining of these fortes: They were so
strong and well provided every way, and our means scant sufficient for so
great an exploit. But his Excellencies own self contrary to all and every
their aduises persisted in his intent most constantly, and would not hear any
thing that might tend to dissuade him from this purpose: and as indeed about a
work of his own, and of the commendation whereof very little can be derived
to any others, he most diligently and dangerously attended always in person
both earelie and late, and put his own hand almost to every particular service
of it, sconces were built, trenches were drawn, skirmishes made on both sides,
and nothing for offense, or defense omitted on either side, that military
skill in like case could execute or invent, till on the fourth of October, the
prince having been advertised by Taxis that the Islande was taken, and that
our works began to grow perilous to the fortes, came in person to Zutphen
with his whole camp, with intent as we could gather, to attempt our trenches
in the Islande on the town side. He came the fourth of October at night, and
on the morrow after, we certainly expected he should have assailed the
Island, for the which he had great opportunities: himself with his camp being
to come in the face on the east and south side, in a fair plain capable of
his army under the town wall: the town on the northeast beating on it with
their great and small shot, and having a gate for salie within arcabuze shot:
the Mill forte between the town and the water, having his artillarie bent on
it: the great fort with his ordenance ready to play on the north side, and the
little forte somewhat nearer with musket and arcabuze northeast, so that saving
on the west and south side they had compassed it round. But his Excellency on
the Tuesday at night, all night long had planted his ordenance to beat upon
the princes camp if it came: and having replenished the trenches with store of
men, was sufficently provided for him. On the Wednesday morning the fifth of
October, we saw of the princes troops of horse and foot raunge up and down,
a mile of and more. But having left some victuals and store of men in the town,
and doubting nothing of the loss of the sconces, he departed that night two
english miles back, which as soon as his Excellency understood, the same
Wednesday at night he planted his ordinance both in the Island, and on the
other side the water against the little fort. On the Thursday morning he
battered the little but strongest fort on both sides, till two of the clock in
the afternoon, and then took it by assault having in it 300. soldiers in the
face of the great fort with eight hundred soldiers, and of the town where
Taxis then was with above 2000. and in hearing at least of the prince, and his
whole camp, having been at Zutphen the day before, and now not three english
miles of it. His Excellency was all the time of this battery and assault in
the trenches in the Island on the town side, and at the assault time with his
pike in hand, verily expecting a salie from the town in that part, but none
came. In this assault did M. Edward Stanley lieutenant to coronell sir W.
Stanley, and captain of one of his bands, being appointed the first for the
assault, behave himself most valiantly, and was with his valor the principal
cause of this days happy success, whom his Excellency beholding made him
therefore presently knight in the trenches, gave him forty pounds sterling in
gold, and sent him the next day a patent of one hundred marks sterling by
year, during the life of the said sir Edward, binding his Excellencies own
lands in England for the due payment thereof, with a most honorable report of
this his fact contained in the patent. We lost about eight men in this assault
and not above. His Excellency appointed the next day for the approaching the
great forte. But that night did all the captains and soldiers within abandon
it, leaving behind them their ordenance, and escaped over the water to the
town where Taxis was feign to receive them. There were taken from the enemy
by our men during this siege two fortes mo, which the enemy had lately erected
about those others, and a castle called Niembeck castle his Excellency himself
in person took in, four english miles in the Vellow from this place: besides
the castle of Boxbergen near Deuenter, which we took also a little before
this time. Great ioies were made in all the united Provinces for the recovery
of these fortes. The whole country of the Vellow about forty english miles in
breadth, and as much in length, being thereby fully cleared: and no less was
the enemy daunted, having now lost his whole footing in that country: and
Taxis the governor having taken from him a goodly reuenew, which the
contributions of that ki^ge e^c^ite up to Amstredam and Loyden did yield him.
Upon the departure of the prince from Zutphen, his Excellency dispatched
secretly sir William Russell and sir Roger Williams, with five hundred horse to
attend upon him, and to observe his march, who found him on the Friday at night
the next day after the assault was given, about Burckloe, eight or ten english
miles from our camp, where they gave alarm to his whole camp, beat in his
scowtes and corpse de gards, but not a man came forth to them. The next day the
prince marched up toward Ringlebert, a house of the duke of Cleues, about
three or four english miles from Weesell, where he lay crased as we hard of
an ague, and dispersed his camp about in the villages adioining, since which
time till his return to Brussels, we hard nothing of him. His Excellency
after he had so honorably, and with so small loss in so short time, taken
these forts, thought before very hard to be won: having delivered Berck also,
which was the principal intent of his first marching, and sir Martin Skenck
with diverse of our english, being come from thence to his camp at Zutphen to
him: seeing his Almaines and Reyters came not: and finding the enemy quietly
gone, having nothing else to do in field, and the time of year far spent,
being about the midst of October, determined by advise of his counsel, to
give order for guarde and defense of the fortes, and to withdraw his soldiers
from the Islande, and other places, and so to dismiss his army. Which things
the better to effect, himself with the chief of his counsel went to
Deuenter: minding withal to assay the garrisoning of that place, being a matter
of great importance. But being called away from thence to Arnham, where sir
Philip Sidney then lay in great danger: and by the death of sir Phillip
retiring himself with extreme grief and sorrow to Vtricht: he gave order
before his departure for the garrisoning of Deuenter, and changing of the
magistrate there to the prince elector of Colloigne Trucses, sir William
Pelham, and sir John Norris, who with some little stur and danger, effected
both accordingly, and left governor of the garrison there sir William Stanley,
with 1200 footmen English and Irish, and two hundred horse.

Whiles this was in doing at Deuenter, there fell out a great and gallant
skirmish at the camp in this sort. Order being given for dismissing the
troops into garrison, first some companies, then others were sent away, and
now it was thought expedient to abandon the trenches on the other side of the
water next Zutphen: and so to take up the bridge and come away. First the
larger trenches were left, and the men drawn into a small fortification at the
bridge end, with intent the next night to take up our bridge also. Which Taxis
perceiving from the town, and seeing the small companies remaining on that
side, he salied with about two thousand footmen, passed the first trenches
forsaken, and assaulted the small fortification remaining with great valor,
himself being of the first in person. Our men being taken on the sudden were
at the first five or six of them slain: but the rest stood manfully to it, at
the pikes end, until sir William Stanley coming over the bridge from the
Vellowe side with supply of five or six hundred footmen, and lieutenant
Nicholas Parker with only five horsemen, drove them away even into the town
gate, and slew many of them, and were likely to have entered the town pell mel
with them, if the soldiers had not been stayed by their leaders. The next
night we left this little fortification also, and took up our bridge, and day
by day, as it might conveniently be done, dismissed the whole forces into
garrisons.

It may be demanded his Excellency being now in a good course of prosperous
proceeding: the Prince with his camp being gone, the forts taken, and nothing
remaining in those quarters but the bare town of Zutphen: why the winning of
that was not attempted also? To which this may be answered: The town is of it
self of small importance without the forts, only prohibiting the free passage
of the river by it: Then is it very strong, well provided of all necessaries,
and at that time manned with two or three thousand bearing arms: and the
Prince though departed further of, yet houering with his army not above
twenty English miles of it, so that the attempt of it could not be but
dangerous, the commodity small. But besides, it remains so environed with
our garrisons round about it, as it may be well said to be now besieged. In
Deuenter six English miles at northest upon the river side is sir William
Stanley with twelve hundred footmen, and two hundred horse. In the forts of
Zutphen on the Vellowe side within musket shot of the town at west, is master
Rowland York with eight hundred footmen, and one hundred horse. At Duisbourge
southward six miles, (and at Brunkhurst castle somewhat nearer) upon the bank
of Issell also is sir John Boroughes with eight hundred footmen, and two
hundred horse. The east and southeast quarters are shut up with our garrisons
of Lockham, Sherenberg, Doetecom: So that they of the garrison of Zutphen can
not stir out, neither can so much as victuals be brought to them, but by land:
and that from twenty or thirty miles of at least: and through the midst of
our garrisons, which will require more forces than the Prince can often spare
them, and more charges than the value of the town will counteruaile. But
before our coming away, as soon as our camp was broken up, we hear that
Taxis has lessened his garrison to the number of two hundred, and put the
Burgers out of the town, meaning to spare victuals, which he has in small
store. For neither did the Prince bring him in much at the times he came
thither, neither could or can he supply him at one time with any plenty for
want of carriages. Besides these, other causes also let this attempt against
Zutphen. The time of year was spent, the wants in our army were very great,
and our Reiters came not, who if they had not disappointed us, all impediments
notwithstanding his Excellency had proceeded further. And last of all it was
thought we had done well for this year: more being indeed most happily
achieved, than was hoped for or purposed at our coming forth. For the only
intent at the first setting out of this last camp was to raise the siege of
Berke: yea, or if we could have honorably delivered our men that were in it,
though the town were lost, it was thought a sufficient piece of service, with
so small means against an enemy so puissant, and with continual late
victories so greatly esteemed and feared. But God be thanked, who is the giver
of victories, and whose power for his poor afflicted appeered not obscurely in
these actions: Berke is clearly delivered, the English are all come from it:
it is left well manned and otherwise provided. And if we will summarily note
all Gods blessings in these military services only showed by the ministry
of his Excellency during the time of his government and abode there, it will
appear that in those few months there have been taken by our men from the
enemy above twenty towns, castles, forts, and sconces: that his footmen and
his best footmen the Spaniards have been met withal at Grave, that his
horsemen and his best horsemen the Albaneses, and Italians, have been well
encountered in the skirmish besides Zutphen: that his strong Zutphen forts were
taken by assault, even in the sight almost of himself, and of his whole camp:
that his army so much redoubted and feared, was drawn from Berck to Zutphen:
there abidden, there encountered sundry times, and at length returned back
again and dismissed without saving his forts, or doing us any damage, saving
the loss of sir Phillip Sidney, True it is, he has gotten in this time Grave,
Venloe, and Nuyse: But Grave by such means, as baron Hemart the governor by
public judgment of his own best friend and commander the Count Hollock, and
of al other military officers of all nations, lost his head for it. Venloe was
yielded by the townsmen whiles the soldiers defended the walls. Nuyse was not
of the jurisdiction, or territory of the united Provinces, and therefore his
Excellency had not to do with it. But this is true also, that in all these
wars and sundry diversities of accidents and attempts in diverse places, the
enemy never got one town, castle, forte, or sconce, wherein any one english
soldier was, nor did any one piece of service worth the noting since his
Excellency came into the field with this last army. And let the Estates
especially, and the people of the united Provinces acknowledge the goodness of
God in these his works, and the great grace and favor of her Majesty, in
spending and sending to and for them, her money, forces, and most valiant,
noble, loving and beloved subjects, by whose service it is now done for them,
that whereas their estate was at his Excellencies first arrival, so utterly
without hope of standing as is showed at the beginning of my letter: Now they
are left in good assurance of safety, religion by a synod being fully
established: the civil government orderly settled: the military discipline
well restored: their people in good obedience: their frontiers in great hope of
maintenance to be continued: their territory in Gelders, Zutphen, Ouerissell,
and Flaunders enlarged: their reuenew by a great accession of contribution in
Gelders and Ouerissell increased: their doubtful friends of Ouerissell
assured, and their enemy put to that plunge, as he yet has not been since
his being in those countries. God make them as thankful to God and her
Majesty for it as they have good cause: and to acknowledge it to his
Excellency as his frank and most behoouefull great service for them has
deserved: whom if extremities of sundry kind of great crosses: plain
destitution and want almost of all fit means: private care of his own most
large expenses for the public: or often dangerous hazard of his person could
have withdrawn from this proceeding, nothing had been done at this time. But
God whom he serves has wrought this great work out of all those difficulties
by him, to him be the praise and glory for it. His Excellency after his camp
thus dismissed, and a little time spent at Vtricht in the public affairs,
departed thence to the Hage in Hollande: where having established perfect order
in the civil and military governments during his absence, being upon important
causes to return into England, from Hage he passed by Delph, Rotterdam, Dort,
Briell, and Vlushing, where he embarked for England on the 23. of November at
night, and on the next night was with her Majesty at Richmonde, of whom he was
most graciously received.

Thus have I been bold to trouble you with this brief discourse, wherein if
any thing set down or omitted be not to your contentation, I hope you will
consider it has proceeded by your own earnest urging from him, who desires
nothing more then to content you, and who but to please you had rather have
showed his dutiful affection in some other matter. But thus much if it like
you so well to interpret of it, may be as it were to give you a taste in these
matters, till some of better skill and more leisure may fully satisfy it with
a just volume, which I wish indeed to be done, the argument will well bear it.
And so remaining to do you what further service my slender ability may aforde
I end.

At London the 8. of January 1586. Your worships humble in all service, T. D.


