MOSES IN A MAP OF his Miracles.

By Michael Drayton ESQVIRE.

AT LONDON Printed by Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold by Thomas Man the
Younger. 1604.

TO MY ESTEEMED PATRON SIR Walter Aston, Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Bathe.
ALthough our sundry (yet our sacred) flames,
Work diverse and as contrary effects:
Yet then your own, we seek not other names,
Nor stranger arches our free Muse erects.
Though limmitlesse be (naturally) our love,
We can her powers officiouslie confine:
Who can instruct her orderly to move,
And keep the compass wisely we assign.
To take our fair leave (till that ampler times
Some glorious object strongly may beget)
We make you tender of these hallowed rimes
The virtuous payment of a worthier debt.
Till to our names that monument we rear,
That steel and marble unto dust shall wear.
MICHAEL DRAYTON.

To him that will read this Book.
REader, to thee that wilt not seem too wise, nor art too singular, I think
it not amiss in the behalf of my Poem (to humble my self thus far) the
better to prepare thy opinion in the same: and to tell thee briefly, that
whatsoever we have from History, as from Josephus, Lyra, or others of less
authority: we use rather as Iems and exterior ornaments to beautify our
Subject, than any way to mix the same, with the solid body of that which is
Canonical and sacred. Though choosing rather to suite and pollish it with the
colors and rarities of those ancient Writers that have attended so long the
worthiness and antiquity thereof, than with any other habiliments of invention
or Poesy, should they seem never so delightful, and not disagreeing from the
state and dignity of so sacred a Subject as this is of ours. Those that have
accompanied us in this kind, is that Reverend Hierony: Vida his Christeis,
containing the life and miracles of Christ, that has been, and is, generally
received through Christendom (and very worthily.) Buchanan his Tragedy of
Iephtha in another kind, and Bartas his Iudeth. I could derive thee a
Catalogue of their like, though I cite these only for the varieties. Thus
requesting thee in reading to correct some few faults that have chanced to
escape in the Press, I bid thee farewell.

To this Poem.
SEe how ingrate forgetfulness
Cireles us round with dangers,
That all the Saints whom God does highly bless,
To us are strangers.
Now Heaven into our souls inspires
No true caelestiall motions:
Lusts ardent flame has dimmed the holy fires
Of our devotions.
While against blasphemers general spite
Our painful Author strives,
And happy Spirits which live in heavenly light
On Earth reuiueth.
Thou Patriark great, who with mild looks
His laboring Muse beholdest:
Reach him those leaves where thou in sacred books
All truth vnfoldest:
And guide (like Israel) Poets hands
From Egypt, from vain Stories,
Only to sing of the fair promised lands,
And all the glories.
JOHN BEAVMONT.

Ad Michaelem Draytonem.
DVm reluctantem Pharium IEHOVAE
Drayton, et fractum canis, et rubentes
Diuidis fluctus, equites reducta et
obruis vnda:
Instruis quanto monumenta nisu?
Quam sacra nomen tibi crescit aede?
Pyramid cedit peritura: cedit
totaque Memphis,
Cedit, et quicquid posuere reges
Molibus fisi nimium superbis.
O sacer vatis labor: a rapaci
tempore tutus.
BEALE SAPPERTON.

To the Honorable Knight Sir Walter Aston.
FRom humble Sheepcoates, to Loves bow and fires:
Thence to the arms of Kings, and grieved Peers:
Now to the great Iehouahs acts aspires
(Fair Sir) your Poets pen: your noblesse cheeres
His mounting Muse: and with so worthy hand
Applaudes her flight, as nothing she will leave
Above the top, whereon she makes her stand,
So high bright Honor learned Spirits can heave.
Such luster lends the Poets pollisht verse
Unto Nobility, as aftertimes
Shall think, there Patrons virtues they rehearse,
When virtuous men they Caracter in rimes.
You raise his thoughts, with full desire of fame:
Amongst Heroes he enroles your name.
Yours BEALE SAPPERTON.

To M. Michael Drayton.
THy noble Muse already has been spread
Through Europe and the Sunne-scorch'd Southern climes,
That I Will where Saturnes royal Son was bred,
Has been enricht with thy immortal rimes:
Even to the burnt line have thy poems slowne,
And gained high same in the declining West,
And over that cold Sea shall thy name be blown,
That Icie mountains rowleth on her breast:
Her soaring hence so far made me admire,
Whither at length thy worthy Muse would fly,
Borne through the tender air with wings of fire,
Able to lift her to the starrie sky:
This work resolved my doubts, when the earths repleate.
With her fair fruit, in Heaven she will take her seat.
THOMAS ANDREWE. Ex arduis eternitas.

The Map of Miracle. THE FIRST BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Canto our attracted Muse
The Prophets glorious birth pursues,
The various changes of his fate,
From humblenes to high estate,
His beauty, more than mortal shape,
From Egypt how he does escape,
By his fair bearing in his flight,
Obtaines the lovely Midianite,
Where God unto the Hebrew spoke,
Appearing from the burning brake,
And back does him to Egypt send,
That mighty things does there intend.
GIrt in bright flames, rapt from celestial fire,
That our unwearied faculties refine,
By zeal transported boldly we aspire
To sing a subject gloriously divine:
Him that of mortals only had the grace,
(On who^ the Spirit did in such power descend)
To talk with God face opposite to face,
Even as a man with his familiar friend.
Muse I inuoke the utmost of thy might,
That with an armed and auspitious wing,
Thou be obsequious in his doubtless right
Against the vile Athiests vituperious sting:
Where thou that gate industriously mai'st fly,
Which Nature strives but fainedlie to go,
Borne by a power so eminent and hie,
As in his course leaves reason far below,
To show how Poesy (simply has her praise)
That from full Joue takes her celestial birth,
And quick as fire, her glorious self can raise
Above this base and euitable earth.
O if that Time have happily reserved,
(Besides that sacred and canonicke writ,
What once in slates and barks of trees was keru'd)
Thing that our Muses gravity may sit,
Vnclasp the worlds great Register to me,
That smokie rust has very near defaced,
That I in those dim Characters may see,
From common eyes that has aside been cast.
And thou Translator of that faithful Muse
This ALLS creation that divinely song, Bartas.

From Courtly French (no travail do refuse)
To make him Master of thy Genuin tongue,
Salust to thee and Siluester thy friend,
Comes my high Poem peaceable and chaste,
Your hallowed labors humbly to attend
That wrackfull Time shall not have power to waste.
A gallant Hebrew (in the height of life)
Amram a Leuite honorably bred,
Of the same offspring wan a beauteous wife,
And no less virtuous, goodly Jacobed:
So fitly paired that (without all ostent)
Even of the wise it hardly could be said
Which of the two was most preheminent,
Or he more honored, or she more obayd,
In both was found that liuelihood and meetnes,
By which affection any way was moved:
In him that shape, in her there was that sweetness,
Might make him liked or her to be beloved:
As this commixtion, so their married mind
Their good corrected, or their ill releeu'd,
As truly loving as discreetlie kind,
Mutuallie joyed, as mutuallie grieved:
Their nuptial bed by abstinence maintained,
Yet still gave fuel to Loves sacred fire,
And when fruition plentifulli'st gained,
Yet were they chaste in fulness of desire.
Now grieved Jsrael many a woeful day,
That at their vile seruilitie repined,
Pressed with the burdens of rude boisterous clay,
By stern Egyptian tyranny assigned:
Yet still the more the Hebrews are oppressed
Like the Frim seed they fructify the more
That by the eternal providence fore-blest,
Goshen gives roomth but scantly to their store.
And the wise Midwiues in their natural need,
That the fair males immediately should kill,
Hating s'abhord, and Heathenish a deed,
Check his harsh brutenes and rebellious will
That small effect perceauing by the same,
Bids the men-children (greatly that abound)
After that day into the world that came,
Upon their birth should instantly be drowned.
And now the time come had bin long foretold,
He should be borne unto the Hebrews joy, Josephus de. Ant. Iud.

Whose puissant hand such fatal power should hold,
As in short time all Egypt should destroy.
The execution which more strongly forced,
And every where so generally done,
As in small time unnaturally diuorc'd,
Many a dear Mother and as dear a son.
Though her chaste bosom that fair Altar wear,
Where Loves pure vows he dutifully paid,
His Arms to her a Sanctuary dear,
Yet they so much his tyranny obay'd,
By free consent to separate their bed,
Better at all no Children yet to have,
Tha^ their dear love should procreate the dead,
Untimely issue for a timelesse grave.
When in a vision whilst he slept by night,
God bids him so not Jacobed to leave,
The man that Egypt did so much affright,
Her pregnant womb should happily conceive.
Soon after finding that she was with child,
The same conceales by all the means she can,
Lest by th'apparance she might be beguild,
If in the birth it proved to be a man.
The time she goes till her account was nie,
Her swelling belly no conception shows,
Nor at the time of her delivery, Joseph.

As other women panged in her throws.
When lo the fair fruit of that prospering womb
Wounds the kind parents in their prime of joy,
Whose birth pronounces his too timelesse doombe
Accused by Nature, forming it a boy:
Yet it is so sweet, so amiably fair,
That their pleased eyes with rapture it behold,
The glad-sad parents full of joy and care
Feign would reserve their Infant if they could,
And still they tempt the sundry varying hours,
Hopes and despaires together strangely mixed,
Distasting sweets with many cordial sowers,
Opposed interchangeably betwixt.
If ought it ayl'd or hapleslie it cride,
Unheard of any that she might it keep,
With one short breath she did entreat and chide,
And in a moment she did sing and weep.
Three laboring months them flatterer-like beguild,
And danger still redoubling as it lasts,
Suspecting most the safety of the Child,
Thus the kind Mother carefully forecasts:
(For at three months a scrutinie was held,
And serchers then sent every where about,
That in that time if any were concealed,
They should make proof and straightly bring them out.
To Pharoes will she awfullie must bow,
And therefore hastens to abridge these fears,
And to the flood determines it shall go,
Yet e're it went she will drown it with her tears.
This afternoon Love bids a little stay,
And yet these pauses do but lengthen sorrow,
But for one night although she make delay,
She vows to go unto his death to morrow.
The morning come, it is too early yet,
The day so fast not hastening on his date,
The gloomie Evening murder best does fit,
The Evening come and then it is too late.
Her pretty Infant lying on her lap
With his sweet eyes her thretning rage beguiles,
For yet he plays, and dallies with his pap,
To mock her sorrows with his amorous smiles,
And laughed, and chuck'd, and spread the pretty hands
When her full heart was at the point to break,
(This little Creature yet not understands
The woeful language mothers tears did speak.)
Wherewith surpised and with a parents love,
From his fair eyes she does fresh courage take,
And Natures laws alowing does reprove,
The frail Edicts that mortal Princes make.
It shall not die, she will keep her Child unknown
And come the worst in spite of Pharoes rage,
As it is hers, she will dispose her own,
And if it must, it'st die at riper age.
And thus reuoluing of her frailties care,
A thousand strange thoughts throug her troubled mind,
Sounding the dangers deeply what they are,
Betwixt the laws of cruelty and kind.
But it must die, and better yet to part,
Since preordain'd to this disast'rous fate,
His want will sit the nearer to the heart
In riper and more flourishing estate.
The perfect husband whose impressiue soul,
Took true proportion of each pensive throw,
Yet had such power his passion to control,
As not the same immediately to show.
With carriage full of comlines and grace,
As grief not felt nor sorrow seemed to lack,
Courage and fear so temp'red in his face,
Thus his beloved Jacobed bespake.
Dear heart be patient, stay these timelesse tears,
Death of thy Son shall never quite bereave thee,
My soul with thine, that equal burden bears,
As what he takes, my Love again shall give thee:
For Jsraels sin if Jsraels seed must suffer,
And we of mere necessity must leave him,
Please yet to grace me with this gentle offer,
Give him to me by who^ thou did conceive him.
So though thou with so dear a jewel part,
This yet remains lastly to relieve thee,
Thou have imposed this hind'rance on my heart,
Another loss shall need the less to grieve thee,
Nor are we Hebrews abject by our name,
Though thus in Egypt hatefully despised,
That we that blessing fruitleslie should claim
Once in that holy Covenant comprised,
It is not fit Mortality should know
What his eternal providence decreed,
That unto Abraham ratified the vow
In happy Sara and her hallowed seed,
Nor shall the wrong to godly Joseph done
In his remembrance ever be enrould,
By Jacobs sighs for his lost little son
A Captived slave to the Egiptians soul'd:
Reason sets limmets to the longest grief,
Sorrow scarce past when comfort is returning,
He sends affliction that can lend relief,
Best that is pleased with measure in our mourning.
Lost in her self, her spirits are so distracted,
All hopes dissolved might fortify her further,
Her mind seems now of misery compacted,
That must consent unto so dear a murder.
Of slime and twigs she makes a simple shread
(The poor last duty to her Child she owes
This pretty martyr, this yet living dead)
Wherein she does his little corpse enclose:
And means to bear it presently away,
And in some water secretly bestow it,
But yet a while bethinks her self to stay,
Some little kindness she does further owe it:
Nor will she in this cruelty persevere,
That by her means his timelesse blood be spilt,
If of her own she does her self deliver,
Let others hands be nocent of the guilt:
Yet if she keep it from the ruthlesse flood
That is by Pharo's tyranny assigned it,
What boots that wretched miserable good,
If so disposed where none do come to find it,
For better yet the Homicyde should kill it,
Or by some beast in pieces to be rent,
Than lingering famine cruelly should spill it
That it endure a double languishment:
And neighboring near to the Egiptian Court,
She knows a place that near the river side
Was often frequented by the worthier sort,
For now the spring was newly in her pride.
Thither she hasts but with a painful speed
The nearest way she possibly could get,
And by the clear brim among the flags and reed,
Her little Coffin carefully she set:
Her little Girl (the Mother following near)
As of her Brother that her leave would take,
Which the sad woman vnexpecting there,
Yet it to help her kindly thus bespake:
(Quoth she) sweet Miriam secretly attend,
And for his death see who approaches hither,
That once for all assured of his end,
His days and mine be consummate together,
It is some comfort to a wretch to die
(If there be comfort in the way of death)
To have some friend or kind Alliance by,
To be officious at the parting breath:
Thus she departs, often stays, often turns back,
Looking about lest any one espied her,
Feign would she leave, that leaving she does lack,
That in this sort so strangely does divide her.
Unto what Dame (participating kind)
My verse her sad perplexity shall show,
That in a softened and relenting mind
Finds not a true tuch of that Mothers woe.
Yet all this while full quietly it slept,
(Poor little Brat incapable of care)
Which by that powerful providence is kept,
Who does this child for better days prepare.
See here an abject utterly forlorn,
Left to destruction as a violent pray,
Whom man might judge accursed to be borne,
To dark oblivion molded up in clay,
That man of might in after times should be
(The bounds of frail mortality that brake)
Which that Almighty gloriously should see,
When he in thunder on mount Sina spoke.
Now Pharo's Daughter Termuth young and fair,
With such choice Maidens as she favored most,
Needs would abroad to take the gentle air,
Whilst the rich year his braueries seemed to boast:
Softly she walks down to the secret flood,
Through the calm shades most peaceable and quiet,
In the cool streams to check the pampred blood,
Stirred with strong youth and their delicious diet;
Such as the Princess, such the day addressed,
As though provided equally to pair her,
Either in other fortunatly blessed
She by the day, the day by her made fairer,
Both in the height and fulness of their pleasure,
As to them both some future good divining,
Holding a steadie an accomplished measure,
This in her perfect clearenes, that in shining.
The very air to emulate her meekenes,
Strove to be bright and peaceable as she,
That it grew jealous of that sudden sleekenes,
Fearing it after otherwise might be:
And if the fleet wind by some rigorous gale
Seemed to be moved, and patiently to chide her,
It was as angry with her lawnie veil,
That from his sight it enuiouslie should hide her:
And now approaching to the flow'rie meade
Where the rich Summer curiously had dight her,
Which seemed in all her iollitie arayde,
With Natures cost and pleasures to delight her:
See this most blessed, this unusual hap,
She the small basket sooner should epsy,
That the Child waked, and missing of his pap,
As for her succor instantly did cry;
Forth of the flagges she caused it to be taken,
Calling her Maids this Orphanet to see,
Much did she joy an Innocent forsaken
By her from peril priuiledg'd might be:
This most sweet Princess pitiful and mild,
Soon on her knee vnswathes it as her own,
Found for a man, so beautiful a Child,
Might for an Hebrew easily be known:
Noting the care in dressing it bestowed,
Each thing that fitted gentleness to wear,
Judged the sad parents this lost Infant owed,
Were as invulgar as their fruit was fair,
(Says she) my mind not any way suggests
An unchaste womb these lineaments that bred,
For thy fair browe apparently contests
The current stamp of a clean nuptial bed:
She named it Moses which in time might tell
(For names do many mysteries expound)
When it was young the chance that it befell,
How by the water strangely it was found,
Calling Melch-women that Egyptians were,
Once to the teat his lips he would not lay,
As though offended with their sullied leare,
Seeming as still to turn his head away:
The little Girl that near at hand did lurk
(Thinking this while she tarried but too long)
Finding these things so happily to work,
Kindly being crafty, wise as she was young,
Madame (says she) wilt please you I provide
A Nurse to breed the Infant you did find,
There is an Hebrew dwelling here beside,
I know can do it fitly to your mind:
For a right Hebrew if the Infant be,
(As well produce you instances I can,
And by this Child as partly you may see,)
It will not suck of an Egiptian,
The courteous Princess offered now so fair,
That which before she earnestly desired
That of her foundling had a special care,
The Girl to fetch her instantly required.
Away the Girl goes, does her Mother tell
What favor God had to her brother shown,
And what else in this accident befell,
That she might now be Nurse unto her own.
Little it boots to bid the wench to ply her,
Nor the kind Mother hearken to her son,
Nor to provoke her to the place to hie her,
Which seemed not now on earthly feet to run:
Slow to her self yet hasting as she flewe,
(So fast affection forward did her bear)
As though forewafted with the breath she drew,
Borne by the force of nature and of fear,
Little the time, and little is the way,
And for her business eithers speed does crave,
Yet in her have bethinkes her what to say,
And how her self in presence to behave,
Slack she will not seem lest to another trust
Her hopeful charge were happily directed,
Nor yet too forward show her self she must,
Lest her sweet fraud thereby might be suspected;
Com'n she does bow her humbly to the ground,
And every joint incessantly does tremble,
Gladness and fear each other so confound,
So hard a thing for Mothers to dissemble.
Says this sweet Termuth well I like thy beauty,
Nurse me this Child (if it thy state behooue)
Although a Prince i will not enforce thy duty,
But pay thy labor, and reward thy love:
Though even as Gods is Pharo's high command,
And as strong Nature so precise and strict,
There rests that power yet in a Princess hand,
Too free on Hebrew from this strong edict:
That shall in rich abilliments bedight,
Decked in the Iems that admirabl'st shine,
Wearing our own roabe gracious in our sight,
Free in our Court, and nourished for mine:
Love him dear Hebrew as he were thine own,
Good Nurse be careful of my little Boy,
In this to us thy kindness may be shown,
Some Mothers grief, is now a Maidens joy.
This while all mute the poor astonished Mother,
With admiration as transpearced stood,
One bursting joy does so confound another,
Passion so powerful in her ravished blood.
Whispering some soft words which delivered were,
As rather seemed her silence to impart,
And being enforced from bashfulnes and fear,
Came as true tokens of a graceful heart.
Thus she departs her husband to content,
With this dear present back to him she brought,
Making the time short, telling each event,
In all shapes joy presented to her thought.
Yet still his manly modesty was such
(That his affections strongly so controlde,)
As if joy seemed his manly heart to touch,
It was her joy and gladness to behold:
When all reioyc'd unmoved thereat the whiles,
In his grave face such constancy appears,
As now scarce showing comfort in his smiles,
Nor then revealing sorrow in his tears:
Yet often beheld it with that steadfast eye,
Which though it sdain'd the pleasdnes to confess,
More in his looks in fulness there did lie,
Than all their words could any way express.
In time the Princess playing with the Child, Josephus Pet. Comestor.

In whom she seemed her chief delight to take,
With whom she often the weary time beguild,
That as her own did of this Hebrew make:
It so fell out as Pharo was in place,
Seeing his daughter in the Child to joy,
To please the Princess, and to do it grace,
Himself vouchsafes to entertain the Boy:
Whose shape and beauty when he did behold
With much content his Princely eye that fed,
Giving to please it, any thing it would,
Set his rich Crown upon the Infants head,
With this weak Child regarding not at all
(As such a Babie carelessly is meet)
Unto the ground the Diadem let fall
Spurning it from him with neglectfull feet.
Which as the Priests beheld this omenous thing
(That else had past unnoted as a toy.)
As from their skill report unto the King,
This was the man that Egypt should destroy.
Told by the magi that were learned and wise,
Which might full well the jealous King inflame,
Said by the Egiptian ancient prophecies
That might give credit easlier to the same.
She as discreet as she was chaste and fair,
With Princely gesture and with countenance mild
By things that hurtful and most dangerous were
Shows to the King the weakness of the Child:
Hot burning coals does to his mouth present,
Which he to handle simply does not stick,
This little fool, this retchlesse Innocent
The burning gleed with his soft tongue does lick:
Which though in Pharo her desire it wrought,
His babish imbecilitie to see,
To the Childs speech impediment it brought,
From which he after never could be free.
The Child grew up, when in his manly face
Beauty was seen in an unusual cheer,
Such mixtures sweet of comlines and grace
Likely apparelled in complexion clear.
The part of earth contends with that of Heaven,
Both in their proper purity excelling,
To whether more pre-eminence was given,
Which should excel the dweller or the dwelling.
Men's usual stature he did far exceed,
And every part proportioned so well,
The more the eye upon his shape did feed
The more it longed upon the same to dwell:
Each joint such perfect Harmony did bear,
That eurious judgment taking any lim
Searching might miss to match it any where,
Nature so failed in paralelling him:
His hair bright yellowe, on an arched browe
Sat all the beauties kind could ever frame,
And did them there so orderly bestow,
As such a seat of majesty became.
As time made perfect each exterior part,
So still his honor with his years increased,
That he sat Lord in many a tender heart,
With such high favors his fair youth was blessed.
So fell it out that Aethiop war began,
Inuading Egypt with their Armed powers,
And taking spoils, the Country ouer-ran
To where as Memphis vaunts her climing Towers.
Wherefore they with their Oracles confer
About the event, which do this answer make,
That if they would transport this civil war,
They to their Captain must an Hebrew take.
And for fair Moses happily was grown
Of so great towardnes and especial hope,
Him they do choose as absolutest known
To lead their power against the Aethiope.
Which they of Termuth hardly can obtain,
Though on their Altars by their Gods they vow
Him to deliver safe to her again,
(Once the war ended) safe as he was now.
Who for the way the Army was to pass,
That by the Egiptians only was intended,
Most part by water, more prolixious was
Than present peril any whit commended:
To intercept the Aethtopians wrought
A way far nearer who their Legions led,
Which till that time impassible was thought,
Such store of serpents in that place was bred:
Devised by birds this danger to eschew,
Whereof in Egypt be exceeding store,
The Storke, and Ibis, which he wisely knew,
All kinds of Serpents naturally abhore.
Which he in Baskets of Egiptian reed,
Borne with his caridge easily does convey,
And where incampeth sets them forth to feed,
Which drive the Serpents presently away.
Thus them preventing by this subtle course,
That all their succor suddenly bereft,
When Aethiop flies before the Egiptian force,
Shut up in Saba their last refuge left.
Which whilst with strait siedge they beleagred long,
The Kings fair Daughter haps him to behold,
And became fettered with affection strong,
Which in short time could hardly be controlde.
Tarbis that kindled this rebellious rage, ^omestor

That they to Egypt tributorie were,
When the old King decrepit now with age,
She in his stead the souereigntie did bear.
Up to his Tower where she the Camp might see,
To look her new Love every day she went,
And when he happened from the field to be,
She thought her blessed beholding but his Tent,
And oftentimes does modestly inuay
Against him the City walled first about,
That the strong site should churlishly denay
Him to come in, or her for passing out,
Had the gates been but softened as her breast
(That to behold her loved enemy stands)
He had ere this of Saba been possessed,
And therein planted the Egiptian bands:
Often from a place as secretly she might
(That from her Palace looked unto his Tent)
When he came forth appearing in his sight,
Showing by signs the love to him she meant.
For in what arms it pleased him to be dight,
After the Hebrew or the Egiptian guise:
He was the brauest, the most goodly wight
That ever graced Aethiop with his eyes.
And finding means to parley from a place,
By night, her passion does to him discover,
To yield the City if he would embrace
Her a true Princess, as a faithful Lover.
The feature of so delicate a Dame
Motives sufficient to his youth had been,
But to be Lord of Kingdoms by the same,
And of so great and absolute a Queen,
Soon gently stole him from himself away.
That does to him such rarities partake,
Offering so rich, so excellent a pray,
Loving the treason for the Traitors sake:
But whilst he lived in this glorious vain,
Jsrael his conscience oftentimes does move,
That all this while in Egypt did remain
Virtue and grace o'recomming youth and love.
And though God knows unwilling to depart,
From so high Empire wherein now he stood,
And her that sat so near unto his heart,
Such power has Jsrael in his happy blood,
By skill to quit him forcibly he wrought,
As he was learned and traded in the stars,
Both by the Hebrews, and the Egiptians taught,
That were the first the best Astronomers,
Two sundry figures makes, Come^tor ex Vet. Script.
whereof the one
Cause them that wear it all things past forget.
As the other of all accidents foregone
The memory as eagerly does whet.
Which he insculped in two likely stones,
For rarenes of inualuable price,
And cunningly contrived them for the nones
In likely rings of excellent devise:
That of oblivion giving to his Queen,
Which soon made show the violent effect
Forgot him straight as he had never been,
And all her former kindnesses neglect.
The other (that does memory assist)
Him with the love of Jsrael does inflame,
Departing thence not how the Princess wist,
In peace he leaves her as in war he came.
But all the pleasures of the Egiptian Court,
Had not such power upon his springing years,
As had the sad and tragical report
Of the rude burdens captived Israel bears,
Nor what regards he to be graced of Kings?
Or flattered greatness idely to awaite?
Or what respects he the negotiating
Matters comporting Emperie and state?
The bondage and seruilitie that lay
On buried Jsrael (sunk in ordurous slime)
His grieved spirit down heavily did way,
That to lean care often lent the prosperous time.
A wretched Hebrew happened to behold
Brus'd with sad burdens without all remorse
By an Egiptian barb'rously controlde,
Spurning his pined and miserable corse
Which he beholding vexed as he stood,
His fair veins swelling with impatient fire,
Pity and rage so wrestled in his blood
To get free passage to conceived ire,
Rescuing the man the Egiptian does resist:
(Which from his vile hands forcibly he took)
And by a strong blow with his valiant fist.
His hateful breath out of his nostrils struck.
Which though his courage boldly dare auerre,
In the proud power of his Emperious hand,
Yet from high honor deigneth to interre,
The wretched carcass in the smouldring sand.
Which then supposed in secret to be wrought,
Yet still has Envy such a jealous eye,
As forth the same incontinent it sought,
And to the King delivered by and by,
Which soon gave vent to Pharoes covered wrath,
Which till this instant reason did confine,
Opening a strait way, an apparent path
Unto that great and terrible design:
Most for his safety forcing his retreat
When now affliction every day did breed,
And when reuengefull tyranny did threate
The greatest horror to the Hebrew seed.
To Midian now his Pilgrimage he took,
Midian earthes only Paradise for pleasures,
Where many a soft Rill, many a sliding Brook,
Through the sweet valleys trip in wanton measures,
Whereas the curled Groves and the flowrie fields,
To his free soul so peaceable and quiet
More true delight and choice contentment yields,
Than Egipts braueries and luxurious diet:
And wandering long he happened on a Well,
Which he by paths frequented might epsy,
Bordred with trees where pleasure seemed to dwell,
Where to repose him, easily down does lie:
Where the soft winds did mutually embrace,
In the cool Arbours Nature there had made,
Fanning their sweet breath gently in his face,
Through the calm cincture of the amorous shade.
Till now it nigh'd the noon-stead of the day,
When scorching heat the gadding Herds do grieve.
When Shepherds now and Heardsmen every way,
Their thirsting Cattle to the Fountain drive:
Amongst the rest seven Shepheardesses went
Along the way for watring of their Sheep,
Whose eyes him seemed such reflection sent,
As made the Flocks even white that they did keep:
Girls that so goodly and delightful were,
The fields were fresh and fragrant in their view,
Winter was as the Spring time of the year,
The grass so proud that in their footsteps grew:
Daughters they were unto a holy man,
(And worthy too of such a Sire to be)
Jethro the Priest of fertile Midian,
Few found so just, so righteous men as he.
But see the rude Swain, the vntutour'd slave,
Without respect or reu'rence to their kind,
Away their fair flocks from the water drove,
Such is the nature of the barbarous Hind:
The Maids (perceauing where a stranger sat)
Of whom those Clownes so basely did esteem,
Were in his presence discontent thereat,
Whom he perhaps improuident might deem.
Which he perceauing kindly does entreat,
Reproues the Rustickes for that off'red wrong,
Auerring it an injury too great,
To such (of right) all kindness did belong.
But finding well his Oratorie fail,
His fists about him frankly he bestows,
That where persuasion could not late prevail,
He yet compels quickly by his blows.
Entreates the Dam'sels their aboade to make,
(With Courtly semblance and a manly grace,)
At their fair pleasures quietly to take,
What might be had by freedom of the place.
Whose beauty, shape, and courage they admire,
Exceeding these, the honor of his mind,
For what in mortal could their hearts desire,
That in this man they did not richly find?
Returning sooner than their usual hour,
All that had happened to their Father told,
That such a man relieved them by his power,
As one all civil courtesy that could:
Who full of bounty hospitably meek
Of his behavior greatly pleased to hear,
Forthwith commands his servants him to seek,
To honor him by whom his honored were:
Gently receaues him to his goodly seat,
Feasts him his friends and families among,
And him with all those offices entreat,
That to his place and virtues might belong.
Whilst in the beauty of those goodly Dames,
wherein wise Nature her own skill admires,
He feeds those secret and impiercing flames,
Nursed in fresh youth, and gotten in desires:
VVonne with this man this Princely Priest to dwell,
For greater hire than bounty could devise,
For her whose praise makes praise it self excel,
Fairer than fairenes, and as wisdom wise.
In her, her Sisters severally were seen,
Of every one she was the rarest part,
who in her presence any time had been,
Her Angel eye transpierced not his heart.
For Zipora a Shepherds life he leads,
And in her sight deceaues the subtle hours,
And for her sake often robes the flowrie meades.
With those sweet spoils to enrich her rural bowres,
Up to mount Horeb with his flock he took,
The flock wise Jethro willed him to keep,
Which well he guarded with his Shepherds crook,
Goodly the Shepherd, goodly were the Sheep;
To feed and fold full warily he knew,
From Fox and Wolf his wandering flocks to free,
The goodli'st flower that in the meadows grew
Were not more fresh and beautiful than he.
Gently his fair flocks lessow'd he along,
Through the Frim pastures freely at his leisure,
Now on the hills, the valleys then among,
Which seem themselves to offer to his pleasure.
Whilst feathered Siluans from each blooming spray,
With murmuring waters wistly as they creep,
Make him such music (to abridge the way,)
As fits a Shepherd company to keep.
When lo that great and fearful God of might
To that fair Hebrew strangely does appear,
In a bush burning visible and bright
Yet vnconsuming as no fire there were:
With hair erected and vpturned eyes,
Whilst he with great astonishment admires,
Lo that eternal Rector of the skies,
Thus breathes to Moses from those quickening fires,
Shake off thy sandals (says the thundering God,
With humbled feet my wondrous power to see.
For that the soil where thou have boldly troad,
Is most select and hallowed unto me:
The righteous Abraham for his God we knew,
Jsack and Jacob trusted in mine Name,
And did believe my Covenant was true,
Which to their seed shall propogate the same:
My folk that long in Egypt had been bard,
Whose cries have entered Heavens eternal gate
Our zealous mercy openly has heard,
Kneeling in tears at our eternal state.
And am come down, them in the Land to see,
where streams of milk through batfull valleys flow,
And lushious honey dropping from the tree,
Load the full flowers that in the shadows grow:
By thee my power am purposed to try,
That from rough bondage shall the Hebrews bring,
Bearing that great and fearful Embassy,
To that Monarchall and Emperious King.
And on this mountain (standing in thy sight,)
when thou returnest from that conquered Land,
Thou hallowed Altars unto me shall light,
This for a token certainly shall stand.
O who am I? this wondering man replies,
A wretched mortal that I should be sent,
And stand so clear in thine eternal eyes,
To do a work of such astonishment:
And trembling now with a transfixed heart,
Humbling himself before the Lord (quoth he)
who shall I tell the Hebrews that thou art,
That give this large commission unto me?
Say (quoth the Spirit from that impetuous flame)
Unto the Hebrews asking thee of this,
That it was: I AM: which only is my Name,
God of their Fathers, so my Title is:
Divert thy course to Goshen then again,
And to divulge it constantly be bold,
And their glad ears attractiuely retain,
with what at Sina Abraham's God has told:
And tell great Pharo that the Hebrews God,
Commands from Egypt that he set you free,
Three iournies thence in Deserts far abroad,
To offer hallowed sacrifice to me.
But he refusing to dismiss you so
On that proud King i will execute such force,
As never yet came from the sling, the bow,
The keen-edg'd Curt'lax, or the puisant horse,
But if the afflicted miserable sort
To idle incredulity inclined,
Shall not (quoth Moses) credit my report,
That thou to me have so great power assigned.
Cast down (says God) thy wand unto the ground,
Which he obaying fearfully, behold
The same a Serpent so dainly was found,
It self contorting into many a fold.
With such amazement Moses does surprise
With cold convulsions shrinking every vain,
That his affrighted and vplifted eyes
Even shot with horror, sink into his brain.
But being encouraged by the Lord to take,
The ugly tail into his trembling hand,
As from a dream he suddenly does wake,
When at the instant it became a wand.
By the same hand into his bosom shut,
Whose eyes his withered leprosy abhorred,
When forth he drew it secondly being put,
Unto the former purity restored.
These signs he gives this sad admiring man,
Which he the weak incredulous should show,
When this frail mortal freshly now began
To forge new causes, why unfit to go?
Egypt accusing to have done him wrong,
Scantling that bounty Nature had bestowed,
Which had welnere deprived him of his tongue,
Which to this office chiefly had been owed.
When he whose wisdom Nature must obey,
In whose resistance reason weakly fails,
To whom all humane instances give way,
Against whom not subtle Argument preuailes
Thus does reprove this idle vain excuse,
Who made the mouth? who th'eie? or who the ear?
Or who depriues those organs of their use?
That thou thy imbecilitie should fear?
Thy Brother Aaron comes unto thee,
Which as thy Speaker purposely I bring,
To whom thy self even as a God shall be,
And he interpret to the Egiptian King.
That when he at thy miracles shall wonder,
And wan with fear shall tremble at thy rod,
To feel his power that swayes the dreadful thunder,
That is a jealous and a fearful God.
Then shall mine own self purchase me renown,
And win me honor by my glorious deed
On all the Pharo's on the Egiptian throne,
That this proud mortal ever shall succeed.
The second Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
Moses does his message bring,
Acts miracles before the King,
With him the Magi do contend,
Which he does conquer in the end,
When by th'extensure of the wand
He brings ten plagues upon the Land,
And in despite of Pharo's pride
From Goshen does the Hebrews guide.
WHen now from Midian Moses forward set
With who^ his wife and fair retine we went,
Where on his way him happily has met
His brother Aron to the Lords intent,
And to the Hebrews in the impatient hand
Of mighty Egypt all his power implies,
And as the Lord expressly did command,
Acts his wonders in their pleased eyes.
Those miracles mortality beholdes
With an astonished and distracted look,
The mind that so amazedly enfoldes,
That every sense the faculty forsook.
The little Infant with abundant joy
To man's estate immediately is sprung,
And though the old man could not back turn boy,
Casts half his years so much becoming young.
Whilst mirth in fulness measures every eye,
Each breast is heaped up with excess of pleasure,
Rearing their spread hands to the glorious sky,
Gladly embracing the Almighties leisure.
These Hebrews entering the Egiptian Court,
Their great Commission publicly proclaim,
Which there repulsed as a slight report,
Does soon denounce defiance to the same.
Where now these men their miracles commend,
By which their power precisely might be tried,
And Pharo for his Sorcerers does send,
By them the Hebrews only to deride.
Where Heaven must now apparently transcend
The Infernal powers Emperiously to thwart,
And the bright perfect Deity contend
With abstruse Magic and fallacious Art.
Never was so myraculous a strife
Where admiration ever so abounded;
Where wonders were so prodigally rife,
That to behold it Nature stood confounded.
Casting his rod a Serpent that became,
Which he supposed with marvel the^ might strike,
When every Priest essaying in the same,
By his black skill did instantly the like:
Which Pharos breast with arrogance does fill,
Above the high Gods to exalt his power,
When by his might (t'amate their weaker skill)
The Hebrews Rod does all their rods devour:
Which deed of wonder slightly he reiects
His froward Spirit insatiatly elate,
Which after caused those violent effects
That sat on Egypt with the power of Fate.
When he whose wisdom ere the world did fare,
From whom not counsel can her secrets hide,
Forewarneth Moses early to prepare
T'accost the proud King by the rivers side.
What heavenly rapture does enrich my brain,
And through my blood extrauagantly flows,
That does transport me to that endless maine,
whereas The Almighty his high glories shows?
That holy heat into my Spirit infuse,
wherewith thou wont'st thy Prophets to inspire
And lend that power to our delightful Muse,
As dwelt in sounds of that sweet Hebruack lyre.
A task unusual I must now assay
Striving through peril to support this mass,
No former foot did ever tract a way,
Where I propose unto my self to pass.
When Moses meeting the Egiptian King
Urges a fresh the Israelites depart,
And him by Aron stoutly menacing
To try the temper of his stubborn heart.
When lo the torrent the fleet hurrying flood The x. Plague.

So clear and perfect Christaline at hand,
As a black lake or settled marish stood
At th'extensure of the Hebrews wand,
Where segs, rank Bulrush, and the sharpened Reed
That with the fluxure of the wave is fed,
Might be discerned unnaturally to bleed,
Dying their fresh green a deep sullied red:
Like issuing ulcers every little Spring,
That being full ripened void the filthy core
Their loathsome slime and matter vomiting
Into the Rivers they enriched before:
What in her banks has batning Nilus bred,
Serpent, or Fish, or strange deformed thing
That on her bosom she not bears dead,
Where they were borne them lastly burying?
That Bird and Beast incontinently fly
From the detested and contagious stink,
And rather choose by cruel thirst to die,
Than once to taste of this contaminate drink,
And useful Cesternes delicatly filled,
With which rich Egypt wondrously abounds,
Looking as Bowls receiving what was spild
From mortal and immedicable wounds.
That the faint Earth even poys'ned now remains
In her own self so grievously dejected,
Horrid pollution travailing her veins
Desperate of cure so dangerously infected
The spungie soil, that digging deep and long
To soke clear liquor from her plenteous pores,
This bloody issue breaks out among
As sickly menstrues or inueterate sores:
Seven days continuing in this flux of blood,
Sadly sits Egypt a full week of woe,
Shame taints the browe of every stewe and flood,
Blushing the world her filthiness to show.
Yet sdaines proud Pharo Jsrael thus to free,
Nor this dire plague his hardened heart can tame,
Which he supposed but Fallaces to be,
When his Magitians likewise did the same.
When he again that glorious rod extends
Against him that Heaven denies that thus to dare.
On Egypt soon a second plague that sends,
Which he till now seemed partially to spare
The soil, that late the owner did enrich
Him his fair Herds and goodly flocks to feed,
Lies now a leystall as a common ditch, The 2. Plague.

where in their Todder loathly Paddocks breed.
Where as the vp-land mountanous and hie
To them that sadly do behold it shows
As though in labor with this filthy fry
Stirring with pain in the parturious throws:
People from windows looking to the ground,
At this stupendous spectacle amazed,
See but their sorrow every where abound,
That most abhorring whereon most they gazed.
Their Troughes and Ouens Toadstooles now become,
That Huswifes wont so carefully to keep,
These loathsome Creatures taking up the room,
A croking there continually do keep.
And as great Pharo on his Throne is set,
From thence affrighted with this odious thing,
which crawling up into the same does get,
And him deposing sits as a King.
The wearied man his spirits that to refresh,
Gets to his bed to free him from this fear,
Scarce laid but feels them at his naked flesh,
So small the succor that remains there.
No Court so close to which the speckled Toad
By some small crannie creepes not by and by,
No Tower so strong nor natural abode,
To which for safety any one might fly:
Egypt now hates the world her so should call,
Of her own self so grievously ashamed,
And so contemned in the eyes of all,
As but in scorn she scarslie once is named.
When this profane King with a wounded heart
(His Magi though these miracles could do)
Sees in his soul one greater than their Art,
Above all power, that put a hand thereto:
But as these plagues and sad afflictions ceased,
At the just prayer of this mild godlike man,
So Pharoes pride and stubbornnes increased,
And his lewd course this headstrong Mortal ran.
Which might have surelier settled in his mind
(At his request which Moses quickly slew,
Leaving a stench so pestilent behind)
As might preserve old sorrows freshly new.
But stay my Muse in height of all this speed,
Somewhat plucks back to quench this sacred heat,
And many perils does to us areed
In that whereof we seriously entreat.
Lest too concise injuriously we wrong
Thigns that such state and fearefulnes impart,
Or led by zeal irregularly long,
Infringe the curious liberties of Art.
We that calumnious Critic may eschew
That blasteth all things with his poys'ned breath,
Detracting what laboriously we do,
Only with that which he but idely says.
O be our guide whose glories now we preach
That above Books must steer us in our Fate,
For never Ethnic to this day did teach
(In this) whose method we might imitate.
When now these men of miracle proceed,
And by extending of that wondrous wand
As that resistlesse providence decreed,
Thereby brings Lyce on the distemp'red Land: The 3. Plague.

All struck with Lyce so numberless they lie,
The dust grown quick in every place does creep,
The sands their want do secondly supply,
As they at length would suffocate the deep:
That the atomi that in the beams appear,
As they the Sun through cranies shining see,
The form of those detested things do bear,
So miserable the Egiptians be:
Who raked the brands the passed Evening burned
(As is the use the Mornings fire to keep)
To these foul vermin finds the ashes turned,
Covering the harth, so thick thereon they creep:
Now Prince and pesant equally are dressed,
The costliest silks and coursest rags alike,
The worst goes now companion with the best,
The hand of God so generally does strike.
The Kings Pauillion and the Captives pad
Are now in choice indifferent unto either,
Great, small, fair, foul, rich, poor, the good and bad
Do suffer in this pestilence together,
In vain to cleanse, in vain to purge, and pick,
when every Moath that with the breath does rise
Forthwith appears venemously quick,
Although so small scarce taken by the eyes.
By which his wisdom strongly does prevail,
When this selfe-wise, this ouerweening man,
Even in the least the slightest thing does fail,
The very beggar absolutely can,
When now these Wizards with transfixed hearts
To make his glory by the same the more,
Confess a Godhead shining through their Arts,
which by their Magicks they denied before.
Yet this proud Pharo as oppugning fate
Still does resist that Majesty so hie,
And to himself does yet appropriate
A supreme power his Godhead to deny.
When from his wilful stubbornnes does grow
That great amazement to all ears and eyes,
When now the Lord by Arons Rod will show
His mighty power even in the wretched'st flies, The 4. plague.

Varying his vengeance in as many kinds,
As Pharo does his obstinacies vary,
Suting his plagues so fitly with their minds,
As though their sin his punishments did carry.
In Summer time as in an Evening fair,
The Gnats are heard in a tumultuous sound
On tops of hills, so troubled is the air
To the disturbance of the wondering ground.
The skies are darkened as they yet do houer
In so gross clouds congested in their slight,
That the whole Land with multitudes they cover,
Stopping the streams as generally the light.
O cruel Land, might these not yet thee move?
Art thou alone so destitute of fear?
Or do thou mean thy utmost to approve
How many plagues thou able art to bear?
Three have forethreatned thy destruction sure,
And now the fourth is following on as fast,
Do thou suppose thy pride can still endure?
Or that his vengeance longer cannot last?
These are as weak and worthless as the rest,
Thou much enfeebled, and his strength is more,
Fitly prepared thee sadly to infest
Thy sins so many, by their equal store.
This wretched creature man might well suppose
To be the least that he had need to fear,
Amongst the rest is terrified with those
with which before none ever troubled were.
As we behold a swarming cast of Bees
In a swollen cluster to some branch to cleave:
Thus do they hang in bunches on the trees,
Pressing each plant and loding every greaue.
The houses covered with these must'ring flies,
And the fair windows that for light were made,
Eclipsed with horror seeming to their eyes
Like the dim twilight or some omenous shade.
For humane food what Egypt had in store,
The creatures feed on, till they bursting die,
And what in this unhappy Land was more,
Their loathsome bodies lastly putrify.
O goodly Goshen where the Hebrews rest,
How dear thy children in The Almighty's sight,
That for their sakes thou only should be blessed,
When all these plagues on the Egiptians light?
What promised people rested thee within,
To whom no peril ever might aspire,
For whose dear sake some watchful Cherubin
Stood to defend thee armed in glorious fire?
Thou art that holy Sancttuarie made,
Where all the afflicted cast aside their fear,
Whose privileges ever to invade,
The Heavens command their horrors to forbear.
But since man's pride and insolence is such,
Nor by these plagues his will to pass could bring,
Now with a sharp and wounding hand will tuch
The dearer body of each living thing:
To other ends his courses to direct
By all great means his glory to advance,
Altreth the cause by altring the effect,
To work by wonder their deliverance.
As Aron grasping ashes in his hand,
which scarsly cast into the open air,
But brings a murraine over all the Land,
with scabs and botches such as never were. The 5. Plague.

What chewes the cud, or hoof, or horn allotted,
vvilde in the fields, or tamed by the yoke,
with this contagious pestilence is rotted,
So vniuersall's the Almighties stroke.
The goodly horse of hot and fiery strain
In his high courage hardly brook'd his food,
That ditch nor mound not lately could contain
On the firm ground so scornfully that stood,
Crest-falne hangs down his hardly managed head
Lies where but late disdainfully he troad,
His quick eye fixed heavily and dead,
Stirs not when pricked with the impulsive goad.
The Swine which Nature secretly does teach,
Only by fasting sicknesses to cure.
Now but in vain is to it self a Leech
whose sudden end infallably is sure.
Where frugall Shepheardes reckoning wool and lamb,
Or who by Herds hoped happily to win,
Now sees the young one perish with the dame,
Nor dare his hard hand touch the pois'ned skin.
Those fertile pastures quickly ouer-spread
with their dead Cattle, where the birds of pray
Gorged on the garbidge (woefully bestead)
Pois'ned fall down as they would fly away.
And hungry dogs the tainted flesh refrained,
vvhereon their Master gurmondiz'd of late,
what Nature for man's appetite ordained,
The creature that is most ravenous does hate.
Thus all that breathes and kindly has increase,
Suffer for him that proudly did offend,
Yet in this manner here it shall not cease,
In Beasts begun, in wretched man to end.
To whom it further violently can The 6. pl^gue.

Not by The Almighty limmited to slake,
As beast is plagued for rebellious man,
Man in some measure must his pain partake.
Those dainty breasts that opened lately were,
Which with rich veins so curiously did flow,
With biles and blaines most loathsome do appear,
Which now the Dam'zell not desires to show.
Features disfigured only now the fair
(All are deformed) most ill-fauour'd be,
Where beauty was most exquisite and rare,
There the least blemish easili'st you see.
For costly garments fashioned with device
To form each choice part curious eyes to please,
The sick man's Gown is only now in price
To give their bloch'd and blistered bodies ease.
It is in vain the Surgeons hand to prove,
Or help of physic to assuage the smart,
For why the power that rules from above
Crosses all means of industry and Art.
Egypt is now an Hospital forlorn,
Where only Creeples and diseased are,
How many Children to the world are borne,
So many Lazers thither still repair.
When those proud Magi as opposed to Fate,
That durst high Heaven in every thing to dare,
Now in most vile and miserable state
As the mean Caitiue equally do fare.
Thus stands that man so eminent alone,
Armed with his power that governs the sky,
Now when the Wizards lastly overthrown,
Groueling in sores before his feet do lie.
Not one is found unpunished escapes
So much to do his hungry wrath to feed,
Which still appears in as many shapes
As Pharo does in tyrannies proceed.
Even as some grave wise Magistrate to find
Out some vile treason, or some odious crime
That bears every circumstance in mind,
Of place, of manner, instance, and of time:
That the suspected strongly does arest,
And by all means invention can devise
By hopes or torture out of him to wrest
The ground, the purpose, and confederacies,
Now slacks his pain, now does the same augment,
Yet in his strait hand does contain him still,
Proportioning his allotted punishment
As he is removed or pliant to his will.
But yet has Egypt somewhat left to vaunt,
What Is now remaining may her pride repair,
But least she should perhaps be arrogant,
Till she be humbled he will never spare.
These plagues seem yet but nourished beneath,
And even with man terrestrially to move,
Now Heaven his fury violently shall breath,
Rebellious Egypt scourging from above.
Winter let loose, The 7. plague.
in his robustious kind
Wildly runs rauing through the airie plains,
As though his time of liberty assigned
Roughly now shakes off his impris'ning chains.
The winds spet fire in one another face,
And mingled flames fight furiously together,
Through the mild Heaven that one the other chase,
Now flying thence and then returning thither.
No light but lightning ceaselesly to burn
Swifter than thought from place to place to pass,
And being gone does suddenly return
Ere you could say precisely that it was.
In one self moment darkness and the light
Instantly borne, as instantly they die,
And every minute is a day and night
That breaks and sets in twinkling of an eye.
Mountain and valley suffer one self ire,
The stately Tower and lowly coat alike,
The shrub and Cedar this impartial fire
In one like order generally does strike.
On flesh and plant this subtle lightning prays,
As through the pores it passage fitly finds,
In the full womb the tender burden slaies,
Piercing the stiff trunk through the spungie rindes.
Throughout this great and universal Ball
The wrath of Heaven outragiously is thrown,
As the lights quickening and Celestial,
Had put themselves together into one.
This yet continuing the big-bellied clouds,
With heat and moisture in their fulness brake,
And the stern thunder from the ayrie shrouds
To the sad world in fear and horror spoke.
The black storm bellows and the yerning vault,
Full charged with fury as some signal given,
Preparing their artillirie t'assault,
Shoot their stern vollies in the face of Heaven.
The bolts new winged with fork'd Aethereall fire,
Through the vast Region every where do roue,
Goring the earth in their impetuous ire,
Pierce the proud'st building, rend the thickest Grove.
When the breeme hail as rising in degrees
Like ruffled arrows through the air does sing,
Beating the leaves and branches from the trees,
Forcing an Autumn earlier than the Spring.
The birds late shrouded in their safe repair,
Where they were wont from Winters wrath to rest,
Left by the tempest to the open air
Shot with cold bullets through the trembling breast.
Whilst cattle grasing on the batfull ground,
Finding no shelter from the shower to hide
In ponds and ditches willingly are drowned,
That this sharp storm no longer can abide.
Windows are shiuered to forgotten dust,
The slates fall shatt'red from the roof above,
Where any thing finds harbor from this gust,
Now even as death it fears to remove.
The rude and most impenitrable rock
Since the foundation of the world was laid,
Never before stirred with tempestious shock,
Melts with this storm as sensibly afrai'd.
Never yet with so violent a hand,
A brow contracted and so full of fear,
God scourged the pride of a rebellious Land,
Since into Kingdoms Nations gathered were,
But he what Mortal was there ever known,
So many strange afflictions did abide
On whom so many miseries were thrown,
Whom Heaven so often and angerly did chide?
Who but relenting Moses does relieve?
Taking off that which often on him does light,
Whom God so often does punish and forgive,
Thereby to prove his mercy and his might.
So that eternal providence could frame
The mean whereby his glory should be tried,
That as he please miraculously can tame
Man's sensual ways, his transitory pride.
But Pharo bent to his rebellious will,
His hate to Jsrael instantly renues,
Continuing Author of his proper ill,
When now the plague of Grasshoppers ensues.
Long ere they fell, The 8. pl^gue.
on'th face of Heaven they hong,
In so vast clouds as covered all the skies,
Coloring the Sunbeams piercing through their throng
With strange distraction to beholding eyes.
This idle creature that is said to sing
In wanton Summer, and in Winter poor,
Praising the Emmets painful laboring,
Now eats the labourer and the heaped store.
No blade of grass remains to be seen,
Weed, herb, nor flower, to which the Spring gives birth,
Yet every path even barren hills are green,
With those that eat the greenenes from the earth.
What is most sweet, what most extremely sour,
The loathsome Hemlock as the verdurous Rose,
These filthy Locusts equally deuowre,
So do the Heavens of every thing dispose.
The trees all barckles nakedly are left
Like people stripped of things that they did wear,
By the enforcement of disast'rous theft,
Standing as frighted with erected hair.
Thus does the Lord her nakedness discover,
Thereby to prove her stoutnes to reclame,
That when nor fear, nor punishment could move her,
She might at length be tempred with her shame.
Disrobed of all her ornament she stands,
Wherein rich Nature whilome did her dight,
That the sad vierges of the neighboring lands
Seem with much sorrow wondering at the sight.
But Egypt is so impudent and vile,
No blush is seen that pity might compel,
That from all eyes to cover her awhile,
The Lord in darkness leaves her to dwell.
Over the great and universal face The 9. plague.

Are drawn the Curtains of the horrid night,
As it would be continually in place,
That from the world had banished the light.
As to the sight, so likewise to the tuch
Th'appropriate object equally is dealt,
Darkness is now so palpable and much,
That as it is seen, as easily is felt.
Who now it hap'd to travel by the way,
Or in the field did chance abroad to rome,
Loosing himself then wandered as a stray,
Nor finds his hostrie nor returns home.
The Cock the Country horologe that rings,
The cheerful warning to the Suns awake,
Missing the dawning scantles in his wings,
And to his roost does sadly him betake.
One to his neighbor in the dark does call,
When the thick vapor so the air does smother,
Making the voice so hideous there withal,
That one's afeard to go unto the other.
The little Infant for the Mother shreekes,
Then lies it down astonished with fear,
Who for her Child whilst in the dark she seeks,
Treads on the Babe that she does hold so dear.
Darkness so long upon the Land does dwell,
Whilst men amazed the hours are stolen away,
Erring in time that now there is none can tell,
Which should be night, and which should be the day.
Three doubled nights the proud Egiptian lies
With hunger, thirst, and wearines oppressed,
Only relieved by his miseries,
By fear enforced to forget the rest.
Those lights and fires they labored to defend
With the foul dampe that over all does flow
Such an eclipsed sullines does send,
That darkness far more terrible does show.
When this perplexed and astonished King
Twixt rage and fear distracted in his mind,
Jsrael to pass now freely limiting,
Only their cattle to be stayed behind.
Commanding Moses to depart his sight,
And from that time to see his face no more,
Which this mild man does willingly aquite
That he well knew would come to pass before.
That for the Droues the Jsraelites should leave,
Forbid by Pharo to be borne away:
Jsrael shall Egypt of her sore bereave,
To bear it with her as a violent pray.
So wrought her God in the Egiptians thought,
As he is only provident and wise,
That he to pass for his choice people brought,
More than man's wisdom ever might devise.
Touching their soft breasts with a wounding love
Of those who yet they enuiously admired,
Which does the happy Jacobites behoue,
To compass what they instantly require.
That every Hebrew borrowed of a friend,
Some special Jewel fainedly to use,
Every Egiptian willing is to lend,
Nor being asked can possibly refuse.
Now Closets, Chests, and Cabinets are sought
For the rich Iem, the raritie, or thing,
And they the happiest of the rest are thought,
That the highest prized officiously could bring.
Rings, chains, and bracelets, jewels for the ear,
The perfect glorious, and most lustrous stone,
The Carcanet so much requested there,
The pearl most orient and a Paragon.
What thing so choice that curious Art could frame,
Luxurious Egypt had not for her pride?
And what so rare an Jsralite could name,
That he but asking was thereof denide?
When God does now the Passover command,
Whose name that sacred mystery does tell,
That he passed over them with a sparefull hand,
When all the first borne of the Egiptians fell,
Which should to their posterity be taught,
That might for ever memorize this deed,
The fearful wonders he in Egypt wrought,
For Abraham's offspring Saras promised seed.
A Lamb vnblemish'd, or a spotless Kid,
That from the dam had wained out a year,
Which he without deformity did bid,
Held to himself a sacrifice so dear.
Roasted and eaten with vnleau'ned bread,
And with sower herbs such viands as became,
Meat for the Eu'ning, that prohibited
The Morn ensuing partner of the same.
Girding their loins, shoes fastened to their feet,
Staves in their hands, and passing it to take,
In manner as to trauailers is meet,
A voyage forth immediately to make.
Whose blood being put upon the utmost posts,
whereby his chosen Jsraelites he knew,
That night so dreadful, when the Lord of Hosts
All the first borne of the Egiptians slew.
Darkness inuades the world when now forth went The 10. Plague.

The spoiling Angel as the Lord did will,
And where the door with blood was not besprent,
There the first borne he cruelly did kill.
Night never saw so tragical a deed,
Thing so repleate with heaviness and sorrow,
Nor shall the day hereafter ever read,
Such a black time as the ensuing morrow.
The dawne now breaking and with open sight
When every laboring and affrighted eye
Beholdes the slaughter of the passed night,
The parting plague protracted misery.
And to his neighbor hasts his heedlesse feet,
To bring him home his heavy chance to see,
And him he goes to by the way does meet,
As grieved and as miserable as he.
Who out of door now hastily does come,
Thinking to howl and bellowe forth his woe,
Is for his purpose destitute of room,
Each place with sorrow does so ouerflowe
People awaked with this sudden fright
Run forth their doors as naked as they be,
Forget the day, and bearing candle light
To help the Son their miseries to see.
Who lost his first borne ere this plague begun,
Is now most happy in this time of woe,
Who mourned his eld'st a daughter or a son,
Is now exempt from what the rest must do.
To one that faines poor comfort to his friend,
His Child was young and need the less be cared,
Replies if his had lived the others end,
vvithall his heart he could him well have spared.
No eye can lend a mourning friend one tear,
So busy is the general heart of moan,
Such strange confusion sits in every ear,
As wants power to entertain his own.
Imparted woe (the heavy hearts relief)
When it has done the utmost that it may,
Outright is murth'red with a second grief,
To see one mute tell more than it can say.
The greatest blessing that the heart could give,
The joy of Children in the married state,
To see his curse the parent now does live,
And none be happy but th'infortunate.
Whilst some for burial of their Children stay,
Others pass by with theirs upon the Beer,
Which from the Church meet Mourners by the way,
Others they find that yet are burying there.
Afflicted London, in six hundred three
When God thy sin so grievously did strike,
And from the infection that did spring from thee,
The spacious I Will was patient of the like.
That sickly season when I undertook
This composition faintly to supply,
When thy affliction served me for a book,
Whereby to model Egipts miseries,
When pallid horror did possess thy street,
Nor knew thy Children refuge where to have,
Death them so soon in every place did meet,
Vnpeopling houses to possess the grave.
When woeful Egypt with a wounded heart
So many plagues that suffered for their stay,
Now on their knees entreat them to depart,
And even impatient of their long delay.
Six hundred thousand Israelites depart,
Besides the Nations that they thence released,
And Hebrew Babes the joy of many a heart,
That Saras happy promises had blessed.
After four hundred thirty years exspir'd,
(Measuring by minutes many a woeful hour)
That day they came they thence again depart,
By his eternal providence and power.
With all the jewels Egypt could afford
With them away that wisely they did bear,
The Egiptians ask not to have back restored,
All then so busy at their burials were:
And Joseph's bones preciselie thence convey,
Whose Tomb by Nyl's often Inundations drowned, Comestor in Exodus

(Yet the deceased straightly to obey)
By Moses was miraculouslie found.
Who did in gold that powerful word ingraue, Petragrammaton.

By which The Almighty fully is expressed,
Which bare the metal floting on the wave,
Till over his Coffin lastly it did rest.
As by a sheep that showed them to the same,
To make them mindful of the reverent dead,
Which Beast thence-forth they called by Joseph's name,
And when they went from Egypt with the^ led.
But that he thus did find his burying place,
As we tradition wisely may suspect,
We only this as History embrace,
But else in faith as fabulous neglect.
The third Book.
THE ARGUMENT.
God drownes the Egiptians in his ire,
Does march before his host in fire,
From the hard rocks strikes gushing springs,
Raines Quails and Manna, conquers Kings,
And fearful plagues on them does try,
For murmuring and idolatry:
Unto the promised Land them brought,
When it they forty years had sought;
Balaam to bless them he does send,
Their good success, mild Moses end.
THose which at home scorned Pharo and his force,
And whose departure he did humbly pray,
He now pursues with his Egiptian horse
And warlike foot to spoil them on the way.
Where his choice people strongly to protect,
The only God of Emperie and might,
Before his host his standard does erect,
Aglorious pillar in a field of light,
Which he by day in sable does unfold,
To dare the Son his Ardour to forbear;
By night conuerts it into flaming gold,
Away the coldness of the same to fear.
Not by Philistia he his force will lead,
Though the far nearer and the happier way,
His men of war a glorious march shall tread
On the vast bowels of the bloody Sea.
And sends the winds as Currers forth before
To make them way from Pharos power to fly,
And to convey them to a safer shore,
Such is his might that can make Oceans dry.
Which by the stroke of that commanding wand,
Shoulder the rough seas forcibly together,
Raised as Rampires by that glorious hand,
(Twixt which they march) that did conduct the^ thither.
The surly waves their Rulers will obay'd
By him made up in this confused mass,
Like as an Ambush secretly were laid,
To set on Pharo as his power should pass.
Which soon with wombes insatiably wide,
Loosed from their late bounds by The Almighty's power,
Come raging in, enclosing every side,
And the Egiptians instantly deuowre.
The sling, the swift bow, and the sharpened Lance,
Floting confusedly on the waters rude,
They which these weapons lately did advance,
Perish in sight of them that they pursude.
Clashing of Armours and the rumorous sound
Of the stern billows in contention stood,
Which to the shores do every way rebound,
As does affright the Monsters of the flood.
Death is discerned triumphantly in Arms
On the rough Seas his slaughterie to keep,
And his cold self in breath of mortals warmes,
Upon the dimpled bosom of the deep.
There might you see a Checkquer'd Ensign swim
About the body of the enui'd dead,
Serve for a hearse or couerture to him,
Ere while did waft it proudly bout his head.
The warlike Chariot turned upon the back
With the dead horses in their traces tide,
Drags their fat carcass though the fornie bracke
That drew itlate undauntedly in pride.
There floats the bard Steed with his Rider dround,
Whose foot in his caparison is cast,
Who late with sharp spurs did his Courser wound,
Himself now ridden with his strangled beast.
The waters conquer (without help of hand)
For them to take for which they never toil,
And like a Quarrie cast them on the land,
As those they slew they left to them to spoil.
In eighty eight at Dover that had been,
To view that Navy (like a mighty wood)
Whose sails swept Heaven might eas'lie there have seen
How puissant Pharo perished in the flood.
When for a conquest strictly they did keep,
Into the channel presently was poured,
Castilian riches scattered on the deep,
That Spaines long hopes had suddenly devoured.
The Afflicted English ranged along the Strand
To wait what would this threatening power betide,
Now when the Lord with a victorious hand
In his high justice scourged the Iberian pride.
Hence three days march to Mara leads them on,
Where Surs wild Deserts as the Army past
Seemed as from their presence to have flone,
The mountains stood so miserably aghast.
Where for with drought they hardly are bested,
And the foul waters bitter as the gall,
That they should through this Wilderness be led
To thanklesse murmuring presently they fall.
God points Moses to a precious tree,
Whose medc'nall branches cast into the lake,
Of that rare virtue he approved to be,
The waters sweet and delicate to make,
Not that his hand stands any way in need
Of mediate means his purposes to bring,
But that in state his wisdom will proceed
To show his power in every little thing.
Nor Metaphisicks fully him confine,
All measuring so immeasurably great,
That does in Nature every cause combine,
This ALL in him so amply has receate.
Which might have learned the^ in this helpless case,
With tribulations willingly to meet,
When men with patience troubles do embrace,
How oftentimes it makes affliction sweet.
And his free bounty fully now they found,
As they from Mara for mount Sina made,
Pitching in Elim in that plentious ground
Of pleasant fountains and delicious shade.
But as at Sur, so they again at Sin,
Before of thirst, of hunger now complain,
Wishing they might in Egypt still have bin,
where never famine all their time did reign.
When clouds of Quails from the Arabian shore
Upon the Camp immediately are sent,
which came so long and in such maru'lous store,
That with their flight they smothered every Tent.
This glads the Eu'ning, each unto his rest,
with souls even sated with these dainty Cates,
And the great goodness of the Lord confessed,
That in like measure each participates.
The morn strewes Manna all about the host
(The meat of Angels) mortals to refresh,
Candying the fresh grass, as the Winters frost,
Never such bread unto so dainty flesh.
O Jsrael pamp'red with this heavenly food,
Which else to Nations earthly he denies,
To raise thy spirits, to rectify thy blood
With these so rare celestial purities.
Then the fat fleshpots they so much desire,
Whereon in Egypt gluttoning they fed,
When they came hungry home from carrying mire
Which only dulnes, and gross humors bred.
Yet in the sweetness and th'abundant store,
His power not so conclusiuely expressed,
But who took most not capable of more
Then in his Gomer he that gathered least.
By night corrupting, each day gathering new,
But for the Sabbath what they did provide,
That day descended not that heavenly dew,
That as that day was only sanctifide.
Thence through those Deserts desolate and dry,
They reach to Reph'dem where as they should pass,
There was not found a fountain far nor nie,
Such want of water every where there was.
Thither the Lord by Moses did them bring,
His force the faithless Israelites might know,
For even in the impossiblest thing,
He most delights his wondrous might to show.
Far worse than Mara is this fruitless soil,
For there were waters bitter (though they were)
But here are non, though sought with never such toil
That they from murmuring longer not forbear.
Commanding Moses he should take the Rod,
Wherewith in Egypt he such wonders wrought,
For that most wise, that secret-seeing God
Saw there were some thus reasoned in their thought.
The mystery of that miraculous wand
He did to plagues and fearful things imply,
That Aron yet never took it in his hand,
When work of mercy was atchieu'd thereby.
Therefore bids Moses to this high intent,
The same to use, they visiblie might see,
That this which erst had been the instrument
Of justice, so of clemency to be.
Which with a blow the Cleeues in sunder cracked,
As with an earthquake violently rent,
Whence came so strong and rough a cateract,
That in the stones wore gutters as it went.
The Springs spout forth such plenty, that withal
Down the slope sides it violently swept,
So diverse ways so various in the fall,
Through every crannie the clear water crept.
In Pailes, Kits, Dishes, Basins, Pinboukes, Bowls,
Their scorched bosoms merrily they baste,
Until this very power their thirsty souls
Never touched water of so sweet a taste.
Scarslie sufficed but in the very neck
Of this, it is bruted by the watchful post,
That the neere-bording envious Amaleck,
Was marching toward them with a mighty host.
When he forth Josua from the rest does draw,
A man selected, of courageous spirit,
Which Moses with prophetic eye foresawe,
Should be the man, his room that should inherit.
Commanding him to muster out of hand,
And draw his forces presently to head,
Against that proud Amalakite to stand,
Which in the field a puissant Army led.
Whilst on rock Horeb with erected hand,
Bearing the Rod up to the glorious sky,
Twixt Hur and Aron Amrams son does stand,
Whilst both the hosts for victory do try.
When blades are brandished and the fight begun,
VVarres thundering horror trumpets do proclaim,
With the reflection of the radiant Sun,
Seems to beholders as a general flame.
Much courage and dexterity that day
On either part sufficiently is shown,
And on the earth full many a Soldier lay,
Thrusting through danger to make good his own.
Here men might see how many a strenuous guide
Strives to make his enemy to bleed,
Now the fierce vaward, then the rereward plide,
As he perceaueth the Battalians need.
They fight the full day, he the Rod vpheld,
But when his strength by long continuing fails,
Where as before the Jsraelites had queld,
The adverse proud Amalakite preuailes.
Whilst the two Hebrews provident of harms,
Setting grave Moses down upon a stone,
And by their force support his wearied arms,
Until the foe was lastly overthrown.
Jethro the just to whom report had told,
Th'atchieuements wrought by his renowned son,
That all the world did tributarie hold,
By deeds in Egypt God by him had done:
This good old man to consummate their joys
In happy hour his Son is come to see,
Bringing his wife and his two little Boys,
Moses sent back in Midian safe to be.
Which by this time two proper Youths are grown,
Bred by their Grandsire with exceeding care,
In all the host there hardly could be shown,
That with those Boys for beauty could compare.
Such mirth and feasting as for them was seen,
For this grave Father and this godly Dame,
Unto this day in Jsrael had not been,
Since to kind Joseph righteous Jacob came.
The day mild Moses scarsly can suffice,
To tell this man the troubles they had past,
The wonders God had acted in their eyes,
Since they in Midian kindly parted last.
Jethro that marked the pains that Moses took
In rising early, and in resting late,
That did himself into all causes look,
And in his person censure each debate:
This Princely Priest a man exceeding wise,
And long experienced in this great affair,
(For at that time few States or Monarchies
Whose government he could not well declare)
Reproues good Moses in this zealous deed:
(Quoth he) me think thou do not well in this,
The course wherein I see thou do proceed
Trouble to thee, and to the people is.
Appoint out Judges, and inferior Courts:
Twixt the Plebeians and thy self to be,
From them receive those matters by report,
Speak thou to God, and let them speak to thee,
In things important be thou still in place,
In lesser causes leaving them to deal,
So may you both your quietness embrace
By an exact and perfect Commonweal.
Now when to Sina they approached near,
God calls up Moses to the mount above,
And all the rest commands to forbear,
Nor from the bounds assigned them to remove.
For who those limits loosely did exceed,
(Which were by Moses marked them out beneath)
The Lord had irreuocably decreed
With darts or stones should surely die the death.
Where as the people in a wondrous fright
(With hearts transfixed even with frosen blood)
Beheld their Leader openly in sight
Pass to the Lord, where he in glory stood.
Thunder and lightning led him down the air,
Trumpets celestial sounding as he came,
Which struck the people with astounding fear,
Himself invested in a splendorous flame.
Sina before him fearfully does shake,
Covered all over with a smouldring smoke,
As ready the foundation to forsake
On the dread presence of the Lord to look.
Erect your spirits and lend attentive ear
To mark at Sina what to you is said,
Weak Moses now you shall not simply hear,
The Son of Amram and of Jacobed,
But he that Adam did imparadice,
And lent him comfort in his proper blood,
And saved Noe that did the Arc devise,
When the old world else perished in the flood.
To righteous Abraham Canaan frankly lent,
And brought forth Isaac so extremely late,
Jacob so fair and many Children sent,
And raised chaste Joseph to so high estate.
He whose just hand plagued Egypt for your sake,
That Pharos power so scornfully did mock,
Way for his people through the Sea did make,
Gave food from Heaven, and water from the rock.
Whilst Moses now in this cloud-couered hill,
Full forty days his pure aboade did make,
Whilst that great God in his Almighty will,
With him of all his Ordinances brake.
The Decalogue from which Religion took
The Being: sin and righteousness began
The different knowledge: and the certain book
Of testimony betwixt God and man.
The Ceremonial as ludiciall laws,
From his high wisdom that received their ground,
Not to be altered in the smallest clause,
But as their Maker wondrously profound.
The composition of that sacred fane,
Which as a Symbol curiously did show,
What all his six days workmanship contain,
Whose perfect model his own finger drew.
Whose absence thence gave leisure to their lust,
Oppugning Aron, Idols them to frame,
And by their power still strengthen this disgust,
In him denouncing the Almighties name.
A gold-made God how durst you ever name,
For him so long had led you from the sky,
In sight of Sina crowned with a flame,
His glory thence residing in your eye?
Such things might melt mortality to see,
That even the very Elements did fright,
He that in Egypt had performed for thee,
As made the world amazed at his might.
Thy soul transpierced never before thou feld'st,
But like a Quarrie 't even claue thy breast,
Coming from Sina when as thou beheld'st
Th'Elected Jsrael kneeling to a Beast.
Him sense forsook, his sinews strengthlesse are,
He came so much amazed there-withall,
The stony tables slipped him unaware,
That with their own weight brake them in the fall.
Down this proud lump ambitiously he flung
Into base dust dissoluing it with fire,
That since they for variety did long,
They should thereby even surfeit their desire.
And sent the mineral through their hateful throats,
Whence late those horrid blasphemies did fly
On bestiall figures when they fell to doat
In prostitution to idolatry.
Now when this potion that they lately took,
This Chimick medicine (made them to prepare)
Upon their beards, and on their bosom stooke,
He does their slaughter presently prepare.
What Is he himself to Levy could alie
Before this Calfe not sinfullie did fall,
Girds not his broad blade to his sinewie thie,
When he hears Moses unto Arms to call?
Killing not him appointed he should slay,
Though they had slep'd in eithers arms before,
Though in one womb they at one burden lay,
Yea when this dead, though that could be no more?
You whom not Egipts tyranie could wound,
Nor Seas, nor rocks could any thing deny,
That till this day no terror might astound
On the sharp points of your own swords to die?
When Moses now those Tables to renew
Of that essential Deity does merit,
(Which from his hands he dissolutely threw
In the deep anguish of his grieved spirit.
When forty days without all natural food)
He on mount Sina fixed his abode,
Retaining strength and fervor in his blood,
Raped with the presence of that glorious God.
Who in his high state whilst he passed by
In the cleft rock that holy man did hide,
Lest he should perish by his radient eye,
When Moses seeing but his glorious side
Celestial brightness ceazed on his face,
That did the wondering Jsraelites amaze,
When he returned from that sovereign place,
His brows encircled with splendidious rays,
That their weak sight beholding of the same,
He after covered from the common eyes,
Lest when for answer unto him they came,
The lusting people should idolatrize.
Might we the mustred Jsraelites admire
From Plains of Sina mighty Moses led,
Or else to view that opulence desire,
To that rich Arc so freely offered.
The marvelous model of that rarest piece
Th'ingrauings, caruings, and embroderies tell,
The cunning work and excellent device
Of neat Aboliab, and Bezaliell.
But we our Moses seriously pursue,
And our strong nerves to his high praise apply,
That through this maze shall guide us as a Clue,
And may his virtues absolutely try.
Whose charge being weary of their weighty Arms,
And much offended they had marched so long,
As often disturbed with their stern Alarmes,
Suppose by Moses to have suffered wrong.
When with the luggage such as lagd behind,
And that were set the Cariages to keep,
Against God and Moses grievously repinde,
Wanting a little sustinance and sleep.
Who with their murmuring moved in his ire,
That they so soon his providence mistrust,
Down from his full hand flung that forcefull fire,
Which in a moment brus'd their bones to dust.
Other the mutt'ring Jsraelites among
When now to Pharan having come so far
For flesh, fish, sallads, and for fruits do long,
Manna (they say) is not for men of war.
Their glut'nous stomachs loath that heavenly bread,
who with full Chargers hunger here releeues,
As by the belly when they strongly fed
On hearty Garlic and the flesh of Beeues?
Mild man, what fearefullagonie thee vexed,
when thou thy God unkindly did vpbraide?
How grievously thy suffering soul perplexed,
when thou repin'st the charge on thee was laid?
With God to reason why he should dispose
On thee that burden heavy to sustain,
As though he did his purposes enclose
Within the limmits of man's shallow brain.
To judge so many marching every day,
That all the flesh of Forest and of flood,
(When the wild Deserts scarsly yield them way)
Should them suffice for competence of food.
That thou should wish that hand so full of dread,
Thy lingering breath should suddenly exspire,
Then that the clamorous multitude should spread,
These wicked slanders to incite his ire.
That God to punish whom he still did love,
And in compassion of his frailties fear,
The spirit he gave him lastly should remove
To those his burden that should after bear.
O wondrous man who paralel'd thee ever,
How large a portion did thou inherit,
That unto seauentie he should it disseuer,
Yet all be Prophets only with thy Spirit?
When lo a cloud comes sailing with the wind
Unto these Rebels terrible to see,
That when they now some fearful thing diuin'd,
A flight of Quails perceived it to be.
A full days journey round about the host,
Two Cubits thicknes over all they flow,
That when by Jsrael he was tempted most,
His glory then most notably to show.
The greedy people with the very sight
Are filled before they come thereof to taste,
That with such surfeit gluts their appetite
Their queasie stomachs ready are to cast.
Those for gross Beef in Gluttony did call
Those the highest God his powerfulnes to try,
Cloyes with the foul that from the Heavens do fall,
Until they stuff the stomach by the eye.
But whilst the flesh betwixt their teeth they chewe,
And suck the fat so delicatly sweet,
(With too much plenty that even fulsome grew,
That lies so common trodden with their feet.)
That God impartial and so rightly just,
When he had given them more than they desire,
Duly to punish their insatiate lust,
Poures down his plagues consuming as his fire.
And with a strong hand violently struck
Their blood, distempred with luxurious diet,
That soon the sores in groynes and arme-pits brake,
Thus could the Lord scourge their rebellious riot.
Aron and Miriam, all too much it were
For grief good Moses ready is to die;
But you whom one womb happily did bear
Against your mild Brother needs must mutiny.
O unkind Aaron when thou fondly fram'dst
That Beast-like Idol bowing Jsraels knee,
He then thee begged, that thou so basely blam'dst,
And did divert the judgment due to thee.
Immodest Miriam when the hand of might
Left thee with loathsome leaprosie defiled,
Contemned and abject in the vilest sight,
From the great host perpetually exiled:
When thou had spet the utmost of thy spite,
And for thy sin this plague on thee was thrown,
He not forsook thee, but in heavy plight
Kneeling to God obtained thee for his own.
His wondrous patience ever was applide
To those on him that causelessly complain,
Who did with comely carelesnes deride
What happy men should evermore disdain.
When now the Spials for the promised soil,
For the twelve Tribes that twelve in number went,
Having discovered forty days with toil,
Safely returned as happily they went:
Bringing the Figs, Pomegranets, and the Grapes,
Whose verdurous clusters that with moisture swell,
Seem by the taste and strangenes of the shapes,
The place that bare them faithfully to tell.
That well expressed the nature of the earth,
So full of liquor and so wondrous great,
That from such wished fruitfulnes in birth,
Sucked the sweet marrowe of a plentious teat.
But whilst they stand attentively to hear
The sundry soiles wherein they late had been,
Telling what Giants did enhabit there,
What Towns of war that walled they had seen.
Of Anacks of spring when they come to tell,
And their huge stature when they let them see,
And of their shapes so terrible and fell,
Which were supposed the Titanois to be.
Their hearts sunck down, and though the fruits they saw
By their rare beauty might allure their eyes,
Yet this report their coward souls did awe,
And so much daunt the forward enterprise
That they their God do utterly refuse,
Against just Moses openly exclame,
And were in hand a Captain them to choose
To guide them back to Goshen whence they came.
Not all the dread of the Egiptian days,
What by mild Moses he to pass had brought,
Nor seen by him done at the purple Seas
On their vile minds a higher temper wrought.
Whom when of God he begged with bloody eyes,
And against Heaven even obstinatly strive,
Obtained so hardly their immunities,
whose sin seemed greater than he could forgive.
Caleb and Josua you courageous men,
When bats and stones against your breasts were laid,
Oppose your selves against the other ten,
That expedition basely that dissuade.
(Quoth they) to conquer as he did before
No more tha^ men: what praise his puisance yields,
But he whose force the very rocks did gore,
Can with the same hand cleave their brazen sheelds.
He that foresawe that this should be our seat,
And only knew the goodness of the same,
Possessed the place with those that were so great
For us to keep it safely till we came.
For which the Lord did vow that not a man
At Sina mustred where such numbers were,
Should live to come to fruitful Canaan,
Only those two so well themselves did bear.
And for the baseness of those recreant Spies
Whose melting minds this impious slander bred,
And the vile peoples incredulities,
In that their God so strongly promised.
For forty days discovery of the Land,
They forty years in Wilderness shall wast,
Consumed with plagues from his impetuous hand,
Until that age be absolutely past.
Which scarsly spoke, but quickly took effect
For those so cold, and cowardly before,
Hearing the censure of their base neglect,
To make his vengeance and their sin the more.
Entering the Land which Moses them denies,
Their desperate will no better can afford,
Offering those lives they did so lightly prize
Unto the vengeance of the Heathenish sword.
And in the host new factions daily grew,
When Chores, Dathan, and Abiram rise,
Two hundred men of special note that drew,
Whose strength gave power to their confed'racies.
But the vast earth incontinently claue,
And on the sudden hurried them to hell
With the shrill screame the shrieking people gave,
The fainting Host into a fever fell:
The rest of the Conspiratours were left
(From the first's fall enforcing their retire,
Of all the succors of the host bereft)
Consumed to ashes with Heavens violent fire.
And those th'abettors of this vile attempt
That did mild Moses cruelly pursue,
From the others sin that could not be exempt,
Them with the dreadful pestilence he slew.
That had not Aron when all hope was fled
With holy Incense their atonement wrought,
Thrusting himself twixt th'liuing and the dead,
All had to ruin utterly been brought.
Where fourteen thousand and seven hundred sanke
Under the burden of their odious sin,
Which now was waxed s'insufferably rank,
It was high time his vengeance should begin.
When after this so terrible a thing,
Now that tryumphant and miraculous wand
Brings forth ripe Almonds, strongly witnessing
In Leuies Tribe the Priesthood still to stand.
With leaves and blosomes bravely it does flourish,
Some budding, some as instantly but blown,
As when the same the natural rynd did nourish,
For Moses sake such miracles were shown.
Forward to Cadesh they their journey cast,
Where the good Miriam makes her latest hour,
Meriam the fair, the excellent, the chaste,
Meriam that was of womanhood the flower:
Here bids her Brothers lovingly adue,
who at her parting kiss her closing eyes,
whose wondrous loss sufficiently to rue,
More is the grief that tears cannot suffice.
Moystare their eyes, their lips are shrunk with heat,
Their grief within, as outward it appears,
Their want of water in that place as great,
As it to them is plentiful of tears.
They at one instant mutiny and mourn,
Sorrows creep forth confusedly together,
The tears for her incontinent they turn
To words against Moses that did guide them thither.
Who from the rock struck water with the wand,
That man and beast might plentiously maintain,
But he from rocks that fountains can command,
Cannot yet stay the fountains of his brain.
Much woe for Miriam these good men did make,
whilst there were two, that might bewail this one,
But two departing for their mutual sake,
Moses remains to mourn himself alone.
Aaron the auncient'st of the Hebrew line,
Repleate with natural comeliness and grace,
(God-like so far as man might be divine)
Ends his days in this predest'ned place.
Which being forewarned to awaite his end,
And here the Fate foretelling him to die,
That the good hour does only now attend,
Willed to ascend the mountain (being nie.)
With Eleazer his dear Child he goes,
Led by mild Moses as the Lord decreed,
To his loved Son his garments to dispose,
Him in the Priesthood pointed to succeed.
When turning back to bid them all adiewe,
who looked as fast to bid this Lord farewell,
Fountains of late so fast from rocks not flewe,
As the salt drops down their sad bosoms fell.
Not the obdurat'st, not the stoniest hearts,
That in deep sorrow melting here forbeares,
Those to whom Nature not those drops imparts,
Spent what in sighs the other did in tears.
Sated with sobs, but hungry with his sight,
Their watrie eyes him earnestly pursue,
When to discern him they no longer might
Where their sight ends, their sorrows do renew.
Com'n to the top, to the appointed place,
His Son in all his ornaments invested,
Which the good Aron meekely does embrace,
And unto him his offices bequested.
When they the time no longer could adiourne,
After embraces and a flood of woes,
(Which when one ceased the other took his turn,)
From eithers eyes that on the other flows.
Now at the last point, at the gasp of death
He whom the whole world has but such another,
Gives up his latest, his most blessed breath,
In the dear arms of his beloved Brother.
So wisely works that eternal Being
By the still changes of their varying state,
(As to the end through the beginning seeing)
To build the frame of vnauoyded Fate.
When those given up to their lascivious wills,
Themselves in Midian wantonness that waste,
Whose fleshly knowledge sip'd those sugared ills,
Twenty four thousand slaughtered at the last.
Of all that age in Sina numbered are,
In plains of Moab mustered then again,
Wasted by time, fire, pestilence, and war,
Those promised two, and Moses did remain.
The time expired that they for Aron mourned,
New conquest now, new comfort them does bring,
Their former hope successively returned,
That seemed before so sadly languishing.
When they the glorious victory obtain
The Plains of Horma scattered all with shields,
where Arad and his Cananites are slain,
Not the least fight of many glorious fields.
With Sehon's slaughter seconded again,
And Ogs great fall of a Gigantick strength,
whose bed of iron fash'on'd to contain
In breadth four Cubits, doubling it in length.
The living remnant of the mighty race,
Of big-bon'd Anack terrible and dred,
which long time batning in that fertile place,
Grew like the fat soil wherein they were bred.
Not Poets fictions of the Phlaegrian fields,
whereas the Giants up to Heaven would clime,
Heaping on mountains not such wonder yields,
As did the men that lived in that time.
And five proud Kings fell in their recreant flight,
Before armed Jsrael on the Midian plain,
Zur, Hur, and Eui, men of wondrous might,
Reba and Rekem valiantly slain.
And as his strength crushed mighty Kings to dust,
And cleft the helms that thu^der proof were thought,
That hand that helped the^, scurg'd their impious lust,
when his high judgment to pervert they sought.
And sent those Serpents (with their fiery stings,)
With inflammations that their flesh did swell,
Sharply to scourge their trustlesse murmurings,
That still in infidelity did dwell.
Rare in this creature was this wondrous might,
That should effect the nature of the fire,
Yet to recure the sorance by the sight,
Sickness might seem the remedy t'admire.
Only by metal miracles to work,
That serpents shape, the serpents hurt should heal,
To show in him the mysteries that lurk,
And being so strange, as strangely does reveal.
That the forged figure of so vile a thing
Should the disease so presently remotie,
Only by the eye a remedy to bring,
Deep searching Magic leaves to approve.
As Balaams beast did Balacks have delay,
And the full purpose of the Prophet brake,
When he beheld the Angel by the way,
Burst out from beast, and to his Master spoke.
Whose execration able to astound
The sun, when he his Summers height did boast,
And with a word could instantly confound
The world, were it a congregated host.
He whose wise lips could Oracles compile,
And judgments irreuocable did pass,
Should be confounded by the thing most vile,
By that base creature the dull worthless Ass,
Ruling his mouth as with a Riders bit,
Bidden by Balaack to denounce their fall:
Does all his dreadful Minaces acquit,
Sounding their blessing and their enemies fall.
When this mild man that only did remain,
Of those from Egypt that the Lord did bring,
Which he in Justice sundry ways had slain,
For their false worship and their murmuring.
Since he remiss at Meriba was proved,
And there his zeal not ardently expressed,
The Lord did swear (though him he dearly loved)
He should not come to Canaan as the rest.
And now approaching Abaris (the place)
From whence he might that promised Country see,
(So much the Lord good Moses pleased to grace)
But there his days must consummated be.
When this great Prophet zealouslie had blessed,
Each seu'rall Tribe with a particular good,
Whose parting, them with sorrow so oppressed,
That shedding tears their eyes shed drops of blood.
To Nebo seated admirablie hie,
(The Spirit prepares him safely to retire)
Which thrusts his head into the cloudie sky,
Pisga so proudly thither dare aspire.
Pisga the height of Abaris, and this
The height of Pisga over all does stand,
That as the eye of mighty Abaris
Suruayeth the imparalelled Land.
Where goodly Gilead unto him he shows
As far as ever he could look to Dan,
The length and breadth that every way it goes,
Till her browe kiss the calm Mediteran.
where the sweet South lays forth her swelling breast,
with a pleased eye he silently suruay'd,
To that fair City whose high Towers do rest
Under the Palm trees more delicious shade.
When this meek man approaching to his death,
In death even pleased fair Canaan to behold,
whilst he had use of his expiring breath,
Thus his last farewell mildly does enfolde.
Jsrael (quoth he) dear Jsrael, now adue,
Moses no more is, that your Leader was,
Josua and Caleb none but only you,
Of the last age must over Jordan pass.
The Egiptian horrors yet 'twas I did see,
And through those strange calamities did wade,
And Jsraels charge imposed was on me,
When they (but then) had scarslie learned to dade.
Forty two iourneyes have I straightly past
Since first this glorious Pilgrimage begun,
In wrath or mercy where as first or last,
Some wondrous thing has happily been done.
M'immortall Maker that so often have seen
(That God of wonder:) these complaints not boot,
In yonder fields so delicate and green,
That may not set my miserable foot.
Thus leaning back against the rising Clieue,
Raising his faint hands to the hopeful skies,
Meek as the morning never seen to strive,
Great'st of the Prophets the good Moses dies.
An hundred twenty hardly passed years,
His natural vigor no whit did assuage,
His eye as bright, his body then appears,
As in the height and Summer of his age.
Who being dissolved the Angels did interr
Near to Bethpeor in the valied ground,
But yet so secret kept his Sepulcher,
That it by mortal never should be found.
Lest that his people (if the place were known)
(Seeing by him the miracles were done,
That ever to Idolatry were prone,)
Unto his bones a worshipping should run.
One that God graced so many sundry ways,
No former age has mentioned to be.
Arrived at the period of his days
The future time in Jsrael shall not see.
FINIS.

