THE Ancient History Of the Septuagint.

Written in Greek, by ARISTEVS 1900. Years since. Of his Voyage to
Jerusalem, as Ambassador from PTOLOMEVS PHILADELPHVS, unto ELEAZER then
Pontiffe of the JEWS.

Concerning the First Translation of the HOLY BIBLE, by the 72. Interpreters.

With many other remarkable Circumstances, Newly done into ENGLISH

By I. DONE.

Tempora, Tempera, Tempore. LONDON: Printed by N. OAKS. 1633.

TO THE Intelligent General READER.
ALthough TIME and DEATH from our Cradles to our Graves pursue us swiftly, and
according to the Almighties Ordinance, overtake and seize upon our frail and
Terrestrial parts, upon some sooner, upon others later: Yet Excellent Acts
like strong Eagles break from their seazure, and soar above them in so
sublime a pitch as neither Time with all his Power and rusty Powder, with which
he blots and rubs out Brass and Marble, can quite obscure or extinguish them,
neither Death close in his darke-gaping Mouth (the Grave) their Nobleness.
Witness this small yet Ancient History, which this last Summer I made part of
my Exercise, to put into an English Habit.

That the Story is Ancient, I may well say; for it is 1900. years since
Aristeus Writ it to his Brother Philocrates, which Aristeus St. Hierome in his
Epistle to the Pentatucke of the Bible Great Esquire.
says, was Hyperaspistes to Ptolomeus Philadelphus; King of Egypt, Syria,
Ph^nicia, and Cilicia, and Son of Ptolomeus Lagus, one of the great Captains
of Alexander Magnus, that divided his Conquests (the World) amongst them.

This Ptolomeus Philadelphus then a most accomplished young Gentleman,
virtuously disposed, and so great a lover of Learning, as he had accumulated
into his Library according to some Authors, 1800000. Volumes, Printing Argument
of the HISTORY.
not then risen in our Hemispheare, was by the said Aristeus a most Noble
Person, and a great friend of (the then) captiued Jews (as an Instrument of
God) for the liberty and freedom of them, (then his people) practiced with
Demetrius Phalerius to tell the King that his so abundant Library was but
poor, because it wanted the Book of Books, the sacred Volume of GOD, which
we call the Holy Bible: The King virtuously covetous thereof, demanded how he
should best acquire it? Aristeus waiting this desiered occasion, proportioned
his advice, that he should first set all the Captiued Jews, not only in
Egypt, but also in Syria, etc. at free liberty: send Ambassadors and Presents
to Eleazer their High Priest and Pontiffe. The King willingly accordes thereto,
as to the Music of his desires, and prepares most rich presents, as a Table of
Massy Gold, embellish't with Precious Stones, Cups of Gold and Silver likewise
adorned: sets at freedom the Captiued by public Edict, Embasies, (with these
gifts and diverse Talents of Gold and Silver) Aristeus and Andrea, Prince and
great Captain of the Guard of his Person.

They go, deliver his Letters of Request and Commends, have gracious
entertainment, return with the 72. Interpreters Jews Letters, and also
Eleazers Presents to the King, and in especial with the Sacred Volume and Word
of God.

The good King adores the Books, feasts the Bringers, who after fall to the
Business, and Translated it out of the Hebrew into the Greek, the common
learned Language of those Times, made famous by the Sword of Alexander. And
this in brief is the effect of this Venerable History which is by me thus
made yours.

And though I seem to Anticipate thus to you, yet it is as nothing; for in it
self as you may further see, it is Elabourately and Eloquently Written by the
said Aristeus; and let no man wonder too much thereat, as thinking our Times
excels theirs in Eloquence: no; For who ever exceeded Demostenes the Greek, or
Cicero the Latin therein?

Lastly, to speak the Praise of History. Libri sunt vasa memoriae, and worthy
Historical Books have in them a kind of Divine Permanency, and as Eminent
Persons should affect Noble actions: so ought they to cherish the Registers, as
their Honourers.

For has not Plutarcke made those Giant Heroes, as Theseus, Romulus,
Alexander, Julius Caesar, and the rest, yet live? and himself more praysefully
longer then them all? So as an ignorant swaggering Fellow threatened his
Adversary to kill him if he had as many lives as Plutarcke: Did not Alexander
sigh for an other Homer?

Lastly, (if I have in honor of the History) like one holding a lighted Taper
to the clear noone-shining Sun, made an Appendix, showing the Antiquity and
Dignity of the Books by the said SEPTVAGINT Translated; and the Excellency of
their inspired Writer, Moses; and have therein been too prolixious, pardon
me, because of the Profoundity and Worthiness of the matter: So I refer you
to that, and the rest; and so rest

Yours, John Done.

The Elenchus, or Contence of the Following Book.
CHaracters of the Persons that were herein ayders, employing and employed. p.
1. Aristeus to his Brother Philocrates. p. 11. The Discourse that Aristeus
held with King Ptolomy, for the deliverance of the Jews. p. 20 The Request of
Demetrius Phalerius to King Ptolomy. p. 30. Tenor of the Letter of King
Ptolomy, to Eleazer great Pontife of Jerusalem. p. 33. Eleazer Pontiffe to King
Ptolomy our most Illustrious friend. p. 38. The names of those which were
chosen of all the Lines and Tribes of the Jews to go into Egypt for the
Translation of the LAW of MOSES. p. 41. Of the Presents sent to Eleazer,
Pontiffe of the Jews, by King Ptolomeus Philadelphus. p. 45 Of the Vessels,
Cups, and Viols of Gold. p. 55. Of the City of Jerusalem and Region
there-abouts, as it was 260. years before the Birth of our Savior. p. 61. Of
the Sacrificators. p. 65. Of the Great Pontiffe Eleazer. p. 67 Of the Fortress
or Castle of Jerusalem. p. 69. Yet ^ore of the Town. p. 71. Of the Region
about Jerusalem, and of the Policy of the Countrypeople, or Pesants. p. 72.
What manner of men the Translators of the LAW were. p. 79. Of the Answer made
by Eleazer upon certain points of the LAW of MOSES. p. 91. Return of the
Ambassadors into Alexandria with the Doctors Jews: and how the King adored the
Holy Law seven times with tears in his eyes. p. 109 Answers of the Doctors
Jews to Questions propounded by King Ptolomeus Philadelphus p. 118. The means
held by the 72. Doctors in their interpreting the Law. p. 171. A Discourse in
way of Apology concerning the truth of this Story: Also diverse Opinions of both
Ancient and Modern Authorities and Fathers, concerning the manner of the
Translation. p. 181 Lastly, an Appendix in my honor of this Ancient and
Famous History, discoursing the Antiquity and Dignity of the Books, and the
excellency of their inspired Writer Moses. p. 198.
CERTAIN Praecognita, or Characters of the chief Persons mentioned in the
ensuing HISTORY.
1. Of PTOLOMEVS PHILADELPHVS.
PTOLOMEVS second of that Name, Surnamed Philadelphus, King of Egypt, of
Phaenicia, and of Cypres, son of the first Ptolomeus, son of One of the
Captains of Great Alexander, the third Monarch.
Lagus, began his Reign in the 271. year before the incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

This Ptolomeus Philadelphus was endoctrined in the Science of good letters, by
Strabo the Peripateticke: in which he became so excellent, that he was esteemed
one of the most accomplished Princes of his Time: but that which was in him the
most admirable, was the Bounty, Debonarity, Sweetness, and Gentleness of his
Spirit, accomodated with the manners and complexions of all worthy and
deserving persons.

By this means he entered so far and before, in the grace of all the World,
that every one in his thought wished he were King: And his Father knowing his
right of Succession was to be so, and rejoicing in his hopes of him, made him
to be Crowned King, and deuested himself of all Authority, without reserving
any Power, Right, or Pre-eminence to himself, only a Superintendency over the
Guard of the King his Son, glorying to be Father of such a King: For the
admiration he had of his high Virtues, kindled and gave occasion between them
both, of a most kind contention in mutual offices, the Son yielding to the
Father, and the Father to the Son in all and by all, through instinct of
Devotion and Piety, so they gave lively touches to one the other in all
reduceable fitting offices, which was cause that the People conceived a great
fidelity and amity toward them, so as it seemed, even the divine providence
prepared this noble spirit to introduce that great good amongst Humanes, as to
make them participants of the Laws, and Divine illuminations wherewith God had
favored the People of the Jews above all the Nations of the world. And it
seems that even then his Almightinesse made a preparatiue for the vocation of
the Ethnicks and Gentiles by communication so, of his holy Law; whereof Ptolomy
was the ordained Minister, to call the Seventy Interpretors into Egypt, to
Translate into the Greek Language, which then was the most traded and vulgar
As the Latins now in Christendom.
through the whole Universe. So as I am amazed at some fanaticall spirits, that
hinders us from the knowledge of God, in not giving his Word in the Language of
the People wheresoever, as is appertaining to every one in regard of Salvation.

I would ask those men, what language spoke those Dames of Rome, Paula,
Eustochina, Melania, Susanna, Fabiola, Demetria, Furia, Flauia, Blesilla, and
others. For the institution of whom, Saint Hierome Translated many Books of
Holy Scriptures out of strange tongues into Latin, which was the natural
language of the said Ladies. I would also know, who was more wise or better
inspired then Saint Hierome. Further, it seems they either are, or would seem
to be ignorant of the institution of the Emperor Justinian, who ordained, that
those who song in the Temples, that they should sing high, and so intelligible,
that all the people might understand them.

But to return to Ptolomy, he undertook to erect a Lybrary in the Capital
City of his Realm Alexandria, the Charge whereof he gave to Demetrius
Phalerius, Prince and an Athenian Philosopher, who erected it so sumptuously,
that there was not the like in all the world: and it lasted until the first
War of the Romans against the Alexandrians. This King had to wife Arsinoe,
to whom he caused a Statue to be raised in height 4. Cubits of one entire
Stone called a Topace, the which had been given to Berince the Mother of
Ptolomy, by a Prince named Philemon.

2. Of ARISTEVS the Author of this HISTORY.
ARISTEVS the near Kinsman and Friend of King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, is named
by Praesal: in Pentatauchum Mosi.
St. Hierome Ptolomei (...) the Shield of the King, or he that definds the
King with his Shield, or ^earer of the Shield Royal, which ^emes to me, that
he held some such ^ace about the King his Master, as we call at this day the
Great Esquier of the Kings body, he was the principal Solicitor for Liberty
of the Jews that then were held Slaves throughout all the Dominions of
Ptolomy, for he made the first request for them and obtained it. And for this
cause he was sent Ambassador with Andrea Prince of the Gardes belonging to
the King, unto Jerusalem to deal with the Great Pontiffe Eleazar, who sent to
the King Ptolomus six Doctors of every Tribe to go on with the Translation
and Version of the holy Books of Moses.

He writ diligently his Voyage, where he shows openly, how and by what course
those 72. Interpreters behaved themselves in the say^ Books. Justin. dialog.
cum Tryphone. Irenaeus Lib. 3. Cap. 25. Clemon. Alexandr. lib. 1. stro^.
Epiphanius de m^ns. et Ponditbus Eusebius. preparat. lib. 8. ca. 1.
Some have been of Opinion, that they Translated all the Bible: but it is more
likely to many the Hieron. in questionibus Hebraicis. in Cap. 5 Ezechielis. et
in Cap. 2 Michiae. Iosephi praefat. in Antiquit. et lib. 12. Antiquit. Cap. 13.
Philo. de. ^^^a Mosis (...). 2.
they Translated but the five Books, that is, Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus
Numbers, and Deuteronomy, which they call the Pentaleucke, which ^ the Law of
Moses: for Aristeus speaks but of the Law of Moses, and it is not likely that
they touched the Books Historical, nor the Prophets; for if it had been so,
Aristeus would not thereof have been silent.

Moreover, that which they Translated, was finished in the space of 72. days,
which is about two Months and a half, and that is a Time too small, and
therefore impossible to Translate all the Old Testament. Nevertheless I am not
ignorant, that there was a Turning of other Books of the Bible, that go by
the Name of the Seventy two Interpreters. But I am persuaded that they were not
then done in Egypt, unless that after they were returned to Jerusalem, they
Translated the rest of the Holy Books: although both in that and other
Opinions, I submit me to the deliberation of the Church, from which I will not
stray. But howeuer, this Translation was manifestly Miraculous: which is
sufficiently showed by that our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles in
Alegations of the Law uses the Version of these Seventy two Interpretors, I
have spoken these few words of Aristeus, to the end the Reader shall not think
that this is that Aristeus Proconensis, that could be invisible when he
listed, making folks believe that he could dye and rise again when he
would, of whom speaks Suidas, Herodotus, Pliny, and Plutarch in the life of
Romulus.

3. Of ELEAZER the Great Pontiffe of the Jews.
ELEAZER of whom Aristeus makes mention, was brother of Simon surnamed the
Just: He after the decease of his Brother Simon, in the year of the reign of
Ptolomy Ptolomeus Laegus.
first of that Name 35. was made Chief of the Synagogue of the Jews, by
reason that Onias, Son of Simon his Brother, was incapable of succeeding in
his Fathers place, as being under age. This Eleazer therefore received the
Honor, that in his Time the Holy Translation of the Law was made by the
Seventy two Doctors that he sent to Ptolomeus second of that Name, King of
Egypt, as Aristeus has left by writing.

4. Of DEMETRIUS PHALERIVS.
DEMETRIUS PHALERIVS was an Athenian Orator and Philosopher, as Cicero notes in
the first Book of his Offices, calling him a subtle and sharp Disputant, and
in the rest an Orator little vehement. He had been Disciple of Theophrastus,
he was a man of such Knowledge, excellent Carriage, that foreign Kings had
him in admiration, and drew him to their Service, even Cassander King of
Macedon. And for this Reputation the Athenians gave him the Principality of the
City and Commonweal, in which he was Ten years in great prosperity: But
some of the Citizens having conceived malice against him, chased and threw him
out of his estate, and then he was honorably received of King Ptolomy of whom
we speak, where he was Master of the Lybrary Royal, the Athenians having
formerly raised to him 360. Statues of Marble, in despite cast them to the
earth, and judged him to death as a Traitor, of which Demetrius being
advertised, said, At virtutem non euerterunt. Diog. Laert. in vit. Demet.
The Athenians have thrown down my Statues *, but they cannot ouer-turne my
Virtue, for which they first erected those Statues. He was wont to say, that
(...). Diog. Laert. ibid.
Eloquence was as necessary in a Commonweal as a Sword in the Wars. He
dyed by the biting of an Aspick, and was buried in the Region of Busina, near
to Diospolis.

NOW FOLLOWS the History of ARISTEVS Ambassador of King PTOLOMEVS
PHILADELPHVS, concerning his Voyage unto Jerusalem: and the first Translation
of the Holy Bible, by the seauenty two Elders.
Written in Greek 1900. years since.
ARISTEVS to his brother PHILOCRATES.
WEll knowing your Natural and good inclination (Philocrates) to have always
had in great esteem the knowledge of all things, and that you have been
desirous, nay covetous to understand the occurrences and passages of good
achiuements: I have deliberated to frame unto you by Writing, a thing not only
excellent, but well deserving to be known; which unto us is happened, being sent
Excellence of this History.
of late unto Eleazer, great Pontiffe of the Jews.

But because these things shall be more facile unto you, I will first declare
you the Causes by the which we were sent; and then I will come to the Progress
of the Matter, so as I will fashion my Discourse to Your understanding, and
that the most truly I possible can, as well for the dignity of the Subject, as
to delight your Spirit, desirous of all good Knowledges, assuring my self that
man has in him nothing more excellent and praysable, then incessantly to
desire Learning, either by the means of Histories, or by the Objects of
things, or by experience of Affairs themselves. For the Spirit of Man, though
Rude and Childish, is greatly adorned and embellished, when from the beginning
it Delights to Taste and Relish those most nectarine, fair, worthy, and
excellent things that may conduct him by an infallible course, to follow Piety
and Reason.

WE therefore searching with great curiosity the Knowledge of Divine things,
and could not attain them; not understanding the Divine Law without being
interpreted and rendered into our knowing tongue, we undertook to go
Ambassador unto one only Person, who amongst his Citizens and others, by
debonarity and great glory was the most Honorable; and who not only did great
Honor and Profit to the Citizens, with whom He conuersed, but also to all the
other Jews, of what other place, or wheresoever.

WE being then well informed, that they had the DIVINE LAW written in Hebrew
Characters, in ^kins of Parchment, we were joyful to accept this charge given
us by the King: as also that the Colonies here of the Captive Jews, desired
the same above all things of the World, who had been hither led^ by the Kings
Father, who had pu^ into his Obedience the City of Jerusalem, and all the
Country adjacent.

BUT since we are fallen to mak^ mention of that business, it sha^ not be
impertinent to give you to understand the whole Discourse, tha^ thereby you may
have better intelligence, knowing well that it shalb^ much better, more
carefully to inform you how to fashion you to the service of GOD Reverently,
the^ to travail your self in the search o^ men's Laws or Actions, although
they may be just. Which affection you have sufficiently manifested, since from
an ^le so far Remote, you are come into this Country to see in Person those
things which may serve you to the adornment of your Spirit without having
Respect to place whatsoever.

I have here therefore Reduced by Writing: First, what has seemed to me worthy
of Memory, touching the Nation of the Jews, as I have something understood by
the Learned and Wise Priests of Egypt: to the end that by this means, I may
aid and increase, by some means Your knowledge: For one ought to have in
Remembrance the good they have received from persons; and especially to those
to show all gratitude who appertain unto us: And principally You, that have
knowledge of Virtue, drawing from your Brother, not only Resemblance,
Proximity of blood, and Lineage, which may thrust on with the same impetuosity
of Courage, to attain the Honor, Glory, and Beauty of Virtue; assuring my
self that neither the admiration of Gold, or Riches: neither the appearance of
things more precious, serve to nothing but vayne-glory; neither will yield you
such fruit as we may gather from Knowledge* Institution, and consideration of
all good Disciplines.

For the rest, to the end that it may not seem that we exercise ostentation
in being prolix in this Preface, I will reduce me to that which from my purpose
has extrauagated.

Demetrius Phalerius master of the Kings Library, giving order with the
greatest care he could, to buy Books from all parts of the World: And to that
end employing great numbers of Persons as Factors spread abroad in many places,
who had charge to buy and Transcript them, they so doing, and that diligently,
the design of the King was accomplished and executed, at leastwise in the best
manner for him possible.

For we being present, the King asking him how many thousand Volumes he had
gotten together in his Bibliotheicke. He answered, that for the present he had
no more then two hundred thousand, and that he
hoped erelong to have to the number of 500000. But Sir (said he) I have
understood that the Laws of the Jews deserves also to be Copied and
Translated, and to be put in your Library: And what hinders it answered the
King, that they be not? have you not all things to serve you commodiously to
this purpose? Demetrius Answered, that it was needful that those Laws were
Translated and Interpreted: because that the Jews used the propriety of their
Characters according to their Language, all otherwise then the Egyptians
following the disposition of their Letters, they adopting and accommodating
them to the propriety of their Voice, and that they were much deceived, who
held they spoke the Syrian tongue: for their fashion of speaking was far
otherwise: To this the King replied, that he would write to the Pontiffe of
the Jews, to the end that all might be obtained what was requisite, to bring to
effect this affayre, as Demetrius pretended.

Then it came into my spirit, that Time and occasion presented themselves for
delivery of all the Jews the which his Father Ptolomeus Lagus had led
prisoners from Judea into Egypt. For the which deliverance I had often prayed
Sosibius the Tar^ntine, and Andrea Captain of the Guarde to the Kings Body.
For these two Commanding in the Army had brought into obedience all that which
was in Syria and Phenicia, filling all these Regions with fear and terror:
and then were the Jews led some Prisoners, others in manner of Colonies, in
such a manner and multitude that there was brought into Egypt to the number of
a 100000 men, of whom were chosen well near 30000. all men of War, who were
established for the Guard of the Province.

True it is, that before there had bin sent with the Persians and other
Companies that were sent against the King of Aethiopia under the Charge of
Psammiticke: but all those which were there, were not of so great number as
those which were led away by only Ptolomeus Lagus. For (as we have said) he
adress'd to Arms all those whom Age or Force showed to be proper, and all the
rest of the Populer, as well Children, Old men, Women, he instituted as
Colonies, determining in himself, that if at any time his men of War grew
insolent, that none could surpass them in course or necessity of War, he
had means to abate such their presumption by those might rise from these
Colonies.

Now then seeking the occasion to bring about the Liberty of these poor men
(as I have formerly said) and having found my opportunity, I opened my desire
to the King thus prosing.

The Proposition of Aristeus to King Ptolomeus Philadelphus for the delivery of
the Jews.
IT is nothing wonderful my Gracious Lord and King, if it come to pass many
times, that the very affairs which we manage, notes and argues unto us
contrariety, and as it were direct against us: for all the Nations of the Jews
have one selfsame Law, the which we desire to be ours, not only Copied,
but also Translated into the Greek language. How then suppose you to send to
them about this business, when the greatest part of them is here in your
Kingdom held Prisoners? Unless it may please Your Magnanimity and Worthy
Nobleness to desire their Holy Books, after you have given free Liberty to
those who live here in great calamity and affliction, having above all things
Respect to that GOD which makes your Kingdom flourish, and You in high
prosperity: who is the same GOD which has given them that Sacred Law which we
desire to have. For they worshipping the GOD which has made and created all
things, and is the very same, whose wonderful Works all Humanes see and
admires, though some not so clearly as others; for, (Sir) we and others Call
him Jupiter, and that not without reason, for it has seemed good to our
Ancestors, because by him are procreated and live all Creatures: the which also
they esteem the Conductor and Gouer^our of the whole Universe. And altough
that he holds in his Domination all men mortal, nevertheless shining with
Spiritual light he neither frustrates nor deceiues the ^owes and Prayers of
those implores his aid.

We then ought humbly to desire that he would incline our hearts to such good
affections, as to do good, and that freely to every one, and especially to
deliver and free those which are in slavery and bondage: for being that Humane
kind is the Work and Creation of God, who has power to turn the heart and
incline it to what part it pleases him. We many times and in diverse fashions
desire it would please him to lead us to a perfection in goodness as the
principal Ruler of hearts, understanding, and spirit.

By this acknowledgement, I conceive a great hope to come to the Head of this
business, principally, because I know God to be favorable to those that pray
for things reasonable and equitable. For when men adopt themselves wholly to
seek and accomplish things tending to Justice and perfection of good works,
God the Lord of all things conducts and addresseth their actions and affections
to blessed and happy effects and ends*

The King then as something gained with a contented Countenance, said to
Andrea, how many is there of the Jews detayned in Captivity? He answered in
few words, more then 100000. it is a small request then said the King, Aristeus
requires of us, Sosibius and some others then there present answered, it is a
thing (Sir) worthy of Your Highness and Magnificence to make an agreeable
present unto God by their deliverance in liew of thanks and action of
acknowledgement, being that the Governor of Heaven and Earth ha^ exalted you
into more Sublimi^ then all your Predecessors: and it will do well, you by this
make ^e manifestation of your thanks.

The King then disposed to Banqueting A D^ma is 3 shillin^ six pen^, that is,
3. Pound ^ 10. shillings the ^ea^.
and pastines in a full Feast, and assembly of his Noble, Commanded that the
Jews should be all searched out, and that every body of them should be
rebought for the sum of 20. Drackmes by pole, and to confirm the same, that
his Edicts should be made, and that herein as much speed and promtitude
should be made as might possible be. And so it seemed that GOD perfitted and
brought to pass our desires, for he pleased to put into the heart of the King
to set at liberty, not only those that by the Army of the King his Father led
Captives into Egypt, but also all others that before or since, had been
carried Prisoners into Egypt, by what means soever: the sum then of those
were franchis^, (...) Talen^^ 600 F(...) Cr^^nes.
mounted unto 400. Talents.

Moreover, I hold it not out of purpose to ^^d you the Copy and Tenor of the
Edict, by which you may understand the greatness of the Affayre and ^e
debonarity and facility of the King, who was moved by the Goodness of God for
the salvation of many.

The Edict of King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, for the Deliverance of the Jews.
We will and command all those that followed Arms under our deceased Father,
through the Country of Syria, and Phaenicia, entering into the Land of Judea,
and their taking the Jews and leading them prisoners, having applied them to
their works and service, both in Towns and fields: That they shall deliver
and restore them into full Liberty: moreover we will that all the Jews that
either before or since have been taken and led away, in what fashion or manner
soever, shall be sent francke and free: For the ransom we have ordained, that
is to say, twenty drachmes for every head; the which sum, the men of War
shall take upon the distribution of the staple and munition of Victuals, and
the rest shall go upon the reuenew of the Table to the King, or reserved: For
we are duly informed that those Jews were constituted and brought away
prisoners against the Counsel of our deceased Father, and against all right
and reason: And that by the boldness and insolence of the Men of War, they
were Conducted into Egypt, and their Country wasted and desolated; when it
was sufficient to have the men of War of the said Country, at their
devotion, and all the Province reduced into obedience.

Intending then to do and render right to every one Universally, and
especially to those who receive injury under the iniust domination of another.
Moreover, to search diligently and particularly all things concerning right and
equity, and to prefer Piety and Religion above all things.

Our will and pleasure is, that all Jews whatsoever, being bond and Slaves in
this Realm, in what part soever they be found, be it in the Colonies or else
where, or be it in what soever manner they were brought into our Kingdom,
shall be delivered, enfranchised, and set at Liberty; for we are pleased it
shall be so done:

And to the end that no person shall be interessed, or receive damage, we
command that three days after the publication of this present Edict, every
one whom it does concern, shall bring before us their requests, containing the
number of heads that every one has set at liberty. For so it pleases us to
have it, for the profit of Us, and our Kingdom.

Declaring further, that the goods of those who are not obedient to this our
Edict, that their shall be forfeit and Consiscate: And we give liberty to
whosoever will, to accuse and bring in their contumacy or contempt of our will
and pleasure.

THIS Edict being written, perfited, and brought to the King, to know if his
pleasure were, it should be Published in this manner, or that he would Correct
and acknowledge it, When he perceived that these Words, viz. And those that
before and since had bin led Prisoners, were wanting, he inserted of his
liberality and magnificence. He then made presently the money to be doubled in
the sum, to his Treasurer and Officers of his Finances.

The which distribution was dispatched in the space of seven days. And there
was defrayed well near six hundred sixty thousand Talents; for there were
found a great multitude of Children with their mothers, which were all set at
liberty, and for every head of those, was paid by the Commaundment of the King
twenty Drachmes: Which was accomplished by the King, to his great liking and
contentment.

And after all was done, he commanded Demetrius by course of estate, to deliver
him the denomberment of the Hebrew Volumes. For these Kings have in Custom, to
comprehend all things by Edicts, and to do nothing be it never so small a
business without Writing; as well because of their Royal highness, as also
that belief may more certainly be given thereto.

Therefore to the end you may, as it were, see all before your eyes, I will
here inserte the Tenor and Copy of the request made to the King, by Demetrius,
and the Epistles which were sent for those that were franchis'd; so as one may
see the multitude, and in what habit they were; and in what Arts and
Professions they were different, and how they were Registered and inroled. The
Exemplary of Demetrius his request to the King, was this.

The Request of Demetrius Phalerius to the King PTOLOMEVS PHILADELPHVS.
GReat Sir: Since it has pleased you to give me Commaundment to search in all
places for all manner of Books to fill, serve, and Decorate your Library. I
have thought it good and necessary we obtain and get the Books of the Jews
Laws, and some other we are yet short and unfurnished of, and because the said
Books of the Jews are Written in Hebrew Characters, proper and best known to
the Jews only, and therefore not yet fallen into your Royal hands:
Nevertheless, that they may be gained and ranked amongst your other Volumes,
partly for the Wisdom contained in them; partly for their Sublimity and
Divine hight of matter they contain: Of which Poets and Historians make often
mention, as very profitable to instruct to good mannets, to institute and
address the Republicke into the fairest shape of Government, by reason of the
excellency of men therein mentioned, to the Reverence of matters therein
entreated; as Scripsit librum de Iudaeis, test Suida.
Hecateus Abderita plainly testifies.

These things seriously considered, (Great King) it would do properly well, if
it would please you to write to Jerusalem, and to the great Pontiffe therein,
that he would send you six men of every Tribe or Line, and that they be such
as are of good parts and Condition, of venerable age, best knowing and Versed
in their own Law, that being all able Translators, they may with judgment
choycely elect and choose that course of expression may be consonant and
Harmoniously agreeing amongst themselves. And this done (great Sir) I shall
hope you will accomplish a course worthy of so excellent an intention, and at
last well agreeing with your desires.

The King having read this request, ordained Letters should be drawn and sent
to Eleazer the High Priest, about this business: In the which was signified
unto him the deliverance of the Jews from their Captivity. With the Letter, he
ordained also to be made ready, Cups, Vessels, and a Table of pure Gold, with
fifty Talents of Gold, and seauenty of silver, for oblations there to be
offered, with many precious Jewels and stones of very great price: Commanding
the Gold-workers with all speed to finish these things, and the money in
Talents for the oblations to be raised incontinently. And because you shall at
full understand the Kings viuacity in this business, I send you here the Copy
of the Letter the King Writ, whereof the Tenor is as follows.

King PTOLOMEVS PHILADELPHVS to ELEAZER Chief Pontiffe of the Jews.
COnsidering the great Multitude of Jews inhabiting within our Territories,
(of whom some had been led from Jerusalem in the times that the Persians had
the Domination: the others following our deceased most Honorable Lord and
Father, being adjoined with him, whereof many were received into his pay and
rank as his Soldiers, and men of War: whereof the most faithful and trusty
were established in the most strong Forts as Garrisons, by that means to
bridle the insolences of the Egyptians. We since being come to the Crown,
and having singular affection to exercise Liberality and Munificence toward
all persons, and in special unto the Citizens, we have franchised and set at
Liberty more then a hundredth Thousand, ordayning that from our Money a just
ransom should be paid to all those that held them Prisoners, valuing at a
certain price and sum for every head of them, with desire to give order by
reason, and to remit them into good estate and tranquillity, whom the
Impetuosity, Cruelty, and Disorder of War had disturbed and diuerted from
Right and Equity. In which we esteem to have done a good and holy deed, as a
work yielding thanks to the Great GOD for all his great benefits received
from him, we make him this Offering, for having adorned and celebrated before
all the World this our Kingdom with a most remarkable Peace, Tranquillity, and
notable Glory.

And those others which had been Slaves and Bondmen in our Army, we have
ordained Soldiers in the Company, and them who have been found more
recommendable in Faith and Fidelity, we have made them Chiefes, and most
advanced in our Court.

Further, because we desire those and all others of the Nation, spread and
scattered through the Universe, to be thankful to our Favors: we have
deliberated to make that your Law which is Written in Hebrew Letters, should
be Translated into the Greek Language; and that our Royal Library be
adorned therewith, as it is with other Books; you shall do well then as a
thing to us very agreeable, and correspondent to our Design and Intention, if
you elect out of every Tribe or Line of your Nation, six of the most Ancient
Personages, and those shall be found of the best breeding and sufficiency, and
most Authorized in the Service of the Law, and have the best Style in Writing
to make for us this Translation: for so shall the Verity thereof be best and
cafiliest drawn, if the Company of the Interpreters be men of mature
Judgment, and well exercised in the Law: well waighing that to effect well and
worthily such an Interpretation and Translation: it is needful, there be
Solicitude, curious Study and Meditation, which may be found in the Many see
more then one only.
consideration of many who are more sharp, more subtle, and more
cleare-seeing then of one alone.

Moreover, we shall esteem that by the accomplishment of so great a Work,
there will redound to us great Honor and Glory.

For this cause therefore we have sent unto you, Andrea, Chief of the Guarde
belonging to our Person, and Aristeus, men of Honorable place in our Court,
having Commission from our part to present you with Jewels for your Sacrifices,
and for other uses an Hundred Talents of Silver.

Besides, herein you shall do us contentable pleasure, and courtesy
resenting Amity, if you have need of any thing, to require it of us, for we
will not fail to accomplish and accommodate you therewith immediately.

To this Epistle Eleazar made Answer in these words.

ELIAZER Pontiffe: to King PTOLOMEVS PHILADELPHVS, our most illustrious Friend.
IF you are well (Sir) and the Queen Arsinoe, and my Lady your Sister, and
your Children my Lords, praised be God; for health is a thing to be desired,
and thanked for, as a due unto him, which is the Giver thereof: As for us, we
are in good prosperity, also lauded be the Giver.

We have received your Letters, which brought unto Us great Contentment, by
reason of your Counsel, Enterprise, and Design; as also for the love and good
will you bear to us.

Having received them, we made a great Assembly of the People, to whom by a
long Discourse, having made known your Liberality toward our Nation, and
demonstration of your Presents and Oblations, to the end they should understand
your holy affection and Piety toward our God.

Showing publickely the twenty Vessels and Viols of Gold, the thirty of
silver, which we have sent, the five cups of Gold, with the Table of
proportion, and the hundred Talents of silver, for the provision and re-eadying
of the victimes and other Uses requisite to the Sacrificers: Which Jewels were
to us presented by Andrea one of our Princes, and Aristeus: Persons truly
worthy of note, both in corporal beauty, and excellency of Behavior and
Condition, as also rare Knowledge; briefly, Lords worthy in all things of your
Conversation and Justice, by whom we have been fully informed of your will
and intention, according with the Tenor of your Letter*

Wherefore we will wholly put our selves into endeavor to accomplish your
desire: For although it be a difficult thing to well bring to perfect effect;
yet for the Times to come it will be an Argument of our great Confederation and
Amity: For you have obliged our Citizens with a great, and as it were, an
inestimable Benificence. Whereupon we have offered to GOD the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving for You, your Sister, Children, and Friends; and the whole
multitude of people has prayed to GOD for your Prosperity, and that it will
please him to address your affection in all your Acts; and that GOD the Ruler
of all things, will make your Realm to flourish and increase in Peace and
Glory: And that the Translation of the Sacred Law, may redound unto your
Vtility and Profit.

After these Sacrifices were accomplished, all the People being to(...) we
have chosen the persons (...) sort, and men of honor and of good life and
Report, being six of every Tribe or Line, which we have sent to you, with the
Holy Law, which was left to us, by the Inspired Writer Moses. Be it your
pleasure (Sir) to return them us, after the Translation of the Books shall be
accomplished.

These are the Names of those which were chosen from all the Lines and Tribes
of the Jews, for to go into Egypt, to make the first Translation of the Holy
Bible, or Law of MOSES.
Of the first Tribe.
Josephus, Ezechias, Zacharias, Ioannes, Ezechias, Heliseus.
Of the second.
Judas, Simon, Somo^lus; Adeus, Mathias, Esch^^ias.
Of the third.
Neemias, Josephus, Theodosius, Baseas, Ornias, Dacis.
Of the fourth.
Ionathas, Auxeus, Heliseus, Annanias, Chebrias, Sacheus.
Of the fifth.
Iasacus, Iacobus, Jesus, Cabateus, Simon, Leuis.
Of the sixth.
Judas, Josephus, Simon, Zacharias, Somelns, Selemias.
Of the seventh.
Sabbateus, Jason, Jesus, Theodotus, Ioannes, Ionathas.
The eighth.
Theodosius, Jason, Jesus, Theodotus, Ioannes, Ionathas.
The ninth.
Theophilus, Abrahamus, Arsamus Jason, Endemias, Danielus.
The tenth.
Hieremias, Eleazarus, Zacharias Baneas, Heliseus, Datheus.
The eleauenth.
Samuel, Josephus, Judas, Ioathes, Chabel, Desitheus.
The twelfth.
Isaelus, Ioannes, Theodosius, Arsamenus, Abiethas, Ezecelus. Number of all 72.
Such was the answer to the Letters of the King.

NOw I will declare unto you the most succinctly I possible can, the beauty and
Decoration of the things we found in Jerusalem, being with Eleazer; and those
also which were sent unto him: for all was wrought with singularity of
manufacture, and of most exquisite beauty; the King being therein so careful
and intentive to perform abundantly all that was necessary for excellency of
finishing the Work, that of his own proper motion he went and came, visiting
every one of the Maister-Worke-men and Gold-smithes, whom he held so close to
their business, that he would not give them any leisure to deboyst themselves
nor to idle sport, by no means.

Of the Presents sentvnto Eleazer Pontiffe of the Jews, by King PTOLOMEVS
PHILADELPHVS.
And first of the Table of Gold.

IT behooves then, that first we describe the Table, for it was a work of
admirable politure. The King desiring to show therein a Maister-peece of Work:
wherefore he demanded the measure and dimension of the Table which was in the
Temple of Jerusalem, and the ornaments of the same. When he knew the measure,
he asked if they would receive one more great. And being answered by some of
the Sacrificers and others; if there were nothing might give impediment
thereby, one more great might be put there.

The King then replied, that he intended to give one five times bigger then
that was there, provided that it might not be discommodious to the
Sacrificers, by a disproportionall quantity. Further, the consideration thereof
ought not only to be with the receite and capacity of the place, but with much
more Care the Habitude should be proper and agreeable with the Sacrifices
thereon to be prepared, and that he was not without consideration, that the
Jews had not made that they then had in their Temple of so small quantity for
poverty and want of Gold: for when it was made, they abounded in all Opulency
and Riches: but that it seemed to him they had so proportioned it by some
reason of perfect Dimention.

Therefore his advice was, that things would not be well and dnely fabricated,
if the Table he intended to have made, were more long or high then the other.
Therefore proiecting all in his Spirits which was clear and prompt to
iudicially weigh of all things: he gave in charge to the Goldsmiths that were
most ingenious and of best spirit to finish and accomplish the business,
engraven and enriched with all variety possible: willing that those which
should work in the Borders, Raysings, Flowries, and Wrappings, Entortilations,
and such like; should amuse themselves only for Beautifying and Decoration:
and what was to be plain, should answer to the Measure and Dimention, and
that in all these things they should be exquisitely careful.

This Table was 2. Cubits large, and a Cnbit and a half in height, and think
not it was covered with Plates or Lames of Gold superficially, but was made all
of solid, massy, pure, and fine Gold; round about it was a Crown of 12.
fingers large, wrapped with Bars of Gold and other pretty Works in fair
passages, in manner of little threads, and enterlaced with little cords
retyring to the Cauetills, a work very shining and polished of the three
sides, for the Table was made in a Triangular form, and of every side wrought
of the same fashion: so that of what side soever one were, it seemed t^ be but
one Frontis-peece and o^^ face. For if you came to contem^plate it upon one
part, the plain ^ the Table by the Crown wit^ which it was bordered,
discovered to your eyes a most resplendant Beauty even admirable, and the
outward Work by the Rays and Splendour of the 2. Squares even dazeld so the
eyes, that one could scarce behol^ it; for the Table as we have say^ was
Triangular, and showed wit^ one Front and the same Superfic^^ on what side
soever you turned.

There was also an enrichment ^ Precious stones, strung through a ^gation of
Cords, and these Ston^ were wrought so properly in one after another, that they
showed string and wreathing of such subtilty that to my thinking it was not
possible to imitate the like. And those Stones were sustained and stayed by
Buckles and Fermillets of Gold for more firmness, and the Joints and
Commissures of Squares made with so great Artifice, entrenched and in^ested the
one within the other, to keep sure and conioyne all the work, that in
beholding them they were scarce discernable how.

Moreover, in the largeness of the Crown that environed the Table by the
aspect above, there was an order of Stones in fashion of little Oualls that
were agenced and holding together, and enfiled with little joncks of Gold, as
raised the luster: and these Ouall Stones were thick set the one with the
other; and the whole Table was as it were Chayned about with this thread of
Oualls. A little above this Chain of chayned Stones the Master Goldsmiths had
labored a Girdle of Flowers, and Tussies of all Fruits, so inter-tyed and
following together so well, that by their eminent risings amongst the Bosses of
Circuting Crown, you might see Grapes tied together; Ears of Corn, Dates,
Aples, Olives, Roses, and many such like; amongst which many Precious Stones
set and bound in Gold, in Color, Form, true and native semblance;
representing those Fruits by an Admirable Artifice. And with this Adornment was
the Corinshes and Fronti-spcece of the Table enriched all about: and so was
this Work of Fruits keeping order with the Ouall Stones above said.

To all these Decorations are adjoined other burnished Works, cut into
Sculpture; and in part with Ioncts and Verges of Gold, beautifying all the
Circuit of the Table: So that the Two parts which present themselves to the
sight, with the Beauty of the Crown unto the place where are the feet of the
Table, one might see a like Beauty, and Daintiness of Doublings; still
Lustrious what part soever of the Table were turned.

They had made the Plate of all the Table solid and massy, of the thickness
of four Fingers: to the end that they might more firmly and sixthly bind in
the feet and tressles to strongly sustain it.

These Feet were put unto the Crown without being so perceived, and were
firmly joined with Buckels and resorts: in such manner that the Table might
be supported and well sitting howsoever the Table were turned, and yet still
shining to the eye. In the Superficies whereof was represented in a fair work
the Flood Meander, running with his sinews, returns, and windings; in the
Channel of which, one might see a Splendour of Precious Stones, representing
his rolling waves, which Chingle was of Carbuncles, Emeralds, Agatts, and all
other sorts of Precious Stones, sparkling with their native Luster.

Near to this Flood there was an interlaced Work as a Wreath of Hair, (a
thing admirable to behold) showing in its aspect a Geometricke Figure, made of
Crystal and of Amber, and this Figure was square sollid: of which all the
squares were equal, and the Angles oblicke of the four sides. In this
polished Figure was showed the forms of the beholders, as if in a fair
Mirror. For the rest, the Ingenious hand of the Master workmen had made the
feet of the Table like to Flower-de-luces of whom the Flowers turning shell
like backwards, sustained the Table; the said Flower-de-luces thick with
Leaves, sprouting up as from within: this foot was sustained and stayed in
this manner.

There was a Stone of a Carbu^ckle, of which the streach was ^ twelve fingers;
having the form ^ a Rock made in a Precipeece, an^ had about 8. fingers of
largenesse^ and upon this stone was borne up a^ the burden and weight of the
Tress^ Upon this lifts up a Lyerre or Herb^ string, which twining about the
sept of a Vine, embraced him even to the top, the Grapes hanging about on all
parts: In this Table were four feet like in disposition and proportion of
workeman-ship, and of all four was one selfsame perspectiue: and so well
were these things accomplished and perfected, by most excellent and ingenious
Manufacture, of men Inuentiue and Ingenious; that not only the aspect of
things true, were made as it were false and illusiue to the eyes, but also one
might hear the leaves rattle by stirring of a little wind moving them one
against another: so were all things labored even as it were to the Life and
Natural, every thing representing a lively Image of what it was made to
represent.

More, the Tressles of the Table were moveable, and to be removed on all ends;
wherein there was a secret of Workmanship which could not be seen or
perceived for the greatness of the work: and by the means of certain
Clasps, all was to be borne together, although one could not perceive either
Creuis, Joint, or Closing: For the Table w^^ no more then a Cubit and a half
b^^ in all, yet therein, and on, was gre^ expense bestowed, and many Tale^
employed.

For after the King had resolved n^^ to exceed the measure and greatn^^^ of
that which was in Jerusalem all that he determined to lay upon one much
greater, was employed (...) the Decoration of this, and much more: So that all
was done and a^complished most beautifully, a^^ with wondrous Art, and was
excellent and admirable according ^ the Kings wish.

Of the Vessels, Cups, and Viols of Gold.
THe two Cups from the base to the middle, were all cut in a scaly work; and
betwixt every two scales, sowed with precious stones, the radious shine
whereof, made such a reflect to the eyes, that it beat back the sight with a
dazlement. The Tower of these Cups was girt with a sculpture of the flood of
Meander, of the hight of a Cubite; all environed and enterlased with diversity
of stones, of inestimable beauty and esteem. Near the flood, there was a
tresse of hairs of gold, with tuffes joined together from the boule above, to
the bottom, being spread in clear ways, as a net of thread. In the middle
parts whereof, we^ to be seen many precious stones, disposed in form and
figure of a Scu^chion, amongst whom there wa^ only a space or interuall of
four fingers; where the splendor made the grace of the Work more pleasant to
the eye; upon the lips and border of the Cups, there was ^ Crown
interlased with Flower-de-Luces, bunches of Grapes, intermixed one with another,
and wreathed like Cordage, and so running all about: These Cups so accomplished
with more then rich Workeman-ship, held more then two Mettrets.

But the Tankerds of Silver were adorned and decorated yet with much more
beauty, in full work and polishment: for within they were ^ resplendant, that
one might see all things, more to the life, then in a mirror. And it is not
possible to tell how the figures of all things were represented to the
natural, by the polishment and sparkling brightness of them, which were so
bright ^d shining, that if you had put one ^f the Silver Cups by one of Gold,
^en one of the Silver, and so one of ^old, and so followed this order, ^ey made
an admirable show, and ^possible to be long looked upon; for ^e shine gave such
a lightning from ^ne to another, and the rays pene^ating one another luster,
that it ^en dazzled and beat back the point ^f the sight, so that no soul was
a^le long to behold them: For if you ^ad turned your eyes to a Cup of ^old,
they were so incountred with ^e order and splendour of the works ^ariety, and
with the force of the ^ght and radiation, and would so ^lance at the point of
the sight, that ^ou could hardly hold them from ^winckling, so as you should
be for^ed to turn the^ elsewhere, or not too ^tedfastly to behold their
fulguratio^: And if you looked upon one of Silver, ^more great effusion of light
shed all ^broad: So that your eyes taken with ^dimnesse, you were not able to
discern thoroughly the structure a^ manufacture.

For the Vessels and Viols of Go^ they were wrought with such i^ gene, that the
middles were enric^ed with clusters of Grapes, the v^ges and lips with
bunches and ^ wrapings of leaves of Myrhe and ^ Olives, bound together in man^
of a Crown, about all the mou^ parts, and all set with precio^ stones,
according with the spa^ and opportunity of the places: So ^ I assure you, the
Maister-worke-m^ had showed their Art in imbelli^ing and ornifying every
thing, w^ an ambitious desire to honor the ingene, and to exalte the
magni^cence of the King: So that in all t^ Treasors, neither in all the
Ca^nets, or other wheresoever, w^ not to be found any thing so rich, ^ fair,
nor so precious, as were the Royal Works.

For the King that had his Hono^ in singular recommendation, the ^ had employed
all ca^e and dilige^ and prodigally spread abroad all mag^ificence. For upon
his own vo^ntary he came often to visit the ^orkes, conuersing and mingling
^ is advice with the Maister-Golde^mithes, making them to change, ^ow this now
that, according to his ^antasie.

Likewise he forbad expressly, that ^hey should not stir from their bu^inesse
to any place, until all were fi^ished and accomplished, as he ^ould have it,
so that all was most ^rtificially perfected in most excel^ent manner, as well
to give acknow^edgement of his illustrious excel^ence and high place, as also
for the ^dignity of the Pontiffe, which sat in ^o high a Respect, to whom these
things were intended.

Surely the multitude of stones, of which some were so rare, as scarce ^knowne,
yet being of marvelous greatness, amounted to the number of five Thousand:
And yet for all ^that, the Worke-man-ship was of greater esteem then all: and
all being valued, it plainly appeared the both precious stones, and curio^
Worke-man-ship, exceeded by fi^ times the Gold therein imploye^ both in
beauty, and estimation Conclusiuely I esteem, that I ha^ formerly Written, may
yield y^ some delight in knowing these Ra^ and curious things, the true lo^
and ingenious goodness of the Ki^ therein.

Now what follows, shall declare the Discourse of our Voyag^ to Eleazer: And
because you may ^ full understand all Circumstances, ^ will describe you first
the Province or City of Jerusalem, and then the Region about it.

Of the City of Jerusalem, and the Region about it.
WHen we arrived near to Jerusalem, we discovered the Town situated in the
Mountain, in the ^iddle of all the Province of Judea, ^uing thereby a far
streaching pro^ectiue to the view. In the head of ^e Mountain is situated the
Tem^e, in most goodly view and appea^nce, which truly is a fair thing ^ see:
About the same is a girt of ^ree Curtains of Walls raised in the ^yre, to the
height of seauenty Cu^ts, and of convenient thickness in ^roportion to the
height, which in^ironeth all the Decoration and tri^ ^f the Temple, with an
excellent beauty and magnificent Work: T^ fight of the Ports, the conexion a^
euenesse of the stones, the From speeces and Butrisses, the faces of ^ Portals,
show with a lustrious be^ty and excellency of Workman-sh^ and one might plainly
see, that in ^ this structure, all things did m^ magnificently abound, and that
charge had bin spared.

Without the Temple, there ^ a veil by which the Temple ^ closed; round this
veil was hang^ trauers from the magnificence of ^ Portals, yielding a very
pleasing s^ctacle; and Principally then, when little Wind rose from the Paueme^
and entering within the veil, runn^ from low to high, making volatu^ and
replies like Waves, and moou^ delightfully with puffes followi^ one the other,
reciprocally and s^cessiue blowing.

Within the Temple there was ^ Altar accompanied with a Chimn^ very Properly
and conveniently bu^ acording to the place for the victim^ ^ere to be offered.
The stayres to ^cend thereto fair and euenly dis^sed, according with the
Magnif^^nce of the place, both for comeli^sse, as also for the ease of the
Sacri^ators, who were invested with ^arments of Limen most subtle and ^t. The
forepart of the Temple ^oking to the East, turns the back ^ the West, and of
him are the spa^s composed and measured by fair ^ mmetry, in all dimention and
show ^eauty very excellent, and Work ^ good grace.

The flower is paued with Stones, ^e Receptacles of the Waters which ^ey shed
in great quantity, in wash^ the Victimes after that they have ^t their throats,
are hidden in con^nient places; for in the days of ^eir Feast, many thousand
of ^ctimes are offered, by means ^ereof is spent so great quantity of ^ater,
that one would deem there ^nne ordinarily a great quick Foun^ne. But this is
a thing yet more ^mirable, and almost vnbeleeuable: the greatness of the
Conduits of the Waters which are under ear^ which are under ground in the
Temple, and stretch five Stades in roun^ n^^se. And to conduct these waters ^
to their Receptacles, there are Pi^ of Lead closed within the Wall^ drawing in
all parts under the Pa^ment of the Temple, by which t^ waters void themselves
after ^^ Beasts are washed: likewise m^ Spouts and openings near to ^ Base of
the Altar, which are ^ known to all, but only to those w^ serve to the
Sacrifices: and by the too the blood of the Offerings in li^ manner runs and
purges.

We coniectured the great qu^tity of waters there shed by ^^ manner. For the
Jews having led^ to walk out of the Town m^ then a League long, they shew^
us a place, where we might heare^ noise of the waters which ranne^der the
earth, which seemed to me^ be such as when one voids water ^ whole Tons.

Of the Sacrificers.
But all the former was as nothing in respect of the Worth, Honesty, ^d Silence
of the Sacrificers and their ^inistery. For without solicitation ^ey set
themselves to their business, ^ery one according to his Estate and ^arge,
without staying for any ^ommandement: Some kindling the ^ood, others the Oil,
others ^inging the Wheat-flowre; others ^e Odours Aromaticke, others the ^lesh;
every one showing his readi^sse with an excellent dexterity. For ^king the
Calves by the thighs, al^ough they waighed more then two ^alents, they lifted
them in the Air, ^ith an admirable facility, and not ^ore handsomely then
easily; in such ^anner, that they never fayl'd to ^lace them where they should
be.

They did the same with the F^dels of Sheep and Goats for all O^ferings, and
Victimes were to ^^ without spot and fat.

Moreover, there was a place p^pared for their rest, where they ^ lay, and rose
most willingly and ^ ligentiy, without being called or w^ked; and so set
themselves to the business in their ranks, one after ^^ other: but also with
so great silen^ that although they were ordinar^ about 700. Ministers, without
r^ckoning a great Troop of those t^^ offered the Victimes, yet it seem^ as if
they all had been but as one man all things were done with so great ^ty and
Reverence to God.

Of the great Pontiffe ELEAZER.
THat we had of greatest admiration amongst other things, was ^hen we saw
Eleazer present him^lfe to the Sacrifices in his glory and ^aiesty, clothed in
his habit and ^abes, in Pontifficat; all shining with ^e luster of Precious
stone, for to ^is Accoutrements hung all about ^ttle Bells of Gold, yielding a
sweet ^armony, amongst which he had al^ Garnets of maruailous colors, and all
was separated with diversity ^f Flowers. Upon his Vestiment he ^ore a Girdle
which girt him very ^omely: and the work was of most ^ire Colors. Under his
breast hung ^at they call the Rational, which ^here there was 12. Precious
stones ^f diverse colors set in Gold, in which was written the Names of the
^rinces of every Tribe which were from the beginning: and all was most
resplendant in their natural, (almost beyond belief:) his head was adorned
with a Royal Bonett, upon which was set a Myter of incomparable Beauty,
together drawing up the Coyfure to a Highness Royal. From this Myter was
dependant a Plate of Gold, upon the forehead of Eleazer, covering his
eyebrows; in which was Written the Name of GOD in Sacred letters, a spectacle
in
truth full of great Glory and worthy of such Mystery: for with this Dress the
shine and redoundance was of such show and worthy dignity, that it might beget
a trembling fear in those beheld him: So as this Pontiffe was represented to
the beholder as it were a figure of God. Briefly, every thing being by us
contemplated, held our spirits in a suspense and amazement through their
beauty, for the manner and decoration of one thing and another drew our
understandings even by force maturely to consider them.

Of the Fortress or Castle of Jerusalem.
FRom thence we ascended to visit the Fortress: It is Situated near to the
Temple in a most fair seat, munished with many Towers made of Stones of
extreme greatness. And by that we could understand and know it is the
Bulwark and Propugnacle of the Temple, to the end that if there happened any
Sedition, or impeteous hostile Invasion, no body should enter by force within
the cloysture of the Temple which is near: and is defended by the high Walls
of this Fortress, situated in a place of precipitate steepness, having his
Sentinels and Munitions with Engines of War.

This place is kept and guarded by a Garrison of lusty young Soldiers, robust
and strong, which are established by all the Towers within, and are such, that
for their merits to their Country, are held in worthy esteem: They have no
liberty to go out of the Fortress, except upon Feast-dayes; and then with
great Solemnity only part of them, and to the re-change of Guarders, and they
dare let no person in, for the Captain of the place there uses such watchful
diligence when he issues, and amongst them makes such watch and diligent
search, that he cannot be circumuented by any Spy, as it fell to us; for we
could but two enter, and that without Arms and by great entreaties, and that
only to see the Sacrifices: for he told us, and that with an oath, that all
those which are of this Garris^n, which are in number 500. have sworn to admit
within but at most five e^s^ns at a time: Because the conservation and
preservation of the Temple consists in the kee^ing of this Fort, which if it
should be taken and held, the Temple had no other defense.

Yet of the Town.
THe greatness of the Town, by that we could judge, stretches in circute
some forty Stades; A City certainly worthy to be regarded, both for the beauty
of the Walls, and disposition of the Towers. She is comparted in fair, straight
great streets* and those well Paued, where there is many little Lanes and
Channels in opportune and convenient places: So as this City that is seated in
a Mountain, with great ease one may mount and descend. Also the entries of the
streets, there are cut out steps in form of Scaffolds, which one mounts by
stayres as it were open Galleries, where the most eminent Persons walk more
high then others, which have also means to Walk by places, which are a little
low; and these banked ways (as it were) are in the most p^^cipall streets, to
the end that those who bear the holy things, should not be contaminated with
fou^enesse and dirt: By which one may judge their Ancestors have wisely an^
with good reason, chosen such a Place for the seat of the Town; measuring and
ordayning such commodious choises in all things whatsoever.

Of the Region about Jerusalem, and of the Policy of the Pesants or Country
People.
THis Region is spacious and fair stretching from one side toward Samaria,
and the Neighboring Idumea, which is a plain Country: On the other side, the
Coasts are fair and fertile. And it is no meruai^e if this Region is so
abounding and fertile of it self, and therefore plentiful in all good
fruits; being ^lso that it is cultiuated by the indu^try and great care of the
Country People: And it is not here, as it is commonly seen about good and
great Cities, placed in good and fertile Lands, where the Pesants are idle,
^arelesse; and for the abounding plea^ures and voluptuousness of Cities,
despise their Labors: And as we see Youth is taken with delights and
idle^nesse, and so become effeminate and ^tender. Which truly befell to
Alexandria, a City Rich, Opulent, and Abounding in all good things: Where the
Youth of the Country that used to follow Country works, staying and amusing
their rough condition with these pleasures and voluptibilities, forgot their
Country businesse^ labor, and become idle and sloathfu^l.

And for these causes doubtless, their Jewish Kings ordained that these
Pesants should make no abode in the City; and that no Creature of them should
dwell but in his rusticke house, longer then twenty days; and that unless for
great, urgent, and important reasons, because they should not loose their time.
Wherefore by Statute it was ordained that all Process, and Controversies o^
Law suites, should be determined i^ five days, and no delay to stretc^ further
then to the fifth day: And for this was Published and promulgate^ a Law, and
the reason thereof dele^gated to the Judges and Ministers o^ every Region, that
the Pesants should not sojourne or make abode in the Towns (as is said)
because of the Demurres of their Suites, negle^ting their Country business,
which might cause damage and loss to the Revenues of their Prince, amoyndring
and diminishing his Tributes and Due^, arising from these Laborers.

I speak all this at large, because we were advertised hereof in Discoursing
with El^azer. The Peasants therefore are very careful and diligen^ in their
Labors and Menagery, by reason whereof in such a multitude of People, the
Region is all planted with fruit Trees, abundant in Corn and all sorts of
Grain in all parts: The Vineyards clothed with Vines, and it is not possible
to ^ell the number of Palme-Trees, O^iue-Trees, Figge-Trees, and besides
pasturage for the raising of Cattle, which they innumerably breed up, so as
they have not only a place, as it were, of choice to this purpose so
commodious, but also an understanding care still to condition it so for the
maintaynance entertaynement of so great a multitude of people; and they have
not better appointed this course for the Villages, but also that thereby they
might fully furnish and beautify their Towns* Besides there comes abundance
of Aromaticke drugges, of Gold, and precious stones to them from Arabia. For
this Province is exposed, as it were, a Fair or general Market, to all about
them for Traffic and Commerce.

The City is full of Tradesmen, having no want of any thing may be
transported by Sea, for it is suc^coured and furnished by the neereness^ of the
ports of Ascalon, of Iaffet, o^ Gaza, and of Acra. Cities founded^ by their
Kings, for this purpos^ of furnishment; and those Cities w^ have named, are to
all conuenienc^ for this Town, not to be too near^ off, or too far from one
the other^ so as it is very easy to have all things necessary in a short time,
with assu^rance of the ways to the goers an^ Comers.

The Region is watered throughl^ by the River Jordan, in whom Wa^ter never
fayles: This flood arisin^ from that siude of the Sun rising, en^uirons not
less then sixty thousand^ paces: In the best and most fertil^ Regions bordring
this flood, hereto^fore inhabited and Conquered thos^ Valiant troops of Jews,
which i^ their times Conquered the Country, and passed this River, being in
number more then six hundred thousand.

This Iorda^ swells and increases ^n the Summer, and ouer-flowes the
^Neighbouring fields like the Nyle; ^ouering a great part of the ground, and
then falls into another River by ^ Acra, disgorging themselves together into the
Sea. There are many other Torrents which have their Ori^inall and course
toward Gaza, and ^ Azota; which have their serpentine ^ourses through all the
whole Pro^ince.

The force, strength, and assurance of this Region, consists in places of ^ard
access and evil to come to, and ^re so naturally strong, for all the Country
is environed with Moun^aines, Rocks, and Precipices cut ^straight down as it
were by the ^plomet, In other parts, it is inclo^ed wiih Rivers, Concurrents,
whereof the Valleys and the Plains is for^tified with great Ditches and
Tren^ches. On the otherside, the ways are so narrow and troublesome by
turnings and windings, too and again, that with great difficulty those that
Travail by Land, come to the great City. They say also they we^ wont in
former times to drawn metals from the Mountains of t^ bordering Arabia: But
since the ti^ that the Persians had domination, the Quest of metals was left
off; t^ charge being more then the gay^ and the labor unprofitable; yet the^
say this excuse was invented by t^ Inhabitams^ of those places, to t^ end that
those Earthes should not b^ swallowed up in the hollownesse ^ the Mines, so
that the Earth beei^ open, passage could not be given ^ Strangers in those
straites.

And so much for these things, Br^ther Philocrates, I have discouer^ unto thee.
Now I will declare the which concerns the Law, and h^ Interpretation and first
Translation.

What the Translators of the Holy Law were.
THose which were chosen were very honest and virtuous men, ^xcellent in all
Knowledge, descen^ed of Noble Parentage: and not one^y understanding in their
own Iuda^cke Learning, but also passing well ^eene and exercised in the Gre^ke
^etters; for they were reserved men and always ready to be employed as
^Embassadours upon occasion: For which they were, as it were, purpose^y bred,
and so proper, and able to judge of those things and courses as ^he case
required: And were those that Constructed the Public Aduer^isements, and gave
Answers with great sufficiency touching all difficul^ies concerning their own
Law: and ^ad ^aruailous promptitude, both for Orationing and giving Iudgment^
They were men clearly void of a^ barbarous Inciuility, but of good an^ sweet
Condition, and complexione^ as it were to follow their prope^ manner of Living
and Estate in a M^ diocrity and most prayseable Mod^sty: still striving above
all things t^ excel all others in Wisdom an^ good Knowledges, and in these
e^ deauours consisted all their Study, ^ steeming no other search more the^ how
to excel one the other in acce^sible graciousnesse, and sweetnesse^ hearing
and answering: so that eu^ry one of them were esteemed of ^ their Tribe, as men
worthy to ha^ Pre-eminence and Principality f^ the Virtue that was in them.

And it is worthy the noting ^ what Honor they held Eleazer, a^ in what
Respect he held them: F^ besides that he Writ to the Ki^ concerning his care
of their conuen^ent return, he recommended a^ that with a loving and great
desir^ and with a great affection these reverent Persons to Andrea; desiring by
many proposes and requests, how we should with our Credits and Grace with the
King, make them all fair way.

To which we made answer, that as these things were matters of our especial
charge, so we would be answerably careful to discharge our selves, with all
due care, so that we desired he would not too much trouble himself therewith;
for that they should therein be absolutely free. I assure you (said he) I am
therein somewhat, and not a little troubled, and not without just cause. For I
know the King, a Prince so diligent, a Lover of virtuous and worthy Persons,
and how industriously he seeks them; that there is no place free from his
desires, when he hears where such are, that excel, or are noted for Knowledge
or Prudence: And I have been advertised, that he uses to say that which is
most true, that in such manner of men dwells and consists the force and defense
of his Kingdom: and in especial when he has near about his person, good
store of just and prudent men, which have provident Council to give him, least
all may fall. Which I perceiue^ well by those he has pleased to sen^ hither.

And we profess in modest earnest^ that we send not these persons vnto^ him,
to aid him in such his affaire^ of his Republicke; but for a general^ profit
and an Universal good of a^ his people, in which regard nothin^ ought to be
refused, or what we w^ not endure. For although the form^ of well living,
consists in the observation and accomplishment of the precepts and
Commandments: Nevertheless it is better learned an^ taught by the Knowledge
and experience of the things themselves, the^ in the simplicity of the Words.
B^ this speech and such like, we cam^ ^o know what great affection Eleaz^ did
bear to these Persons.

Of the Answers made by ELIAZER, upon certain points of the Law of MOSES.
IT behooves also we touch briefly the Answers Eleazer made us, being asked by
us: For knowing the Jews make great curiosity and ^teeme of the obseruances
and diffo^nce that they put upon their meats ^d drink, according with their
^aw; and of certain Beasts they e^eeme unclean and infected: We ^iestioned
saying, since all things are ^ one and the same Creation, and ^ceiues one
selfsame substance; therefore it is that some are rejected ^ infectious, as
well to eat as to ^ndle; so that it seems the Law ^treateth more prolixiuely
then pro^rly.

Eleazer then answered, you kno^ not (said he) what virtue and pr^priety,
custom has in regard ^ well-liuing, and what mutations a^ changes she brings
in humane things See we not that those who conu^^ with the Evil, let
themselves run^ to a course of corruption in manne^ whereby they become
Wretched ^ their lives after: In the contrary, th^^ that custom and acost
themsel^ with men Wise and Prudent, ^ though they are yet ignorant, char^ from
good to better, and beco^ happy and fortunate. The which o^ Lawmakers
considering, resolui^ his ends to Piety and Justice, h^ not only taught us all
we ought do by Words; but showed us all ^ Examples, and forbidding us to ^
Evil, putting before our Eyes ^ causes wherefore GOD has crea^ every thing.

First, he has taught that G^^ is One and All, by the Power whom are Couerned,
and consist^ all things; and that He is present^ ^ll places; and without Whom,
Nothing can remain in its being, be it ^euer so little; and that Nothing can
^e hidden from Him, whatsoever ^en do upon Earth never so secretly, ^uen what
men do and think with ^hemselues, or what they plod and ^ontract with another,
all is to Him ^otorious and Naked before his Eyes. For He sees the things to
come, as ^f they were present: Moreover, He with his gracious Goodness
teaches that when any one intends to Work ^uill, that he may assure himself
it cannot be hidden, and pretends by ^ll the Law, no other thing then to show
the power and strength of our good GOD.

Being then heedfull of the beginning of these things, he shows that other
people who have opinion that ^here are many Gods, are themselves more powerful
then the Gods they by folly adore. For they affirm foo^ishly that the Images
and likenesses they frame of stone, or of Wood, are the representances and
forms of those who have brought someth^ profitable by their inventions, to ^
common use of their living; and the they Worship, prostrating themsel^ upon
their knees before them. ^ they are out of their rightsences, a^ indeed out of
themselves! and if o^ demand of them what is their ^uentions: they allege
somethi^ produced from Nature, as a thi^ produced, Created, and Compos^ by the
fore-sayd Inuentors, althou^ such never thereto put their hands, ^ which they
sufficiently prove the blind Wills and Beastiality. For it well known, that if
there be qu^stion of any good invention, the there may be found at this day
persons more Learned, more subtle, a^ more prompt to invent any goo^ thing,
then those have done, w^ have bin in these times long since pa^ yet they are
not therefore ador^ as Gods, although the Sage Greek^ esteemed such Inuentors
worthy ^ Ho^our. What should I say of the A^gyptia as and of their Neighbou^
which are herein more madd then the others who have brought in divine worship
to brute beasts^ others unto Reptiles: which out, as it were, of common reason
and all understanding, making Sacrifices to the living and dead, immolating to
them Victimes? whereby the Wise and Prudent Lawmakers being instituted of God,
in the knowledge of all things has compared and fortified us as it were with a
Trench and Palisado, and with inexpugnable Endowments, has environed us with a
Wall of Iron, to the end that being innocent in the Soul, and pure in the
Body, we should not mingle our selves in what fashion soever with other
Nations, and that rejecting all follies and vain opinions, we should adore one
only GOD, which has power over and upon all Creatures.

For this the Priests of the Egyptians, Princes of the People (although they
fail in many things) name us men of GOD, and agree with us in many things*
because other People has not this Religion t^ Adore one only God, according
to the Truth as we do: For thos^ give themselves over to Gurman^ disings and
Drunkenness, building up shadows, amusing themselue^ with no other things but
pleasure^ and belly-cheere. Of which there i^ no one of us has so much as
though^ but all the course of our lives is employed to the only knowledge o^
Virtue and Divine ^ower, to the end we fall not into Sin, and be^ not
polluted by the conversation o^ such people in any manner what ever.

He has also defended and arme^ us on all sides with Purity and Honesty, not
only in our Drink and Meat, but also in what we handle^ touch, see, and
hear; for he has reduced and brought all things before our natural reason,
even so a^ all things have their being from on^ Power: so as with a most
profound^ understanding, he has ordained the things which we ought to use,
and also those we ought to abstain from. I will allege you one or two for
example: to the end that if you take heed to the words and plain speech, you
cannot think that Moses has not taken such pains to ordain his Laws,
because of Rats, Weasels, and such things.

For it is necessary you understand, that he has very well and wisely
ordained all things to the Honesty of living, having regard to Purity and
Cleanliness, and to the correction and amendment of manners. And as for Birds,
and flying Fowls, he has permitted us to eat ordinarily of such as are tame
and are different from the others in purity and cleanenesse, and that live upon
Grain and Seeds: as are Pigeons, Turtel^, Peacocks, Partridge, Geese, and such
like. And those he has forbidden us to eat, they are wild, ravenous; living
upon flesh and Carrion, of proud natures, inclined to ra^ine, and prey, and such
as by force set upon others, and seek not their living but to the damage,
hurt, and injury of the other Poultrey which are gentle and tame; but those
fierce ones not only assail those of their kind, but also seize upon Lambs,
Kidds, and euen^ upon men yet living, or half dead.

Our Law maker therefore nothing this by way of Similitude, and by a^ certain
way of Translation taken^ from the Nature of such Fowls, hath^ pronounced them
unclean and infectious; willing to reduce and bring all things to the
consideration of Purity and Cleanelinesse of the Soul; to the end that every
one being admonished by ordinary and household examples, may understand how it
behooves to use Equity and Justice, and that it is not granted to man be he
n^uer so strong, powerful, proud, bold, and audacious soever, to ravish by
force that of another, nor do injury to any person, but that is convenient;
he orders the course of his life to the imitation of the Foul which I have
spoken of, who live by Grain, leading a gentle and peaceable life: And that it
is not lawful to vex and trouble any person of our kind, nor rampe away his
goods by force, as does those Beasts he has prohibited to eat; and not to
use force in whatsoever cause which is showed by the Nature of Beasts that are
not wholly deprived of Sense: You understand then the cause for which he has
forbidden us the use of the said things, that is to say, by reason of the
Inclination and Nature of every Beast.

You may therefore now well conceive how our Lawgiver Moses has be^ne
careful in all things to correct our Manners, and establish them by the things
to which we are accustomed, and there to regard the Nature of brute beasts:
for where he has licensed us eating the flesh of foure-footed beasts, who
have two and the hoofes cloven: is the sign and signification that we ought
to part our operations into right and bounty by this compartiment and sig^e^ee
^nioyneth us to be inuentiue to Justice. For the which cause we are separated
from other Nations: to the end we be not polluted with Sin by their
frequentation and company. For many people of the Gentiles are sullied with
Impiety by mixture of one with another, and not only suffer the Provinces and
Cities to be spotted, infected, and dishonored with the fin^ against Nature,
but are foully staind with the unclean blood of Childbearing Women, having no
feeling or shame to commit Incest with their own Daughters, from which things
we are wholly separated.

Moreover, where he has noted to us the sign of this Division, he has also
advertised us to be heedfull by the same Character, being in the selfsame
subie^t; for in all places where it is printed by their tract, it gives us
mention of this Division and still admonishment to the afo^e-sayd. He has
adjoined that they should be such as chew the C^d: By which he manifestly
admonishes us to have this rumination in memory and course Reasons for the
Jews choice and diversity in Meate^.
of our Actions: for what signifies this chewing of the Cud, but that we ought
still to have in our minds a continual recordation of our lives and acts, and
so by a frequent meditation the duty to which we are bound, and that we ought
to do. For even as the life of the Body is intertayned in still Cogitating; so
is our Spirit nourished in reducing to memory her functions. And for this
cause, he says in the Scripture, Have GOD still in thy Memory and Thought,
which has made in thee such great and admirable things. If this thou truly
considerest, thou shall find it great and admirable indeed.

For first, thou shall behold the Architecture of the Body, the distribution,
and transfusion of the Elements, the Conexion and tying of all the Members; a
thing truly worthy of admiration: But it will be more admirable, if thou take
regard to the composition of the sense, which is given to every member: If thou
weighest the actions of the Understanding; if thou considerest the Invisible
moouings, and how in every of them there shines a vigor, and acuity of Spirit,
from whence is proceeded the invention of Arts, even almost innumerable.

Wherefore not without cause, Moses commands us to have in continual
consideration, that all things have been established and related exemplary by
the DIVINE Power and Providence; for so has he finished and contermined every
thing, according with its time and place: Recalling always into the memory the
consideration of GOD the Lord Ruler and Creator of the whole Universe.

And if we will begin with that which concerns Eating and Drinking; has he
not well and prudently commanded that we should give praises and thanks to
GOD when we sit at Table? In which he has not permitted us to devise or
Discourse of any thing in the world that should make us forget or deface in our
memories the power and providence of GOD.

Wherefore he has ordained we draw upon the Doors and Ports of our houses
such Inscriptions as shall move us to actions of thanks, still to renew our
memories: GOD and his goodness in our thoughts, showing by a most evident
sign, that all our Study ought always to bring to the memory Equity and
Sincerity, and that the thought ought always to represent GOD before our eyes.

Also he has ordained, that not only when we sit to the Table, but Order of
meats.
when we rise, that we praise the Works and Deeds of GOD not only with
words, but also with a sober and reverent countenance: red^cing into the memory
the perpetual moving of the Heavens, and that this alternatiue and successiue
Nature is not only Divine, but also incomprehensible to Man; Thus to you is
expounded the reason of the division, the remembrance thereof by Reminiscence,
concerning the cleft of the hoof, and in Beasts their chewing of the Cudde
which you have propounded: assuring you that there is nothing ordained which is
superfluous or improper for the understanding of^ the Spirit, but by this
figurative manner and use, he has accommodated all things according to Verity.

Also the said Lawgiver by a like figure has admonished us from falling into
Injustice and sin, by the hearing or too much relying upon our Eloquence,
Prattle and leasting^ which we may learn in the consideration of vilde
Beasts: for the Weasels are of a filthy complexion: as also Rats, and such like
Creatures, which he has forbidden us to handle or touch. For Rats they make
all things foul, infectious, and hurtfull^ and are not only pernicious to
eat, but wholly unprofitable to man in all things. And Weasels are a kind of
vermin which are yet more foul, more infectious, and the most filthy and
unclean of all those we can speak of. For they conceive by the ears and bring
forth their little ones by the throat, which is a thing abominable in Men,
when they hear any thing, receiving by the hearing any accursed folly, to
utter and augment the same by their tongue and report, and to exagerate the
same by words odious and bitter. Whereof there comes many times cause of great
inconvenience, and that which of it self is foul and filthy, they fill and
multiply with more great wickedness, and deprauation; by all the means they
may.

Wherefore your King as we have heard say, instly makes the race of such men to
be punished with Death. I think (said I then) that by such Calumniators, ^alse
reporters, or Spies. Some Copies call them Emphanists.
you mean the Emphanists?^ for the King punishes those without cease or
mercy, by Process, by Torments and sufferings, even to infamous death. They are
the same (said Eleazer) for their idleness and negligence brings nothing to
Men but perdition and most dangerous ruin and destruction.

And likewise our Law commands to do no wrong or damage to any person either
by deed or word. See then how I aduertize you in brief, and show you that all
our actions by the Law, are addressed to Justice and Equity: and that our holy
Scriptures aduoucheth not any thing that is evil beseeming, nor to be done
impertinently and with choler: But we are commanded that in all our lives we
bear our selves toward all persons, both in all our operations, and
negotiations justly and graciously, never putting out of our memories GOD the
great Dominator.

Now to whom could it seem otherwise, but that Eleazer had well and
pertinently spoken of those beastly Vermin, Reptiles, and such filth, and of
other Creatures also; showing thereby very properly, that all the Letter of the
Law tended to no other end then to justice, and to form and well address the
manners and wills of Men.

Further, he declared concerning the oblations of Calves;^ of Sheep, and of
Goares, making thereof a fair discourse: showing that it was their custom to
choose such Beasts from the Folds, and from Herds of household and tame breed,
to make with them their Offerings to GOD: never offering Sacrifice with wild or
harmfull beasts: because those which made such oblations, and them offered,
should not conceive any height of heart, or be puffed up with pride of mind;
but instructed by the gentle and sufferable nature of the Victimes, and that
they should make their profit from such examples, to become humble and gentle,
and to always have in their sacrificing their spirits stretched to GOD the
Creator of all things.

Hithe^to Philocrates, I have framed unto you by Writing these memorable
things, considering the desire you have to learn and to know: the which I have
done, to the end that by this little you may understand the Majesty of the Law,
the Causes and natural considerations that in it are contained, and now I will
come again from what we are digressed.

Return of the Ambassadors into Alexandria, with the Doctors of the ^ewes; and
how the King adored the Holy LAW seven times with tears in his eyes.
ELEAZER then after the Sacrifices were accomplished, as was usual: H^uing
chosen the Person^ as is before specified, to send unto the King; he sent him
also many fair* Presents, which indeed were very Magnificent. When therefore
we had taken le^ue, and parted from him very amiable, with his salutation* of
Peace, and were returned into Alexandria, our arrival was incontinently showed
to the King. And soon after Andrea and my Self entered into the King^ Hall;
we making most humble Reverence, and presented to his Mai^sty the Letters of
Eleazer. Then the King as very joyous that the success of this Voyage had
succeeded so well to him, having obtained the personages ^e so much wished for,
made the troop of those were there about their petitions and suites, to
avoid; and commanded that the Doctors Jews should be incontinently called,
sooner then they expected so to be: For the custom of the Country is, that
when any Ambassadors arrive for any business they are sent about; it is not
permitted that they be presented to the King, if they are not Ambassadors from
Kings, or or of Signiories and excellent Commonweals, without great
difficulty to have Audience, until thirty days after their Arrival, and
sometime longer; according as the King shall have respect to the d^gnity and
gr^atnesse of those which sent them.

But the King ^a^^ng made auoydance of those he esteemed not necessary to this
Entertayment; remained in the Hall, there walking until the Doctors were
presented unto him to do him their Reverence.

Who being introduced did their duties in delivering the Presents sent to the
King from ELEAZER.^ Likewise they Presented him with diverse skins of Parchment,
exceeding fine, smooth, and delicate, bound to one so the other, by a binding
that was fare^ and excellent.

In these Skins was the DIVINE LAW of MOSES in Letters of The delivery of the
H^ly LAW or Sacred Books of MOSES, in Hebrew characters to King PTOLOMY.
Gold, and in the HEBREW Language; a thing truly admirable to look upon.

As they presented them to the King sitting in his Estate: The King presently
turned toward them, regarding them All, the one after the other; and then
demanded of them the Books of the LAW: Then they displayed the Roules
involued in these skins of Parchment or Vellame afore-sayd. Which the King
seriously beholding, remained as one ^auish'd a pretty space. Then after adored
the HOLY LAW by seven times, saying these Words: We give you thanks, my
Masters, and much more him that has sent them hither, and the High GOD above
all, of whom these are the Sacred Words.

Then the said Doctors, and all those who were assistant with the King, showed
great tokens of joy, with plaudities; and there fell tears of Joy from the
Kings eyes; as we see many times, that excessive contentments will draw tears
from the Eyes, especially in excellencies that are of spiritual condition and
inclination.

Then the King commanded* that the Skins and Books of the LAW should be
returned into their place^ Which done* he saluted them saying* Reason will,
grave Sirs, that first I do you Honor and Reverence, because I have made you
to come hither, of which I give you my hand, to the end, I assure you, that
this very day shall be to me the Day, that all the days of my life I will hold
great and memorable, and shall be Celebrated every year with feasting; because
you not only come to see me; but in like sort it happened, I obtained a Sea Fight
against Antigonus. Wherefore we will, that this very day you rejoice your
selves in Feasting with us.

Incontinently he commanded the Princes should be invited: Amongst whom he did
me the Honor to make me sit. Moreover, he caused to be put forth in full show,
all the rich mooueables, wherewith the Palace Roya^l was, in great Feasts used
to be decked:^ In like sort, he commanded,^ they should make ready Lodgings
very near to the Castle, in the most sumptuous^ manner they could: And in like
sort the King ordained, that the Feasts should be readied in most Opulent and
Magnificent manner, could be possible. And then the King commanded Ni^anor his
Chief Physician to bid Dorothea Controuler of the House, (as from the Will and
Command of his Majesty,) that he should, and that with all diligence, deliver
all things necessary for every one of the Doctors, as well for their use, as
for the adornment of their Lodgings, and that without failing, as from the
ordinance and command of the King, which incontinently was accomplished with
great celerity by many hands: As we see is conformable in great Cities, when
they prepare to make great Feasts and public Banqueting, when there is chosen
Co^missaries which are ordained to furnish every one of that is in his charge
and office: The establishments of the King who assisted in care, even himself,
and his people in Truth, were Nature of good Officers and Subjects.
not troublesome people, grumlers at their pains taking, or unwilling to their
Commanders; for they furnished with all freeness and Ioyfulnesse and with
Honor, all they saw requisite and necessary, executing the commands of the
King with pleasant and joyful countenances; so was the King fully served, and
freely Obayed in this, and diverse other Respects.

For Dorothea was very liberal and Magnificent; and very careful in his
charge and Office, which was chiefly to have in regard the Furnish for these
grave and Reverent persons, not using things formerly adopted to such uses, but
choice and fresh stuffes, sparing nothing was in his power.

He assigned to every one of them his Couch of Ease, besides his Bed, with
fair Ornaments, as the King had Commanded. Moreover, the King would that the
half of them should be so placed and seated at the Table, that they might be
face to face against him, and the others here and there from his Seat Royal;
Forgetting nothing might any ways do them honor, or might serve and
accommodate their very thoughts.

After the seats of the Table were well and magnificently placed and prepared
for every one; the Kings command to Dorotheae was, that all those that came
from Iudeae, should have Victuals distributed, and such as they desired,
according to the fashion of their Country, and ordinance of their Law;
Nevertheless, that they should be furnished therein abundantly; as also for
their Oblations, Vows, and Sacrifices, according to the custom of their
Nation.

After all these Ceremonies, the King prayed one of them, named Eleazer, the
most aged of all those came with us, to make the Prayers. Who as he was very
Venerable, being then risen from his Seat, began in this manner.

GOD Almighty fill thee, O King, with all goodness, and give grace to thy
Wife, and to thy Children, and that thy plenty may be Perman^n^, without
alteration or change, all the course of thy Life and theirs.

Hardly had he ended this Prayer; but there rose a brute and exclamation of
joy, with a pleasant murmur and plaudite, that lasted a pretty while.

Thus all things being disposed and prepared to jouisance, all the Company
betook themselves to make great cheer, and those who attended upon the
Table, were very ready and dilligent to their Offices, as the Controler had
ordained them: Amongst those who served at the Table, were the Children of the
King, Custom of agypt was so.
and all the most greatest Peers and Lords.

Answers of the Doctor Jews to the Questions, propounded by King PTOLOMEVS
PHILADELPHVS.
WHen the time came, and occasion presented it self for Discourse, the King by
certain pauses, began to ask them by order, and as they were placed at the
Table; according to the age of every one: to him therefore that was set most
highest, he made to him this Question.

How he should maintain his Kingdom whole and safe unto the end?
AFter the Doctor had a little studied, he answered, you shall great King
dispose the estate of your Kingdom very well and wisely, if in all, and by
all, you give your self to be an Imitator of the sweetness and Debonarity of
GOD: using Patience and Sufferance, raising to Honor those which are Worthy,
and bringing the high and ambitious proud spirits to repentance and knowledge
of themselves, by showing them Humanity, Affability, and fairness of access.
To the other.

How he might bring all things to good end justly?
IF in all things (answered he great King) you have your eyes and thoughts bent
upon your actions, taking heed to your self: you shall do nothing which shall
not be well done; and if you consider that the Sense and Reason proceeds from
God, of whom we ought always to have the fear before our eyes, and before
all our operations, for that is the means never to go astray. To the other.

How he should have friends agreeable to himself?
IF they know (Great King) that you think not of any other thing then that is
good and profitable; and for the vtility of the People: and that you do so,
considering that the wealth that GOD gives to humane kind: he giving according
to the want of the Body, sustinance, to sustain the life, health of body, and
other goodness. To the other.

How he should purchase good rep^tatation in expedition of affairs both in
doing Justice, and punishing offenders?
IF you show your self reasonable and equitable to the right of every one, and
if you execute nothing against Malefactors from your absolute power and by
affection, you may get knowledge; if you take into your remembrance the
providence and disposition of GOD, which grants the requests and wishes of
those are worthy: and to the Malefactors and vicious, he shows that to them is
hurtful, either by work and expense; or by terrors and dreams; also he
chastises not the sins of men according as they have deserved, n^r according
to his great power, but seeks their amendment sweetly using all gentle
means. To the other.

What he should do to be invincible in War?
IF you put not your trust in the force of Arms, or in your Puissance, but
that you call upon GOD incessantly for his aid, to that is your Just
business, and he will adresse and conduct you with Counsel and designs. To
the other.

By what means he may make himself terrible to his Enemies?
IF you be provided of good Arms, and of a strong Army, and of all furniture
of warlike Engines; nevertheless that you take heed that for a time all this
your preparation be as it were thrown behind you, and neglected, as if you
esteemed it not; for before GOD disbands the Terror of his power, he gives a
certain truce, and then he comes withal his provision to put the
understanding of men in amazement, f^are and dread. To the other.

What thing may be to him most profitable and best in this life?
THat is Great King, to have in perfect Knowledge that God is the Dominator
Sovereign of all men: for we have not the power of our selves to address our
Counsels to all worthy works; but it is GOD that rules over all things, that
leads and conducteth to perfection the Actions of all humane affairs. To the
other.

By what means he might save his goods without loss of any thing, and so to
leave them in the same estate unto his Children?
IF incessantly you pray to GOD, (great King) that he will give you good
advice, and good understanding in that you are continually Negotiating; and
that you command your Children that they boast not themselves, or grow proud
either in Riches or Honor, but that they acknowledge and persuade themselves
that GOD has enlarged all that they have, and enjoy by his free benignity and
liberality; and that for their part, they possess nothing which proceeds
from themselves. To the other.

By what means He might bear patiently good and evil Fortune.
IF you consider in your self (great King) that all humane people are Created
of GOD, under this Condition, to be afflicted with great misfortunes in the
beginning, and then after to come again into prosperity, and to have well and
ill alternatiuely. For there is no man in this World that is not subject to
such alteration, or that can avoid it. But it is requisite he pray unto GOD
that he will be pleased out of his free goodness to reduce all your Estate
into Tranquillity.

The King then approouing this reason, said, that they all had well and
pertinently answered. But after (said he) I have asked one demand yet behind,
I will leave questioning, because we may return to our rejoicing, passing the
rest of this day in merriment; and six days hence we will Learn that for
the present we intermit. And so he put forth this Question, to the other.

What is the end of Magnanimity.
IT is to be content, when there happens perilous accidents, after one has
provided by good Counsel to come to the end of his affairs: For GOD gives
good success to Negotiations, that are conducted by good and profitable
Counsel.

To this answer, was made acclamations and applauses of praise, by all the
Assistants. And the King turning himself toward the Philosophers which were
there, in good number.

I am (said he) of opinion, that these Men are excellently ornified in
Virtue, and that they have great experience in all thing, being they have so
promptly and pertinently, at the suddayne answered to such high Questions,
still founding their speeches always in GOD.

Then a Philosopher named Menedemus Eretriensis answered the King in this
manner: Truly Sir, considering that man is a Divine work, which one may know
by the Fabric of the whole World; it is a thing well-beseeming and reasonably
fitting, that we begin with GOD; and found in him all the efficacy and elegancy
of our Discourse. The King approouing his speech, all the Company betook them
to make cheer and to jouisance; and so the Feast lasted till Night, in great
pleasance and recreation.

Upon the morrow, the Tables were disposed in the same order, and the Banquet
continued. And when the occasion came to make interrogations as pretented. The
King began to address his Countenance to those were in the rank of answering
next to those were in the former day questioned, beginning at the eleauenth,
after the ten precedent.

What is the means to well Rule or Govern a Kingdom?
THat is first to well rule ones self, and not suffer himself to be
transported with pride and ouer-weaning, through the affluence of much having,
and Worldly honors; and not to desire any cruel thing, or against due, by a
lofty fierceness. Which if you consider of well (great King) and ponder well
in your mind, esteeming all things as they justly are. You shall reckon all
that you possess, as it were nothing: Think also that GOD is full of all
goodness, and has no need of any thing; which cogitation you ought to fix
in your mind and Spirit, as firmly as the humane spirit can contain; and not
too couetously wish the ouer-flowing abundance of Worldly greatness and
riches, to think thereby the better to R^i^ne. To the other.

How he ought to choose the best things?
IF you have always regard to that is just and equitable; and if you censure
things unjustly and wicked to be put privation of Life; for GOD has ordained
great and abundant goodness to just men. To the other.

How I may avoid the unrest, that many times comes to us by dreaming.
YOu ask me, Great King, a most diff^c^lt Quest^on, for one can give no order
to things that trouble the Understanding by troublesome Dreams. For we are
sometimes led by our sensuality fore coming, from either which has been, or
from the objects presenting themselves to our view. Whereby we many times
think dreaming, we are sailing upon the Sea, or we are passing over Rivers,
sometimes we are in earnest business, then that we fly with Wings, moving
from place to place, and such like things that are even ridiculous to waking
trueths. Moreover, things to which we have great Appetite and desire, troubles
our Fantasies by dreams.

Wherefore (great King) I am of opinion that with all your power, and that all
you say and do, let still all your intention be addressed to Piety and
Holiness; to the end that perseuering in that manner, you shall be environed
and fortified on all parts with Virtue, and shall show your self inviolable
against all Voluptibilities. And on the other part, that you take not by force
from another, that to him justly belongs; because the things of which we most
entreat and most ^usie our selves in waking, commonly appear fantastically
unto us again in our dreams, led into our fantasies by our affections we had
to them: but when you conduce all your affections, operations and affairs to
the Butt and White of Virtue and to honest ends, then sleeping and wakeing you
shall be at rest. To the other.

By what means he should do nothing indecently?
IF in all things you consider that which appertains to your Estate, and that
which is in your power: to the end there escapes not from you any unworthy
thing or unfitting to your high degree, neither in deed or word: Also you must
consider, that all your Subjects still speak of you, judging all your acts,
and censuring your courses. Further, consider
how you are exposed to flatterers, that deui^e upon your very thoughts by the
diversity of your carriage and countenance, by which they will be shaping out
their own ends: but in this great King, you should know well how to direct
your self: not subiecting your self to any person that may charm you with
his Siren flattery, or disguise the truth by dissimulation; for God has
endowed you with great Ciuility in your behavior accompanied with gravity and
readiness.

The King then^ applauded the auswere with great joy, and gave leave to all the
Company to go to their rest: yet preparing them all to their meeting at the
Feast the day following which was ordered as the former; they being met and as
before the time presenting it self for discourse: the King made this Question
to the first of those that yet had not spoken.

What is the most difficult thing to a King?
THat is, to command himself, and not to suffer himself to be gained with
Appetites and evil affections. For all Humanes have a certain natural
inclination whereto they many times aptly suffer themselves to be led, as
their concupiscences will guide them, some to Banquets and drunkenness, other
to pastimes and voluptuousness, where the greatest part of the Multitude
suffer themselves to tumble: But King, that should have their thoughts more
high, for they are solicited by the greatness of glory and honors to settle
their actions to conquests, and to subject under their obeisance Peoples and
Nations. Nevertheless this is greatly prayseable to hold a measure in all
things, and to conserve carefully that which GOD has and shall give you, and
not so much as to wish for that which is out of reason, or unworthy of the high
glory of your place. To the other.

What is the means to carry no envy to any person?
IF before all things you consider in your self and memory, that riches,
honors, and greatness are gifts of GOD to Kings, of whom no person has true
right to command. Wherefore if any would make himself participant of this
glorious praerogatiue, he will never obtain his end, for it is a gift of GOD.
To the other.

What is that he ought to do to meprize his enemies?
IF you become gracious and favorable toward all persons exercisi^g Liberality
without respect of Amity to any body. Likewise in that you receive from others
not to show your self unthankful to the services and good-turnes you have
received from them, for that is a sign of the grace of GOD. To the other.

How he might continue in Glory and Honor?
IF you be toward others and abone all excellent in Liberality, and
magnificient in good deeds, accompaning the same with a good grace, never will
glory and honor abandon you: and it behooves you still to pray to GOD that
such virtues may perpetually assist you. To the other.

To what Persons he should do honor?
THey esteem commonly (Great King) that we ought to do honor to those that
we especially love: but for my part I am of opinion, that one ought to do all
the honor that one can to the envious, and to be toward them gracious and
beneficial with all our power: to the end that by such means they may be
induced and drawn to do that which is good, beneficial, and profitable; i^
which we must implore the aid of GOD, who in inspireth the understanding: to
the end that he may accomplish in us this perfection. To the other.

What persons he ought to gratify?
FAther and Mother (Great King) before all persons. For GOD has established a
great Commandment to the duty we owe to our Father and Mother: giving therein
but a second place to friends, the which he has named semblable in spirit.
Further I esteem it (Great King) no small happiness that you provoke all the
world to love you. To the other.

What thing is more worthy then Beauty?
THat is Piety, for she her self is excellent Beauty above all the others, and
her puissance consists in Charity the which is a gift of GOD, which you have,
and with her you shall possess all good and all virtues. To the other.

By what means one may recover greatness and glory lost?
BEing (Great King) that if you be full of Clemency, Debonarity, and gracious
to all the world, (which are things drawing and attracting the love of the
people,) it is hard if you loose your greatness. O^ the other part great
preparations for Arms promises a great assurance, but those who fall into
such accidents, it is needful then they abstain from the things that made
them fall into such inconvenience: and thence forward they acquire friends, by
giving themselves to exercising equity, and bearing themselves justly: for good
works are gifts of GOD. To the other.

How he should live without sorrow?
IF you offend no body, and that you aid every one, doing Justice to all the
world. For from so doing one gathers such pleasant fruits as they shall live
always pleasantly. Nevertheless we ought to crave of GOD that the accidents
which comes against our hope, bring us not damage, as death, sicknesses, and
such like inconveniences: the which can do you no damage, if that you be full
of Piety. To the other.

What is the thing of the World worthy of the most great Glory?
THat is, to serve GOD: not by Sacrifices, neither by oblations so much, but by
purity and sincerity of Spirit: and to conform himself to the will of a
simple and lively faith. Which if you do (Great King) you will imprint firmly
in your heart, that all you have done, and shall do hereafter, shall be
evident and discovered to all the World.

After these things the King with a high voice, saluted them all, attributing
to them great praise, and so did also the assistants: especially the
Philosophers which were there present: and not without cause, for these
Personages were excellent in deeds, and in words, putting always the
foundations of their Answers and Opinions in GOD. This done, the King began to
rejoice in this Feast and B^nquet merrily.

The day following, the Tables were covered in the same manner as before, aod
all the Lords aforesaid being set to the Table, the King taking his opportunity
of Devising, began to to interrogate those who followed the others in the
precedent day of answering; and made this Question.

I would know if Prudence may be taught?
PRudence is a certain decoration and ornament to the Soul, flowing from the
puissance Divine, having propriety to receive good things and to repulse the
contrary. To the other.

Which is the thing is most profitable to the health of the Soul?
THat is Prudence, which no person can acquire or obtain unless GOD prepares
his understanding to receive it. To the other.

By what means may one sufficiently and enough yield thanks to their Father
and Mother?
IF you give them no cause of grief in the world, although there is scarce any
person to be found which can so govern themselves, excepting GOD, Prince of
all light, do inluminate his understanding to all the actions of Virtue. To
the other.

How he might be made covetous to hear many things?
IF you consider (Great King) how much it is to you gainefull and profitable,
to know every thing Created: for by that means accommodating and comparing
that which you have understood to the quality of the times present, you shall
have the choice and election of that which to you shall be most agreeable and
conveniable, in which you ought always to pray unto GOD, that he will be your
succourer; for from him proceeds all the accomplishment of good works. To the
other.

What he shoul'd do, not to transgress the Laws?
IF you know that GOD has inspired the understanding of those who has
established the Laws, for the government and address of the life of us
humanes: you shall well follow the Laws. To the other.

What profit may arise to him by Parentage?
GReat King, if we will weigh the accidents which happen, we shall find, that
when our Parents fall into any adversity, that we receive our part thereof,
and are oppressed and also grieved with the greatness of their sorrow. And if
there come also any prosperity and happy fortune we are glad, find content,
and pleasure, in which we rejoice. And in verity, if the Parents are so well
advised that they can transpose and so entreat their affairs amiably
together, and that all things between them be so well linked together by
astriction of firm Amity: one need not desire a life more happy, and from the
same there remains no other or further blessing but only to pray unto GOD
that he will give prosperity unto all things. To the other.

How he might be free from all fear?
IF your conscience be free from all knowings of former evil dealings, putting
always GOD before your eyes, for your guide and address of all your counsels
to happy and good issue. To the other.

How he should be readily provided with right Reason and Sense at all* times?
IF you seriously bethink you how ^to the importunate accidents of this humane
life all the world is exposed, putting often before your eyes the admirable
changes that GOD has sent to men. How some are advanced unto riches and
honors, others fettered with calamities and struck down into extreme
ignominy. To the other.

What means he should hold and follow, not to be vanquished by idleness, or
by voluptuousnes.
THe same to you (Great King) is eas^e that have the Regiment of a great
Kingdom; and by consequent, so the management of great affairs. So that by
doing according to your estate, it is impossible that you shall have the
leisure to settle seriously your fantasy upon other things, then to your
affairs, which will neither promit nor permit any repose. For it is convenient
therefore, you be always careful of your charge, and to pray unto GOD, that
^ee will give you the grace to omit nothing of that which concerns your
function. To the other.

By what signs he may know those that would deceive him?
IF you take heed in your self, what liberty every one uses in your behalf:
if he has always so
done, and if he continues the same fashion still, so to court you according
to his will: Or if he holds the same means in giving you Counsel as a
custom, and if his conversation and manner of life is the same as before: And
if he has forgot nothing of that which love and observance that he owes you
does require^ Briefly, if his affections and other fashions of doing are
changed. GOD instruct your understanding to foresee the surplus.

Then the King gave praise to all, naming every one by his name, wherewith all
the assistants rejoiced. The next day when the King espied his o^portunity in
the Feast, he began to Question the others in this same manner.

What is the most greatest negligence of the World.
THat is not to hold an account of his Children; and not to take care for their
instruction, to institute them in Virtue and good manners and behavior. For
pray we not ordinarily to GOD and not for our selves, but also desire him that
it will please him to address our Children in all goodness, and to impart to
them Doctrine, and Wisdom; the which proceeds from the grace of GOD also. To
the other.

How he should come to be a lover of his Country?
IF you persuade your self, that it is a happy thing to live and dye in your
House, and that peregrinations brings nothing but folly to the poor, and
dishonor to the Rich; for most people are of opinion that they have been
chased out of their Countries for some misdeed, debt, or forfeit. But to you
(great King) you shall have easily that which you demand in doing well, (as
you do) to all the World, for GOD will give you a good share in all your good
affairs and actions. To the other.

What one ought to do, to live agreeingly with his Wife.
ALthough that some race of Women are deficile and troublesome, and that
opinion of themselves grow obstinate in their affections: Moreover frail, by
reason of the imbecility of the Sex, and subject to commit some faults; yet
nevertheless it behooves to temporize with them, and to use them for our
health and commodity, contesting not with them, nor contradicting them with the
Spirit of frowardness; for it is necessary to address ones life to a certain
Butt or End, as the Governors and Pylots of Ships do by observing
Land-markes, all which things are conducted by the order and Providence of our
great GOD. To the other.

What means he should, not to be deceived?
IF you do all things by reason, you will not suffer your self to be persuaded
by the reports of detractors; but (as you are endowed with a very good spirit)
put a difference betwixt the deeds and sayings of every one: By the means
whereof you shall, so doing, that you shall be out of the danger of being
circumuented, accomplishing your desires in your designs: the which you shall
project by assured judgment; nevertheless you must resolve and think that
the intelligence of such business, and the effect and execution of them, is
the work of the Divine puissance. To the other.

What he should do, not to be Choleric at all.
GReat King, if you consider that He of whom Depends the Life of many, is
the cause of the Death of abundance of folks; when he executes his Will with
fury and choler, and it is a thing accursed to extinguish the life of many by
ambition of domination^: But when the subjects conform themselves to the will
of the Prince, humbly yielding and obaying: What reason has he then to vex
himself, and to enter into Choler? Moreover he must think that GOD who
guides and Governs the Universal world, is not any way subject unto Wrath,
nor heated with Choler; of whom a Prince ought to follow the benign and
sweet goodness. To the other.

What thing is that which may well be foreseen by good Counsel?
THat is to Administer well all things, by the Rule and Discourse of Reason;
and to conduct them to a certain end and design pretended; and to reject all
that, which is Unprofitable, and contrary to right and reason; in such manner
that discovering the Spirit by every thing, we come to the head of our
affairs, by good Counsel: But GOD by his Virtue makes all counsel assured
and firm; and yours principally, because you are given to the exercise of
Piety. To the other.

What is it to Philosophize?
THat is Well and Wisely to argue and consult of all things, which present
themselves and come upon one; and not to suffer ones self to ^lide along in
his Appetites; to des^se all follies and vanities proceeding from Covetousness
and Lusts; and to be always ready to the accomplishment of good Works, by
good and just measure, which to attain unto, we ought to implore the aid of
GOD incessantly. To the other.

What is the Sovereign grace of Hospitality?
IT is to show one^ self not to be ingratfull, but mensurable and equitable
to all the World, redoubling with bounty the pleasure you have received from
another; in such sort as you may bear the prize of Courtesy. For GOD exalts
the humble greatly, bearing great favor and love to those abate themselves to
exalt and show Virtue to others. To the other.

What are the works of most Durability?
A Person is esteemed to do a du(...) Work, when he has brought to pass a
weighty business and worthy of Reverence; and when it is such as the Beholders
durst not put their hands to it, for the difficulty and excellency of the
business; and that he nevertheless suffers not any body that has traveled
therein to be vnrecompensed. Likewise forgetting not to provide for those that
he has constrained to busy themselves therein of all things to them
necessary. For GOD regarding all things in this world gratifieth men with
Infinity of gifts, enlarging to some health of Body, and of Understanding, and
many such goods. Wherefore (Great King) you in the imitation of GOD ought to
give comfort to the afflicted: and to change their calamities into solace and
rest, being assured that what is done by justice and equity, is of longest
lasting, even perpetual. To the other.

What is the fruit of Wisdom?
THe fruit of Wisdom is, when we have committed nothing whereof our
conscience does not remember us knowingly; and when we have passed the course
of our lives in ^^rity. For of such things (Excel^ent King) there is engendered
in our spirits a very great contentment, and an infinite joy, with a pleasant
voluptabitity. For you (Great King) you can never want hope in GOD, conducting
your Reign* in Piety and Religion. These Answers heard all the assistants,
made signs of great Iouisance with an applauding approbation. Then the King
provoked them graciously to drink. The morrow when all the company returned to
the Table, the King asked the others in this manner.

What means he should hold, never to be lifted up with Pride?
YOu shall never be blown up or lifted with Pride, if you keep equally in
your self, that is to say, if in all things you have this Maxi^e imprinted in
your spirit; that you which have commandment upon Men, consider you are a Man
also^: thinking also with your self that God extermineth the proud and high
minded, and that he lifts up those who (...)

What Counselors he ought to have near his Person?
THose shall be your Counselors (Great King) which have beene^ long
exercised and versed in your affairs, and such as you know bear you great
fidelity and love; and those which know to conform and accommedate themselves
to your conditions: the light of GOD will discover those which are worthy of
such a function. To the other.

What is the thing is most necessary to a King?
THe love of his Subjects; for by that means he will make a bond of
indissoluable good will^ To the rest, GOD accomplisheth that which one chooses
for the best. To the other.

What is the end of a Speech or Oration, in one pleading.
IT is, after he has proposed your intention, persuading your cause to be
good, confuting the Objections of your adverse party, and showing them to be
inept, worthless and
impertinent: But the main end is to march rightly in the business in all
affairs, and not to stray with ambages; for the true persuasion is a thing
addressed from GOD. To the other.

How he should accommodate himself to diverse People in one Kingdom.
DOing and administering Justice to every one equally; and by the same you shall
Govern and Rule them as you list: for the rest, GOD inspireth men with power
to discern the right of Kings. To the other.

In what things are we constrained to be sorrowful?
IN the Calamities and Adversities of our friends, and most when we see that
such calamities are of long indurance, and inevitable; and when they are
therewith so attached, as to make them dye: For in such griefs there is no
means how we can take off our sorrow, (and there were) there is no possible
hope of remedy, nor any profitable to be found against such accidents; with
which all humane kind so are grieved. For to avoid wholly all mischances, is a
business rather for a DIVINE power, then a Mortal. To the other.

In what thing a man depriues himself of Glory and Honor.
When a man becomes intractable and inaccessible, by fierceness and pride:
for then vituperation comes upon him, and privation of honor follows him: for
GOD, who is the Dominator of Glory, gives and takes it away, as seems good to
him. To the other.

What kind of men he ought most to trust.
TO those who bear you such love, that neither Fear, nor Avarice, nor
Ambition, nor Covetousness,
nor hope of Lucre, cannot at all have any power to divert them. Nevertheless,
the index of this Love is not easily to be discerned; and in the same, it is
needful to have Observation by long space of time, for those which being near
to a King, aspires to make themselves rich, and spares no means to pluck by
his favor, great hauings, and are naturally traytor^. But GOD conduct (Great
King) your Council, that they may sufficiently show you, who are those, that
perfitly love you. To the other.

What is that which conserueth a Kingdom.
THat is, that the King take dilligent care, and give order, that those who are
in Office, and have charge, commit no undue things against the profit of the
people: The which you know very well to do, for (as it seems) GOD has given
you a spirit very excellent. To the other.

By what means he might keep Grace and Honor?
BY Virtue: For she is the accomplishment of all fair Works, and trips up the
feet of Vice, as you (it appears) know very well how to do, by your
excellent Bounty toward all persons: Which in you is a sign of the gift of
GOD. To the there.

How in Time of War he might keep himself still in Tranquillity of Spirit?
IF you propose in your understanding, to give order that your Lieutenants and
Captains commit nothing that is Evil; but that they contend by Virtue one
with another, for the prooffe of their virtue, and further that they have in
you a perfect confidence, that you will have their Domesticke affairs in a
singular recommendation, if it happen that they loose their Lives for, and in
your Service. By this means you shall have no Occasion to grieve you self
disposing all prudently by DIVINE Clemency, which will inspire you to
understand all that is good.

King PTOLOMIE receiving this Answer with great Congratulation and Joy, with a
cheerful Countenance, entreated them all to Drink, showing extreme
contentment.

The seventh Day, the Feast was prepared more great and more sumptuous then it
had hitherto been; because that many Ambassadors from Citti^s were hither
Arrived. Then all being set in their Order: the King f^nding occasion to
devise, asked the first of those that had not yet savde their advise in this
same manner.

How he might be resolved thoroughly by reason, and by Arguments?
IF you Weigh well the p^opositions which you shall hold, and the persons which
speak, and the Subject whereof they Treat: and that you often inform your
self, and that in diverse manners, and by long interualls of time, of the
estate of the aboue-sayd Affairs: For the Bounty of the Spirit, is an
illustrate gift of GOD, by the which one may easily know and discern all
things. To the other.

Wherefore is it that many cannot Approach unto Virtue?
BEcause Nature has Created all Humanes, subject to incontinence, and prompt
to voluptuousness; from whence injustice and inequity is engendered, and
Auariciousnesse grows a gathere. But the estate of Virtue which is fastened to a
sublimed place, casts far away those that by their Voluptuousness, are from
her most distanced^ For she commands before all things, that Justice and
Magnanimity shall be Observed, the which GOD gives, and is thereof the chief. To
the other.

What is that which Kings ought to follow, above all things.
THat is the Laws: To the end that they ruling the lives of Subjects by just
and equitable Acts (as we have heard you do,) Great King you shall gain by
this means immortal memory, in following the p^e^epts and Commaundments of
GOD. To the other.

Who are those that one ought to elect for Offices and Magistracies?
THey are those that have in hatred things unjust, and that are imitators of
your affections: and that being drawn with the sweetness of praise, go
incessantly after good operations to come to glory and honor, to which
certainly, O Worthy King, still following Virtue you will attain: For GOD is
he that crowns with honor and glory, glorious Justice. To the other.

What persons ought one to choose for Captains?
THose who are the most excellent in Justice and Magnanimity, and that have
more respect to the lives of men then to a bloody Victory: For GOD is he from
whom Humanes receive infinite goodness, the which you shall follow in still
following the doing of so much goodness to your Subjects. To the other.

Who is the man worthy of admiration?
THat is he who is exuberant and abundant in glory and greatness, opulent in
Riches, and sublime in Puissance: and nevertheless yields himself just and
equitable to every one as we have heard, Great King, you do; and the same
shall make your self admirable to every one. For so GOD will engraue this
Solicitude in your heart. To the other.

What behooves that he exercise himself in, when he is at leisure, thereby
not to be drowned in Sloth?
IT is necessary to put into consideration, and that with great diligence the
discourse which presents it self to the understanding, touching the form
and image how to live: which one ought to have incessantly before the eyes.
Likewise to reduce into the memory, to what end, property, and virtue, were all
things ordained: because in the said discourse there is fair and honest
pastime conjoined with Science. For amongst little and vild things, one finds
many times something that one is well pleased to choose and take; for the rest
(Great King) it seems well to us GOD has so favored you with perfect bounty,
that you will still be e^ecting all virtuous behavior and elegance, by the
honor you bear to the study of Wisdom. To the other.

In what things ought Kings most to employ their time?
IN the knowledge of Histories, and in reading Books which entreat of
affairs that most often present themselves to him: in whom it is needful that
he employ much time. It be houeth moreover that he enquireth for those
Writings that teaches to conserve Kingdoms, and to correct the manners of
men: which to accomplish with such diligence as you do, GOD will give
prosperity to your designs, in which he will grant you an excellent glory
far above other Kings. To the other.

What Persons ought one to inuit to Banquets?
ONe ought to call those which are covetous ^o learn, and those who often
think how the affairs of a Kingdom ought to pass, and that know how to
recount the lives of Princes: for there is nothing more pleasant, nor more
delectable then such Company. For they are those that are well instituted and
instructed in the beauty of Know ledge, and have GOD in high reuerer^ce. The
which thing it seems you do accomplish well (Great King) as one may perceive,
by that wherein GOD has sent you prosperity and happiness in all your
affairs. To the other.

Which is most profitable for the People, either to choose over them a King
from a private person, or to obey a King that was Son to a King?
THe most profitable to the People is that which is most according with Nature:
For although that some Kings Sons be sometimes rude to the People,
nevertheless those which from private persons come to be lifted into such
Sublimity and Greatness, because they have experienced Poverty, and endured
calamities and laborious travails of private persons, they are more curell
then bloody Tyrants, and command their Subjects by force and intolerable
violence. Wherefore the Ordinance received and accustomed, and the common
fashion of doing, is much more sure and much better for Regiment, that it come
from the King by succession, from Father to Son as it is with you (Worthy and
Great King:) for your Greatness and Excellency consists not so much in
honors, glory, and great Domination, as in Clemency and Benignity. The which
by (a gift from God) draws and attracteth the hearts of all persons to love
you. The King accepted this Answer with praise, and turned himself toward the
last saying.

What is most profitable to a Kingdom?
THat is, to hold and contain the People in peace; and to give order that
Suites and Processes of Law should be incontinently and without delay adjudged
definitiuely for such things are executed when the Prince hates the wicked,
and shows favor and love to good and honest men, and such as be virtuous;
and that he esteems it a great thing to have saved the Life of one of his
Subjects: as we have been informed, you do (Great King) that have in horror
Murderers, disposing and tempering all by Justice: In which you adorn to
eternity the greatness of your deeds, God having inspired you with a Soul
delivered from all fowlnesse of Vice, and illustrated the same with great
Virtue.

AFter these Answers, there arose a great noise of Congratulations and
Applauses with an excessive joyful acclamation, and the whole Hall was full of
joyful rumor. The King then commanding silence, and taking his Cup, invited
them all to drink: then addressing his Speech to the said Doctors, pronounced
these words in the presence of all the Assistants. I repute this day (my
Masters) to be to me very happy by your presences, for your Answers have
brought to me a most great profit and instruction for the Gouer^ment of my
self and my Kingdom.

This purpose ended, he ordained that to every one of the Doctors should be
delivered 3. Talents of Silver, and by and by gave to every one of them a Page
to wait upon them at their Table. So with great contentment to every one the
Feast took end with great praise to the Kings Liberality, who above all
shewed^ a countenance of receiving the greatest satisfaction and most joyful
content.

I Have been hitherto Philocrates, thus prolixe in the recital of the
businesses, which I have done, for the admiration I have had of such men and of
their Wisdom: maruelling at the promptitude of their Answers, and so
pertinently answering to that which was proposed to them upon the sudden:
showing such Elegance in their Speech as if these Questions had been long time
in premedita^ion: and that he who had proposed them, had thought of them long
time before he demanded them: and yet their Answers were to him found so
accordant as if they had about them long before consulted together. Wherefore
it is no marvel that they seem admirable, not to me only, but to the
Philosophers also, that were there present in the Company, and to all them were
present, assuring you that such things are more harder to believe then one
would imagine, in which I will not wonder, if the faith of the Readers be
vanquished: For my part, what occasion have I to add dreams or falcities,
seeing that all which I have Written, is to be found in the Registers of the
King, where it is held the greatest crime of the World, to find falcenesse in
the least thing of the World.

I assure you then, that this Recitation is most veritable, containing the
Discourse of all the things as they have passed in verity, without mixture of
any error; for to this end that I might best know the truth, I have used this
diligence to take out the Registers public, where we may see recited the
Bankets and feasts, together with the interrogats also of the King; and the
Answers which were given him, and all even Word It was a Custom to Register
what was propounded and Answered in the Kings of Egypts presence.
for Word; from whence I have borrowed that I have here Written. For you know
it is the custom to Register and Inroule all that is done and said, every day
since the hour that the King began to give Audience, unto the time the King
went to bed; without omitting any thing that he did, or was said to his
Majesty: A thing and coursetruely, very profitable and well instituted: For-by^
that means the Acts inregistred, being read of the day preceedant, if the
King has said or done any thing that there is want either in his saying or
doing, there is occasion and means of amendment.

Therefore, after I had dilligently searched the day Book of the King, I have
Collected the same to you, here by Writing, as afore-sayd. Knowing the great
and good desire you have to know all worthy and extraordinary occurrences.

The means holden by the 72. Doctors, in their Interpreting, or Translating
the LAW.
THree days after these Feasts and Disputes, Demetrius conducted all these
Doctors toward the Sea into an I Will; and entering upon a Bank, passed a Bridge
which drew toward the North, where was the place designed for this Assembly,
and where they should make their Conference for their Interpretation of the
LAW.

It was a House of pleasant Situation, and in a Triumphant manner upon the
Banks of the Sea, very stately and minionly deoked and trimmed: where above
all commodities, there was great silence for the tranquillity of the Spirit,
and repose of the understanding. Moreover there was all things neoessary for
the Life, carefully provided and prepared with great conuenience and ease.

In this place Demetrius entreated them they would dispose themselves to the
Interpretation of the Law, in which they began to travel, disputing, and
conferring together of every thing: until they came all to one general accord
and consent, to resolve in a true sense advisedly. The which done, they set
down in Writing, that which was so by them composed and reduced into good
order, the most learnedly, and the most eloquently that they could by the
advice and counsel of all, they put it apart, that the same after might be
put into the hands of Demetrius.

Their Colloquiums and Conferences lasted from the Morning until nine of the
Clock, and so rising from these Disputes, they went to take Recreation and
Air for their health, after all things were sumptuously administered unto them.
For D^rothea, who had the same in charge was therein so careful, that there
was nothing made ready for the Kings Person, but every day they had as much of
the same to every single person, and he would once the day come to visit them
with courtship in his own proper Person, and they sometimes to salute with
reverence the King, and so return to priuacy.

Every Morning it was custom to make their prayers to GOD, after they had
washed their hands in the Sea, as the Jews accustomably use Lauations, so after
to their readings and interpretations.

I was so bold to ask them why they so washed their hands before they made
their prayers? to which dem^^nd they made this Answer: that this washing of
the hands did admonish them to do nothing wickedly, but to accomplish all
things of their actions to Piety, and Sanctity: because that all the works
they do with their hands might be effected according to justice, and truth,
and cleanenesse, as we have before-sayd.

To conclude, these Personage^ being in such Serenity of air, Beauty of
dwelling, Tranquillity of silence, and Pleasantness of repose, and Royal
entertainment, finished the work undertaken: and which is a note of marvel,
(they had so expressly taken order amongst themselves) and followed it with such
care and diligence, that the Interpretation of Law was fully finished in the
space of 72. days. Demetriu^ then seeing the Translation and Interpretation of
the Law was so well and happily brought to an end, made the means that the
multitude of the Jews then being in Egypt, were conuccated to the place where
the Work was then perfited: to whom he showed how all things had been done,
beginning with all circumstances of the Enterprise, and all in the presence of
the Interpreters. To the King all the Multitude attributed great praise, and
gave infinite thanks, for being the mediate cause of so important a good, and
a benefit of such excellency: L^^ewise they shared a part of the Honor to
Demetrius, int^earing him to show them that favor as to have a Copy for their
Princes, for to have their advice, and to deliberate upon the profit or damage
might arise upon the same.

In this sort was the Law reuiewed, visited, and re-knowne in the assistance of
the Princes of the Jews, and of the Multitude, and of the Ambassadors of
Towns, upon the which spoken and proclaimed (the 72. Doctors being present)
that all was well and holily Translated, and that all was most very well so:
provided that nothing thereof should be changed, and that all things should
remain in the same estate without alteration of the least thing, or title of
the world.

As the Translation was thus approved of all, and the Decree made for the
ratification of the same: Demetrius^ commanded that according to their custom;
they should make Imprecations and Maledictions against those which should
undertake or should presume to add any thing thereto, or to transfer it
otherwise by changing, efficacing ordering any thing whatsoever it were, unto
that which was so perfectly now written. And when all was perfected and
accomplished in this manner, he adjured the Jews to hold, keepe^ and preserve
it inviolably forever: the which they promised to do with great Joy and
Acclamation.

So Demetrius finding himself greatly satisfied, in himself; especially
because he had been a Conductor of the Work: and that he had given to the
King such contentment in the happy execution and accomplishment of his charge
and of this his felicity, made great congratulations to the King. Who having
after with great diligence visited this Interpretation, and considered the
profundity of the Sense of the Lawmaker, which he admired with an astonished
regard: he said to Demetrius, how comes it to pass that none of the Poets or
Historians has not put their hands to this Law, being that it is a thing of so
high and
perfect Excellency? To which Demetrius answered, that no body never durst
touch it, as well for the reverence of the same, as also that GOD has
forbidden it; so as some having presumed to attempt it, have been chastised
with Divine punishment. Whereupon they have been constrained to desiste from
their enterprise: For as testifies Theopompu^, which by a recital of himself
says, that presuming to transfer into his History some secrets of the Holy
Law, he was afflicted more then 30. days following with a perturbation of his
understanding: But calling upon GOD in the interuals and cessations of the most
vehement fitts of this his Malady, it was told him in his sleep, this
punishment was sent him from God for having presumed to profane and falcifie
things Sacred. So by this Vision he was corrected, repented and re-came to his
good senses again.

And said Demetrius, upon mine own knowledge, I affirm that Theodorus a
Tragicke^ Poet willing to usurp something from this Law therewith to enrich his
Poesy, lost his sight: Nevertheless aduising with himself, and concluding
that this his audaciousnesse was the cause of his blindness, prayed to God for
many days, whereby he came again to health.

The King saying that this was wisely spoken, adored the Law: making
Commandment that the Books of the same should be preserved the most curiously
and carefullest that might be possible: and devising with the Interpreters
benignely and graciously, prayed them that when they were in Judea they would
often come and see him.

Finally, he gave order that they should be honorably returned back^ and
conducted into their^ Country, promising them, that how often soever, and when
they pleased to return, he would entertain them as his principal friends: so
honoring them with fair presents according to their merits, and commanding
that all things should be made ready for the dispatch of their return, using
toward them all Royal Magnificence. He gave to every one of them three rich
Habilliments, and two Jalents of Gold, and an excellent Cup of the weight of a
Talent. Moreover, furniture for the whole furnish of a Chamber, over and above
he sent to Eleazer ten Table-beds or Couches of ease, which had the feet of
Silver, and ornified with all that was necessary to the full trim of them.

Further, he sent him a present of 30. Talents of Cilicia, that is to say, ten
Roabes, whereof the one was of Purple; and a fair Crown of a 100. Tunicks of
Crespe, of Viols, of Basins, and two Cups of Gold for the Sacrifices. After he
made entreaty to Eleazer, that when any of the said Doctors should desire
rather to return to him, then to remain in Jerusalem, that he would not
hinder him by any means, for he protested he made great esteem of wise men's
company; and that he would spare for nothing to draw them to him. In which he
should well employ his riches with Sovereign content profitably, and not in
vain things, as do some prodigal Princes.

Behold here, my Philocrates, the Present which I promised you; in which I
hope, you will take more pleasure, then in reading vain Fabulous Narrations,
being that you use to Whet and sharpen your understanding in the exercitation
of high deeds and gests: In which you have employed much time, which has
given me occasion now to Write you more worthy and excellent, and the best that
I could choose, because that betwixt us, I would kindle a kind contention, and
emulation of aymiable Virtue; for the desire to have and intelligence of things
more worthy to be observed, and which are the most excellent.

The end of ARISTEVS his History.
Proofs Concerning this HISTORY.
Follows diverse Opinions of diverse Authors* Ancient and Modern, concerning
this Business and Translation of the LAW of MOSES. And first an Extract from
the fourth Chapter of the fifth Part of the several Collections of Pietro
Messie, in which there fell (says he) an admirable and miraculous hap, viz.
How the 72. Interpreters being put severally into several Cells, by the
Commission of the King, without possible means to confer the one with the
other, and that after they had made so separated, every one his Traduction, and
being brought altogether before the King withal their Traductions; the which
nevertheless were found so conform^ that there was not one syllable more i^
the one, then in the other: Which could not be without the especial^ Grace and
Operation of the Holy Ghost: As says Saint Augustine^ Ireneus, and Tertullian,
who says he had seen in his Time, and in Alexandria, the very Books Written
by the hands of the 72. Translators who were in Hebrew and in Greek As much
also, says Justin the Philosopher, in the Book of his Aduertisements, that
he made to the Pagans and Gentiles: Where he says That King PTOLOMEVS, mad^
to be built without the City of Alexandria, 72. Halls, to lodge severally the
72. Traductors, and there provided very Honorably for them all of all that to
them was necessary: I^ the which place, the said Translators^ remained, without
seeing the on^ the other, until that such their Translations were perfectly
finished. And he affirms also, to have seen ther^ the Ruins and olde-Walls
of these buidings^, which were kept as Relickes and things Sacred.

And although Saint Hierome and Ruffinus agree not in the number of the said
Chambers, the matter is not great. Seeing that according to Saint Augustine,
and many other Authors, every Translator made his Translation a part, without
conference with the other, yet all the Traductions found conform.

And truly, how ever, when it is duly considered, it appears a great
Mystery, and may be held for a great Miracle this conformity of style and of
Order, to Translate a thing so ^ong and so diverse, although all the
Translators had been together, and that they had begun this Work at this time.

For we see that it is enough to accord two men in one only point, when they
are to mix some thing together.

After the Translation was finished, the Jews that remained in Egypt, and
which had been Versed in their LAW, recommended to the King, this Holy
Writing; wherewith the King was right well content. And for certain, according
to Josephus, and Eusebius; King PTOLOMIE was astonished at the Holy Scriptures,
and rauishingly taken with their Mysteries: That he demanded of Demetrius
Phalerius (who had the charge of his Library) saying how comes it that
Lyourgus, Solon, and other Law-giuers, are so silent of the Law of the Jews?

To whom Demetrius answered saying (Sir) this LAW as you may sufficiently see,
comes from GOD so that no Lawgiver durst be so hardy to touch it, or take from
it any Tract: For even Theopompus was stricken by the Divine Hand with
perturbation of his Sense, and with a Cardiacke passion, for having will to
mix the Holy History of the Hebrews, by his Enriching it with eloquent Words,
and Rhetorical^ colors.

But after returning to GOD, and commending himself to his mercy, it was
revealed to him in a Dream, that his Disaster came upon him for so attempting
to embellish, and (as he thought) to enrich the Sincerity of the Holy
Scriptures with dressed Words and trimmed Phrases, and to communicate it so to the
Pagan, and Infidels.

It comes also into my thought, how Theodorus a Tragic Poet suddenly lost his
sight, for having taken one only passage of Holy Writ for argument of his
Tragedy: but repenting him of the same, and doing penance for this forfeit,
he recovered his sight as before.

HItherto are the words of Pietr^ Messie, by the which we may see the
diversity of opinions that is amongst Authors, concerning this Translation of
the LAW of Moses. For my self, it seems to me that Aristeus which was
always present, and that had conduced the affair, in part meriteth that one
do him the Honor to give belief to his History although some Doctors therein
vary.

Thus the Ancient Fathers of the Church are divided in their Opinions
concerning the manner of this Translation. And that, three ways. Some are of
opinion that the Seventy Translators were parted into several Cells. Others,
that they were put two and two into a Cell. And others, that they all conuersed
and confered together to make up this Translation.

Of the first Opinion is Orati^ne exhorta^o, i^ ad Gent^s.
Justin Martyr: who reaches, that they were parted all into several Cells, and
that every one of them Translated the Scripture after the same manner, without
difference so much as of a word. And this Opinion of Justin Martyr has been
taken up since by Iren^i lib. 3. chapter 25
Iraeneus, Catc^h. 4
Cyrill, S^^oma^^m lib. 1
Clemens Alexandrinus, Apo^ogetici cap. 19.
Tertullian, and Homil. 7 in Math.
Chrysostom.

Of the second Opinion, is Li^ro de M^^^u^i^^t Pondelibus.
Epiphanius; who writes, that these Translators were put two and two into a
Cell, and that every Pair or Couple of them made the very same Translation
to^idem verbis: and that in all, there were just Six and thirty Copies of that
Translation.

Of the third Opinion is Praefat. in Pent.
St. Hierome: who believes that the Translators communed and conferred
together, to make the Work. Who for his Opinion, cites not only Josephus,
who in the twelfth Book of his Antiquities and second Chapter, speaking of
this Story, makes no mention of any such Division and Separation into several
Cells, but even this present Work of Aristeus, who in the one and twentieth
Chapter of this Book, speaks plainly, that they met and conferred every
day together, till the Ninth hour.

To reconcile these several Opinions, it is to be noted, that of all these
Fathers some only, as Justin Martyr, Iraenens, Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Epiphanius make express mention of the Cells: the Rest speak only of a
Miraculous Consent and Agreement of theirs about the same thing, as Tertullian,
Chrysostom, and Saint Augustine. For it is not necessary, that what those
Fathers spoke of the Miraculous Consent of the Translators, should be
understood of their separation into several Cells: For it is Miraculous enough
for so many men assembled together, in so short time to agree all in their
Opinions, without Disputes and Delays, which are ordinary in a Multitude where
there is such diversity of Judgments. So that the third Opinion is not only S.
Hieromes, but may be Tertullians, Chrisostomes, and Saint Augustines too; and
the most probable, and most received, questionless, it is of all the three.

For Justin Martyr, the first broacher of those Cells, it was not improbable for
the Jews to persuade him, those Ruins Apud Alexandriam vestigia Cellularum se
vidisse, narrat Justinius in Oratione exhortatoria ad Gentes.
which he saw, were the Cells wherein the Translators were enclosed: because in
Religious minds, the Devotion is commonly stronger then the Judgment. And for
Epiphanius, it is likely he took up that of the two and two to a Cell from
Report and Relation, and not from his own Reading: for none besides himself
ever made mention of such a business.

Nor is it worth obiecting, that At inquiu^t Epiphanius, Aristeus legit et
^itat. Bell. lib. ^. de verb^ Dei. chapter 6. Sess: At.
Epiphanius, that vtters this Opinion, cites this Aristeus our Author: whereby
some would conclude, that this Aristeus our Author has either been corrupted
since the time of Epiphanius, and that the mention of those Cells have been
expunged: Or, that before Epiphanius his time, the true Book of Aristeus was
never extant, but in it, it was, for if they pitch upon the first, and say,
that Aristeus Cum Aristeus. E^non multo post losephus nihil tute retulerint.
Hieron. in Prae^a^ in Pent.
was entire and whole in Epiphanius his time, but corrupted since, they are
refilled out of Josephus and Eusebius, that wrote before Epiphanius, that have
many things Verbatim out of Aristeus, but not a syllable of those Cells.

But I leave the business to the Judgment of the Reader, assuring that St.
Hierome esteemed Aristeus worthy of belief, for he has writ these words in
the Preface of the Pentateuck of Moses his Book, viz.

Et nescio quis primus Author Sept^uaginta Cellulas etc. i. d. I know^ not who
was the first that by his Dream has built in Alexandria 72. Cells, the which
were separate, and that they writ just the same sillables: for being that
nether Aristeus the great Esquire of Ptolomy, nor Josephus, that was long time
after, make any mention: but say the Interpreters were assembled together in a
Hall, and there conferred together, and Prophesied not: for it is one thing to
be a Prophet, and another to be an Interpreter: For in the one the spirit
fore-tels things to come, in the other the copious abundance of the tongue and
the Knowledge, translates that he understands: hitherto Saint Hierome.

But be this difference as it it will to please Miracle-louers; it greatly
matters not: for ceraine it is, that all Grave Testimonies and Authors which
have toueht herea^, say there was such a Ptolomeus Philadelphus, such a
Library: For as Philo the Jew says, Jesus the Son of Sirach, one inserted
into the Geneology of Christ, and Prince and Captain of the Children of Israel
in the time of P^olomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, came to Alexandria a City
of Egypt, where he gathered out of that flourishing Library his Book of
Ecclesiasticus, as Bees from diverse Flowers gather sweet Honey.

And Strabo says, speaking of the Beauty of the City Alexandria, that
Ptolomeus Philadelphus was so great a lover of Learning, that he erected a
Library containing 400000. Books; the Fame whereof being published through the
World, many people of diverse Nations resorted thither to see it.

And how Eleazer High priest of the Jews at the request of P^olomeus sent 72.
Interpreters to Transl^te the Bible out of Hebrew into Greek, which was as
Josephus observes in An Abstract of the whole History out of o^ephus.
the third year of his Reign before Christ 260. in recompense of which
courtesy he sent to be dedicated in the Temple of Jerusalem a Table of Gold
richly adorned with Carbuncles, Smaragdes, and other precious Stones. Two
stately Cups, and Thirty Bowls of pure Gold, as it appears in Josephus Lib.
Antiq. 12. The Academy continued there till after Christ's time, as you may
read Acts 6, But the Library was consumed 47. years before Christ, and the
City greatly defaced.

For Julius Caesar at that time making War upon Pompey the younger, who
continued with his Sister Cleopatra in this City, caused the Kings Navy to be
set on fire, and the Library standing near to it, the flame took hold of it
and burnt it down to the ground with all that was in it, and so was the end of
that their Sacred Volume by this Disaster. Whereof this History (which I have
done into English for your ease) shows its first passage into that place and
consumption: But this Story of ARISTEVS has ouer-dured those flames. Which I
thus commend to your Christian View, desiring pardon in that, I have no^ done
so well as I would, but I have followed my Author, as near as I could.

A short Discourse of the Antiquity and Dignity of the Sacred Books, and
Excellency of their inspired Writer, the Prophet MOSES.
By the English Translator.
AS the true GOD is the Ancient of Days and Times; so it pleased Him that His
perpetual HISTORY contained in Holy Scriptures, should excel in Antiquity of
time, all other Histories and Writings of the World, that can be found; the
Writings of the Pagans and Nations, being all under these and long after, and
that only of MOSES the subject of this former History, contaynes the account of
years justly from the Creation and beginning of the World, even unto the
coming of the promised Redeemer. A reckoning (I say) so just and certain,
that there is no such to be found.

For to come to the Time wherein the Prophet of GOD, MOSES the first Writer of
Holy Writ, began to Write manifestly under the Lord of Heaven and Earth; we
may gather, and without prejudice, of all that then could be done: as by a
passage amongst many other places we read of in the 17. Chapter of the Book
of Exodus, where it is said, GOD Commanded him to Write; and that in the same
year the people of Israel issued out of Egypt, which was from the Creation of
the World 2513. upon which we may advertise our selves, that the years are
Calculated according to Verity of the said Scriptures, by the Faithful
Servants of GOD, which have happily trauayled therein.

And therefore we need not rest upon the calculation of Histories, Annalls,
and humane Chronicles, or other Writers that have not entirely followed Holy
Scriptures, who are discordant amongst themselves, and many times directly
opposite to one another times.

Therefore if we dilligently search all Antiquities and Writings of men, of all
Nations that have any appearance of certain time, wherein those Writings were
made, and after confer those times with the things recited and inregistred by
the Holy Prophet MOSES, and the time wherein he Writ them: we shall see
manifestly the Excellency and Antiquity that he is herein above all men: For
the Fables and disguisments of profane Poets, Greeks and Latins, which all
came long time after MOSES: Amongst them (I say) we shall see no other but
manifest Dreams, Lies; and amongst other things noteable, some corruptions of
the Sacred Scriptures long before Written, of which they having heard some
inckling, and received it as from hand to hand, or drawn it from his Writings,
or heard it recounted by the Father to the Son, and they from their
Ancestors, which were the Children and Successors of the three Sons of Noe,
who was the second Father of humane kind, and restorer of the Nations of all
the World, all issuing from his Posterity, after the universal Flood.

His three Sonn^^, (as Holy Scripture has acquainted us with,) were Sem, Cham,
and Iaphet, of whom are descended all the Earth: And this before spoken, is
easily and sufficiently discovered in the Writings of the said Pagans, by the
proper names of the said Children of Noe, and of their Successors, which of
long time before these writings and profane Histories, had been named by
MOSES.

For the Pagans testify tha^ the people had made of these Ancient Father,
Idols, and gods: As of Iaphet, Iapetus, they drew Iauan, Ianus, and Ion; and
because they were names held in the Hebrew Letters, or value of them; they
accommodated them to their tongues and letters, and to make them more easy and
glib in their accustomed pronounciation, came near, but with alteration.

And if we will go more high, and weigh the old Times of the first Age, which
preceeded the Flood, as we have it from that only History of MOSES in the
Holy Bible: we shall easily perceive that the Pagan Poets and Writers have
received, even the Ancient names, and mingled them amongst their Fables and
Dreams, and drawn them from the Holy Scriptures.

And so it shall appear plainly that their falce god Vulcan is not very hard
to unmask, that he was a mortal man, and one of the Sons of the other
Lamech, the prime Bigamist and corrupter of Marriage; who descended of that
accursed Race of Caine: And this appears by the faculty of this Vulcan, which
was a Smith or forger of Armor: And MOSES declares him so, and by his name
too, for he is by him called Thu-vulcain; and every one any thing skilled in
the Hebrew, knows, that if they leave the first letter, which is servile, and
put to form the name, according to the manner of the Hebrews, it will appear
mere Vulcain; for their letter. B. having not a prick in him, is pronounced
as our v consonant.

And for the name of Vulcains wife by MOSES called Nehama, which signifies fair
in their language, or as speaks the Latins Venusta: It is a plain course to
discover vain beauty, or their so much celebrated unchaste and wanton Venus. A
goodly Race and fair family of that accursed murderer Caine.

And here may we see some of the proper gods and Idols of the poor Pagans,
amongst that Anthil of such other ill stolen names, unhandsomely fetched from
the Holy Scriptures, with and by the subtilty of the Devil; to the end that a
wicked troop of execrable ^yants, violent oppressors of men, Thieves, and
Adulterous desperates, shaken off and damned by the Word of GOD. Of whom the
first Apostate and liar Satan, made his counterfeit gods and Idols, the old
Serpent expert and knowing in all malice, that there was no better way for him
to muffle and blind humane judgment, from the knowledge of the true GOD, at
first engraven in the Souls of men, but by this counterfeite device with
Posterity.

But to pass further in our begun purpose, touching the fabulous writings of
the Pagan Poets, we shall find that their Discourse in the best we can of it,
is but corruptions of the Truth, in the Holy Scriptures of GOD, or things
therein revealed: turned by them into dreams, and profane Narrations: As we
may see in that they writ of the Creation of the world, and government of the
same, of the Divine virtue that Ovid. 1. de Me^^. Virgil. 6. de Aeneid. Virgill
Eglog. ^^ 5.
sustaines and interiourly nourishes all things; of the consumation of Heaven
and Earth with fire at the last day: and also of the restoration of the World,
and of all things in such good order for all so many confusions, proceeding
from sin. All which things they might obtain, and by some dark means draw
from the Books of Holy Scripture and sacred Prophets Translated out of Hebrew
into other Languages, or understand some thing by means of the dispersion
Josephus antiq.
of the People of Israel spread through all the Provinces of the Roman Empire,
and through all the Quarters of the World. For the Jews had for the most part
leave in all places to hold their Synagogues, and to have public Lectures of
Act. 18. 20
their Law and Prophets: When these Poets, flatterers of men, turned all that
spoken of the Person of Christ, the promised Redeemer, and that then was
expected; falsely to apply the^ by flattery to their Princes, falsegods Virgil.
A^^erd.
and Idols.

But let us leave all those Iuglers and Liars that durst be so profanely
bold, to corrupt the pure Verity of Gods Word, and speak we of the Gentiles
Writings, how long they came after Moses, and Writ since he: and that even they
have given Testimony to him and his Divine Writings, which may at least suffice
to convince all Contradictors, that Moses was in Nature, and before them all.
We understanding that his reckoning is a perpetual following all the years
since the Creation of the World even unto his time, as it is easy to gather by
his Books, and his account of the years, and lives of the first Fathers from
Adam unto the Patriarch Abraham, and after from his Successors, as from Father
to Son, to wit; Isaacke, Jacob, Leui, Caath, Amram, and then Aaron, and Moses
himself, Children of the said Amram: And that he had express charge to Write
for the very last, the year since the creation of the World 2513. and of his
life the 80. year, and has continued his Holy Stories even to the year of
his Death, and of the world 2553.

Now since that time, GOD has always so provided for the advancement of his
Glory, and the edification of his Church, that the perpetual History of her,
and the certain account of the years of the World, has been continued and
still put in Writing by his Prophets.

As it is to be seen in the Holy Books that treat and contain the
Government of Joshua, and the Judges: then to Samuel and the Kings of the
People, unto the transmigration into Babylon, and of other Governors which have
succeeded them, after their return from thence.

And finally, the Prophet Daniel has declared the rest of the time, that is,
The 490. years since the said Deliverance of the Jews and return from
Babylon, by the means of Cyrus Daniel 9.
King of Persia, even to the Death and Resurrection of Christ the Redeemer
promised to the holy Fathers, which is our Lord Jesus the eternal Son of
God, true God, and true Man; who appeared living after his Luk 24. 1 Cor. 15.
Death and Resurrection to more then five hundred faithful Witnesses at one
time, besides his other manifestations, and mounted visibly into Heaven in the
year of the World 3961.

Now if we will search all the Histories of all the Nations of the World, of
whom the Writings are arrived to our Age, the most Ancient time of which they
make mention, shall be of their Antique destruction of Troy by the Greeks. The
History whereof has been written by Dictis of the I Will of Creet, which is the
best Testimony they have for the present, and since by Homer and many others.

And from this Destruction Diodorus Siculus, renowned amongst the Historians,
began his Books; now the same according with the common Judgment and
Calculation of knowing men, comes only to be about 358. years before the
building of Rome; the same time then falls^ to be in the 16. year of the
Government of Elon Judge of the People of Iudge^ 12
Israel, mentioned in the Book of Judges. And the same was 316: years before
the first Olympiade the reckoning of the Annalls of the Greeks. So then the
said Destruction of Troy falls to be only under the year of the World 2838.
when therefore we shall give consent that their Writings, the most certain,
whose Narrations we may best give credit vnto^ Yet the Prophet Moses shall be
found much more Ancient then all the Writers of the World, what Nation soever;
though they are in great number, and of whom we see yet the Old Books in
these last times in their proper Tongues.

And that he has put his hand to the Pen, and began to Write his Divine
Revelations of the Creation and Conduct of the World even to his time, and his
sacred History and Prophesies touching the Church of GOD shall at least be 325
years before all other Writers, of whom there is any mention or news in the
World; that is to say, in the year of the World 25^3.

Whereupon we note even to this Present, against all those profane mockers
that have disgorged that enormious blasphemy amongst others, that the World is
eternal and of it self: which if it were so as they dream, and that it had
no such beginning as is written by Moses, they might find then by all, and in
all Languages, many Histories of infinite times, and many Chronicles of many
Ages, and of old times that have praeceded Moses in the account of years.

But we see that there is no such, and that the Holy Bible is found even in
the middle amongst all sorts of enemies that str^ue to destroy* loose,
abollish, burn, and extermine from the World the Books of it, and for all
thereto they had so long time: yet nevertheless they never could, nor ever
shall. For we see the said Bible yet in his proper Writing and Language, and
of all others of what Nation soever, the most celebrated and renowned: And if
they could find any History which had been written before Moses was borne
into the World, yet shall it contain their time and composition, with more
years and ages, as we can gather from the Holy Scriptures even to this
present year 1633. since the Nativity of Christ.

The which account of times past from the Creation unto this present year,
shall come to amount to 5563* years, but such Histories neither can be found,
nor ever were.

But for Moses and his faithful Writings, even profane Authors and Histories
of the Gentiles themselves have been, even as it were, ^iuinely constrained to
^ea^e testimony, ma^ger their Cal^mnies, Lye^, Dreams, and Disguisings,
through and by the Invincible force of Truth. And so they have served for
Certificates to all Nations of the venerable and well known Antiquity of him
and his Holy Writs.

For some of them have noted and writ thus, (as a thing notorious of their
times) to wit, That is the East Trogus. Justinius.
parts, and of Sy^ia it self, there had been an Abraham, an Israel, and even
a Joseph, who say they, was a Son of the said Israel, sold by his brethren,
and led into Egypt.

Then how he was received into the Court, and held very dearly with the King,
to whom he foretold the grievous and great famine, so as without the divine
Counsel by him given, (whereupon the admonished King gathered up and made
reservation of Corn before the time of the said Fami^e,) Egypt had perished.

And finally, how his Successor Moses, and all his People issued out of Egypt,
came to Mount Syna, how they consecrated the Seventh day for their Sabbath, or
Resting day^ But I will leave this Discourse though diuersified from a spark of
Truth that these Historians have mixed with their own devices, as propha^^e;
and in which they were poorly Advertised and deceived, by the subtilty of
Satan, as we may well know by conferring their VVriting with the Holy Bible.

And be it that these Scoffer^ of GOD and his Holy Word, dare be so bold to
say and calumniate, that MOSES and his have suppressed and abolished all
praece^ent Histories, making their Writings to be before all others thereby to
Authorize them the better; but we will leave those their calumnies to the
judgment of any of sound sense and understanding: If that could be, or can
have any place or shadow of belief amongst men of sound judgment or
reasonable Discourse: for if they will put into mature consideration, the small
means and contemptible quality in the world of these poor Israelites, but
Shepherds and breeders of Cattle; and which is worse, people exposed to the
oppressions and hard servitude under their puissant Enemies, and evil disposed
Neighbors.

Then who shall make comparison of them with great Kings and people of the
Earth, Babilonians, Aegytians, Syrians, Romans, and other Potentates, who with
all their Authority, their Edicts, Forces, and Armies, yet had never power to
abollish the Holy Books, written simply by our poor Shepherds; when they
could not conserve their Royal Lybraries, favored of all the World! Truly
this may well put to the blush these wiselings, that show themselves fools in
so speaking, and discoursing without Discourse, and will judge of things
without inquiry.

Now for the Integrity of MOSES for us Christians, we are sufficiently cleared
and satisfied by the Authority Praise of Moses.
of the Holy Spirit of GOD. Who has given excellent Testimony by all the
Scriptures, both in the old and New Testament, of his Original and Lineage,
being descended from the latter Leuy, Nephew of the Holy Patriarch Abraham:
Also of his miraculous conservation and Deliverance from Death and Waters; from
whence he was drawn forth, and then had that name of MOSES in their language.

Then his royal education and breeding, his Love to his afflicted people, and
his Magnanimity to despise humane greatness, in preferring the just cause and
sufferance of CHRIST the Redeemer then looked for, before all the Regal estate
and great Treasure of Egypt.

Moreover, his sufferance long and bitter, for the defense of right and equity,
and for the deliverance of the poor afflicted: His Divine calling to the
Charge and Government of his People, his Patience, Gentleness, and
Perseverance with such faithfulness in the difficult execution of this weighty
charge; and the singular gift of Prophecy, and of his Divine miracles so
strange and supernatural, that they have been admired and celebrated of all
the whole World.

But there is one point above all^ very remarkable, and which is more then
sufficient to overcome humane Reason, and to show the Integrity of MOSES;
which is, that if he had would, he might easily and according to the manner
of men, occupied the Monarchy and Domination for his Children, and their
posterity, upon all the people of Israel: And with the same, the two fertile
Kingdoms, reduced under his hand, and Conquered beyond Iordane. Nevertheless,
he left his Son: Gersom and Eliezer, and their posterity, private men, and of
most simple estate^ amongst the other Levites. And the same Children remaining
subject to the Sacrificers successors of A^ron and to the Magistrate and
Governors of Israel.

More, that he has himself written and Inregistred his own proper faults;
and yet more notable, those of his House; as of his Brother, Sister, and
Nephews, and the redoubtable judgments of GOD's chastisements and punishments
of them all.

Of which things, all his People were witnesses, in number more then six
hundred thousand Persons: And if they could have contraried him for any
fals^ity, either for the present, or times to come: If he had been, I say,
such, as they could have found any bracke in his actions, or in his Writings,
or falsenesse in either his Person, or any of his, in his Life, and his
miracles, in his Writings or end? But in the contrary, all the Hebrews and
Jews which have been since that time, and are now near 3000. years since;
and that are dispersed through all the World, who are in so great a number,
that if they were reunited into a body of People, and into a State, their
multitude should be innumerable, and might astonish the most greatest Nation of
the whole Universe.

All those, I say, have all received from their Ancient Fathers, from their
Kings and Princes, and their Sacrificators and Ancestors, from Father to
Son, and from hand to hand, and with an admirable consent, even in the middle
of so many confusions and dissipations, have kept, and yet keep always in
their Bibles, the Holy VVritings of MOSES, in their proper Letters, and Hebrew
Tongue, as Books most True and Veritable, Sacred, and Divine: And such so
Known and Acknowledged in all Nations, with the excellent Testimony,
Authority, and Holiness of them: that CHRIST himself has spoken of them: and
the Prophets and Apostles also in their Writings and Allegations, I, and the
most Ancient Pagans and Strangers, cannot (with sound sense) but acknowledge
them.

And so, Reader, although I have been (as I formerly said) something prolixe,
yet the Excellency of the Subject, forced and bound me, to be so teadious
herein, to show as an illustrious Addition, the worthiness of the Books, and
Divine Writings, as their Antiquity, Dignity, as also the Excellency of their
Humane Writer, from the Dictate of the Most Highest: And being the matter
whereof we have formerly Entreated, I held it not impertinent, though I have
dealt too weakly in so worthy a Business, but refer the rest and it, to
your charitable Censure.

FINIS.

