A SERMON UPON THE EIGHTH VERSE OF THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE ACTS OF THE
APOSTLES.

Preached To the Honorable Company of the VIRGINIAN PLANTATION, 13. Nouemb.
1622.

BY JOHN DONE Deane of Saint Paul's, LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jones. 1624.

TO THE HONORABLE COMPANY OF THE VIRGINIAN PLANTATION.
BY your Favors, I had some place amongst you, before; but now I am an
Aduenturer, if not to VIRGINIA, yet for VIRGINIA: for, every man that Prints,
Adventures. For the Preaching of this Sermon, I was but under your Inuitation;
my Time was mine own, and my Meditations mine own: and I had been excusable
toward you, if I had turned that Time, and those Meditations, to GODS Service,
in any other place. But for the Printing of this Sermon, I am not only under
your Inuitation, but under your Commandment; for, after it was preached, it
was not mine, but yours: And therefore, if I gave it at first, I do but
restore it now. The first, was an act of Love; this, of Justice: both which
Virtues, Almighty God evermore promoue, and exalt in all your proceedings.
AMEN.

Your humble Servant in Christ Jesus, JOHN DONE.

ACTS 1.8. But ye shall receive power after that the HOLY GHOST is come upon
you, and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea,
and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the Earth.
THERE are reckoned in this Book, Two and Twenty Sermons of the Apostles; and
yet the Book is not called the Preaching, but the Practice, not the Words, but
the Acts of the Apostles: and the Acts of the Apostles were to convey that name
of Christ Jesus, and to propagate his Gospel over all the world: Beloved, you
are Actors upon the same Stage too: the uttermost part of the Earth are your
Scene: Act over the Acts of the Apostles; be you a Light to the Gentiles, that
sit in darkness; be you content to carry him over these Seas, who dried up
one Red Sea for his first people, and has powered out another Red Sea, his own
Blood, for them and us. When man was fallen, God clothed him, made him a
Leather Garment; there God descended to one Occupation: when the time of man's
Redemption was come, then God, as it were, to house him, became a Carpenters
Son, there God descended to another Occupation. Naturally, without doubt, man
would have been his own Tailor, and his own Carpenter; something in these
two kinds man would have done of himself, though he had had no pattern from
God: but in preserving man who was fallen, to this redemption, by which he was
to be raisd, in preserving man from perishing, in the Flood, God descended to a
third occupation, to be his Shipwright to give him the model of a Ship, an
Arc, and so to be the author of that, which man himself in likelihood, would
never have thought of, a means to pass from Nation to Nation. Now, as GOD
taught us to make clothes, not only to cloth our selves, but to cloth him
in his poor and naked members here; as God taught us to build houses, not to
house our selves, but to house him, in erecting Churches, to his glory: So God
taught us to make Ships, not to transport our selves, but to transport him,
That when we have received power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon us,
we might be witnesses unto him, both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

As I speak now principally to them who are concernd in this Plantation of
Virginia, yet there may be diverse in this Congregation, who, though they have
no interest in this Plantation, yet they may have benefit and edification, by
that which they hear me say, so Christ spoke the words of this Text,
principally to the Apostles, who were present and questioned him at his
Ascension, but they are in their just extention, and due accommodation,
appliable to our present occation of meeting here: As Christ himself is
Alpha, and Omega, so first, as that he is last too, so these words which he
spoke in the East, belong to us, who are to glorify him in the West? That we
having received power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon us, might be
witnesses unto him, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

The first word of the Text is the Cardinal word, the word the hinge upon
which the whole Text turns; The first word, But, is the But, that all the rest
shoots at. First it is an exclusive word; something the Apostles had required,
which might not be had; not that; And it is an inclusiue word; something Christ
was pleased to afford to the Apostles, which they thought not of; not that, not
that which you beat upon, But, but yet, something else, something better then
that, you shall have. That which this but, excludes, is that which the Apostles
express in the Verse immediately before the Text, a Temporal Kingdom; Will thou restore again the kingdom of Israel? No; not a temporal Kingdom; let
not the riches and commodities of this world, be in your contemplation in your
adventures. Or, because they ask more, Will thou now restore that? not yet: If
I will give you riches, and commoditles of this world, yet if I do it not at
first, if I do it not yet, be not you discouraged; you shall not have that,
that is not Gods first intention; and though that be in Gods intention, to give
it you hereafter, you shall not have it yet; that's the exclusive part; But;
there enters the inclusiue, You shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost
is come upon you, and you shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and
in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth. In
which second part, we shall pass by these steps; Superueniet Spiritus, The
holy Ghost shall come upon you, The Spirit shall witness to your Spirit, and
rectify your Conscience; And then, by that, you shall receive power; A new
power besides the power you have from the State, and that power shall enable
you, to be witnesses of Christ, that is, to make his doctrine the more
credible, by your testimony, when you conform your selves to him, and do as
he did; and this witness you shall bear, this conformity you shall declare,
first in Jerusalem, in this City; And in Iudaea, in all the parts of the
Kingdom; and in Samaria, even amongst them who are departed from the true
worship of God, the Papists; and to the uttermost part of the Earth, to those
poor Souls, to whom you are continually sending. Summarily, If from the Holy
Ghost you have a good testimony in your own Conscience, you shall be witnesses
for Christ, that is, as he did, you shall give satisfaction to all, to the
City, to the Country, to the Calumniating Adversary, and the naturals of the
place, to whom you shall present both Spiritual and Temporal benefit to. And
so you have the Model of the whole frame, and of the partitions; we proceed
now to the furnishing of the particular rooms.

1. Part.
FIrst then, this first word, But, excludes a temporal Kingdom; the Apostles
had filled themselves with an expectation, with an ambition of it; but that was
not intended them. It was no wonder, that a woman could conceive such an
expectation, and such an ambition, as to have her two sons sit at Christ's
right hand, Mat. 20.20.
and at his left, in his Kingdom, when the Apostles expected such a Kingdom,
as might afford them honors and preferment upon Earth. More then once they
were in the disputation, in which Christ deprehended them, Mat. 1.81.
which of them should be the greatest in his Kingdom. Neither has the Bishop
of Rome, any thing, wherein he may so properly call himself Apost licall, as
this error of the Apostles, this their infirmity; that heis evermore too
conversant upon the contemplation of temporal Kingdoms. They did it all the
way, when Christ was with them, and now at his last step, Cum actu ascendisset,
when Christ was not Asending, but in part ascended, when one foot was upon the
Earth, and the other in the cloud that took him up, they ask him now, will thou at this time, restore the Kingdom? so women put their husbands, and men
their fathers, and friends, upon their torture, at their last gasp, and make
their death- bed a rack to make them strech and increase ioyntures, and
portions, and legacies, and sign Scedules and Codicils, with their hand, when
his hand that presents them is ready to close his eyes, that should sign them:
And when they are upon the wing for heaven, men tie lead to their feet, and
when they are laying hand fast upon Abraham's bosom, they must pull their hand
out of his bosom again, to obey importunities of men, and sign their papers:
so vnderminable is the love of this World, which determines every minute. GOD,
as he is three persons, has three Kingdoms; There is Regnum potentiae, The
Kingdom of power; and this we attribute to the Father; it is power and
providence: There is Regnum gloriae, the Kingdom of glory; this we attribute
to the Son and to his purchase; for he is the King that shall say, Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blossed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the World. And then between these three is Regnum Gratiae, The
Kingdom of Grace, and this weattribute to the Holy Ghost; he takes them, whom
the king of power, Almighty God has rescued from the Gentiles, and as the king
of grace, He gives them the knowledge of the mystery of the Kingdom of GOD,
Mat. 4.11.
that is, of future glory, by sanctifying the^ with his grace, in his Church.
The two first kingdoms are in this world, but yet neither of them, are of this
world; because both they refer to the kingdom of glory. The kingdom of the
Father, which is the providence of God, does but preserve us; The kingdom of
the Holy Ghost which is the grace of God, does but prepare us to the kingdom
of the Son, which is the glory of GOD; and that's in heaven. And therefore,
though to good men, this world be the way to that kingdom, yet this kingdom
is not of this world, says Chist himself: Though the Apostles themselves,
John 18.36.
as good a School as they were bred in, could never take out that lesson yet
that lesson Christ gives, and repeates to all, you seek a Temporal kingdom,
But, says the Text, stop there, A kingdom you must not have.

Beloved in him, whose kingdom, and Gospel you seek to advance, in this
Plantation, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, if you seek to establish a
temporal kingdom there, you are not rectified, if you seek to be kings in
either acceptance of the word; To be a King signifies Liberty and indepency,
and Supremacy, to be under no man, and to be a King signifies Abundance, and
Omnisufficiencie, to need no man. If those that govern there, would establish
such a government, as should not depend upon this, or if those that go
thither, propose to themselves an exemption from Laws, to live at their
liberty, this is to be Kings, to deuest Allegiance, to be under no man: and
if those that adventure thither, propose to themselves present benefit, and
profit, a sudden way to be rich, and an abundance of all desirable
commodities from thence, this is to be sufficient of themselves, and to need
no man: and to be under no man and to need no man, are the two acceptations
of being Kings. Whom liberty draws to go, or present profit draws to
adventure, are not yet in the right way. O, if you could once bring a
Catechism to be as good ware amongst them as a Bugle, as a knife, as a
hatchet: O, if you would be as ready to hearken at the return of a ship, how
many Indians were converted to Christ Jesus, as what trees, or druggs, or Dies
that Ship had brought, then you were in your right way, and not till then;
Liberty and Abundance, are Characters of kingdoms, and a kingdom is excluded
in the Text; The Apostles were not to look for it, in their employment, nor
you in this your Plantation.

At least CHRIST expresses himself thus far, in this answer, that if he
would give them a kingdom, Non adhue.
he would not give it them yet. They ask him, Will thou at this time, restore
the kingdom? and he answers, It is not for you to know the times: whatsoever
God will do, Man must not appoint him his time. The Apostles thought of a
kingdom presently after Christ's departure; the coming of the Holy Ghost, who
lead them into all truths, soon delivered them of that error. Other men in
favor of the Jews, interpreting all the prophesies, which are of a Spiritual
Kingdom, the kingdom of the Gospel, into which, the Jews shall be admitted)
in a literal sense, have thought that the Jews shall have, not only a
temporal kingdom in the same place, in Jerusalem again, but because they
find that kingdom which is promised, (that is the kingdom of the Gospel) to
be expressed in large phrases, and in an abundant manner, applying all that
largeness to a temporal kingdom, they think, that the Jews shall have such
a kingdom, as shall swallow and annihilate all other kingdoms, and be the
sole Empire and Monarchy of the world. After this, very great men in the Church
upon these words, of One thousand years after the Resurrection, have immagin'd
a Temporal Kingdom of the Saints of God here upon Earth, Apo. 20.
before they entered the joys of Heaven: and Saint Augustine himself, De
Ciuit. Dei 20.7.
had at first some declinations toward that opinion, though he dispute
powerfully against it, after: That there should be Sabatismus in terris; that
as the world was to last Six thousand years in troubles, there should be a
Seventh thousand, in such joys as this world could give.

And some others, who have avoided both the Temporal kingdom imagined by the
Apostles, presently after the Ascension, And the Imperial kingdom of the
Jews, before the Resurrection, And the Carnal kingdom of the Chiliasts, the
Millenarians, after the Resurrection, though they speak of no kingdom, but
the true kingdom, the kingdom of glory, yet they err as much in assigning a
certain time when that kingdom shall begin, when the end of this world,
when the Resurrection, when the Judgment shall be. Non est vestrum nosse
tempora, says Christ to his Apostles then; and lest it might be thought, that
they might know these things, when the Holy Ghost came upon them, Christ denies
that he himself knew that, as Man; and as Man, Christ knew more, then ever the
Apostles knew. Whatsoever therefore Christ intended to his Apostles here, he
would not give it presently, non adhuc, he would not bind himself to a
certain time, Non est vestrum nosse tempora, It belongs not to us to know Gods
times.

Beloved, use godly means, and give God his leisure. You cannot beget a Son,
and tell the Mother, I will have this Son born within five Months; nor, when
he is borne, say, you will have him past danger of Wardship within five
years. You cannot sow your Corn to day, and say it shall be above ground to
morrow, and in my Barn next week. How soon the best Husbandman, sowed the
best Seed in the best ground? GOD cast the promise of a Messiah, as the seed
of all, in Paradise; In Semine Mulieris; The Seed of the Woman shall bruise
the Serpents head; and yet this Plant was Four thousand years after before it
appeared; this Messiah Four thousand years before he came. GOD showed the
ground where that should grow, Two thousand years after the Promise; in
Abraham's Family; In semine tuo, In thy Seed all Nations shall be blessed. God
hedged in this Ground almost One thousand years after that; In Micheas time,
Et tu Bethlem, Thou Bethlem shall be the place; and God watered that, and
weeded that, refreshed that dry expectation, with a Succession of Prophets; and
yet it was so long before this expectation of Nations, this Messiah came. So
GOD promised the Jews a Kingdom, in Jacobs Prophecy to Judah, Genesis 49.
That the Scepter should not depart from his Tribe. In Two hundred years more,
he says no more of it; Deuteronomy. 17.14.
then he ordaines some institutions for their King, when they should have one.
And then it was Four hundred years after that, before they had a King. GOD
meant from the first hour, to people the whole earth; and God could have made
men of clay, as fast as they made Brickes of Clay in Egypt; but he began upon
two, and when they had been multiplying and replenishing the Earth One
thousand six hundred years, the Flood washed all that away, and GOD was
almost to begin again upon eight persons; and they have served to people Earth
and Heaven too; Be not you discouraged, if the Promises which you have made to
your selves, or to others, be not so soon discharged; though you see not your
money, though you see not your men, though a Flood, a Flood of Blood have
broken in upon them, be not discouraged. Great Creatures lie long in the Womb;
Lions are litterd perfect, but Beare-whelpes licked unto their shape; actions
which Kings undertake, are cast in a mould, they have their perfection quickly;
actions of private men; and private Purses, require more hammering, and more
filing to their perfection. Only let your principal end, be the propagation
of the glorious Gospel: and though there be an Exclusive in the Text, GOD
does not promise you a Kingdom, Ease, and Abundance in all things, and that
which he does intend to you, he does not promise presently, yet there is an
Inclusiue too; not that, But, but something equiuolent at least, But ye shall
receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

2. Part.
NOw our Savior Christ does not say to these men, since you are so
importunate, you shall have no Kingdom; now, nor never, it is, not yet; But, Sed.
he does not say, you shall have no Kingdom, nor any thing else, it is, not
that; But: the importunity of beggars, sometimes draws us to such a froward
answer, For this importunity, I will never give you any thing. Our pattern
was not so froward; he gave them not that, but as good as that. Samuel was
sent to super-induct a King upon Saul, 1. Sam. 16.
to anoint a new King. He thought his Commission had been determined in
Eliab, Surely this is the Lords Anointed. But the Lord said, not he; nor the
next, Aminadab; nor the next, Shammah; nor none of the next seven; But; but yet
there is one in the field, keeping sheep, anoint him; David is he. Saint
Paul prayed earnestly, and frequently, to be discharged of that Stimulas
Carnis: God says no; not that; but Gratia mea sufficit, Thou shall have grace
to overcome the tentation, though the tentation remain. God says to you, No
Kingdom, not Ease, not Abundance; nay, nothing at all yet; the Plantation
shall not discharge the Charges, not defray it self yet; but yet already, now
at first, it shall conduce to great uses: It shall redeem many a wretch from
the Laws of death, from the hands of the Executioner, upon whom, perchance a
small fault, or perchance a first fault, or perchance a fault heartily and
sincerely repented, perchance no fault, but malice, had otherwise cast a
present and ignominious death. It shall sweep your streets, and wash your
doors, from idle persons, and the children of idle persons, and employ them:
and truly, if the whole Country were but such a Bridewell, to force idle
persons to work, it had a good use. But it is already, not only a Spleen, to
drayne the ill humors of the body, but a Liver, to breed good blood; already
the employment breeds Mariners; already the place gives Essays, nay,
Fraights of Marchantable Commodities; already it is a mark for the Envy, and
for the ambition of our Enemies; I speak but of our Doctrinall, not National
Enemies: as they are Papists, they are sorry we have this Country; and
surely, twenty Lectures in matter of Controversy do not so much vex them,
as one Ship that goes, and strengthens that Plantation. Neither can I recommend
it to you, by any better Rhetorique, then their malice: They would gladly have
it, and therefore let us be glad to hold it.

Thus then this Text proceeds, Spiritus Sanctus.
and gathers upon you. All that you would have by this Plantation, you shall
not have: GOD binds not himself to measures; All that you shall have, you
have not yet: GOD binds not himself to times, but something you shall have;
nay, you have already some great things: and of those, that in the Text is,
The Holy Ghost shall come upon you. We find the Holy Ghost to have come upon
men, four times in this Book: First, upon the Apostles, Acts 2, 1.
at Pentecost: Then, when the whole Congregation was in prayer for the
imprisonment of Peter and John. 4, 31.
Again, when Peter preached in Cornelius his house, 10, 44.
the Holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard him. And fourthly, when Saint
Paul laid his hands upon them, 19, 6.
who had been formerly baptized at Ephesus. At the three latter times it is
evident, that the Holy Ghost fell upon whole and promiscuous Congregations, and
not upon the Apostles only: and in the first, at Pentecost, the contrary is
not evident; nay, the Fathers, for the most part, that handle that, concur in
that, that the Holy Ghost fell then upon the whole Congregation, men and women.
The Holy Ghost fell upon Peter before he preached, and it fell upon the
hearers when he preached, and it has fallen upon every one of them, who have
found motions in themselves, to propagate the Gospel of Christ Jesus by this
means. The Son of GOD did not abhor the Virgins Womb, when he would be
made man; when he was man, he did not disdain to ride upon an Ass into
Jerusalem: the third Person of the Trinity, the Holy Ghost, is as humble as
the second, he refuses Nullum vehiculum, no conueyance, no door of entrance
into you; whether the example and precedent of other good men, or a probable
imagination of future profit, or a willingness to concur to the vexation of
the Enemy; what collateral respect soever drew thee in, if now thou art in,
thy principal respect be the glory of God; that occasion, whatsoever it was,
was vehiculum Spiritus Sancti; that was the Petard, that broke open thy Iron
Gate; that was the Chariot, by which he entered into thee, and now he is fallen
upon thee, if thou do not Depose; (lay aside all consideration of profit for
ever, never to look for return) No, not Sepose, (leave out the consideration
of profit for a time; for that, and Religion may well consist together:) but if
thou do but Post-pose the consideration of Temporal gain, and study first
the advancement of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, the Holy Ghost is fallen upon
you; for by that you receive Power, says the Text.

There is a Power rooted in Nature, and a Power rooted in Grace; Potestatem.
a Power issuing from the Law of Nations, and a Power growing out of the
Gospel. In the Law of Nature, and Nations, A Land never inhabited by any, or
utterly derelicted, and immemorially abandoned by the former Inhabitants,
becomes theirs that will possess it. So also is it, if the inhabitants do not
in some measure fill the Land, so as the Land may bring forth her increase for
the use of men: for as a man does not become proprietarie of the Sea, because
he has two or three Boats fishing in it; so neither does a man become Lord of
a maine Continent, because he has two or three Cottages in the Skirts
thereof. That Rule which passes through all Municipall Laws in particular
States, Interest Reipublicae vt quis re sua been vtatur; The State must take
order, that every man improoue that which he has, for the best advantage of
that State, passes also through the Law of Nations, which is to all the World,
as the Municipall Law is to a particular State: Interest Mundo, The whole
World, all Mankind must take care, that all places be emprou'd, as far as
may be, to the best advantage of Mankind in general. Again, if the Land be
peopled, and cultiuated by the people, and that Land produce in abundance such
things, for want whereof, their neighbors, or others (being not enemies)
perish; the Law of Nations may justify some force, in seeking, by permutation
of other Commodities which they need, to come to some of theirs. Many cases
may be put, when not only Commerce, and Trade, but Plantations in Lands, not
formerly our own, may be lawful. And for that, Accepistis potestatem, you
have your Commission, your Patents, your Charters, your Seals from Him, upon
whose Acts any private Subject, in Civil matters, may safely rely. But then,
Accipietis potestatem, You shall receive power, says the Text; you shall, when
the Holy Ghost is come upon you, that is, when the instinct, the influence, the
motions of the Holy Ghost enables your Conscience to say, That your principal
end is not Gain, nor Glory, but to gain Souls to the glory of GOD; this
seals the Great Seal, this iustifies Justice it self, this authorizes
Authority, and gives power to Strength it self. Let the Conscience be
upright, and then Seals, and Patents, and Commissions, are Wings; they assist
him to fly the faster: Let the Conscience be lame, and distorted, and he that
goes upon Seals, and Patents, and Commissions, goes upon weak and feeble
Crutches. When the Holy Ghost is come upon you, your Conscience rectified, you
shall have Power, a new power out of that; what to do? that follows, to be
Witnesses unto Christ.

Infamy is one of the highest punishments that the Law inflicts upon man;
Testes.
for it lies upon him even after death: Infamy is the worst punishment, and
Intestabilitie (to be made intestable) is one of the deepest wounds of Infamy;
and then the worst degree of intestabilitie, is not to be believed, not to be
admitted to be a Witness of any other: He is Intestable, that cannot make a
Testament, not give his own goods; and he Intestable, that can receive
nothing by the Testament of another; he is Intestable, in whose behalf no
testimony may be accepted: but be is the most miserably Intestable of all, the
most detestably intestable, that discredites another man, by speaking well of
him; and makes him the more suspicious, by his commendations. A Christian in
profession, that is not a Christian in life, is so intestable, he discredites
Christ, and hardens others against him. John Baptist was more then a Prophet,
because he was a Witness of Christ; and he was a Witness, because he was
like him, he did as he did, he lead a holy and a religious life; so he was
a Witness. That great and glorious name of Martyr, is but a Witness. Saint
Stephen was Proto-martyr, Christ's first Witness, because he was the first
that did as he did, that put on his Colors, that drunk of his Cup, that was
baptized with his Baptism; with his own Blood: so he was a Witness. To be
Witnesses for Christ, is to be like Christ; to conform your selves to Christ:
and they in the Text, and you, are to be Witnesses of Christ in Jerusalem, and
in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

Saint Hierome notes, that John Baptist was not bid to bear witness in
Jerusalem, Jerusalem.
in the City, but in the Wilderness; he, and none but he: there were but
few men to witness to, there; and those few that were, came thither with a
good disposition, to be wrought upon there: and there, there were few Witnesses
to oppose John's Testimony, few Tentations, few worldly Allurements, few
worldly Businesses. One was enough for the Wilderness; but for Jerusalem, for
the City, where all the excuses in the Gospel do always meet, they have
bought Commodities, and they must utter them; they have duchased Lands, and
they must state them, they have married Wives, and they must study them: to
the City, to Jerusalem, Christ sends all his Apostles, and all little enough.
He has sent a great many Apostles, Preachers, to this City; more then to any
other, that I know Religious persons, as they call them, Cloistered Friars, are
not sent to the City; by their first Canons, they should not preach abroad:
but for those who are to do that service, there are more in this City, then
in others; for there are more Parish Churches here, then in others. Now,
beloved, if in this City you have taken away a great part of the revenue of
the Preacher, to your selves, take thus much of his labor upon your selves
too, as to preach to one another by a holy and exemplar life, and a religious
conversation. Let those of the City, who have interest in the Government of
this Plantation, be Witnesses of Christ, who is Truth it self, to all other
Governors of Companies, in all true and just proceedings: That as CHRIST said
to them who thought themselves greatest, Except you become as this little
Child; so we may say to the Governors of the greatest Companies, Except you
proceed with the integrity, with the justice, with the clearenesse of your
little Sister, this Plantation, you do not take, you do not follow a good
example. This is to bear witness of Christ in Jerusalem, in the City, to be
examples of Truth, and Justice, and Clearenesse, to others, in, and of this
City.

The Apostles were to do this in Iudaea Iudaea.
too, their service lay in the Country as well as in the City. Birds that are
kept in Cages, may learn some Notes, which they should never have sung in the
Woods, or Fields; but yet they may forget their natural Notes too. Preachers
that bind themselves always to Cities, and Courts, and great Auditories, may
learn new Notes; they may become occasional Preachers, and make the emergent
affairs of the time, their Text, and the humors of the hearers, their Bible:
but they may lose their Natural Notes, both the simplicity and the boldness
that belongs to the Preaching of the Gospel; both their power upon low
Understandings, to raise them, and upon high Affections, to humble them. They
may think, that their Errand is but to knock at the door, to delight the
ear, and not to search the House, to ransacke the Conscience. Christ left the
Ninety and nine for one Sheep; populous Cities are for the most part, best
provided; remoter parts need our labor more, and we should not make such
differences. Yeoman, and Labourer, and Spinster, are distinctions upon Earth,
in the Earth; in the Grave there is no distinction. The Angel that shall call
us out of that Dust, will not stand to suruay, who lies naked, who in a Coffin,
who in Wood, who in Lead; who in a fine, who in a courser Sheet: In that one
day of the Resurrection, there is not a fore-noone for Lords to rise first, and
an afternoon for meaner persons to rise after. Christ was not whipped, to
save Beggars; and crowned with Thorns, to save Kings; he dyed, he suffered
all, for all: and we (whose bearing witness of him, is to do as he did)
must confer our Labors upon all; upon Jerusalem, and upon Iudaea too; upon
the City, and upon the Country too. You (who are his Witnesses too) must do
so too; Preach in your just actions, as to the City, to the Country too. Not
to seal up the secrets, and the mysteries of your business within the bosom
of Merchants, and exclude all others: to nourish an incompatibilitie between
Merchants and Gentlemen; that Merchants shall say to them in reproach, You have
played the Gentlemen; and they in equal reproach, You have played the Merchant:
but as Merchants grow up into worshipful Families, and worshipful Families
let fall Branches amongst Merchants again; so for this particular Plantation,
you may consider City and Country to be one Body: and as you give example of
a just Government to other Companies in the City, (that is your bearing
witness in Jerusalem;) so you may be content to give Reasons of your
Proceedings, and Account of Moneys levied over the Country, for that is your
bearing witness in Iudaea.

But the Apostles Dioces is enlarged, farther then Jerusalem, farther then
Iudaea, Samaria.
they are carried into Samaria; you must bear witness of me in Samaria.
Beloved, when I have remembered you, who the Samaritans were, Men that had not
renounced GOD, but mingled other gods with him, Men that had not burned the Law
of GOD, but made Traditions of Men equal to it; you will easily guess to whom
I apply the name of Samaritans now. A Jesuit has told us (an ill Intelligencer
I confess, but even his Intelligencer, the Devil himself, says true
sometimes) Maldonate says, the Samaritans were odious to the Jews, upon the
same grounds as Heretics and Schismatiques to us; and they we know were
odious to them, for mingling false gods, and false worships with the true. And
if that be the Caracter of a Samaritan, we know who are the Samaritans, who
the Heretics, who the Schismatiques of our times. In the highest reproach to
Christ, the Jews said, Samaritanus es and Daemonium habes, Thou art a
Samaritan, and have a Devil. In our just detestation of these Men, we justly
fasten both those upon them. For as they delight in lies, and fill the world
with weekly rumors, Daemoniu^ habe^t, they have a Devil, quia mendax est and
pater eius. John 8.44.
As they multiply assassinats upon Princes, and Massacres upon people,
Daemonium habent, they have a Devil, quia homicida ab initio: as they toss,
and tumble, and dispose kingdoms, Daemonium habent, they have a Devil, Math.
4.10.
Omnia haec dabo was the Devils complement: but as they mingle truths and
falsehoods together in Religion, as they carry the word of GOD, and the
Traditions of Men, in an even balance, Samaritani sunt, they are Samaritanes.
At first Christ forbad his Apostles, to go into any City of the Samaritans;
after, 10.5.
they did preach in many of them. Bear witness first in Jerusalem, Acts 8.25.
and in Iudaea; give good satisfaction especially to those of the household of
the Faithful, in the City and Country, but yet satisfy even those
Samaritans too.

They would be satisfied, what Miracles you work in Virginia, and what people
you have converted to the Christian Faith, there. If we could as easily call
natural effects Miracles, or casual accide^ts Miracles, or Magical illusions
Miracles, as they do; to make a miraculous drawing of a Tooth, a miraculous
cutting of a Corn; or, as Iustus Baronius says, when he was converted to
them, that he was miraculously cured of the Cholique, by stooping to kiss the
Popes foot: If we would pile up Miracles so fast as Pope John 22. did in the
Canonization of Aquinas, Tot Miracula confecit, quot determinauit quaestiones,
he wrought as many Miracles, as he resolved Questions, we might find Miracles
too. In truth, their greatest Miracle to me, is, that they find men to believe
their Miracles. If they rely upon Miracles, they imply a confession, that they
induce new Doctrines; that that is old, and received, needs no Miracles: If
they require Miracles, because though that be ancient Doctrine, it is newly
brought into those parts, we have the confession of their Jesuit Acosta, that
they do no Miracle in those Indies; and he assigns very good reasons, why
they are not necessary, nor to be expected there. But yet bear witness to
these Samaritans, in the other point; labor to give them satisfaction in the
other point of their charge, What Heathens you have converted to the Faith;
which is that which is intended in the next, which is the last branch, You are
to be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria,
and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth.

Literally, Fines terrae.
the Apostles were to be such Witnesses for Christ: were they so? did the
Apostles in person preach the Gospel over all the World? I know that it is not
hard to multiply places of the Fathers, in confirmation of that opinion, that
the Apostles did actually and personally preach the Gospel in all Nations,
Math. 24.14.
in their life. Christ says, The Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in
all the World; and there he tells the Apostles, that they shall see something
done, after that; Therefore they shall live to it. So he says to them, Mark
13.9.
You shall be brought before Rulers and Kings for my sake; but the Gospel must
first be published among all Nations: In one Evangelist there is the
Commission; Luke 24.47.
Preach in my name to all Nations. And in another, the Execution of this
Commission, Mark 16.20.
And they went and preached every where. And after the Apostle certifies, and
returns the execution of this Commission, Col. 1.5.
The Gospel is come and brings forth fruit to all the world: and upon those,
and such places, have some of the Fathers been pleased to ground their
literal exposition, of an actual and personal preaching of the Apostles over
all the world. But had they dreamed of this world which has been discovered
since, into which, we dispute with perplexity, and intricacy enough, how any
men came at first, or how any beasts, especially such beasts as men were not
likely to carry, they would never have doubted to have admitted a Figure, in
that, Luke 1.1.
The Gospel was preached to all the world; for when Augustus his Decree went
out, That all the World should be taxed, the Decree and the Tax went not
certainly into the West Indies; when Saint Paul says, Rom 1.8.16.19.
That their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World, and that their
obedience was come abroad unto all men, surely the West Indies had not heard of
the faith and the obedience of the Romans. But as in Moses time, they called
the Mediterranean Sea, the great Sea, because it was the greatest that those
men had then seen, so in the Apostles time, they called that all the World,
which was known and traded in then; and in all that, they preached the
Gospel. So that as Christ when he said to the Apostles; Mar. vlt. vlt.
I am with you unto the end of the World, could not intend that of them in
person, because they did not last to the end of the World, but in a succession
of Apostolic men, so when he says, the Apostles should preach him to all the
World, it is of the Succession too.

Those of our profession, that go; you, that send them who go, do all an
Apostolical Function. What Action soever has in the first intention thereof a
purpose to propagate the Gospel of Christ Jesus, that is an Apostolical
Action: Before the end of the World come, before this Mortality shall put on
Immortality, Romans 8.
before the Creature shall be delivered of the Bondage of Corruption under
which it groans, before the Martyrs under the Altar shall be silenced, before
all things shall be subdued to Christ, his Kingdom perfited, and the last
Enemy (Death) destroyed, the Gospel must be preached to those men to whom ye
send, to all men. Further and hasten you this blessed, this joyful, this
glorious consummation of all, and happy reunion of all Bodies to their
Souls, by preaching the Gospel to those men. Preach to them Doctrinally,
preach to them Practically; enamore them with your Justice, and (as far as
may consist with your security) your Civility; but inflame them with your
Godliness, and your Religion. Bring them to love and reverence the name of
that King, that sends men to teach them the ways of Civility in this World,
but to fear and adore the Name of that King of Kings, that sends men to teach
them the ways of Religion, for the next World. Those amongst you, that are old
now, shall pass out of this World with this great comfort, that you
contributed to the beginning of that Common Wealth, and of that Church, though
they live not to see the growth thereof to perfection: Apollo watered, 1. Cor.
3.6.
but Paul planted; he that begun the work, was the greater man. And you that
are young now, may live to see the Enemy as much impeached by that place, and
your friends, yea Children, as well accommodated in that place, as any other.
You shall have made this Island, which is but as the Suburbs of the old world, a
Bridge, a Gallery to the new; to join all to that world that shall never grow
old, the Kingdom of Heaven, You shall add persons to this Kingdom, and to
the Kingdom of Heaven, and add names to the Books of our Chronicles, and to
the Book of Life.

To end all, as the Orators which declaimed in the presence of the Roman
Emperors, in their Panegyriques, took that way, to make those Emperors see
what they were bound to do, to say in those public Orations, that those
Emperors had done so, (for that increased the love of the Subject to the
Prince, to be so told, that he had done those great things, and then it conuayd
a Counsel into the Prince to do them after.) As their way was to procure
things to be done, by saying they were done, so beloved I have taken a contrary
way: for when I, by way of exhortation, all this while have seemed to tell you
what should be done by you; I have, indeed, but told the Congregation, what
has been done already: neither do I speak to move a wheel that stood
still, but to keep the wheel in due motion; nor persuade you to begin, but to
continue a good work; nor propose foreign, but your own Examples, to do
still, as you have done hitherto. For, for that, that which is especially in my
contemplation, the conversion of the people, as I have received, so I can give
this Testimony, That of those persons who have sent in Moneys, and concealed
their Names, the greatest part, almost all, have limited their Devotion and
Contribution upon that point, the propagation of Religion, and the conversion
of the People; for the building and beautifying of the House of GOD, and for
the instruction and education of their young Children. Christ Jesus himself is
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. In the advancing of his Glory, be
you so too, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, here: and hereafter,
when Time shall be no more, no more yesterday, no more to day, yet for ever and
ever you shall enjoy that joy, and that glory, which no ill accident can
attain to diminish, or Eclipse it.

PRAYER.
WE return to thee again, O GOD, with Praise and Prayer; as for all thy
mercies from before Minutes began, to this Minute; from our Election, to this
present Beam of Sanctification, which thou have shed upon us now: and more
particularly, that thou have afforded us that great Dignity, to be this way
Witnesses of thy Son Christ Jesus, and Instruments of his Glory. Look
graciously, and look powerfully upon this Body, which thou have been now some
years in building and compacting together, this Plantation. Look graciously
upon the Head of this Body, our Sovereign, and bless him with a good
disposition to this Work, and bless him for that disposition: Look
graciously upon them, who are as the Brain of this Body, those who by his
power counsel, and advise, and assist in the Government thereof: bless them
with disposition to Unity and Concord, and bless them for that disposition.
Look graciously upon them who are as Eyes of this Body, those of the Clergy,
who have any interest therein: bless them with a disposition to preach there,
to pray here, to exhort every where, for the advancement thereof, and bless
them for that disposition. Bless them who are the Feet of this Body, who go
thither; and the Hands of this Body, who labor there; and them who are the
Heart of this Body; all that are heartily affected, and declare actually that
heartinesse to this action; bless them all with a cheereful disposition to
that, and bless them for that disposition. Bless it so in this Calm, that
when the Tempest comes, it may ride it out safely; bless it so with Friends
now, that it may stand against Enemies hereafter. Prepare thy self a glorious
Harvest there, and give us leave to be thy Laborers, That so the number of thy
Saints being fulfilled, we may with better assurance join in that Prayer,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; and so meet all in that Kingdom which the Son
of GOD has purchased for us with the inestimable price of his incorruptible
Blood. To which glorious Son of GOD, etc.

Amen.
FINIS.

