Mr. EDWARD DERING, HIS Godly private Prayers for Christian Families.

Whereunto is annexed, his brief and necessary Catechism for Householders.

Mark 11.24. Whatsoever you desire when you pray, believe that ye shall have
it, and it shall be given unto you. ^om. 10.13. Whosoeu^r shall call upon the
Name of the Lord, shall be saved. LONDON, Printed by Isaac Iaggard, 1624.

A PREFACE describing the Glorious estate of the Saints on earth and the true
Nature, and Right use of Prayer. To the excellent that are on earth, all things
pertaining to life and glory through the spirit of Grace and Supplication.
Beloved in the Lord Jesus,
AS the love of God has herein exceedingly abounded unto us, that we are
called the Sons of God; so there is not a more pregnant Emblem of our Adoption
to be his Children, then that we cry Abba, Father; nor a more lively pledge of
our love unto God, then that we do cast our selves into the arms of his
mercy, by faithful prayer. Oh how much better is it to be a doore-keeper in
the House of God, then to sit on the Throne with Princes? How exceeding were
the riches of Gods mercy toward us, that spared not his only Son unto
death, to restore us from death, to life? That the Lord of Glory became a
Servant unto all, that he might redeem us from the bondage of sin, into tbe
glorious liberty of the Sons of God? That life it self became death, that
he might deliver us from death unto life: That he that knew no sin, but was
perfect holiness it self, yet became sin for our sakes, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. Surely, if David thought it an high
advancement to be the son in law to an earthly and wicked King, How much
more glorious is our advancement, that we are become the adopted sons of the
Almighty, and Holiest God, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? And if
the Queen of Saba counted the servants of Solomon happy, because they enjoyed
his presence and were partakers of the worldly and fading Comforts as abounded
in his Court: Oh how much more happy is the condition of the Saints of God
that do not only enjoy the gracious presence of God with open face, in whose
favor is Eternal life, but are thereby translated into the same image, from
glory to glory, as by the Spirit of GOD, that so they may be made meet
partakers of that glorious inheritance with the Saints in light; even that
light which is immortal and undefiled, which fades not? If to be rich in
faith and good works be the true and dureable treasure which fails not; If
the joy of the Spirit be that which none can take away from us; If all earthly
honor be as dung in comparison of that inward glory wherewith the Kings
daughter is adorned; If their safety be impregnable, which have a wall of fire
to beguirt them, and therein walking most secure that have the Lord of Hosts to
protect and guide them; then happy surely, and thrice happy is the condition of
Gods Children, who have God to be their Portion, and may enjoy durable riches,
pure and everlasting Comfort, honor that never fades, and security without
security. For as our security in God makes us watchful over our own ways,
and jealous of our own inability, so hereby are we daily cast upon the riches
of Christ, and from him increase and grow in grace. And as we grow in grace so
do we attain to, and prosper more and more in peace of conscience, and thereby
abound with joy in the holy Ghost. And the more we are filled with joy and
peace in believing, the more do we glorify our God in cheerful obedience, and
so as members are more entirely interessed in the glory of our head,
approaching hereby nearer to the life of Glory, the more we triumph over all
our oppositions, and are more thoroughly abased and excluded of all glorying in
our selves, that so doing all things to the glory of our God, we may be
advanced by him in abasing our sel^es, and weaned from all carnal and fading
glory, that we may be fitted for the glory of the life to come. And what can
now hinder us heerefrom, whereto all things shall further? No trouble can do
it, seeing it prepares thereto: No, not sin shall hinder, because it is not
imputed; but rather auailes to the imputation of righteousness, that so the
sting of sin may be removed. It is not life can do it, because we are dead
unto sin; neither shall death avail hereunto, seeing we are alive unto GOD.
Much less may Angels hinder, because they are ministering spirits for our good,
to keep us in all our ways: Nor Principalities can prevail, because the
Kingdoms are the Lords, and so overseers to the Saints: It is not powers shall
hinder, seeing all power is given to our Head; and so in him we are able to do
all things: Neither things present should ought avail hereto, because we live
by Faith, and not by sight, and so can lay up a good Foundation by them against
the life to come. Neither shall things to come hinder us, which are already
ours by Faith, whereby we apprehend them, though yet we enjoy them not, and so
in patience wait for them; and so by continuance in well-doing, make ready for
the^. And how shall height hinder us who have the Highest to be our hope, whom
lowliness aduanceth, and highness abaseth? Can depth prevent us, when our
Head is above water, nay above the highest Heavens, whether he will draw us up
all after him, out of the deepest snares? No, no, it is not hell can hinder us
seeing it is destroyed, nor Satan shall prevail, for seeing we have the shield
of Faith to resist him, he will fly from us

Behold the wonderful and glorious privileges of the sons of God! And by this
we know, that we have this glorious union and fellowship with God, even by his
Spirit that he has given us. And hereby we know effectually, that the Spirit
dwells in us even by this blessed liberty and boldness in pressing to the
throne of Grace, crying Abba, Father, with all Son-like importunity; and
challenging his promise in Christ Jesus. Thus by the Spirit, we know our
Adoption, and by the Spirit of Prayer, we plead the same. And can we be denied
when the Spirit helps our Infirmities, and knovves our Wants? Shall we not
prevail above whatsoever we can ask or think, seeing our Savior is our
Advocate to make intercession for us, who knows what is best for us, who
hears before we ask, and asks that we may be heard?

Behold here the ground and necessity of Prayer. If the Spirit be in us, we
shall pray in the Spirit; and if we pray in the liberty of the Spirit, we are
set at liberty thereby, even the liberty of the Sons of GOD. Only be we
wise to try the Spirit by the Spirit, that so we may not offer the sacrifice
of Fools.

1. It is the Spirit of knowledge, and so we must pray in knowledge.

2. It is the Spirit of Christ that is in us, and so we must pray in the Name
of Christ by the Spirit.

3. It is the Spirit of Faith, and so we must pray in Faith without doubting.

4. And it is the Spirit of Patience, and so we must wait in Prayer.

5. It is the Spirit of Wisdom, teaching us what to pray for, and so we must
pray in wisdom for such things as be most sovereign and necessary. For
spiritual graces absolutely, for temporal with condition.

6 It is the Spirit of Humility, teaching us to deny our own wisdom, and
not rest in our own righteousness, and so to submit to the will of God, as
not to faint in our labor, although we fail in our particular desire.

7 It is the Spirit of Perseverance, and so we must pray continually, and
persevere therein with all thankfulness.

8 It is a quickening and powrfull Spirit, working mightily in us, and so we
must pray in all zeal and feruency of the Spirit, because if they be fervent,
they shall prevail.

9. It is the holy and blessed Spirit, and therefore whosoever calls on the
name of the Lord must depart from Iniquity; if we regard iniquity in our hearts
the Lord will not hear our prayers.

Thus may we pray in the Spirit. Neither may such prescript form of Prayer
prejudice or stint the same. But we must be careful of the sense of our
particular wants, and apprehension of Gods favor in Jesus Christ, to power out
our hearts unto our GOD, who is only privy hereunto, and loves truth in the
inward parts: so shall the words of our mouths be acceptable unto him, whether
we speak by the mediate direction of holy men, who are inspired by the holy
Ghost, or immediately by the inspiration of the holy and blessed Spirit.

1 Being wise in either to avoid formality, customaries, and superstition, as
if the thing how soever done, would prevail.

2 Laboring still to quicken up our hearts in the love of Christ, that so we
may continue with all patience and perseverance therein.

3 Using carefully to search and prepare our hearts, when we come before the
Lord.

4 Preparing our hearts by holy Meditation of the Majesty, power, and goodness
of God, to quicken our faith, and confound carnal Wisdom.

5 Renewing our Vows and Covenants with the Lord, when soever we look to
speed well from him.

6 And yet not building any further in the issue upon our God, then may stand
with his good pleasure for our cheifest good in his Time and Manner, which
shall be fittest for us.

7 Comforting our selves rather in the sense of that divine assistance,
quickening our requests, and continuing powrefully therein, then in any present
sensible issue concerning our selves: that still we may have to rejoice in our
God, and not in our selves.

8 And so quieting our hearts that we have done the will of our GOD, that the
will of God may be done in us, to the satisfying of our best desires in that
manner and measure, as best pleases him for our maine and principal good.
Thus may we prevail in Prayer.

And to this end may thou make use of these helps, rather as Directions to
inform thee aright in the matter and order of Prayer; the^ any strict bounds
to confine thee to the letter thereof Wishing thee in the fear of God, so to
make use thereof, as to make them rather means to stir up the Spirit in thee,
then to stint or prescribe the same. Which thou shall do, if that thou do
seriously meditate on each particular Model before thou use the same to inform
thine understanding, and kindle thine affections to the love thereof: and then
so use the Form as not to rest herein, but rather to propound it as a
pattern for thy better direction in the like, and so to sample it as near as
thou may, or rather even to put life unto it, and better the same.

And so the Lord give thee understanding in all things, in whom I rest.

Tho: Cooper.

A Table of all the several Prayers contained in this Book.
A Brief Prayer upon the Lords prayer. 64 Another Prayer more at large upon
the Lords prayer. 76 A Confession of sins with Faith and repentance. 101 A
prayer for the prosperous estate of the whole Church. 110 Morning prayer for
private houses and Families. 125 Evening prayer for the same. 135 A form of
prayer daily to be used of all faithful Christians in their houses, or
elsewhere. 144 A special Morning Prayer for the Sabbath. 184 Evening prayer
for the Sabath. 205 A Prayer to be said before the hearing or reading of the
holy Scriptures. 222 A Thanksgiving after the hearing or reading of the word
of God. 230 A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament. 236 A Prayer to be
said after the receiving of the Sacrament. 238 A Prayer for constant
perseverance in praying, when we are dull to prayer. 240 A Prayer for all
times. 245 A prayer for all estates. 250 A Prayer to be confirmed in the
knowledge of God. 255 A Prayer for the obtaining of saving Faith. 258 A Prayer
to feel in heart spiritual comfort, and the lively sense of our Adoption by
Faith. 274 A Prayer against doubting, whereby to strengthen a weak Faith, and
to persevere therein. 278 (...) Prayer for obtaining of Trial, and cherishing
of the holy Spirit of God. 302 A Prayer for obtaining of a lively Hope. 322 A
prayer for the obtaining and increase of Love. 330 A prayer to obtain and
preseru^ the fear of God, that we may b^ kept constant thereby in holiness^ to
the end. 3^^ A prayer for the obtaining of grace and wisdom. 34^ A prayer to
walk faithfully an^ fruitfully in our Civil and personal Callings. 35^ A
prayer before the taking of Journey. 36^ A Thanksgiving for good succe^^
therein. 3^^ A Prayer for a Woman in Tr^uaile. 3^^ A Thanksgiving after safe
De^uerance. 3^^ A prayer for those that assist a tr^uailing woman. 3^^ A
Thanksgiving for their g^^ success. 3^^ A prayer for such as in this w^^ be
very rich. 391 A prayer for such as be poor and needy. 395 A prayer to obtain
grace of God, against the assaults of the world, the flesh, and the devil. 397
A Thanksgiving after blessings obtained, to acknowledge them as from God. 409
A prayer for patience in Tribulation, and that God may be glorified thereby.
412 A prayer for Mortification and holiness. 417 A prayer for the feeling of
the sin of Hypocrisy, that we may direct our life according to the prescript
rule of the Word. 424 A prayer against the secret venim and great danger of
prosperity. 431 A prayer against Whoredom and Uncleanness. 439 A prayer
against Covetousness and Ambition. 443 A prayer against usual and common
Swearing. 446 A Prayer against Pride. 449 A prayer against Gluttony and
Drunkenness. 455 A prayer against Idleness and Sloth. 460 A prayer against
Infidelity and despair, necessary for a troubled and wounded Conscience. 464
The END of the Table.
A brief and necessary Catechism: Very meet to be known of every one,
before they be admitted unto the Supper of the Lord.
Question.

WHat is the cheifest thing which every one ought to be most careful of, as
long as they live?

An. Every one ought to be most careful of these two points. First and
chiefly, ^ow we can be saved in the day of judgment, before Gods judgment
seat, and so come to life everlasting. Secondly, how to live according to Gods
holy will during our life. In which two points wholly stands the glory of
God, so much as of man ought to be sought for.

Que. How can we know this how we are discharged before Gods judgment seat?

An. We can never know how we be discharged before the judgment seat of God,
until such time as we know our own miserable estate by reason of the
greatness of our sins, and the horrible punishment, which we deserve for
them.

Que. How do thou know the greatness of thy sin, and the horrible
punishment due to the same.

An. The greatness of my sin, and the horrible punnishment thereof, I know ^y
the Law of God, rightly understood, the sum whereof is contained in the ten
Commandments.

Quest. Rehearse the ten Commandments.

An. God spoke all these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God, wc brought
^hee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of ^ondage.

1 THou shall have none other but Gods me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that ^s in Heaven above, nor in the ^arth beneath, nor in the water under
the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: For I the Lord
thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
children, to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands, in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy GOD in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it, thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manseruant, and thy maidseruant, try cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days, the LORD made heaven and earth,
the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit Adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house: thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors wife, nor his manseruant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass,
nor any thing that is his.

Qu. What is the first Commandment?

An. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

A. The Lord God straightly charge us in this first commandment, that we
worship God alone, which worship stands in three points. First, that we
love God above all. Secondly, that we make our prayers to none but to God.
Thirdly, that we acknowledge God alone to be the guider and governor of all
things, of whom we receive all the benefits we have, and therefore that we
trust and stay upon him alone.

Que. What is the second Commandment?

An. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, etc.

Qu. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

An. In this second Commandment be contained three things. First, that we
should not think God to be like either man or woman, or any other thing, and
therefore, that we make no image of God in any case.

Secondly, that we make no image of any other thing, either to worship the
image it self, either God, Saint, or Angel by the image, neither yet to this
end, to be the better put in mind of God by the Image.

Thirdly, that we worship not God in any other outward worship, according to
our own fantasies, but as God commands us in his word.

Que. What is the 3. Commandment?

An. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

Ans. God charge us in this third Commandment, these three things. First,
that we use with a most high reverence the name of GOD, whenever we either
speak or think upon him.

Secondly, that we never blaspheme the name of God in our common talk,
although the matter be never so true: but only where the glory of God is
sought, or the salvation of our Brethren, or else before a Magistrate in
witnessing the truth when we are thereunto lawfully called. In which causes we
must only swear by the name of God. But as for Saints, Angels, Rood, Book,
Cross, Mass, or any other thing, we ought in no case by them to swear.

Que. What is the 4 Commandment?

An. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

An. The hallowing of the Sabbath day, is to rest from our labors in our
Calling; and in one place to assemble our selves together, and with fear and
reverence, to hear, mark, and lay up in our hearts, the word of GOD preached
unto us, to pray all together, that which we understand, with one consent. And
at the times appointed, to use the Sacraments in Faith and Repentance, and all
our life long to rest from wickedness, that the Lord by his holy Spirit, may
work in us his good work, and so begin in this life the everlasting rest.

Que. What is the fifth Commandment?

An. Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

An. The meaning of the fifth Commandment is, that we should honor, that is to
say, love, fear, obey, and relieve our Parents, or any other that are unto us
in their stead. As our Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, our Pastors and
Teachers, our Masters, and all other which are above us in any calling, placed
by God: the Aged and ^ray headed: and, that all Superiors do show themselves
indeed Parents, in defending and guiding their Inferiors.

Qu. What is the sixth Commandment?

Ans. Thou shall do no murder.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

An. First, the Lord God forbids us in this Commandment, all killing,
fighting, and quarrelling, all reproaches, mocks, and taunts. Secondly, he
forbids all killing in heart, that is, al anger and malice, all desire of
revenge. Thirdly, on the other side, he commands us to preserve life, by
exercising the works of mercy and compassion toward our Brethren, yea, even
toward our Enemies. Fourthly, to love one another inwardly in heart, as our
selves, yea even our enemies, and them that hate us.

Que. What is the seventh Commandment?

An. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

An. We are forbidden in this seventh Commandment, first, all Adultery,
Fornication, and all other uncleanness in our bodies.

Secondly, all vnpure thoughts, and lusts of the heart.

Thirdly, all other things which might entice to such uncleanness; as all
unchaste behavior, filthy talk, and songs, wanton apparel, lewd and idle
pastimes, gluttony, drunkenness, houses of open whoredom, and whatsoever else
may allure us to uncleanness.

Fourthly, on the other side he commands us to keep our bodies and souls
chaste and pure, as Temples of the holy Ghost. Or if the gift of Chastity be
not given us, then to use the lawful remedy appointed by God, which is marriage.

Que. What is the 8. Commandment?

An Thou shall not steal.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

An. In this eighth Commandment, the Lord God forbids all stealing and
robbing in ou^ward deeds. Secondly, he forbids all stealing in heart; that
is, all desire of any man's Goods wrongfully. Thirdly, he forbids all false
and wrongful dealing. Fourthly, on the other side, he charge us that we be
content with the portion of goods which the Lord gives us, to apply our
selves in our vocation and calling, to get our own living, and live of that
which is our own, and also to be helpful to others.

Que. What is the 9. Commandment?

An. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

Qu. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

Ans. The Lord God in this ninth Commandment does command us: first, that we
should never speak falsely in witnesse-bearing. Secondly, that not only in
witnesse-bearing, but also in other matters, we should never lie, flatter, or
dissemble. Thirdly, that we should never tell any false tales behind our
neighbors back, or hear them of others: that we should never believe any evil
spoken of them behind their backs, until we fully know the certainty.
Fourthly, in private offenses, to speak nothing, although it be true, to the
hurting of our Brothers good name, if by private admonition he may be won.

Que. What is the 10. Commandment?

Ans. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house.

Que. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

An. Hee^e the Lord God in plain words, does forbid all inward desire,
whatsoever is unlawful to be done, although we never consent unto it, as the
rebellion of the flesh, all corruption of the old man, all blot of original
sin, so that by this Commandment, most clearly we may see the Image of
that man that pleases God, even such an one in whom nothing is impure, neither
in will, nor nature.

Que. Can thou fulfill all these Commandments of God, without breaking any
one of them?

An. These are the Commandments of Almighty God, the perfect fulfilling
whereof, no flesh can attain unto: No, although I do all that I can, yet I
break them daily, both in thought, word, and deed.

Que. What punishment does God appoint for breaking any one of these?

An. The punishment for the breaking of the least Commandment, even in
thought, yea, if it were but once broken in all my life, is the everlasting
curse of God, which contains all the torments that can be devised both of
soul and body, and in the Scripture is called by diverse names to express the
pain, as hell fire, the worm that never dies, utter darkness, burning Lake,
second death, damnation, and such like.

Qu Is there nothing which a man can do in the World, to serve as a sufficient
recompense to God for one sin?

An. No, although I should give all my goods unto the poor, or suffer my body
to be whipped all my life long, or suffer any other punnishment which might be
devised: it is not sufficient for one of my least sins.

Que. Yea, but God is merciful, will he therefore punish sin so sharply
think thou?

An. Our God indeed is merciful, but he is also just and true, and therefore
must needs of justice and truth, punish man's sin, with the punishment which
he has appointed.

Que. Seeing then this punishment must needs be suffered, are we in our selves
able to suffer and overcome it?

An. None is able to suffer and overcome this great punishment of sin, being
only man.

Quest. Is there then no means at all, whereby we may be saved from those
pains everlasting?

An. The pains which our sins deserve, must needs be suffered by man,
because that God of his justice must needs be suffered by man, because God
of his justice must needs punnish sin in man, which was committed by man:
and therefore our Savior Christ being everlasting God, became also man, and
has fully suffered whatsoever was due for man's sin.

Que. Are not then all people discharged, seeing the punnishment is paid?

An. None are discharged, saving those that take hold upon Christ, and his
merits with a true Faith.

Que. What call thou this true Faith?

An. This true and lively Faith, is a full persuasion and assurance of my heart,
grounded upon the promise of God, and wrought in me by the holy Ghost, whereby
I am fully assured, that whatsoever Christ has wrought for man's salvation,
pertayneth not only to others, but even to me, and is wholly mine, as surely
as if I performed the same in mine own person.

Que. How can it be that thy sins are forgiven thee, and yet according to
Gods truth fully punished, with the punishment which God has appointed for
sins?

An. By this my true faith, I see my sins both to be forgiven, and yet fully
punished; for in Jesus Christ, to satisfy Gods justice, they be fully
punished, and yet to me they be forgiven, because in me they be not punished,
but in Christ for me, to set forth Gods mercy, and therefore shall never be
laid to my charge. In this manner therefore, I see the Lord my God to be both
merciful and just.

Que. Yea, but although the punishment of my sins be paid in Christ, yet
seeing there can no unrighteousness dwell with God, how can thou stand before
Gods judgment seat, as righteous and just, s ing thou have no righteousness;
but such as is staind with so many sins?

An. I stand as just and righteous before the Throne of God, not clothed with
mine own righteousness, which I have wrought in mine own person, but with
the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Which righteousness being taken hold upon by
a true faith, is made mine: thus am I just in the sight of God, not in respect
of mine own works which I have done, but taking hold upon Christ his Works,
to be mine by Faith.

Quest. Does not this make men to run into all sin and wickedness?

An. No: for this true faith as soon as it has wrought in us through the holy
ghost does frame our hear^s anew, and causes us to detest, hate loathe, and
abhor sin in all men, but especially in our selves, and makes us to have
our whole delight and joy in those things which be agreeable unto Gods Will,
and causes us likewise, to show and express the same in our life and
conversation, or else it is no true Faith, but a dead Faith.

Que. Rehearse the sum of this faith.

An. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Marie. He suffered under Pentius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried, he descended into hell, and the third day he rose again from
death. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty. From thence shall he come, to judge both the quick and the dead. I
believe in the holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The Communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. So be it.

Que. What is the effect of this Creed?

An. This Creed contains four especial points. First, what we ought to
believe concerning God the Father. Secondly, concerning God the Son. Thirdly,
concerning God the holy Ghost. Fourthly, concerning Gods people, called the
Church.

Que. What beleeuest thou in the first part, concerning God the Father?

An. First I believe, that God the Father thorough Christ, into whose body I
am grafted by faith, is not only a Father of other faithful, but even my
Father, and therefore loves me. Secondly, that he is Almighty, that is, that
he has all power in his hand, guiding and ruling all things, so that nothing
can be done in heaven, earth, or hell, without his providence.

Que. What beleeuest thou in the second part concerning God the Son.

An. I believe that Jesus Christ one God in substance with the Father and the
holy Ghost, took flesh of the Virgin, and is become perfect man as I am in all
things sin only excepted, and in my Nature has wrought for me, whatsoever
was needful for my salvation.

Que. What meanest thou, when thou say, He suffered under Pontius Pilate?

Ans. Because that manner of death which men do suffer by the sentence of the
Judge, and under the Title of Justice, is more shameful, slanderous and
terrible, then if a man should dye naturally in his bed. Therefore Christ
took on him our person, to show himself before an earthly Judge, and to be
condemned by the mouth of Pilate, he being then Judge, that thereby we might be
cleared before the judgment seat of God.

Que. What meanest thou, when thou say, Christ was crucified, dead, and
buried.

An. First I mean, in that he was crucified, that he suffered the death of the
cross, which was an abominable and cursed death, to deliver me from the
curse which was due for my sins.

Secondly, forasmuch as death was a punishment due unto man for sin, therefore
our Savior did suffer death and by suffering, overcame death. For in his death
does lie the principal point of our salvation: for, if he had not been truly
dead, we should be yet subject to eternal death and damnation.

Thirdly, he was buried, for the more greater confirmation of his death and
Resurrection. And in the intent to make it more certainly known unto us, it
pleased him also to be buried after the common manner of men, and that by two
notable persons, Nicodemus, and Joseph of Aramathia, which was done also by the
will and consent of Pilate, who caused the body to be delivered to them.

Que. What meanest thou concerning this, that Christ descended into hell?

An. Where it is said, that Christ descended into Hell, thereby I believe, that
Christ did not only suffer in his body the punishment due to my body; but also
in his soul the punishment due to my soul, which was, the Torments of hell,
second death, sorrows of death, and abiection from God, as it does appear by
the anguish of his soul in the garden, when drops of blood issued out of his
body, and also upon the Cross by his lamentable cry to his Father. For in
miserable case had we been, if he had suffered only the punishment due to our
bodies, and not to our souls.

Que. What fruit have thou by the death of Christ?

Ans. First I believe, that this death and punishment, which Christ suffered,
is the appeasing of Gods wrath, and a full satisfaction to God for all my
sins. Secondly, that as he is dead for sin, so he will cause sin to die
in my mortal body.

Que. What profit have thou by the rising again of Christ?

An. First, I am assured by his rising from death, that he has overcome death,
hell and sin, and has finished my justification. Secondly, that as he is
risen from death so he causes me as a member of him, to rise from sin, and
delight in righteousness. Thirdly, his rising again, is a sure pledge to me,
that my body shall in like manner rise again.

Que. What is the meaning of this, that Christ ascended into heaven?

An. Christ as touching his manhead, is only in Heaven, but in his Godhead and
comfort of his holy Spirit, he is with us to the end of the world.

Que. What good gettest thou by the ascending of Christ into heaven.

An. First, Christ his ascending into heaven, is a sure pledge unto me, that I
shall in like manner as a member of him, by his power, be received into heaven,
in that same nature wherein he is ascended.

Secondly, Christ having ascended into Heaven, makes continual intercession
for me.

Que. What is the meaning of this, that Christ sits on the right hand of God
the Father?

An. Christ sits on the right hand of the father, that is, has all power
given him of the Father over all things whatsoever.

Que. What fruit do thou receive by this, that Christ shall come to judge the
quick, and the dead.

Ans. To me that am a member of Christ, it is a singular comfort, when I know
assuredly, that none shall be my Judge but he that is my Savior. But terrible
it will be to those that flee from Christ, when they shall see him come to judge
them, whom they in their life time refused.

Que. What beleeuest thou in the third part, concerning God the holy Ghost.

An. I believe that GOD the holy Ghost, seals into my heart all Christ's
benefits to be mine, and makes sin to dye in me, and stirs me up to
righteousness, and holiness of life.

Que. Seeing there is but one only God, why namest thou the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost?

An. Because God has so opened himself in his Word, that these three sundry
persons are in substance but one true and everlasting God.

Que. Now let us come to the fourth part: What call thou the Catholic
Church?

Answer. The Catholic Church, is the whole company of faithful people, that
ever were since the beginning of the world in all places, which also be now,
and shall be to the end of the world. Of the which number, I believe that I am
one: I believe that God knows them all, and has a most tender care over them.

Que. What call thou the Communion of Saints?

An. The Communion of Saints, is the society that all we which believe have one
with another, as members of one head Jesus Christ: whereby we are ready to
communicate all Gods benefits, both Spiritual and Temporal, to the mutual
health and comfort one of another, according unto the measure which we have
received of God in this life.

Que. What is it to believe the forgiveness of sins?

An. I believe, that Jesus Christ has wholly appeased God for my sins, and
paid the full punishment due to them, and therefore that they be freely
forgiven me, and shall never be laid unto my charge.

Que. What beleeuest thou of the rising again of the body?

Ans. I believe, that after this life e^nded, my soul shall go to God that gave
it, and my body shall rest in the grave until the appointed time: and then, I
shall see God in my flesh, and mine eyes shall look upon him: and this my
body, shall be made like to the glorious body of Christ, without al
corruption.

Que. What is it that thou say of Life everlasting?

An. I believe, that when God shall raise again this my body, and ioyn it
again together with my soul, that then I shall live with Christ for ever, in
his everlasting kingdom of glory.

Que. By what means do we attain to this, which thou have here confessed?

An. The holy Ghost has appointed the preaching of the word to be the ordinary
means, whereby he works in our hearts this true and lively faith, and
without this preaching of the Word we can never have faith.

Que. After that GOD by the means of his word, has wrought in our hearts
faith, by what means afterward does he strengthen the same?

An. This faith does God strengthen in us by the self same preaching of the
word and also, by the use of the Sacraments.

Que. What call thou the Sacraments?

An. Sacraments be outward signs ordaind of God, for the greater assurance
and strengthening of our Faith; being unto us, sure pledges of these benefits
of our Salvation, which we receive in Christ to be ours, and are represented
unto us by the outward signs of water in baptism, and Bread and Wine in the
Supper of the Lord. They serve also for a mark of our profession, whereby we
differ from other people which be Heathen.

Qu. How many Sacraments be there?

An. There be two Sacraments, that is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord.

Qu. What strength of faith have thou through Baptism?

Ans. I am taught and assured by Baptism, that my sins are forgiven me: for
as the water washes away the filthiness of my body, even so should I through
the holy Ghost, be thereby fully certified and persuaded that the blood of
Christ, being sprinkled upon my soul by the hand of Faith, has washed away
both the guiltiness of my sin, and the punishment due unto the same: the
fruit and effect whereof appears herein, that through the power of Christ
his death and resurrection, I am dead as touching sin, and raised up again in
newness of life: which two things, in whomsoever they appear not, they may
well have the name and title of Baptism, but indeed they are no Christians.

Qu. What strength of faith do we find in the use of the Lords Supper?

Ans. The Supper of the Lord, thorough the Holy Ghost, does strengthen my
Faith, that I should not doubt, but as surely as I receive the Bread and Wine
into my body, to become wholly mine, so my soul receives withal Christ, with
his passion and righteousness to be wholly mine, as surely as if I had wrought
them mine own self.

Que. Are not then the bread and wine in the supper of the Lord, turned into
the body and blood of Christ?

An. The bread and wine as touching their nature and substance are not turned:
but as touching the use of them, they differ from common Bread and Wine, in
that they are appointed of God, to serve unto us as Seals and ^ledges of those
benefits which Christ in his body has wrought for us.

Qu. In what manner ought thou to prepare thy self to the receiving these
mysteries?

An. In preparing my self to receive the supper of the Lord, I ought
diligently to observe these three things.

First, to examine my self whether I stand in faith or no, which I shall know,
if I feel my heart assured by the Spirit of God, that the punishment of my sins
is fully discharged in Christ, and that whatsoever he has done, pertains
not only to others, but even to me.

Secondly, to examine my self whether I find my heart inwardly sorry for my
sins, with inward hatred and lothing of sin, and an earnest desire, and sure
purpose wholly to conform my self to the will of Gods word.

Thirdly, if any offense be betwixt others and me, that I reconcile my self
unto them. All these things, although they ought earnestly to be considered in
the whole course of our life, yet then especially, when we come to the supper
of the Lord.

Que. Now seeing we be saved, by Christ's Works, without our deseruings,
whereto then now serves our well doings, or what avails it to do good works?

An. We must do good works, not to deserve our salvation by them, but by our
works to glorify God in walking as becomes Gods Children, declaring thereby
our thankfulness to God for our redemption.

Secondly, by our works to make our election more certain unto our selves.

Thirdly, to win others unto Christ, by our holy life and conversation.

Quest. What works call thou good works.

An. Our works can never be accepable and good in the sight of God, unless in
doing them we keep these two things.

First, that they be framed according to the rule of Gods laws and
Commandments, and not after our own device.

Secondly, that they proceed from an heart purged by faith. If either of these
two points be lacking, our works are abominable in the eyes of Almighty God,
although they appear never so glorious in the sight of men.

Que. Because prayer is one especial means which Gad will have us use to
increase our faith, tell me what belongs to true prayer?

An. It is requisite in true prayer, that we observe these five things.

First, that we make our prayers only to God, thorough Christ, and not to
Saints. Secondly, that we be inwardly touched with need of the thing we ask,
having our mind wholly bent thereupon, and not carried away with by-thoghts.
Thirdly, that our prayers be grounded upon Gods promise, with full assurance
that they shall be granted, so far as the Lord does know them to be meet and
needful for us. Fourthly, that we continue in prayer, although we have not our
requests at the first. Fifthly, that we ask not those things which we think
good in our own fantasy, but only that which God commands us to ask of
him: All which things be contained in the Lords prayer.

Quest. Rehearse the Lords prayer.

Answer.

Our Father, which art in heaven hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come: thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Qu. What do thou desire of God in this prayer?

An. First, I desire of our heavenly Father, that his name may be hallowed:
First, in his excellent works, which is, when we acknowledge his mercy,
wisdom, justice, and providence, that he alone works ell things, and that
only the Lord God be had in honor, all other set aside. Secondly, that his
name may be glorified in our godly living, and conversation.

2 In the 2. petition, we desire that God his Kingdom may come, that is, that
he will declare himself to be King over his Church, in guiding and defending
it, in increasing the number of the faithful, in thrusting forth Laborers into
the harvest, and blessing their Labors, and suppressing the rage of the wicked
Tyrants. Secondly, that he will exercise his kingdom severally, in every one
of his, killing sin in us, and all worldly care, and renewing of us to
righteousness of life.

3 In the third petition, we desire that Gods will may be done, that is, that
we may willingly in every thing resign our selves unto Gods will, without
murmuring or grudging.

4 In the fourth petition, we pray that he will give unto us, walking faithfully
in our calling, our daily bread, that is, all things needful for our living in
this present life.

5 In the fifth petition, we pray that our sins may be forgiven us, that he
will not lay to our charge our sins, nor the punishment due unto them, but
that he will accept the death and passion of Christ, as the full satisfaction
for our sins, and that we may hereof have just assurance in our Conscience,
that the punishment of our sins is fully discharged in Christ, and therefore
freely forgiven unto us, as surely as we do forgive others: and that we may
love one another from the bottom of our hearts, all desire of revenge set aside.

6. In the sixth and last petition, we do pray God that he will not lead us into
temptation, but deliver us, that is that he will not bring us further into that
battle with our spiritual Enemies, then we by his holy spirit shall be able
to prevail and overcome.

Que. And why is this added. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

An. Not only to kindle in our hearts to desire the glory of God, but also to
teach us that this Prayer is grounded upon none other, then God only and that
we should not think the kingdom of God to be weak and void of force and
might. Also that he is not only to be honored, praised, and gloryfied, and
that his power is infinite, perpetual and everlasting. And in this word Amen,
is expressed the fervent desire to obtain those things which we ask of God,
and our hope is confirmed, that those things which we ask be granted unto us,
by which our consciences are pacified, and so we end our prayers.

Qu. Tell me now briefly the effect of all thou have said.

An. By the ten Comdements, I see my miserable estate, that I deserve death,
damnation, and the curse of God, which must needs be paid, because God is
just: and whereas I my self am not able to pay it, the holy ghost through the
preaching of the Gospel, works in me Faith, which assures me, that the
Son of God being made man for me, has even in my nature suffered whatsoever
my sins deserved, and has made me with him the child of God, and heir of
everlasting Life. Whereof, least I should doubt or waver, he has appointed two
Sacraments, as outward signs and Tokens to be seen and felt of me: that as
surely as I see my self made partaker of them outwardly: so the holy Ghost
inwardly be partaker of Christ himself, with all his benefits, his ransom,
righteousness, and holiness to be mine, that in him, and through him I shall
have life everlasting. And thus being borne anew into this lively hope, by the
holy ghost, my ways should be directed and guided by the same Spirit, to walk
in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. So be it.

A prayer containing the effect of this Catechism.
O Merciful and heavenly Father, for so much as at every light occasion, I am
withdrawn from thy holy laws to the vanities of this life, unto all sin and
wickedness: I beseech thee in mercy set before mine eyes always the
remembrance of thy judgment seat and my last end, whereby I may be daily
stirred to consider in what great danger I stand, through the horrible
punishment due for my sins, that daily groaning under the burden of them, I
may fly for succor to thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, who has fully paid,
suffered and overcome the punishment due to them, and through the working of thy
holy Spirit in me, I may be fully assured in my soul and Conscience, that the
curse, condemnation, and death, which these my sins deserve, is fully paid,
suffered, and overcome in Christ, that his righteousness, obedience, and
holiness is mine, and whatsoever he has wrought for man's salvation, is wholly
mine.

Strengthen this faith in me daily more and more, that I may inwardly feel
comfort and consolation in this, that I feel thy holy Spirit bear record
unto my spirit, that I am thy Child, grafted into the body of thy Son, and
made with him fellow heir of thine everlasting kingdom. So work in me by thy
holy spirit, that daily more and more, I may feel sin die in me, that I do
not delight therein, but daily may groan under the burden thereof, utterly
hate, detest, and loath sin, set my self and all the powers of my soul and
body against sin, and have full delight, joy, comfort, and pleasure in those
things which be agreeable to thy will, that I may walk as becomes the child
of light, looking still for that good time, when it shall please thee to call
me unto thine everlasting kingdom, for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

FINIS.
GODLY PRIVATE Prayers for Householders to Meditate upon, and to say in their
particular Families.

Made by Mr. Edw. Dering: sometime Reader of the Divinity Lecture in Paul's.

Mark 11.24. Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have
it, and it shall be done unto you. LONDON Printed by Isaac Iaggard, 1624.

Godly private Prayers, to be said at all times, in Christian Families.
A prayer containing the effect of the Householders Catechism.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, I see in thy blessed Laws and
Commandments, the greatness of my sins and wickedness: yea, I see O Lord my
God, the whole course of my life to be almost nothing else, but a continual
breaking of thy holy Laws and Commandments. The thoughts of my heart (either
in vanity, or else open wickedness) are in number infinite, daily in the
abundance of them, causing my mouth to speak, and my body to execute, and
do contrary to thy holy will. And again, O Lord, I see thy heavy wrath,
vengeance and judgment against sin, to be intolerable, that even the least
wicked thoughts, and most secret cogitations of my heart, procures thy heavy
wrath and everlasting curse, the torments of hell, and everlasting fire, even
although I had but once in all my life broken any of thy Commandments, so much
as once in thought. And I know, O Lord GOD, that thou art true and just, and
can not abide sin and wickedness, but will justly punish every sin,
even with the selfsame torments of hell, which thy justice has appointed.

This O Lord my God, throws me down, and even amazeth me so that I know not
what to do. I look into my self, viewing mine own power, whether I am able
to overcome this punishment of my sin or no: and I see that all, even the
most exquisite punishment which I can devise of my self, in whipping of my
body as long as I live; wearing Hair-cloth, pining my self with fasting, or
any other pain. I see, I see, O Lord, that all this punishment is not
sufficient for one of my least sins, because it deserves even the
everlasting pains of hell. I look to Heaven, I see there is no Saint, nor
Angel, able to abide and overcome this punishment of sin; I look to men in
this wo^ld, even to the Popes Treasure, that wicked man of sin, and I see that
neither his Mass, nor Purgatory, Pilgrimage, Pardons, Penance, Satisfactions,
nor any of such like wicked stuff, alas, I see they are nothing for the
satisfying for one of my least wicked thoughts, seeing the punishment is due by
the just decree and sentence of thy everlasting curse. Wherefore I am driven
out from my self, and all that I can do, to seek this punishment dischargd
other where, or else to quail under the burden; I see there is no help for me in
Angels, Saints, nor Mortal men, but only in that perfect man Christ Jesus
thy dear Son, in whom I see the full punishment of my sin wholly paid,
satisfied, discharged, and overcome: death vanquished, the pains of hell in
victory swalowed up, the curse satisfied, and the eternity of the punishment
(thorough his everlasting power) ouer-reached.

This I see (O Lord) by the eyes of faith, being through thy holy spirit, wholly
assured, that all the whole punishment of sin paid by my Savior Christ, is
not only paid for other men, but even also for me and my sin. This
assurance of faith being thine only, work in me, I beseech thee in mercy to
strengthen and increase, for I feel it often full of wavering and doubting.
Grant that I may daily more and more in my soul and conscience, feel my self
knit and ingrafted into the body of thy Son, whereby I may be assured that
whatsoever he has done, pertains to me, and is fully and wholly mine: that I
may through the power of his death, feel sin daily dye in me, and thorough
the power of his resurrection feel my self risen from sin, to have my full
joy and comfort in those things which be agreeable to thy holy will, only
detesting, hating, and abhorring from my heart, all things which be contrary to
thy will and pleasure: that even in this life I may still look for his
endless joy and felicity, using the things of this world, as though I used
them not, till that good time that it shall please thee to call me to thine
everlasting kingdom of glory, there to reign with my Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer upon the Lords prayer.
The first petition.
Our Father which art in heaven.
O Most mighty Lord and eternal God, who have by thy dear son Chrtst Jesus
our Lord and Savior, reconciled unto thy self all things in Heaven and earth,
and in him have made an everlasting bond and Covenant with us thy faithful
Children, that thou will not only be our God, but also our most loving and
merciful Father, whereof as a pledge uhou have given us thy holy spirit of
adoption, whereby we may with boldness and full trust and confidence come to
thee by hearty prayer, as unto our most loving and merciful Father, being
assured that thou will not deny ought which thou know shall be expedient for
us: grant we beseech thee dear Father, that being fully persuaded in our
hearts of this thy Fatherly love and affection toward us, we may be stird up to
make our petitions with such an affection, ardent desire, love, and reverence
to thy Majesty, that our minds be not carried away with by-thoughts creeping
in, but without all wandering may be fully bent and attentive to the things we
ask, and fully staid upon thy merciful and just protection.

Hallowed be thy name.

WE then beseech thee (dear Father) that thou will strenghen our hearts with
thy holy spirit, that considering thou have made al things for the glory of thy
name, so we may in all our doings, enterprises, counsels, and purposes,
cheifely above all things seek thy glory: that we may fully acknowledge thee
not only the Auther of all things, but the Ruler, Guider, and Governor of all
things, both in heaven and earth: that we never diminish thy incomprehensible
glory, by attributing unto our selves any power, strength, or ability to do,
will, or think that which is good: but from our hearts we may acknowledge all
our goodness to come from thee, yielding for the same continual praise and
thanksgiving to thy glorious Name, that we never by distrusting thy mercyfu^l
providence, dishonor thy Name; but that even in our greatest desires we may
put our full confidence in thee, not looking upon our weakness, but staying
upon thy power and promises, by hearty prayer, flying unto thee our only
refuge: that our whole life may be framed, according to thy holy will in all
points, that thy glorious name in us may be sanctified, and that we be not an
occasion that thy holy Name be any way blasphemed through our wicked life and
conversation.

The Second Petition.
Thy kingdom come.
LEt thy Kingdom most merciful Father, appear and manifestly be declared in
all the world, but especially amongst thy Church and faithful Flock: declare
thy self Lord and King over them, ruling them by the scepter of thy holy word
and force of thy holy spirit. Increase the number of faithful Pastors and
Preachers among the people: bless their labors, to the increase of this
kingdom of thy dear son Jesus Christ, and to the destruction of the
kingdom of Satan and Antichrist. Suppress the rage of the Enemies, that they
may know that thou (O Lord) do reign in all ages, to the behoof of thy
Church, and terror of thin^ enemies. Grant these mercies good Lord, not only
to a whole Church in general, but especially to every one of us thy Children
particularly, grant that we may affectually feel the force of this thy
kingdom in our hearts. Beat down in us our old Adam. with all sinful
delights, thoughts, motions, and desires: and renew in us day by day, our
spiritual and inward Man, that we may be wholly bent to delight, think,
desire, and do those things which be acceptable in thy sight.

The third petition.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven.
FRame our hearts good Lord with such humble obedience to thy holy will, that
we may be heartily well content with whatsoever it pleases thy goodness to lay
upon us: that we never cease in our miseries, but continually call on thee by
hearty prayres athough we feel no release at all; yet that still patiently we
may abide and quietly wait for thy good leisure, and appointed time of
deliverance, when thou know it shall be most expedient for us.

The fourth petition.
Give us this day our daily bread.
GRant us dear Father, that all our Counsels, studies, labors and endeavors,
being by thy holy spirit guided and framed, we may every one in that vocation
in which thou have placed him, so fairhfully travail to the discharging of our
Consciences, and edyfying of thy Church: that our account may be found
acceptable before thy Throne and Judgment seat. So bless our labors and
travails, that we may have sufficient for the preserving of this present life
and be content with those benefits which thou shall bestow upon us, whether
they be many or few, acknowledging them to be received of thee: not greedily to
care for them, or vainly to delight in them, and thankefully esteem of them
as thy benifits bestowed upon us, and as faithful Stewards moderately to use
them to the relief of our brethren and discharge of our consciences.

The fifth petition.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass aginst us.
Increase in us O Lord, the gift of Faith, that we may daily more and more in
our Souls and consciences be assured; that our sins be defaced, clean blotted
out, and covered with the full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice of thy dear
son Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior once made for us: that we are united,
knit, and made one body with him partakers of his righteousncs, justification,
and holiness, and even fellow-heirs with him of everlasting life: that we may
unfeignedly from the bottom of our hearts love thee for this thine unspeakable
goodness and mercy, forgetting from our hearts our Brethren that do offend us,
pray for them, love, cherish and comfort them as fellow members all of one
body, with perfect natural love and compassion linked together unto our head
Christ Jesus.

The sixth petition.
Lead us not into temptation
STrengthen us good Lord with thy holy Spirit, that we be not ouercom with the
subtle suggestions and sinful motions of Satan the devil, hold us up with thy
merciful hand, that we sleep not in sin, that we be not drawn away with the
wicked world nor the entic^ments of the flesh, to delight in Wickedness: but
so arm us with thy mighty power, that we may strongly abide all the
assaults and subtle sli^hte^ of our ghostly enemy, and sincerely to walk
before ^^ces both in prosperity and adversity, to thy honor and glory, the
health of our souls and profit of thy Church, through Jesus Christ our only
Lord and Savior, Amen.

The Lords Prayer more at large.
The first Petition.
Our Father, which art in Heaven.
MOst mighty and eternal Lord God, who of thine infinite love to mankind, have
given us thine own eternal Son Christ Jesus our Lord, to be made man for us,
in the similitude of sinful flesh, to become flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bones, in all things like unto us, sin only excepted: who being thy true
and natural Son, has made us with him sons, children, and heirs, to thee
our most merciful Father, giving us by thy grace, that which is his by Nature:
And by his due alone, once suffered sufficient Sacrifice, has paid the
ransom of our sins, before thy divine Majesty, to satisfy thy justice upon
sinful flesh. Which debt being paid for us, he has brought us in favor with
thee, so that we may now with boldness and trust come to thee, as unto our
most merciful and loving Father, with full assurance, that as thy soul is so
much greater, and more excellent toward us, then all love of eatthly Parents
toward their Children, as thou passest all men in goodness and mercy; so thou will deny us nothing which shall be expedient for us. So that, although all the
Fathers that are in earth, having shaken off all seeing of Fatherly
naturalnesse, would forsake their children, yet would thou never forsake us,
because thou can not deny thy self. Who promisest, that if earthly Fathers
being evil can give good gifts to their Children: how much more will thou our
heavenly Father, being altogether goodness it self, give good things to them
that ask in thy Sons name? And that although a Mother should forsake her
Children, yet will thou not forsake us thy children, who^ thou have before the
beginning of the World, in thy dear Son Jesus Christ, chosen to be thy
children and heirs with him of thine immortal Kingdom. Whereof that we our
selves might be sure and certain, and out of al doubt that we are the
children and heyrs of everlasting life, thou have given into our hearts thy
holy Spirit, as a true pledge and earnest of our inheritance, which Spirit
does assure our spirits, that we are thy children, and thou therefore cries
in our hearts Abba, Father. Grant this for thy dear Son Jesus Christ our
Savior, Amen.

The Second Petition.
Hallowed be thy Name.
We therefore as thy dear Children, ransommed and bought by thy dear Son,
fly to thee our most loving and merciful Father, who in goodness art infinite;
in mercy, abundant; in substance, incomprehensible; in immortality,
everlasting: who by thy mighty power, and singular providence rulest all
things according to thy heavenly Wisdom, beseeching thee, for thy dear Son
Christ Jesus his sake, that as thou have sufficiently set forth thy glorious
name in making and framing the whole world, heaven, earth, and all the things
therein contained: so we may in beholding and viewing thy Creatures, the works
of thine hands may be lifted up to thee our Lord God the Creator and maker,
and in them glorify thy holy name, acknowledging in them thy singular
goodness and love toward man, for whose use thou have created all things
both in heaven and earth: and that we may for the same, even from the bottom
of our hearts, yield due honor, praise and thanksgiving unto thee dear Father,
all the days of our life.

Grant most merciful Father, that we may in heart and mind be fully
assured, thou by thy heavenly providence, rulest and guidest all things in
heaven and earth; so that nothing in the whole world comes to pass, but
according to thine appointment: that thou guidest and framest the aff^ires and
doings of men; that thou have even their hearts, and all their powers in thy
merciful hand, to turn them which way soever it seems best unto thy godly
wisdom: so that, whether we be in prosperity or adversity, we may acknoledge
both of them to be thy work in us: and therefore, be no less thankful for
sickness, then for health; for sorrow, then for comfort; for a troubled mind,
then for a quiet; for imprisonment and banishment, then for liberty; especially
seeing we know, that thou turnest them all, seem they never so sharp, to the
comfort and commodity of thy children, which fear thee: and that in all
things which shall befall unto us; whether they be grievous or joyous,
prosperity or adversity, life or death, thy holy name may be sanctified in us
by yiedling due and continual praise and thanksgiving, to thy eternal
Mai^sty: that we never cease to put our full trust and confidence in thy mercy,
who have promised to be our defender, buckler, and shield; to keep us as the
apple of thine eye, to deliver us when we call upon thee, to open when we
knock, to give when we ask: that we knowing our own weakness, that of our
selves we have no power or strength to do, no not so much as to will that
which is good, we may acknowledge al our strength comfort, joy, faith, love,
hope, and confidence to be thine only gift and work in us. And for the same,
and the increase of the same, and for all thy benefits in us, whereof we feel
our selves destitute, we may constantly flee unto thee by hearty prayer,
requiring the same at thy merciful hand. And having felt thy merciful dealing
toward us, we may always to the end of our life continue thankful unto thy
blessed name: that we never speak or think of thee (O LORD GOD) without high
reverence, and an obedient fear unto thy glorious Name.

The third Petition.
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
ANd forasmuch (O Lord God) as of our selves we be nothing but stubbornness
and rebellion, against thy holy Majesty, we beseech thee (dear Father) that as
thine Angels in heaven do willingly obey thy holy and most blessed will
without any resistance, so we thy most vild and unworthy Servants and Children
in earth (all stubobrnesse rebellion and peruesnes, by thy holy Spirit in us
being utterly extinguished and quenched) we may willingly submit our selves,
resign and yield our whole affections to thee, O Lord, to be governed after
thy blessed and heavenly will. That we may feel in our selves no other motion
or desire, then a meet consent to thy holy will: that whatsoever affections in
us fight against thy holy will, thou will utterly make them void. That we
never will any thing of our selves, but that thy holy Spirit in us may govern
our hearts, by whom inwardly being taught, we may learn to love, embrace, and
take comfort in those things that please thee, and to hate those things that
displease thee; That our hearrs, minds, and wills, being wholly subdued to thy
blessed will, we may willingly be content with that estate of life which it
pleases thy goodness to exercise us withal in this world, whether it be in
adversity or prosperity, in sickness or health, in ignominy or glory, in
quietness or trouble, in sorrow or gladness. Grant us dear Father, this
willing and patient mind, that even in our greatest distress, we may be
content with thy good will, and not to murmr or grudge against thy Majesty,
knowing that thou will lay nothing upon us, but that which shall turn to our
goodn^sse and profit. And that we may patiently abide whatsoever it shall
please thee to lay upon us: that we be assured in our hearts, that thou will
lay no more unto us, then thou will give us strength to bear, and even in our
greatest afflictions wilt find a way for our deliverance, and that thy power
and strength is more fully declared, when we feel our selves utterly void of
strength, and see no way of deliverance, that we may in our most grievous
assaults, conflicts, and anguish or mind submit our selves wholly to thy blessed
will, and look for our deliverance at thy hand, when thou know it most
expedient for us, and most for thy glory, leaving the time and means of our
deliverance to thy good will and pleasure, and that in the mean time, we never
cease but call upon thee by hearty prayers continually as thou have commanded,
until such time as thou shall hear our petitions. And although after many and
sundry callings upon thee thou seem not to regard us, but rather deal more
extremely with us, yet notwithstanding strengthen us so with perseverance in
prayer, that we faint not, but still continue in prayer, being assured that
although we feel our selves nothing released, yet we may quiet our selves
herein, that we as thy Children have laid our complaints, griefs, and sorrows
in the bosom of thee our heavenly Father, who will as a loving Father, when he
sees it most convenient help us. And although thou seem nothing to grant our
requests, yet we honor thee in calling upon t^y name, seeing thou do accept
it as a most chief honor to be called upon in the day of truble.

The fourth petition.
Give us this day our daily Bread.
ANd forasmuch dear Father, as thou do by thy mighty power, nourish, feed,
sustain, preserve, and maintain all living Creatures, yea even the very young
flocks and Beasts, we beseech thee to send unto us thy Children, (over whom
thou have a more special care) all things necessary for this our present life:
that we having sufficient may walk every one in our calling, in sincerity and
pure holiness before thy face acknowledging all our benifits of riches, health,
wealth, meat, drink, apparel, and all our substance to be thy mere gifts
bestowed upon us, and delivered unto us from thine hands: that we be not drawn
from thee, through setting our minds too much upon them, but so moderately
use them, as thy benefits for a time bestowed upon us, knowing that thou will
at our hands require an account how we have used them.

That we do not carefully gape or seek after them, but discreetly to thy
glory use them, acknowledging in them thy goodness and liberality toward us.
And seeing most merciful Father, that it is not our travel, labor, pains,
study, or endeavor, which is able to get us our living, but only in so much
as it pleases thy goodness to bless and prosper them: we beseech thee that
yet through our great Trauaily and pains, we be yet still poor, and in mean
estate, that thou will give us a contented heart, knowing that thereby thou
let us understand, that it is thy good will and pleasure, so to keep us
under, that we more effectually may give our selves to serve thee. Or if it
be thy will and pleasure more abundantly to bless us, and our travail, to
send us abundance of all things, we beseech thee dear Father give us a
thankful heart to acknowledge them to be thy good gifts, and frame our
hearts with such liberality, that we may be contented to distribute them
according to the necesity of thy children, being assured, that thou have to
this end made us Stewards over them, that may at his hands require much, on
whom thou have bestowed much: so that we having the due estimation of thy
benefits which we ought to have, may both reverence thy goodness in thy
benefits, and supply the want of our brethren, to the relief of their
necessity, and furtherance of thy glory.

The fifth petition.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
AND whereas most merciful Father, thy Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
has in our nature paid the ransom and debt of all our sins, which we have
from the beginning of our life committed and do daily commit, we beseech thy
gracious gooodesse, that thou will by thy holy spirit in our hearts, assure our
souls and consciences with a lively faith, that by that same one only
sufficient sacrifice, the punishment of our sins is paid, thy wrath
appeased, and thy Justice satisfied: whereby our consciences may be quieted and
set at peace with thee our merciful Father and God.

Let us dear Father feel in our souls and consciences, that we are united
to thy dear Son Jesus Christ and made one body with him, and heirs with him
of everlasting glory: so coupled and joined with him, that we are members of
his body, so that whatsoever he has done in his body, we may be assured
that it is ours: that his righteousness is our righteousness, his
sanctification and holiness is ours: the curse condemnation, and death, which
he suffered, is the same curse, condemnation, and death due for our sins:
that we know that our sins be done away, and clean forgotten and forgiven by
thy merciful love and goodness declared in offe^ing up thy Son to death for
us, we may be driven to love thee unfeignedly from the bottom of our hearts,
for this thine unspeakable love. And considering that thou have in mercy
pardoned so many our heinous offenses, we may gladly be moved to forgive one
another their offenses, and put out of our heart all rancour, malice, and
hatred, toward ou^ Brethren, knowing that we are all members of one body,
Christ our Savior that so surely as we have forgiven them that offend us we
may be so certainly assured that our merciful Father has forgiven us, like
as we have forgiven our Brethren.

The sixth petition.
Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
ANd for as much most heavenly Father, as we of our selves be feeble, and
frail and weak, and have a strong and subtle Adversary, Satan the Devil,
who goes about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour:
we beseech thee strengthen us by thy holy Spirit, that we may withstand his
subtle suggestions and motions: hold thou us by thy merciful hand, and keep
us always in thy safeguard and protection, that we be not overcome in the
mighty assaults of our adversary. And forasmuch as he often uses ever our own
flesh, armed against us to conquer us, we beseech thee dear Father, mortify,
subdue, and kill in our flesh all subtle suggestions, and sinful motions of
Satan, that we yield not our selves as slaves thereunto, but continually fight
against them, and bring them into subjection of the Spirit. Grant unto us dear
Father, that we may not be drawn through the subtle and sliely torments of
Satan to have our delight and pleasure in the vanities of this world, but by
thy grace, might, and power, may so in the prosperity of this life be
vpholden, that our minds with full joy and comfort may be lifted up to our
perfect consolation in our Lord and Savior Christ: and in him, take our full
and perfect joy and consolation, so that no vain delight of this world put us
from the same, neither any sharp aduersaty, as poverty, misery, or calamity,
through the malice of the devil, drive us to despair of thy merciful
goodness toward us: but always being through thy grace and assistance
defended, we may be fully and perfectly armed against all the subtle
intrappings of Satan, and rest wholly in thy merciful defense and aid. For
thou have (O Lord and eternal God) in thy government, all things in heaven and
earth, all power and dominion over all creatures, Angels and devils, to rule
them according to thy good pleasure and will, to the profit and commodity of
thy Church, and every faithful member thereof, and to thine incomprehensible
glory: that in all things, in all ages, for ever and ever, thy glorious Name
may be exalted, and thy faithful flock edified through Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Confession of sins with Faith and Repentance.
O Merciful and heavenly Father, we thy Servants do humbly p^ostrate our
selves before thy Majesty, acknowledging here in thy sight, our heinous
offenses committed against thy Majesty, seeing and beholding thy heavy wrath
against them: we feel our selves laden, O Lord our God, with a huge company
of horrible sins, whereof the very least, being but conceived in thought, is
sufficient in judgment to throw us down to the everlasting burning lake.

Our own consciences (O Lord) do bear witness against us of our manifold
transgressions of thy blessed Law, of our security, senseless blindness,
running headlong to destruction, committing sin after sin, although not
notorious to the world, yet horrible before thine eyes.

The thoughts of our hearts rise up in judgment against us: the vanity of our
talk before thy Majesty conde^neth us, the wickedness of our deeds from thy
sight rejects us: all our wicked thoughts, words, and deeds; with the inward
corruption of our nature, do altogether as it were a whole lump and load of
sin, lie heavy upon us, and with their intolerable weight, do even press
us down to Hell. We do daily groan under the burden of them, inwardly
lamenting our own folly, too greedily running into them. In heaven, earth, or
hell, we see none able to sustain the weight of them, but even thy dearly
beloed Son Jesus Christ, who in mercy infinite, and compassion endless, has
sustained and overcome that endless punishment due unto them in him therefore,
in him most merciful Father, and through him, we come to thee, being fully
assured according to thy promise, that thou will accept and take that full
recompense which he thy dear Son has made for us, as a just ransom for
the sin of all those, who with a true Faith take hold on him. In him therefore
we see thine anger toward us appeased, thy wrath satisfied, and our debts
paid.

Increase in us good Lord we beseech thee, this lively and feeling; faith for
we feel it oftentimes in us very weak, and troubled with many doubts:
Increase it in us O Lord, that we may through thy holy spirit be assured;
that the punishment of our sin is fully in thy Son discharged. Make us, O
Lord our God, to feel the same in our souls and consciences, that Jesus
Christ is ours, and all that he has done. that we are ingrafted into his
body, and made one with him, and therefore fellow-heires with him of
everlasting life. Let us not only have these words in our mouths, good Lord,
but through thy holy Spirit, let us feel the comfort of them in our hearts,
fully sealed and settled in us, that we feeling our selves inwardly before thy
Judgment seat discharged, and our consciences toward thee appeased, may be
swallowed up with an unfeigned love toward thy heavenly Majesty, and toward
our Brethren for thy sake. Make sin to die in us daily more and more, that
we may hate, detest, and utterly abhor all sin and wickedness in all men,
but especially in our selves, that we may strongly, through thy holy Spirit
set our selves in open defiance against all sin and wickedness: that we
please not our selves in our sins, but straightly examining sin by the just
rule of thy holy Laws, we may utterly from the bottom of our hearts condemn
even the least sin in our selves, having our whole joy, comfort, and
consolation, upon those things which be agreeable to thy blessed will, always
being afraid to do any thing contrary to the same: that we may even from the
bottom of our hearts, examine and try our thoughts before thy presence, that
they be upright and unfeigned, not hypocritical in outward show only and
appearance, but that even all the corners of our hearts being opned and
disclosed before thee, we may even as though it were openly before the face of
the whole world, bring them in show, knowing that a double heart is destitute
in thine eyes: and that we may walk always as before thine eyes, not only
before the eyes of man, being more careful to walk circumspectly in this
respect, that we have thee to be a viewer of our doings a thousand fold more
then the eyes of man. That thus we may walk as becomes thy Children, not
only in outward show, but also in sincerity of heart, abhorring even the least
sin in our selves, striving, resisting, and fighting against sin, not
nourishing the same in our breast, but earnestly embracing, and studiously
seeking after those things which be pleasant in thine eyes: that neither the
fear of man, nor loss of goods, life, lands, possessions, or friends, draw
us away from thee to do any least thing contrary unto thy will and pleasure:
neither the favor and friendship of man, nor yet the flattering enticements of
this World, nor the vain promotions of the same, do move us any whit from the
true and endless joy, delight, and pleasure which we ought to have in those
things which be agreeable to thy will, and the constant performance of the
same: but that always to the end of our life we may continue in thy paths,
growing and increasing from faith to faith, from strength to strength, till at
length, we shall come to thine everlasting rest, Amen.

A Prayer for the prosperous estate of the whole Church.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, forasmuch as by thy holy word, we are
commanded in our Prayers, not only to be mindful of our selves, but also of
all other thy children: yea, even of our enemies, we commend unto thy divine
Majesty, all thy whole true and Catholic Church, and every member thereof,
that as it has pleased thy goodness by the bright beams of thy holy word to
shine over the whole world, whereby thou have expelled, driven away, and caused
to vanish the dark and misty clouds of ignorance and superstition: so thou
would vouchsafe by thy holy Spirit, to touch the hearts of men, that they
may joyfully embrace that thine so high a Treasure sent amongst us, that
through our unthankfulness, we provoke not thy Majesty in anger to take it
from us.

Crush, bruise, and destroy with the breath of thy mouth the mighty power of
that man of sin, which so proudly exalts himself above all that is called
God. Let not thy simple flock (dear Father) in whose consciences he so long
time has, and yet does sit as God, be any longer poisoned with his sweet
enticing poisons: but so lighten their hearts, that they may perceive his
iuglings, and embrace the sweet and comfortable doctrine of life everlasting
revealed in thy glorious Gospel.

And forasmuch as it has pleased thee in mercy above all Nations of the earth,
to pow^e down the sweet showers of thy heavenly graces upon this our English
Nation abundantly; in more plentiful wise, watering the same with the gifts
of thy holy Spirit, in promoting thy Gospel, and overthrowing Idolatry, we
beseech thee continue thy favor toward the same, and vttery root out all
Remnants, Relics, and Mon^ments of Idolatry, that thy glorious name may be
thoroughly exalted in sincere, pure, and holy worship.

And as thou have in mercy from amongst us in this thy Church, utterly
banished all false, venomous, and poisonfull doctrine, wherewith the souls of
thy Children heretofore have been wounded ^o death, and in place thereof, have
placed the true and comfortable doctrine of life everlasting; wherewith the
souls of thy children may be fed and norished to everlasting joy: so in like
mercy and favor we beseech thee, dear Father, establish in the same thy
Church, a true, perfect, and sincere regiment thereof, according to the
prescript rule of thy blessed Word, all fantasies of man's brains, and dreams
of humane policy utterly abolished, that thy glorious Majesty only may be
exalted in the light of thy glorious Gospel: and that thy Church may flourish
and increase, being through thy protection aided, supported, maintained, and
defended: we beseech thee ^^thy holy Spirit, guide and rule every part and
member thereof, especially thy servant James, our King, whom thy gracious
favor and merciful providence has appointed a chief member of the same:
under whose wings (next unto thy protection) it has a chief succor and
support. Grant unto him, O Lord, a pure and perfect zeal, above all things to
promote thy glory: first and cheeflie in laboring and endeavoring of himself
earnestly in wiping away and purging out of the Church all blots and
deformities, to reduce the same to a pure and sincere form of worship,
agreeing to thy blessed word, utterly to remove all stumbling blocks, which
stay and hinder the course of thy Gospel. Give in like manner, O Lord GOD, the
spitit of wisdom, discretion, and government, that with equity and justice he
may see this whole Realm, which thou have committed to his charge, peaceably
and quietly governed: that he may studiously labor, that as well through the
whole Realm virtue be exalted, and vice abandoned, as especially in his own
house and Court, that all wicked vanities of this world, all licentious and
inordinate life, all flattering and dissimulation being utterly banish^d, the
f^are of thy glorious Majesty may so reign in the hearts of all within his
Highness Palace and Court, that their lives and conversation may be
agreeable to thy blessed will, in sincerity and true holiness, and integrity
of life, that from them, as from the head, may shine purity of life and
conversation as an example and pattern of true godliness to the whole Realm.

Preserve him we beseech thee, good Lord, from all conspiracies and Treasons,
that if it be thy good will he may have a long and quiet reign over us, to
the benefit of thy Church, and advancement of thy glory. Indue the whole
Counsel good Lord, with true and perfect wisdom, that in all their
consultations and Counsels, having thee present before their eyes, they may
consult of those things which principally and chiefly may be for the
advancement of thy glory, and the commodity of thy Church, and next for the
quiet peace and gracious government of this his Realm. So lighten all inferior
Magistrates of this Realm, good Lord, with brightness of thy holy Spirit,
that understanding thy will, they may zealously defend, maintain, and further
the course of the Gospel, with the sword of justice cut off the wicked and
cherish the godly.

Defend and govern by thy holy Spirit, the Pastors of thy Church, and
labour^rs in thy vineyard, that ^hey may zealously, earnestly, and diligently
feed thy flock committed unto them, with the food of life, thy bl ssed word,
wherewith their souls may be nourished to life everlasting. Increase the
number of them dear Father, place over every flock, a godly, learned, and
painful Pastor, who may painfully and carefully travel every one in his
charge, to bring thy people (which now alas in many parts do wander and go
astray like lost sheep) to the true knowledge of their Lord and God, and of
thy dear Son Jesus Christ their Savior. And for thy mercy, we beseech thee
to take pity upon thy poor and simple flock, root out all ravening
woolues, which have craftily crept into thy sheepfold, and do make havoc of
the souls of thy simple Flock. C^st out all hirelings, time-seruers and dumb
Dogs, which to fill their bellies only, have thrust themselves among thy
sheep, and do pitifully suffer the Flock of Christ thy Son, to be
devoured and scattered of the Woolfe. Stir up good Lord, and place in their
rooms faithful Sheepeheards, which diligently, painefully, carefully, and
earnestly may labor in thy Vineyard, seek to win the souls of thy people,
out of the tyranny and power of Satan, to the freedom of thy dear Son
Christ Jesus our Lord.

And that thy Church may better be furnished with godly learned Pastors, we
beseech thee good Lord, to prosper and increase in all Godly knowledge all
schools of lea^ning: especially the two Universities Cambridge and Oxford.
Grant dear Father unto all the students of the same, that the chief end of
all their studies, may be to the furtherance of thy Church, and maintenance of
the commonwealth. Bless their studies (dear Father) that al vain studies
set aside, they may so fructify in all profitable and godly Sciences, that
hereafter they may become profitable members of thy Church and godly Vpholders
of the Commonwealth.

Grant (good Lord) to all the whole Commons of this Realm, that their hearts
being touched with a sincere fear and reverence of thy Heavenly Majesty,
acknowledging thy mercy in placing over them a godly and Religious Prince, they
may every one in their callings walk in all true and humble obedience unto
him, in thee, and for thee without resistance, tumults, Insurrections,
conspiracies, or rebellions know^ great to resist the higher Powers, is to
rebel against thy Majesty. Finally we beseech thy goodness, so to giude and
govern the hearts of all the whole Realm of every degree, that every one in
his calling, being by thy holy wisdom supported, may so occupy his Talent,
that thy glory in all things may be advanced, thy church enlarged, and this
whole Realm into sincere godliness virtuously reduced.

Moreover, we beseech thee (O Lord our God) in Mercy to behold all those which
suffer persecution for thy glorious words sake, whether it be imprisonment,
death, or banishment, or whatsoever else, strengthen them good Lord, that they
having thee always before their eyes, and the glory laid up for them in the
life to come, may continue constant in defending thy truth without fear of
man, or vain allurements of the world, that whether it come by life or death,
they may glorify thy holy Name in continuing in the truth to the end.

Preserve in like manner we beseech thee, all others thy Children, whom it
has pleased thee with any kind of Cross to chasten for their amendment,
whether by pestilence, famine, war, poverty, Imprisonment, sickness, or
banishment, trouble of conscience, vexation of spirit, unquietness of mind,
want of spiritual comfort, or whatsoever kind of affliction of body or mind
thou do try them with: that by thy holy spirit being fully assured that thou
by this thy correction mindest to call them back to a feeling of their sin,
and due consideration of their life and conversation, they may patiently abide
thy Fatherly trial, looking for aid, help, and comfort from thee, when it
seems most convenient to thy holy wisdom: and being by thy merciful hand
once delivered, may acknowledge thy singular power and work, giving all laud
and praise to thy glorious name: and afterward all the days of their life,
study and live before it he in sincerity and perfect holiness, even to their
lives end. This O Lord, we beseech thee in Mercy to grant, for thy beloved
Sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior, Amen.

Morning prayer for private Houses and Families.
O Gracious God, and loving Father, according to thy commandment, we do here
present our selves before the throne of thy mercy, acknowledging and confessing
from the bottom of our hearts, that we be miserable sinners, daily breaking
thy commandments, both in thought, word, and deed, wherein we justly deserve
everlasting damnation, and to be utterly thrown from thy presence: yet O
Lord, we see thy goodness again toward us, who not suffering us thus to
perish in our sins, have sent thine own dear Son Jesus Christ, to take
upon him whatsoever is due, to reconcile and make us at one with thee again.
In him therefore good Lord, and through him, do we come unto thee, beseeching
thee for his sake, that we feeling the grieuousnesse of our sins, and
groaning under the burden of them, may feel the release and ease of them, in
that we be thorough thy holy Spirit assured, and steadfastly believe, that
Christ has borne the burden of them even for us. Grant likewise, O most
merciful Lord and heavenly Father, that we being assured hereof in our
consciences, may through thy holy Spirit be renewed in the inner man, to hate,
detest, and abhor sin, and to study to live according to thy blessed will
during our whole life.

We do not only pray for our selves, but also for all thy whole Church,
especially such as be persecuted for thy word: grant unto them, that whether
it be by death or life, they may glorify thy Name to their lives end. Be
merciful to this Church of England, Scotland, and Ireland, we beseech thee
good Lord, and preserve every part and menber of the same, especially thy
servant James our King: grant him all such gifts as be needful for so high a
calling, to the advancement of thy glory, and benefit of this Common wealth,
to the establishing of a perfect government of thy Church, according to the
prescript rule of thy blessed word, to the rooting out of all superstition and
relics of Antichrist, to the governing of his subjects in all peace and
tranquillity. Defend him, O Lord, from all conspiracies, treasons, and
rebellions, and so work in the hearts of all his subjects, that knowing his
authority does come from thy heavenly Majesty, they may with obedient hearts
humbly obey them in thee, and for thee. Preserve the whole Council and the
Magistrates of the Realm, that being lightened through thy holy Spirit, they
may defend the truth, suppress wickedness, and maintain equity. Behold all
the Pastors and Preachers of thy word, bless their labors, increase the
number of them, place over every Church a painful watchman, remove all idle
lubbers, and confound the power of Antichrist, and turn the hearts of the
people that they may be obedient to thy truth. Bless the two famous
Universities, Cambridge and Oxford, and all the students of the same, with all
Schools of Learening. Behold all those that be afflicted with any kind of
cross, that they may profit by thy correction in newness of life.

Lastly, for our selves here gathered, we humbly (O Lord) crave at thy hands,
that it would please thee to make us thankful unto thy Majesty for all thy
loving kindness showed unto us even from our infancy: especially, that thou
have this present night delivered us from all dangers both of body and soul,
whereinto many have fallen, as we in the like manner should have done, if we
had not been stayed with thy merciful hand: that thou have also granted unto
us so sweet and comfortable rest, and have now presently brought us to the
beginning of this day. For these things, good Lord, we yield thee most hearty
thanks, beseeching thee to make us more and more daily thankful unto thy
Majesty for them, and pardon our unthankfulness. And as thou have safely
preserved us unto this present hour from all the dangers of this life: so we
beseech thee continue thy favor toward us this day, and the whole course of
our life. Defend us, O Lord, that we now entering into the affairs of this day,
be not drawn away with the vain allurements of this world, to sin and
wickedness: that we walk not in the shadow of death, that we be not
entangled in the snares of sin, that we stumble not at the blocks of
iniquity, that we finally fall not into the pit of death and destruction: but
being shadowed under thy wings, we may cheerfully and constantly go on
forward to the end of our course. Grant unto us, O Lord our God, that this good
time which thou grantest unto us in this life, be not idly, or vainly of us
consumed, but that every one of us may be diligently exercised in his calling
this day, and all our life long, being assured that thou will once call us to
yield an account of our Stewardship. Indue us, we beseech thee, with those
gifts and graces which be needful for us in our calling, and that with a pure
heart and sincere conscience, we may use them to the benefit of our brethren,
and discharge of our own conscience before thy Majesty. We beseech thee, O
Lord, that in all our consultations words and works this day, and the whole
course of our life, we may always have thee presnet before our eyes, knowing
that thou see even the very deep thoughts of our hearts, which always may
be as a bridle to pull us back, that we neither do, nor yet consent to any
sin or wickedness, but that always we may be so exercised in the affairs
of this life, that we look still to the end of our course, when it shall
please thee to bring us through the pilgrimage of this life to our everlasting
rest with thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Savior. In whose Name for these
mercies and whatsoever thou know to be needful for us, and for thy whole
Church we pray unto thee, as he himself has taught us in his holy word,
saying. Our Father, etc. The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face
shine upon us, and be merciful unto us, the Lord turn his favorable
countenance toward us, and grant us his peace. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the love of God the Father, and the most comfortable f^llowshippe of
the holy Ghost, be with us, preserve us this day and evermore, Amen.

Evening Prayer for private Houses and Families.
O Gracious God and loving Father, according to thy Commandment we do here
present our selves again before thy Majesty, humbly prostrating our sinful
selves before the Throne of thy mercy, acknowledging and confessing from the
bottom of our hearts, that we are miserable sinners, daily breaking thy
Commandments, both in thought, word, and deed; wherein we justly deserve
everlasting damnation, and to be utterly thrown from thy presence. Yet (O
Lord) we see thy goodness again toward us, who not s^ffering us thus to
perish in our sins, have set thine own dear Son Jesus Christ, to take
upon him whatsoever is due, ^o reconcile and make us at one with thee again.
In him therefore (good Lord) and through him, do we come unto thee,
beseeching thee for his sake, that we feeling the greeuousnesse of our sins,
and groaning under the burden of them, may feel the release and ease of them,
in that we be through thy holy Spirit assured, and steadfastly believe, that
Christ Jesus our Lord, has borne the burden of them, even for us. Grant O
Lord, that we being assured hereof in our Consciences, may thorough thy most
holy and blessed Spirit, be renewed in the inner man, to hate, detest, and
utterly abhor all sin, and that we may study to live according to thy
blessed will, during our whole life.

And now (O Lord God) we pray not only for our selves, but likewise for all
thy whole Church, especially for such as be persecuted for the testimony of a
good conscience: Grant unto them, O Lord, that whether it be by death or life,
they may glorify thy Name to their lives end. Bless these Churches (good
Father) wherein we live, and therein our gracious Sovereign, and thy servant
James, King of Great-Britaine, France and Ireland. Keep him, O Lord, from all
Conspiracies, Treasons, and Rebellions. Preserve the Noble and hopeful Prince
Charles; the illustrious Prince Palatine, the Lady Elizabeth with their
Princely Issue. Bless the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Counsel, the Magistrates and Ministers of this Land. Shower down thy
blessings (O Lord) upon both the Universities) and all Schools of Learning
Comfort all those that be afflicted with any kind of cross, that they may
profit by thy correction, to newness of life.

And lastly (gracious Lord God) we come unto thee for our selves here gathered
together, rendering unto thy glorious Majesty, most hearty Thanks, which have
hitherto from our infancy presetued us by thy mercy from all perils and
dangers both of soul and body, whereunto frail man is subject, that thou
have sent unto us every thing necessary for this present life, as health,
food, apparel, and such like, which many of thy dear Children do want,
being notwithstanding, as preciouslie bought with the precious blood of thy
dear Son, as we be, and yet be in misery and calamity, oppressed with
poverty, nakedness, imprisonment, and banishment; in whose case also (dear
Father) thou might have brought us; save only that thou dealest herein more
favorably with us, then with them. For the which thy loving kindness, we give
thee hearty thanks: desiring thee, that as thou have hitherto thus favorably
in mercy preserved us by thy protection, and even presently this day have
brought us past all dangers thereof, so we beseech thee (good Lord) in like
favor to behold us this night, that we taking our natural rest and quietness,
may through thy protection, be defended; that our Bodies resting, our souls
may be occupied in beholding thy favor and mercy toward thy Children,
still looking for the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ for our full
Redemption.

Grant that our sleep be not immoderate, according to the lust of our flesh,
but as much as is sufficient to refresh our weak nature: that being thus
refreshed, both the body and the mind, may be more able to do their several
office and Function, in that Vocation wherein thou have placed us.

Grant, that we laying our bodies down to rest, may be thereby put in mind o^
our long rest of death, that as we do now lay down our bodies in bed, so we may
be thereby admonished, that hereafter they shall be laid down in the Grave,
to be consumed to dust, earth, and ashes; from whence they were taken: That we
having this before our eyes, may be stirred up in mind, warily to walk in
this our Pilgrimage, not knowing when the time shall be of our departure, but
always to be found ready with ou^ Lamps of pure faith clearly burning, that
we may be accepted to meet the Bridegroom, when our mortal, earthly, and
corruptible Bodies shall be made like to the glorious body of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, there to reign with him, in perpetual joy and
consolation, together with all the Elect children of God; continually lauding
with thy Heavenly multitude, the glorious Majesty of thee our Lord God and
heavenly Father, in our God and Savior, Jesus Christ.

For these, and whatsoever else thou know to be needful for us, and thy
whole Church, we pray unto thee, as he himself has taught us saying, Our
Father, etc.

The Lord bless us, and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us: The Lord turn his favorable countenance unto us, and
grant us his peace. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the
Father, and the most comfortable Fellowship of God the holy Ghost, be with us,
preserve, and keep us, this night forth, and for evermore, Amen.

A form of Prayer daily to be used of all faithful Christians, in their
houses, or elsewhere.
ALmighty God, and merciful Father, in and thorough Jesus Christ our Lord; in
whom, and by whom, we trust that thou art our God and Father; we most humbly
here prostrate our selves before the Throne of thy Majesty, beseeching thee
first (good Father, and God) to pardon all our sins, which we confess and
acknowledge against our selves, b^seeching thy gracious Spirit, to work in us
the knowledge of them daily more and more, that thereby we may come vnt^ true
Repentance for them; and together therewith, unto the knowledge of the height,
breadth, depth, and fullness, in all sorts of thy grace and mercy, whereby
through Jesus Christ thou have forgotten them, and removed them as far from
us, as the East is from the West. And, although we know by them too well (good
Lord) that we have, as much as in us lay and lies, labored to provoke thine
anger against us: heaping sin upon sin, and multiplying offenses and
transgressions against thy high grace and Majesty, breaking thy holy word and
Commandments: yet thou (O Lord) have not been as Man, nor thy affections as
the affections of the Sons of men, but have continued gracious and merciful,
and bountiful unto us, in pardoning our sins, and daily renewing in us with
the morning, thy graces diverse and manifold.

Therefore we beseech thee most merciful Father, so to give us thy holy
Spirit, that we provoke thee no more, that thou rise not against us to destroy
us as we have deserved: for we have been, and are dry as stubble, and yet thou
have not dispersed and consumed us, we have been unfruitful, and thou have
not cut us down: yea Lord, we have brought forth wild and sower Fruit,
corrupt, and detestable, and yet thou let thy rain to fall, and Sun to
shine upon us.

Make us therefore we beseech thee sorry as becomes thy Children, for that
we have disobeyed thee, so merciful and loving a Father, and frame us daily,
and fashion us to the likeness of thy well beloved Son, Jesus Christ our
Lord: that in knowledge and true holiness, we may glorify thee before the
world, and by the fruits of godliness and righteousness, be assured and made
certain of thy holy Spirit, and of the love wherewith thou love us. Make us
thankful dear Father, for the infinite and unspeakable benefits of our
election to life and everlasting glory before all time and for our creation,
redemption, and sanctification, in time to bring thy glorious counsel to pass.

Work in us certain faith, and assured hope in thy promises, the true fear
of thy Majesty, perfect hate and detestation of all disordered and sinful
affections. Work in us eternal love of thy truth and Gospel, sincere
affection and love toward thy Children, and amongst our selves patience,
knowledge, virtue, love, compassion, with all graces of thy kingdom, that in
all on behavior, thou O God may be glorified in us. Also we beseech thee
most merciful Father, for the benefits of this life. That as thou art not
only the God of our spirits and souls, but also of our bodies: so it would
please thee, notwithstanding our sins, to grant us thy blessings of health,
peace, and maintenance, of which (by thy gracious providence) some of us do
feel the want, and some of us have for long time enjoyed and used the same;
that together with them, we may have thy Spirit to instruct us, as well in the
wants, as in the true and lawful use of them: that we may more earnestly and
seriously study and labor in these vocations wherein thou have set us, through
thy great mercy, to the promoting and increasing of thy Kingdom, to the
benefit and comfort of thy Children. And we pray not only for our selves,
but beseech thee make us earnest and fervent in prayer unto thy Majesty, even
for others also, yea, for all men: that as thou art the Creator of all, so thou
would mercifully regard them, and continue thy gracious goodness and mercy,
in adminstring and ordering the world, so that by no Tyrants nor wicked men,
that order which thou have established be ouerthrown: but the spring and
harvest, the rain and fruitful times, and the joy which thou show and
give by them, may provoke all men continually to fear and love thee; yea, to
seek thee and find thee. That not in those outward blessings alone, but much
more in thy Spirit, they wh^me thou have there-unto ordained, may rejoice in
thy Fatherly goodness by Jesus Christ. And that to this end, it may please
thee to pour out thy graces upon men, that they may be instructed and framed
meet instrtments, for the calling of all such as thou have appointed to be of
thy Church.

That these builders may be cunning and expert. That these Gardiners, may be
wise to plant and water, with judgment and discretion; that these Stewards of
thy mysteries, may so behave themselves in thy Church, that they knowing how
and wherewith to feed thy house, the glory and beauty thereof may appear in
the eyes of all the world, which thou have before so long time promised, and
which to see the eyes dazell and faint with looking for. And although we know
well, O Lord, that the cause of all miserable disorders, deformities, and
breaches now adays, is in our selves, which shut up thine hand, and (as it
were) bind thine arms from reaching them out unto us, for our salvation and
comfort, yet let the Lord arise and be merciful unto Sion, and have pity on
the ruins thereof. For the time is come, our own Country and people are
before our eyes continually, whose sin and disorder, whose Ignorance and
stubbrnoesse, whose negligence and contempt of thy word, thou have now long
time punished, withdrawing thy hand from doing them good. For by thy just
judgment now many years, thou have plagued them, and us, with idle, profane,
unlearned, and unskillful Pastors: Guiders thou have given them, but to their
ruin: Feeders, but of themselves, not of thy flock: Teachers and Doctors, who
have mouths but speak not, eyes but see not, neither have they Judgment to
instruct thy people, nor wisdom, how to go out and in before them; and that
which is most fearful, thy good hand is not wi^h those Prophets which are
amongst them, who do sow indeed, but the earth gives not her increase. They
water, but thy plants rise not in any number. They feed, but thy flock is
poor, not fat nor beautiful. O let the Lord forget the sins of his people.
Why has he bound them upon his hand to look upon them for ever? Why has
he set them day and night in the sight of his countenance? We confess and
acknowledge against our selves, O Lord, all our sins, we judge and condemn
our selves, yea we testify against our selves, that we have deserved that
even those sparks of thy fire and heavenly light which are amongst us, should
be quenched and put out, that the smoke of thy glory which is still in thy
Church amongst us, should rise up and vanish away from amongst us as the dew of
the morning; that the same building which as yet stands, were to be thrown
down, that the Lord should mount upon his Chariot, and flee from us. But shall
the Lord deal with his people by weight and measure? shall he use judgment,
and not mercy? shall our Father forget his Children, although we provoke him?
shall not the sighs and groans of them that bewail Syon, come before him and
enter into his ears? O Lord, let the judgment and severity which we have
deserved, be stayed: let Chariots and Horses be loosed, let the Armies of the
Lord be discharged, and let the Lord vngird himself, and forgette his
counsel, and turn and be merciful and gracious unto them acknowledge and
confess their sins. Let the Angels that be the destroyers, go from before
thy face, to overthrow and cast down all that stands to hinder thy glory,
and to maintain sin and Ignorance, Pride, and Vanity. That thy good Angels
may follow, to mete out and describe all things that pertayne to the building
of thy Temple. Let them lay to it the square and plummet, and let all thy
people stand and showte and sing glory, at the laying of this foundation. Let
thy Spirit guide all those good Lord, that in fear and reverence before thee,
walk in their vocation. In the Universities and in all parts of the Realm,
yea, of the earth, looking and laboring for this work, and increase the
little mumber, as the thousands of Ephraim, and the ten thousands of
Manasses, and those that laugh at, and hinder, and draw back this work, let
them be ashamed and confounded, and all thy marvelous blessiings be showed in
the success thereof. But let them have no force nor strength to hinder it: so
shall Jacob rejoice in thy mercy, and Israel in thy everlasting truth. So shall
our eyes see thy glory, O Lord, and we sing perpetually to thy praise. So
shall Jesus Christ delight in the beauty of his Church, and his people be a
people meet to serve him, decked and adorned with his gifts, laboring and
studying to please him, that in them his love may rest. To this end, good Lord,
show thy mercy upon all Princes and Magistrates of the earth, that belong to
thy election: turning the hearts of all those that hitherto have not known thy
truth, but lent their power and might to Satan and Antichrist, to persecute
thy people, to the great dishonor of thy name. That yet now at the last, they
may b^e brought home into thy sheepfold, and in stead of persecutors, become
Nurse-fathers, and Nurse-mothers to thy Church. But especially, we most humbly
beseech thee for all such Princes and Magistrates, as have received thy truth.
And namely, for our dear Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty, whom thou have
placed over us in this Realm, and for his most honorable Counsel, and all
Magistrates therein, that thou would augment the graces of thy holy Spirit
in him, and in them: especially, the spirit of wisdom, counsel, and power:
that he and they may go forward in the work of the building up of thy
Church, in all obedience to thy will, speedily, and constantly, and
perseuerantly, that thy people the Sheep of thy pastors, whom thou have
committed to him and their government, may godly and peaceably live and dye to
thee, and with them and for them, glorify thy most holy name for ever and
ever. We beseech thee also good Lord our God, for all our Brethren
wheresoever, that those which are in thy Church in peace and safety, may
prosper and go for, ward, and stand in thy truth for ever, that thy goodness
may be assured unto them-and that thou would keep their place, and
maintain their cause, against all that labor to trouble them. And for such as
do yet labor under tyranny and affliction, whose sufferings thou know, O
Lord, better then we can declare: It may please thee to break the rod of
their oppressors, to quench the fire of their adversaries, and to lighten, or
rather clean take away that burden, that they so press them withal; that
they together with us, may join in thy Congregation, and feed safely. So that
there may be none to scar us. Let thy Spirit of comfort possess our hearts,
that all trouble may seem less then thy truth and glory, and so lighten our
eyes, that in our darkness we may have such sight of thy glory, and of Jesus
Christ, who is in that high Mountain where he is now so glorious, that our
griefs may be swallowed up.

A Special Morning Prayer for the Sabbath.
MOst Mighty, and glorious Lord of Hosts, and God of Sabbaths. Who though thou
did rest from all thy works of Creation, yet daily workest in all the world,
disposing and preserving all things therein, by thy general providence: and
especially rulest in thy Church and Children; doing all their works for them,
and daily preserving them from the evils of the time: encouraging them daily by
the renewing of thy mercies to seek thy face, and refreshing thy Beloved
(daily) from Sabbath to Sabbath with the fruits of thy house, that they may be
fitted to rest for ever with thee in thine eternal Sabbath. It is thy singular
mercy, and great patience (O Lord our God) that thy unworthy and unprofitable
servants, having so often provoked thee, to call us to an account and take our
Talents from us; are yet respited to a further use of thy blessings, and
redeeming of the time in better husbanding thereof. But (O Lord our God) how
wonderfully and (above all other) unspeakable is this thy goodness, that
though we have no better then profaned this thy holy day, generally
heretofore by speaking our own words, and thinking our own thoughts therein;
so far from being bettered by thine ordinances, that we still remain more
hardened and inexcusable thereby, more leauened with hypocrisy and worldlynes,
more barren in uprightness and holiness of conversation, and so deserve for
ever to be plucked up by the roots, and cast out of thy presence. Yet have
thou offered us once again this gracious opportunity of thy blessed Presence,
and to draw near unto thee, his thy day in the use of thy holy ordinances.
How justly might thou long since, either fatted up our hearts, and so given
us up to our own lust, and reprobate ways, that all good motions might be
utterly quenched in us, all desire of thy presence wholly extinguished. Or
though we had any desire, yet thou might justly hide thy face from us, and
turn this day of our visitation into a perpetual night. Have thou not thus
reckoned with our neighbors round about? And what might thou find in us (O
blessed Lord) that any way could stay this fearful reckoning? Is it, because
we have enjoyed more favors longer then they have done? Lord, what may we
truly expect herefrom, then to be beaten with more stripes? And though thy
patience be more enlarged toward us, yet shall not the reckoning be the more
intolerable? Or is it not thy singular wisdom, to warn us graciously by our
Bretherens harms, and humble us the more by the sense of our unprofitableness,
as if our case were bootlesse, and desperate? Or is it because thou have given
us some remorse of Joseph's affliction, and enlarged our hearts with some
compassion toward them. Oh how does this continue our cruelty toward them,
that while we seek to ease them of their smart by our cold compassions, we
yet encorage them by our example in sin? How does this challenge our want of
mercy to our selves, while we more harden our hearts hereby in wickedness, as
if we were more righteous then they, because we are spared, and they are
punished; and so heap up more wrath against our selves by our impenitencie,
while we labor to reclaim others from the fury thereof. Thus find we nothing
by our selves, why we fare better then others; but that our best fare is like
to prove our deadly bane. Only in thee (O our God) there is absolute power to
do with thine own what thou will, with thee there is free mercy, to spare
whom thou please; In thee, there is infinite wisdom to draw thy Children
unto thee, by contrary means; some by fear, plucking out of the fire;
alluring others by thy tender compassions, that thou only might have the
glory of all thy works; melting some by thy patience, which harden others, and
hardening some by thy corrections, which soften others. Meditate (O my soul) on
this Power, Wisdom, and mercy of thy glorious God. Exalt him and say; who is
like our God, that spares and punishes whom he pleases; that punishes by
sparing, and spares by punishing? And solet thy heart begin this day with
such devout Meditation and rauishment therewith, that it may truly cast thee
down before his glorious presence, and utterly cast thee out of all carnal
confidence, and so wholly cast out of thee all vain and earthly thoughts, that
may interrupt thy sweet fellowship with thy glorious God, while thou labourest
to power out thy soul before him in judging thy self, and justifying his free
goodness for thy former preservation, and crying for acceptance in thy Savior
for the pardon of thy sins, and to be clothed with his righteousness, that
thou may appear all fair in the presence of thy God, and so be safely
carried by his Spirit, into the Chamber of thy Mother, there to suck and be
satisfied. O grant us (gracious God) thus to begin this day in thee, and with
thee. And that we may be better quickened and enabled hereunto, and set to
the spending thereof wholly in thy fear. Persuade our hearts, we pray thee
(Blessed Lord) of the morality and equity of this thine own ordin^nce: that
what thou have for thine own entire and solemme worship so unchangeably
ratified, we may not esteem common and indifferent, as either to seek my
self any whit therein, or else not to seek thee in all thy ways: as if either
thou had imposed rest from our worldly employments, because idleness pleases
thee, and the ease of the flesh were part of the worship; or else might excuse
us from spiritual employments: or else, that herein also we might take our
ease, and serve our selves, refreshing the labors of our souls, by satisfing
the flesh. But cause us (gracious God) to know, that therefore, in thine
infinite wisdom thou have now restrained us from bodyly labors, that we might
be there by freed from all encombrances of care and worldly mindedness, and
so might wholly apply our selves both to the public and private means and
practice of thy worship therein, even all the day: and that we may so do, O
grant us we humbly pray thee, to call thy Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it
glorious unto thee; eschewing our own ways, and renouncing our own will,
forsaking all vain and ordinary words, giving no way to any loose or worldly
thoughts: but we may bind our selves to an entire and constant following thee,
in all the ways of thy worship, as may any way seem to the sa^ctifying of
this day.

And because I am like to meet with many hindrances herein, both within and
without: mine own heart within, repining hereat, as an heavy yoke, and
pleading for unseasonable and carnal liberty: The world without, alluring by
cunning pretenses and contrary example, and scorning my strictnes and
scrupulousness herein. O arm me strongly (gracious God) against all these
enchantments, and foolish scarcrowes; That I may not lean to mine own
wisdom, but to thy sacred word, studying the more carefully to please thee in
all things, that I may stop the mouths of gainsayers, or glo^ie herein the
more, that they are still opened against weldoing, and shall prouoake thee
justly to stop their mouths in due time, with confusion. O persuade my heart
(as thou have taught me) that thy yoke is easy, thine ordinances not
grievous: and grant me to try mine ease, by the diseasing of my flesh; and to
prepare for comfort therein, by grief for my fayllings, which may still
prouoake me to continue therein: and the subduing of my flesh may better fit
me to the cheerful undergoing thereof: and the more I feel mine own wants
and grieve therein, the more I may hunger after and value thy sweet ordinance,
whereby my wants may be supplied, and sorrows r^freshed: that so in the
denial of my self, I may be still found of thee in Christ, and by his power
may be still enabled to go through the spiritual occasions of the day, and
norished with hope of the acceptance of my weak endeauours therein.

So grant me (loving Father) when I speak unto thee, to speak even from
thee. From the sense of thy Majesty, to abase me humbly before thee: from the
light of thy Truth, to discern my special wants by the light of faith, to
apprehend thy special favor in Christ, to cast me out of my self, and cast
me boldly upon thee, and by remembrance of thy former mercies and faithful
promises, to assure me good success in presence with thee, and so from the
sense of thy love, to offer a sacrifice of praise unto thee, that I may still
receive from thee by emptying my soul in compassion to others may be more
replenished by thee.

O grant me (Blessed Lord) that when thou speak to me, I may hear thee
only, and alone by thee. Let thy key open my heart that it may receive thee
inwardly: Let it shut my heart again that by meditation, I may retain thee
constantly. Let it open my heart again, by applying thine ordinance to my
present and special wants; and so break the stony rock again, that the
tears of hearty Repentance may gush out plentifully. O then let it shut my
heart fast by confidence in thee, that I sincke not in despair; And then let
it open and enlarge my heart again, with joy unspeakable and glorious, in the
sense of thy rich mercies. And now let it shut up my heart again, against
self love and spiritual pride, that so it may be opened by special grace, to
all gracious and constant duties to thee, my self, and my neighbor.

And when we are to meet thee together in that holy communion: O prepare the
room for thy self, that thou may delight to feast with me, and give me an
heavenly appetite, that I may desire to feed on thee. Humble my soul before
thee, that thou may stoop unto me; and ease my soul of its heavy burden,
that it may ascend unto thee, and so knit my heart hereby unto thee in an
everlasting fellowship.

When I observe thy church enlarged by the admission of new members, the breach
of mine own Vow, to consider my decay and backe-slydings from thee; and in the
sense thereof, to pray more earnestly for thy Blessings upon thine own
Ordinance, rejoicing for the increase of thy Church hereby, and yet preparing
unto the bloody Baptism, and so hungering after the full consummation of thy
Chosen.

When I join with the Congregation, either in giving thee praise, or in prayer
^o receive from thee (O grant) me to join of conscience not custom, to the
satisfying of the flesh, to humble each other, that we may have mutual
comfort, to labor with one mind and end, that our pains may not be tedious or
fruitless.

Give me so to praise thee, that I be more humbled in my self, so to give
thee thanks, that I part not stakes with thee: so to sing unto thee, that I
may sorrow for my sins, so to rejoice before thee, as that I may still hunger
after thee, and long for thy everlasting presence.

So enlarge me from thy bounty, to all occasions for thy sake, to fill the
empty, to empty the gorged stomach, to raise the humbled, recall the
wandering; confirm the weak^, inform the ignorant, convince the obstinate,
comfort the abject, and reconcile the auerse: and in all these, give me, good
Lord a cheerful heart, rather choosing to prevent, then be prevented. herein
rather striving with the last, then giving over with the first. And so what I
have found a broad, O grant me to communicate at home with my God in prayer, to
bless it unto me; with my self in private application to be bettered thereby,
with my family in conference and instruction, to increase the kingdom of
Christ, still raising my soul higher from the world, by meditation of the
wisdom and goodness of my God, in his wonderful works, and so still more
abasing my flesh, in the view and sense of mine own unprofitableness in the
best I have done: yet comforting my soul in the promise of my God, that he
will require no more then he gives, and show his power in my weakness; that
though I find no more in my rekconing, but a dearer and more deep sense of my
corruption, as this day to discern and detest the same: so this deep sense of
corruption, may enable me to prepare more conscionably against the more public
occasions, and provoke me more earnestly to hunger after the everlasting
Sabbath.

And even so grant me (Gracious God) thus to end the day with thee, as I have
endeavored to begin, and continue the same in thee. O pardon, I humbly pray
thee, whaesoeuer has been mine, and accept graciously, and crown thine own
work in me, who am thy servant and the Son of thy handmaide. And so do
heartily commend my self, and all mine, into thy special tuition, beseeching
thee to give me my full acquitance before I meet thee in public, that I may
approach thy presence with comfort, and partake thine own ordinances as my
appointed food, make such benefit by them as may satisfy me with thy
fullness, to the rejoicing of my soul in the light of thy Countenance, and to
provoke me to long for thine everlasting presence, and fit me daily to meet
my Savior in the Clouds, in whose worthynesse, I humbly pray thee to accept
thine unworthy servant, and his weak prayers, to whom with thine own
Majesty, and God the blessed Spirit, three glorious Persons, one God in unity,
might, and Majesty, be ascribed as most due, all glory and Power, and Majesty,
and Dominion, with all fear and hearty obedience, of us and the whole Church
of God now and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for the Sabbath Evening.
ALmighty and everliving Lord God, F^ther of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him
our most loving and gracious Father, whose faithfulness is everlasting, and
loving kindness past finding out: it is thy good providence (holy Father) that
we thine unworthy Servants, have had this opportunity to commerse with thy
glorious Majesty this day, in thy holy ordinances, and now are to make up our
reckoning for our employment therein, in the shuting up thereof, and it is
thine infinite mercy and tender compassion toward us, that thou have yet
respited us to the end of this thine holy Sabbath, to make our peace with thee,
that so we may lie down in thy favor, and so be sealed up hereb^ unto thine
eternal Sabbath. For we unfeignedly here confess before thee, O thou thee
searcher of our hearts, that though thou have offered thy self most graciously
unto us this day in all thine ordinances, to the reclayming of us from our
vain and perverse ways, as also to allure us to constant and cheerful
obedience, yet Lord, thou know what little power we have found to subdue
the rebellions of our proud spirits, how little comfort we have reaped from
thence, to arm us against temptation, and stay us from sinking therein: Nay,
our wisdom has the more opposed thy Spirit, by how much the more it has
been convinced there by, and our wounds have more stunke and putrified, the
more thou have labored to lance and cure them.

How slightly did we prepare our selves to thy public worship, being only
formal and customarie in the private: rather standing upon the adorning of
our stinking carcasses to please men, then to humble our souls that we may
be accepted of thee. How careless have we been in exhorting and prea^i^g thy
Family, that they together with us, might go up with confidence to the house
of God, and so be there refreshed with the fatnes of thy house. And as we
took not he^d to our feet when we should come before thee, so when we came,
our footing deceived us; and though we saw our face in thy glass, and were
justly abased at the foul spots therein, yet we forgate presently the true
hue thereof, and so lose our selves at home, even when we sought to find thee
abroad, departing always without sound comfort from thy presence, because we
could not endure to be thoroughly abased in our selves before thee.

And thus has it befalne us (holy Lord) even while we have endeavored to
honor thee in thine Ordinances; that while, we have rather sought therein our
own glory, then thine; and desired rather the outward credit of Profession,
then the power of Conversion, and renewing of our inward spirits. Though thou
gave us our desire to be seen of men, yet thou did send leanness into our
soul; denying us justly, the true comfort which we did not cheefely desire,
or indeed were not fit for. For (alas) what leave could we expect from thee, or
at all in thee, who while we tendered with the Harlot offerings of peace and made
glorious shows of loyalty unto thee; yet did no better then usurp upon thy
honor by our hypocrisy and vaineglory, and (as much as lay in us) challenge
most blasphemously thine omniscienced righteousness; as if either thou did
not discern our inward rottenness, or did approve of our outside and bodily
worship. And did ever any fight against God, and prosper? Even so (Lord) has
it fared with me this day: Mine own proud heart has fought against thee in
the use and sense of all thy Blessings, seeking to serve my self by them, and
not thy glory, and so to harden my heart therewith, that though thou fillest
the hungry with good things, yet did thou send me away empty of true
comfort, because my proud and swollen heart utterly excluded the same. And so it
justly befell me, according to thy word, that it carried me from the presence
of thy grace. While I stood in the presence of thy Ordinances, Lord how my
mind wandered from thee, while my body was before thee. Nay, my disharted
mind perverted my body also, that even with much deadness of the outward man,
much drowsinesse and irreuerence, I behaved my self so before thee, as I durst
not before my Friend; as I might give just advantage to mine Enemy: rather
thinking the time too long, because my mind was on my belly, yea sometimes
wishing mine cares shorter, and more slow to hear, that so I might not
conceive what was contrary unto my corruption: that I might (as it were)
bless my soul in my shallow and counterfeit holiness? And what I yet
conceived, how quickly either did I lose it, that I might not find my self:
or how foolishly did I turn it, to the puffing up of my flesh, with a conceit
of knowledge, or to the adoring of the vessel that yielded the Treasure, that
so he also might cloak and magnify me?

O Lord, how my deceitful heart couzened it self herein? Either in applying
what I heard to others, as if my self were not aimed at, that so I might
hereby commit two Evils, both to condemn others, and justify my self: Or
else, in misapplying what I heard unto my self, fastening on such Comforts as
did not belong unto me, or slighting such Terrors, as specially aimed at my
sore. What should I say unto thee (O thou more inward with me, then mine inmost
parts) Though mine ear was sometime tickled, yet mine heart was not moved at
al, or more hardened by its contrary motion: Though mine heart was stricken for
the present, and shaken by thy Terrors, yet it was calmed again by the
enchantments of Hypocrisy and Security. And although I saw my true face in
thy glass, yet I stopped mine ears from the hearing of thy Law; and therefore
thou did also hide thine ears from my Prayers, which I afterward made
before thee in private, and deniedst thy gracious blessing to my endeauours, in
the informing of my Family, and conferring of what I had heard, for their
further building up in knowledge and obedience: and because I had been so
careless in attending thee; therefore thou did justly leave me to the
neglect of my duty to my self, and mine; that so in our failing each other,
wherein happily we might be more confounded, as making this the main of our
Religion, rather to be honored of each other, in mutual help, then to honor
thee our God, in seeking help from thee alone, we might know the true cause,
why thou did fail us in the public, even because we sought our selves, and
not thy Glory. Oh the infinite riches of the wisdom of God! How wisely did
thou abase thy Servant at home, where he sought to advance himself in private
by profiting others, who neither sought thine honor abroad, nor how to benefit
himself by the public Ordinances. And yet how mercifully did thou herein
deal with him, by calling him to account, and charging him as an unprofitable
servant, for his unworthy walking before thee in the public, while he was
casting up his peniworthes at home, and expiated the approbation and recompense
of a profitable servant. Even thus, O Lord my God, fared it with me at home,
the best that I reaped was accordingly as I had sown. As I sowed to the flesh
abroad, so of the flesh I reaped corruption and confusion at home: and while I
endeavored to heal the wound, and mend my self, by imparting of my b^d
peniworths to others, it was more increased by their drowsinesse and deceitful
chaffering with me, yielding me no better then the chafe and refuse of bodily
and formal attendance for all my Lip-labor and cold devotions bestowed upon
them. And this is all that I can truly account with thee (O thou Searcher of my
secret parts) for all the goodness I have received from thee this day, even to
account my self unworthy of the least of thy mercies, not able to answer thee
one for a thousand, if thou sholdst enter into judgment with me. But herein yet
have I boldness before thee, and comfort from thee, that in this I do
unfeignedly judge my self, that thou may not condemn me, that in the
judging of my self I desire to give thee the only glory of all thy mercies
vouchsafed unto me this day in acknowledging my self unworthy of the least of
them, that so still I may be found of thee in Jesus Christ; not having mine
own righteousness, and so in his Peace, may find peace and comfort with thee.

O pardon therefore (I humbly pray thee) the manifold wanderings of thy poor
servant from thee this day, even while he has bin with thee, and discharge him
of those fearful reckonings which he has had with his own soul, because he
has reckoned without thee, and not measured himself by his acceptance with
thee, but rather by what he has slightly performed unto thee. Accept me
therefore in the righteousness of my Savior, and cover all mine imperfections,
with the perfect holiness of my Redeemer, that in him I may appear all fair
before thee: And speak unto my poor soul, by the testimony of thy good
Spirit, sealing up unto me, the forgiveness of my best endeauours; that so the
conscience of my manifold wanderings, and backeslidings from thee, in my vain
and worldly thoghts, carnal walking, and behavior far unbeseeming either
this day, or thy presence, may not confound me in thy presence, while I sue out
my discharge from thee.

O give me to mourn unfeignedly for greeuing thy Spirit so often this day, and
dishonoring thy great name, wherein I have sought to honor thee: and make me
to abhor my self before thee in a just detestation of my best endeuou^s, as
to be justified thereby; that so I may be acquitted by thy free mercy in Jesus
Christ, and in him may find peace and comfort in thee: both that my faylings
are not imputed unto me, and that my poor endeavors being the work of thine
own Spirit, may be accepted of thee. Let this comfort me (O my God) that I
have desired to walk before thee this day in the truth of my heart: and let
this still humble me before thee, that I have not answered my desires herein,
that so I may have comfort in thy free acceptance, above all that I could do,
or desire. And so in this comfort, grant me to repose my self wholly, in thy
free Grace, both to refresh me in the night season, that I may not sleep in
death; and so to raise me up again to a wise redeeming of the time of my civil
Calling, and therein to lay up a good foundation, for better preparation
against the next Sabbath, and so to be prepared to my eternal Sabbath with
thee for ever in thy glorious kingdom. Hear me (O Lord) in these my
supplications, pardon the weakness of my sinful prayers, accept my person in
the Son of thy love, and answer me above all that I can ask or think, even
for the only merit of thy dear Son my only Savior Jesus Christ, in whom
thou art well pleased, Amen.

A Prayer to be said before the hearing or reading of the holy Scripture.
O Heavenly Father, whatsoever I am, whatsoever I have, whatsoever I know, it
is only by thy grace: for by nature I am the child of wrath, and I am not borne
anew of flesh and blood, neither of the seed of man, or of the will of man.
Flesh and blood cannot reveal the mystries of thy heavenly kingdom unto me:
but by thy blessed will I am that I am, and by the same know I that I know.
Therefore, O Father, do I commit into thy hands only, my salvation. If my
knowledge be small, yet I doubt nothing but that I am the child of thy
everlasting kingdom: and therefore by thy mighty power, I shall grow (when it
shall be thy good will and pleasure) to a more full and riper knowledge, as of
a more perfect age, wherein my faith shall be fully able to comprehend and
perceive the breadth, depth, height, and largnesse of thy great mercies and
gracious promises. But seeing, O Father, this power of full knowledge and
perfect revelation, passes all power natural, and remains only in thy
power, and light of thy Spirit: O Lord, do thou whatsoever it shall please
thee, to open unto me and all the rest of thine elect servants and children,
depending upon thee, so much of the light of thy countenance, as may be most
for thy glory, and our comfort: yea, and at such time as shall seem good to
thy wisdom and fatherly mercy. In the mean while, thus resting wholly upon
thee, neithet can I despair, neither will I be too much careful, although I
cannot attain to the knowledge of many of thy works, neither to the
understanding of many places of thy Scriptures. But I will confess unto thee
the weakness of my faith, waiting always for the further revealing of thy
glorious light to be uttered unto me thy poor servant, when thou shall think
(of thy Fatherly benevolence and goodness) meet and convenient. I knowing
most assuredly, that thou will pity my weak imbecilitie and childish
infancy, and cause the same to serve for thy glory, and my great commodity:
seeing that I err as a child before such a Father, which can not but off thy
Fatherly pity and compassion, but rather as thou have bought me unto thee, to
be an heir of thy kingdom by the blood of thy natural Son my Savior
Jesus Christ: so am I sure that thou will lighten me in the end, with full
fruition of the bright light of thy countenance, that I may see thee, and know,
that as this thy Son knows thee: yea, see thee and know thee my Father face
to face, to know th^e as I am known. Thus rest I only in thy hands (O my God)
craving of thee to increase my knowledge in thy holy word, whereby I may know
thy good will and pleasure. And knowing the same, give me, O Lord, thy holy
Spirit to conduct and lead me in the same all the days of my life; that in
sincerity of faith, and pureness of living and conversation, thy glorious
Majesty be magnified in me for ever. Give me grace therefore (most merciful
Father) that for so high a treasure left among us, as is this thy most holy
word, I may be thankful, reverently embrace, accept, and esteem of the same,
as the most precious jewel in earth, be there^n confirmed more strongly, that
all things therein contained to be most certain and undoubtedly true, not by
any mortal man, but by thy most holy Spirit in man, penned and written to the
comfort and behoof of man: that I may most humbly, lowly, and with most high
reverence, submit my self thereunto, as becomes thy Majesty, and thy word
proceeding out of thy most blessed mouth: that I may reverently with
humbleness and obedience, read, hear, and occupy my self in the same, to
the comfort of my soul, and increase of thy glory. Lighten mine understanding,
most dear Father, with thy holy Spirit, that I may learn, clearly to
conceive, and understand the things therein contained, which no mortal man can
conceive, save those who have learned of thee, and whom thou by thy holy Spirit
do lighten and instruct. Guide me (deer^ Father) with thy holy Spirit, that
having the true understanding of the mysteries therein contained, I may be
fully established and confirmed in the true knowledge of thee my dear Father,
and of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, my Lord and Savior, thoroughly in
conscience persuaded that I have my full and perfect salvation and life
everlasting in him, and through his atonement, made through his death and
passion, that I do not vainly abuse the knowledge of thy sacred word, to
satisfy vain curiosity, or brag of knowledge: but only to the releeuing
of my hungry and wounded conscience, to the loosing of my fettered soul, and
the appeasing of my sorrowful heart: that I may to the end of my life, walk
in sincerity before thee, my heavenly Father, in the comforts of thy dear
Son our Savior, vpholden still by the merciful power of the holy Ghost, to
thine everlasting praise and glory, world without end. Amen.

A Thanksgiving after the hearing or reading of the word of God.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, I yield unto thee most hearty
thanks, for all thy benefits bestowed upon me, especially that it has
pleased thy heavenly goodness to shine into my heart through the light of
thine holy Spirit, in the Mysteries of thy holy word, and that thou have framed
my heart and mind to take such unspeakable joy, and comfort in thy most
blessed and holy word, and the embracing of my salvation therein offered unto
me. For these thine unspeakable mercies, I beseech thee, O Lord, make me
thankful, that I may acknowledge the great benefit thereof, and esteem of so
inestimable a treasure, above all earthly possessions or treasures. And, O Lord
my God, for so much as I wander in this present life, among many and infinite
dangers, whereby I am every moment in peril of sliding back, and falling from
this fervent zeal of thy everlasting truth, which thou have kindled in my
breast, if otherwise thou do not stay me by thy merciful hand: and for so
much as I learn out of thy most blessed and holy word, that it is not
sufficient to have begun well unless I continue to the end, not sufficient
to hold my hand to the plough, and look back: I crave at thy hands, in the
name of thy beloved Son, my Lord and Savior Christ, that this thy work
which thou have begun in me, thou will in mercy increase in me, more and more,
and continue it even to the end of my life: that I do not wax cold, secure,
dull, or faint, but continually increasing in true zeal, I may still more and
more be delighted with reading, hearing, and meditating of thy holy word: I may
thereby also daily increase in true knowledge of thy blessed will, from faith
to faith, that I may even from the bottom of my heart, so sincerely profess
thy true Religion, that all hypocrisy, vainglory, and fained holiness,
utterly through thy holy Spirit rooted out of my heart: I may only hold my
self contented, that I may have the eyes of thy Majesty, beholding my inward
heart and mind, whereby I only studying to be allowed before thy Majesty, may
utterly reject all the vain praise of men, which might puff me up; or the
scoffing jests, taunts, or reproaches of the ungodly, which might else drive me
down. To this end (O Lord my God) that I may increase, and daily more and more
be confirmed in thy mercies begun in me. I beseech thee stir up true and
sincere Preachers, and Messengers, who daily may stir up my mind and heart,
otherwise by nature dull, to the joyful embracing of the glad tidings of
peace. Leave me not destitute, O Lord my God, of the means which thou have
appointed for the increase of a lively faith, and true zeal; which mean, is
only the Ministry of thy blessed and holy word: but make me always careful
for the seeking of it: and so provide, O Lord my God, that I may always have
it, comfortably receive it, and sweetly digest it. Keep me by thy holy
Spirit, O Lord, that I never be seduced by erroneous doctrine, but that only I
may give ear unto thy voice, that cleaving only unto thee, I may in this
present life which thou have given me, so occupy my self, and use this good
time which thou have appointed, that I may still look for the coming of thy
dear Son, to receive me into the everlasting rest, prepared for all the
elect and chosen, whereby I shall for ever remain together with my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, world without end, Amen.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the sweet comfort of all that call upon thee,
and the sure succor of all such as sue unto thee; behold me a most sinful
creature, and foul offender, which bowing the knees of my heart with all
humility before thee, confess unfeignedly, that I am not worthy to entertain
and receive thee into my sinful and unclean house. Nevertheless, most loving
Lord, which have said, that who so eats thy flesh, and drinks thy blood,
shall dwell in thee, and thou in him, have mercy upon me, O have mercy upon
me most merciful Savior, and behold me most miserable sinner, prepared at
this present, not only to let thee in under the roof of my mouth, but also to
lodge thee in the house of my heart. O bountiful Jesus, be my gracious
Redeemer, and grant that I receive not the Sacrament of thy body and blood
unworthily, purchasing thereby unto my self death and damnation, but rather be
made through faith in thee, a worthy receiver, and a meet member of thy
blessed body, and so by the strength of this heavenly food, may not only be
enabled to cast away all my former sins, and most beloved corruptions; but
may also walk before thee, in all constant holiness, to the making sure of mine
election. Grant this I beseech thee, for thine own mercy sake, Amen.

A Prayer to be said after the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Sweet Savior, which with thy precious salve of compassion, curest the
foul and filthy sores of our sins, and prouidest for us all necessary
preservatives against the poison of the soule-infecting maliciousnes, hear I
beseech thee, the humble supplications of me thy poor servant, which here
present my self before thee at this present, and grant that this my receiving
of the Sacrament of thy blessed body and blood, may be a true testimony unto my
conscience, that I have through faith in thee, received full remission of all
my sins and offenses past: and am now become (as it were) a new Creature in
thy sight: I beseech thee likewise grant, that casting away all my former
works of wickedness, I may henceforth walk in newness of life, and godly
conversation, bringing forth such fruits of true conversion, as may move
others by my example, to honor and praise thy holy name. And that running the
whole race of my life in dutiful obedience toward thee, I may when it shall
please thee to think meet, received among the number of thine elect, into
that everlasting happiness where we shall be perfect in holiness, Amen.

A Prayer for Constant perseverance in praying, when we are dull to prayer.
O Lord God, most merciful Father, according to thy commandment, in mine
afflictions, and necessities, I seek to thee for succor by continual prayer
and calling upon thy Name. I call upon thee in the day time, and in the night
season do I pour out my prayers unto thee, and yet for all that I feel me
nothing released, but oftentimes worse and worse, which makes me many times
dear Father almost to doubt of thy goodness, that thou do reject my
Prayers, and give no heed unto them, whereby I do almost think that it is
no boot for me to pray, seeing I feel no release: but (O Lord) this is but
weakness in me, and the frailty of flesh, which will not willingly be subdued
unto thy Spirit: which my frailty, I beseech thee O Lord, forgive me. For thou
do O Lord God see my conflicts, and look upon my continual sighs and
petitions, but thou do defer and prolong thy help the longer: and do not
at first help me, to this end, that I may see fully mine own weakness, learn
by little and little to subdue my rebellious will to thy good will, who knows
better what is meet for me then I my self. Therefore (O most dear Father)
strengthen me by thy holy Spirit, that I may still persevere and continue in
prayer, and with longing desires patiently wait for thee O Lord, being assured
that although it appear not, yet thou art always present with me, and
hear my sighs and complaints, and wilt when thou see thy time declare thy
self manifestly in the renewing my heart with spiritual joy: stir up O Lord
my dull and sluggish nature, to call upon thee continually, appointing thee
neither time, nor the means of my deliverance, but leaving all to thy good
will and pleasure: I may in the mean time, never cease my continual prayer,
to call for thy merciful help, until such time as it shall please thy
goodness to send me full deliverance. I feel my self (O Lord) oftentimes
very unwilling to pray, for that I do not fully perceive my prayers to be
heard, but do go on still languishing in my sorrows, as though thou had no
care of me. But this my dullness, I beseech thee, O merciful Father, pardon
in me, and grant that I may be raised up to pray for aid and relief of thee
continually, although I should see no sign of favor: yet that I may continue
still, with the faithful Woman of Canaan, and never cease in heart, mind, and
mouth, till thou grant my requests at thine appointed time, when thou know
it shall be most for my behoof, and for thy glory. And that when thou shall
mercifully look upon me to deliver me: I may then fully with my whole heart
acknowledge thy goodness toward me, and let it never stir out of my heart,
but continue thankful for the same all the days of my life, whereby thy
glory in me may be declared, and my soul relieved thorough Christ my Lord
and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for all times.
O Lord God, Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, without whom we have
neither hope nor comfort, we poor wretched sinners beseech thee of thy
Fatherly goodness, to look upon us, and to make us partakers of thy gracious
goodness, so that evermore we may set forth thy honor and glory: let our
conversation be such, that a great many beholding our good works, may
glorify thee our heavenly Father: and so direct our ways, that we may hold
forth the profession of thy Gospel, as a Lantern to lighten the steps of a
great many, that they may turn to the, and praise thy name in their
visitation. Thus (O Lord) we beseech thee to deal with us, that in deed we
may be vessels of honor unto thee, now to set forth the glory of thy name, and
after this transitory life, to behold thy glory, who have immortallitie alone,
and dwell in light, that no man has approached unto: remove far from us
our sins and iniquities, that they may not separate between us and thee:
blotte out of us our offenses, and make our prayers righteous, that thou may
favorably grant our requests: look upon us with thy favorable mercy, that
thou may have pity upon us, and behold us in the righteousness of thy
beloved Son Christ Jesus; and that we may be presented faultlesse in thy
sight: and thou accepting us as holy, we may have the grace evermore to set
forth thine honor and glory, and to speak of thy praises in the midst of all
thy people.

Let us love (O Lord) the things that are good, and hate the things that are
evil, let us delight in all things that may please thee, and let us be greiued
with whatsoever is displeasant in thy sight. And to the intent we may have true
understanding, and be able to descerne between things, what is good or evil,
we beseech thee, let thy word dwell in us plentifully, that it may guide our
understandings so that we may abound in all knowledge, and do according to
that which is righteous. And in this estate of true Christianity, being
instructed in mind, and ready in body in all holy obedience, we beseech thee
make us to grow and increase from grace to grace, from faith to faith, until
we come unto the fullness of age, to be perfect members of the body of Christ,
waiting for the blessed hope of thine elect, and sighing in spirit until the
time that thy Children be revealed.

In the mean season, let us sigh with all those that have received the first
fruits of thy spirit, that these days of sin may cease, that Satan be
trodden down under feet, that Antichrist may be revealed* yet to many thousands
that be in ignorance, that the number of thine elect may be full, the body of
thy Saints made perfect, all tears wiped from their eyes; even then when thy
Son shall appear the second time, to judge the quick and the dead: which
time (O Lord) send quickly, according to thy good will, and teach us to pray
with all thy Saints, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Grant this, O most
merciful Father, for thy Sons sake, in whose name we pray unto thee. And
although we be but earth and ashes, yet we are bold to say unto thee, (the
God of all glory) even as he has taught us. Our Father which art in heaven,
etc.

A Prayer for all estates.
O Lord God, Father of light, with whom is no change, neither yet shadow of
change, but have established thine appointed counsels, which shall not be
changed for ever: thou O God, have made among us this diversity of estates and
degrees, according as every Commonwealth needfully requiteth, keep us all,
we beseech thee, that we may walk obediently in our calling, and follow the
steps that thou have set before us, even from the highest to the lowest: let us
accomplish that duty unto which thou have appointed us, and with a faithful
remembrance of thy promise made of old to our Father Abraham, that thou art his
exceeding great reward, we may likewise depend on thy providence, and seek
not any shameful ways to get our living, wandering from the righteousness of
our vocation, into the manifold errors of sin and iniquity. Look upon us
(O Lord) and enrich us with thy grace; make us obedient to our superiors,
meek toward our enemies, faithful to our friends, true and just toward all
men, that we may dwell steadfastly rooted in the hope of thine ^lect: until
thou shall make an end of all our labor: look upon our most excellent King,
and Prince, with his Highness honorable Counsel; as thou have called them to
the highest rooms, so give unto them the great^st measure of grace, that they
faithfully dispense the Talents committed unto them: Lead them with good King
David into the Sanctuary, that they may see thy loving kindness, which is
better then life, and say with the Prophet, All flesh is grass, and the glory
of man is as the flower of the field, and so consecreate themselves to do thy
will, offer up their bodies to be holy, living, and reasonable sacrifices unto
thee, that they may be nurse-fathers unto thy Church: look also we beseech
thee, upon the Ministers, whom thou have appointed to the preaching of thy
Gospel, make them (O God) faithful dispencers of thy mysteries, without
respect of persons, to do the work unto which thou have appointed them, that
they may convert sinners, and have their glory perfect in the day of Christ:
and knit us together in peace and love, that they may be full of compassion
one toward another, to rejoice with them that rejoice, and mourn with them
that mourn, especially to instruct one another in the way of righteousness,
that by our mutual help we may the better withstand our enemy, and dwell
safe in hope of thine elect, till our days shall be full, and we shall walk
in the ways of all the world: which time we beseech thee bring us happily
unto, even for thy Sons sake, we beseech thee, to whom with thee, and the
holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor and glory, now for ever,
and evermore, Amen.

A Prayer to be confirmed in the knowledge of God.
O Most mighty, and eternal God, thou that by the creation of the world, the
Sun, the Moon, and Stars, the Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is,
has sufficiently declared thy self to be the everlasting and Almighty God,
for that these things do far pass the reach of man's wisdom. And not
herein only have thou declared thy self to be a God: but in that also, that
thou do continually guide and govern all things of thee created: It is thou
therefore that thunderest from heaven, that with lightnings and tempests, and
of waters and winds, show thy terrible vengeance upon sinful flesh. It is
thou (O God) which let us feel sensibly in our selves, thy mighty power
and working, not only in that, that thou have made our bodies and souls: but
especially, that thou make us even of force to confess thy eternal Spirit
in us, who so mightily fights against the assaults of the enemy, that of
force we are driven to acknowledge that it is thy working in us, and not we our
selves. Seeing therefore, O most merciful Father, that we have both in thy
creatures, and also in our selves so manifest testimony, that thou only art
the eternal and everliving God, which reigns in all thy creatures, guiding
them by thy heavenly providence: grant we beseech thee, that our hearts may be
hereof fully assured, to acknowledge thee not only to be God eternal. who
has created all things: but also that we may in heart be fully persuaded, that
thou O Lord God, do govern all things according to thy most blessed will, so
that nothing can be done in the world without thine appointment, and that thou
have such a singular care over thine elected people, so that not so much as an
hair of their head shall fall without thy providence: that thou so guidest all
their doings, that all things shall turn to their commodity, and thy glory.
Grant O Lord God, that hereof we may be fully assured in our hearts and souls,
that we may in all our doings set thee before our eyes: acknowledging thee to
be our only Lord and Father, and by the working of thy holy Spirit in us, may
be confirmed in Faith, and comforted in soul, and lightened in understanding,
that always here upon earth, we may glorify thy holy name, and after the
dissolution of this body, we may attain to everlasting joy, through our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns world without end, Amen.

A Prayer for the obtaining of saving Faith.
O Eternal God, and merciful Father, who in the riches of thy mercy, have
ordained thine only Son Jesus Christ, to be the propitiation for the sins
of thine elect: that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have
everlasting life: that so many as receive him, and believe in his Name, may
have power from him, to be the Sons of God, and heirs with him of eternal
glory. And in thine infinite wisdom, have so disposed of me thy Creature,
that being first estated by thee, in a condition of holiness, and falling
willingly from the same, by mine own rebellion, into a most fearful and
desprate estate of sin and damnation: I might be restored again to a better
condition of life and immortality, by the death and passion of thy dear
Son. Look down I humbly pray thee, with the ^ies of thy mercy upon me thy
most vnwo^thy servant, who does unfeignedly here confess before thee: that,
though I am by Nature most sinful and miserable; yet such herein is my
desperate case: that through the blindness of my mind, and hardness of heart,
which cannot repent, I am so far from knowing my misery, much less how to
help my self out of this woeful estate, that the very wisdom of my flesh,
is emnity against thee. And my self, not only rebelling against the means,
which might discover unto me my misery, but most desperately perverting those
means, to the further hardening of my heart, and so to the more desperate
enwrapping me in the bonds of damnation, by heaping up wrath against the day of
wrath.

And therefore, First I humbly pray thee Blessed Lord, who have the key of
David; that openest and no man shuts, that shuts and no man openest; to open
the blind eyes of my mind, that I descerne the wondrous things of thy law;
that so in the true glass of thy holy law, I may clearly discern mine own
miserable estate, and by the hammer of thy Law, my hard heart may be thoroughly
broken, with the sense of my sins: that so feeling my sin a burden, which
I am not able to bear; I may be wholly confounded in my self, as discerning my
self to be an utter cast-a-way, and reprobate branch, fit for nothing, but
for the unquenchable fire of thy Jealousy. O make me Lord, to see the inward
vildnesse of mine heart, and that all the thoughts, and imaginations thereof,
are only evil continually: that though I may be happily free from gross
evils, and seem to show forth some civil goodness, yet those may be
co^uinced to be most abominable, because they proceed from the filthy sink of
my heart: and the less I discern the evil of my ways the more I may
acknowledge the deceitfulness of mine heart, the more I may convince the
obliquitie thereof; that howsoever I seemed to be alive, as being ignorant of
my misery: yet now discerning my self in thy righteous Law, I may not only
acknowledge my self dead in sins and trespasses, and so utterly senseless
and unable to help my self; but also, may renounce utterly mine own wit and
wisdom to any good, as being no better then desperate Rebellion against thee.

Thus being confounded, and wholly cast out of my self, and finding my case
to be out of measure sinful, and so altogether desperate in regard of any
ability as of my self, to my recovery: O let me not sink utterly under this
insupportable burden, but put thine holy hand under me, to prevent utter
despair: and sustain me secretly by thy mighty Power, that I be not
swallowed up in death: Oh raise me up I humbly pray thee, with the hope of thy
mercy, and lead me by the hand of thy grace, to seek it where it may be
found. Bring me into the secret Chamber of thy gracious Presence, where I may
behold thy face in my Savior, and grant me to admire thine infinite wisdom
and mercy, in providing so sovereign a remedy, for my distress.

O give me, to be ravished with thy love, in the exceeding riches of my
Redeemer, and make me so to value the worth of his Merit, as for the obtaining
thereof, to resolve on utter renouncing and parting with whatsoever I have, to
obtain the same. And so finding now by thy Grace, what need I have thereof;
oh work in me a secret hope that thou may be reconciled if I can fasten on
the means thereto, and grant me above all, to hunger after his righteousness,
that so mine iniquities being thereby covered, I may draw near with confidence
unto the Throane of Grace, to beg unfeignedly, even with strong cries, the
pardon of my sins. And though I receive not a present answer to my desire,
yet sustain me I pray thee with thy gracious Spirit, that so I may with
patience wait thy good leisure, and never give over, till thou have said unto
my Soul, I am thy Salvation.

And though I do not presently feel this testimony of thy Spirit, sealing me
up to the day of Redemption, yet grant me (I pray thee) to be strong in Faith,
believing what I feel not as I would, and hoping for what I do not yet enjoy,
that so thereby being knit unto Christ my Savior, and made one with him, I may
thereby draw virtue from his death, to the mortifying of my corrupt Nature, and
killing of those special lusts that do hinde^ this sense of thy love in him
toward me; that so feeling in me a dying to corruption, I may also thereby
apprehend more fully, the discharge of the guilt of my sins, in the merits
of my Savior: and so thereby renewing my peace with thee my gracious God, I may
rejoice in the hope of that glory, which he has purchased for me.

And so in the hope of that Glory, grant me (I humbly pray thee) to draw
virtue from the Resurrection of my Savior, that so I may be raised up with him
to newness of life: whereby I may render thanks unto thee for this
unspeakable gift, and to be made meet for the same, in the acceptable time.

And that I may not be disappointed of my Hope: Oh grant me still to live by
faith in the Son of God, daily denying mine own righteousness, that still I
may be found acceptable with thee in him, above all worthiness in my self,
of my imperfect endeauours, only in his righteousness, and so thereby may be
prepared to the hope of Glory.

And seeing I am like to meet with many hindrances in pursuit of this Glory,
both from the World without, either detaining me in the way, or drawing me
from the mark; as also from mine own deceitful heart within, as discouraging
me in my course, and laggering me in my pace; and sometimes also blinding me
either not to discern, or mistake the gole. Oh grant me to walk by faith and
not by sight, as to rest on the foundation which stands sure, the Lord knows
who are his, though sometimes in the building I may miss of it: so to walk as
a stranger and Pilgrim in the world, not clogging my self in my journey with
unnecessary luggage, and fretting cares, nor setting up my rest in any present
Inn of outward happiness, or inward means thereto, but still casting away
every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast upon me, I
may run with joy the race that is set before, looking unto Christ Jesus the
Author and finisher of my Faith; and so by him seeing within the rule into the
glory that is set before me, I may despise the shame, and wait with patience,
the great recompense of Reward. That so neither riches may daunt my Faith by
presuming too far, nor depth may quayle it, by stooping too low: That
Principalities may not shake it by force of tentation, nor Powers overcome it
by their violent impressions: that neither things present may abase it by
groueling thereon, nor things to come may deiect it by doubtings or false
fears: That neither life may corrupt it by doting thereon, nor death may
confound it by vnpreparednesse thereto: That nothing may separate me from the
love of God in Jesus Christ, in whom (by Faith) I am more then Conqueror over
all things.

Thus grant me (gracious God) to walk by Faith, and not by sight. And that I
may receive the end of my Faith, even the salvation of my soul, Oh keep me by
thy mighty power through faith unto salvation, and guide me by the word of
Faith in all my ways, that I may not lean to mine own wisdom, bur to thy
sure Word, as to a Light shining in a dark place, that so I may daily grow in
knowledge, and in the grace of Jesus Christ from Faith to Faith; filled with
all joy and peace, in believing and abounding in all fruits of righteousness
and perfect holiness, that so I may be perfect and intyre, wanting nothing,
waiting for the appearance of Jesus Christ; that so my Conversation being in
heaven, an entrance may be thereby made unto me, into the everlasting kingdom
of thy dear Son, even to take possession by faith in this life thereof, and
to see a far off by faith, into the fullness of that glory, that so I may
fight the good fight of Faith, and lay hold of eternal life, in full assurance
of what I have already the earnest of by Faith; and so in that h^pe daily
purging my self of all wickedness of the Spirit and of the Flesh, that I may
grow up to perfect holiness in the favor of GOD, waiting daily by Faith the
adoption of the sons of God, and laboring to attain the resurrection of the
dead; that so I may be kept blameless, in Soul, Body, and Spirit, unto the
coming of my Savior Jesus Christ. Grant these things (gracious Father) even
for his sake in whom thou art well pleased, Jesus Christ the righteous. To
whom with thine own blessed Spirit, one glorious Unitive Trinity, be glory,
and praise, and Dominion, now and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer to feel in heart Spiritual comfort, and the lively sense of our
Adoption by Faith.
O Lord God, most merciful Father, now I fully perceive and know, that the
heart of man is not in his own hand, for thou have taught me by diminishing
thy Spirit of comfort in my heart, that it rests wholly in thy power to make
joyful the heart of man, and to diminish the same joy according to thy good
pleasure and will. For if (O God) it had been in mine own power and will, to
have received comfort in thy holy word, or to have believed thy promises from
my heart, I would long since have enjoyed comfort, and been confirmed in faith:
but I cannot (most merciful Father) it is thy mere work, I look therefore,
O gracious God, for thy blessed comfort and strength of faith, which I beseech
thee, O Lord, send into my heart to fill the same with spiritual joy, that by
the working of thy holy Spirit in me, the comfortable promises of thy
merciful protection may be thoroughly sealed in mine heart, and sink down
deep into my soul, that I may be fully assured that thou art my strong rock
and house of defense, that thou do keep me as the apple of thine eye, as
thou have promised in thy blessed word, that thou will not lay more upon me,
then thou will give me strength to abide, and that thou will assuredly at
thine appointed time renew my heart, and the whole powers of my mind, that I
may fully glorify thy holy name. But in the mean time (O Lord) alas, my heart
is clean void of spiritual joy, yea, even as hard as a stone, so that the
loving promises of thy holy word (although I know them to be true) yet they
cannot sink into my hard and stony heart, until such time as thou by
increasing of thy holy Spirit to me, shall mollify and make tender my hard
heart, that it may be meet to receive the sweet comfort of thy Spirit. Thy
holy Spirit, O Lord, in me, which is the assurance of my salvation, does
continually send forth unspeakable sighs and longings, for thy full and joyful
presence. I beseech thee therefore (dear Father) for thy Son Christ Jesus
sake, harken unto my prayers, and grant my requests, make tender my hard and
stony heart, by thy holy Spirit, that I may from the bottom of my heart,
acknowledge thee to be my most merciful God and Father, and all things in thy
holy word contained, to be most certain and true, reverently embrace the same,
and into my soul take comfort and joy in the same: that I may, dear Father,
even unto my lives end, walk before thy face in sincerity of heart, being
assured of my salvation, through that one alone sufficient sacrifice for my
sins, made by thy dear Son Christ Jesus, to whom with thee, and the holy
Ghost, be all honor, and glory, world without end, Amen.

A Prayer against doubting to strengthen a weak Faith, and to persevere therein.
GLorious and mighty Lord, who by ^hy Sovereign, and All-sufficient power, as
thou made al things of nothing, so thou call those things which are not,
as if they were, and do command light to shine out of darkness, that so we
might be translated out of darkness, into this marvelous light. Holy Father,
it is thine unspeakable mercy, that I thy most unworthy servant, being once the
child of hell, yea darkness it self, am now through thy free grace,
illightning mine heart by Faith, enabled to behold thy face in Jesus Christ,
and so through this light, am become light in the Lord: being enabled by faith,
to discern the great Mystery of Christ, and so by faith to lay hold thereon,
as to be freely thereby discharged from the guilt of my sin, and to be
invested with the perfect righteousness of my Savior; that so I might be
found acceptable unto thee. Holy Father, how unspeakable herein have been thy
mercies to me a vilde sinner; that passing by the wise and noble of the world,
it has pleased thee of thy free grace to visit me, a very reprobate branch,
with thy saving health, and to send the Spirit of thy Son into my dead heart,
whereby thou have quickened me by faith in the merits of my Savior, enabled
me with boldness to draw near unto thee: and to cry with confidence, Abba,
Father. O how have thou shed thy love abroad in my heart by the holy Ghost,
which thou have given me, whereby, though I have been in great heaviness
through many temptations, especially with the sense and horror of my sins; yet
have thou wonderfully refreshed my fainting spirit, and caused me to rejoice
with joy unspeakable and glorious. O how have these holy rauishments, taken me
up into the third heavens? How has my soul now longed to put off this
corruption, and to be taken up, for ever to enjoy thy glorious presence? How
gladly would I now have obtained the mark, before I had run my race? How
willingly would I have the crown, before I had finished my course? O the
unspeakable riches of the wisdom, and mercy of my God toward me! Did thou
not put this precious treasure of faith into an earthen vessel, that the glory
might be of God, and not of man: did thou not Redeem me out of the hands
of our enemies, that so I might pass the time of my pilgrimage in fear, and
magnify thy power daily in mine infirmities, daily denying mine own
righteousness, that still I may be found of thee in Christ, that still I might
live by faith, in the Son of God, and grow up in him to perfect holiness.
Surely blessed Lord, when I consider mine own corruption, daily more and more
appearing in me, and rebelling against thy righteous will, and casting up daily
mists to dim the eye of my Faith, that I cannot so clearly discern the light
of thy countenance: yea, sometimes so leading me captive into sin, that I am
many times to seek of the sense of thy Love: I am many times put to question
the truth of my faith, and to distrust my self whether I have any faith, or
no. For alas Lord, I must needs confess, to thy glory, that although thou
command me to believe perfectly in thy Son, and to be strong in faith,
yet I find on the other side, such strength of corruption, prevailing over me,
and commanding me forcibly to give way thereunto, and so not only
interrupting the sense of thy love unto me, but also challenging my love unto
thee, that I am forced many times to fear, whether I am led by the Spirit
truly of faith or no; whether ever thy love were shed abroad in my heart: if
ever I loved thee in truth, seeing it seems unto me, that my love unto sin
is not altogether quenched: nay, I feel the power of corruption, carrying me
so violently after the lusts of my heart, that as I find my self less
cheerful and constant in thy service, so on the other side, I sometimes find
my self less able to resist temptations: more apt and inclinable to such
lusts which heretofore I have subdued, yea, often more foully overcome and
foiled by them. What shall I say unto thee (O thou searcher of my heart, and
preserver of my soul) do thou not see how cold sometimes I am in prayer? How
dull in the hearing of the word? How careless of thy Sabbaths? How
unconscionable and negligent in my calling? How rebellious and inordinate in my
affections? O how often have I grieved thine holy Spirit, by neglecting the
good motions thereof, yea many times willingly crossing the same, and
entertaining contrary suggestions of my cruel enemy? How careless have I
been to examaine my heart, and renew my covenant with thee? How deceitful or
careless, in breaking often my vows which I have made unto thee against
special corruptions, for renuwing of decayed graces? O How often have I been
ready to give way to such curssed thoughts of blasphemy, and fearful
impiety, which might even quench thy Spirit, and lead to the dispighting
thereof? How have I sometimes bin ready to violate my Conscience, by rushing
on desperate evils? yea, how fearfully have I wounded the same by committing
gross sins, and to make up the measure of my misery? How have I hardened my
heart by sleeping in sin, and neglecting the saving means of deep
humiliation, to awaken me to repentance? Alas (Lord) thou know full well that
though thou have followed me with many secret and open afflictions to rouse me
out of this sleep of Security, yet either it has proved but a dream, and so
I have fallen asleep again; or if my heart has bin awake, yet it has not bin
unto thee to make my sound peace, but rather unto my Enemy, to cease his
violence; yea, sometimes to the World, to procure some temporary lenity rather
to ease my present pain, then to heal me thoroughly. And surely (righteous
Lord) even thus it has befalne, that such as I have sown, I have often reaped
even more hardness of heart, less sense and remorse for sin, more boldness
thereto, and more ease therein; less delight in holy duties, less life in
prayer, less conscience in the word, more slights in my calling, more
distraction in my recknings, and more confusion in my Spirit.

Yet still (O Lord) I hear a voice behind me, saying; This is the way, walk
in it. Yet still I find thy hand over me to stay me from sinking; still my
better advised heart tells me, it was better with me formerly then now, when I
had comfort in thy presence, and conscience in thine Ordinances. Still thy
Spirit is ready to revive me with hope, that I may recover again, and my hope
is confirmed hereby, that the means are still offered me, and I am capeable
of them. But (alas Lord) insted of comfort by them, I reap nothing but further
confusion, because as I am unable to apply them to my self, so indeed I am not
now fit for that comfort which I seek for in thee. For what peace can there be
to me, while my corruptions stink before thee? Or how can I look for comfort,
before I be soundly healed? O the unspeakable Riches of the wisdom and mercy
of my God! how insearchable are thy Councels, and thy ways past finding out?
As thou did bring light out of darkness in calling me from darkness unto
light; so do thou cause thy light to shine in darkness, that thy glory
may be perfected in my infirmities. And therefore, though I am now thy
Creature, renewed after thine own image, yet seeing thou will have the only
glory of thy work, therefore as the light of the righteous must shine more and
more unto the perfect day; so the darkness of corruptions must not be
dispelled utterly at once; but daily be banished more and more unto the coming
of Christ.

Therefore is it (blessed Lord) that though thou have cancelled the guilt of my
sin at once by faith in Christ, yet have thou wisely left the corruption of
sin to be abolished by degrees, that so I might still live by Faith in the
death of Christ for the mortifying thereof, that I might daily; grow up in
Christ to perfect holiness, and therefore though corruption remain in me, yet
seeing it does not reign in me, here is my comfort, that I am not under the
Law, but under Grace, and though I am sometimes as no better then lost in my
self: yet, this is that I may still deny mine own righteousness, that I may
be found of thee in Christ: for the concerning of present corruption, and for
the auesting of my person in him, to be enabled thereby to perfect holiness.
Only gracious God, grant me here I pray thee, still to justify thy
wisdom, in condemning mine own folly, and to advance thy free and constant
grace, in the acknowledging of mine own corruptions. True it is holy Father,
that as thou made man righteous at the first, but he sought many inventions
to his own overthrow, so did thou so restore me again by thy power of
Christ unto a more durable state of holiness, that neither shall I ever fall
away from thee finally, neither though thou have left corruption in me: yet,
seeing thy end herein was to make me still deny my self, that I might stand
fast in Christ, in whom thou have ingrafted me, therefore neither might I have
fallen at al into such fearful distraction, if I had kept me close unto my
hold, neither though I have fallen by letting go my hold, yet shall not my
falling make thy truth without effect; nay, rather shall prove a means to make
good the same. And therefore I do here unfeignedly acknowledge before thee
(blessed Lord) mine own folly in letting go my hold; thou have not been
wanting with all means to preserve me upright; but I have been wanting to the
means, and so I have been wanting unto thee and to my self. thou have willed
me to live by faith, even when I have feeling of thy love; and my inward pride
has perverted thy gracious feeling to make me live by sense, and behold the
Sun when it shines: and so by perverting the comfort of thy Spirit, as an
occasion to the flesh, I have justly greiued thy Spirit, and so thou with
drewest thy face from me, and I have been troubled. Troubled in my soul for
the loss of thy favor, troubled of the world by seeking false remedies there
from: troubled in my Spirit, by the confusion of those remedies, as breeding
some times hardness of heart, and so bringing forth troubles, by exposing to
outward evils, and hindering in the use of spiritual remedies: sometimes
hereupon breeding further trouble and inward horror and anguish of spirit, many
times laying the axe to the very root, and challenging the maine. And yet in
all this, far less then I have deserved, that so I might have hope in thy
free grace for my recovery. And in all this, advancing thy righteousness, in
abasing my folly, that so I might still renounce mine own righteousness, and
labor to be found in Christ for my recovery and perfection. Only keep me
here (holy Father) from presumptuous sin, that it may not have dominion over
me to turn thy grace into wantonness, and then lead me into thy privy
Chamber: and stay me with thy flaggons, that I may not only not sleep in
death, but also awake and sing out of the dust, and out of the deep; to admire
thine infinite wisdom, and to see thee who art invisible, that I may be
raised up again. O give me therefore (most mighty Lord) to condemme mine own
folly, for being wise in mine own eyes, in turning thy favor as an occasion
to the flesh: grant me to thank my self, that of the flesh I have reaped
such confusion, and give thee thanks, the more thou have sustained me in the
grave. Grant me out of experience of mine own foolishness, to give thee the
glory of thy free goodness, and out of the experience of thy power, in my
weakness, to comfort my self, that thou will return again. And that thou
may undoubtedly return with speed: O strengthen my weak faith I humbly pray
thee, with thy precious promises, that thy foundation stands sure, whatsoever
my building may be: thou know who are thine. O let it comfort my fainting
spirit, that all things shall work together for the best, to those whom thou
have chosen, that so I may wisely compare one thing with another: things past,
with things present, and by those things to come, that so I may live by faith,
in the judging of my present estate, by looking behind and before, and not be
cast off my hold, either by present temptations, or future fears. O establish
me with thy precious promise, that thou will keep me to the end, that so I may
live by faith, in casting my self upon thy mighty power, and committing my
self in weldoing into thine holy hands. Teach me to deny mine own wisdom,
that I may trust perfectly in thy mercy, and grant me in things to rely upon
the wisdom of thy word, which is able to make me wise and perfect to
salvation. Let thy word keep me in all my ways, that I may not decline to the
right hand or to the left: and let my supplications be always manifest at the
throne of grace, that so I may be careful for nothing. O let me not in any
case, greiue thine holy Spirit any more, but grant me to entertain and
cherrish the motions thereof, by turning them into fervent prayers, and
conscioa^ble practices, seasonable to the occasion: weane me from the love of
the world, that I may have fellowship in thy love: and purge my heart from
secret wickedness, that it be not stolen away from thee. keep me always
close unto thee, that I may not fall into open wickedness; and give me grace
always to remember my end, that I may be still prepared, against the coming
of my Master and Savior Jesus Christ. And so still accept me (gracious
Father) as I am in him and not in my self, as I would be in thee, and not what
I am in corruption; as I shall be with thee, not what I am in this present
world: enabling me still to desire above what I can do, and to believe above
what I can think or desire, and so lead me forward by thy power, through the
valley of tears, that though I sometimes slip, yet I may up again: though I
stray a while, yet I may thereby mend my pace, and follow close after the
mark, not looking on my self, and mine own worth or inability, but still
looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of my faith: that so I may in him
be more then Conqueorr, and so fighting still the good fight of faith, I may
finish my course with joy, and lay hold of eternal life in due season. And so
fill me (O God of grace) with all joy in believing, that so I may live by faith,
that I may be readier to die in faith, and to give up my soul by faith into
thy holy hands, apprehending by faith, the Resurrection from the dead, that so
I may be translated from death to life, and enjoy for ever thy glorious
presence. Grant these things (O Gracious Lord) according to thy goodness, in
Jesus Christ my Savior, and blessed Redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer for obtaining Trial, and cherishing, of the holy Spirit of God.
GLorious and everlasting Lord God, Father of all Spirits and souls of the
righteous, who have revealed thy self in thy sacred word to be a Spirit, holy,
and incomprehensible, eternal, infinite, immortal, and all-sufficient; and
therefore wilt be worshipped in Spirit, and truth. And have in the riches of
thy mercy, promised to send thy holy Spirit the Comforter, into our hearts, to
lead us into all truth, and to comfort us in all our tribulations, and so to
seal us up to the day of Redemption. Look down graciously upon me thy
poor and forlorn servant, whose po^tion is in this valley of misery, to
wander in darkness, and walk many times in the valley of the shadow of death,
altogether ignorant of my way, and so subject to continual error, and wholly
destitute of all direction therein, and so necessarily exposed to continual
danger. For mine own heart within me, is no better then a guide to betray me
to error, and the glory of the world is naught else then a bait to deceive me,
either by clogging me in the way, that I may faint in my journey, or diuerting
me from my right home, that I may set up my rest in mine Inn, or build my
foundation upon the sands. And mine old adversary still compasses and
watches all opportunities from both: either to sink me with despair, that I
may perish in the way, or to swell me with presumption that I may not enter
into the straight gate. And even so did it fare with me, (Blessed Lord) all the
days of my vanity, before I knew thee in Christ. As mine own heart misled me
into all error, through my wilful ignorance, so it betrayed me hereby, to all
occasions of sin without, which I swallowed more greedily then my appointed
food, and blessed my soul therein as my cheifest happiness, and so was faster
bound in the chains of Satan, as being led captive at his will, to every
lust, and rejoicing therein as my greatest liberty. And so also has it in part
befalne me since my liberty in Christ, by whom though I received the free
Spirit to lead me in the way of thy statutes, and so have sometimes obeyed the
motions thereof, to the euidencing of my glorious liberty; yet such has been
the power of my corruption prevailing over me, that I have many times grieved
thy good Spirit, by my manifold backslidings, and to my sense and
apprehension, seemed utterly to have quenched the same: so strong have I found
my corruption, to lead me captive into many desperate evils: so little life
and comfort have I found in prayer, hearing thy word, especially, in my
endeavor to repentance; either to resist temptations, or release my self out
of the snares thereof. And yet thou have promised, that thy Spirit shall abide
with me for ever; and still methought in my greatest wanderings, on the right
hand, and on the left, methought I heard the voice of thy Spirit behind me,
saying, This is the way walk in it. Me thouhgt I have heard the voice of my
beloved, many times knocking at the door of my heart, when I have been
asleep in the bed of my security, saying, Open unto me, my Love, my Dove, my
undefiled; yea, I have felt him putting in his finger at the hole of the door,
to open it for me, that so I might arise and let him in? And have I not many
times arose to entertain him, and lo he was gone? Did I not follow after him
to seek him, and yet found him not? Have I not many times smarted soundly for
my folly, because I would not open betimes? Have not the watchmen that should
have cherished me, wounded me justly for my carelessness? Have they not plucked
away my veil to discover my nakedness the more, that so my face being covered
with shame, I might seek thy face more humbly? And yet (O my God) I am still
to seek of thee, though thou still call on me to seek thy face, and my
heart in some poor measure, answers, Thy face Lord will I seek. Yet what
fellowship can there be between light and darkness, what hope have I to find
thee, seeing I want my guide unto thee: yet thou art not wanting unto me, to
tender this holy guide: and my guide is not far from me, though I know it
not; yea, thou art ever with me, to keep me from utter fainting, and thine
holy Spirit is within me, helping me to cry unto thee. O harken therefore I
humbly pray thee, unto the groans of thine own Spirit, and have mercy upon
thine own servant, for greeuing the same. Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation, that I may discern the seal of thy Spirit, and establish me with
thy free Spirit, that I may ever be with thee. O make me wise to try the
Spirits, whether they be of God or no, that neither I may be deluded by a
Spirit of error, and withal may be able to discern the work and evidence of
thine holy Spirit, from the motions and testimony of mine own ignorant and
d^ceitfull heart. Grant me therefore (Gracious Father) to plead mine interest
in thy Spirit, by such true means and endeavors, as may undoubtedly avouch it
to proceed from thee: and may apparently convince, that it dwells in me. Give
me to discern the means whereby thy Spirit is conuayed unto me, that after I
have heard thy word, and believed therein, then I have been sealed with the
Spirit of promise: grant me to discern the manner how it took possession of
mine heart: that, to make way for it fit habittation, it cast down every
Imagination that enabled it self against thy wisdom, that it only might
rule and govern me Spiritually (and that withal) thereby my house was swept
and cleansed from the Dominion of sin, that Jesus Christ thereby might wholly
govern me. And grant me to avouch the truth of thy Spirit dwelling in me,
not so much by my entertainment and apprehension thereof, because it blows
where it lifts: and though I may hear the sound thereof; yet I know not
whence it comes nor whether it goes: but rather by the nature and quality of
thy Spirit; which will leave it true stamp in my received Spirit, in every
quality thereof, for the assuring my possession thereof, by resemblance
thereto, though yet surely and absolutely according to the Nature of the Spirit:
neither working it at all times alike, nor at any time in full measure: but
still working according to the capacity of the vessel, and the maine end, the
glory of God, that still it power may be seen in my weakness, that the
glory may be of God, and not of Man. And therefore, as I may not challenge a
right in thy Spirit, unless I find some lively resemblance and effects of it
holy nature in me, as to be Holy, Meek, Peaceable, Sincere, and the like: so
I may not challenge the truth thereof in me, though I find not at all times a
like measure of it working, nor at any time in this life may express the full
Image thereof, seeing it works freely, and so cannot always be apprehended
alike: and it works freely, that it only may have the glory of the work,
and therefore so still works, that it power may be in weakness, and it
glory perfected by infirmity. And therefore as I may at all times find the
like working of thy holy Spirit, so if I feel, in regard of this different
working thereof, a different apprehension of the seal: as sometimes not to
feel it at all, sometimes more or less to apprehend the same: yet grant me
(holy Father) not to challenge the working of thy Spirit, because it is free
and wise, working according to what is best for my present state, which is not
sometimes fit for comfort, and yet absolutely in it good pleasure, even then
suspending comfort, when I have long fitted my self thereto. But rather,
specially to condemme mine own folly, in depriving my self of such effect of
it, working above all; to adore the infinite wisdom and power of thy Spirit,
working yet in these greatest desertions so with me, as to keep me from utter
fainting, and further my chief good, to raise me up again by repentance,
that I may be fit for comfort: and yet when I have done my best, to suspend
what I most desire, that so in the best, I may acknowledge my self an
unprofitable servant, and so still labor to be found in Christ, to be lead
along to perfection.

Thus grant me (gracious Father) to make trial of Spirits, and when I have
found by some such lively evidences, that thine holy Spirit dwells in me: O
make, me I humbly pray thee, wise to cherish and retain this blessed guest,
that I may never break through by greeuing the same, that not departing from
it guidance, it may never depart from me: and therefore give me still, to harken
to the call of thy Spirit, showing me the right way, and enable me to submit
my self to the yoke of thy Spirit, howsoever irksome and unsavory to my
rebellious corruptions. Let me not consult at any hand, with flesh and blood,
in the motions of thy Spirit; neither let me turn the comforts of thy Spirit,
as an occasion to the flesh: keep me I beseech thee from Spiritual
wickedness, that I may not abuse thy blessed Spirit, and enable me to avoid
gross offenses, least I offer violence to thy Spirit, and drive it from me.
Above all keep me I pray thee, from wisdom in sin, either to commit it
upon carnal grounds or ends, which thy word allows not; or to lie in it by
presumption, or security least I waste my conscience, and so quench thy Spirit.
O make me still jealous of my self and best ability, that I may not
challenge the power of thy Spirit, and give me conscience even of secret
thoughis, that I may tremble at, and abhominate them, least I grieve thy
Spirit, make me to startle at the motion of such sins as the world makes a
sport of, least I startle thy good Spirit. and grant me to be humbled in my
best endeavors, that so the Spirit of Christ may help me for the acceptance
thereof. O give me to make my requests manifest daily unto the throne of grace,
least I be distracted in all things, and so grieve thy holy Spirit: and in all
things grant me to resign up my self, to the guiding and tuition of thy
blessed Spirit, that so in all occasions it may go well with me.

Thus grant me (gracious Father) to retain the comfort of thy Spirit, by
entertaining all good occasions to cherish the same. And seeing I must needs
acknowledge, that by my neglect of these duties, I have much grieved thy
Spirit, and have done what lies in me, even to quench the same. O grant me
(blessed Lord) to recover thy Spirit again, and so to enjoy the most powerful
presence thereof. And therefore give wisdom herein seriously to enter into
mine own heart, and to judge my self for greeuing thy Spirit. Enable me with
strong cries to cause the return of thy Spirit, and give me patience to endure
such afflictions, as my wantonness has procured me: Make me wise to
remember the times of old, when thy face did shine upon me, and give me comfort
in the present, that it is far better with me then I have deserved. It is
thine infinite mercies that I am not swallowed up of despair, that hence I may
gather hope of the return thereof again.

Grant me to stir up thy Spirit in me, by communing with mine own heart, and
submitting the same wisely to the search and censure thereof, and make me
more vile in my self, because I have so abased thy Spirit, that thou may
have the glory in the denial of my self. O let me never give over until
thou have spoken peace to my soul, and thy good Spirit has answered me, That
thou art my salvation; and grant me to esteem highly, and so make use of the
least glimpse of thy favor, even in the meanest and unlikeliest occasions, as
undoubted Emblems of a greater supply in thy good time. And so teach me to wait
thy good leisure, in healing my soul of that stinking rottenness that has
grieved thy Spirit; yet to be led meekly by thy word, that so I may be fit for
comfort, and then to wait thy good pleasure, when thou will refresh me: Yea,
though I find not happily such return all my life long, which formerly I have
had; yet grant me to wait all the days of my mourning, upon thy holy hand,
who know what is best for me, and to live still by Faith in the Son of
God, that although thou kill me, yet I I will trust in thee, that thou which
art coming, will come, and the just must live by Faith. Even so (O Father)
keep me by thy mighty power, when I seem lost in my self, and that through
Faith in thy Son Jesus, that I may still be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, and that I may be kept unto salvation by the power of his
merit. Unto whom with thine own glorious Majesty, and God the blessed Spirit,
be ascribed as is most due, all honor, and power, and praise, and obedience in
all the Churches, Amen.

A Prayer for the obtaining of a lively Hope.
O God of hope, who art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and in thy
special wisdom, as thou have commanded us to believe in thy Son, that so
we might have everlasting salvation; so have thou enjoined us to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling; and that we may not faint in our
endeauours, nor be to seek of what we yet enjoy not: have promised an Anchor
of hope, both to give us some security, amidst the manifold troubles of this
life, and to give assurance also unto us, that we shall at length attain the
haven. Have mercy upon me thy poor servant, and vouchsafe me this grace of
hope, to establish my wavering spirit: that neither things present may
discourage me from the hope of a good issue, nor things to come may confound
me, in the pursuit thereof, as being so far above my capacity, so exceeding
my desert. For I confess (O Lord) unfeignedly before thee, by reason of this
body of sin which I carry about me, I am a stranger from thee, as all my
Fathers were: and in regard of my inward blindness, cannot see afar off, to
the price of the high calling that is set before me, and therefore am subject
to many distractions, and slavish fears; both to divert or stay me in my
journey, and to disappoint me of the mark which I should hasten too, so that I
manytimes miss of my way, and manytimes am ready to give over in the midst of
my race. O grant me the refore (holy Father) to live by hope in what thou have
promised, that I neither may be confounded in any present distress, nor yet
may rest in any present comfort whatsoever, that I may not be deceived with
the counterfeite thereof, nor yet may settle my self in any true measure of
the same. O grant me a lively hope, that I may not fear in death, and give me
to apprehend that blessed hope, of the appearance of Jesus Christ, that I may
attain to the resurrection of the dead. And that I may improve my unfeigned
hope in thee alone, O strengthen my weak Faith, to see more clearly within the
veil, that so I may be strong in hope, to enjoy, what yet I see not: and make
me more acquainted, with the secrets of thy special providence, that by mine
own experience of thy wonderful dealing, in bringing contraries out of
contraries, even light out of darkness, I may hope for the accomplishment of
thy promises, though never so impossible to human capacity. Above all, make
more expert the riches of the glory of that great mystrie, even Christ in me,
the hope of glory, that so I may not be weary nor faint in my mind: let the
aim of my hope be, to see thee, who art invisible; and in thee, those
unspeakable mercies which as yet I do not see. And grant me (blessed Lord) an
undaunted and invincible hope, even to hope above hope, that no oppositions may
confound me. Let my hope be patient, that I may wait for that I yet enjoy not,
and purify my hope daily, in the expectation of what I shall be, that so I may
be purged and fitted to the enjoying thereof: season my hope with joy, that I
may not quail in any present troubles, and quicken my weak and fainting hope,
with the strong cries and groans of thy blessed Spirit, that I may fasten on
the inestimable glory which is laid up for me: let the hope of the life to
come, stablish me in thy blessed fear, and so make me lively and diligent in
all present occasions, enableing me to hold fast the profession of my hope
without wavering, and to sanctify my God, in giving a reason of my hope, with
meekness and fear to those which may demand it. And that I may not be
disappointed of my hope, comfort me (O Lord) with the sweet and glorious fruits
thereof; that seeing it is the hope of salvation and eternal life, which is
surely laid up for me in the highest heavens: grant me in all occasions to lay
hold upon eternal life, that I may not be ashamed of my hope. O let me have
hope even in death, because I have hope in the resurrection from the dead. And
let the hope of what I enjoy not, humble me daily in the sense of my
imperfections, which are the cause thereof, that so I may daily fear, and
depart from evil. And seeing I am a prisoner of hope, O grant me daily to
groan under this body of sin which I carry about me; that so I may long for
my glorious deliverance from this body of death; and in the hope of this
deliverance, cause me in all my troubles, to commit my self in well doing,
into the hands of thee my faithful Creator, that so I may be keept by thy
mighty power through Faith. Grant me these things (O God of my hope) even for
thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, the hope of mine endless glory, to
whom with thee (O righteous Father) with God the blessed Spirit the Comforter,
be ascribed all glory, power, dominion, and thanksgiving for ever and ever,
Amen.

A Prayer for the obtaining and increase of Love.
HOly Father, who out of the boundless riches of thy free Grace, did so love
me, that thou gave thine only Son to death for me, that being redeemed
from the bondage of sin, and snares of destruction, I might be translated
from death to life: and therefore did love me first, that I might serve thee
in love, and offer up my self a Free Will Offering, gracious and acceptable
before thee in all holy obedience; and have hereby assured me, that I am
beloved of thee, if all my works be done in love; loving thee for thy self,
and all other things for thy sake. Look graciously upon me thine unworthy
servant, and shed thy love into my heart by thy blessed Spirit, that I may
love thee above all things, and all things in and for thee. And that I may so
love thee, that I may be more united unto thee, and fully at the length enjoy
thee: O grant me first to know thee in Jesus Christ the Son of thy Love, that
so I may know, what love in him thou have showed me; that when I was dead in
sin, thou did raise me up in him from dead works, that I might serve
thee the living God, in the newness of Spirit, that so discerning in this
lively Mirror of thy Love unto me, mine own unworthiness of thy love, and
inability to love thee again, I may wholly deny my self, that I may be found
of thee in Christ, and by his power be enabled to love thee again. Grant me
therefore, (gracious God) to trust perfectly in Jesus Christ, that I may feel
my self to be beloved of thee in him, and inflame my heart with the love of
Christ, that so in him, I may love thee again.

And seeing nothing in me was able to hinder this thy love in him to me, Oh
grant me, that nothing within me, or without me, may hinder or separate my Love
from thee. And seeing, of thine own free grace thou diddst love me in him, oh
grant me for his sake only to love thee: seeing he thought nothing, no not
his precious blood too dear to expres his love unto me; oh let me think all
things base in comparison of my love unto him. Seeing he loved me in deeds, not
only in words, both doing for me what I could not do, and suffering for me what
I could never have endured; oh grant me to love thee again, not in words, but
in deeds, both doing what thou command with all sincerity and diligence,
and suffering what thou imposest with all joy, chearfulnes, and patience: so to
love thee for thy mercies, as to fear to offend thee in regard of my
corruption: so to fear in respect of mine own aptnes to offend thee, as to
love thee for thy free grace in Christ, accepting me in him, above mine own
unworthiness, not imputing my sins unto me, and for his sake accepting my
willing mind, to do what I cannot, and enabling me daily in him to do above
what I am able in my self, yea, doing in him all my works above the worth
thereof; yea, doing wonderfully by him in me above what I presently can
discern: yea, above whatsoever I am able to ask or think: that thou in him
may have the glory of all thy goodness. O let thine unspeakable love unto
me, enlarge my heart from thee to the love of the Brethren: that so I may know
hereby that I am translated from life to death. Grant me so to love thine own
Image, wheresoever I find it stamped on Man; that I may love him best, that is
most like unto thee: and yet loath that in him which is unlike unto thee. Give
me to love him with a pure heart as thou love me, and to affect him
fervently, as thou affectest me. Grant me to do the best good to him, as
thou gave the best for me: and yet not to neglect to do the least, as thou
failest not me in the least occasions. Give me to love him constantly, as thy
love to me continues: and not to be weary of well-doing, that I may obtain
the reward. And as thou louedst me, when I was thine enemy: so grant me to
love my enemies, and pray for them that persecute me, because they carry thine
Image, and are thine Instruments to do me good; that so I may overcome evil
with good, and heap coals of love upon their heads. And seeing I am yet a
stranger and soiourner in this world: O grant me not to love the world, nor
the things therein; but so to use them as if I used them not: and yet thereby
be stirred up to love thy most wise providence, who have made all these things
for me, that I therein serve and honor thee: and that I may so do, O knit my
heart fast unto thee by this hand of love, that I may love thee more, the more
thou openest thine hand to fill me with them, and yet love thee more
constantly, the more thou sustainest me without them, still returning thee the
praise both of giving them to me, and taking them from me; that nothing may b^e
able to separate me from thy love, that I may daily more and more hate my
corruption, and all occasions thereof; so to hate my sin that still I may
more love thy mercy in pardoning thereof, more admire thy wisdom in turning
it to my good, more love and long for the appearance of Jesus Christ, for the
full abolishing of the same. That so living in thy love, I may die in thy
favor, and dying in love I may live for ever with thee, to love and glorify
thee my blessed God in Jesus Christ, with the blessed Spirit, one glorious God
in three persons, blessed for evermore, to whom be praise and Dominion, with
all hearty love and obedience, of all that love the coming of Jesus Christ,
Amen.

A Prayer to obtain and preserve the Fear of God, that we may be kept
constant thereby in holiness to the end.
GLorious and everlasting God, whose Love is as thy self free and
unchangeable, and because thou art not changed, therefore the Sons of Jacob
are not consumed, and that they may not miscar^y thou have promised to put thy
Fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from thee. And having
accepted the blood of thy Son as a sufficient satisfaction for their sins,
do daily accept also the cry of that blood to preserve them in thy fear,
and to present them blameless at the glorious appearance of thy righteous
Son Jesus. Have mercy upon me thy poor servant, and put thy Fear in my
heart, that I may cleave fast unto thee and never depart from thine holy
Covenant: for I confess unfeignedly (O Lord my God) that as mine own
unbelieving heart does daily misgiue me, and is ready to betray me to such
occasions as may withdraw me from my steadfastness: So there is no occasion
without; which without thy special Grace is not likely daily so to enueigle
and estrange my heart from thee, as that it may stagger and utterly deny thee.
For if I look on the right hand to fair shows of the world, what are they
else but so many baits to ensnare my wavering spirit, and steal it from
thee? If I look on the left hand to the sorrows and storms thereof, are they
not either as so many billows to overthrow my weak Bark in the first setting
out, or else to sink or swallow up in the midway? Above all (O Lord) my own
deceitful heart is so subject to presumption and secu^itie, that I am in
danger, either to be split upon the Rocks, even at the shore, or else to be
swallowed of quick-sandes in the very haven. Against all which seeing thy name
(O Lord) is a strong tower, and as thy name, so is thy Fear. O grant me in all
things to fear thy great and glorious name, to stand in awe of thy Majesty
that I may daily fear my own self, and so distrusting mine own inability, I
may both fear to offend thee, and in all things may study to please thee: and
that I may so fear thee, as still to rely upon thee, and draw near with
confidence to thee. O grant me to fear thee for thy mercies, that I may love
thee in the entertainment of them, so to be afraid of thy judgments, as to
take warning by thy threatenings that I may avoid them, as to answer thee by
repentance that I may not be swallowed up of them. Give me so to fear thee,
as not to be daunted with things present, least my life be unprofitable and
uncomfortable, neither to be distracted with things to come, least I be
unprepared to mine end: And that I may be continually prepared for thee, O
grant me daily to make even reckoning with thee by repentance, that I be not
taken tardie, and to renew my life daily in Christ, so living by Faith in him,
that I may work out my salvation in fear and trembling, both renouncing the
worth of whatsoever good I have or can do, as to be justified thereby: yea,
though I know evil by my self, yet not standing upon my clearing, because
thou know all things, and also not resting in any present measure, as if I
had attained or were already perfect, but forgetting what is behind and
hastening that which is before, I may press toward the mark, for the price
of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ. That so being daily dead to sin,
yea, to my self, and having my life hid with Christ in God, when Christ which
is my life shall appear, I may also appear with him in glory. Grant this
gracious Father for Jesus Christ his sake my only Advocate and Redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer for grace and wisdom.
O Most mighty God and merciful Father, pour into my heart thy heavenly grace
and wisdom. Comfort my sinful soul with thy heavenly Manna, molifie and
make soft my hard heart with the sweet and pleasant oil of thy most holy
word. Suffer me not (O merciful Lord) to swerue or slide from the ways of
truth, but grant help of thy holy Spirit, that I may walk in the same unto my
lives end, and let not thy heavenly wisdom depart from me at any time during
this life.

According to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses. Preserve me
from this my youth and infancy, under thy favorable protection. Give me grace
(O Lord) that I may even to the grave continue a faithful and manly Sould^er
in defense of thy truth, and that I may in all my life, daily grow to the ripe
perfection of godly wisdom, and truly and justly, acknowledge thee mine only
God. Deuteronomy. 6. That I may only fear thee and honor thee. That I may cleave
fast unto thee. Deuteronomy. 10. That I do not after the abomination of any
idolatrous people, worship stocks or stones. Deuteronomy. 8. Nor let me not (O Lord)
harken to any false Prophets that teach their own imaginations, and not the
word of God. Deuteronomy. 13.

Now vouchsafe (O Lord God) to hear me, and let thy wisdom govern me. I
know (my God) that no creature can truly say, I have done my duty in the
se^uice of the Lord: neither is it in the power of man (who is so deeply
subject to sin) to escape all those stumbling blocks which have made our
ways dangerous and perilous through those innumerable practices, wherewith
Satan our great enemy through his malice and craft, has devised to entrap
our sinful souls to our utter destruction.

Lord of thy great mercy root and pull out of my heart all the works of
Satan, namely, fornication, adultery, uncleanness, wantonness, pride, envy,
unnatural desires, vnpure thoughts, lewd behavior, idleness, and all other
vicious and naughty actions, which being followed according to the pleasures
and delights of the world in this life; bring with them everlasting damnation
of body and soul, in the world to come.

Increase in me (O Lord) such abundance of thy grace, wisdom, and heavenly
blessing, that through the operation of the same in me, I may prove a true
workman in thy harvest, such a servant as occupies his Masters Talent unto
gain, a witness that bears testimony of Christ, to all people, at all
times, and in every place, continue constant in the truth, during the whole
course of this my mortal life.

In thy truth (O God) do I delight, therefore make me perfect in the same. In
thee alone do I repose my whole trust and confidence, save me (O God) of all
mercy, and defend me against my enemies.

Establish and confirm me (O Lord) in faith toward thee. Keep thou my lips,
and govern my tongue. Suffer not my heart to purpose any thing that may
displease thee, nor my tongue or lips to speak ought whereby I should purchase
thy wrath.

Whosoever does trust in thee (O God) shall understand thy truth, and the
faithful shall have rest in thy favor: but the ungodly according to their
own wicked thoughts shall find corruption. The souls of the just are in the
hand of God, and the force of death shall not touch them.

All wisdom comes from the Lord, and has been with him always, and is
with him from the beginning, Eccle. 1. The fear of the Lord does expel sin.
Lord of thy mercy grant me thy heavenly wisdom, whereby I may truly learn to
know thee rightly, and be diligent to perform thy precepts effectually.

Lord leave me not in my young days, let thy wisdom enter into my heart, and
make her habitation in my soul; so shall I live in thy favor, and persevere in
thy laws through thy grace.

Let not them that trust in thee (O Lord God of Hoastes) be ashamed: let not
those that seek thee be confounded, O God of Israel. Lord I make my prayers
unto thee in an acceptable time: even in the multitude of thy mercies. O God,
hear me in the truth of thy salvation.

In thee alone (O heavenly Father) are all things generally: and what is not of
thee, is altogether naught. Replenish and bless me (O Lord) with all good
gifts: show thy loving countenance toward me, govern me by thy grace,
continue me in thy favor, and protect and defend me now and evermore, under
the wings of thy manifold mercies, so shall no vile temptation have power to
prevail against me.

Such is the force of thy heavenly wisdom (O God) that whosoever obtains the
same, and directs his life accordingly, shall prosper and see good days.
Whosoever pleases thee (O Lord) from the beginning, are made whole through
wisdom, Sapient. 9. Which of thy mercy (O my God) vouchsafe to grant unto me,
for thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake. To whom with thee, and the holy
Ghost be all glory, honor, and praise, now and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer to walk conscionably in our civil and personal Calling.
O Most glorious and wise God, who in thine infinite wisdom, have ordained,
that every Son of Adam should eat his bread in the sweat of his face, and so
have wisely fitted each man in his several place, with several and particular
gifts, of nature, experience, and grace, that so he might glorify thee in
some special calling: not willing that any should live idly, like an
unprofitable burden of the earth, mispending his precious time, and wasting
away thy Creatures, neither doing good to human society. And herein have
given us a pattern from thy self, who even workest hitherto: and albeit that
thy great business of Creating all things, ended with those first six days,
in which every particular was brought forth by thee in his proper kind, yet thy
providence is never intermixed in it, neither slumber nor sleep over takes
thee. And so also thy dear Son Jesus Christ, whilst in the days of his
flesh h^e humbled himself to live as man upon the earth, both in his private
life attended upon a painful trade, and when the time came of his
manifesting himself to the world, went about doing of good; yea, and with that
chearfulnes, that it was his meat and drink to do thy will, and to finish
the work of him that sent him. And all thine holy actions, also in continual
action, obeying the voice of thy word and ministering for their sakes, that
shall be heirs of life; nay, does not every Creature in his place obey this
thine ordinance, the Sun, the Moon, and all those heavenly Orbs? Do they
not execute their operations faithfully, and finish their Reuolutions in their
seasons? Do not these inferior things daily perform thy will herein? Who am I
that (Blessed Lord) that I should not rejoice, that it has seemed good unto
thee, to make me among other of thy servants, and to set me as it were my
proper task upon which to give my faithful attendance.

Grant me therefore I pray thee, not to repine heereat, as at some uneasy
burden put upon me, but that I may contentedly and comfortably under go it,
even like that glorious creature the Sun, who having his Tabernacle set him
in the heavens, rejoices like a mighty man to run his race. And seeing thou
have not placed me (O Lord) in this calling, for mine own p^^uate good alone,
but also for a more public and common benefit; give me such an honest,
sincere, and charitable heart, that I may determine with my self never to
seek, no not yet willingly to receive that gain which comes by the wronging,
or loss of others.

Let me ever have in mind that golden rule, whatsoever I would that men should
do unto me, of doing even so unto them. Let it never slip out of my mind,
that the wages of unrighteousness is put into a broken bag. And that as the
good man shall give inheritance to his Childrens Children, so the riches of
vanity shall diminish, and that thou will draw even out of the belly of the
oppressor the su^stance which he has devoured; or if it do continue with him,
it shall be for his great hurt, his own ease shall slay him, and his
prosperity shall be his destruction. Grant me therefore I humbly pray thee,
rather to choose a little with thy blessing, then great revenues with thy curse
and vengeance accompanying the same.

And if it shall be thy good pleasure to bless my basket and my store, and to
increase my portion by my honest industry: O keep me I humbly pray th^e, that
I may not set my heart upon it, let not my riches be my strong City, or as
an high wall in my Imagination: so I may be more and more afraid of my self,
lest the cares of this world and the deceitfulnes of riches, should choke in
me the seeds of grace, and steal away my mind from better things: and
therefore make it my care (good Father) to follow my calling with that holy
wisdom, as that I may not so far ensnare my self into the business of it,
that I should abridge and scant my self of convenient opportunities for
heavenly and Spiritual employments. And as I shall feel thy hand to be
opened unto me, so open my heart and hand toward others, knowing that he that
scatters shall be more increased. so he that spares more then is right
shall surely come to poverty: ever make me to consider thy all-seeing
presence, that all things are naked and open before thee, and that thou will
surely bring forth to judgment every seceret thing. That so I knowing thee to
be a witness to all my courses, my care may be to walk as in thy presence,
and to approve my self unto thee by an even and upright behavior, so walking
still in my civil calling, as that I may begin and sanctify the same by my
spiritual: so carrying my self therein, as still to look higher to the
things above, still to look low to what may befall me, preparing for want in
my greatest abundance, and abounding with content in my greatest wants,
humbling my self in my disappointment herein for my negligence in better
things, and comforting my self in my spiritual thrift, that all shall work
for the best: using diligence in what is set before me, and leaving the issue
to thy wise providence, not indenting with thee for what measure thou shall
bestow, but still laboring to attain to the greatest measure of grace, that
it may be sufficient for me in all occasions, so grant me to commit my self
in well-doing into the hands of thee my faithful Creator, and so try my
thriuing in these outward things, by my thriuing in grace and holiness in the
fear of thee our God, and so hastening in all these things, which can give me
no sound comfort nor true contentment, to the life of glory, wherein I shall
be fully satisfied, with thy fullness, who art all in all, God blessed for
ever and ever, and with Jesus Christ thy Son our blessed Savior, to whom
with thee, and God the holy Spirit, be all praise, glory, and honor for ever,
Amen.

A Prayer before the taking of a Journey.
ALmighty and most holy Father, who have promised to be with thy Servant,
whither soever I go, and to atte^d me with ^^o^^o ministering Spirits thine
holy Angels, to pitch their Tents round about me, and bear me in their
hands. Vnspe^keable as thy goodness herein, O Lord unto me, wh^^^^ by nature
a child of wrath, and a mere slave of Satan should be assured of so ^igh an
hand of heavenly protection. Make good (I pray thee) now at this time this thy
mercy women, being my necess^ry business, to navel from mine own place. Many
are the perils which both by nature and desert I am subject; no man is able to
number them, or ^y his own strength or policy, to avoid them. Compass thou
me with thy favor as with a shield: Go before me as thou did of old before
thy people in the wilderness: it is only thou that can make me go and
come in safely. Some put their ^rust in outward help, but cause thou me to
remember thy Name, and to make thy truth to be my shield and buckler. A horse
is a vain help, and shall not deliver any by his great strength, neither is
the mighty man saved by his power: it is better to trust in the Lord, then to
have confidence in Princes.

If thou (O Lord) be my sight and my salvation, whom shall I fear? If thou
be the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Let this I pray thee
be the Anchor of my soul both sure and steadfast: suffer no power of Satan to
remove my faith from this foundation. Howbeit (gracious Father) if it shall be
thy pleasure in this my journey to bring some cross upon me, either by making
me a prey to spoylers, or by some other hazard, I beseech thee prepare me to
it, give me patience and comfort in it, and an holy assurance, that no outward
inconvenience can separate me from thy love in Jesus Christ.

Make me always mindful of this, that thy favor must not be measured by
these outward accidents, and cause me ever to hold fast this Rule, that all
things shall work together for the best unto thy servants. And as in my
travails I am desirous of thy favor, so teach me (good Father) I humbly pray
thee to make conscience of thy Fear. That as I expect and crave protection
from thee, so I may apply my self to yield obedience unto thee. Wherefore when
I am iournying on earth; grant me to mind my departure from the world, and my
journey to Heaven: when I am alone grant that I may possess my heart with holy
thoughts, and may diligently watch over my self, for the preventing of all
unclean and worldly cogitations. Let me never presume upon the advantage of my
secrecy, seeing thou art in my secret parts: nor that I am unknown in the
places where I come, as to do ought unbeseeming the profession of a Christian:
seeing in all places I am known to thee, and would be known and approved of
thee.

And if I light into the company of others, make me still careful to seek and
entertain all good opportunities of doing or receiving good; that I may never
conform my self to the humors of profane persons, but in a godly discretion
may so carry my self, as that I may neither wilfully make my self a scorn to
the wicked, neither yet may any why be offensive to the godly, either by
wounding them by my scandalous carriage, or wounding mine soul by
communicating with their evils, but either may win or bridle, or at least
make them inexcusable, either bettering them, or being better by them; not
returning to them, if they will not return to me.

This grant me gracious God in an assured expectation of thy gracious guidance
to betake my self to mine intended journey. And so I commend both my self and
it, together with these my suits unto thee my loving Father, in the name and
worthiness of Jesus Christ my only Mediator and Redeemer, Amen.

A Thanksgiving after a Journey.
IT is thy great mercy (O Lord my God) that as I craved thy assistance in my
journey, so it has pleased thee to give me good success therein, and to
bring me safe again unto mine own home: and it is my duty as I have
obtained favor from thee herein, so to return thee the only praise and
glory thereof. For thou (O Lord) have only prospered my occasions, thou only
causest me to go forth and return in safety.

Gracious have thou been unto me even from the womb unto this present,
delivering me out of all my troubles, supplying all my wants, and doing all my
works for me: above all crowning thine own graces in me, and accepting both
me and all my service above the worth thereof, in the merit of my Savior, in
whom thou have pa^doned all my sins, and sanctified my afflictions: yea, my
very sins unto my good. There is no day, nor hour of the day, nor minute of
the hour, no occasion that has befallne me in any moment of time, in which
thy blessings are not renewed toward me. O that I could be so lively and
effectually thankful unto thee as becomes me. O that my heart within me
might even melt with grief, that I have passed over so many of thy favors
without due regard. And yet behold, how now also thou prouokest me to this
duty. O quicken me, I humbly pray thee hereunto. Make me diligently to look
back into the course and order of the whole journey, and to observe by
degrees, how thou have been good unto me: how thou have blessed my going out,
and my coming in, and have brought me in peace to my resting place. Many
dangers might have swallowed me up, which yet (through thy great goodness I
have happily escaped:) sundry times has there been (such is the brittlenes of
this house of clay which I bear about me) but even a st^ppe between me and
death, out of the jaws whereof thy right hand, and thine own only arm has
saved me. I can ascribe nothing to my self or mine own providence, neither
can I say that my safety is the reward of mine own deserving. Not unto me (O
Lord) not unto me, but to thy Name does belong the glory, for thou have
preserved me (O God of truth.) And now grant (I beseech thee) that the sense
of thy love, may beget in me such a love of thee, and of that which thou
command, that I may willingly and cheerfully and with full purpose of heart,
dedicate my self to thy service: accounting as my life now renewed unto me,
so every new kindness is as it were a new bond and a fresh encouragement
hereunto, that I may walk before thee daily in newness of life, passing the
time of my pilgrimage in fear, and going on from strength to strength till I
appear before thee my God in Sion, even that new Jerusalem which is above.
Grant me these things gracious Father, even for thy dear Son sake, Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for a woman in time of her travail.
RIghteous and holy Lord God, I do now find by experience the fruit of my
sin, that I must travail in sorrow, and bring forth in pains: and I
unfeignedly adore the truth of thy Sacred word, as certifying unto me, that
sorrow must be in the Evening: so comforting me also against the Morning, that
a Child shall be borne. Willingly, do I desire to submit my self in hope into
this thy chasticement; and to learn the desert of my sin, horrible in
themselves, that these temporal pains, are forerunners of eternal: and yet
by thy mercy may be so sanctified unto me, as not only to prevent eternal
vengance, but also prepare for eternal comforts, even to be Sacred by bearing
of Children.

Grant me therefore (gracious Father) true repentance and pardon for my sins
past, that they may not stand at this time in this my need between me and thy
mercy. Give me a comfortable feeling of thy Love in Christ, which may sweeten
all other pangs, though never so violent or extreme: make me still to lift up
my soul unto thee, in my greatest agonies, knowing that thou alone must give a
blessing to the ordinary means for my safe deliverance. Lay no more upon me
then I am able to endure; and strengthen my weak body to the bearing of what
sorrow soever, by which it shall seem good unto thee to make trial of me.

Grant me to consider that howsoever it be with me, yet I am always as thine
hand, whose mercies fail not, who will be found in the Mount and greatest
extreamitie, and to whom belong the issues of death: so prepare me therefore
to death, that I may be fit for life, even to yield fruit alive unto the
world, and to be renewed and enabled to nourish the same. And when thou have
safely given me the expected fruit of my womb, make me with a thankful
heart, to consecrate both it and my self wholly to thy service all the days
of my life, through Jesus Christ mine only Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

A Thanksgiving after safe deliverance.
O Blessed for ever be thy great and glorious Name (most dear and loving
Father) for thy great mercy to me most weak and sinful woman.

Wonderful art thou in all thy works (O Lord) the riches of thy mercies are
past finding out: thou have plunged me with great afflictions, and yet thou
have returned and refreshed me again: thou have brought me to the fear of the
grave, and yet thou have raised me up again to life. O how have thou showed
thy power in my weakness? How has thy loving kindness prevailed against my
unworthiness? Thou might for my sins have left me to perish in mine
extremities, but thou have compassed me about with joyful deliverance: thou
might have made my womb a grave to bury the dead: or in affoording life to
another, thou might have procured my death, but yet thou have not only made
my womb a wel-spring of life, but restored life unto me also, for the
cherishing thereof. Marvelous (O Lord) are thy works; infinite are thy
mercies, my soul by present experience knows it well. O my soul praise thou
the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy Name. My soul praise thou
the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Thou have heard my prayers, and
looked upon my sorrow, thou have redeemed my life from death, and healed mine
infirmities, and crowned me with thine everlasting compassions.

O give me, I humbly pray thee, a thankful heart, not only now while the
memory and sense of thy favor is fresh before me, but continually even so
long as I have any being.

Grant that I may learn by this lively evidence of thy power and mercy, for
ever hereafter to depend only on thee. Quicken me also to all holy duties,
that my thankfulness may appear in my pure and Christian carriage.

Make me a kind and careful mother, willing to undergo the pain and trouble
of education. Let no niceness or curiosity hinder me from those services, to
which both nature and religion has appointed me: let me also be careful when
time requires, to season the fruit thou have given me, with the saving
knowledge of thee, and thy dear Son, that my desire may manifestly appear
to be set for the increase of thy Kingdom. Vouchsafe so to order my affections
and to bring them in obedience under thee, that if it should be thy pleasure,
either now or hereafter to take this Infant from me, I may as willingly part
with it as thou freely gave it me.

And now (O God) perfect in me that strength which thou have begun, make me
to grow in care to serve thee faithfully, both in the duties of piety, and in
other business of my place and calling, that I may be a comfort to my
husband, and example to my neighbors, a grace to my profession, and a means
of glory to thy Name, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for those who are employed in the assistance of a travailing woman.
HOly Father, who have commanded us to serve one another in love, and have made
this the trial of our true love unto thee and our neighbor, that we help
them in the time of need. Be present we pray with us, ^y thy gracious Spirit,
to seal up the pardon of our sins, that they hinder us not in this
business; and to assist us with such conscience and diligence, that our labor
may not be in vain.

We confess (O Lord) that we are not worthy of any g^^d for our selves, much
less that we should smother the good of others: neither that any labor of
ours can further thy good without thy special Grace enabling us therein, and
accepting the same. Accept us therefore we pray thee, in the blood of thy Son,
and shed thy love into our hearts by thine holy Spirit, that all our labor may
be done in love. In love to thy Majesty, who enablest us to all good, and in
love to our Christian Sister, especially to her soul. And therefore keep us
we pray thee, from all idle savors and superstitious conceits, as available
heereunto: from all rotten and unsavory speech which may interrupt the work;
and teach us to seek help only from thy Grace, using al gracious
communication both among our selves, and to the comfort of the distressed, that
she may only depend upon thy mighty power, applying all diligence and
wisdom, in affoording seasonable help for the easing of the pain, or
furthering of the birth. Furnish us with skill, and her with strength,
patiently to awaite the appointed time of her deliverance: and knit all our
hearts unto thee, that we may fear thy Name; observing the passages of thy
providence in this, and all other thy great works; and studying to give thee
praise and glory for the same, in Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

A thanksgiving upon the blessing of their labor in the Deliverance.
HOly Father, who have revealed thy self in thy word to be a God that hear
prayer: and have now made good this promise unto us thine unworthy servants in
hearing our prayers, in the behalf of this distressed woman. Give us hearts we
humbly pray thee, to conceive wisely of this thy great kindness: and open our
mouths, we beseech thee, that we declare this thy goodness for the comfort of
others, that by this lively example, we may believe in thy great Name.

What have thou not done herein (O Lord) even abundantly above what we could
think or ask? And what can we repay unto thee worthy of so great salvation?
We confess our selves unworthy to ask, much less to obtain for our selves,
and yet behold, thou have heard our cries, and relieved this thy desolate
servant. It is not enough, that thou have given ease and deliverance to the
Mother, unless also thou did live to her Babe, that so in it her life might
be again received: yea, thou have made our cup to run over with joy and
gladness; who were almost overwhelmed with sorrow and despair. Thine (O Lord)
be the only glory and praise hereof: O fill our hearts with thankfulness,
that our rejoicing may be in truth, and humble us unfeignedly in the
consciences of our own unworthiness, that we may give thee the only glory of
all thy mercies. Let our humility appear in serving each other in love, and
let our love be manifest in provoking each other to trust in thee alone, for
the time to come: let our confidence in this prepare us to this or the like
occasion, that so we may find a gracious issue in our greatest extremities.
And let our experience of thy good hand herein weane us from the love of the
world, wherein we are like continually to meet with what will oppose or ensnare
us: and provoke us to long for our dissolution when all tears shall be wiped
from our eyes. And let our desire to be with thee, make us always ready for
thee, in all sobriety, modesty, humility, patience, and perseverance, that so
we may be found faithful when our Master comes. And that we may be
found in peace at his glorious appearance, O grant us daily to deny our selves,
that still we may be found of thee in the righteousness of our Savior, may by
the power thereof be daily accepted of thee by the efficacy of the same, may
be more and more conformed to thine holy Image, and so may at length be fully
satisfied therewith.

And as thou have now added one unto the number of mankind, showing thy
wisdom and power in the framing of him in the womb, and in bringing him
forth into thy light; so in thy time add him also to thy Church, and beget him
again unto a lively hope, by the immortal seed of thine holy word, delivering
him from the power of darkness (in which by nature we are all) into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

And if it shall seem good unto thee, to lay any further trial, either of
sickness, or death upon this thy servant, or the fruit of her womb: prepare
us all to a quiet and patient bearing of thine holy hand, and to a comfortable
and contented resting upon thy providence: assuring our selves, that all things
shall turn to the good and benefit of thy chosen. And so into thine holy
hands we commend our selves, with thy servant and her issue, together with
hers and our Families, and that great Family of thy chosen, wheresoever
distressed and dispersed, to be kept by thy mighty power through Faith unto
salvation. Grant us these things (O God of our salvation) for the merit of thy
beloved Son our Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for such as in this world be very rich and wealthy.
Eternal GOD, and most merciful Father, from whom all good things do come
and proceed, who in thy wisdom distributest thy benefits, and bestowest thy
blessings manifoldwife, as seems good to thy heavenly will, to some more, to
some less, as thou (who know all things) see it to be best for every one.
I give thee hearty thanks, in that it has pleased thee to bestow upon me, a
most unworthy sinner, such large blessings of earthly treasures and riches in
this life, most humbly beseeching thee for thy great mercies sake, to give me
grace to use them to thy glory, and to the help and comfort of those that have
need, knowing that thou have given me this abundance, to the end that I
should be ayding and helpful to others, upon whom it has pleased thee to lay
the cross of poverty: and that I am but as a Steward from thee which must
render account how I have bestowed them, I beseech thee also good Lord, that
while I live and possess plenty of all things from thee, I may be careful to
do good unto all men, but especially unto them that be of the household of
Faith, according as thy holy word has commanded me, laying up thereby a good
store of my self, against the day of wrath, and to make me friends of
unrighteous Mammon, that when I depart hence, they may receive me into
everlasting habitations.

And as these thy good gifts, O heavenly Father, so I beseech thee, that I
abuse them not, either by getting, retaining, or otherwise by mispending of
them. Let not my heart at any time be affected toward them, nor my mind
drowned in the delight of them, but that always I may esteem both them and
all things else, as vile dung and filthy dirt in respect of thee. And in the
midst of mine abundance, keep me (O Lord) that I advance not my self
vaingloriously above my Brethren, that I be not puffed up, nor high minded, and
that I consume not thy treasure upon pride, whoredom, gluttony, drunkenness,
or any other wickedness else whatsoever, thereby purchasing thy heavy
judgment against me for the same. But grant good Lord, that as thou have made
me rich and wealthy in worldly substance, so thou will make me much richer in
all goodness, righteousness, holiness, and innocence of life, thorough
Jesus Christ our only Mediator and Advocate: to whom with thee and the holy
Ghost, be praise for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for such as be poor and needy.
O Eternal and everliving God, who appointed diverse and sundry states and
conditions of men, some rich, some poor, some high, some low, and have
notwithstanding commanded every one to be content with his estate and calling,
without repining or grudging against thee for the same. I poor wretch and
miserable caitiue, whom it has pleased thee to place in the lowest and meanest
degree, most entirely beseech thy Fatherly goodness, to give me grace to be
well contented with the some, to submit my will to thy will, to depend wholly
upon thy providence, to cast all my care upon thee (who have promised to care
for me) to repose all my affiance, trust, and confidence in the^, and none
else, and to look for all good things from thy merciful hands. And though I
be poor and needy (O Lord) yet I beseech thee, let me not despair of thy
help, nor yet attempt any unlawful or unjust means to maintain my estate
withal, contrary to thy will. But grant that I having all things necessary in
this life for body and soul, may neither be swallowed up, nor choked with
the cares of the world, nor yet remain barren, and destitute of good works,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy
Ghost, world without end, Amen.

A Prayer to obtain grace of God, against the assaults of the world, the
Flesh, and the Devil.
O Lord God of eternal glory, and Father of endless mercy, we thy unworthy
Creatures, are bold in the name of thy beloved Son, to represent our selves
before thee, humbly beseeching thee for his sake, that thou will vouchsafe to
send down thy holy Spirit into our hearts to guide and govern us in all our
godly ways, and to defend us from all manner of temptations of this world, and
the assaults thereof.

Lord God of thine unspeakable goodness, grant that thy grace may continue
with us always, and that at no time we swerue nor fall from thee. Let thy
truth evermore be with us, and make us constant in the same, that we never
be afraid of any thing which lies in the power of man over our bodies, but
always confessing, that whomsoever thou please to defend, no Tyrant shall
be able to destroy. Strengthen and increase Faith, Love, and Charity, in the
hearts of all people. Make us able to resist the vain pleasures of the world,
let not the perilous allurements have any power to conquer and overcome us,
nor the subtilties th^reof be able to deceive us. Defend us also (O Lord) from
the many perils and temptations, which the devil our adversary practices
against us, least we fall into his sna^es. Let neither his endeavors, nor the
wanton inticements of our own flesh prevail against us. We know (O Lord)
that without thy sufferance, he of himself can take no hold on us, nor be
able to diminish the least hair of our head. Give therefore unto us, such
grace from thee, that we may be willing to strive against the world, the flesh,
and the devil, and such strength, as we may be able to break and beat down
the forc^ and vehemency of their strong temptations. Grant us thy heavenly
light, whereby we may perfectly see and perceive, those malicious and cruel
engines which they lay to entrap us, least unawares we fall into the fame. Even
now (O Lord) in these perilous days, the devil and his ministers do most
busily seek to sift us by all means and ways possible, namely, by pride,
envy, malice, covetousness, gluttony, drunkenness, fornication, and all
other evil works whereunto he does move us, and by him thrust into our
hearts, and whereby (without the assistance of thy grace) he does bring us
within his baits and snares laid for our souls. And contrariwise we of our
selves have no ability nor any means to prevail against them, unless thou of
thy mercy vouchsafe to be gracious unto us, to strengthen us by thy power, and
to defend us in all temptations which he works against us, that he may not
triumph over us, to ou^ destruction.

We beseech thee from the bottom of our hearts, to vouchsafe to be our comfort
in all our troubles, to defend us against all temptations, and that it would
please thee to lead and govern us in all our thoughts, words, and deeds, so
shall we dwell in safety.

O Lord thou know that among all Creatures man is most rebellious against
thee, and his offenses and transgressions against thee most manifold and
contrariwise, every one creature in his kind, does most worthily show thy
power, might, and praise: and by them is thine omnipotency declared: but we in
our lives do show our selves most unkind and unnatural children toward thee,
daily offending thy divine Majesty, and every minute transgressing against thy
Laws and Commandments, nothing regarding thy judgments, which might in a
moment destroy us. But thou (O Lord) in thy mercy do vouchsafe
notwithstanding to spare us, admonishing us to repentance and newness of life,
that through our faithful conversion we may be saved. Raise us up therefore
good Lord, from our drowsy sluggishnesse and careless security. Suffer us not
any longer to wallow and tumble our selves in our grievous Iniquities. Let not
sin have so much power over us, or increase in us. Destroy and overthrow
Satan and his wily policies. Root out of our hearts, all works of the world,
wicked motions of the flesh, and pernicious practices of the Devil, that we
may no longer offend thy goodness. And plant in us such good thoughts, good
motions, and good endeavors, that we may diligently serve thee in all things
according to thy will, and embrace with willingness thy holy word, to the
comfort of our Souls, and setting forth of thy glory.

Open thy bountiful hands O Lord, and bless us with all good gifts, give us
obedient hearts and willing minds, to search and seek out the truth of thy
holy word: strengthen us with constancy in the same, that in all things we may
lead our lives accordingly, not as professors alone, but as faithful
performers of the same, to the utter diligence of our power. Confirm and
establish us in all good works, thar we may as true Christians, sow such
Seeds of thy known truth, that others from whom the brightness of thy Gospel
has been concealed and kept unknown, may by our good example, take such
happy fruits thereof, that they may know thee, and be brought home to thy
Fold as lost Sheep. Be thou (O Lord) our Shepherd, and let us be then sheep
of thy Fold, and remain in thy protection, both now and always to the end.
Increase the number of the faithful: diligent, and careful Ministers,
Preachers, and distributers of thy holy word and Sacraments, and give unto them
a single heart toward thee. Let them not be such as do only preach and teach
thy word with their lips and tongues, and have their hearts far from thee,
but that they inwardly with all their soul, in perfect faith cleave unto thee
and thy truth, and accordingly show the same in their life and conversation.
Drive also out of thy Church, all Buyers and Sellers, and such as like ravening
Wolves seek to live by the spoil of thy sheep. Cast out (O Lord) we pray
thee, such idle Pastors as are crept into thy Church, who more respecting gain
then grace, employ their study for promotion, and leave the flock unfed which
is under their charge. Lord of thy unspeakable Mercy, deliver us from such
careless keepers, and blind guides, least we also being made blind by their
negligence, may be kept blind in ignorance, and so with them fall into the
dangerous pit of thy deep and heavy displeasure.

Rehearse and pardon us all our offenses, teach us to serve thee as we ought,
make strong our faith and hope in thee, indue us with thy heavenly light, that
we may perfectly see our foul and manifold enormities, and examining our own
conscices, and discerning our imperfections, we may learn to amend our lives.

Make us willing Followers of thee, and diligent lovers of thy Law. Make us
penitent for our sins past, and continue in us thy fear. Let us not fall
inro any manner of temptations, but by thy mighty power deliver us from all
evil. To thee alone (O Lord) belongs mercy and forgiveness, and thou only
art our loving Savior. Purge us and make us clean, that we may be found
chosen vessels, fit to serve thee in this life, and after to obtain perfect
salvation at thy merciful hands, and enjoy everlasting rest in thy Celestial
habitation, prepared for thy faithful and elect people, and with thy holy and
blessed Angels may sing praise unto thy holy name for ever. These blessings (O
Father) we beseech thee to bestow upon us for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose
name we pray unto thee as he himself has taught us, Our Father, etc.

A Thanksgiving after blessings obtained, to acknowledge them a^ from God.
BLessed Lord, I feel in my self how mercifully thou have dealt with me,
grievously I was troubled, and now by thy goodness partly releas^d how
dangerously I was assaulted, and now by thy mercy partly delivered: this
relief (although I must needs confess by infallible arguments ^o be thy
only work in me yet such is the pride of my rebellious flesh, that it will
not suffer me to as^^^^e fully) the same to proceed of thee, and thine only
goodness but seeks out other fained causes, according to the vain devises
of my mind, therefore I beseech thee most gracious Father, that thou will so
frame my heart, that I may with my whole heart and mind, and with all the
powers of my soul, acknowledge a^ my comfort and aid to be thy only work,
wrought in me by thy holy Spirit, and that I may be thankful for the same all
the days of my life (O Lord) thou have sworn by thy holiness, that thou will
not give thine honor to any other. Seeing then dear Father, that thou have
sent me this strength: let me be persuaded fully in my heart (dear Father)
that it comes from thee, that to thee I may render due honor, praise, and
thanksgiving for the same, and the rest of my life, that I may be assured in
heart of thy merciful defense, in mine extreme dangers, as thou have many
times wonderfully delivered me, and thou will according to thy promise so
continue thy merciful aid, whereby thy name in me may be glorified, my soul
in mercy preserved, and thy whole Church edified, now and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for patience in tribulation, and that God may be glorified thereby.
GRacious and merciful Father, who have from time to time, in all ages
exercised even thy most dear children with grievous afflictions, and sharp
corrections, to draw their minds from too much love of earthly pleasures, to
delight in heavenly joys, and spiritual comforts of the soul: grant I
beseech thee, that I even from my heart, may acknowledge this affliction, which
does now grievously pierce my soul, to be thy Fatherly correction, and
scourge of thy mere mercy and love, laid upon me, to put me in mind of my
duty toward thee, least else, with too much quietness, I should have been
drawn through the flattering pleasures of this vain world: from the
remembrance and delight of my spiritual joy in heavenly things, to have had my
sinful delight in this vain world and so should have run headlong to
everlasting damnation with the wicked world. But that thou (O Father) have
called me back by this thy Fatherly rod, whereby thou mindest to let me see,
that of my self I have no strength unto goodness, but that it was thou, who
by thy abundant mercy, had before time replenished my heart with joy, that I
took great pleasure and comfort in reading and hearing thy holy word, and
receiving other benefits: which spiritual comfort and quietness of mind,
because I did not fully acknowledge to be thy good gift in me, thou have now
taken from me (for a time) that I may effectually perceive and learn by the
lack of it, that it was thy work in me: and when thou restorest the same
again, I may more abundantly glorify thee in thy manifold mercies. But while
it shall be thy good will and pleasure, (O Lord) to exercise me with this thy
loving correction: give me grace that I may patientiy abide, whatsoever it
shall please thee to lay upon me for my amendment, strengthen me (O Lord) that
I do not faint under the burden of affliction: but being vpholden by the
strength of thy holy Spirit in me, I may never cease calling upon thy name,
with full persuasion that thou will at thy time appointed, send me full
assurance, to my singular comfort, and thy eternal glory. And when it shall
please thee (O Lord) fully to deliver me: I beseech thee so work in my heart,
that I may acknowledge the same to come from thee, and to be thy only work,
that I may be thankful for thy so great mercies in all the days of my life,
and I never forget thy loving and Fatherly dealings toward me, but so to the
end of my life I may live in thy fear and love, that thy holy name in my life
may be glorified, and after death, I may be received to that full joy, which
thou have prepared for thine elect children, through our only Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer for mortification and holiness.
BLessed Lord God, and most merciful Father, I do acknowledge unto thee, that
I am unworthy to appear before thy high Majesty, to offer up unto thee a
sacrifice of prayer; being full of sin and corruption, naturally glad of
evil, and unprofitable to good. Yea, being so miserable, yet I see not my
misery, I feel it not, I bewail it not as I ought to do, but multiply mine
iniquities, provoking thy just judgment against me. My zeal is cold, my love
feeble, my exercises of Religion faint and few, and I take no way but that
which leads from evil to worse, and finally, would lead me from sin, to
the reward of sin. All this is true, dear Father, yet my heart is not moved
with fear: all this is true, yet I do not sorrow for it, but walk with joy,
where I must (if I continue) reap affliction: therefore be merciful unto me,
and bless me: be merciful unto me, and in Christ Jesus, wash away all mine
iniquities; be merciful unto me, and create in me a new heart, and prepare it
to prayer, and to thy holy service; for thou alone (O Lord) art my hope, and
the mighty God of my salvation. Thou have given me a desire to serve thee, O
teach me that I may do it: and the good work which thou have begun, make it
perfect in me, that I may no more love wickedness, and follow vanity, but that
my good desires in thee may be increased, and all of them accomplished; so
shall I praise thee and magnify thee for ever. For there is no honor but thy
honor, no glory but thy glory: O Lord, it is vain to trust in Princes, but
truly to trust in the Lord brings plentiful salvation. From age to age it
has appeared, that thou (O Lord God) art merciful, and that in thy Courts
there is nothing but truth and holiness. This world is full of vanity, full
of pride, full of rebellion, and the flesh also. The world has many baits of
destruction, and the flesh does delight in them* they are sworn together to
betray us to Satan; yea, we betray our selves, therefore (dear Father) by
the cross of Christ, mortify in us the deeds of the flesh and crucify in us
the deeds of the flesh, and crucify both us to the world, and the world to us,
that our souls may live. In our general calling make us obedient to serve
th^e in holiness and in righteousness all the days of our life: in our
particular callings, also make us faithful, that we may neither put away a
good conscience, nor make ship-wracke of faith. I believe, O Lord, help my
unbelief: in the day of peace and prosperity make us sober, in the day of
trouble and adversity, make us look up, and cheerefuly to wait and trust
in thee for our deliverance, that our enemies mouths may be stopped by our
godly conversation, and their hearts pricked with zeal to turn unto thee.
Neither do I pray (O Lord) for my self alone, but for the whole body into the
which I am grafted by Christ Jesus: that is, for thy Church (O God) for thine
inheritance, that rhou would increase it from one end of the world to
another, that all Nations may worship before thy footstool. Especially (O
Lord) I pray for them that profess thy Gospel, as for this our Nation, that
thou would be merciful unto it, turning our hearts to thee: for our
gracious Soueraign the King, and for all our Council, that thou would pour
thy graces upon them, to discharge of their duty and our peace: for all the
holy Teachers in the Church, that thou would bless them and their labors:
for the peace and full beauty of this Church, for the peace and wealth of the
Commonweal. We pray thee also for to bless all the means to bring this to
pass. Also we pray thee for our Parents, for all others to whom we owe
special love or service: but principally we beseech thee to show thy
compassion upon all that are in persecution for thy Gospel: O Lord, increase
and renew their strength, give them victory, and turn their adversaries
hearts, if they pertain to thy holy election, otherwise (O Lord) bring upon
them the confusion that they would bring upon others, and into the pit that
they have dug, let them fall and never rise up again. O Lord, hear us in
these suites: pardon our dull spirits in prayer, and give us these and all
other graces needful for us, and the Church, to thy glory, for our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whose name we pray as he has taught us, saying: Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the feeling of the sin of hyprocrisie, that we may direct our
life according to the perscript rule of the word.
RIghteous Lord God and heavenly Father, which art a just judge to punish all
them that do continue to offend thee: as thou art a Father most pitiful, to
receive to mercy all those which give over themselves to please thee: show me
thy grace and favor, To that I may be truly touched with inward displeasure
of my sins, and that in the place of flattering my self, to sleep in sin,
I may be so cast down in heart, that the rather I may truly with mouth
confess, most humbly to give thee the honor, glory, and praise, due unto thy
holy name: and that as thou of thy great mercy, do instruct thereunto by thy
holy word, so (for thy mercies sake) make that the same may so lighten and
clear our conscience, that in due examination of our life, we may truly
learn to be angry and displeased with all our former and corruptible living.

O that it may please thee to draw near unto us, in addressing and guiding our
footsteps, in the true and perfect way of obedience to thy holy Laws and
Commandments. Send thy holy Angel to pitch his Tents round about us, that
Satan, and his infernal army never prevail against us, but that always with
strong faith, we may through Jesus Christ withstand all his crafty engines and
snares, knowing undoubtedly, that thou never forsakest them that put their
trust in thee. O let us not be led by the infirmity of our outward flesh, but
strengthen us by the virtue of thy holy Spirit. Suffer us not to lie under thy
heavy wrath, and vengeance through hypocrisy: but rather touch us so inwardly,
that we may without ceasing, sigh and groan unto thee, by true and unfeigned
repentance. And although we be not always so well disposed to ask and pray as
we ought to do, yet (good Lord, for thy glorious Names sake) stretch out thy
mighty hand, that by the gracious working of thy holy Spirit, our minds and
hearts, may be drawn from all earthly and corruptible things, so that our
prayers unto thee, may proceed of an inward, earnest, vehement affection, so
that we never presume to come before the throne of thy Majesty with a double
heart, knowing, that whosoever asks and prays for any thing of thee, not
asking in faith, cannot obtain.

Increase therefore (sweet Lord) our faith that we presently may lively feel
the benefit of remission, and pardon all our sins through the merits and death
of Christ Jesus our Savior: and so work in us for ever hereafter to live in
thy fear, and to stand in awe of thy displeasure, that thou may continue
our merciful Father, world without end, Amen.

O Shepherd of sheep, seek out me thy wandering sheep. And being found, lay
me upon thy blessed shoulders, and bring me home to the very fold of thy
flock, heal my sick soul: feed my hungry soul, yea, almost dying through
hunger: watch over the same (O sweet Lord) least the ravening Wolf do invade
my soul, and so slay it to utter destruction. Wherefore, O most dear GOD) be
merciful to me a wretched sinner, and grant pardon to him that repents;
give not forth the voice of thy sentence according to my demerits, but like as
thy mercy before has done in the beginning of my life, so let it conclude the
end thereof, to remain with thee, world without end: Amen, dear God, Amen.

Forasmuch as in this life, holy Scriptures does promise trouble, penuries,
oppressions, increase of grief, and abundance of temptations, vouchsafe (O
most loving Lord GOD) to prepare my heart to all possible patience, least I do
faint in thy foote-path: compel (my sweet Lord) this stubborn and rebellious
flesh of mine, to be subject to thy holy Spirit, beyond all expectation, so
that I may possess my soul in patience, and keep the same continually in thy
everlasting service: to the which purpose thou of thine infinite goodness and
mercy have created the same. Wherefore, (O Lord GOD) show thine almighty power
unto me most wretched sinner, that so long as I fight in this wretched life, I
may obtain victory against mine enemies, (thou being my defense) for there is
none other that fights for me, but only thou O God. Now I say, repress the
violence of mine enemies, and vouchsafe with great effect to bring into bondage
my miserable flesh, that tormenteth my soul. So that obtaining victory, I may
give praise to thee my only deliverer, in perpetual eternity. Amen.

A prayer against tbe secret venim, and great danger of prosperity.
O Lord, prepare my heart to wisdom, prepare it to prayer, and teach my soul
to feel all the dangers wherewith it is beset on every side: and grant good
Father, that I may not pray in words, or in sound of speech, but in Spirit
and Faith. I acknowledge to thee O Lord, thy great mercies toward me at this
time; for beside the unspeakable graces of my redemption, and of my holy
calling in the Gospel, (which are evermore good) thou have given me a large
measure of earthly blessings, my table is richly and daintily furnished, my Cup
ouer-floweth, mine enemies are chased away, and I feel no want, no affliction,
no sorrow. My prosperity leads me, as by the hand, from one delight to
another, and from one pleasure to another. In the morning, peace is at my right
hand, and at night quietness at my left. O Lord are not these thy blessings?
Have not thou opened thy merciful hand, and filled me with all these comforts?
True it is, O Lord, that they came all from thee, and for them I am indebted
unto thee, and give thee hearty thanks. But alas, O Lord, I find by experience
that prosperity (such is our infirmity) carries us too too far away, it
feeds us from day to day, and from time to time, with new delights, it
ingendereth also secretly such peace and confidence in these things, which are
but as a reed to lean upon, that we are carried away, we forget not thee
only, but our selves also. But the day of adversity, the day of sickness,
the day of trouble, that lays open our weakness, it causes much care to
be released, it provoke many prayers for relief. O it is a happy day, a day
of returning to the Lord, a day of repentance, as in Sackcloath and Ashes. O
how may my soul praise the day of affliction, wherein I called upon the name
of the Lord, and he heard me, and I found that his rod comforted me.
Nevertheless, O good Lord, consider and help: two days of health, take away
the fruit of many days of sickness: we are as men Sea-sicke, that coming
on the shore, presently return to joy and mirth, and forget both dangers on
the Sea; and dangers on the Land. So came it to pass from age to age in thy
people of Israel, being tied fast in misery, and iron, they called upon thee
and received mercy; being delivered, they soon turned back like a bow, and
became drunken with prosperity. Then thy face was against them, thy anger was
kindled, and they cast into affliction again: but in their miseries they
renewed their prayers and thou did renew thy grace: but new prosperity
brought new rebellion, and new rebellion new punishments, and new punishments
new conversation. The house of mirth was to them, and is to all, a bait to
wantonness: but in the house of sorrow, a provocation of humility and prayer.
Prosperity is as a Cup of wine mingled with poison, as a bed of security, and
a way to destruction. Therefore, O Lord with the fullness of earthly things,
give me also the fullness of spi^ituall things, that I forget thee not in
vanity of life, or in the false delights of sinful flesh. O keep my heart
that it be not made drunken with prosperity: but grant me in soberness to
use thy blessings to thy glory, and to the relief of my Brethren: and when I
rejoice, not to rejoice in these base things (for that rejoicing is evil) but
to rejoice in thee, turning my mirth from wanton Daunces, from vain Songs,
from other carnal delights, to exercises of Religion, to helps of knowledge,
and singing of Psalms, with melody to thee in my heart.

Finally, O Lord, seeing that in this earthly prosperity there is so great
abuse and so present danger for want of grace to abuse them: O Lord teach me
the true use of them, that I may not set my heart thereon, but in thee, giving
thee thanks for them: and laboring with all diligence through thy grace in
Jesus Christ, that they be not through my wickedness turned into curses. As
Solomon teaches wisdom, to take heed of an Harlot, so teach me to take
heed of vain pleasures, in worldly matters, that I be not bewitched with
prosperity, and forget thee, bathing my self in pleasures, and never setting
thee before mine eyes. O merciful Father for thy dearly beloved Son Jesus
Christ, work this in me, that I may be rich in good works: that I may have,
as not having: that I may use the world, as not abusing it, but using it to thy
glory and praise, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, be all praise, honor, and
glory both now and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer against Whoredom and uncleanness.
O God, which by thy holy word have commanded, that for the avoiding of the
filthy sin of fornication, eue^y man should have his lawful wife, and every
woman enjoy her lawful husband, threatening death and damnation to all such as
seek to live contrary to thy commandment herein: I humbly beseech thee for
Christ's sake, that thou will mortify and kill in me all carnal concupiscence,
filthy motions, and fleshly desires, by the operation of thy holy Spirit in me,
that I never defile either my body or soul in this loathsome and stinking
sin of whoredom, adultery, fornication, Incest, or other uncleanness of
body whatsoever, but living purely and unpolluted therewith all the days of my
life, I may practice to please thee in all my proceedings. I know (O Lord) that
flesh and blood, (the filthy unclean works of flesh and blood) cannot enter
into thy habitation, nor yet possess any portion in thine everlasting kingdom
of glory: and therefore whenever the devil, his wicked members, the world,
or the flesh, shall tempt and provoke me to preparation hereto, give me power
and strength to withstand their assaults, and put into my mind to consider
that thine eyes do behold me, and thine holy Angels look upon me also: that
the horrible company of devils compass me about, ready to register my filthy
fact in a book of memo^ials against the great day of the Lord. And so by thy
gracious assistance, and th^se good considerations, I may be^ partly terrified,
and partly ashamed for ever to commit the same; knowing that thou who sparedst
not the former world, but destroyedst Sodom and Gomorrha with fire and
brimstone from heaven, the whole world with water; the City of the Sichemites
with the edge of the sword, and the children of Israel at sundry times, slaying
infinite Millions of them for this horrible vice, wilt not spare me a most
wicked and abominable sinner, if I commit the like offense. Wherefore (blessed
Father) suffer me not thy dear Child in Jesus Christ, bought with thy most
precious blood, to be once spotted, stained, or blemished, either in body or
mind, with this filthy stinking sin of whoredom and fornication, that I
appearing clean in thy sight, may after this life ended live with thee, thy
Son Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost: one true and ever living God, world
without end, Amen.

A Prayer against Covetousness and ambition.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, who have commanded every man to
labor and travail in his vocation and calling, thereby to relieve his
necessities, and to maintain his estate, and have promised thereto thy
blessing. Bless I beseech thee, all my actions and labors which I shall at
any time take in hand in thy name, and thereby I receiving sufficent
sustentation and maintenance for mine estate and calling, may be free from the
insatiable desires of covetousness, ambition, avarice, and all desire of
unlawful gain; knowing that those that desire to be rich, fall into diverse
tem^ptations and snares of the devil. From which co^tagious infection, I
beseech thee so much more warily to keep me, by how much more I find the
same forbidden in thy holy word. The holy Apostle calls it idolatry,
worshipping of Idols, and the root of all evil, excluding them out of the
kingdom of heaven that be infected therewith. And thy dear Son Jesus Christ
tells us, that it shall be easier for the Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man (that is a covetous rich man, whose affiance is in
his riches) to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore (good Father) keep
me far from this filthy vice of covetousness and ambition, and grant that I
having food for my body, and clothes for my back, with all other necessaries
incident to this life, may be well contented therewith, not coveting or
desiring any more: and all the days of my life in true simplicity of heart,
may give thee praise for the same. Finally, grant that I seeking the kingdom
of heaven and the righteousness thereof, as thou have commanded us in thy holy
word, may receive the reward of thy promise, that is, all things necessary for
this life, and in the life to come everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer against usual and common swearing.
Eternal God and lou^ng Father, in thy holy word, the word of truth, thou
say that the man who uses to swear much is accursed, and the plague shall
never depart from his house: and in thy holy Gospel have said, that we shall
render account at the day of judgment for every idle word that we shall
speak. O how much more shall we give accounts of every p^ophane, blasphemous
and bloody oath, that we swear? And therefore to the end we might avoid thy
vengeance against that day, thou have commanded us not to swear at all, but
that our communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more then that,
comes of evil. Wherefore I beseech thee (good Lord) in the bowels of mercy,
so to dispose and order my tongue and mouth (the use whereof thou have given me
above other creatures to glorify thee withal) that thereby I abuse nor
blaspheme not thy holy name. For true it is (O Lord) that swearers and
blasphemers of thy holy name, as much as lies in them, do crucify thy Son
afresh, and are as guilty of his blood as Judas was that betrayed him, or the
cursed Jews that slew him.

And seeing that to swear by thee, whose blessed name is never to be thought
of, nor yet once called into question, but with great reverence, fear, and
dread, is most horrible blasphemy, and to swear by any creature else, is most
detestable Idolatry, keep me I beseech thee from all manner of unlawful
swearing, and from all wicked bloody Oaths, that both my heart, tongue, and
mouth, and all parts else both of body and soul, may be instruments of praise
to set forth thy glory, all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ our Lord
and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer against pride.
HOly Lord, thou have in thy blessed Gospel commanded us by all means
possible, to eschew the filthy vice of pride (which is a certain rebellion of
the heart against thee) and above all things to embrace and ever hold fast the
anchor of humility. A perfect pattern whereof we may learn in thee (O
blessed Savior) who was humble, lowly, courteous, gentle, merciful, pitiful,
full of compassion, and all goodness, not disdaining the vilest person, or
loathsomest Lazer that ever lived, if he faithfully believed in thee. Thou
humbledst thy self, that we might be exalted: thou becamest poor, to make us
rich: thou came down to the earth to live in humility, that we might be
exalted to live in felicity.

Thou wast poor in estate, mean in attire, and base in all things before the
world, in respect of thy humanity: but before thy heavenly Father, in respect
of thy Deity, most magnificall and glorious. And therefore not without cause,
thou biddest us learn of thee, saying, Learn of me, for I am humble and
lowly, and your Souls shall live. Thou ouerthrowest the proud in their own
imagination, and give grace to the humble, yea thou so much abhorrest pride,
that thou iudgest them to eternal damnation that offend therein.

If we would consider with our selves our own misery, we should have no
cause to rise up into pride. For in respect of our bodies, are we any thing
else then vile dung and ashes? And in respect of our souls, til they be
regenerate by the Spirit of God, are they not bondslaues to Satan, receptacles
to fiendes, and subject to everlasting damnation? What have we now that we
have not received? Or whereof may we be proud? Wherefore (O my God) I beseech
thee who art the true mirror of all humility, give me the spirit of meeknes,
humbleness, and lowliness of heart, and keep me from all filthy pride and
arrogance of body or mind, that I never lift up my self into pride against
thee, or think of my self above that which I am of my self, but that I
casting down my self, and distrusting mine own worthiness, may be by thee
advanced to eternal glory. Grant that those things which thou gave me for
necessities sake only (as thou diddst my apparel to hide my shame withal)
may never be abused of me as instruments of wickedness. And those things
which thou gave me to praise and glorify thee withal, as thou did my
heart, my tongue, and mouth, I never abuse to thy dishonor. And as it may
please thee to indue me with this true humility of mind toward thee, so I
beseech thee to give me the true humility of body and mind toward my brethren
also, that I be not puffed up, nor advance my self above them, disdaining or
contemning them, though otherwise never so mean or contemptible before the
world.

And whenever the Enemy assaulteth me to stir me up to pride, I beseech
thee, whose power is incomprehensible, to strengthen me to with-stand his
temptations, and set before the eyes of my mind, the examples of thy Judgment
inflicted upon the children of pride in all ages, as namely, how thou threwest
down Lucifer a bright Angel in heaven into hell fire, how thou condemnest Adam
and all his posterity. How thou destroyedst Nymrod that huge Giant, Goliath that
fierce monster, Nabuchadnezar that ambitious and bloody tyrant, Herod that
arrogant miscreant, and many others, who through the sin of pride rebelled
against thee, and may by these examples be terrified from committing that
great and heinous sin against thee: that I humbling my self in this world,
after the consummatio^ of this life, may be exalted in the kingdom of heaven,
there to reign with thee for ever and ever, Amen.

A Prayer against Gluttony and drunkenness.
BLessed Lord, as thou have created man after thy own similitude and
likeness, and have given him a perfect body like unto thy Son Jesus Christ;
so thou have ordained and provided for him ordinary means, as meat, drink,
flesh, fish, herbs, oils, wines, and what not, to keep and sustain the
same. And have commanded these thy creatures to be moderately taken, to the
sustentation of the body, with praise and thanksgiving to thee, accursing them
to hell, who by abusing, not lawfully using these thy bl^ssings, make them
instruments of sin, and so consequently of damnation to themselves. Give me
grace I beseech thee that I may never abuse thy gifts through gluttony,
drunkenness, riot, or excess, but that I living in all godly temperance and
sobriety, may be thankful unto thee for them, and also use them for my
necessity. Knowing that our meats without thy blessing, cannot nourish the
body, but destroy it rather, as experience daily teaches. Make me (O Lord) to
loath and detest this horrible vice so much the more in respect of the
filthynes of the same, for besides that, it transformeth man into the Image of
a beast, or rather makes him worse then a beast (for they neither eat nor
drink, without measure) it also blinds his eyes of reason, that he sees not
the wickedness that he commits. And therefore Lot being drunk, perceived
not his incestuous fact committed with his two Daughters. The Israelites
swelling in gluttony and drunkenness, perceived not their grievous sin of
Idolatry which they fell into. The rich glutton, drunken with the abundance of
all things, perceived not his contempt of the poor, nor yet their great want:
and therefore thou in thy great wrath tookest him away from the face of the
earth. By these and the like exampes of thy Judgments (grant O heavenly
Father) that I being admonished, may be careful and studious, never to be
culpable in this filthy vice, least in thy wrath thou deprive me of the use of
thy creatures in this life, and in the world to come, give me my portion with
the wicked in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, that never shall
be quenched.

This is the reward thou threatnest in thy holy word, to all drunkards,
gluttons, and ryotous persons, saying by the mouth of the Apostle; neither
whoremongers, adulterers, gluttons, drunkards, nor such like, shall ever enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore most dear Father, I beseech thee to
deliver me in mercy, that I never be stained therewith, but may always use
thy gifts to thy glory, the relief of mine own necessities, and the help
and comfort of others that do want the same. And grant, that I seeking after
not only this corporal food which perishes, but also that sweet Ambrosia and
heavenly Nectar, the word of life, which never decays, may after the end of
this life, have the full fruition thereof, to my eternal comfort: and for ever
laud and praise thy blessed name, through Jesus Christ our Savior and
Redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer against idleness and sloth.
MOst holy Father, after thou had created man, thou placedst him in
paradise, commanding him for the avoiding of idleness, to dress and manure
the same. And afterward being cast out of paradise for the sin of
transgression, and sent into the world, thou enioynest him in the sweat of his
face to eat his bread, to the end he should not at any hand be idle, and so
minister occasion to the enemy to invade him: for man being idle and inclined
to sloth, the devil he besieges us with a thousand of temptations, our flesh
lusts to evil, and our minds are inflamed to all kind of wickedness.
Wherefore most merciful Father, I most heartily beseech thee, that duting the
short course of my life in this world, I may be always godly occupied, and
virtuously exercised in the affayers of this life, and in all manner of good
works before thee, that my enemies the Devil, the World, nor the Flesh,
prevail not against me. And considering that I must render account of all my
actions whatsoever, and of every minute of an hour, or iotte of time lent me
in this life, I beseech thee give me grace to spend my time in such godly
actions, as may please thee, and not in idleness, sloth, or in any wanton,
lewd, lascivious, or wicked exercise, that being found faithful and vigilant
in my calling, when the day of Tribulation comes, when every man shall be
rewarded according to his deeds, I may obtain everlasting life. And as it may
please thee to keep my body from idleness and sloth, so vouchsafe I beseech
thee, to exercise my soul in godly contemplations and virtuous Meditations of
thee, and of thy holy and blessed word: together with the heavenly joys and
beatitudes prepared for all those that unfeignedly long for thy coming. In the
practicing whereof, make me to love nothing but thee, to honor and obey thee,
to fear, dread, and reverence thee, and to desire and covet nothing but thee,
that I dwelling with thee in mind only during this life, may after the
dissolution of this earthly tabernacle, dwell with thee both in body and soul,
world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, to whom
with thee, and thy holy Spirit, be all praise and glory, now and for evermore,
Amen.

A Prayer against Infidelity and despair, necessary for a troubled and
wounded spirit.
GLorious Lord God, and our most tender Father in Jesus Christ, in whom thou
have elected us before all worlds to life and glory, and in thy due time have
called us to a lively hope of eternal happiness, that we might walk before
thee in holiness and righteousness: and in thine infinite wisdom have so
disposed of us in this estate of holiness, that thou may have the glory of
thy free grace: and therefore as thou have discharged us freely of the guilt of
our sin by the blood of thy Son, and accepted us perfectly righteous in his
obedience, so also thou have left corruption in us, to be daily maistered and
subdued, that so being thereby daily conscious of our own unworthiness and
insufficiency; and subject in regard thereof to much distraction and
infidelity, we might learn still to live by faith in the Son of God,
denying our own righteousness, that still we may be found in him, to the
glorious praise of his free grace, and so may be keept by his mighty power
through faith unto salvation.

Look graciously upon me (thine unworthy servant) who do here unfeignedly
acknowledge before thee, that thy Foundation stands sure, thou know who are
thine: yet my faith is so weak, that I ofttimes am to seek whither I am thine
or no. For such is my ignorance of what I should know, that I sometimes grope
at the light in the noone day: neither knowing the worth of my holy calling,
nor being able to use the means which may truly inform me therein: but
sometimes over value mine estate, as if it were better with me then it is: and
sometimes abase my self to be worse then indeed I am, or should be. And my
corruption sometimes breaking out into gross rebellion, does so hinder and
obscure my spiritual eye of faith, that I can neither truly discern whereto I
am come, neither can see afar to what I should attain: yea many times it
fares so ill with me, that for want of speedy endeavor to recover my self
by repentance, I do not only plunge my self deeper into the snare of sin,
by not applying the true remedy aright, or stumbling upon vain helps: but
hereby many times am cast into such straights, that I not only question all
former truth of thy grace, as if I were no better then an hypocrite, and had
builded on the sands, but also am ready to give over all hope of attaining the
same: as if either it did not belong unto me, or else it were too late to
pursue and apprehend the same, as if thou had forgot to be merciful, because
I feel my self so miserable: as if thy compassion were clean gone, because
my rebellion seems so desperate. Hence it is (O my God) that I turn all thy
comforts to be corrasiues unto me, and esteem all thy threatenings no better
then flashes of hell and enterances to eternal vengeance. Thus am I bceome (O
Lord) as one forlorn and out of mind, free among the dead, no better in mine
own account then a mere abject and cast a-way, whose hope is not only
perished from the earth, but without hope or help from thee my God. And all
this is justly come upon me by reason of mine own foolishnes, who have
neglected my watch, and so have fallen from thee, and have been careless of
the means to restore me speedily again, whereby my wounds have festered, and
seem to be incureable, and so my anguish is greater then I can express: my
sins are become a burden that I am not able to bear, my heart within
wastes with continual sorrow, and I daily receive a sentence of death. And
yet though all this be come upon me, yet thy foundation stands sure, thou
know who are thine: though thou have chasticed me sore for my folly, yet
thou have not given me over unto death, and therefore yet there is hope;
though I have received a sentence of death: yet it is that I might dye to mine
own confidence, and trust in thee the living God, who raises up from the
dead: the more I feel my sins a burden which I am not able to bear, the
more do thou inuit me to come unto thee, that I may be raised: and therefore
I must find my self, daily lost in my self, that I may be found of thee in
Christ, not having mine own righteousness. Though thy law does thunder nothing
but vengeance against me, yet thou command me still to believe in thy name,
and therefore though thou kill me, yet I will trust in thee. For thou (O my
God) wilt be found in the issues of death: thou louedst me even when I was
thine enemy, and therefore can not reject me now I se^ke thee in truth.
Thou have embraced me with everlasting compassions, and therefore can not,
neither wilt forsake me in my great extremity: and thou have many times
heretofore delivered me from the Lion and the Bear, from many desperate snares
thou have many times rescued me, and will thou not deliver me from every evil
work, and preserve me constantly unto thy glorious appearance? yea certainly
(blessed Lord) I believe, help my unbelief. I believe, that thou art able to
do wonderfully above what I can think or desire, and therefore that thou will
not deny me what I ask in thy name. I believe that thou can bring light out
of darkness, and therefore thou will turn my darkness into light. I believe
that all things shall work together to the best, to those which are called
according to thy purpose, and therefore that thou will turn this my greatest
abasement, to my greatest comfort.

Only I humbly pray thee, give me patience to wait upon thee until thou
come and comfort me: submit me to thy wise physic, whereby thou may heal
me, that so being healed, I may be fit for comfort. O heal me therefore I
humbly pray thee, by the blood of thy son, wash me thoroughly from all my
sins, and cleanse me from all mine iniquities. Create in me (O Lord) a
clean heart, that I may appear all fair before thee, and renew a right
spirit within me, that I may worship thee in spirit and truth: Restore to me
the joy of thy salvation, that I may be persuaded of thy love unto me, and
stablish me with thy free spirit, that I may unfeignedly love thee again and
never depart from thy holy covenant: grant me to renew my covenant daily with
thee, that thou may be for ever with me, to keep me in thy fear: and keep
me daily lowly in mine own eyes, that still I may be accepted of thee in thy
beloved. Give me trust in thee, by distrusting mine own deceitful heart,
especially in time of temptation: and teach me to rely on thy mighty power by
faith, even when powers and principalities do most oppose me. O strengthen
me with the strong cries of thy blessed Spirit, that I may be fervent in
prayer, to wrestle with thy Majesty, that so thou may hasten thy work to
comfort me, And though I find not that comfort I have had, or desire: yet let
this comfort me that I have done thy will, and let it humble me still, that I
am not fit for the comfort I do desire, that so with patience I may wait for
the same, comforting my self, that seeing this is the time of my warfare, and
not of my crowning, therefore if I wait for what I am not fit for, yet there
is enough before me to satisfy me abundantly: and therefore grant me still
to forget what is behind, and to hasten to what is before: to wait for the
coming of my Lord and Savior, and so prepare my self daily to his glorious
appearance. And even so, come Lord Jesus come quickly, Amen.

FINIS.

