A BRIEF DIALOGVE, Concerning preparation for the worthy receiving of the
Lords SVPPER.

Taken, for the most part, out of the ten Sermons of Mr I. DOD, and Mr. R.
CLEAVER, touching that Subject.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by I. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
near FIeet Conduit, 1614.

A DIALOGVE of Preparation to the Lords SVPPER.
Question. WHat is the Lords Supper?


Answer. It is a Sacrament of the Mat. 26. 28
eternal Covenant, whereby through the use of bread and wine rightly
administered, and faithfully Ioh. 6. 27. 54. etc
received, the souls of them that are ingrafted into Christ, are spiritually
nourished unto eternal life.


Q. What then is required of those that will be pertakers of this heavenly
food at the Lords Table?


A. They must be prepared as meet Mat. 22. 12 1 Cor. 11. 28.
guests for such a banquet.


Q. For the better attaining to this preparation, how many things are there to
be considered?


A. Three: first, what is to be done before the parting of it: secondly, what
at it: thirdly, what after it.


Q. What is it that must be done before?


A. There must be, first, an examination how fit we are to receive: secondly,
a 1 Examination.
premeditation of the benefits that we are to receive: thirdly, a faithful
and fervent prayer for Gods blessing upon our examination, premeditation and
receiving.


Q. Of what points are we to examine our selves?


A. First, in general, whether we be of the number of the faithful, and have
in us the life of grace: for otherwise we are utterly unfit to be partakers of
the Lords Supper, which is appointed for food to continue spiritual life
where it is, and not to work it where it is not: to be for nourishment unto
Gods Children, but for the bane and destruction of dogs and swine, that dare
presume to meddle with the same. Secondly, we must examine our selves more
particularly.


Q Concerning what matters?


A. Whether we have attained unto a competent measure of Repentance,
knowledge, faith, and love: which if we can find in our selves, we may
resolve our hearts in that point of general examination, and conclude that we
are within the covenant of grace, and have communion with Christ Jesus, and
therefore are in state to be communicants at his Table.


Q. How should we try our selves in the matter of Repentance?


A. We must examine, first, whether we have at any time carefully sifted our
1 Repentance.
hearts and behauior, to find out as many of our corruptions as possibly we
could. Secondly, whether we have been, and are heartily sorrowful for the
same. Thirdly, whether we have rightly confessed them before the Lord, with an
earnest desire of the pardon thereof. Fourthly, whether we purpose and resolve
for ever hereafter (through Gods gracious assistance) to reform both our
hearts and ways.


Q. Is there any necessity of that searching of our selves?


A Yes verily: for otherwise we shall be found hiders of sins, which hinders
all 1 Searching. See the Sermon on Pro. 28. 13. Doct. 1. Job. 20. 12.
true prosperity, and argues plainly that there is in us a love of iniquity,
and abundance of hypocrisy, which will keep us from reaping benefit by the word
or sacrament.


Q Whereby should we try our selves to the intent that we may come to a more
full and particular sight of our corruptions.


A. By the Law of God, which is the true touchstone: examining our selves by
every Commandment, that so we may discern, if not all, yet the most part of
the corruptions of our Souls, and errors of our lives: and for our more
orderly proceeding herein, we may use this direction following: wherein are
set down the chief heads of most of the sins against every Commandment,
Sins against the first Commandment.
1 Atheism, which is, when men either If any do desire proofs of Scripture
for these particular sins mentioned, he may use the help of Mr Dods Book on
the commandments or of the True watc^ where many of these are touched.
think there is no God, or live as if there were no God. 2 Idolatry: which is,
the having of a false god. 3 Ignorance, vncapablenes of knowledge, errors, and
heresies. 4 Forgetfulness of good things, especially of those that most
concern us, and chiefly at that instant when we should make use of them.
Secondly, remembering of evil things; especially of those that most corrupt us:
and chiefly then, when we should be most free from the thought of them. 5
Unwillingness unto good things, principally to the best: readiness unto, and
wilfulness in evil, especially the worst. Secondly, impatience under crosses.
6 Distrust of Gods power, mercy, promises, and providence, whence carnal
fears are wrought and cherished, and the true fear of God is expelled and
banished. 7 Presumption upon Gods mercy. 8 Carnal confidence in wit, learning,
wealth strength, friends, etc. thinking our selves the better, or more safe
simply for them: whence arises pride and security. 9 Too much love of evil:
as also of our selves, our friends, our pleasure, profit, credit, etc.
Secondly, too little love of God, and of goodness, of Gods servants, and
services. 10 Hatred of God and goodness. Secondly, want of hatred against our
own, and others sins. 11 Abundance of worldly sorrow, shame, and
coffeehouse. Secondly, want of spiritual grief, and indignation against
our own and others transgressions. Thirdly, not lamenting for the calamities
of Gods people, private or public. 12 Immoderate carnal mirth: too little
spiritiuall joy. 13 Hardness of heart, benummednes of conscience: or hellish
terrors and accusations, proceeding from doing things either without, or
against the rules of the Word.
Sins against the second Commandment.
1 BAse and unwarranted conceits of God, as when we frame any Image of him in
our minds. 2 Worshipping of Images. 3 Adoration of Angels or Saints, observing
holy days in devotion to them, swearing by them, etc. 4 Approbation of
Idolatry by presence, speech, gesture, silence, keeping of superstitious
relickes or monuments, keeping company with Idolaters, etc. 5 Neglect of any of
Gods ordinances, as of preaching, hearing, reading, meditation, conference, the
use of good books, and of good company, of private and public prayer,
fasting, making of vows, etc. 6 Superstitious fasting, rash vows, breach of
lawful vows, abuse of lots, etc. 7 Want of sorrow for being borne of
Idolatrous forefathers.
Sins against the third Commandment.
1 PRofession joined with profaneness, whereby Gods name is dishonored. 2
Abusing of Gods word: first, by fruitless speaking of it: secondly, framing
jests out of it, or against it: thirdly, maintaining of sin by it: fourthly,
applying it to charming, etc. 3 Abusing the names or titles of God: first, by
admiration, as by saying in our common talk, Oh Lord, Oh Jesus, etc. Secondly,
by cursing, etc. 4 Swearing vainly, outragiously, and falsely, etc. 5
Blaspheming. 6 Taking a lawful oath without due reverence and consideration. 7
Praying without faith, feeling, reverence, feruency, not waiting for answer.
etc. Asking evil thinks: aiming more in our requests at the relieuing of our
necessity, then at the advancement of Gods glory. 8 Hearing, reading,
meditating, conferring, singing of psalms, and receiving the Sacrament without
preparation, attencion, renerence, delight, and profit. 9 Light passing over of
Gods great works, of creation, preservation, redemption, as also of other his
mercies and judgments. 10 Abuse of our Christian liberty, to the hardening,
insuaring, perverting, or just grieuing of any
Sins against the fourth Commandment.
1 NEglect of peparation for the Saboth before it come, and of fiting our
hearts for holy services when it is come. 2 Profane absence from. or
unfruitful presence at Gods ordinances. 3 Excessive eating and drinking, which
causes drowsiness, and unfitness for Gods worship. 4 Doing any ordinary
work of our calling. 5 All recreations which distract. 6 Vain and worldly
speeches, and thoughts. 7 A secret desire that the Sabbath were over. 8 Neglect
of calling our selves, or others to a reckoning after holy excercises. 9 Giving
liberty to our selves in the night before the whole Sabbath bath be ended.
Sins against the fifth Commandment.
Sins of all inferiors in respect of their superiors. 1 Want of reverence
inward, or outward: secondly, neglect of prayer: thirdly, of humble submission.
Sins of all Superiors. First want of love: secondly failing in prayer:
thirdly in giving good example.
Sins of Children in respect of their Parents. 1 Disobedience. 2 Murmuring at
their Parents corrections, though unjust. 3 Contemning them for any defect of
body or mind. 4 Unthankfulness in not releeuing them, not standing for their
deserved credit, etc.
Sins of parents. 1 Negligence in not instructing their children betime. 2
Not correcting them till it be too late, or doing it with vitternesse without
compassion, instruction, and prayer. 3 Giving them ill example. 4 Neglect of
bringing them up in some lawful calling. 5 Not bestowing them timely, and
religiously in marriage. 6 Light behavior before them, and too much
familiarity with them, whereby they become vile in their eyes. 7 Loving beauty,
or any outward parts more then Gods Image in them. 8 A sin peculiar in the
mother is refusing to nurse them
Servants sins in respect of their Governors. The three first sins of
Children may be in servants, as also these that follow 1 Idleness in their
calling. 2 Unthriftiness and unfaithfulness in dealing with their Masters goods
and affairs. 3 Stealing, privy defrauding of them. 4 Eye service.
Diverse sins of Parents are found in Masters, as these that follow. 1 Unadvised
entertainment of sinful servants. 2 Not using religious exercises with them:
not admonishing nor correcting them, or doing it in an ill manner: grieuing
more when they fail in their business, then when they are slack in Gods
service. 3 Not recompencing their labors by giving them a due reward when they
are with them, and when they part from them. 4 Neglect of them in sickness:
unjust stopping of their wages for that time. 5 Not relieuing them (if they be
able) in their age, who have spent their youth in their service.
Sins of the wife in respect of her Husband. 1 Failing in reverence, which
appears in froward looks, speeches, or behavior. 2 Disobedience in the
smallest matters.
Sins of the Husband. 1 Not dwelling with his wife. 2 Neglect of edifying her
by instruction and example. 3 Denying her comfortable maintenance, and
employment.
Snnes common to them both. 1 Want of love. 2 Bewraying one another
infirmities: discovering each others secrets. 3 Jealousy. 4 Contention.
Sins of the people in regard of their Ministers. 1 Disobeying and opposing
against their doctrine. 2 Denying them competent maintenance. 3 Not standing
for them when they are wronged.
Sins of Ministers. 1 Slacknesse in preaching. 2 Unprofitable or hurtful
teaching. 3 Giving ill example.
Sins of Subjects. 1 Rebellion. 2. Refusing to pay dues.
Sins of Magistrates. 1 Carelessness in establishing and promoting true
religion. 2 Of maintaining peace, and providing that Malefactors may be
punished, and well doers be encouraged.
Sins of Inferiors in gifts or age. 1 No^ acknowledging, nor reuerencing, nor
imitating the graces of their superiors. 2 ^espising of the aged. See the
sins of Superiors in gifts or age, in the very beginning of the fifth
Commandment.

Sins against the sixth Commandment.
1 RAsh anger, envy, hatred, and malice. 2 Brawling, reuiling, threatening, and
provoking of others. 3 Fighting. 4 Cruelty in punishing, oppression, etc. 5
Murdering of ourselves or others, or consent thereto. 6 Immoderate worldly
sorrow: neglect of Physic, or wholesome diet, and exercise in surfeting and
drunkenness, all which are enemies to the health and life of man. 7 Cruelty to
our own, or others souls.
Sins against the 7. Commandment
1 ADultery, fornication, incest, rape, Sodomie. 2 All wantonness, secret or
open, alone or with others. 3 Nocturnall pollutions, and lustful dreams, etc.
4 Unholy marriages, in regard of religion, age, neerenes of blood, want of
parents consent, etc. 2 Abuse of the marriage bed, not observing the time of
natural separation Leu. 28. 19. solemn humiliation
6 Nourishing of the causes and occasions of wantonness, as impure lusts,
surfeiting, drunkenness, idleness, lascivious apparel, society with
lascivious persons, lewd books, songs or speeches: wnaton looks, pictures,
stage plays, dancing, dalliance, etc. 7 Wearing apparel contrary to our sex.
8 Unlawful divorce.
Sins of the eight Commandment.
1 Covetousness, and all desire of our neighbors goods, albeit through fear or
shame we cannot get them. 2 Church-robbing. 3 Robbing of our selves by
wastfulnesse in diet, apparel, gaming, etc: by idleness, unadvised suretiship,
nigardlines, etc. 4 Robbing of others, taking away the smallest things: first
by fraud: secondlyvncharitable enclosure: thirdly, dealing wrongfully with the
goods of the deceased: fourthly, deceit in buying and selling:* fifthly,
withholding either things committed unto us, or things found lent, earned, or
otherwise due. 5 Not making of restitution. 6 Counselling, or consenting to
others in theft.
Sins against the ninth Commandment.
1 FAlse witnesse-bearing in public or private, or consent thereunto. 2
Raising, spreading abroad, or listening to false reports of tale-bearers. 3
Rash suspicion* hard judging, interpreting things in the worst sense. 4
Aggravating and discovering others infirmities without care of their credit,
others edification, orour own good. 5 Flattery. 6 Lying, though in jest, or to
a good end. 7 Boasting. 8 Injurious charging of our selves to be hypocrites in
time of temptation. 9 Want of care, of our own, and others good name, that God
might have more glory.
The breach of the tenth Commandment: by
MVltitudes of evil thoughts and motions against our neighbors, and scarcity
of such as are good.



Q. When we have attained to a particular sight of our many and grievous
iniquities and transgressions, what is further to be done for us?


A. We must labor to bring our hearts Dan. 9. 9. 2 Godly sorrow. See the Sermon
on Isa. 1. Doct. 1. Iam. 4. 8, 9. Ier. 4. 14. Joel. 2. 13. Zac. 12. 20. Chr.
13. 8
to true sorrow and contrition for the same.


Q. What use is there of that?


A. It is requisite in diverse respects: it being a special means to purge
our souls from the pollution of sin, to move the Lord to have compasssion on
us, and plen^^fully to pour down his mercies upon us, without which, it is
certain there is no sound repentance in us, nor mercy to be expected from our
God.


Q. Since it is so necessary, show me how it may be gotten?


A. First, we must beseech the Lord, (from whom proceeds every good and
perfect gift) to work it in our hearts.

Secondly, we must use all good helps to stir up our selves thereunto: as,

First, to call to mind the multitude, and grieuousnesse, and offensiuenesse
of Nehem. 9 Psalm. 51.
our sins, together with our long continuance therein: aggravating them by
every circumstance to make them more odious to our selves.

Secondly, to go to the house of mourning, Eccles. 7.
and to make use of every stroke of God, as well upon others, as our selves.

Thirdly, not only with patience to endure, but with earnestnes to entreat,
and with gladness to accept of the help of such as have broken hearts
themselves, and so are more able and skillful to pierce and wound the souls of
others.

Fourthly, when by our own sifting, and others faithful dealing; our hearts
are touched with some remorse, let us seriously and thoroughly ponder upon the
infinite mercy of God the Father, in giving his Son, and of Christ Jesus in
giving himself for us, who by reason of our sins were deadly enemies unto him:
the consideration whereof cannot but move our hearts to relent, unless they be
altogether flinty, and hard as Adamant.


Q. When our hearts are touched with inward grief for our special
corruptions, what is to be done in the next place? 3 Confession. See the Sermon
on Prou. 28. Doct. 2. 2 Ioh. 1. 9, 2 Samuel 24. 12.



A. We must bring them in an holy confession before God.


Q. What motives are there to induce us so to do?


A. Diverse: for first, without this there is no promise of pardon of sin, nor
indeed any godly sorrow, or sound repentance for sin.

Secondly, this is a sovereign preservative against relapses, as may be seen
in David, Peter, and Paul.

Thirdly, this is an effectual means Dan. 9. 19. Neh. 1. 5, 6.
to quicken our hearts unto prayer.

Fourthly, hereby God is much glorified in his Truth, Mercy, and Justice.


Q. Seeing this acknowledgement of sin is so needful, declare how it must be
performed?


A. These rules must be observed therein. First that it proceed from a good
root, viz.

1 From an utter hatred of sin: not from weariness under the Cross, as in
Pharaoh, nor from some sudden passion, as in Saul.

2 From hope of mercy: for if that be 2 Samuel 14. 18.
wanting, we shall never rest on God for pardon.

Secondly, that it may be made in a good manner, viz.

1 Heartily and sincerely, not coldly and hypocritically.

2 Particularly and with enumeration of our special and most beloved sins, as
in Ier. 31. 19.
Paul and Ezra.


Q. What will follow upon such a confession?


A. A desire of reformation, and a full 4 Reformation. See the Sermon on Prou.
28. Doct. 3. Acts 19. 18 Isa 1. 16.
purpose to abandon the allowance of every infirmity, and the practice of every
gross sin.


Q. How may this reformation be attained unto?


A. First, we must constantly and carefully avoid all the occasions of sin,
and be most sealous of our selves where we are most prone to be overtaken.

Secondly, we must conscionably and continually use all the means of goodness.

Thirdly, when we are euertaken through infirmity, we must presently and
heartily lament our fall, and seek a reconciliation.

Fourthly, if these means prevail not, we must bind our selves by a solemn
vow to strive against our principal sins, and most dangerous corruptions.


Q. what other notes are there besides these already spoken of, whereby we may
be assured that our repentance is sound, and that our hearts do not deceive us
therein?


A. These following: First, if we be universal in our obedience desiring to
Notes of sound repentance. Psalm. 119* 6 See the Sermon on that place Doct. 2.
Ps. ^. 13, 14 Ioh. 31. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 3.
practice or forbear whatsoever GOD would have us: not giving a dispensation
to our selves for the committing of any sin, or for the omitting of any du^y,
but (...) manner of evil both in our selves and others.

Secondly, if we increase in goodness, neither waxing worse, nor standing at a
stay, but daily getting ground of our corruptions.

Thirdly, if in all our intents and actions we look unto the Lord, as the
searcher of our hearts, and the tryer and rewarder of our works, not
discouraging our selves whatsoever men think, or speak of us and our doings,
so that God do approve of us and them: not contenting our selves with men's
approbations when the testimony of God is not for us.

Fourthly, if we like best, and desire most that company in private, and that
teaching in public, where our special corruptions shall be roundly and
wisely, and mercifully reproved and inueighed against, and the duties wherein
we come shortest, most earnestly pressed, and stood upon: neither falling out
with those that admonish us, nor denying, cloaking, excusing or extenuating our
faults.


Q. What else is required in a worthy receiver?


A. A competent measure of knowledge, so that he be able to discern between
the 2 Knowledge.
elements, and the Lords body and blood: taking every thing in it own nature
and kind: not confounding the sign with the thing signified, nor putting no
difference between the Sacramental and common bread, but using each of them
in the manner appointed by Christ, and with such reverence as is due unto them,
and to that end for which they were ordained: namely, the commemoration of
Christ his death, and our nearer and fuller communion with him.


Q. What further examination must we use before our communicating at the Lords
Table?


A: We must try whether we have faith or not: without the which it is
impossible 3 Faith. Heb. 11. 6. Rom 14. 23.
to please God, and whatsoever we do is sin.


Q. What then is to be believed concerning this particular ordinance?


A. That it is ordained of God not to Se the 2. Sermon on Not. 14. Doct. 7.
be a sign to signify and represent, but a seal also to confirm, and an
instrument to exhibit Christ with all his merits unto every believer.


Q* Why is love unto men required in all faithful receivers.


A. First, because being destitute of that we cannot be assured of Gods love
unto 4 Love.
us, nor of our love unto him.

Secondly, we cannot with any confidence Ioh. 3.
expect at the Sacrament a general acquittance from all our debts unto God,
except we in love, can pass by small offenses in our brethren.

Thirdly, the Lords Supper is ordained as a seal of a mutual fellowship, and
Mat. 18. 35
communion of Gods people, as with their head Christ, so with one another.


Q. What rules are we to observe in love?


A. First, if any indignity or injury See the Sermon on Isai. 1 Doct. 1 Mat.
18. 35 Romans 12. Mat. 5.
have been offered us, we must forgive, and forget the same, and overcome
evil with goodness: loving them that hate us, and praying for them that
speak and practice evil against us, at least desiring and striving so to do.

Secondly, if we have done wrong unto others, we must undo it again:
otherwise our sacrifice and service cannot be accepted.


Q. But what if those that we have wronged be far off, that we cannot
seek unto them: or will not yield to a reconciliation when it is sought for?


A. God will accept of our true and unfeigned desire in that behalf, when a
reconciliation is desired, but occasion denied, and if others will not be
pacified toward us, it is their fault and not ours, neither must that keep us
from the Sacrament.

Thus much concerning examination.


Q. what is that Premeditation which must be used?


A. It is a serious consideration of the 2 Premediatinu.
benefits which we are to receive by Christ Jesus.


Q what are those?


A. They set down in the new covenant Eze 36. 21. Ier. 31. 31.
(whereof the Lords Supper is a seal,) and they may be reduced to these heads.
1. Freedom from all manner of evil whatsoever, whether of sin or misery, in
this life or in that which is to come: 2 The inioyme^t of all good things: 1.
In this World: and that, 1. For the inward man. 1. Perfect justification. 2.
True sanctification.
2. For the outward man. a good name, estate, safety, health, etc.

2. In the world to come. all manner of happiness. etc.





Q. Having thus examined our selves concerning our repentance, knowledge,
faith, and love, and used premeditation of the benefits that are to be expected
of all worthy receivers, what remains further to be done by us?


A. We must before our approaching 3 Prayer.
to the Lords Table, earnestly beseech his Majesty to give a blessing to these
our endeauours: and where we have come short in fitting our selves, we are to
entreat him to pardon i^; to accept of us in the mediation of his dear Son,
and to make a supply of all our wants, of his rich mercy and free grace.


Q. But what if a man find that he comes very short of that examination, and
preparation that is required; were he not better to be absent himself from the
Sacrament, till he be better fitted?


A In no wise: for if he be upright hearted, See the 2. Sermon on 2 Chapter 30
Doct. 3
though never so weak, the Lord will accept of him. And if he feel his
sickness to be grievous and dangerous, he has the more need to hasten to the
Physician: neither is the staying from Gods ordinance a means to better his
estate, but rather to make him worse, and to pull Gods heavy judgments upon his
soul and body. Number. 9.

Thus much concerning the duties tending to preparation before our receiving.


Q. How must we be disposed in the present act of receiving?


A. We must present our selves with reverence be fore the Lord, setting our
senses How we are to be disposed in the act of receiving. Isai. 53.
and our faith a works, and heed fully meditating upon these fo^re things.

First, when we see the bread broken, and the wine poured out, we must
consider the bitter passion of Christ Jesus, who was wounded for our
transgressions, and broken for our iniquities; who encountered with his Fathers
wrath, and with Satan, death, and hell: and for our sakes in particular
sustained such woeful terrors in his soul, and torments in his body, that he
cried out in the bitterness of his heart, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and at length, shed forth his most precious bloold for the
pacifying of his Fathers displeasure, and the satisfying of his infinite
justice. And withal we should seriously ponder upon the inconceiueable love of
God the Father, in giving his only and well beloved Son, to suffer ^^ch
unspeakable fortures for us, who were cursed Rebels against him: and thence
be drawn to think on the heinousness and odiousness of our sins, which
so far incensed the Lords wrath and indignation, that nothing could quench
the flame thereof, but only the precious blood of his dear Son.

Secondly, when we see the Minister distributing the bread and wine, we are to
consider, that as those outward elements are offered unto us by man: so Christ
Jesus with all his benefits is offered unto us by the blessed Trinity.

Thirdly, that as we reach forth our natural hand to receive the bread and
wine, we must withal reach forth the hand of faith to apprehend and lay hold
on Christ.

Fourthly, in eating the berad and drinking the wine, we must apply Christ
with all his merits particularly unto our selves, and be assured, that as that
bread and wine are made the nourishment of our bodies: so Christ his body and
blood are made the nourishment of our souls: And as certainly as the bread
and wine are made one substance with us, to strengthen our bodies, and to
refresh our hearts, so surely Christ is made one with us, and we with him, and
then our souls shall be strengthened, and our hearts spiritually revived,
either presently in the very act of receiving, or afterward in due time, when
we shall stand in most need of comfort. And therefore in assurance of faith
we should stir up our hearts to expect all the forenamed benefits of remission
of sins, and sanctification of our natures, together with the fruition of all
outward blessings, and the remouall of all hurtful crosses.


Q. well were it for us indeed, if we could look for these things to be
bestowed upon us: but the greatness and multitude of our sins is such, that
we justly fear they will keep good things from us.


A. This doubt should not perplex See the Sermon on Isai. 1. Doct. 7. 1 Ioh. 1.
6. Eze. 36. 25
nor trouble us, if we be truly penitent for all our transgressions: for
Christ has paid for many and great sins, as well as for fewer and lesser:
and through him the Lord is ready to pardon all, and all manner of iniquities,
as well the greatest of them, as the smallest, and if once our sins be done
away, all the forenamed benefits do of right belong to us.

Thus much concerning the meditations that are needful in the very act of
receiving.


Q. What is to be done after our receiving?


A. First, we must give hearty thanks unto the Lord for this inestimable
benefit, 3 What to be done after our receiving.
which we have received in being partakers of the Lords Supper.

Secondly, we must carefully mark how we speed, and what success we find,
and if the Lord aff^ord us present comfort, we must be much more thankful,
and endeavor by all good means to nourish and cherish the same, and if we
miss of it for that time, we must notwithstanding give God the glory of his
truth, in making good his Covenant and every part thereof, and therefore with
confidence and constancy wait and pray for the blessing: resolving with our
selves (every one in his own soul) that as sure as God is true, and faithful
in his promises, we shall in the fittest season reap fruit and profit by his
ordinance, which in conscience and obedience unto him, we have been partakers
of. In which regard every particular believer may boldly speak, in this, or
the like manner unto his own soul: I have with as great uprightness as I
could, communicated at the Lords table, and there received the seal of the
everlasting covenant of grace, and therefore it shall assuredly be performed
unto me: and albeit my faith, and assurance of Gods favor be but weak, it
shall be strengthened, and whatsoever Satan, or mine own deluded conscience
tell me, all mine iniquities are pardoned and covered, and I am at this very
instant, as free from sin in Gods account, as Adam was before Psalm. 32.
his fall, and as the Saints and Angels are now in heaven; yea, as Christ Jesus
himself is, I being a member of his mystical body.

And for sanctification, though I be tainted with much ignorance, with many
errors, with bad affections and evil actions, yet the Lord according to his
Covenant, will reform all, and give me a mind to know him, and his will, and a
memory to hold fast what I know: he will give me a heart to love him, to
fear him, and to obey his Commandments. I shall have Christ his power to
strengthen and uphold me, his wisdom to instruct and direct me, and his
Spirit to work all needful graces in me, so that all the powers of hell
shall never be able to prevail against me, much less shall the afflictions
of this World be able to separate me from Christ Jesus, I need not fear any
evil: For all shall work together for the best unto me, neither can I want
any thing that is good, for God having given Romans 8.
us his Son, how shall he not with him give us all things?

Thirdly, we must determine and endeavor to lead a new life, bringing forth
the fruits of Repentance, Faith, and Love, more abundantly then in former
times, as having renewed our covenant with the Lord for that purpose: and
therefore when we find any sinful motions stirring within us, we should
reason thus: Did I not at the Sacrament vow and covenant with God to strive
against all manner of corruptions? and did I not receive the seal of the
covenant in assurance that I should have power and strength against them? Why
then should I yield unto them? why should I be any longer in bondage unto them?
nay, I will not serve sin in the lusts thereof, but will resist it, and by
the power of Christ I shall get victory over it: for the Lord has said that
Romans 6. 14.
sin shall not have dominion over us.

So also when we find wants and imperfections in our best services, as
coldness in prayer, distractions in meditating, unfruitfulness in hearing,
deadness in singing of Psalms, etc. As also impatiency, or faint-heartednesse
under crosses, disgraces, persecutions, etc. Let us thou relieve our selves
with these, or the like meditations: Was I not lately at the Lords Table, where
I received a pledge of my ingrafting into Christ, who is the true Vi^e? and is
there not in him sufficient juice of all good graces to be derived to every
branch that is in him: and is not the second Adam as able to convey his virtues
into me, as the first Adam was to convey his corruptions* why then should I
not seek to him, in assurance of obtaining strength to do and suffer
whatsoever he will have me? yea, I will run unto him, and crave power and
ability Job. 15.
from him, and asking, I shall obtain: for he has said it, that will never
falsify the least part of his truth.


Q. May it not then be concluded, if immediately upon the receuiing of this
Sacrament, we grow worse then we were before, that we came unworthily thereunto?


A. Yes verily, if we be indeed worse, and not in our own conceit only, it
is sure that there was some sin or other unrepented of lying upon our
consciences, which caused Gods ordinance to be ineffectuall. Indeed the
worthiest receivers, in their own imaginations, and through Satan's false
suggestions, seem unto themselves to be worse, (when in truth they are not so)
because they feel their corruptions stirring more violently, and temptations
rushing upon them more fiercly then e^^r before: but this is so far from
being an argument of unworthy receiving, that if they set themselves to resist
this combat, there can be no more evident testimony of their worthy receiving:
for now that their sin has had a deadly blow, it begins (like a mad bull
in the same case) to rage more furiously: and Satan being dispossessed of his
holds, plyeth his business with new and fearful assaults; and therefore
such have no cause at all to be dismayed, but rather very great cause to be
comforted.


Q. But (will some say) what shall I think of my self in this matter, when I
find, that whereas I resolved upon new obedience, I come still far short of
that which I am desirous to perform?


A. You need not discourage your heart for all this: the sight of your
imperfections argues that your eyes are more enlightened then in former times,
and that you have gotten an humble and lowly conceit of your self, and your
good deeds, which are things very pleasing unto God: neither does he require
such strict observation of the Commandments, as that we See the Sermon on
Isa. 1. Doct. 1.
should obey them in perfection, but only that we should consent in our
hearts, and labor in our practice to yield obedience thereunto: which if we
can do, the Lord See the Sermon on 2 Chapter 30 Doct 3.
will graciously accept of us, and of those duties which we perform, seeing
that we fall not in the substance of his service, but only in some
circumstances, and that full sore against our wills.


FINIS.

