TWO SERMONS ON THE THIRD OF THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMY: Preached at Hanwell
in the first year of his Majesty's reign, 1602. The one by I. D. the other by
R. C.

PHILIP. 3.1. It grieueth me not to write the same things to you, and for you
it is a sure thing.

ISAIAH 55.3. Hearken, and your soul shall live.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Jonas Man, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Star, at the West door of Paul's Church in London. 1608.

To the Christian Reader.
Having occasion to reuise notes of certain Sermons taken by pen from their
mouths, whose labors both in word and writing have been and are no less
profitable than acceptable unto Gods Church, I thought it not amiss to take
some small pains to copy out some of them, that if perhaps they should be
thought worthy of public view, they might be offered to the light: if not,
they might be reserved for more pruiate use. Amongst the rest, I judged these
two Sermons not the unfittest for such a purpose, and so did others, whose
encouragement also I had for the publishing of them. They were preached in the
beginning of his Majesty's reign, at that time when general humiliation by
fasting, was by authority enjoined upon occasion of the Pestilence, then
dangerously dispersed: which albeit through Gods merciful providence it be now
well allayed, yet the infection of sin, the very true cause thereof, still
remains and gathers new strength. For the staying whereof, if any remedy
may be gotten hence, I hope for more easy pardon, from the authors, of my
boldenes in publishing: and from the reader for my many faylings in penning
these their labors. I did my best in taking from them, and offering unto thee,
that, and in a manner nothing but that which they then delivered. The substance
of the matter I doubt not, is all sound, and will much content a wise and well
affected heart. The manner and form of words and sentences is more imperfect
than in the delivery it was, or now might have been, if the authors had
either penned it before the preaching thereof, or undertaken the through
polishing of it since. But howsoever, since that could not be obtained which
might have been wished, my desire was greater to satisfy thirsty souls with
this that is done, then was my fear to offend curious heads and itching ears
by the manner of doing it.

JOHN WINSTON.

THE FIRST SERMON.
Lamentations, chap. 3. verse. 48. etc. 48 Mine eye casts out rivers of water
for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

49 Mine eye droppeth without stay, and cease not.

50 Till the Lord look down and behold from heaven.

51 Mine eye breaks mine heart, because of all the daughters of my city.

52 Mine enemies chased me sore like a bird without cause.

53 They shut up my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.

54 Waters flowed over my head, then thought I, I am destroyed.


ALL these words do contain a Lamentation of Jeremy, and of the rest of Gods
people for the judgments of God on his Church and on Jerusalem his own city:
and for the misery and calamity that lay upon their whole state. After this
sort they bewail their heavy case: Mine eye casts out rivers of water, etc.

Now this Lamentation is set forth, The division.
1 Partly by the manner of it, and 2 Partly by the causes of it.


1 The manner of it is declared in the four former verses, and that by diverse
circumstances: namely, 1 By the greatness of it: for in regard of the misery
of the daughter of his people, he did not only moisten his eyes with tears,
but sent forth rivers of tears, verse. 48. which is an excessive kind of
speech usual in the Scriptures, and signifying that he wept abundantly. 2 It
is set out by the continuance of it. Mine eye droppeth without stay, and
cease not, verse. 49. Neither shall it cease, but I will continue lamenting
till the Lord look down from heaven, and show some sign that he does
behold and pity our estate, verse. 50. 3 Their lamentation is set out by the
sincerity of it, that it proceeded from truth and uprightness: Mine eye
breaks mine heart, verse. 51. That is, the things that I see with mine eye,
do cause me to lament wonderfully: so heavy is the case of all the daughters
of my city, that it even breaks my very heart.
2 The causes of it are of two sorts: 1 Inward, which was grief of heart,
verse. 51. 2 Outward, which was the cruelty of their enemies: which cruelty is
set forth: 1 By a similitude taken from fowlers: Mine enemies have chased me
sore like a bird, verse. 52. Implying thereby that they made it a sport, a
recreation and trade to pursue Gods servants: they did as it were go a hawking
after innocent and harmless souls. 2 Their cruelty is described by a
comparison taken from hunters, who used to dig pits to the intent that great
beasts might fall into them, and so be intrapped: and the^ they would throw
stones at them, or use some such means to kill them, when they durst not go
down into the pit where they were. Such were the plots and endeavors of their
adversaries: they were as cunning and as eager in their attempts against the
people of God, as men would be in killing a Bear or a Lion, that otherwise
would kill them if they were at liberty, verse. 53. 3 Lastly, their cruelty is
set out by a comparison drawn from the inundation of waters: their rage was
like the violence of mighty rivers and floods, that ouerflowe and drown all
that comes in their way, verse. 54.


Verse. 48. Mine eye casts out rivers of water] Their affliction was so sore,
that their case in regard of any earthly succor that could be expected, was
helpless and remediless. In vain it was to speak unto men; for they were
inexorable, because they were merciless: in vain it was to take weapons; they
had had too much of that before, and by that means Zedekiah had even undone
them: and as for other helps, they were as far to seek as for these. Now
therefore they fall to weeping, and seek to relieve themselves by tears, and
by sighs and groans before the Lords throne in heaven. Whence arises this
doctrine:

That godly sorrow and holy affliction is the best remedy in any sorrow and
affliction: whether it be from men, Doct. 1. Godly sorrow a sovereign remedy.
from Satan, or from God himself: whether it be on body, on state, on name,
or on the mind and soul of a man: whether it be on particular persons, our
selves, or those that are about us, or on the whole land, on church or
commonwealth, this is the most sovereign remedy in all miseries and
extremities whatsoever. This inward godly grief is a salve for every sore, and
a plaster for every wound. To weep and cry and power out our hearts before
God is that course that they here take, and that which we must take in the
like distress: according to the measure of the affliction, and as it is more
public or private, so must be the measure of our lamentation. To this there is
a promise made in the prophecy of Isaiah, etc. That when our hands cannot help
our selves, nor our tongues prevail with others, yet then we may relieve our
selves by our prayers unto God: Isaiah. 61. 12. etc.
for in that place the Lord undertakes that mourners shall be comforted, etc.
God the Father sends his own son, and the Father and the Son do send the
holy Ghost, that when men are mourning and seele their poverty so as it
breaks their hearts, the spirit which is the comforter may minister comfort
unto them: that when they feel their captivity and imprisonment as it were,
Christ Jesus may set them at liberty: be they never so weak, never so mean,
never so miserable, never so sinful, if once they come thus to mourn, they
shall have their hearts comforted: though they be covered with ashes, God will
give them beauty for ashes, and put on them the garment of gladness, for the
spirit of heaviness: bestowing upon them that which shall make them cheerful,
even the oil of joy: not an earthly but an heavenly oil.

And there is great cause why God should deal so with such kind of persons:
for

Joel in his 2. Chap. verse. 13. bids us rent our hearts and not our
garments: Joel. 2.13.
that is, bring inward sorrow that may crush and break the heart, and then
turn unto the Lord: which if we do, we shall be sure of relief: and why? the
Lord is merciful (says he) and our God is very ready to forgive.

When we see our children mourning and confessing their faults, we cannot but
have our bowels of compassion earning toward them.

If Jacob had stood by and heard his son Joseph's pitiful moan that in the
anguish of his soul he made unto his brethren, when they dealt so
unnaturally with him, would he not have pitied him, and by strong hand have
rescued him from his cruel sons? What shall we then think of God? he is
far more merciful than Jacob was, and we are nearer unto him than ever
Joseph was unto his father? And therefore when we mourn in a holy manner,
certainly he will arise and have mercy upon us. He cannot slay, when he sees
our hearts full of sorrow, and our eyes full of tears: for the sighs and
groans of his people do give him no rest in heaven.

Jacob wept in his prayer, it was so effectual that he prevailed. Genesis.
32.11.
When Gods people joined together to power forth buckets full of tears, drawn
from the bottom of their hearts before the Lord, they were marueilously
helped: 1. Sam. 7.6.
for the great measure of their tears, made their supplications more fervent:
and therefore it is said of Christ Jesus himself, that in the days of his
flesh he did offer up prayers with strong crying, Heb. 5.7.
and tears unto him that was able to save him from death. When our Savior was
about the principal point of his mediatorship, then did he gather strength unto
himself by this means.

Zachary 12. and 13.

Seeing then that this godly and holy sorrow is a means to make God pity us,
to make us call earnestly upon him, and to expel sin, which might hinder us
from prevailing with him, it must needs follow that of all remedies in times
of distress, this is the best and surest.

own towns and families: nay there are many things amiss in our own hearts:
here is a medicine for euetie one of our maladies: let us get it and use it,
and all arguments and helps that may continue and increase it: as the
Nineuites, having direction by the spirit of God (as many of them as were his)
did when Jonah threatened destruction against their city within forty days;
they abased themselves and fell to mourning, and used fasting to help it
onward: the people must show it in their countenances: the lowing of the
beasts, and crying of the infants must further them to this holy remorse and
grief for their great and heinous transgressions. They had grieved the Lord by
their iniquities, and therefore now they would grieve themselves with godly
contrition for them. Hence it was that Gods people amongst the Jews used to
wear sackcloth, to lie on the ground, and to put dust upon their heads, which
were then means to further them in the work of humiliation.

Therefore now that we fear danger is near us, let us betake our selves to
this holy mourning: if we refuse to do it, and still continue to be
hard-hearted; if the pestilence come into our families, we are likely to be
taken away with the first, and to have not only our bodies, but our souls in
danger, and that of Gods wrath and everlasting displeasure.

Therefore let us seek to have our hearts mollified by this excellent means
of God; and for this end, consider of the blessings of God plentifully powered
down upon our nation, Nehemi. 9.
and upon out selves in particular: as they did in the day of their
humiliation, of whom Nehemiah makes mention.

Let us seriously recount how many mercies we have enjoyed, and how much they
have been abused: how many afflictions we have felt, and how little we have
been bettered: how many deliverances we have found, and yet how careless,
nay how rebellious we have been notwithstanding them all.

Let us weigh with our selves what hurt our sins have done unto us; how many
good things they have turned from us; and how many evils they have pulled upon
us: and above all, let us remember what a huge weight and multitude of miseries
they have brought upon our Savior: namely, debasement and humiliation:
sorrows and sufferings: assaults and temptations: the heavy burden of our
guiltines, and the grievous punishment due for our deserts: the rage and
violence of most malicious men, and the wrath and displeasure of the most
righteous God: torments of body, and terrors of soul, and death it self, a
painful death, a shameful death, and a cursed death.



There is no danger in Christian sorrow, but the more of it, the better. And
therefore the Apostle James says: Iam. 4.9.
Suffer affliction, or afflict your selves, and sorrow and weep: and if any
thing keep you from mourning, away with it: let go laughter, and let carnal
mirth be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness: O then you cannot
cast down your selves so low, but God will raise you up again.

Object. Oh but to weep and lament, it is not manhood: it argues that men want
courage and fortitude, and is altogether unbeseeming the person of a man: they
will trust in God (they say) and never mourn for the matter.

they think of Jacob, was he a coward? They cannot say so: for the holy Ghost
gives him that commendation, that he had strength and courage not only to
prevail against men, but with the Angel of the covenant. And what was his
conflict? Hosea. 12.3.4.
He wept and prayed, as the Prophet Hosea witnesses. Was this cowardlines?
Nothing less: for the scripture commends it for notable strength.

And further, what do they think of David? was he a coward? they will not so
disgrace that renowned king, and worthy captain of the Lords host, as to lay
upon him the imputation of cowardice: yet he makes mention of his tears and
that often: Psalm. 6.6. Psalm. 9.136
as in the Psalms, where he says, that he watered his couch with tears:
that his eves did gush forth with rivers of tears because men kept not Gods
law: and such like.

And what will they say to all Gods people, of whom it is said, Zachary. 12
that they should mourn as they did for Josiah in the valley of Itadadrimmon,
where he was slain, whose death all Israel did bitterly bewail? and as one
mourns for his first borne, the only heir and hope of the family. What will
they answer to this? will they condemn all Gods people for a generation of
cowards? Nay, this is so far from bewraying want of fortitude, that we may
boldly say, that when men are fullest of such tears, they are fullest of
fortitude.

For what shall we think of the Lord Jesus Christ? had he no heart? was he
destitute of courage? that could not possibly be. Nay, when he was to
exercise the fullness of his power: to undertake such a work as no creature
durst attempt: when he was to offer up himself to his father as a sacrifice
for the sins of the Elect: when he was to encounter the Lords wrath and his
justice, Satan and death, heil and damnation, and all the power of darkness,
that same time he wept and that abundantly. Heb. 5.
And I hope none will say that then our Saviors strength failed him,
notwithstanding his bitter tears and cries.

In truth those that do not weep when there is cause, they are without
heart, and utterly void of true fortitude: subject to marvelous fears and
violent distempers, (which arise from a base mind) for what is the reason they
are so affraide of death? but because they have not mourned for their sins,
and so removed the sting of death? which if they had done, they would triumph
over death, and say with S. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. O Death where is thy sting? their
hearts would then, stand fast as the strong mountains, and not be affraide of
any ill tidings: Psalm. 112. Psalm. 91.6.
Not not of the pestilence that walks in the dark, nor of the plague that
destroys at noone day.

Blessed are those that mourn, Math. 5.4.
for they shall be comforted: more happy is the poor man that weeps for his
sin, than the greatest potentate that rejoices in the flesh.

Verse. 18. For the destruction of the daughter of my people.] Here is the cause
of their lamentation: it was the ruins and calamities of Gods Church, and
poor distressed servants: whence this doctrine may be gathered.

Doct. 2. What afflictions do go nearest the hearts of the Saints.
That the greatest affliction that should touch the hearts of Gods people, is
the affliction of the Church: as is evident out of this text: For when Gods
inheritance was spoiled, some put to the sword, others led captive, the temple
of God razed, and the exercises of religion abolished, this made them to grieve
exceedingly: this was it that wrought upon Jeremy, and made him break forth
into those wishes, Oh that mine head were full of water, Jeremy 9.1.
and that mine eyes were a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night for the slain of the daughter of my people. As if he could not have his
fill, nor weep enough for the desolations of Sion, and the miserable overthrow
thereof which he foresawe.

This was it that went near the heart of good Nehemiah: who being in great
prosperity, Nehem. 1.4. and 2.1.2.3.
cup bearer to the mightiest Monarch that was then in the world, and in
special favor with him: yet for the affliction and reproach wherein the Church
of God was, he conceived such inward sorrow, that he was sad in the kings
presence: which yet was a thing that he must and would have forborne, if
possibly he could. Moses goes further: he does not only mourn, but is
content to lay down his prosperity, and to expose his estate to a manifest
overthrow, so that he might help forward the deliverance of the afflicted
Israelites, Heb. 11.24.25.26. Act. 7.
and save them from the hands of their oppressors: For he knew he could not be
in favor with Pharaoh, if he should join with them, whom he so cruelly
handled: but he chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than
to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. Hester seems to go somewhat
beyond him: for, she resolves with her self for the cause of the Jews (who
were then all destinated to slaughter) to adventure her life in going to the
king in their behalf: Hester. 4.16.
I will go (says she) though it be contrary to the Law, and if I die, I die.

But our Lord Jesus Christ goes beyond them all: for when he was in supreme
excellency, he was so affected with the woeful case of his Elect, into which
they had brought themselves by their own rebellions against him, that he
humbled himself, Philip. 2.6.7.
and took on him the state of a servant; and submitted himself to many
sorrows, disgraces, and sufferings not only while he lived, but principally
when he dyed (as has been before in part declared) that so he might deliver
his people from the wrath to come, and from eternal death, which they had
deserved, and must have else endured.

mourn in our hearts for any evil that befalls them: as Jeremy did, chap.
30. that the Lords flock should go into captivity.



And that there is no danger in dealing for the servants of God, may appear in
Exodus. One would have thought there had been some great evil near Moses and
Aaron, when they must fetch out of Egypt such a people from such a King: not
only by petition, but by command, and threatening if he would not yield: we
would have imagined that Pharaoh, a proud man, would never have endured this at
their hands; and yet we see they were in peril, but of all others most safe.

3 Thirdly, the affliction of the church must needs work most upon the hearts
of Gods chosen, because of the insultations and triumphs of the wicked against
them, when they cry out, where is now there God? Exodus 32.1 Numbers. 1416.
And that was it that Moses did urge to move God to spare his people, when he
threatened to destroy them for their Idolatry, he entreats God to remember his
great name and to spare them, lost the Egyptians should say that he had
brought them out maliciously to slay them in the mountains, and to consume
them from the earth: or that he was not able to bring them into the land of
Canaan. This is it that goes to the heart of the faithful, when they hear
profane persons reuilling the host of the living God. Oh these are your
professors (say they) these are they which run with their bibles to sermons,
these are they that were wont to brag that prayer would prevent or remove Gods
judgments: do you not see that they are swept away by the pestilence as well
as others? that they were pinched with poverty and necessity as well as
others? that these and the like despitefull and bitter speeches and taunts, do
wound the very hearts of such as love Gods glory, and desire the prosperity
of his Saints, and so cause them much to bewail the tribulation of the Church.

They drink wine in bowls, Amos. 6.6.
and give themselves to all excess, but no man is sorry for the affliction of
Joseph.

This is a great fault in these days, now many Christians are taken away, and
the sword of the Lord is stretched out still, and many are smitten down on
every side; yet there is as much feasting and sporting and frequenting of
wakes, and that on the Lords sabbath, as if all things went well with us.
Which argues strange infidelity, and is such a sin as the Lord will pursue
even unto death, if it be not reformed: Isa. 22.12.13.14.
as the Prophet Isaiah threatens. In that day (says he) did the Lord of
hosts call unto weeping and mourning, and to baldness, and girding with
sackcloth, and behold, joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing sheep,
eating flesh and drinking wine, eating and drinking for tomorrow we shall dye:
and it was declared in the ears of the Lord of hosts. And what follows
thereupon? Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die,
says the Lord God of hosts.

Which being so, it stands Magistrates upon, to use their authority for the
redress of such things, as are so dangerous to the whole state of the land.

But there is yet another greater fault amongst us than this that has been
named. For many do not only walk securely in the affliction of their brethren,
but desire the continuance and increase of it, in hope that they shall enlarge
their possessions, and better their estate by means thereof: as if scarsitie
of people did bring abundance of riches, whereas in truth it is quite
contrary. But howsoever, those that have but a glimpse of Christianity in
them, would rather have the society of others, than live alone in the midst
of the earth.

3 There is yet a third and worser sort than the former, which come justly
under this reproof: Such I mean as long for sturs and mutinies and
insurrections. Poor men (say they) can get nothing, but some few great ones
carry away all, and so they grow to murmuring and repining, and multiply
speeches of coffeehouse: grieuing and lamenting that at the taking away of
the former Prince al things should be so quiet and peaceable. Down (say they)
with these Magistrates and with these Preachers, this too much plenty yields
us nothing, and therefore they could also be glad of unseasonable weather,
that through scarsitie of things there might arise some tumults, and so they
might get provision from such as fall into their hands. These have bloody
hearts.

4 Yet others there are that are worse than these, who do not only wish for
such troubles on the Church and Commonwealth before they come, but rejoice at
them when they are come: And when others eyes are full of tears, their mouths
are full of laughter; as Jeremy charge the Moabites: He magnified himself
against the Lord: Jeremy 48.26.27.
Moab shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision: For did
thou not deride Israel as if he had been found among thieves? For when thou
speak of him, thou art moved. This was their manner of dealing, and this is
the property of all such wicked Moabites: they cannot speak of the calamities
of the faithful, but they are wonderfully affected with joy, so that they
cannot sit still in their places, they are so moved with mirth and laughter.
These have cruel hearts, and shall be met withal accordingly as Moab was.

5 But especially are those here to be condemned that do not only rejoice at
the troubles, but at the sins of those that are religoiously affected: if
they slip through infirmity, and fall into any sin: if they be ouergone
with worldlines (which is greatly to be taken heed of) if they be lifted up
with pride, and manifest the same by violence of words, or actions, or be
stained with any the like vices, presently they exclaim against them and take
on beyond measure: ^ot you what? (say they) the great professor has spoken or
done this or that: and so they are as glad together, as if they had gotten a
kingdom, and came home in triumph.

Herein they show themselves to be right Satan's, who takes pleasure in nothing
so much as in sin.

6 And yet there is one higher degree of sin, contrary to the practice of
these holy ones; which is, when men are so far from grieuing that it goes ill
with Gods servants, that if they be somewhat amiss, they will make them worse,
and help forward their misery, and for that end misinforme and incense such
against them, as they know will inflict punishments upon them. These are
inspired by the spirit of Satan, as those who are mentioned in this text are
inspired by the spirit of God.



They that lament for Sion, Isa. 66.10.
shall be comforted with Sion. God has promised them singular consolation; it is
their portion, and they may confidently expect it.

Verse. 49. Mine eye droppeth without stay.] From which words this doctrine may
be gathered.

Doct. 3. How long humiliation must be continued.
That we must never cease our humiliation,till God give consolation. When the
Lord ministers unto us occasion of grief, we should never surcease, until
he reuine our hearts. We must not begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh:
but having a good entrance, we must go on with our work and bring it to
perfection: and if God give us a heart to mourn, set to it and never give
over, till he set us free. Lament. 2. verse. 18.19.
So they are exhorted in an other chapter of this book, Let tears run down
like a river day and night, take thee no rest, neither let the apple of thine
eye cease; arise, cry in the night, power out thine heart like water before the
face of the Lord, etc. And just it is, that we should never make an end of
mourning, till God make an end of afflicting: accordnig to their example who
are mentioned in Nehemiah, that wept at the hearing of the Law, Mehemi. 8.9.
till they were bid to rejoice. It was a notable commendation of that people,
that they would not leave off, till they had warrant to leave off. So Mordecai
when Queen Hester sent him garments, to cloth him, and would have had his
sackoloth to be taken from him, he would not receive them, Hester. 4.4.
but humbled himself so long, till he was assured of deliverance.

So Jacob would never let go his hold, Genesis 32.26.
but still wrestles with the Angel, and continues weeping, and praying, till
he obtained a blessing: so the woman of Canaan sticks close to it, Math.
15.22. etc.
and is importunate with Christ for her daughter, and would never desist, nor
let her suite fall, till she had prevailed with our Savior.

And there are reasons, why we must never break off, but still continue our
humiliation, and feruencie, till God show by good effect that he has
mercifully respected us, and our supplications.

Jacob and with the woman of Canaan) till it have gotten the desired success.

now hope never makes ashamed: Romans 5.5.
because it is never disappointed of the thing hoped for.

3 Thirdly, they have love, which makes up a threefolde cord, every twist
whereof is stronger, than all the cords of the world: for love is strong as
death, etc, the coals thereof are fiery coals, Cant. 8.6.7.
and a vehement flame. Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods
drown it, etc.

In regard of all these it is impossible that those that foundly begin the
work of humiliation should be put back, until they have obtained their
purpose. Which may be further seen in the spouse, Canticles 3. who never gives
over seeking till she had found him whom her soul loved.

but those that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, in the due time of the
Lord. Whether they be futers for the church, or commonwealth, or for
themselves, in regard of crosses on their bodies, anguishes in their souls, or
afflictions in their estate, the Lord will look down from his holy place in
heaven upon them, and hear and help them at length, if they persevere without
fainting. This is lively and notably expressed unto us in the parable of the
unrighteous Judge, who though he feared not God, Iub. 18.12.
nor reverenced man, yet heard the poor widow, and in the end, did her right
against her adversary, because of her importunity. Oh then what shall we
think of God? will a man, will a wicked man, will a merciless man be moved
by importunity; and will not God, will not the gracious God, will not the God
that is full of compassion be moved to avenge his servants, and to minister
justice unto the^? I tell you (says Christ) I that am the wisdom of the
Father, Luk: 18.8.
and know all things, even I tell you, that he will do it: He will avenge them,
and that quickly. It is as possible that God should be without ease, as that
they should be without help.

world, and unto Satan, and to carnal means. If they cannot mend their estate
by prayer, they will patch it up by odd shifts: if their hearts have not
present comfort from Gods spirit, they will seek comfort from iesters and
leaud companions.

Commonly such people grow of all other most bitter against those holy
exercises which they have profaned, and therefore could have no benefit by
them. Such were they of whom the Prophet Isaiah speaks, who are so impudent
and shameless, that they dare expostulate the matter with God himself:
Wherefore have we fasted? (say they) we have punished our selves, and thou
regardest it not. Isa. 48.3. etc
See what bragges they make of their services, they that do least and worst,
commonly brag most. But what says the Prophet? Behold in the day of your fast,
ye will seek your own will, and require all your debts. 4. Behold ye fast
to strife and debate, etc. 5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a man
should afflict his soul for a day, and bow down his head like a bull-rush?
etc. Thus we see what reckoning God makes of their fasting, what account so
ever they themselves make of it: and yet if they fail of their expectation,
they will quarrel with the Ministers of God, with the word of God, and with
God himself; because using such exercises carnally, they received no benefit
by them.



It is not good for one that takes physic to give up the potion forthwith, as
soon as it begins to work. Peter as a wise physician gave other counsel to
his hearers that began to be moved by his doctrine. They had been mockers,
and scoffers: they had crucified the Lord of life, and so exceedingly
endangered their own souls: wherewith being charged by Peter, and being
pricked and stung in their hearts and consciences, they ask the Apostles; Men
and brethren, Act. 2.37.38.
what shall we do? He does not tell them, as some unskillful Ministers
would, your case is good: be not discomforted, my soul for yours, you shall
do well; but he bids them amend their lives: repent, and get sound and
hearty sorrow for their sins, that so being thoroughly humbled, they might
afterward be soundly comforted.

Doct. 4. The eye must affect the heart.
Verse. 51. Mine eye breaks mine heart.] The meaning of which words is, that
his heart was marueilously moved with the things that his eye did behold.
Whence this doctrine offreth it self for our learning:That good men must use
their eyes to stir up their hearts to pity and compassion, that so they may
be pierced with grief, and sorrow. This we have proved unto us in the example
of Christ Jesus, the most absolute pattern of all holiness: Mark. 6.34.
For it is said of him by the Evangelist Mark, That when he lifted up his
eyes, and saw the multitude, which had no faithful Ministers to instruct
them, his very bowels were moved with commiseration toward them, because they
were as sheep without a shepherd.

In this regard it is that Solomon describing a good man: Pro. 22.9.
calls him a man of a good eye: and says of such an one: That he will bestow
his bread upon the poor, he sees the faces of some pale, and of others
black, by reason of long want and forbearance of food: Others he beholds
naked and cold, and exposed to the injury of the air; and of all sorts of
unseasonable weather. Now having a good eye he will not only take a view of
them, but be inwardly affected with the sight of them, and from a tender and
pitiful heart minister relief unto them.

Hence was it, Act. 7.23. Exodus 2.11.
that Moses did not content himself to know of the miseries of his poor
brethren, the Israelites by hearsay, but he would go out to see their
burdens, and how they spent their pains and their strength, and after all,
were recompensed with stripes from their taskemasters: which did so work upon
him, that it made him stretch forth his hand to avenge some of them. So
likewise in the Gospel of Matthew, it is set down as the property of all
holy and religious persons, Mat. 25.36.
that they will go to the prison to see, and to the house to visit the
distressed members of Christ, and take all occasions, to bring their own
hearts to pity their poor brethren: and will even compel their inward parts,
to bear a burden with them, that they may be more helpful unto them.

who have eyes full of adultery, 1. An adulterous eye.
that they cannot look about them, but they are stirred up to beastly and vile
lusts. Who have eyes full of envy, 2. An envious eye.
that they cannot behold their brethren, that are equal unto them, or go
before them, or come near unto them; but presently they fret against them, and
others welfare is their woe and misery. Others have a wicked eye, 3. A
covetous eye.
that they cannot look upon their neighbors cattle, houses, possessions, and
the like; but forthwith their hearts are poisoned with a covetous desire of
them, and then they cast about how they may make them theirs; and if they
cannot, they eat up their hearts with coffeehouse, as Ahab did. Pro. 28.22.
Agreeable to this, is the place of Solomon, where he says; A man of a wicked
eye, lusts after riches; but he shows there, that God meets with him: for
he shall be so far from getting more, that he shall not keep that which he
has: but the more he runs after riches, the faster poverty shall pursue him.

Another kind of ill eye, is a niggardly eye, 4. A niggardly eye.
spoken of by the wise man in the Proverbs; Pro. 23.6.
where he gives this counsel: Eat not the bread of him that has an evil
eye, etc. that thinks all lost that goes from him, and all taken out of his
stomach, that goes into other men's bowels: he will give men a welcome for
fashion sake, but all that eat of his meat, are a vexation unto him; and
these thoughts run in his head while men sit at his table: This cost I
might have spared: this would have served my family all the week: I had
rather have their room than their company, that thus trouble and charge me.
And so his heart is ever full of discontentednesse: Thus it is apparent, that
many have their hearts sinfullie affected, by means of their eye; as Gods
children have them holily affected.

Verse. 52. Mine enemy chased me sore.] By these similitudes here used, it
appears how fierce they were; and yet all was without cause, as the text
witnesses. Indeed, God saw in them matter that deserved correction, and
affliction; but their adversaries had no occasion offered, why they should
behave themselves so cruelly toward them.

Doct. 5. The innocent molested.
From which this doctrine maybe collected;That the more harmless men be,
Psalm. 35.12.13. etc.
the more they shall be molested. This we see in David: he prayed and fasted,
and mourned for his enemies; and yet they sought his woe and ruin. Therefore
he says in one Psalm, the foundations must be cast down, Psalm. 11.3.
and what has the righteous done? there was great preparation, and there must
be sore and mortal wars; they would sweep all away, and not leave a good
man in the land: but, what has the righteous done? There must be a great
execution; but where is the conviction: that is just nothing? Luke 23.2.
So they cried against Christ; Away with him, away with him; crucify him,
crucify him, etc. But what evil has he done? (says Pilate) Oh Pilate must
know, that men so just as they were, would never have delivered him into his
hands, except he had been a notorious offender; whereas indeed, he was a
lamb without spot, and none iniquity was found with him. Agreeable to this is
the saying of David, the wicked gnasheth his teeth against the righteous. Psalm.
37.12
The more innocent and just any one is, the more he shall be maligned and
pursued. And this stands with reason:



This may be seen in Jeremy, Jer. 15.10.
he had done them no wrong, but brought unto them the ministry of salvation;
and yet every one curses him, and cries out against him; and why? because God
at that time showed himself more clearly in Jeremy, that in any other. Act.
7. Act. 22.22.
The like violence they showed against Steven and Paul, casting dust into the
air, and crying out upon them; that one would think them brutish creatures.
And why were they so full of rage against them, but because they were full of
grace, and dealt faithfully in the work that they were set about? because they
did help to raise up the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to race the kingdom of
Satan more than others? But for Jesus Christ, who was the engraven image of his
father, they had a greater quarrel against him, than ever they had against
any. Young Bulls of Basan, Psalm. 22.
such as were full of might and malice: Dogs and Lions, such as were full of
rage and fury, did all beset and compass him about; their madness was never so
great against any as against him, because none was ever so good as he.

2 An other reason may be, because there is a contrariety betwixt the good and
evil: though they be of the same country, of the same town, of the same
family, yea of the same parents, yet are they not of the same world. For so
says our Savior Christ to his disciples; John. 15.19
ye are not of this world, etc.

Esau and Jacob had the same parents, and were both together in the same womb;
and yet they contend one with another. Rebecah their mother would feign know
the cause of it; the Lord tells her the cause. Ge^. 26.22.23.
Two nations are in thy womb; and two manner of people shall be divided out of
thy bowels: etc: The one the seed of the serpent, the other the seed of the
woman. There is not so great enmity between a man and an adder, as there is
between the righteous and the wicked: and therefore no faulkener nor hunter:
no hawke nor hound are more desirous and greedy of the pray and game, than the
outrageous enemies of the church are of the destruction of Gods servants;
because they are possessed with the spirit of Satan, and violently ouercaried
with hellish fierceness.

3 Thirdly, the carriage of Gods children does disgrace them, and therefore
they maligned them: because they ran not to the same excess of riot with them,
2. Pet. 4 4.
therefore speak they evil of them. For impious persons reason thus: They go
to Gods house, I go to the Alehouse: They carry themselves soberly, I carry
my self intemperately: They are esteemed, I am contemned: I know they like not
of me, as I do not of them, and therefore what mischief I can do them, they
shall be sure of it.

to live godly in Christ Jesus, must look for persecution. It is impossible
that there should be so many fowlers and hunters, and not labor to catch
somewhat.

Indeed they wilbee favorable enough to gross adulterers, thieves, and other
malefactors: and if any be more forward to punish and redress such; Oh it is
great cruelty: they deal hardly and severely: they would be very loath that
breed should be taken away.

But if they be religious persons that are to be punished, no torture is too
great, no death too grievous for them; therefore let those that are christians
look to it: they shall have great men against them, Psalm. 69.12.
as David had princes: They shall have mean men against them, as he had
drunkards on the alehouse bench to make songs of him: There they will utter
their merchandise, false tales and vile reports.

Those that are further off wilbee against them, those that are neighbors, nay
some that are of their own family wilbee against them: no bands of civility,
no bands of kindness, no bands of nature will hold, where the bands of
Christianity are wanting.



in the world ye shall have trouble: Joh. 16.33.
So he promises, that in him we shall have peace and comfort: if there were a
thousand worlds, and all against one of us, yet one comfort of Christ is able
to counteruaile all their oppositions.

If God give us assurance of a better life, what great matter is it if they
deprive us of this life? If we see the Angels and Saints, and Christ Jesus,
and the whole Trinity to be with us; what peril is it, if all leaud base
sinful men be against us? If God promise to make our names and persons
glorious, what need we fear though they seek to make us ignominious? Not
one hair of our head can fall without Gods providence: We are not in their
power, though we be in their hands.

They may proceed so far as to arraigne us, convict us, and condemn us; and
yet (except God will) they shall not execute us: though our natural brethren
and sisters and friends forsake us, God will give us new brethren and sisters
and friends, that shall be more kind and faithful unto us, than ever they were,

But if men for fear of difficulties and dangers, will not adventure upon
religion, are they sure to keep themselves from troubles by that means? Nay,
if am an will not suffer for a good cause; God can and will make him suffer for
an ill cause. Achitophel would leave David, and take the stronger side, though
the worser side: but was not that to his destruction? So Judas, he would turn
from Christ to the Pharisees: but did that bring him any peace? No, it tended to
his utter confusion.



Verse. 54. Then thought I, I am destroyed.] This was the case not only of
Jeremy, but of the rest of Gods seraunts in captivity, they were even past
hope for any recovery.

Doct. 6. Outward afflictions usually, accompained with inward temptations.
The doctrine that here may be gathered is:That when troubles arise against
our bodies and states, Satan labors to breed troubles in our souls: when there
are fightings without, usually there are terrors within. This is manifest in
the Chapter that we have now in hand, verse. 17.18. When they were far from
peace and prosperity, then they conclude; their strength and hope is perished
from the Lord. He had made them many gracious promises (they could not deny)
but now they never expected the performance of them: all their hope was gone.

And this we see that Gods children have still been exercised with great
terrors and fears within, when they have been set upon by grievous trials
without: the truth whereof we see in Job and in Jeremy, Job. 3.3, etc Ier.
15.10.
the violence of whose inward conflicts, made them to break forth into
marvelous great distempers.



If God loved you, he would never let you be in this estate: (...)
as he dealt with (...) Savior If thou be the Son of God, command that
these (...) should have said: Is this the God (...) all this while? See how he
deals with you (...) ^^^^ainely forsaken: if you will eat stones you may
(...) provision he makes none for you; and is it likely then that you are the
son of God? If you think you are so still, trust no more in him, but provide
for your self, and command that these stones be made bread, that so you may
have relief that way.

God has turned away his face from them, Psalm. 30.
and they have been troubled. Since (I say) the case stands thus, let us get
good evidence for our happy estate in Christ, and for our interest unto
eternal life. Let us have our hearts seasoned with true piety; with the love
of Gods word; with the fear of his name; with zeal for his glory, and the
like virtues and graces of Gods holy spirit: and that before distresses come,
that so in the evil day we may have good assurance, of Gods invaluable and
unchangeable favor in his son.

For if we be slack and negligent herein, and only hope well, and trust
that God will be merciful unto us, and accept of us for his children, then
when Satan, and affliction, and our flesh join together, and make an assault
against us, our hope will prove but a broken reed: we shall be tossed with
every wave; yea sore perplexed and utterly overwhelmed in the gulf of
distress, if not of despair it self.

Therefore let men make sure work before hand, especially before death
approach. For otherwise the devil will tell them, that then it is too late to
set upon matters of godliness, as he ever persuaded them before that it was too
soon: then will he bring before them all former reckonings, and charge upon
them the iniquities of their youth; and if their grounds be not very good,
their hearts will utterly fail them, and then they are undone for ever.

For if the Church of God make this woeful complaint, that their hope and
strength were perished from the Lord: how shall wicked unregenerate persons be
able to stand, when God shall come against them?

Not with matters of temptation (as he does against his children) but with
matters of truth; not of mercy, but in judgment; not that the devil makes
them believe so, but that indeed it is so. When God shall once begin to draw
out his sword against them, where will they be then? If Gods children do
feel such a heavy burden of it, do not you think it will press them down
to the gates of hell? When no friend shall stand by them, no shifts and
inventions of wit shall be available for them: when all mirth will be
uncomfortable, and every thing frown and look heavily upon them: God, and
Satan, and sin, and their own consciences, being all up in arms against
them. When this (I say) comes upon them, (as come it will sooner or later)
which way can they turn them? and how can they shift off that heavy load of
Gods wrath and indignation, which will lie as a mountain upon their guilty
souls? though they have been full of boasting in the days of their iolitie,
and have vaunted what a notable faith they have, yet (as Zephanie says) in
that day the strong man shall cry bitterly. Zeph. 1.14.


Howsoever they imagine to put off these things, yet let them know that their
strength will be found too weak, and their skill too small, to ward off the
Lords blows.

The thief that has courage enough to rob and steal upon the highways
side, yet has he little enough when his poor executioner is to deal with
him: even so shall it be with all wicked and proud men, when the time of their
execution does approach: their hearts shall fail them for the things that
shall come upon them, and continue upon them for evermore.

Paul, who had the sentence of death past upon him, 2. Cor. 4.11.
and died daily almost; so that when he went out in the morning, he was in
danger to be slain ere he returned home again: and yet God did uphold him,
and made him hereby more confidently and comfortably to rest and rely upon him.

So the good Prophets wife thought all help was gone: 2. Kings 4.1. etc.
her husband was gone, her goods gone, her labor gone, her children like to be
gone, and she had no means in the world to relieve her self; yet even then
when she was almost past hope, God provided a competent estate for her. So
Hezekiah concludes that he was gone, he should never go to the temple any
more: Jsa. 38.10.
never see man more among the inhabitants of the world: his web was cut off,
etc. with many speeches to this effect: and yet we read how God restored him
again, and prolonged his life for many years.

Say then that one have great discomforts in his soul; great breaches in his
estate; grievous and dangerous sickness upon his body, etc. yet here is his
comfort, that God that raised up others, can and will in due time raise up him.

according to your faith it shall be unto you?

you not, for he does for us many times above that, that we can ask or
think.

But you imagine you have no more faith, than you have feeling, whereas it is
far otherwise: there may be much faith, and little feeling: faith may be
strong, and yet strongly assaulted: comfort may be departed, and yet not
utterly lost: we may fear we are cut off, and yet not perish: for Gods
strength and perfection, is seen in our weakness and imperfection: though
we cannot believe, yet God is still faithful: though children will not credit
their parents, yet they will relieve their necessities, and so will God ours;
albeit through weakness of faith, we cannot so fully apprehend and apply his
promises to our selves: He sees it is not maliciousness nor gross infidelity
in us; and therefore he will pity us, and bear with us, rather than in
severity proceed against us.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON.
Lamentations, chap. 3. verse. 55. etc. 55 I called upon thy name O Lord, out of
the low dungeon.

56 Thou have heard my voice: stop not thine ear from my sigh and from my
cry.

57 Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou said, Fear
not.

58 O Lord thou have maintained the cause of my soul, and have redeemed my
life.

59 O Lord, thou have seen my wrong: judge thou my cause.

60 Thou have seen all their vengeance, and all their devises against me.

61 Thou have heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against
me.


YOu heard in the words immediately going before, The connection.
the woeful distress that the children of God were driven unto: how they were
cast into the dungeon, and stripped of all outward and inward comforts.

Now here he shows what remedy they used: they cast their burden upon the
Lord, and hoped for succor at his hands: and the reasons that move them so to
do, are set down in the text to be two.

First, The division and meaning of the words.
one is taken from their present behavior toward God; which was, that they
prayed and sighed, and cried, verse. 55.56. And that they might be so much the
more regarded, they declare that it was not without cause, that they were so
earnest with God: for they called upon him out of the low dungeon: verse. 55.
that is, out of great and grievous affliction. And yet further mischief was
intended, and their adversaries did speak and plot all cruelty against them,
verse. 60. Thou have seen all their vengeance, and all their devices against
me: 61. Thou have heard their reproach, etc. And that this might appear not to
be a false imagination and conceit of their own, he says; Lord thou have
seen my wrong, etc. Thou have seen all their rage, 59. 60. They are all
evident and apparent before thee, how closely and covertly soever matters be
carried in respect of men.

2 The second reason is drawn from Gods former goodness, and gracious dealing
toward them, He had heard them and drawn near unto them: he had considered
of them and of their cause: and they knew he was still as good as he was wont
to be, and they used as good means as they were wont to do; and therefore
they conclude, that he that drew near unto them heretofore, would now do the
like again; verse. 57.58. These considerations do revive their spirits, and
raise their hearts even out of the pit of desperation. And thus much for the
meaning and order of the words. Now let us harken unto such doctrines and
instructions as are therein contained for our learning.

Verse. 55. I called upon thy name.] This is the speech of the whole Church, who
by reason that they are members of one body, and temples of one spirit, are
brought in speaking throughout this whole book, as if they were but one
person. By [low dungeon] is meant desperate evils: they were as it were shut up
in a dungeon, where they had no hope of escaping: yet out of the depth of
misery and anguish and horror, they called upon the Lord. Whence naturally
arises this doctrine.

Doct. 1. The faithful can never be Driven from prayer.
That there is no distress, no breaking and crushing, whatsoever, that shall
hinder Gods people from praying unto him. It may for a passion and a fit, cause
them to be at a stand, and bring them even to their wits end, as it did these
here; but they will recover themselves and get heart again: and though in
their distempers they say God has forsaken them (which is a woeful thing) yet
they recall their words again, and at length betake themselves to the right
means of recovery; which is, to make their griefs known unto God, who is
able to save and ready to succor those that seek unto him. This may be
evidently seen in Psalm. 88. verse. 6. Psalm. 88.6.
where the man of God bemoneth his case, saying: Thou have laid me in the
lowest pit, in darkness, and in the deep. Thine indignation lies upon me,
and thou have vexed me with all the waves.

From which words, together with the rest in that Psalm, we may gather, that
he was in wonderful fore perplexity. Now in this extremity what does he? O
Lord God of my salvation (says he) I cry day and night before thee; as if he
should have said: Though thou have cut off me, yet I call upon thee: and
though thy hand lie heavy upon me, yet I pray still. Isaiah 38.1.21. 2.
Kings. 20.1.
So Hezekiah was smitten (as it seems) with the plague, and that unto death:
and was in such extremity, That he chattered like a crane or a swallow; and
mourned like a dove: and concluded, that he should go to the gates af the
grave, and be deprived of the residue of his years: His case in appearance
was desperate, so that it was as hard to recover him, as to make the sun in
the firmament to go backward: yet he set upon the matter by prayer, and
obtained his desire; insomuch that fifteen years were added to his days, so
that no man in the world had ever such a lease of his life as he had. So Jonah
when he fled from the presence of the Lord, and was therefore cast into the
Sea and swallowed up of the whale: being in a low dungeon, where he had
neither sunnelight nor candlelight: yet he does not think his case
remediless, (as indeed it was not) but he cried in his affliction unto the
Lord, Jonah. 2.1.2
and he heard him: Out of the belly of hell did he cry, and God heard his
voice: and then as sin and passion had brought him into danger, so repentance
and prayer did help him out of it.

Yea the Lord Jesus Christ, when the burden of our sins and of his fathers
wrath for the same was so grievous, that it made his soul heavy unto the
death, and pressed blood out of his veins: Luke 22.42 44. Heb. 5.
yet the more horror he was in, the more fervently he prayed unto his father.



1 Because he that is once Gods child, is ever so: and every child of God,
Romans 8.26.
has the spirit of prayer, which will always stir us up, to make requests
with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed.

If those that cast Gods servants in prison, could withal pull Gods spirit out
of their hearts, then they had done somewhat to the purpose: but they may as
well pluck the sun out of the firmament, as the holy Ghost out of their
souls. And therefore they can never bring them so low, but they can cast their
eyes up toward heaven, and make their complaint unto their God. And if he be
with them in prison, as he was with Joseph, their restraint shall be far
more pleasant than their adversaries liberty: and they shall be able with Paul
and Silas to sing Psalms at midnight through joy and gladness. Act. 6.25.


2 Secondly, Gods children have faith in their hearts, and the nature of faith
is to bear down all before it, and to break through al manner of lets and
hindrances. Therefore Gods servants hold up their heads, because their faith
ouercomes the world: Joh. 5.4.
And therefore wicked hypocrites faint, because the world ouercomes them. When
Gods child goes unto the dungeon, faith goes with him; and then he will never
give over praying, but be more fervent in praying.

And this is certain, that in worldly helps, the deeper distresses we be
in, the least comfort they will afford us: so spiritual helps, the greater
extremities we be in, the more comfort will they minister unto us. When we are
helpless and hopeless, then faith works wonders, and never shows forth it
self so mightily and powerfullie as when it works alone. Beauty, and
wealth, and strength, and other outward things of the same kind, when miseries
lie heavy upon us, and we begin to cast an eye to them, expecting some
relief and comfort from them; will deal with us, as the high Priests did with
Judas: When all went well with him, they made show of favor and friendship
toward him: but when in the horror and anguish of his soul he makes his moan
unto them, crying out that he had sinned, betraying innocent blood; they sent
him away with a cutted and uncomfortable answer: What is that to us? (say
they) Such cold comfort shall we receive from any earthly supports and props
whereon we rest and stay our hearts: when we have most need of them, they will
stand us least in stead. So that we may truly say of them, as Job did of his
friends; miserable comforters are ye all. But as for those that live by faith
in Christ Jesus, they are vnderlaide with better props than the world can
afford: for when they have none other to deliver them, they can deliver
themselves by prayer, and by calling upon Gods name out of the lowest dungeon.

Judas and Achitophel and other monsters have done. But let a godly man be
laid fast in the same dungeon, Act. 16.25.
he will be full of joy, when the other is full of desperate grief, and sing
Psalms and power forth many holy prayers, in stead of the others imprecations,
and blasphemous speeches. Peter and Judas had both dealt unfaithfully (though
in a far different degree and manner) with their Lord and master, and were
both in the dungeon even in great perplexity; but Peter goes out, confesseh
this fault, weeps bitterly, and gains exceedingly by it. Judas on the other
side sorroweth desperately, and speedily dispatcheth himself. Whereby does
manifestly appear the different carriage of the faithful and of infidels, when
they are both ouerburdened with sorrows and miseries.



Romans 8.
and if you can make your requests known unto the Lord, he will cause all to
work together for the best, and give an happy issue, either by life or death,
unto all your distractions, doubts and fears.

Verse. 55. I called upon thy name.] This was it that stirred them up to prayer,
even the knowledge of Gods name; his majesty is so glorious, that it would
make them fly from him: and his essence is so incomprehensible, that it is a
light that none can have access unto, and a huge sea that will drown such as
will adventure to wade into it: but the knowledge of Gods sufficiency to
help, and of his mercy and free favor, whereby he is ready to help; and
the like is it that incourageth them to come before the Lord. Which affords
this doctrine:

Doct. 2. The right understanding of Gods name, very helpful in prayer.
That the name of God is the only cause that brings Christians into Gods
presence, and makes them to call upon his name with strong cries, and
comfortable requests. This is evident, Psalm. 9.10. where the Prophet shows,
how they come to seek unto God: They that know thy name will trust in thee,
for thou never failest them that feeke thee. How come they to seek God? They
first trust in God. And how come they to trust in God? By the knowledge of Gods
name: which till men do know, they can never trust in God, nor seek to God.
Therefore it is said in the songs of Solomon: Thy name is an ointment powered
forth: Cant. 1.2.
like unto that ointment mentioned in the Gospel, which filled all the house
with the odor of it. No ointment can so delight the natural sense, as the
name of God does the hearts of the faithful; in which regard it is added in
that place, Therefore the virgins love thee: That is such as do not go a
whoring after fleshly lusts, and after the vanities of the world. They must
needs love Christ, because they know that there is no evil; but in this name
they shall have a medicine against it. No doubt, but there they shall find a
resolution for it: no good thing, but there they may get a certainty of
obtaining it. This name of God is notably and comfortably set down: Exodus
34.6. and Isa. 9.6.

In Exodus thus: The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, The name of God.
and gracious, etc.

1. Jehouah.
The first thing that we may for our comfort here consider of, is the word
Jehovah: signifying the essence of God, and his absolute perfection in all his
attributes, and showing his constancy in all his properties that follow, as
having his being in and of himself; so that this preuents an objection,
concerning all that which follows. For one might say, God indeed has showed
himself strong, merciful and gracious, etc. But what is that to us now? Why
he is Jehovah, the same for ever: and therefore look what he has been in the
days of old, you may be assured ^ee will be the same still. But because this
part of Gods name is handled else where; it shall be needelesse at large to
entreat of it in this place. See Mr. Dods exposition of the Command. the
preface thereof. I am Jehovah.


2. Strong.
2 The second thing to be considered is, the strength of God, the Lord, the
Lord strong, etc. Whence we are to learn, that all power is in him, and from
him, and for him. And in like manner, is Christ called the mighty God: Thereby
implying not only that he is mighty in his own nature, but that he has
his might to use for our salvation, and our enemies destruction: and that he
does and will use it to that purpose. Isa. 9.6.


In which regard it is said in that place; that he is given to us. Revel.
1.13.15.
And in the first of the Revelation, he is said to walk in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks: that is, in the midst of his Church, and to have
feet of burning brass: Not only to tread down all inward and outward
enemies, but to consume them when they are down: for in that respect are his
feet said not only to be of brass, but of burning brass.

Ill weeds when they are cut up, if the roots be left behind, will quickly
spring up again: therefore will Christ burn up root and branch, that there
may be no fear nor danger of their second growth.

So that if we knew this part of Gods name, to wit, his alsufficient power,
what affliction or trial should make us faint?

The least temptation or affliction, Romans 4.19.20.21.
if God support us not in it, will be too strong for us: the greatest, yea all
rushing at once upon us, if this mighty God be on our side, shall not he be
able to hurt us or daunt us.

This was it that confirmed Abraham's faith; as the Apostle Paul witnesses.
Though Sarahs womb were dead, he knew God was not dead, but that he was able
to give him a son of her: And that that God who shall at length raise us out
of the dead grave, could and would raise him up a son out of her dead womb.

And so Moses, Exodus 16. and 17.
when he had six hundred thousand and upward, to provide for in the
wilderness, where he had neither bread not drink for them; yet he trusted and
relied on God, who could bring water out of the flint, as well as out of the
river: and bread out of the clouds, as well as out of the barn. Canaan he
knew could not maintain them, without Gods blessing, and with it the barren
wilderness could.

So Jonathan when he went against a great many thousand Philistimes, 1. Sam.
14.6
he knew Gods name to be [Mightie] For he flood resolved of this; that God
could deliver with few, as well as with many. And yet Asa went further: for
when he had a very huge army coming against him, and no equal forces in any
proportion to withstand them, he notwithstanding comes confidently to God for
help, assuring himself, that God could save and deliver with none, 2 Chronicles.
14.11.
as well as with many.

And so may it as truly be said, that God can help by few friends as well
as by many: yea, without all friends and means, as if we had all that the
world could afford us.



Jonah so? And yet he prayed and was helped: therefore never be dismayed: Your
troubles are great, but your God is greater and mightier to help you out of
them, than they are to hold you fast still. The Lord has made the heavens and
the earth, by his word, and that drowned the whole world in his displeasure.
This mighty Lord, I say, rides upon the heavens (as it is Deuteronomy. 33.) full of
majesty, and full of ability to deliver you; and to set you free from the
strongest bonds of affliction.

3. Merciful.
3 The third thing in Gods name is, that he is merciful. Which word
signifies, that God has such bowels of compassion toward his servants, as a
mother has toward the child of her womb. There need not many exhortations,
much less an eloquent oration to a mother, to stir her up to succor, and
relieve her child, when it stands in need of her help: and yet put all the
kindness of all the men and women in the world together, and it will come but
to a drop, in comparison of that sea of mercy that is in our merciful God.



Psalm. 6.2.3. Ps. 86.1.2.
Lord help me, for I am sore troubled: Lord save me, for I am poor and
needy.

And this mercy of God we may more clearly see in the Father of the
prodigal son, Luke 15.
who perceiving his lost child coming toward him, he runs toward his
son, and falls on his neck and kisseth him, giving him all kind
entertainment that might be: his very misery was a sufficient motive to
work upon his fathers heart: neither does he at all vpbraide him with his
former leaud behavior. Now if any earthly father can be and ought to be thus
merciful, how much more will our heavenly father, especially since that he
loves us better than any earthly father can love his children? and shows forth
his love upon every occasion as the Prophet Hoseah testifies, saying; Hosea
14.4.
In thee the fatherless finds mercy.

Objection. Oh but I am worthy of no mercy.

4. Gracious.
Answer.What of that? Gods name is also gracious] That is, loving and showing
mercy without any merit: he will not tarry till we deserve it, but will
freely show forth his goodness toward us. Do not we give food and raiment to
little children that hang on the breasts? If parents should stay till they
deserve it, they would never grow to be men and women. Therefore it is said of
Abraham, Rem. 4.5.
that he believed in him that justifies the sinner. Noting thereby, that
sin cannot hinder Gods favor from offenders, but that through faith they
shall be justified, and made innocent in Gods account, as if they had never
offended at all.

Let us not then when we are in distress, be discouraged, by reason of our
corruptions, but go to the Lord who will show himself gracious notwithstanding
them all.



is a gracious God:and when we can find no matter of worthiness in our
selves, he can find matter enough in his own nature and in his sons merits.
If we could find any desert in our selves, or our works, God should lose his
name of being gracious.



5. Slow to anger.
What if you have, he is slow to anger. That is, long ere he be provoked, and
when he is provoked, easy to be appeased. We can no sooner fall out with
our sins, but he falls in with us. An earthly father will not take every
advantage against his child; and when the child is grieved for a great fault,
will not good parents be easily satisfied? And why should we think God
harder than our selves? At least let us make him as good as our selves, and be
assured that when we have kindled his wrath against us, one tear of true
repentance will quench all the flame thereof, and draw down his pity and
compassion upon us. To this David gives testimony, saying: Ps. 103.8.9.
The Lord is slow to anger, and of great kindness: he will not always chide,
nor keep his anger for ever. And this he himself found by experience. For
when he, being a King, and that of Gods own choice, set over his own people,
and withal a holy Prophet: in both which respects, he was to be a pattern
of all godliness and righteousness unto others: when he (I say) after many
mercies received, had grievously provoked the Lord, insomuch as he was angry
with him: 2. Sam. 11.27.
and then did not repent for his sin, but lay in it, and added diverse other
heinous offenses unto it, yet after all this God does not reject him, but sends
his Prophet Nathan unto him, 2. Sam. 12.13
and is more ready to offer him pardon than he is to ask it, and when he
did but begin to make confession of his sin, God tells him forthwith, that
he had put away his sin.

And this wonderful readiness in God to be appeased toward penitent
sinners, the Prophet Isaiah makes mention of; bringing in God himself,
speaking in this manner: Isa. 57.16.
I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: For the spirit
should fail before me, and I have made the breath. Where we see, that as
Psalm 103. there is a reason drawn from Gods nature why, he cannot deal
rigorously with us; namely because he pities us, as a father does his child:
So here there is a reason brought from our nature, why he cannot be
ouer-seuere, to wit, that then the spirit would fail before him: and those
whom he has made and redeemed, would perish and be utterly consumed. Men
were not able to bear the continuance and grieuousnesse of his hand, but would
sink under their burden, and so should be a greater loser than they, in that
he should lose them, whom he has so long and so entirely loved, for whom he
has so dearly paid: and therefore he says, that he will not contend for
ever, etc.



that God is abundant in kindness, Abundant in kindness.
he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. It is the
property of kindness to take small things in good worth, to pass by
infirmities, and to be easy to be entreated. And this is evident in earthly
parents: for they will accept of very small matters at the hands of their
children, that would do better if they could: how much more will God, who is
the author of all kindness both in men and beasts? Psalm. 103.
who knows whereof we are made, and remembers that we are but dust.

Indeed, if we live in presumptuous sins, and be proud and stomackfull,
and will not stoop under Gods hand, then Gods greatest kindness is to scourge
us, until he bring us home to himself. But if we be once pure and humble in
heart, though we cannot attain to that measure of sanctification as others
have, nor power out our soul in prayer as we should, and as we would, yet
God will take all in good part. He that will reward a cup of cold water, he
will reward a cold prayer. God looks not for perfection from poor weak
creatures, that are full of imperfection.

kindnesss of God shall be performed unto me,seeing that I have prayed and
waited long, and yet am never the nearer?

abundant in truth as well as in kindness. 7 Abundant in truth.
As he never threatens any thing, but he executes it: so he never promises
any thing, but he performs it. Never any yet could charge him with breach of
promise. He has said, Psalm. 34.9.10. Psalm. 50.15.
that those that fear him, shall want nothing that is good: Call upon me in
the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, etc. And the like, who ever did
so, and found not according to his expectation? If then none have ever failed
of his hope, why should not we rest upon his promise? Take away his truth and
take away his Godhead.

Many there are in the world, who, when their money and friends, and outward
stays are taken away, begin to think with themselves, what shall we do
now? What will become of us? We see all is gone: But is Gods truth gone? Has
not he promised to provide for us when we are poor, as well as when we are
rich? When we are in sickness, as well as when we are in health? Has not he
said: I will not leave thee nor forsake thee? Heb. 13.^.
Did not he provide for us in our infancy? And why should not we trust in
him as well in our age? Oh, then we had good friends to look unto us. And who
raised up those friends? Cannot God, that inclines the hearts of some to pity
us then, draw others hearts to have compassion on us hereafter?

Oh, but I know no friends that will show me that favor? Neither did you in
your infancy, and yet God did provide some, and that without your entreaty.
How much more will he do it upon your faithful prayers? Or else (which is
best of all) take you to himself, where you shall stand in no more need of
friends and helpers.

But because we are much led by example, 8 Reserving kindness for thousands.
and look how God has dealt with others: therefore he adds next,
[reseruing mercy for thousands] Giving us to understand thereby, that he has
floods of mercy for all that stand in need thereof. Never any went to God for
mercy, but he found mercy; if he sought in faith, as God bids him.

With earthly Kings, he that comes not first speeds worst: but it is not so
with the King of heaven: he has sufficient for those that come to him last,
as well as for those that come to him first. We see this in a creature of God,
even in the sun, which communicates his light to all, though they be never
so many, as well as if they were but a few. And what shall we think of God
the Creator of the same; cannot he comfort many thousands as well as one
person, and yet his store not be lessened a whit? Yes surely, there are many
thousands in heaven, that were once as bad as we are, and yet now they are in
a Paradise of rest, out of the reach of all sin and sorrow. And who would not
come to such a Physician, as has wrought a perfect cure of so many, and that
of free cost, and never suffered any one to miscarie that was willing to be his
patient?

Men would lie at the poole of Bethesda many years, expecting to be healed:
Ioh. ^.
we need not lie so long at the gate of heaven, for the curing of our souls,
but we are sure to be perfectly helped, when we are truly humbled and fitted
for help.



God forgiueth iniquity, transgression, and sin.] 9 Forgiving iniquity.
And if he should not show himself to be such a God toward the militant
Church, he should lose his name and his people at once: but he pardons all
these kinds of sin. Iniquitie] That is, original sin, and the
perverseness of our nature, that cleaues so fast unto us: Transgression:] That
is, sins of rebellion and presumption: And Sin:] That is, sins of
custom, and such as are grown to a habit. If any one be weary of this
burden, God will give him a speedy dispatch. This a man may boldly claim at
Gods hand, and entreat him to be God: for that he could not be, unless he
should perform this for us.

This is also the name of his son, who is called Jesus, Math. 1.21.
because he does save his people from their sins. Therefore let us take the
accusation and humiliation for sin upon us, and pray to God to pardon us
according to his name: and then God will take away the guilt and punishment of
sin it self from us, and be fully pacified toward us.



Moses) he holds not the wicked innocent] let them take their swinge, Not
holding the wicked innocent. Nahum 1.2.3.
and make havoc for a time: God may spare them long, yet will visit them at
the last. According to that of Nahum: God is jealous, and the Lord reuengeth:
The Lord reuengeth, even the Lord of anger, the Lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and he reserueth wrath for his enemies. The Lord is slow to anger,
but he is great in power, and will not surely clear the wicked, etc. For as
Habakkuk says, Hab. 1.12.
he has ordained them for judgment, and established them for correction.

Psalm. 73.5.


11. Visiting.
Visiting the iniquities of the parents upon their children, and upon their
childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation. They shall taste of
the bitter cup of Gods wrath here, as their fathers do in hell.

Here we see what a number of temptations are swept away, by the right
understanding and applying of the name of God.

Now for that other place, Isaiah 9.6. Christ is there said to be a
counselor, Christ a counselor.
the prince of peace, etc. Such a counselor as is always at hand to advise
us: for he walks in the mids of us. Such a one as is furnished with wisdom
sufficient to counsel us: Revel. 1.
for he is the ancient of days, and the very wisdom of the father. Such a
one as will give us his advice freely. And lastly such a one as can and will
make his counsel effectual, for he is the mighty God, and can do what he
will. Therefore what should a Christian trouble himself? Has he crafty
enemies? Go to Christ for direction, whose wisdom is infinitely beyond their
policy. Has he strong enemies? Go to him who is mightier than they all. In
a word, has he any out ward affliction or inward corruption, that does annoy
and trouble him? Let him have recourse to this name of God, and there he shall
find a remedy for all; which being so many ways profitable and helpful to
a Christian, that must needs follow, which was at first set down, to wit,
that the knowledge of the name of God, is a most effectual means to draw us
unto fervent and faithful prayer.

Psalm. 30.
they begin to think and speak with David: That their mount is so strong,
that they shall never be cast down: and conclude with the rich man in the
Gospel, that they have riches laid up for many years, and therefore bid their
souls take their rest. But what says God, thou fool, etc. These are ignorant
fools indeed: Psalm. 62.
for do they not know that power belongs unto God? Is it not his name to be
called the mighty God? Riches have no power at all in them, they cannot make a
man live one hour longer or happier.

When David boasted of his subjects and soldiers, and of the arm of flesh
that he had gotten, what became of it? God withdrew his face a little, and his
son and subjects and all were against him. And as riches have no power in
them, so neither do they procure any jot of kindness: for kindness belongs
unto God: Psalm. ^.
it is his name to be abundant in kindness: And therefore we must go to him
for these things, and not to the world: and it is Gods mercy that men should
sometimes deceive us, that so we might learn to trust in God, and to seek to
God for these things, and not so much unto outward means. Carnal men in their
prosperity will brag, that they can call upon God as well as the best of
them. But this is sure, if Gods name be not as an ointment powered out and
spread upon their hearts, in time of distress, they will seek unto any rather
than unto God. And thence it is, that when outward things fail them, they are
altogether hartlesse, and comfortless: They complain that they want many
things, and so they do indeed: but all is for that they want the knowledge of
Gods name: which whosoever knows, he will not distrust God though he have no
means: nor trust in them, though they have all means.



Many that are accounted wise men, are too much cast down in the time of
misery, which is an evident sign that how excellent so ever they be for
worldly policy, yet they want this heavenly wisdom. For if they were
acquainted with Gods name, they should be able comfortably to power out their
hearts before God, knowing that the Lord which created all things of nothing,
is able to save without means, and against means.

Solomon says; Pro. 18.10.
the name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs unto it, and is
exalted. Here is a refuge and a hiding place for all just men, and for none else.

Others may make a kind of offer, to go toward that Tower: but if they fail
in righteousness, they will be so far from running, that they will go
limping, nay, halt down right, and never come thither: but all that are
upright in heart, may have free access, and sufficient shelter when they come
thither, not only from the invasions of men, but from the wrath of God, and
from the strokes of God, as the pestilence or the like: yea, from the fury of
Satan, and from the assaults of sin.

All other towers are but poor weak cotages. Let men dwell where they will,
whither can they go, but death will find them out? They may fly from the
Plague, but God will pursue them: for he is not an archer that has but one
arrow, or such arrows only, as will reach those that are near: but though
they should run to the end of the world, he is able to shoot at them, and
the arrows of his vengeance will find them out. No strength can defend them,
when he comes against them with his strength: nay, all the power of men is but
a broken reed, and all means of no force in themselves. If we only use
them in obedience, they will be as a staff to lean upon: if we rest on
them, they will be as a broken staff that will deceive us, and give us a fall.

Verse. 56. Thou have heard my voice, stop not thine ears. 57. Thou drewest
near, etc. Whence this doctrine arises:

We must observe how we speed in religious exercises.
so that they cannot only say, I thank God, at such and such a time I prayed,
but O Lord thou did then hear my voice, then did thou draw near unto
me: at such a time I was put to it, and thou deliueredst me out of great
danger. This we see in the spouse, who when her beloved was departed from her,
says, In my bed night by night I sought him, Cant. 3.1.2.
whom my soul loves, and found him not. She had not that joy and refreshing,
as she was wont to have, from the use of the private means, and she knew it,
and observed it full well. Then she went abroad, and there found as little
success. Afterward she comes to confer with Gods Ministers how she might
recover her love to Christ, and the feeling of Christ's love unto her, and yet
there she had not that full success, as she expected. Then she goes a little
further, that is, (as was before showed) waits patiently upon God, and then she
found him whom her soul loved, and took hold of him; that is, faster hold
then ever she had done before. She had paid so dearly for her negligence, that
she would be wary how she failed in her duty any more. So that when she sped
well or ill, she knew how it went with her. This point is further proved unto
us out of another verse of this Chapter of the Lamentation, Lament. 3.8
where these words are used: When I cry and shoute, he shuts out my
prayer: Not but that God took notice of it, and had a time to reward it: but
for the present he gave them no answer.

They had hard hearts, and God saw that one cry and shoute would not be
sufficient to mollify and soften them: and therefore he lets them pray and cry
again and again, and yet still they had the repulse, and they observed to
their great grief. Psalm. 66.18.19.
Answerable to this, is that in the Psalm, where David says, If I regard
wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me: But God has heard me, and
considered the voice of my prayer.



For unless we do so, it is impossible that we should ever be thankful
for that we receive, or lay up any store of comfort against the time to come.
If we speed ill, we shall go away without any care or study to grow better:
if we speed well, we shall depart without any desire of glorifying God, or of
confirming our hearts for afterward.

Whereas diligent observation how God deals with us, would work in us great
experience, both for our humiliation and consolation.

For sometimes Gods servants have a comfortable answer to their suits, and
then they come away as fresh, and nimble, and joyful, as if their hearts had
been made glad by sweet and pleasant wine. Ps. 109.15.
At another time, they come limping, and fainting away, as if they had been
struck on the head. So for the Sermon, now and then they depart from it, as
from some notable feast, so merry and comfortable, as if they had made the
best bargain that ever they did in their lives: at some other times they come
out of the church hanging down their heads and full of pensiveness, as if
they had received the sentence of death. What is the cause hereof? Profane
persons think they are the melancholiest, and vnconstantest people in the
world. But will not they themselves look heavily on the matter, when they are
crossed in things that are most dear unto them? And why then should they blame
Gods servants, if they be sometimes merry, and sometimes heavy, according as
they are crossed or comforted in the word of life, which is more dear unto
them, then all the treasures of the earth? Howsoever they may charge them to be
unconstant, yet indeed they themselves are more unconstant: For let them have
to deal with some great Judge, about matters of their estate, and let them be
told this day, that they are likely to have good and favorable hearing: that
the Judge likes well of them, and of their cause; how joyful and iocund will
they be? How will they talk of it, and in a sort boast of it? But let them
come to the Judge themselves the next day, and let him frown upon them, and
tell them: I understand you are a leaud fellow: I know your practices well
enough: look to your self and acquit you well, lest I strip you of your
lands and life together. Will not such a salutation cast them into their dumps,
and make them look heavy and sad, as if they were half dead? And if one
should ask them: why are you so variable? They would wonder why he should make
such a question. Have we not just cause to be cast down (would they say)
when the Judge that gave me such good hopes before, does now look and speak
so wrathfullie against me? And wherefore then will you find fault with Gods
servants, who deal with the King and Judge of heaven and earth, in the matter
of their salvation: whose favor they esteem more than all things in the world:
and whose displeasure they fear more then all the men's in the world: yea then
death it self? Why (I say) do you find fault with them, if their comforts
ebb and flow, as matters go better or worse betwixt God and them?

Romans 7.
Paul was once alive, before the Law came, and so are all unregenerate men in
their own conceit: they can hear the word without fear and trembling (they
thank God) and be never troubled in their consciences as some are. Do you
thank God for this senslesnesse? Nay, do not so, for that is a shameful
taking of his name in vain: but rather repent before God, and crave pardon for
the same. For they that fear least, are the most hard-hearted people of all
other, and they never succeed well.

The like may be said of them who are always alike affected in prayer: Pro.
28.13.
they never yet knew what a faithful prayer means.

Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.

And there is as great gain by humiliation at sometimes, as by consolation and
sweet feelings at other times. For if we should have always a present
answer, we should grow secure, and contemn these answers of God. For such is
our vile nature, that when things grow common, they grow by degrees out of
reckoning and estimation with us: therefore God will not suffer us always to
have present hearing.





But as for wicked men that never feel their sickness, but grow to
comparisons, that they can pray as well as the best of them: they are dead in
sin, and without repentance shall perish in their sins.

Thou have heard my voice, therefore stop not thine ear,] Whence this doctrine
may be gathered:That those whom God has once heard in mercy he will always
hear, prevail with God once and ever. Whom God once hears in mercy he ever
hears.
With men it is not a good argument to say, Sir you paid such and such a debt
for me: you help me out of prison, such and such a time, therefore do it
again: for it may be he has by that means so weakened his estate already,
that he is not able to do the like again. But it is otherwise with God, all
his former benefits, are of so many bonds for new biessings: if he inclined
his ear unto us, such and such a time, when we powered out our prayers and
tears before him, we shall find the like success again, upon the use of
the like means.

He is Jehovah, yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Heb. 13.6.
If he have received us vesterday, he can and will do it in like sort to day,
yea, and hence-forward for ever, there is no change in him. There remains the
same cause of mercy still in his nature: he had as much reason to love Peter
after his sall, as before. And when Christ prayed that Peter's faith might not
fail, that proceeded from Christ's goodness, not from Peter's. If our prayers
have been once a sweet smelling sacrifice in the nostrils of the Lord, they
shall never be rejected by him: once welcome to him and always. It is an
argument that will surely prevail with God, Heb. 12.2.
Lord thou drewest near once, therefore do it still. To this purpose it is
said, that Christ is the author and finisher of our faith: where once he has
laid the foundation, he will rear up the building, and bring it to
perfection. So is it said in the Psalm: Psalm. 90.2.
From everlasting to everlasting thou art our God. If ever God should have
refused to show us favor, it would have been then, when we were dead in
sin: but even then he sought to us, ere we sought after him, and before we
imagined any such matter, he was at the cost to bestow his sons blood upon
us, that his spirit might be shed abroad in our hearts, that we might have
experience of his love: that we might have title to his sons death and
merits, and being once his sons and daughters might still be favored,
relieved and succored by him.

Let us consider what we do, and be thoroughly grounded and persuaded upon good
warrant, before we take comfort to our selves in Gods mercies: but when we
have a good foundation to build our assurance upon, let us know that all Gods
mercies are everlasting mercies.

thigns that they never marked. Then their case will be hard when trouble
comes. If they have no old store, they will be shut out as the foolish virgins
were. Math. 15.


A Christian has an old stock which he lives upon: God has heard him often,
he has given thanks to God as often, or at least very often: he has gone
through the pikes, but still God has been at his right hand, the remembrance
whereof, will much sustain the heart.

But as for them that have no experience of Gods former favors, in answering
them in the days and times when they have called upon him, they can have
little hope that they shall find any kindness from him, when afflictions take
hold of them.

If a prisoner that has deserved death should say, he hopes well, and looks
for favor: And why? He has every day, put up two or three supplications to
the Judge: we would ask him presently, But what answer received you? If he
should tell us, nay I never looked to that, we would not think he should speed
much the better for all his supplications. Such is the case of hypocrites, that
draw near unto God with their lips, but not with their hearts: though they
think themselves the safer and better for that, yet in truth they are not,
because they had never in their lives any sign of Gods love toward them for
good, upon the making of their suites known unto him. And therefore let them
get some of this store: for that is it that will stand them more in stead than
all the goods in the world.

Psalm. 77.3.4.5.6.
For this was David's case: He did think on God, and was more troubled: he
prayed, and his spirit was full of anguish, and all seemed to make against him.
What then? I considered (says he) the days of old, and the years of ancient
time: I called to remembrance my song in the night, I communed with mine own
heart, and my spirit searched diligently, etc. He recounts with himself, how
faithful he had been unto God: how merciful God had been unto him, and
then his little spark of hope and comfort became a great flame.

If a man have old provision, he will do well enough in the hardest times. If
one can say from an humble and sincere heart: Lord thou know that I have
shed many a bitter tear in secret for my sins: I have often with joy praised
thee for thy mercies, and powered out my heart in singing Psalms in private: I
have sought thee in the night, when no body was by, when no eye was privy
unto it: and at such times thou have vouchsafed to look down from heaven with
a merciful eye upon me, and have filled my soul with joy unspeakable and
glorious, etc. If (I say) one have these and the like evidences from former
experience, he may assure his heart that God will still be found of him in
goodness till the shutting up of his days, and never withdraw his loving
kindness from him. heaviness may endure for a night, Psalm. 30.5.
yet joy shall come in the morning. For if God be once ours, he is ever ours.
And this should be the staff and stay of Christians, when they have lost
their feeling.

Verse. 56. Stop not thine ear from my sigh, and from my cry.] Here is showed
what service they brought unto God: they did not pray alone, but sigh; nor sigh
alone, but cry. That is, they drew forth their prayers from a fervent heart,
which was as a thirsty land that gapes for the rain, and is even ready to
eat up and to devour the clouds. Which words afford us this doctrine:

Feruencie in prayer requisite. Joel 2.13.
must be sure that they sigh and cry: and that their petitions proceed from
a broken heart, and from an humble spirit. So the Prophet Joel bids them, rend
your hearts, and not your garments, etc. For till the heart be even pulled in
pieces by godly sorrow, sin and lust will not out: and then there can be no
acceptance looked for with God, either of us or of our services. Psalm. 51.17.
Therefore David says; the sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite
and broken heart, O Lord, thou will not despise. Mark 7.34. 1. Sam. 1.15.
Therefore did Christ groan in his spirit, when he prayed for that poor man in
the Gospel. So did Hannah sigh and weep sore, and powered out her soul before
God.





And this is true not only of the wicked, Psalm. 32.
but even of the godly. David rored and cried, but he was never the better,
till he confessed his sin, being inwardly grieved for the same: but then
both sin and punishment were removed at once.

This may teach us to strive with the Lord in our prayers and supplications;
laboring for this crying and sighing that is so needful: and then doing as
here the Church did, we shall speed as they did. Many there are that sigh in
their troubles. Iam. 5.9.
But how? James tells us: They sigh one against another, and not under the
burden of their sins, nor through an earnest desire of Gods mercy: They sigh
under the weight of unkindness that lie upon them, and clamor against men,
but have little feeling of their own unkindness against God to be humbled
for them. But these are sighs of the flesh, and not of the spirit. Let us groan
from a broken heart, and the Lord will give us life, Isa. 57.15.
when we are troubled in spirit: and the longer we wait and cry, the greater
measure of comfort we shall have, and the longer it shall tarry with us.

Verse. 57. Thou drewest near.] Not in his essence: (for so is he always
alike near) but in his merciful presence and with gracious deliverance. Which
words thus understood, do yield us this point of doctrine:

God is as ready to hear as we to pray.
when we send up our petitions unto him, he will send down speedy and
comfortable help unto us. Those that are suitors unto God, shall be always
sure of good success: even above that that they can ask or think. Whether
their requests be that their enemies may be repressed, or that their own
corruptions may be subdued, or whatsoever else, they shall be sure to speed
well. Math. 7.8.
So says our Savior; Whosoever asks receives, and he that seeks
finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. Let one knock at the
chamber of Presence of an earthly King, if he be poor and base, he shall be
bid to stand back: and if he make not the more have, he may chance to have a
rappe to send him backward: but let one knock at Gods presence chamber, how
mean and contemptible so ever he be, he shall have no repulse. Ps.
145.18.19.
As David testifies; God is near to all that call upon him, yea to all that
call upon him in truth: he will fulfill the desires of those that fear him.
Though their hearts be so oppressed that they can bring no words, that is no
matter: God will have respect to their very desires.

Men will not hear such many times as have been good and faithful servants
unto them: but God will hear such as have been rebels against him, if once
his fear be planted in their hearts.

This we see in the book of Chronicles, where it is said, 2 Chronicles. 13.3.
that the Israelites lived many years without the true God: And why? because
they had no preaching, nor powerful ministry, no Priest to teach them, as
there it is said: yet whosoever returned in his misery and sought God, Ast. 2.
he was found of him: according to that saying, Whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved.

An example of Gods goodness in this regard, we have in Jonah, who albeit he
had dealt foolishly, and was cast into the sea for it, Luke 23.42.43.
yet God heard him out of the belly of the fish, and set him upon the dry land
again. So the thief on the cross, had been a notable malefactor, yet he no
sooner opened his mouth for mercy, but Christ (though in great extremity at
that time) respected him, and his suite: never casting him in the teeth with
his old sins. 2. Chron. 33.
So Manasses had been a woeful and miserable sinner, yet when he cried to the
Lord in his distress, he heard him, set him free, and restored him again to
his kingdom. He had done evil in the sight of the Lord, like the
abominations of the heathen: he revived Idolatry which his father had
abolished, worshipped the host of heaven, defiled the Temple of God, caused his
sons to pass through the fire, gave himself to witchcraft, and charming, and
sorcerie: and did very much evil in the sight of the Lord, and that to anger
him. After all this, God admonished him by his Prophets, but he would not
hear. Then the Lord brought upon him the captains of the host of Ashur, which
put him in fetters and bound him in chains, and carried him to Babell.

Now being in sore tribulation, he prayed unto the Lord his God, who was
entreated by him, and heard his prayer.

And to shut up all, whatsoever our case be, in Psalm 107. it is showed, that
if we seek to the Lord, we shall have help. Psalm. 107.10. etc.
Some are rebels and care not for the word of God, but despise the counsels of
the most high; then he casts them in prison, and binds them in brass and iron,
so that all their hope is gone: at length they lay about them to cry unto the
Lord; which they can no sooner do, but he breaks the gates of brass and the
bars of iron a sunder, and sets them at liberty: so that an humble and
fervent prayer, we see, draws us out of bondage, and sets us at large: and in
stead of mourning and heaviness, gives us matter of rejoicing, and praising of
God.

Another is cast into the sea, every foot ready to be swallowed up, the
Pilot has neither skill nor will to help; yet when their prayers ascend unto
heaven, God rebukes the sea and the winds, and they are quickly at the haven
where they would be.

And so for famine and every other misery, God has a medicine for every
sickness, and a salve for every sore: and when men cry unto him, he is
ready to help them in all extremities, as is there more particularly and at
large specified.







God is near unto all them that call upon him in truth: though not with that
strength of faith as they should. If we seek him, he will be found of us.
Math. 7 8.
He limiteth us not for time nor things; and therefore we may look for help
at all times, and in all things: and when we have most need, then we shall
be sure of the best help.

But if we would be certain of this comfort, we must withal observe these
rules: Rules to be observed. Job 11.14.


1 That we put all wickedness out of our hearts, and out of our hands: that
we humble our selves, and turn from our wicked ways. Let us remove our
sins, 2. Chron. 7.14. Jam. 4 8.
and God will remove our crosses. So James exhorts them, Purge your hands ye
sinners, and your hearts ye hypocrites: that is it that they must do, if they
would have God to draw near unto them. For God loves not to dwell in a heart
defiled with sin: he will turn his eyes and ears from us, if we continue in
our evil ways: because when our tongues cry for mercy, our sins cry for
vengeance.





2 An other rule is, Cant. 3.1. etc.
that we must seek God by all his means, as in that place of the Canticles
before alleged, when the Church had lost Christ, that is, the feeling of his
love, and the sense of that communion which formerlie she had had with him, she
uses all private and public means, and at length comes to conference with
Gods servants, (which few will do till they be driven to it of necessity) and
then having waited a while, she finds him whom her soul loved. The same must
be our practice: if one medicine will not serve the turn, use another: Pray,
fast, meditate, confer, and then at last the Lord will be found in mercy.
But as we are slack in using any of the means, so shall we fail in our
comfortable expectation of favor from God.

3 The last rule is, that we must use the means diligently, and in good
earnest: for if we have a base account of Gods mercies, Iam. 5.16. Psalm. 72.12.
it is just we should go without them. The prayer of the righteous auailes
much, but with this condition, if it be fervent. God delivers the poor when
he cries. If they would have hearing, there must be crying. God powers forth
floods of grace: Isa. 44.3.
but upon whom? On the thirsty ground.

Hence is it that a number read, and hear, and pray, and yet prevail not,
because they do it so drowsilie and carelesselie. The Lord deferres to help
them, because they are not fit for help, and do not strive and wrestle in
their prayers as Jacob did. Hosea. 12.3.
Let us therefore use all the means, and that with constancy and
carfulness, and then we shall obtain our hearts desire in mercy.

Verse. 57. Thou saiedst, Fear not.] Not that there came any such voice unto
their ears, or that God used any extraordinary means to speak unto them,
but when they drew near to God, and cast their cares upon him, and laid open
their sorrows unto him, God did so comfort them, as if he had spoken unto
them: they were content to make him their stay, and to trust him with their
soul and state and all, and then he pacified their hearts, and gave them an
expected answer to their prayers. Now in that God said, Fear not, the point
is:

Doct. 7. God only frees the heart from fears.
That God only cancure the heart of fears.If ten thousand Prophets had said
unto them, fear not, if God had not said so by his spirit, they would have
feared for all that. wicked flee, when none pursues them: Pro. 28.1.
whereas the righteous are bold as a Lion. Because their sins are removed,
and they reconciled to God through Christ, who has made a sufficient payment
for them, to satisfy his fathers justice.

2 Secondly, God only can give says, which rids the heart of fear: in which
regard Christ says; Math. 8.
why did you fear; O ye of little faith? Implying thereby, that all our
troublesome distempers, proceed from want of faith.

Now because none can give that but the living God, therefore none can heal
the heart of fears but only God.

3 A third reason is, because God only can put his true fear into our
hearts, Jeremy 31. Ezekiel 3.6.
which is a mighty defense against false fears. Godly sorrow is a strong
fortress against worldly sorrow: and godly joy a strong bulwark against
carnal joy. Therefore it is said, Psalm. 102.1. Blessed is the man that fears
the Lord, etc. He shall not be afraid of ill tidings.



And therefore think not to put away such fears, by gaming and
companie-keeping, by eating and drinking and laughing: for they will return
again, though they may be smothered for a time, and an ill conscience will be
a fearful conscience.



If then we would be soundly cured of fears, Helps against fears 1. Prayer.
first let us go unto the Lord with a broken heart, and beseech him to put
courage into us, and to give us assurance of eternal life; and the joy of the
holy Ghost; then come life or death, we shall not be much dismayed. This is
one special means, to free our hearts from unnecessary fears, even
faithful prayer: as the Apostle shows, where he says, Phil. 4.6.
In nothing be careful, but in all things let your requests be made known to
God, etc. He bids them not take away the occasions without but heal the heart
within; for then they shall be safe enough: The peace of God that passes all
understanding, shall keep their hearts and minds in Christ Jesus: that is, in
a blessed communion with Christ Jesus, whereby they shall be possessed with
such peace as none knows what it means, but those that have tasted of it:
which quiets and sets down the heart and mind, and settles the same in the
assurance of a happy issue, out of all straites and difficulties: as we see
in David, who having committed himself to God, Psalm. 3.
who was able and had promised to help him, he triumphs over all his enemies,
and says he will not fear though ten thousand should compass him round
about. That was some odds: and one would think he had little need to use
such speeches, but rather to run away as fast as he could, at least he
should take little sleep in the night, so long as he was in such danger: or
if he did lie down and sleep, he should have little hope to rise again in
the morning: yet we see verse. 5. that he laid him down and slept, and rose
again, because the Lord sustained him: and this he got by calling upon God: as
it is verse. 4.

2 Secondly, if we would not be oppressed with fears, labor to be righteous:
for wickedness makes men dastardly, whereas righteousness makes men stout as
Lions, 2. Righteousness. Pro. 28.1.
that will not look over the shoulder, for the barking of every dog, but
walk on without all fear. Indeed the child of God, will not be
presumptuous; neither will he be timorous: though his enemies, sin, Satan
and the world be strong, yet he knows God is stronger, and that none evil
can come unto him without the Lord.

Which if we can thoroughly meditate upon, and take this receite every morning,
to season our hearts with the fear of God, and to wash our hearts and hands
from unrepented sins; walk where we will, so it be in our ways, nothing
shall be able to hurt us.

Verse. 58. Thou have maintained the cause of my soul.] That is, thou have
stood on my part, and freed me from death, that was intended against me. For
though my name and liberty and riches be taken from me, yet my life is
redeemed: and that is thy mercy that body and soul are not yet parted.
Whence the doctrine is:

Doct. 8. God vpholds his. Isa. 44.23.
That God is the maintainer and vpholder of his people. Howsoever Kings and
Princes be nursing fathers unto Gods Church, yet that is not because he needs
them, but because he would do them a good turn, in employing them in his
service. And therefore may God be called the vpholder of his people, because he
saues them from their firmes; and from the punishments due to their sins, which
no man can do: He watches over them night and day, and waters them every
moment; Jsa. 27.3.
and he will contend with them that contend against his people.

This should strike a terror into the hearts of those that are injurious unto
Gods servants: they are bold where the hedge is lowest; every dwarf
adventures to leap over. But let them know, that God is as a wall of fire
about his Church, and he will maintain the right of his children.

Indeed their props are and still have been so weak, their enemies so
strong, the standers against them so shameful, and the oppositions so
continual, that it is a miracle the Church stands to this day: but God has
been, and ever will be the vpholder of it, and therefore it must needs go
ill with those, that lift up themselves against it.



If money and friends, and large revenues and the like, had been the vpholders
of the Church, it would have gone to the ground long ere this. But what says
the Church here? O Lord thou have maintained the cause of my soul. There is
our stay: let us be sure we have a good cause, and lay it before Gods
judgment seat, and then though we be ouerborne, God will not be ouerborne,
but he will stand on our side, even he that loves goodness, and hates
wickedness, and will be avenged on those that bend themselves and their
endeavors to do mischief unto his people.

We would willingly have him to be our Judge, who is most just, who carries
the greatest love to us and our cause, and the hardest mind against our
adversaries: such an one is God. And therefore seeing we have a good cause to
stand in, even the matter of our salvation; and enemies whom God hates with a
deadly hatred, the devil, the world and the flesh, etc. this should put life
and heart into us, to go unto Christ Jesus our Judge, who has so dearly
loved us, as to lay down his life for us, and for the destruction of all our
enemies. When we are ouercharged with burdens and temptations, let us lay them
upon him, and say, Lord, thou have undertaken to comfort thy children: I am not
able to undergo this that is upon me; therefore do thou maintain my cause,
and help and deliver me from my misery.

Verse. 59. Thou have seen my wrong.] From these words this doctrine may be
collected:

Doct. 9. All vvro^gs known to God.
That there is nothing done,spoken or thought against any Christian, but God
takes knowledge of it: there is not one practice, slander or device of cruel
beasts against the sheep of Christ, but God sees it, and marks it. And this
must needs be so:



2 Secondly, it is his nature to behold all things. Psalm. 94. Ephesians. 4.6.
For he that made the eye, shall not he see? etc. He is above us all, and
through us all, and in us all. Yea, we are as it were the apple of his eye.
Now it is a hard matter for one to come with thorns to put out another eye,
and he not take notice of it: and

3 Thirdly, God does the rather observe the indignities that are offered unto
his children, because their profane adversaries do hate his image in them. For
when they were as bad as themselves, they could live with them twenty or
thirty years, and be good friends with them: but when once they renounce the
service of Satan and of their own lusts, unto which they are in bondage still,
then they oppose with might and maine against them: Psalm. 69.7.
and therefore it is said, for thy sake have we suffered rebuke, shame has
covered our face.

4 The fourth and last reason, why God must needs take notice of the wrongs
done unto his servants, is, because it belongs to him to reward every one
according to their works. Revel. 20.12.
He must and will give them full pay, and therefore he keeps all upon just
and due record. As the works of the righteous shall stand for them, so shall
the works of reprobates be written in great capital letters against them,
that all the world may take notice of them at the last day.







Neither is this to be restrained only to corporal enemies, but it holds
much more strongly for spiritual enemies. Say a man be surcharged with sin
and Satan, let him bemone his case before the Lord, and it will be a marvelous
ease unto him. If one of our children should but say, father or mother, I am
exceeding sick, ready to saint under my pains etc. he need say no more:
this would set their hearts and hands a work to do him good. And is there not
far more love in our heavenly Father? Yes surely: and therefore in all such
extremities, let God be our refuge, and let us cast all our cares and sorrows
upon him, who is able and willing to bear them, and in due season to free us
from them, and in the end, to make us gainers by them.

FINIS.

