THE FIRST SERMON PREACHED TO KING CHARLES, At Saint JAMES: 30. April. 1625.

By JOHN DONE, Deane of Saint Paul's, London.

LONDON, Printed by A.M. for THOMAS JONES, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Black Raven in the Strand. 1625.

PSALM. 11.3. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?
We are still in the season of Mortification; in Lent: But we search no
longer for Texts of Mortification; The Almighty hand of God has shed and
spread a Text of Mortification over all the land. The last Sabbath day, was his
Sabbath who entered then into his everlasting Rest; Be this our Sabbath, to
enter into a holy and thankful acknowledgement of that Rest, which God affords
us, in continuing to us our Foundations; for, If foundations be destroyed, what
can the righteous do?

I scarce know any word in the Word of God, in which the Original is more
ambiguous, and consequently the Translations more various, and therefore,
necessarily also, the Expositions more diverse, then in these words. There is
one thing, in which all agree, that is, the Argument, and purpose, and escape of
the Psalm; And then, in what sense, the words of the Text may conduce to the
scope of the Psalm, we rest in this Translation, which our Church has
accepted and authorized, and which agrees with the first Translation known to
us, by way of Exposition, that is the Chalde Paraphrase, If Foundations be
destroyed, what can the righteous do?

The Church of God ever delighted herself in a holy officiousness in the
Commemoration of Martyrs: Almost all their solemn, and extraordinary
Meetings, and Congregations, in the Primitive Church, were for that, for the
honorable Commemoration of Martyrs: And for that, they came soon to institute
and appoint certain Liturgies, certain Offices (as they called them) certain
Services in the Church, which should have reference to that, to the
Commemoration of Martyrs; as we have in our Book of Common Prayer, certain
Services for Marriage, for Burial, and for such other holy Celebrations; And
in the Office and Service of a Martyr, the Church did use this Psalm; This
Psalm, which is in general, a Protestation of David, That though he were so
vehemently pursued by Saul, as that all that wished him well, said to his
Soul, Fly as a Bird to the Mountain, as it is in the first verse; Though he
saw, That the wicked had bent their Bows, and made ready their Arrows, upon
the string, that they might privily shoot at the upright in heart, as it is in
the second verse: Though he take it almost as granted, that Foundations are
destroyed, (And then, what can the righteous do?) as it is in the third verse
which is our Text, yet in this distress he finds what to do. For as he
begun in the first verse, In thee Lord, put I my trust: So after he had
passed the enumeration of his dangers, in the second and third verses, in the
fourth he pursues it as he begun, The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords
Throane is in Heaven. And in the fifth he fixes it thus, The Lord tries the
Righteous, (he may suffer much to be done for their trial) but the wicked, and
him that loves violence, his soul hates. This then is the Syllogism, this
is the Argumentation of the righteous Man; In Collateral things, in
Circumstantiall things, in things that are not fundamental, a righteous Man, a
constant Man should not be shaked at all, not at all Scandalized; That's true;
But then (in a second place) sometimes it comes to that, That Foundations are
destroyed, and what can the Righteous do then? Why even then, this is a
question, not of desperation, that nothing can be done, but of Consultation
with God, what should be done. I know, says David, I should not be, and thou
know, O God, I have not been moved with ordinary trialls; not though my
Friends have dis-auowed me, and bid me fly to the Mountain as a Bird, not
though mine enemies prepare, and prepare Arrows, and shoot, and shoot
privily, (bestow their labor, and their cost, and their wits, to ruin me)
yet these have not moved me, because I had fixed my self upon certain
Foundations, Confidences, and Assurances of Deliverance from thee. But if, O
Lord, I see these foundations destroyed, if thou put me into mine Enemies
hand, if thou make them thy Sword, if their fury draw that Sword, and then,
thy Almighty Arm, sinewed even with thine own indignation, strike with that
sword, what can I, how righteous soever I were, do? So then, for the
Explication, and Application of these words, there will need no more, but to
spread them by way of Paraphrase upon these three considerations: Diuisio.
First, That the righteous is bold as a Lion, not easily shaked; But then,
Foundations themselves may be destroyed, and so he may be shaked; If he
be, yet he knows what to do, or where to ask Counsel, for these are not
words of Desperation, but of Consultation, If Foundations-bee destroyed, etc.

If Foundations be destroyed, intimates pregnantly, that except there be
danger of destroying Foundations, it is the part of the righteous Man, the
godly man to be quiet. Study to be quiet, says the Apostle; Study, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
that is an action of the Mind; and then, Oporam detis, say the Vulgate
Edition, Labor to be quiet, and Labor is an action of the body: Indeed it
is the proper business of the Mind and Body too, of Thoughts and Actions
too, to be quiet: And yet, alas, how many break their sleep in the night,
about things that disquiet them in the day too, and trouble themselves in the
day, about things that disquiet them all night too? We disquiet our selves too
much, in being over tender, over sensible of imaginary injuries. Transeant
iniuriae, says the Moral man; Let many injuries pass over; for, Seneca.
Plaerasque non accipit, qui nescit; He that knows not of an injury, or
takes no knowledge of it, for the most part, has no injury. Qui inquirunt,
quid in se dictum est, says he, They that are too inquisitiue, what other men
say of them, they disquiet themselves; for that which others would but whisper,
they publish. And therefore that which he adds there, for Moral, and Civil
matters, holds in a good proportion, in things of a more Divine Nature, in such
parts of the religious worship and service of God, as concern not Foundations,
Non expedit omnia videre, non omnia audire; we must not too iealously suspect,
not too bitterly condemn, not too peremptorily conclude, that what soever is
not done, as we would have it done, or as we have seen it done in former
times, is not well done: for there is a large Latitude, and, by necessity of
Circumstances, much may be admitted, and yet no Foundations destroyed; and
till Foundations be destroyed, the righteous should be quiet.

Now this should not prepare, this should not incline any man, to such an
indifferency, as that it should be all one to him, what became of all things;
all one, whether we had one, or two, or ten, or no Religion; or that he
should not be awake, and active, and diligent, in assisting truth, and
resisting all approaches of Error. For, God has said of all, into whose hand
he has committed power, You are Gods. Now, they are not Gods, but Idols, if,
as the Prophet says, Psalm. 115.6.
They have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, Hands and strike not; nay,
(as he adds there) if they have Noses and smell not; if they smell not out a
mischievous practice, before it come to execution. For, Gods eyes are upon the
ways of man, Job. 33.21.
and he sees all his goings: Those, who are in the number of them, of whom
God has said, they are Gods, must have their eyes upon the ways of men, and
not upon their Ends only; upon the paths of mischief, and not upon the bed
of mischief only; upon the Actors of mischief, and not upon the Act only.
Gods eyes sees our ways, says David too; that, is, he can see them, when he
will; but there is more in the other Prophet, Gods eyes are open upon all our
ways; Iere. 32.19.
always open, and he cannot choose but see: So that, a wilful shutting of the
eye, a winking, a conniuencie, is not an assimilation to God. And then, Aba^.
1.13.
Gods eyes are purer, then to behold evil, and they cannot look upon
iniquity: So that in an indifferency, whether Times, or Persons be good or
badd, there is not this assimulation to God, Hebr. 4.13.
Again, All things are naked and open to the eyes of God: So that in the
disguising, and palliating, and extenuating the faults of men, there is not
this assimilation to God. Thus far they falsify Gods Word, who has said,
They are Gods; for they are Idols; and not Gods, if they have eyes, and see
not. So is it also in the consideration of the Ear too for, as David says,
Psalm. 94.9.
Shall not he that planted the Ear, hear? So we may say, Shall he upon
whom God has planted an Ear, be deaf? Gods ears are so open so tender, so
sensible of any motion, Psalm. 39.12
as that David forms one Prayer thus, Auribus percipe lachrimas meas, O Lord,
hear my tears, he puts the office of the Eye too, upon the Ear. And then,
if the Magistrate stop his Ears with Wool, (with staple bribes, profitable
bribes) and with Cyuet in his wool, (perfumes of pleasure and preferment in
his bribes) he falsifies Gods Word, who has said, they are Gods, for they are
Idols, and not Gods, if they have ears, and hear not: And so it is also of
the hand too, In all that Job suffered, he says no more, but that the Hand of
God had touched him; but touched him, in respect of that he could have done:
for, when Job says to men, Why persecute you me, Job 19.22
as God? he means, as God could do, so vehemently, so ruinously, so
destructiuely, so irreparably. There is no phrase oftener in the Scriptures,
then that God delivered his people, in the hand of Moses, and the hand of
David, and the hand of the Prophets: all their Ministerial office is called
the Hand: and therefore, as David prays to God, That he would pull his hand
out of his bosom, and strike: so must we ever exhort the Magistrate, That he
would pluck his hand out of his pocket, and forget what is there, and execute
the Cause committed to him. For, as we, at last, shall commend our Spirits,
into the hands of God, God has commended our Spirits, not only our civil
peace, but our Religion too, into the hand of the Magistrate. And therefore,
when the Apostle says, Study to be quiet, it is not quiet in the blindness
of the Eye, nor quiet in the Deafness of the Ear, nor quiet in the Lamenesse
of the Hand; the just discharge of the duties of our several places, is no
disquieting to any man. But when private men will spend all their thoughts upon
their Superiors actions, this must necessarily disquiet them; for they are off
of their own Center, and they are extra Sphaeram Actiuitatis, out of their
own Distance, and Compass, and they cannot possibly discern the End, to
which their Superiors go. And to such a jealous man, when his jealousy is
not a tenderness toward his own actions, which is a holy and a wholesome
jealousy, but a suspicion of his Superiors actions, to this Man, every Wheel
is a Drum, and every Drum a Thunder, and every Thunder-clapp a dissolution
of the whole frame of the World: If there fall a broken tyle from the house,
he thinks Foundations are destroyed; if a crazie woman, or a disobedient
child, or a needy servant fall from our Religion, from our Church, he
thinks the whole Church must necessarily fall, when all this while there are
no Foundations destroyed; and till foundations be destroyed, the righteous
should be quiet.

Hence have we just occasion, first to condole amongst our selves, who, for
matters of Foundations profess one and the same Religion, and then to
complain of our Adversaries, who are of another. First, that amongst our
selves, for matters not Doctrinall, or if Doctrinall, yet not Fundamental,
only because we are sub-diuided in diverse Names, there should be such
Exasperations, such Exacerbations, such Vociferations, such Eiulations, such
Defamations of one another, as if all Foundations were destroyed. Who would
not tremble, to hear those Infernal words, spoken by men, to men, of one and
the same Religion fundamentally, as Indiabolificata, Perdiabolificata, and
Superdiabolificata, that the Devil, and all the Devils in Hell, and worse
then the Devil is in their Doctrine, and in their Divinity, when, God in
heaven knows, if their own uncharitableness did not exclude him, there were
room enough for the Holy Ghost, on both, and on either side, in those
Fundamental things, which are vnanimely professed by both: And yet every Mart,
we see more Books written by these men against one another, then by them
both, for Christ.

But yet though this Torrent of uncharitableness amongst them, be too
violent, yet it is within some banks; though it be a Sea, and too
tempestuous, it is limited within some bounds; The points are certain,
known, limited, and do not grow upon us every year, and day. But the
uncharitableness of the Church of Rome toward us all, is not a Torrent, nor
it is not a Sea, but a general Flood, an universal Deluge, that swallows all
the world, but that Church, and Churchyard, that Town, and Suburbs,
themselves, and those that depend upon them; and will not allow possibility
of Salvation to the whole Arc, the whole Christian Church, but to one Cabin in
that Arc, the Church of Rome; and then deny us this Salvation, not for any
Positive Error, that ever they charged us to affirm; not because we affirm
any thing, that they deny, but because we deny some things, which they in
their afternoon are come to affirm.

If they were Iusti, Righteous, right and just dealing men, they would not
raise such dustes, and then blind^ men's eyes with this dust of their own
raising, in things that concern no Foundations. It is true, that all Heresy
does concern Foundations: there is no Heresy to be called little: Great
Heresies proceeded from things, in appearance, small at first, and seemed to
look but toward small matters. There were great Heresies, that were but
Verbal, Heresies in some Word. That great Storm, that shaked the State, and
the Church, in the Council of Ephesus, and came to Factions, and Commotions in
the Secular part, and to Exautorations, and Excommunications amongst the
Bishops, so far, as that the Emperor came to declare both sides to be
Heretics; All this was for an Error in a Word, in the word Deipara, whether
the Blessed Virgin Marie were to be called the Mother of God, or no. There
have been Verbal Heresies, and Heresies that were but Syllabicall; little
Praepositions made Heresies; not only State-praepositions, Precedencies, and
Prerogatives of Church above Church, occasioned great Schisms, but Literal
Praepositions, Praepositions in Grammar, occasioned great Heresies. That great
Heresy of the Acephali, against which Damascene bendes himself in his Book,
De Natura Composita, was grounded in the Praeposition, In; They would confess
Ex, but not In, That Christ was made of two Natures, but that he did not
consist in two Natures. And we all know, what differences have been raised in
the Church, in that one point of the Sacrament, by these three Prepositions,
Trans, Con, and Sub. There have been great Heresies, but Verbal, but
Syllabicall; and as great, but Litterall; The greatest Heresy that ever was,
that of the Arrians, was but in one Letter. So then, in Heresy, there is
nothing to be called little, nothing to be suffered. It was excellently said
of Heretics, (though by one, who, though not then declared, Nestorius.
was then an Heretic in his heart,) Condolere Hereticis crimen est; It is a
fault, not only to be too indulgent to an Heretic, but to be too
compassionate of an Heretic, too sorry for an Heretic. It is a fault to
say, Alas, let him alone, he is but an Heretic; but, to say, Alas, hope well
of him, till you be better sure, that he is an Heretic, is charitably
spoken. God knows, the sharp and sour Name of Heretic, was too soon let
loose, and too fast spread in many places of the world. We see, that in some
of the first Catalogues, that were made of Heretics, men were Registered for
Heretics, that had but expounded a place of Scripture, otherwise then that
place had been formerly expounded, though there were no harm, in that new
Exposition. And then, when once that infamous Name of Heretic was fastened
upon a man, nothing was too heavy for, any thing was believed of that man. And
from thence it is, without question, that we find so many so absurd, so
senseless Opinions imputed to those men, who were then called Heretics, as
could not, in truth, with any possibility, fall into the imagination or
fancy of any man, much less be Doctrinally, or Dogmatically delivered. And
then, upon this, there issued Laws, from particular States, against particular
Heresies, that troubled those States then, as namely, against the Arrians, or
Macedonians, and such; and in a short time, these Laws came to be extended,
to all such Opinions, as the passion of succeeding times, called Heresy. And
at last, the Roman Church having constituted that Monopoly, That She only
should declare what should be Heresy, and having declared that to be
Heresy, which opposed, or retarded the dignity of that Church, now they call
in Brachium Spirituale, All those Sentences of Fathers, or Counsels that
mention Heresy, and they call in Brachium Saeculare, all those Laws which
punish Heresy, and whereas these Fathers, and Counsels, and States, intended
by Heresy, Opinions that destroyed Foundations, they bend all these against
every point, which may endammage, not the Church of God, but the Church of
Rome; nor the Church of Rome, but the Court of Rome; nor the Court of Rome, but
the Kitchen of Rome; not for the Heart, but for the Belly; not the Religion,
but the Policy; not the Altar, but the Exchequer of Rome.

But the Righteous looks to Foundations, before he will be scandalized
himself, or condemn another. When they call Saint Peter their first Pope, and
being remembered, how he denied his Master, say then, that was but an Act of
Infirmity, not of Infidelity, and there were no Foundations destroyed in
that; we press not that evidence against Saint Peter, we forbear, and we
are quiet. When we charge some of Saint Peter's imaginary Successors, some of
their Popes, with actual, and personal Sacrificing to Idols, some with
subscribing to formal Heresies, with their own hand, many with so enormous an
ill life, as that their own Authors will say, that for many years together,
there lived not one Pope, of whose Salvation, any hope could be conceived; and
they answer to all this, that all these were but Personal faults, and
destroyed no Foundations; we can be content to bury their faults with their
persons, and we are quiet. When we remember them, how many of the Fathers
excused officious Lies, and thought some kind of Lying to be no Sin, how
very many of them hearded in the heresy of the Millenarians, That the Saints
of God should enjoy a thousand years of temporal felicity in this world,
after their Resurrection, before they ascended into Heaven; And that they say
to all this, The Fathers said these things before the Church had decreed any
thing to the contrary, and till that, it was lawful for any man to say, or
think what he would, we do not load the memory of those blessed Fathers with
any heavier pressings, but we are quiet. Yet we cannot choose but tell them,
that tell us this, that they have taken a hard way, to make that saying true,
that all things are grown dear in our times; for they have made Salvation
dear; Threescore years ago, a man might have been saved at half the price
he can now: Threescore years ago, he might have been saved for believing
the Apostles Creed; now it will cost him the Trent Creed too. Evermore they
will press for all, and yield nothing; and there is indeed their
Specification, there is their Character, that is their Catholic, their
Universal; To have all; As, in Athanasius his time, when the Emperor pressed
him to afford the Arrians one Church in Alexandria, where he was Bishop, and
he asked but one Church in Antioch, where the Arrians prevailed, not doubting
but he should draw more to the true Church in Antioch, then they should
corrupt in Alexandria, yet this would not be granted; It would not be granted
at Rome, if we should ask a Church for a Church. In a word, we charge them
with uncharitableness, (and Charity is without all Controversy, a Foundation
of Religion) that they will so peremptorily exclude us from Heaven, for matters
that do not appertain to Foundations. For, if they will call all Foundations,
that that Church has, or does, or shall decree, we must learn our Catechism
upon our Death-bedd, and inquire for the Articles of our Faith, when we are
going out of the world, for they may have decreed something that Morning. No
one Author of theirs denied Pope Ioane, till they discerned the Consequence,
That by confessing a Woman Pope, they should disparage that Succession of
Bishops, which they pretend, And this Succession must be Foundation. No Author
of our side denied Saint Peter's being at Rome, till we discerned the
Consequence, That upon his personal being there, they grounded a Primacie in
that Sea, And this Primacie must be Foundation. Much might be admitted in
cases of In differencie, even in the Nature of the things, Much in cases of
Necessity, for the importance of Circumstances, much in cases of Conueniency,
for the suppling of boisterous, and for the becalming of tempestuous humors;
but when every thing must be called Foundation, we shall never know where to
stop, where to consist. If we should believe their Sacrificium incruentum,
their unbloody Sacrifice in the Mass, if we did not believe their Sacrificium
Cruentum too, that there was a power in that Church, to sacrifice the Blood of
Kings, we should be said to be defective in a fundamental Article. If we
should admit their Metaphysiques, their transcendent Transubstantiation, and
admit their Chimiques, their Purgatory Fires, and their Mythologie, and
Poetry, their apparitions of Souls and Spirits, they would bind us to their
Mathematiques too, and they would not let us be saved, except we would
reform our Almanackes to their ten days, and reform our Clockes to their
four and twenty: for who can tell when there is an end of Articles of Faith,
in an Arbitrarie, and in an Occasional Religion? When then this Prophet says,
If Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do, he means, that till
that, the righteous should be quiet: Except it were in fundamental Articles
of Faith, our selves should not be so bitter toward one another, our
Adversary should not be so uncharitable against us all. And farther we need
not extend this first Consideration.

The second is, to Suruay some Foundations, as fall within the frayltie, and
suspicion, and possibility of this Text, that they may be destroyed: for when
the Prophet says, If they be, they may be. Now Fundamentum proprie de
aedificijs dicitur, says the Law: when we speak of Foundations, we intend
a house: and here, we extend this House to four Considerations; for in four
Houses have every one of us a dwelling. For, first, Ecclesia Domus, the Church
is a House, it is Gods house; and in that House, we are of the householde of
the faithful, if (as it is testified of Moses) we be faithful in all his
House, Hebr. 3.5.
as Servants. You see there is a faithfulness required in every man, in all
the house of God, not in any one room; a disposition required to do good to
the whole Church of God every where, and not only at home. Secondly,
Respublica Domus, The Commonwealth, the State, the Kingdom is a House; and
this is that which is called so often, Domus Israel, The house of Israel, the
State, the Government of the Jews: And in this House, God dwells, as well as
in the other; In the State, as well as in the Church: For, these words, The
Lord has chosen Sion, Psa. 132.13
he has desired it for a habitation, are spoken of the whole Body, Church,
and State. Thirdly, there is Domus Habitationis, Domus quae Domicilium, a House
to dwell in, and to dwell with, a Family: and in this House God dwells too;
for, as David says of the Building, we may say of the Dwelling, Except the
Lord build the House, Psalm. 127.1.
they labor in vain: So except the Lord dwell in the House, it is a desolate
Habitation. And then lastly, there is Domus quae Dominus, a house which is the
Master of the House; for as every Man is a little World, so every man is his
own House, and dwells in himself: And in this House God dwells too; for the
Apostle seems so much to delight himself in that Metaphore, as that he
repeats it almost in all his Epistles, Habitat in nobis, That the Holy Ghost
dwells in us. Now, of all these four Houses, that house which has no walls,
but is spread over the face of the whole Earth, the Church, And that House,
which with us, has no other walls, but the Sea, the State, the Kingdom, And
that house which is walled with dry Earth, our dwelling house, our family, and
this house which is walled with wet Earth, this loame of flesh, our self, Of
all these four houses, those three, of which, and in which we are, and this
fourth, which we our self are, God is the Foundation, and so foundations
cannot be destroyed; But, as, though the common foundation of all buildings
be the Earth, yet we make particular foundations for particular Buildings, of
Stone, or Brick, or Piles, as the Soil requires; so shall we also here
consider such particular Foundations of these four houses, as may fall within
the frailty, and suspicion, within the possibility, and danger of the Text,
of being destroyed.

Of the first House then, Ecclesia Domus.
which is the Church, the foundation is Christ, Other foundation can no man
lay, 1 Cor. 3.11.
then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Non propterea dicimus, says
Saint Augustine. De vnita. Eccles. C. 16.
We do not say that our Church is Catholic therefore, because Optatus says
so, and because Ambrose says so, (and yet Optatus, and Ambrose, the Fathers,
are good Witnesses) neither do we say it, (says he) Quia Collegarum nostrorum
Conciliis praedicata est, Because some Synodes and Counsels of men of our own
Religion have said it is Catholic (And yet a Harmony of Confessions is good
Evidence,) Nec quia tanta fiunt in ea mirabilia, says he, we call it not
Catholic, because so many Miracles are wrought in it, (for we oppose Gods
many miraculous Deliverances of this State and Church, to all their imaginary
miracles of Rome) Non ideo manifestatur Catholica, says still that Father, All
this does not make our Church Catholic, nay, non manifestatur, all this does
not declare it to be Catholic, all these are no infallible marks thereof,
but only this one, says he, Quia ipse Dominus Jesus, etc. because the Lord
Jesus himself is the Foundation of this Church. But may not this be subject to
reasoning, to various Disputation, Whether we have that foundation, or no? It
may; but that will go far in the clearing thereof, which the same Father
says in another Book, De Moribus Eccles. Cat. C. 25.
Nihil in Ecclesia catholica salubrius fit, quam vt Rationem praecedat
Autoritas: Nothing is safer for the finding of the Catholic Church, then to
prefer Authority before my Reason, to submit and captiuate my Reason to
Authority. This the Roman Church pretends to embrace; but Apishly; like an
Ape, it kills with embracing; for it euacuates the right Authority; The
Authority that they obtrude, is the Decretals of their own Bishops, The
authority, which Saint Augustine literally and expressly declares himself to
mean, is the authority of the Scriptures.

Christ then, that is, the Doctrine of Christ, is the foundation of this first
House, the Church. 2 Chro. 3.3.
Haec sunt fundamenta quae iecit Solomon, says the vulgate Edition, These are
the foundations that Solomon laid; and then our Translation has it, These are
the things in which Solomon was instructed; One calls it Foundations, the other
Instructions; All Is one; The Instructions of Christ, the Doctrine of Christ,
the Word, the Scriptures of Christ, are the Foundation of this House. For, when
the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.20
Christ Jesus himself is the chief corner Stone, yet he adds there, Ye are
built upon the Prophets and Apostles: for the Prophets and Apostles, had their
part in the foundation; in the laying, though not in the being of the
Foundation. The wall of the city, Apoc. 21.14
says Saint John, had twelve Foundations, and in them, the Names of the twelve
Apostles: But still, in that place, they are Apostles of the Lamb, still they
have relation to Christ: For, they, who by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, writ
of Christ, and so made up the Body of the Scriptures, have their parts too, in
this Foundation. Besides these, it is said, in the building of the Material
Temple, 2 Reg. 5.17.
The King commanded, and they brought, great Stones, and costly Stones, and
hewed Stones, to lay the foundations of the House: The care of the King, the
labors of men conduce to the foundation. And besides this, in that place of
the Revelation, The foundation of the Wall, is said to be garnished with all
manner of precious stones; Garnished, but not made of that kind of precious
stones. So then Salomons hewed Stones, and costly stones, may, in a fair
accommodation, be understood to be the Determinations, and Resolutions,
Canons, and Decrees of general Councels: And Saint John's garnishment of
precious stones, may, in a fair accommodation, be understood to be the
Learned and Laborious, the zealous and the pious Commentaries and Expositions
of the Fathers; For Counsels and Fathers assist the Foundation; But the
foundation it self is Christ himself in his Word; his Scriptures. And then,
certainly they love the House best, that love the foundation best: not they,
that impute to the Scriptures such an Obscurity, as should make them
in-intelligible to us, or such a defect as should make them insufficient in
themselves. To deny us the use of Scriptures in our vulgar Translations, and
yet to deny us the use of them, in the Original Tongues too, To tell us we
must not try Controversies by our English, or our Latin Bibles, nor by the
Hebrew Bibles neither, To put such a Majesty upon the Scriptures, as that a
Lay man may not touch them, and yet to put such a diminution upon them, as that
the writings of men shall be equal to them; this is a wrinching, a shrinking,
a sinking, an undermining, a destroying of Foundations, of the foundation of
this first House, which is the Church, the Scriptures.

Respub. Domus.
Enter we now into a Suruay of the second House, The State, the Kingdom, the
Commonwealth; and of this House, the foundation is the Law. And therefore
Saint Hierome referres this Text, in a litterall and primary signification to
that, to the Law: for so, in his Commentaries upon the Psalms, he translates
this Text, Si dissipatae Leges, He makes the euacuating of the Law, this
destroying of foundations. Lex communis Reipub. sponsio, says the Law it
self: The Law is the mutual, the reciprocal Surety between the State and
the Subject. The Law is my Surety to the State, that I shall pay my
Obedience, And the Law is the States Surety to me, that I shall enjoy my
Protection. And therefore, therein did the Jews justly exalt themselves above
all other Nations, That God was come so much nearer to them then to other
Nations, by how much they had Laws and Ordinances more righteous then other
Nations had. Now, as it is said of the Foundations of the other House, the
Temple, The King commanded in the laying thereof, the King had his hand in the
Church, so is it also in this House, the State, the Commonwealth, the King
has his hand in, and upon the foundation here also, which is the Law: so
far, as that every forbearing of a Law, is not an Euacuating of the Law;
every Pardon, whether a Post-pardon, by way of mercy, after a Law is broken,
or a Prae-pardon, by way of Dispensation, in wisdom before a Law be broken,
is not a Destroying of this foundation. For, when such things as these are
done, Iuo.
Non astu Mentientis, sed affectu compatientis, not upon colorable disguises,
nor private respects, but truly for the General good, all these Pardons, and
Dispensations conduce and concur to the Office, and contract the Nature of
the Foundation it self, which is, that the whole Body may be the better
supported. But where there is an inducing of a super-Soueraigne, and a
super-Supremacie, and a Sea above our four Seas, and a Horn above our Head,
and a foreign Power above our Native and natural Power, where there are
dogmaticall, Positive Assertions, that men borne of us, and living with us, and
by us, are yet none of us, no Subjects, owe no Allegiance, this is a wrinching,
a shrinking, a sinking, an undermining, a destroying of Foundations, the
Foundation of this second House, which is the State, the Law.

The third House that falls into our present Suruay, Domus Domicilium.
is Domus quae Domicilium, Domus habitationis, our Dwelling house, or Family,
and of this house, the foundation is Peace: for Peace compacts all the pieces
of a family together; Husband and Wife, in Love and in Obedience, Father and
Son, in Care and in Obedience, Master and Servant, in Discipline and in
Obedience: Still Obedience is one Ingredient in all Peace; there is no Peace,
where there is no Obedience. Now every smoke does not argue the house to be on
fire; Every domestique offense taken or given, does not destroy this
Foundation, this Peace, within doors. There may be a Thunder from above, and
there may be an Earthquake from below, and yet the foundation of the House
safe: From above there may be a defect in the Superior, in the Husband, the
Father, the Master; and from below, in the Wife, the Son, the Servant; There
may be a Jealousy in the Husband, a Morositie in the Father, an
Imperiousness in the Master; And there may be an inobsequiousnesse and an
indiligence in the Wife, there may be leuitie and inconsideration in the
Son, and there may be unreadiness, unseasonableness in a Servant, and yet
Foundations stand, and Peace maintained, though not by an exquisite performing
of all duties, yet by a mutual support of one another infirmities. This
destroys no Foundation; But if there be a window opened in the house, to let
in a Jesuitical firebrand, that shall whisper, though not proclaim, deliver
with a non Dominus sed Ego, that though it be not a declared Tenet of the
Church, yet he thinks, that in case of Heresy, Civil and Natural, and
Matrimonial duties cease, no Civil, no Natural, no Matrimonial Tribute due
to an Heretic; Or if there be such a fire kindled within doors, that the
Husbands jealousy come to a Substraction of necessary means at home, or to
Defamation abroad, or the Wives leuitie induce just Imputation at home, or
scandal abroad, If the Fathers wastfulnesse amount to a Disinheriting, because
he leaves nothing to be inherited, Or the Sons incorrigiblenesse occasion a
just disinheriting, though there be enough, If the Master make Slaves of
Servants, and macerate them, or the Servants make prize of the Master, and prey
upon him, in these cases, and such as these, there is a wrinching, a shrinking,
a sinking, an vnderming, a destroying of Foundations, the Foundation of this
third House, which is the family, Peace.

Domus Dominus.
There remains yet another House, a fourth House, a poor and wretched Cottage;
worse then our Statute Cottages; for to them the Statute lays out certain
Acres; but for these Cotages, we measure not by Acres, but by Feet; and five
or six foot serves any Cottager: so much as makes a Grave, makes up the best
of our Glebe, that are of the Inferior, and the best of their Temporalties,
that are of the Superior Clergy, and the best of their Demeanes that are in
the greatest Sovereignty in this world: for this house is but our self, and
the foundation of this House is Conscience. For, this proceeding with a good
Conscience in every particular action, is that, which the Apostle calls, 1 Timothy 6.19.
The laying up in store for our selves, a good foundation, against the time to
come: The House comes not till the time to come, but the Foundation must be
laid here. Abraham looked for a City; Heb. 11.10
that was a future expectation; but, says that Text, it was a City that has
a foundation; the foundation was laid already, even in this life, in a good
Conscience: For no interest, no mansion shall that Man have in the vpper-roomes
of that Jerusalem, that has not laid the foundation in a good Conscience
here. But what is Conscience? Conscience has but these two Elements,
Knowledge, and Practice; for Conscientia presumit Scientiam; He that does any
thing with a good Conscience, knows that he should do it, and why he does
it: He that does good ignorantly, stupidly, inconsiderately, implicitly, does
good, but he does that good ill. Conscience is, Syllogismus practicus; upon
certain premises, well debated, I conclude, that I should do it, and then I
do it. Now for the destroying of this foundation, there are sins, which by
Gods ordinary grace exhibited in his Church, prove but Alarums, but Sentinells
to the Conscience: The very sin, or something that does naturally accompany
that sin, Poverty, or Sickness, or Infamy, calls upon a man, and awakens
him to a remorse of the sin. Which made Saint Augustine say, That a man got
by some sins; some sins help him in the way of repentance for sin; and
these sins do not destroy the foundation. But there are sins, which in
their nature preclude repentance, and batter the Conscience, deuastate,
depopulate, exterminate, annihilate the Conscience, and leave no sense at all,
or but a sense of Desperation. And then, the case being reduced to that, Sap.
17.11.
That wickedness condemned by her own wickedness, becomes very timorous, (so as
the Conscience grows afraid, that the promises of the Gospel belong not to
her) And (as it is added there) being pressed with Conscience, always
forecasteth grievous things) that whatsoever God lays upon him here, all that
is but his earnest of future worse torments, when it comes to such a Fear, as
(as it is added in the next verse) Betrays the succors that Reason offers
him, ver. 12.
That whereas in reason a man might argue, God has pardoned greater sins,
and greater sinners, yet he can find no hope for himself; this is a
shrinking, a sinking, an undermining, a destroying of this Foundation of this
fourth House, the Conscience: And farther we proceed not in this Suruay.

We are now upon that which we foundations are shaked, the righteous stirs
not; In some cases some foundations may be shaked; if they be, what can the
righteous do? The holy Ghost never asks the question, what the unrighteous,
the wicked can do: They do well enough, best of all, in such cases:
Demolitions and Ruins are their raisings; Troubles are their peace, Tempests
are their calmes, Fires and combustions are their refreshings, Massacres are
their harvest, and Destruction is their Vintage; All their Rivers run in
Eddies, and all their Centers are in wheels, and in perpetual motions; the
wicked do well enough, best of all then; but what shall the righteous do? The
first entrance of the Psalm in the first verse, seems to give an answer; The
righteous may fly to the Mountain as a Bird; he may retire, withdraw
himself. But then the general scope of the Psalm, gives a Reply to the
Answer; for all Expositors take the whole Psalm to be an answer from David,
and given with some indignation against them, who persuaded him to fly, or
retire himself. Not that David would constitute a Rule in his Example, that it
was unlawful to fly in a time of danger or persecution, (for it would not be
hard to observe at least nine or ten several flights of David) but that in
some cases such circumstances of Time, and Place, and Person, may accompany and
inuest the action, as that it may be inconvenient for that Man, at that Time,
to retire himself. As often, as the retyring amounts to the forsaking of a
Calling, it will become a very disputable thing, how far a retyring may be
lawful. Saint Peter's vehement zeal in dissuading Christ from going up to
Jerusalem, Mat. 16.21.
in a time of danger, was so far from retarding Christ in that purpose, as
that it drew a more bitter increpation from Christ upon Peter, then at any
other time.

So then, in the Text, we have a Rule employed, Something is left to the
righteous to do, though some Foundations be destroyed; for the words are
words of Consultation, and consultation with God; when Man can afford no
Counsel, God can, and will direct those that are his, the righteous, what to
do. The words give us the Rule, and Christ gives us the Example in himself.
First, he continues his Innocence, and auowes that; the destroying of
Foundations, does not destroy his Foundation, Innocence: still he is able to
confound his adversaries, Ioh. 8.46.
with that, Which of you can convince me of sin? And then, he prays for
the remoouing of the persecution, Transeat Calix, let this Cup pass. When that
might not be, he prays even for them, who inflicted this persecution, Pater
ignosce, Father forgive them; And when all is done, he suffers all that can
be done unto him: And he calls his whole Passion, Horam suam, it spent nights
and days; his whole life was a continual Passion; yet how long soever, he
calls it but an Hour, and how much soever it were their act, the act of their
malignitie that did it, yet he calls it his, because it was the act of his
own Predestination as God, upon himself as Man; And he calls it by a more
acceptable Name then that, he calls his Passion Calicem suum, his Cup,
because he brought not only a patience to it, but a delight and a joy in it;
for, for the joy that was set before him, Hebr. 12.2.
he endured the Cross. All this then the righteous can do, though
Foundations be destroyed; He can withdraw himself, if the duties of his
place make not his residence necessary; If it do, he can pray; and then he
can suffer; and then he can rejoice in his sufferings; and he can make that
protestation, Our God is able to deliver us, Dan. 3.17.
and he will deliver us; but if not, we will serve no other Gods. For, the
righteous has evermore this refuge, this assurance, that though some
Foundations be destroyed, all cannot be: for first, The foundation of God
stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19
and he knows who are his; He is safe in God; and then he is safe in his
own Conscience, Pro. 10.25.
for, The Righteous is an everlasting foundation; not only that he has one,
but is one; and not a temporary, but an everlasting Foundation: So that
foundations can never be so destroyed, but that he is safe in God, and safe
in himself.

Domus Ecclesia.
For such things then, as concern the foundation of the first House, the
Church, Be not apt to call Super-Edifications, Foundations; Collateral
Divinity, Fundamental Divinity; Problematicall, Disputable, Controuertible
points, points Essential, and Articles of Faith. Call not Super-Edifications,
Foundations, nor call not the furniture of the House, Foundations; Call not
Ceremonial, and Rituall things, Essential parts of Religion, and of the
worship of God, otherwise then as they imply Disobedience; for Obedience to
lawful Authority, is always an Essential part of Religion. Do not
Anti-date Misery; do not Prophecy Ruin; do not Concur with Mischief,
nor Contribute to Mischief so far, as to ouer-feare it before, nor to mis
interpret their ways, whose Ends you cannot know; And do not call the
cracking of a pane of glass, a Destroying of foundations. But every man doing
the particular duties of his distinct Calling, for the preservation of
Foundations, Praying, and Preaching, and Doing, and Counsailing, and
Contributing too, Foundations being never destroyed, the Righteous shall do
still, as they have done, enjoy God manifested in Christ, and Christ applied in
the Scriptures, which is the foundation of the first House, the Church.

For things concerning the Foundation of the second House, Respub. Domus.
the Commonwealth, which is the Law, Dispute not Laws, but obey them when
they are made; In those Counsels, where Laws are made, or reformed, dispute;
but there also, without particular interest, without private affection, without
personal relations. Call not every entrance of such a Judge, as thou think
insufficient, a corrupt entrance; nor every Judgment, which he enters, and
thou understand not, or likest not, a corrupt Judgment. As in Natural
things, it is a weakness to think, that every thing that I know not how it
is done, is done by Witch craft, So is it also in Civil things, if I know not
why it is done, to think it is done for Money. Let the Law be sacred to thee,
and the Dispensers of the Law, reverend; Keep the Law, and the Law shall
keep thee; And so Foundations being never destroyed, the Righteous shall do
still, as they have done, enjoy their Possessions, and Honors, and themselves,
by the ouershadowing of the Law, which is the Foundation of the second House,
the State.

For those things which concern the Foundations of the third House, Domus
Domicilium.
the Family, Call not light faults by heavy Names; Call not all sociablenesse,
and Conversation, Disloyalty in thy Wife; Nor all leuitie, or
pleasurablenesse, Incorrigiblenesse in thy Son; nor all negligence, or
forgetfulness, Perfidiousnesse in thy Servant; Nor let every light disorder
within doors, shut thee out of doors, or make thee a stranger in thine own
House. In a smoakie room, it may be enough to open a Window, without leaving
the place; In Domestique unkindness, and discontents, it may be wholesomer
to give them a Concoction at home in a discreet patience, or to give them a
vent at home, in a moderate rebuke, then to think to ease them, or put them
off, with false diuertions abroad. As States subsist in part, by keeping their
weaknesses from being known, so is it the quiet of Families, to have their
Chauncerie, and their Parliament within doors, and to compose and determine
all emergent differences there: for so also, Foundations being kept
undestroyed, the righteous shall do, as they should do, enjoy a Religious
Unity, and a Civil Unity, the same Soul toward God, the same heart toward
one another, in a holy, and in a happy Peace, and Peace is the foundation of
this third House, The Family.

Domus Dominus.
Lastly, for those things which concern the Foundations of the fourth House,
Our selves, Mis-interprete not Gods former Corrections upon thee, how long, how
sharp soever: Call not his Physic, poison, nor his Fish, Scorpions, nor his
Bread, Stone: Accuse not God, for that he has done, nor suspect not God, for
that he may do, as though God had made thee, only because he lacked a man,
to damn. In all scruples of Conscience, say with Saint Peter, Domine quo
vadam, Lord, whither shall I go, thou have the Word of eternal life, And God
will not leave thee in the dark: In all oppression from potent Adversaries,
say with David, Tibi soli peccaui: Against thee, O Lord, only have I sinned,
And God will not make the malice of another man his Executioner upon thee. Cry
to him; and if he have not heard thee, cry louder, and cry oftener; The first
way that God admitted thee to him, was by Water, the water of Baptism; Go
still the same way to him, by Water, by repentant Tears: And remember still,
that when Ezechias wept, Vidit lachrymam, God saw his Tear, His Tear in the
Singular; God saw his first tear, every several tear: If thou think God
have not done so by thee, Continue thy tears, till thou find he do. The
first way that Christ came to thee, was in Blood; when he submitted himself
to the Law, in Circumcision; And the last thing that he bequeathed to thee,
was his Blood, in the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament; Refuse not to go
to him, the same way too, if his glory require that Sacrifice. If thou pray,
and have an apprehension that thou hear God say, he will not hear thy
prayers, do not believe that it is he that speaks; If thou can not choose
but believe that it is he, let me say, in a pious sense, do not believe him:
God would not be believed, in denouncing of Judgments, so absolutely, so
peremptorily, as to be thought to speak vnconditionally, illimitedly: God
took it well at David's hands, that when the Prophet had told him, The child
shall surely die, yet he believed not the Prophet so peremptorily, but that
he proceeded in Prayer to God, for the life of the child. Say with David,
Thou have been a strong Tower to me; Psalm. 61.4.62.7.
I will abide in thy Tabernacle, Et non Emigrabo, I will never go out, I know
thou have a Church, I know I am in it, and I will never depart from it; and so
Foundations being never destroyed, the righteous shall do, as the righteous
have always done, enjoy the Evidence, and the Verdict, and the Judgment, and
the Possession of a good Conscience, which is the Foundation of this fourth
House. First, govern this first House, Thy self, well; and as Christ said,
he shall say again, Thou have been faithful in a little, take more; He
shall enlarge thee in the next House, Thy Family, and the next, The State, and
the other, The Church, till he say to thee, as he did to Jerusalem, after all
his other Blessings, Et prosperata es in Regnum, Now I have brought thee up to
a Kingdom, A Kingdom, where not only no Foundations can be destroyed, but
no stone shaked; and where the Righteous know always what to do, to glorify
God, in that incessant Acclamation, Salvation to our God, who sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb; And to this Lamb of God, who has taken away the
sins of the world, and but changed the Suns of the world, who has
complicated two wondrous works in one, To make our Sun to set at Noone, and
to make our Sun to rise at Noone too, That has given him Glory, and not
taken away our Peace, That has exalted him to Vpper-roomes, and not shaked any
Foundations of ours, To this Lamb of God, the glorious Son of God, and the
most Almighty Father, and the Blessed Spirit of Comfort, three Persons, and
one God, be ascribed by us, and the whole Church, the Triumphant Church, where
the Father of blessed Memory reigns with God, and the Militant Church, where
the Son of blessed Assurance reigns for God, All Power, Praise, Might,
Majesty, Glory, and Dominion, now, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Errat. Page 12. l. 17. for Cause, read Laws. pa 43. l. 20. for Syllagismus,
r. Syllogismus.



