SEVEN GODLY AND FRVITFVLL SERMONS. THE SIX FIRST PREACHED by Master JOHN DOD:
the last by Master ROBERT CLEAVER.

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED, A brief Discourse, touching, 1. Extinguishing of the
Spirit, 2. Murmuring in affliction.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for WILLIAM WELBY, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swan. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTER ERASMUS DRYDEN Esquier, grace, and peace be
multiplied.
SIR, it is a point well known unto your Worship, that in duties of absolute
necessity we must regard what God does command and enjoin, not what men do
approve and like of: and that we must still offer up our service in obedience
to the Almighty, whatsoever men do think or speak of us. As for this work
of publishing the labors of such faithful and painful Ministers, as desire
rather to spend their time in preaching, then in writing, I take it not to be a
duty of that kind: but of an inferior nature; wherein the acceptance or
disallowance of those that are godly wise, should have a great stroke, either
for encouragement to proceed in it, or for discouragement to desist from it.
Herein having made some trial, I have (through Gods blessing) found success
beyond my expectation: which as it ministers unto me matter of much
rejoicing, in regard there are many thousands in Israel, who desire and embrace
the sincere and plain doctrine of the Gospel; so does it set an edge on my
desires to take up some vacant hours in this employment: being right glad, if
by any means I may be an helper to the truth, and an instrument of refreshing
hungerbitten souls, by conueying unto them some baskets full of such
fragments, as may be communicated without any detriment or disadvantage to my
self, or to any else. These Sermons I have made bold to recommend unto your
favorable acceptance and patronage, not only in regard of the interest which
you have in them, and that encouragement which I have often received from your
Worship in businesses of this nature; but also because I persuade my self that
your very countenancing of them, will add, though not unto their goodness, yet
unto their good esteem, among many that are religiously affected.

And thus nothing doubting of your Worships favor in taking in good worth this
my bold attempt, I leave you to the safe tuition of God Almighty, beseeching
him to enrich you and yours with all manner of corporal and spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus; and to add unto your life, as also unto the life of
your faithful and gracious yoake-fellow, many happy and comfortable days.

Your Worships much indebted, and in what J may to be commanded, JOHN WINSTON.

The Doctrines of the first Sermon on ZECHARY 12.10.
Doct. 1. THe way to all happiness, is, to have the Spirit of grace. 2. None
can make a faithful prayer without the assistance of Gods Spirit. 3. The
Spirit of prayer does always lead men unto Christ Jesus. 4. The due
consideration of Christ his death, is asorcible means to affect the heart with
godly sorrow. 5. It is not sufficient to mourn for sin, but we must make our
sins to be our greatest sorrow. 6. It is not enough for men to be religious
themselves, but their families also must be religious. 7. Holy duties must be
performed in secret as well as in public.
The Doctrines of the second Sermon on LVKE 6.48.
Doct. 1. Hypocrites may go as far as Christians in many things. 2. They are
the blessedest hearers of the word, that are the best practisers thereof. 3.
Every man is in truth that out of temptation, which he shows himself to be
in temptation. 4. Of all falls, the fall from religion is the most woeful.
The Doctrines of the Sermon on PSALM 14.5.
Doct. 1. They that are most bold in committing of sin, are most cowardly
when dangers do approach. 2. God is always present with good men. 3. Mocking
is a grievous kind of persecution. 4. The estate of Gods people is commonly a
poor and afflicted estate. 5. True godliness is that which breeds the
quarrel betwixt the wicked and the godly.
Five other select Doctrines.
Doct. 1. They are the most miserable rebels, that rebel against God. 2. It is
an infallible note of an impious person, to be unwilling to hear the word of
God. 3. The more holy and wholesome any doctrine is, the more grievous to
wicked sinners. 4. Our wretched nature is never so forward unto any thing, as
unto that which is evil. 5. All the sorrows of Gods children shall end in
joy.
THE FIRST SERMON, UPON the twelfth of Zechariah.
ZECH. 12. verse. 10.11, etc. Verse. 10. And I will power upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of
prayers, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced; and they shall
lament for him, as one that mourns for his only Son, and be sorry for him,
as one is sorry for his first borne.

11 In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning
of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo.

12 And the land shall bewail every family apart, the family of the house of
David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart,
and their wives apart.

13 The family of the house of Leui apart, and their wives apart; the family of
Shimei apart, and their wives apart.

14 All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.


IN the eighth and ninth verses of this Chapter is set down a gracious promise
of God, made unto the church, which should be in the time of the Gospel (for
that is meant by the inhabitants of Jerusalem.) Which promise is this, that he
that is feeble among them: that is, the weakest Christian that made conscience
of his ways, and of the means of his salvation, in that day should be as
David: that is, equal to the most excellent in the time of the law in sundry
respects: and the house of David: that is, the excellenter sort of Christians,
should be as Gods house, and as the Angel of the Lord before them. The
Prophet could not find any holy man, with whom he might filly compare them,
and therefore he says, that they should be like the Angel of the covenant
Christ Jesus, which went before the Israelites in the wilderness to guide and
govern them.

Then he goes on and tells us, that after the Lord has showed this mercy
unto his Church, He will seek to destroy all nations that come against
Jerusalem; that is, all the enemies that do oppose themselves unto his people,
and endeavor to hinder his good work in them, and for them. Now when it is
said that he will seek to destroy them, the meaning is, that as he has a
resolution to overthrow them, so he will provide means whereby it shall be
effected.

Then further in the tenth verse he sets down the means how his people
would be brought to such excellency. I will pour upon the house of David, and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace, etc. Signifying that he
would vouchsafe unto his Church under the Gospel a more plentiful measure of
his Spirit, that as, they should have more excellent, and clear, and powerful
means; so they should find a greater blessing upon the use of those means;
that whereas under the law, they had but drops of grace, distilling easily and
by little and little, now they should have whole buckets full, as it were; yea
whole floods of grace poured down upon all sorts of Gods servants. By the
Spirit of grace, is meant the Spirit of adoption, and of regeneration; so
called, both because it is given out of Gods free grace and favor, as also
because it works grace and goodness in all such as are endued therewith:
this Spirit is further described by a special effect, viz. that it is a Spirit
of prayers. Till such time as men are made partakers hereof, they may use many
words of prayer, but they are altogether idle and vain; fruits of their
flesh, and not of their faith; such as they have great cause to be humbled for,
and no reason at all to be comforted in: but when once they have this Spirit
put into their hearts, they can call upon the Lord in an acceptable and
comfortable manner.

Then next is showed whither this Spirit leads them; to wit, unto Christ.
They shall look on him, whom they have pierced. When men begin to pray in a
religious and conscionable manner, they disclaim all fleshly helps and hopes,
and betake themselves unto their Savior, whom they have pierced by their
sins; for it cannot properly be said, that the Scribes and Pharisees, or
Judas, or the high Priests, or the Romans, did put Christ to death-they being
but instruments thereof; but the iniquities of Gods elect did the fact, and
they were indeed the true and principal cause, that brought upon the Son of
God all manner of affliction, and persecution, and execution it self.

In the next place it is said, that when his children shall look upon him,
They shall lament for him, or over him, or concerning him: (all comes to one
reckoning.) As soon as they see what evils, and miseries, they have brought
upon Christ Jesus, by their transgressions, and how odious their offenses are,
which could be healed by no other medicine, but by the precious blood of the
immaculate Iambe of God: the due consideration hereof will cause them to be
troubled and grieved at the very heart. Which grief is set out, by two
special circumstances; to wit, by the greatness of it, and by the truth of
it. The greatness thereof is declared by two comparisons, which yet are
inferior and less then the thing it self.

For the first comparison, it is said, That they should lament for him, as one
that mourns for his only son, and be sorry, as one is sorry for his first
borne. If parents have many children, yet it will much grieve them to part with
any of them: but if they have but one only son, who is likely to be the
heir of the family, and they lose him, and so are disappointed of their hope,
then they usually mourn with an exceeding bitter lamentation, as the woman of
the city of Nain did for the death of her only son. Luke 7.11. Such (the
holy Ghost says) shall be the sorrow of all true penitent persons, when they
apprehend the multitude and grieuousnesse of their sins, whereby they have
slain the Lord of life.

The second comparison, here used to express the measure of their sorrow, is
taken from the example of the Jews, who when their godly and worthy king
Josiah was slain in the valley of Megiddo near Hadadrimmon, in fighting
against Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt, 2. Chron. 35.
they lamented for him very bitterly: and not only the common people who have
not so good a government of their affections, mourned for him, but Jeremiah the
Prophet also, and others of the best sort of men and women, took this loss
exceedingly to heart, as seeing in the death of Josiah, the death and ruin
both of Church and common wealth. In which regard it was set down as an
ordinance, that they should have set times of mourning, for that affliction
which befell them through his death; and such (says the Prophet) shall be the
lamentation of those that attain to the sight and sense of their sins,
whereby they have slain the Lord Christ Jesus. verse 11.

Having thus set forth the greatness of their sorrow, he comes in the next
place to express the soundness thereof: The land shall bewail every family
apart, etc. Not in the public assemblies alone, where the tears of one may
draw on the tears of another, and so their mourning be either natural for
company, or hypocritall for vain glory: but he says, that every family should
weep apart, and in private; yea not only the several families, but
particular persons, yea those that were most nearly lincked together, viz. the
husband and the wife, should be separated in this work of humiliation, and
not content themselves to pray and bewail their sins one with another, but
take some time each of them to perform this duty in secret; and if they that
are so inward one with another should lament apart, much more others, that are
further off one from another.

By the house of David is meant (as was before showed) the excellenter sort of
Christians; and the like is signified by the house of Nathan, who was the son
of David, of whom Christ came: (for the family of Solomon was wholly
extinguished.) By the house of Leui, is meant the ordinary sort of the Levites;
and as for the family of Shimei, it was one of the principal families of Leui.
Whence we may observe, that all families without exception are tied to this
work, and ought jointly and severally to perform the same. None are so good
but they must weep for their sins in secret, and pray for the continuance
and increase of their goodness: and as it is not needless for the best, so
neither is it bootlesse for the meanest, but whosoever does so, shall have a
fountain of grace opened unto him, whereby all his iniquities shall be washed
away.

The drift then of these words (we see) is, to manifest and express the great
goodness of God toward his servants, in the time of the Gospel; and here is
showed, 1 First, what gift he will bestow upon them, viz. abundance of his holy
Spirit. 2 Secondly, the good use that they will make of it, which is twofold.
1 First, they will betake themselves unto faithful prayer, and by the eye of
faith look unto Christ, through whom both they and their prayers must be
accepted. 2 Secondly, they will grow to a maruailous great loathing and dislike
of their sins, and sorrow for the same; which is declared by two maine
circumstances, viz.
1 The greatness thereof, which is illustrated by two comparisons. 2 The
soundness thereof, both which are more fully laid open in that which goes
before.


Thus much concerning the meaning and order of the words: now let us consider
of such instructions as may thence arise for our learning.

Verse. 11. [ And I will pour upon the house of David, etc. the Spirit of grace
etc.] In that the Lord having promised, that his Church shall be brought to
wonderful excellency, does set down this as the means whereby he will effect
it, that they shall have the Spirit in great plenty powered down upon them, this
shall be the doctrine, That the way to all happiness and blessedness, The
Spirit of God is the author of all happiness.


Whosoever has not this, though he be never so great in the world, he is
altogether wretched and miserable, subject to the curse of God, and to
continual vexations, and discontentments: and on the other side, whosoever
has this holy Spirit dwelling in his heart, is an happy and blessed man,
though he be never so much dejected and cast down through outward afflictions
and tribulations.

This point is evident in the prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 32.13.14. etc.
where it is showed, that so long as the Spirit of God is withheld from men,
they have grievous ruins, and desperate decaies among them, and they still go
from ill to worse, being ill without, and ill within: but how long does this
continue? Until the Spirit be powered upon them from above. And what then? The
wilderness shall become a fruitful field; That is, those men and women that
were like a wilderness before, bringing forth nothing but brambles and briars,
nothing but pride and worldliness, and such like fruits of the flesh, even
those men and women shall be as a fruitful field, being beautified and adorned
with the virtues of Christ, and with the graces of his Spirit; and not only
so, but likewise enriched, with all good prosperity, which the Lord sees
needful for them.

Now the reasons why the Spirit makes men so happy,

First, Romans 8.13.
with all the lusts and fruits thereof. It does not lie still where it is,
suffering the soul of the party to be under the dominion of sin; but it
abateth and consurneth it by little and little, till at length his soul and
body be as clear from sin, as Adams was before his fall. So that look how
the Israelites did by degrees wear and wast the Canaanites out of the land,
till it was wholly brought in subjection unto them: so does the holy Ghost
destroy and root out the enemies of our souls; not making them tributarie, as
Joshua did some of the cursed Canaanites, but spoiling them of their strength
by little and little; and at length utterly consuming This is to be understood
of the time of their dissolution: as it appears by diverse other Doctrines of
Master Dods: as that on Isaiah, Doct. 4. and Doct. 8. that God looks not for
perfection in this life. See also the 3. use of this Doct. Ephesians. 2.1. Romans
8.11. 1. John 4.4.
them, so that they shall have no place at all within us. And as it kills
sin, so it quickens the dead soul, and makes the whole man apt and fit
for every good work. That Spirit which raised up Christ Jesus from a natural
death, does also raise us up from the death of sin, to the life of grace: and
puts more spiritual strength into us, then the flesh, the world and the
devil can bring against us.

Further more in the third Chapter of the second to the Corinthians, 2. Cor.
3.14.
so that they can see nothing to save their souls, to further their
repentance, to cause them to believe in Christ Jesus, and to place their hope,
and happiness in him: as soon as ever the Spirit of grace enters into them,
this blindness of mind and hardness of heart is removed; and then they are
enabled soundly to understand, and truly to apply the word preached unto
their own souls. Verse 16.

Again, That where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, Verse. 17.
Till such time as that does set men free, they are held fast in the cords and
chains of iniquity, and are miserable slaves unto the vilest slave that is,
even unto Satan himself (who is an Apostata, and a reprobate,) and in the most
wretched slavery that can be imagined, viz. to serve sin in the lusts thereof;
and (which is the most grievous of all the rest) they shall have the worst
wages that may be, even the curse and vengeance of God, while they live, and
eternal damnation of body and soul after they are dead. Now when the Spirit
of Christ takes possession of us, it causes us to disclaim the service of
Satan, and to become servants unto the living God; Romans 6.
it fills us full of good meditations, of holy desires, and spiritual
affections; it furnishes us with ability to perform the duties of religion,
and of our callings; and in a word, it makes us willing and able both to do
all manner of good, and to resist all manner of evil. So that after we have
received the holy Ghost into our hearts, we shall not say: This is my nature,
and I cannot do otherwise: but with the Apostle Paul; I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me: I will never be in bondage unto my
corruptions any more; for grace shall have the upper hand of nature, and the
Spirit shall master the flesh, and get the better of it.

Lastly, it is added in the same place, verse 16. We would think no price too
great to be given for such a looking glass, as would make one that is deformed
to become beautiful by the very beholding thereof: how much then should we
esteem the holy word of God, which (through the operation of the Spirit) is
made effectual, not to change the natural visage (which is a smaller matter)
but to alter the form and shape of the soul, and to make it very beautiful
and amiable in the sight of God and of his holy Angels, which was before time a
most ugly and deformed creature? This must needs be a marvelous great benefit;
for if the defacing of Gods Image be the cause of all our woe, then the
repairing thereof must of necessity be the cause of all our happiness.

A fifth reason why their state is so happy that are endued with Gods spirit,
is, upon them, do either fret or faint; either fall to murmuring, or to
desperation: but those that have their hearts replenished with the holy Ghost,
do then most strongly rejoice, when tribulations and miseries lie most heavily
upon them: as the Apostles when they were most grievously persecuted, are said
then to be filled with the holy Ghost. Acts 4.31.
And what of that? Acts 5.41.
Then they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ
his name. And as Paul's sufferings did abound, 2. Cor. 1.5.
so did his consolations in Christ abound also. So that when comfort is comfort
indeed, and when life it self would go unless comfort came, then does the
holy Ghost most plenteously refresh the heart with inward joy and contentment:
1. Pet. 1.6.8.
according to that saying of the Apostle Peter; Now for a season ye are in
heaviness, and yet rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

Hitherto the reasons alleged have tended chiefly to his, even to show what
good the Spirit of grace brings unto our selves.

Now further, Gal. 5.22. And in the sixth chapter of that Epistle, ver. 1. the
Apostle says; If any man be overtaken by any offense; ye that are spiritual
restore such a one, not ye that are witty or learned, etc. For no man can be a
good Physician unto others, but he that has first wrought a cure upon his own
soul; in which regard the Apostle Paul says: 2. Cor. 1.4.
We are able to comfort others with the consolations wherewith we our selves
have been comforted. Look then who is most spiritual, and we shall find that
he does always most good. Therefore was it, that when the Apostles were to
convert the whole world, and to batter down hell gates upon Satan's head, they
had the Spirit plentifully poured down upon them; Acts 2.
which filled them so full of heavenly wisdom, and courage, and zeal, that
they did that which all the Kings and Monarchs of the earth could never have
effected by all their power and policy. So also when Christ was to do the
greatest good that ever any creature did, the Lord says, that his Spirit shall
rest upon him: and thereby was he fitted to go through with the great work of
our redemption. Isai. 11.1.
For (as it is in that place) the Spirit of the Lord is a Spirit [of wisdom
and vnderstanding] making those that have it to be of a sound judgment, and
able to search into the hidden things of God: [a Spirit of counsell] to guide
and direct them [and of power] to strengthen and confirm them, though they
were never so feeble and weak: [a Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the
Lord] to make such as are endued therewith, prudent in his fear, as there the
Prophet speaks.

Now seeing it is clear by these reasons, that the having of this holy spirit
is the way to al happiness:

First of al,

Secondly, Romans 8.9.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his: and if he be
not his, 2. Cor. 13.
he is for the present, a bondslaue of Satan, and in the state of a reprobate;
and if such can be happy men, then are they happy, otherwise not. If it were
possible that for their outward condition of life they could be equal unto Adam
in paradise, yet must they needs be very miserable as he was, when the spirit
of God was taken from him; it was not the garden of Eden that could then yield
him contentment, but he was in far greater misery and perplexity in that
place then many thieves are in the dungeon, or upon the gallows, when they are
ready to be turned over. He that has the spirit of God as Paul had, shall find
a heaven in prison, in sickness, in death it self: whereas he that has it
not, shall find a hell, though he lived in as good a place as the very paradise
of God was.

Thirdly, here is an use of instruction, viz.

If then we would be resolved of this point, How we may discern whether we
have the spirit or not. Gal. 5.17.
let us first examine, whether there be in us that continual war and
conflict (mentioned Gal. 5.17.) between the flesh and the Spirit, which al
godly men do find and feel in themselves more or less: for as the Apostle
there speaks, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh. Now this combat is general throughout all the powers and faculties
of the soul, as (to give instance in the chief of them:) First, in the
understanding part, there is a conflict between carnal reason, and the
judgment rightly informed by Gods word; as in this particular: A good man is
railed upon, and undeservedly traduced, and vilified; in this case reason will
thus play its part: Why should you bear it at his hand, are not you his
better? have you not him at an advantage? Why should you not take him down,
and give him as good as he brings? Nay (says the Spirit) you must not render
evil for evil, Romans 12. Matthew. 5.
but rather overcome evil with goodness, and bless them that curse you, and
pray for such as hate you and persecute you in word or deed: they have too
much fire in them already, and therefore do not you add more fuel thereunto,
lest the flame be redoubled; but rather cast water upon it, that it may be
extinguished. Thus does the Spirit bring the weapons of God to subdue the
flesh, even as the flesh does come armed with the weapons of the Devil to
resist the Spirit. Indeed there is many tiems in unregenerate persons, a fight
betwixt carnal reason and their natural conscience; but that is not general
throughout all the powers of the soul, neither does it extend it self unto
the motions and inclinations that are evil, to curb and repress them; nor
breed humility and poverty of spirit, in the parties in whom it is found,
and so drive them to the Lord to crave aid and strength from him to subdue
their corruptions: but these checks of the natural conscience do rather make
men more fierce and froward, and at length more violent and outrageous in
sinning, especially if they have been occasioned either by the hearing of the
terible curse of the law, denounced against them in the public ministry; or
by the faithful dealing of some Christian friend, which has thoroughly applied
the threatenings of the word unto their drowsy consciences, wherewith they were
moved for the time, but afterward return to their vomit again: then (I say)
they will be much more boisterous in their sinful courses then ever they were
before.

And as there is a conflict in the understanding part, so is there the like in
the affections: for the flesh is ready to draw them unto pride and envy, and
uncleanness, and covetousness, etc. But the Spirit stirs and moves them unto
better things, showing withal that those forenamed vices will harden the heart,
make it unfit for prayer, or thanksgiving, or any such spiritual exercise; and
in the end will bring many bitter troubles and afflictions upon those that let
them to have sway and dominion in their souls: all which evil inconveniences
we shall escape, if our affections be heavenly and spiritual, and set on
their right objects.

So likewise in the will this fight will appear, wheresoever true
sanctification is begun. For the flesh will be unwilling to pray, to hear, to
meditate, to confer; and in a word, as any duty tends more to the
crucifying of the lusts thereof, so will it be more auerse therefrom, and more
prone to delay and to put off the performance thereof. But the regenerate part
is contrarily disposed, and cheerfully embraces that which is good, though it
be clogged and hindered in the performance of the same: setting down this for a
certain truth, that the more painful any service is, the more gainefull it
is; that though we begin our prayers in heaviness, yet we may end in
gladness; that the more intractable and untoward the flesh is, the more
glorious our conquest is, if we can get the maistery of it, and bring it into
Gods presence; and that if we cannot do as well as we would, yet if we do as
well as we can, we shall be accepted and blessed of the Lord: and by the sight
and sense of our manifold failings, grow more humble and lowly in our own
eyes, and more pitiful and gentle toward others.

And lastly for the memory, before their conversion, Gods own children are
prone to remember injuries and unkindness, which others have offered unto them,
and to forget such as they have offered unto others; they can hold fast all
such things as will further corrupt them, but they let slip whatsoever may
benefit and help then in good and holy courses: but after their regeneration
the case is altered with them: for them they strive to disburden their memories
of all things that may hurt them, and to retain only such matters as may make
them more humble, and merciful, and thankful. This spiritual fight in the
inward man is a most infallible mark of the spirit of grace, which is the
rather to be noted, because many of Gods servants through ignorance take it to
be quite contrary. We find (say they) such a deal of carnal reason, so many
sinful affections and lusts, and such unwillingness and unfitness for every
holy duty, that we much doubt whether we have Gods spirit in us or not. But
who tells you that there are so many things amiss in you? who is it that
causes you to see the errors of your mind, and the corruptions of your heart?
who is it that causes you to hate them, and to be out of liking with your
self for them? who is it that enableth you to take Gods part against them, and
to strive by all means to be freed from the bondage of them? Is it not the
spirit of God that works al these good things in you? and why then should you
make question whether it dwell in you yea or no: these are fruits of the
Spirit, which are never found in any but in spiritual men.

And if any desire yet a further trial, let him examine whether there be in
him those other virtues of the Spirit which are recited Gal. 5.22. viz. 1. Love
unto God, to his word, to his Saints, to mankind, yea to our very enemies, so
far as to desire their conversion and salvation. 2. Joy in Gods favor, in that
he has given us any sparkles of grace, and thereby assured us that he will
provide al good things for us in this life, and afterward save our souls and
bodies everlastingly. 3. Peace with the Lord himself, with our consciences,
and with our brethren. If (I say) any desire further assurance that the Spirit
of grace does possess his heart, let him try whether he can find in himself
these fruits thereof, together with the rest there mentioned; to wit, long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: and as these
do more or less abound in him, so may he be assured that he is more or less
spiritual.

A fourth use of this point may be this, How Gods Spirit may be obtained.


Now one means is, exceedingly to desire it, and earnestly to long for it:
for the Lord says in the prophecy of Isaiah: Isaiah 44.3.
I will pour water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will
pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy buds. In which place,
we see, there is a large promise made, but to whom? To poor desolate
Christians that do feel their own miserable and wretched estate, and do even
thirst for a supply of Gods graces, as the dry and parched ground does for the
rain to fall upon it; which does even gape for it before it comes, as if it
would devour the clouds before they fall. Concerning such the Lord says, that
he will pour water upon them: neither shall they have grace by drops, but
whole floods thereof shall be poured upon them: for God can as easily ouerflow
their souls therewith, as the ground with waters when it stands in need
thereof. But what shall they be the better for this? what benefit shall they
find thereby? The Prophet tells us in that very place. Verse. 4. They shall
grow as among the grass, and as willowes by the rivers of waters. No rain can
make the grass so fresh and green; no river can cause the trees that are
planted thereby, so to flourish and prosper as the Spirit of God will every
thirsty soul, when it is plentifully poured thereupon.

A second means to obtain the Spirit, notable argument for us. Luke 11.12.
Ask (says he) and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find, etc. If
ye which are evil can give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that ask it? As if he should
have said: You have no matter of desert in you, and therefore you are
discouraged from prayer: but what merit is there in one of your little
children, which are full of frowardness, of brawling and unquietness? yet if
they ask any thing of you that you conceive to be good for them, you will
presently grant it unto them. Now if you that are sinful can pass by the
infirmities of your children, and give them such things as are needful, though
you have made them no promise; and you cannot relieve them without cost and
pains unto your selves, nay many times not without pinching your selves, and
sparing from your own backs and bellies: if you (I say) that are evil can
deal thus lovingly and kindly with your children, how much more will your
heavenly father, who is the God of all goodness, yea goodness it self, deal
favorably with his children, having made a promise unto them, and it being no
pains nor charges unto him, to bestow a plentiful measure of spiritual
graces upon them? and especially seeing that the more liberal he is that way
unto them, the more glory shall thereby redound unto his great name. If then we
desire the Spirit of grace in an abundant measure, let us crave it at the
hands of the Lord, who gives of the same liberally, and casts no man in the
teeth: and we may the more comfortably and confidently do thus, because we live
in those happy times, wherein the Lord has promised to pour his Spirit upon
all flesh, Joel 2.28.
and to bestow as excellent gifts and graces upon ordinary Christians, as the
most worthy men had in the time of the law.

A third means to get and increase the virtues of the holy Ghost, Gal. 3.2.
the Spirit is not bestowed for any goodness in us, or through any works
wrought by us, but God of his free mercy gives it, and conueigheth it unto his
children, by the preaching of the Gospel. And again, the same Apostle
persuading the Thessalonians not to quench the spirit, 1. These. 5.
(for that is the best fire in the house, and without it men must needs freeze,
in woe and sorrow and misery) he says, 1. Cor. 14.3.
despise not prophesying; that is, the ordinary ministry of the word, when it
is truly expounded, and faithfully and wisely applied, as may be most for the
edification of the hearers. This is as it were the fuel whereby the fire of God
is continued and increased in our souls; and as we are more careful in this
duty of laying up the word in our hearts, so shall we find the warmth, or rather
heat of the Spirit to be more abundant and more constant in us.

Lastly, if we would have the holy Ghost continually working in us with great
efficacy, let us labor evermore to keep an humble and broken heart, and
beware of pride, and all vain conceit of our selves, as the very rock
against which the ship wherein the Spirit is carried, does, as it were, make
shipwreck: for God resists the proud, 1. Pet. 5.5.
and gives grace to the humble. If one have a hauty heart, though there be no
body else that seeks his overthrow, the Lord will bring him down: but if any
have a meek and lowly heart, there is a palace for the Lord himself, Isai.
57.15.
who will dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are of a broken heart.

In the last place here is an use of comfort for all such as are endued with
the Spirit of grace; they can no more stay the operation thereof, then they can
stop the course of the wind from blowing whither it will: John 3.
therefore shall they never be able to defeat Gods servants of that blessed
estate which in Christ Jesus he has promised unto them, and through his
preicious bloodshedding purchased for them.

The Spirit of grace [and of prayers.] From these latter words arises this
second point: that

None can make any acceptable prayer unto the Lord, Faithful prayers proceed
from Gods Spirit.
unless he be assisted and directed by the Spirit of grace.

Howsoever men imagine it to be an easy matter to call upon God, yet the
truth is, that it is as hard for any, of himself to make a faithful prayer, as
it is to make a world. Therefore it is said in the ^pistle to the Romans, Romans
8.15.
Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, father. So that
none can confidently call God father, but by the help of his blessed Spirit. If
unregenerate men will pray to their father, Christ tells them who he is, when
speaking to such kind of persons, John 8.44.
he says; You are of your father the Devil. And how proves he that? The
lusts of your father ye will do. As those that are willing to do the works of
God, are assuredly the children of God; even so they that are ready to do the
works of Satan, are without doubt the children of Satan; and if they will pray
unto their father, they must pray unto the Devil.

Again, in that very place it is said, that the Spirit helps our
infirmities: Romans 8.26.
for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
requests for us with sighs that cannot be expressed; where it is evident, that
the best of Gods servants, without the help and assistance of the holy Ghost,
are ignorant both of the matter and manner of prayer; but the Spirit does
inform their minds what to ask, and frame their affections how to ask in an
holy and acceptable sort: so that albeit sometimes they want words to express
their meaning, yet they are full of inward sighs and heavenly desires. But what
are they the better for them (will some say) if they cannot pour them forth
before the Lord in an outward form of prayer? They are much the better,
because (as it is in the 27. verse) He that searches the hearts, knows the
meaning of the spirit: and he so knows it, that he approves of it, and
delights in it. If there be never so many good words, and those uttered by
the very Saints of God themselves, yet if they proceed not from the Spirit,
but from the flesh, (as sometimes they may) they are not pleasing unto the
Lord, but abhorred of him. And on the other side, albeit there be no words at
al (as many times it falls out, when the heart is oppressed through extremity of
grief) yet if there be a multitude of holy desires in the soul, stirred up
through the powerful working of the holy Spirit, they are accepted of him, and
shall be rewarded by him: for (as it is added in the place above named) The
Spirit (eue^ at such times) makes requests for the Saints according to the
will of God. And therefore their suits according with his will, he cannot but
yield unto the same.

Again, John 16.8.
it is the proper work of the Spirit to convince the judgment of sin, and
to humble the heart therefore; without which, there can no faithful prayer be
made unto the Lord. Bring never so strong reasons to adulterers, or gamesters,
or Sabbath Breakers, or any that live in the continual practice of such
dangerous and damnable sins, and press them never so forcibly to cause them to
forsake their leaud and wretched courses; and yet can they not see why they
should leave them, but rather imagine that they may lawfully follow the same
still. And no marvel: for till the God of heaven do set down their carnal
reason, it can never be set down; and till he stop their mouths, they will
never be silenced, but still have somewhat to say for their wretched and vile
behavior.

Seeing then it is evident, Reasons collected from the former places.
that Gods Spirit alone can persuade us of the love and favor of our heavenly
Father toward us, that so we may be in case to pray unto him: and withal must
furnish us with the matter, and help us in the manner of our prayers, and
humble us in the sight of our own miserable wants, that so we may be more
earnest and fervent in the requests that we make: the point now in hand, may
hence be strongly concluded; to wit, that none can make a faithful prayer
without the special aid and direction of the holy Ghost: which serves,

First for the confutation of those senseless people, pray day and night. They
that know what it is to lift up a fervent prayer unto the heavens, do easily
discern that they are but mere braggers and boasters, and that indeed they
never made one faithful prayer since they were borne, because they are, and
still have been sensual and carnal, and utterly void of any sanctifying grace
of Gods spirit: and therefore so far are they from having any cause of
rejoicing in regard of their good prayers (as they call them) that they have
great cause to be humbled for them, as being works of the flesh, and not of
the Spirit, such as do rather provoke the Lords displeasure against them, then
pacify his anger, or any way procure his favor toward them.

Such are the prayers of all blind and ignorant Papists, who pray in an
unknown tongue, to whom it may be said, as it was by our Savior unto the sons
of Zebedeus, Ye know not what ye ask. They may speak what they list of their
often praying, and how readily they can go through with their stint and task:
but they that understand what it is to bring God and their own souls together
in earnest requests, and fervent supplications, cannot but judge them to be
bragging Pharisees, who think that the Lord is beholding unto them, and
indebted unto them for such prayers; whereas in truth he may justly condemn
them unto hell for the same, and will do so, if they be not humbled for them, as
well as for the rest of their iniquities. And therefore they that have indeed
the Spirit of prayer are of another mind: for when they have used the best
preparation that possibly they can, they find so many defects in their prayers,
that they are driven to make a new prayer for the pardoning of those their
wants, and are stirred up heartily to praise the Lord, when they can in any
poor measure power out their souls before him, as knowing, that it is not
from any strength that they have in themselves, but from the help and
furtherance of his good Spirit.

Secondly, Jude exhorts) to pray in the holy Ghost. Jude verse. 20.
For those be the petitions that pierce the heavens, and bring peace and
comfort unto the conscience. But how shall we know, whether ^ur prayers proceed
from Gods Spirit or not? for our sinful hearts are apt to deceive us on both
sides: viz. either to make us think (through Satan's suggestion) that we do
not pray in the holy Ghost, because we have so many frailties, when in truth we
do; or that we pray as we ought to do, because we have matter and words at
will, when indeed there is no such thing, but only a natural gift of uttering
that which is in our minds and memories, in apt and fit terms, and in a
fluent manner of speech. Therefore if we would know, what it is to pray in the
holy Ghost, it is this.

First, Rules for prayer.
we must have a warrant for the things that we ask, where the Lords will is
revealed, 1. John 5.14.
according whereunto all our petitions must be framed. In which regard we must
acquaint our selves with the holy Scriptures, and often exercise our hearts in
the meditation thereof. That is, as it were, the wood, whence we must fetch
timber for this building: and the mine, out of which we may take many golden
arguments to bring before the Lord in our prayers, which he cannot deny
because they are his own hand writing, whereby he does grant us liberty to
ask, and assurance to obtain al needful things. So that spiritual graces
we may ask simply without any exception, or limitation: and for outward
blessings, we may crave them so far as they may be good for us: and for
crosses we may lawfully desire either to have them kept from us, or sanctified
unto us, so that we may have strength and patience to bear them, and grace and
wisdom to make a right use of them.

Secondly, Rom 8.26.
that the Spirit makes request for us [with sighes] which cannot be expressed.
As we see in Hannah, who came with a heart full of heavenly meditations and of
holy desires, which she did not express in words, but made them known unto
the Lord, with whom her heart was laboring all the time of her prayer. Now if
we would obtain this inward affection, we must ponder much on Gods goodness
and readiness to hear, and to help us; and of our own miserable wants, which
move us to become suitors unto his Majesty: and then if we can get a good
persuasion of God, and a due estimation of the things which we beg at his
hands, we shall not choose but be instant and earnest in our prayers; not taking
up the time in words of course, and in making vain and idle repetitions, or
drowsy and lumpish petitions, as if we cared not whether we lost, or found;
but we shall be able to cry fervently unto the Lord, and then cannot he deny
our requests. Ps. 145.19. James 5.
For he hears the cry of them that fear him, and fulfilleth their desires;
and the prayer of the righteous avails much when it is fervent.

Thirdly, See M. Dods Sermon on James 4.3.
then must we propose a right end in our suits, not asking any thing with an
intent to spend it upon our lusts, but with a purpose to use it unto the glory
of God, the furtherance of our own salvation, and the good and comfort of
mankind, especially of such as are of the household of faith.

Fourthly, Mar. 21.14.
Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it. Which faith
of ours will be unto us a sure argument, that we pray in the Spirit, which
stirs us up to make such requests alone, as it assures us shall be
performed. But by the way let us observe, that sometimes spiritual men may
make carnal prayers, as Job, and Elijah, and Jonah did, when they desired that
God would take away their lives; which proceeded from the pride of the flesh,
and from the rebelliousnesse of their wills, in that they could not content
themselves to live in that estate, whereunto the Lord had brought them. Such
fleshly petitions may we sometimes put up before the Lord; but we shall have
checks and rebukes in our hearts for the same, and no assurance that they shall
be granted: but when our suits are spiritual, the holy Ghost which moves us
to ask, will also persuade us that God is able and willing to hear us, and to
relieve us, and that therefore we shall obtain a blessing sooner or later.

Let us therefore labor to ask in faith, (as the Apostle James exhoreth) and
not waver: James 1.3.
for he that wauereth, and makes question whether God will hear him or not,
is like a wave of the sea tossed with the wind, and carried away; being never at
quiet in himself, but sometimes imagining that the Lord will help him, he
runs unto him; and then having a conceit that such and such men will do
somewhat for him, he leaves prayer, and betaketh himself unto them: but
finding no relief there, he will to prayer again; and yet having not a
present answer, nor faith to wait upon the Lord, he falls to shift for himself
by using of ill means; and so is altogether unstable and unsettled, even as the
waves of the sea that are never at rest; every vain cogitation, and every
slight tentation tossing and turmoyling, and disquieting his heart. Thus it
ought not to be, neither will it be thus with those that ask in faith; for
they know that they shall obtain, and that it shall be unto them according to
their faith: that either they shall have the particular thing that they ask,
or a better in stead thereof: and therefore they pray still, and wait Gods
leisure: and herein they much honor the Lord, in that they cast themselves
upon the truth of his promise, and do not trouble their hearts with unnecessary
fears and cares about the success, which is Gods work, and not theirs. Men
will be glad to be rid of importunate suitors, that they should not be still
hanging upon them, especially if their suite be weighty, and the things that
they crave of some importance: But the Lord would in no case have men to let
their suits fall; nay he takes delight in such as will not have a repulse, but
still depend upon him, and daily renew their petitions: for they show evidently
that they have a lively and strong faith: they would not presume to ask unless
they had a warrant; and having a warrant, they dare not make question of
obtaining; for that were to make doubt of Gods truth and fidelity.

Thus we see what it is to pray in the holy Ghost, viz. to have a good ground
for that which we ask: a good end, and a good affection in asking, and faith
to believe, that we shall obtain whatsoever we ask in such a manner.

A third use of this point, only such flashings as hypocrites sometimes have;
yet hereby they may be assured that the holy Ghost dwells in them indeed,
because they constantly power out strong cries, and faithful supplications
before the Lord, which no hypocrite can do: Job 27.10.
for (as Job speaks) He cannot set his delight on the almighty, nor call
upon God at all times. For that is a special gift of God, and peculiar unto
the Saints; and as any one makes more such holy prayers, so may he be more
confidentlie persuaded, that he has the Spirit of grace in a greater measure.

[And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced] that is, upon Christ,
and that by the eye of faith, setting their heart and hope on him, and through
him expect to be heard and relieved: whence observe this doctrine, that the
Spirit of prayer does always lead men unto Christ Jesus.

It causes them wholly to go out of themselves, The Spirit of prayer does
always direct men unto Christ Jesus.
and through their Savior and Redeemer. This was figured in the sacrifices
that were offered under the Leuiticall law; at which time if any one were
polluted by any occasion, or otherwise clogged with sins that he had
committed, he was to bring his offering unto the Priest, and was to be
sprinkled with the blood thereof; which did signify the blood of Christ, by
which all Gods elect were to be cleansed, and a reconciliation betwixt God and
them was to be procured. For this cause Daniel though he were a man much
beloved of God, and endued with the Spirit of prayer in a wonderful measure,
yet he desires the Lord to hear him, not for his sake, Daniel 9.17.
or for his peoples sake, but for the Lord Christ Jesus his sake. Therefore does
our Savior tell his disciples, John 16.23.
that whatsoever they should ask the Father [in his name] he would give it
unto them.

Now the reason why the Spirit of grace does always direct us unto Christ in
our prayers, Ezech. 36.31.
it is said: Then shall ye remember your own wicked ways, and your deeds
that were not good: and shall judge your selves worthy to have been destroyed
for your iniquities, and for your abominations. This is the first work of the
Spirit, even to set them down, that they should have nothing to say for
themselves, but plainly acknowledge that shame and confusion, that destruction
and eternal condemnation is due unto them, if the Lord should enter into
judgment with them. Now when they are thus abased and humbled in themselves,
then will they seek to have a part in Christ his merits; that so both they,
and their services may be accepted of the Lord through his righteousness, and
through his intercession, which he does continually make for them: which
serves,

First for the confutation of the Papists,

Secondly,

Thirdly, here is another use of consolation, of instruction both, that if we
will have this testimony unto our souls that we pray in the Spirit, then when
we have the most feeling affections, and purest desires, let us offer them up
in Christ Jesus; let us not play the Priests our selves, as king Vzziah did,
lest we be smitten with a worse leprocie in our souls, then he was in his
body; but let us make Christ our high Priest, to present our offerings before
the Lord. So also when our prayers and thanksgiuings are most imperfect and
weak, let us present them through him, that so they may find acceptance with
God, being perfumed by the righteousness of his dear son.

Oh,

What of that? Heb. 5.
And for whom shall those he effectual, but for such poor Christians as
cannot so fervently call upon God for themselves?

It is said Hebrews 12. Heb. 12.14.
That the blood of Christ speaks better things then the blood of Abel. Now we
can easily believe that Caine was in a dangerous case, when the blood of Abel
did call for vengeance against him: and why should we not as thoroughly believe,
that they are in an happy case who have the blood of the son of God to call for
redemption, and salvation, and acceptance of al holy services in their
behalf, as all true hearted Christians have? The want of this persuasion is
the cause why we omit many excellent prayers and thanksgiuings, which would be
very pleasing unto the Lord, being offered up as sweet incense by our high
Priest Christ Jesus: and therefore let us labor for an increase of faith in
this point, that so God may not be deprived of service, nor our selves of those
comforts and blessings which are promised to all that call upon him in truth.

[And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall lament
for him, etc.] In that this great lamentation is set down as an effect of
their beholding of Christ whom by their sins they had crucified, this
doctrine may hence be gathered, that

The due consideration of the death of Christ, The consideration of Christ his
sufferings, is a forcible means to godly sorrow.
is a most forcible means to break the hearts of Christians with godly sorrow.

There is no such motive to make men weep bitterly for their offenses, as to
weigh with themselves in a serious manner, that they by their sins have slain
the Lord of life; that his bitterest adversaries were not the causes of that
his shameful and painful death which he endured upon the tree, but that
they themselves brought him thither, John 10.11.
and were the procurers of that his bitter passion. Christ laid down his life,
but for whom? even for his sheep. He was cursed, that they might be blessed: he
was was wounded, Isaiah 53.
that they might be healed: he suffered disgrace, that they might be brought
to glory; and endured in a sort the torments of hell, that they might partake
of the joys of heaven: the sound meditation thereof, cannot but wound the
hearts of such as have any spark of grace in them. When it was told David that
Abner was slain by Ioab, though he had formerly been a rebel, and was now
newly reconciled unto him, yet he mourned for him till the evening, because he
was a worthy man; albeit he himself was altogether guiltless of his death. Oh
then how much more should the Saints of God lament over Christ Jesus, who was
not a worthy man, but infinitely more worthy then all both men and Angels? and
not murdered by the treachery of another, but killed by the sins of their
souls, the sins of their lips, and the sins of their hands? and if he had
not been so killed, they had been everlastingly damned. Put case that a man had
one only son, which was to be the heir of the family, and he of a sudden
should find him stark dead, would it not inwardly touch him, and strike cold
unto his heart? especially if he himself had unwittingly been the cause
thereof? yes certainly, it would go through his heart even like a sword: and
such will be the grief of those who through their transgressions have slain
their blessed Savior, as this very text witnesses, when they by the eye of
faith do see him heavy unto the death, crying unto his Father in the
bitterness of his grief; being full of torment in his body, and fuller of
anguish in his soul, and that for their sakes, even for their sins, they
cannot but be exceedingly moved hereat. And a little to press the other
comparison used in this text, if the people of God did so bewail the death of
their worthy king Josiah, who yet died unwillingly, and without any intent to
benefit them thereby: how much more bitterly should we lament the death of
our blessed Redeemer, who was a far greater and excellenter king then Josiah
was, and yet willingly and freely laid down his life for our sakes, that he
might free us from eternal death, and destruction both of our bodies and
souls? Questionless if we have any spiritual life and sense in us, this
will make us loath our sins, that brought our dear Savior so much woe and
misery; and cause us heartily to mourn for the same, even as a man would do
at the sight of a knife, or sword, or some such like instrument, whereby at
unawares he has slain his child, or wife, or any that was near and dear
unto him. Especially if we consider; that God out of his mere love gave his
only Son unto us, when we deserved nothing at his hands, but his heavy
curse and vengeance to be executed upon us: John 3.14.
and that the Son of God was content from the abundance of his love, to be so
abased and vilified, so afflicted, and tormented, for our offenses; this must
needs work upon our souls, if we have but the least drop of goodness in us.

But here some man may object and say, hereof: but all Gods elect were the
cause hereof, as well as I.

This does nothing diminish the love of God and of Christ toward you,

Again,

The answer hereunto is easy, surety should be content to sell his lands and
goods for the discharge of our debts, we had just cause to rejoice thereat; and
yet reason requires that we should be touched with inward grief, for that we
had been such bankrouts, and provided so ill for the state of our suertie. Even
so the case stands betwixt Christ and us: he did undergo those punishments,
which were to be inflicted upon us, and discharged those debts, which
otherwise should have been charged upon us: in regard of our freedom, we
ought to take comfort; and in regard of that which our Savior did and suffered
for us, we must be humbled and grieved.

Which serves for the great terror of sundry graceless persons, in sin,
because Christ has redeemed you by his blood, that you would therefore abhor
it and eschew it, because it cost him so dear. Even as one that has any
sparkle of civility in him, if his friend have endured great tortures to free
him from the imputation of treason, or have been at great charges to deliver
him being cast in prison for debt, will walk more circumspectly and advisedly
all the days of his life; and will be so far from aduenturing upon those bad
courses again, that he will be so much more careful to avoid them, by how
much more pains and cost his friends have been at for his redeeming.

Secondly, Gal. 3.1.
And this we may better behold in the preaching of the Gospel, and in the
administration of the Sacraments, then if we had been standing by when he was
put to death between the two thieves: for that would have daunted and amazed
us, as it did the disciples that were Christ his followers: whereas in these
ordinances of God, viz. the Word and the Sacrament, his sufferings are lively
expressed and represented unto us, so that we may more clearelie and fully
see the love of the Father, and of the Son through the working of the holy
Ghost in our hearts, then they could that were eyewitnesses of his bitter
passion.

[And they shall lament for him, as one mourns for his only son, etc.] In
these words, as also in those that follow, is declared the measure of their
sorrow, viz. that it was exceeding great, as the two comparisons here used do
evidently express: whence observe this doctrine, that

It is not sufficient to mourn for sin, Great sorrow for sin very requisite.
See M. Dods Sermon on Isa. 1. Doct. 1. where this point is largely handled.
but we must make our sins to be our greatest sorrow.

Nothing must so pierce the hearts of Christians, as that by their iniquities
they have slain their Lord and Savior.

This thorough and sound lamentation is required, Joel 2.13. and was found in
David, Psalm 51. and in the people of God, of whom mention is made, 1. Sam.
7.6. who are said in the day of their fast to draw water, viz. out of their
hearts, and to pour it out before the Lord: whereby is meant, that they wept
very bitterly and abundantly for their offenses against the Lord.

First, Isa. 59.2.
and that which keeps from us all manner of good: and have we not just cause
then to grieve that we should lodge such a guest in our souls? especially if
we consider how beneficial this holy grief will be unto us? for

First, 2. Cor. 11. and also to purge our hearts and hands from the corruption
thereof, so that we shall not be in bondage thereunto any longer. Iam. 4.8.
And hence it will come to pass, that either crosses shall not at all light upon
us, or at least they shall not be burdensome unto us. If we keep an Assizes
at home in our own souls, and find our selves guilty, 1. Cor. 11.2.
and condemn our selves, then shall not we be judged of the Lord: but because
we deal very partially in our own matters, therefore is the Lord driven to
help us, by laying his correcting hand some way or other upon us: or if
crosses do not fall upon us in that regard, but our hearts tell us that we
deal faithfully in this behalf, then will our troubles be more easily borne:
for when sin lies heavy, afflictions lie light. And therefore when men are so
vexed and disquieted at injuries and indignities, or any outward distresses,
that they cannot eat, nor drink, nor sleep, it is sure that they have little
godly sorrow, and store of worldly sorrow: for if that holy grief did possess
their hearts, it would eat up and consume carnal vexation, even as Moses
serpent did the serpents of the Egyptian sorcerers. And this every godly man
shall find in his own experience, that look what day, or hour soever he
has wept most bitterly for his offenses against God, then he esteems
crosses to be most light and easy, and finds matter of thankfulness in
whatsoever grieuances befall him, as knowing it to be Gods goodness that it is
not worse with him.

Here then are those to be reproved that will tell us a long tale of their
repentance, on. Miserable men, little do they know what sound repentance
means: for that is the thing which Gods Ministers must aim at, even to make
men despair in themselves, that so they might rest wholly upon Christ Jesus.
And happy is that Sermon, and happy that day which makes men so to weep
over Christ Jesus, as that they utterly fall out with themselves, and with
their naughty and profane courses: for this will best prove unto their
souls, that they have received the Spirit of grace, and have attained unto
true repentance.

Secondly,

Thirdly, thereof, but endeavor to bewail our sins with a bitter
lamentation. Such as is mentioned in this text, viz. that we mourn as one
would do for the death of his first borne, and as the Jews did for Josiah,
when he was slain in the valley of Megiddo.

But (will some say) if this be required of all true Christians,

Indeed it is true for the most part, Iosiahs death: and as for others that
have not been altogether so deeply plunged in grief and anguish, they take
up that in continuance, which they wanted in present passion. Natural mourning
is ordinarily more violent, as we may observe in David's mourning for Absolon,
who cried out in the bitterness of his heart, so that the people might hear
him: but godly lamentation is more lasting and durable. So that the one may be
well compared to a land flood, which makes a great show and noise for the
time, but come a week after, and there will be little appearance thereof: and
the other, to wit godly sorrow, may be likened to a still and constant rain,
which enters more deeply into the ground, and remains longer, and does more
good a great deal, then a sudden, violent, and tempestuous shower. and herein
let these be judges, who are endued with the Spirit of God, and are acquainted
with the ways of God; and let them speak, who have had the greatest crosses,
and have been even drunken with wormwood, as the Prophet speaks: let them (I
say) speak and testify for the clearing of this point, whether many of their
great troubles be not in a sort forgotten, in regard of any present grief that
they conceive for them; and whether the sins of their youth do not more
constantly vex and torment them, then all the afflictions of their youth do.
And if it be so, then may it well be concluded, that their sorrow for sin is
greatest, though it be notalwaies so boisterous and bitter for the present: and
therefore seeing it is a thing that may be attained unto, let us use all good
means and helps whereby we may be furthered therein. See the means in that
Sermon on Isa. 1.

Verse. 12. [And the land shall bewail every family apart; the family of the
house of David apart, and their wives apart.] From which words this doctrine
may be gathered, that

It is not sufficient for us to be religious our selves, Religion required in
every one in the family.
but our families also must be religious. Not only the heads and governors,
but the whole household must be addicted unto Gods service. And whosoever is
religiously disposed in Gods house, he will certainly take care for the
planting of religion in his own house.

This testimony the Lord gives of Abraham: I know (says he) that Abraham
will command his sons, Genes. 18.19.
and his household, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness
and judgment.

And Joshua protests and voweth, Joshua 24.15.
that he and his house should serve the Lord. And David also, Psalm. 101.5.6.7.
that he would not endure a wicked person near him: but if he knew any to be a
vassal of the devil, to be a slanderer, a proud person, a liar, or the like,
he should not long remain in his sight, but he would soon thrust him out of
his house, and banish him from his presence. And it stands with reason that
good men should deal thus:

First, he that is a friend unto God, and truly loves his honor himself,
will be desirous that every body else should be affected in the like sort,
especially such as are near unto him. He that carries a loyal and loving
heart toward his sovereign, will be very unwilling that traitors and
professed enemies to his life and diguitie, should have entertainment under
his roof.

Secondly, they be not by, yet God is always by, who will call them to an
account for all their works.

Thirdly, Potiphars house was blessed for Joseph's sake, and Labans estate much
bettered, and his wealth exceedingly increased for Jacobs sake.

Would we then have a testimony unto our souls,

Furthermore here is an instruction for servants, that they should learn to
know their duty, and be ready to join with their governors in all godly, and
Christian exercises, assuring themselves that none are in truth good servants
unto men, but those that are withal faithful servants unto almighty God.

Every family [apart] the family of the house of David apart, and their wives
[apart,] etc. The doctrine hence to be gathered is this: that

It is not sufficient to come to public religious exercises in the family,
Christian duties are to be performed in private.
but every one must perform the same in private and apart.

Therefore it is to be noted, that in this place it is said of husbands and
wives, that they shall lament [apart] even they that are linked in the nearest
bonds, and might with most conueniencie lay open their hearts each before other;
yet they should not content themselves with those services which they performed
together, unless God and their consciences might sometimes meet in secret. And
as our Savior chose for himself, private and solitary places, where he might
with more freedom pray unto his Father: so does he give the like advice unto
others: Matthew. 6.6.
When thou prayest (says he) enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut
thy door, pray unto thy Father which is in secret. Whereby [chamber] he
means any secret place, where a man may freely lay open his wants before the
Lord. Hence was it that Peter after the denial of his master, is said to go
out, and there to weep bitterly. Now the cause why we must do thus, is

First,

Secondly,

This doctrine serves for the just reproof of many professonis, with their
whole family, they imagine that they have gone as far as they need to do;
though they never throughout the whole week perform any service unto the Lord
in secret; never conscionably meditate on the word; never earnestly bewail and
confess their hidden corruptions; never fervently cry unto the Lord for the
saving graces of his holy Spirit; nor perform any such duty apart, as all
Christians are bound to do. Such kind of persons may assure themselves, that
their hearts are not right with God, and that they are not led by the Spirit of
grace, which draws those in whom it reigns, unto the performance of good
duties apart, as well as with company: in their closets, in their chambers, in
the fields, or in some such private places or other, as well as in the Church,
or with the whole society where they live.

How much more are those to be condemned who are so far from serving the Lord
in secret, that they either refuse to do it in public, or if they afford
their bodily presence, yet they are idle or profane, or wanton in their looks,
and in their gestures, letting all that are near them see the vile disposition
of their hearts, by their leaud and abominable carriage? These sinful wretches
are so far from being excused by being at religious exercises, that they are
much to be condemned, for that in the land of righteousness (as the Prophet
speaks) they work wickedness, and in the places where they should show al
manner of holiness, they express such notable profanenes. These are even like
Judas, who was plotting to betray his master even then, when he was at the
Lords table to be partaker of the holy Sacrament; and they shall speed even
as he did: for when affliction and misery seazeth upon them (as come it will
sooner or later, if they prevent it not by hearty repentance) then shall they
not be able to stand before the Lord, nor before the face of their accusing
consciences, but shall be overwhelmed with horror and amazement, and be
moreready to lay violent hands on themselves, then to seek unto the Lord for
mercy, whom they have so hainouslie and presumptuously offended.

Secondly,

Therefore let us tie our selves every day to spend some time in meditating on
the word, in searching our hearts, in hu^bling our selves for our offenses past
and present; in praying to the Lord to strengthen us where we are weak, to
resolve us where we are in doubt, to show us our errors, and to direct us in
the right way: to let us see our wants, and to supply them of his rich grace;
let us (I say) constantly perform these and the like duties in secret, and
then shall it be plain unto our souls that we are guided by Gods good
Spirit. And howsoever the devil will object that we are not sincere, because
we have many times more in show outwardly, then we have in substance inwardly;
yet hereby shall we be able to approve the sincerity of our hearts: that
albeit we have not that within us which we seem to have, yet we desire to
have it, and strive to attain to it; and he only is an hypocrite which neither
has, nor desires to have that which he makes semblance to have.

The end of the first Sermon upon the twelfth of Zechariah.
THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE SIXTH OF LVKE.
LVKE 6.47. etc. Verse. 47. Whosoever comes tome, and hears my words, and
does the same, I will show you to whom he is like.

48. He is like a man which built an house, and dug deep, and laid the
foundation on a rock: and when the waters arose, the flood beat upon that
house, and could not shake it: for it was grounded upon a rock.

49. But he that hears, and does not, is like a man that built an house upon
the earth without foundation, against which the flood did beat, and it fell by
and by: and the fall of that house was great.


IN the words immediately going before, is declared, how Christ rebuked those
that would call him, Lord, Lord, and make a profession of religion, and yet not
do the things that he commanded them: for if they would speak to their Lords,
they must speak to their lusts, for to them they are in subjection. Having
bestowed such a reproof upon them, he leaves them not so, but directs them
what they should do, exhorting them to a conscionable practice of the word, to
which that he might more thoroughly persuade them, he uses two forcible
reasons.

1 One is taken from the great commodity that will redoune unto those that do
practice it, namely, that they shall be invincible against all temptations, and
immovable in all the storms and tempests that shall arise. Verse. 47.48.

2 Another is taken from the great danger that will ensue upon the contrary;
which is this; that let men hear as much as they will, if they do not yield
obedience unto it, they shall have a desperate, and fearful, and unrecoverable
fall: and therefore are they compared to an house that has good stone and
timber and workmanship bestowed about it, but it is built on an il foundation,
on sand, or on a quagmire, which is shaken by every blast of wind, and if
there arise any blustering storms, is utterly overthrown.

Verse 47. [Whosoeuer comes to me] In that Christ shows that some have
recourse unto him, to hear his word, and are builders as well as others, (48)
and yet are but dissemblers, Hypocrites in many things agree with Christians.
the doctrine hence to be learned is, that hypocrites may go as far as
Christians in many things.

They may come to Christ in the hearing of the word, in the receiving of the
sacrament, in public prayer, and yet be false-hearted all the while. A true
Christian hears the pure word of God, without mixture of popish or humane
inventions; so does an hypocrite. A true Christian is a builder, he edifies
himself in knowledge and understanding; so does an hypocrite. Judas as well as
Peter can carry away many good lessons; and yet the one go to hell for his
falsehood and guile, when the other has heaven for his portion, because he had
an upright heart, and a spirit without guile. Thus far we see in the text
wherein true Christians and hypocrites do agree: now (...) what difference
there is betwixt them. The one when he is to build, digges deep, and casts out
the loose earth, that so his foundation may be firm and sure: implying thus
much, that the servants of God know their hearts to be hollow and false
ground, and therefore when they have heard a Sermon, they suspect their own
guiltiness, and so search their hearts, and lament their corruptions: for
searching is digging, and lamenting is casting forth of the rubbish and loose
earth. They think their labor even lost, unless their hearts can meet with
such a promise, with such a threatening, or with such an instruction, to make a
right use of the same.

Now on the other side, an hypocrite makes quick work, all his building is
above ground, and therefore when he has talked a little of the Sermon, he is
well, and thinks all his work is dispatched: he spends no time in digging and
searching; nor in grieuing and lamenting for his corruptions: nay he censureth
Christians as too melancholy and pensive, that will go aside into a corner,
and there deal by prayers and tears betwixt God and their own hearts: what
need all this ado (says the hypocrite) is not God merciful? He is so
indeed, yet will he have us to be severe and unmerciful toward our corrupt
and evil lusts, and therefore still to be digging at them, and casting of them
forth of our hearts. And as in this place we may perceive how far true
Christians do both agree and differ, so there are other Scriptures to clear
the same, as the eighth of Luke, the parable of the grounds, wherein it is
evident, that the stony ground did hear the word of God, and that with
understanding, yea with joy: nay which is more, the thorny ground did not only
receive the seed, but brought forth both the blade and the ear, that is, did
not only with readiness receive the word, but also did somewhat (in their
manner) which the word commanded: thus far the ill grounds agreed with the
good ground. But herein the good ground went beyond them, that those that were
signified thereby, came with a good and honest heart, and had patience to
undergo persecution for the truth, and contempt of the world, that they would
not be choked with the cares and pleasures thereof: whereas the other sort if
they saw in likely hood, that they might get more profit and ease by following
the world, then by cmbracing Christ, they were gone.

Another place fit for the proof of this point, Matthew. 25.
we have in the parable of the Virgins; where we may observe. 1. That they were
all [Virgins] that is, such as did profess to separate themselves from worldly
lusts, and did not go a whoring after the common corruptions of the times, but
kept themselves within the bounds of outward sobriety; as Judas and Saul for a
time did, who could not be charged with gross covetousness or cosenage, or the
like. 2. Further they had all [lampes] that is, an outward show of good things.
And (3.) [Oyle in their lampes] so much as could make a blaze to get them the
credit of professors: they could speak well, and do diverse works that were
glorious in the view of the world. 4. They all went to meet the Bride-groome]
that is, all of them frequented the means of salvation, as if they expected
favor and fellowship with Christ Jesus. 5. Lastly (it is said) they all
[slumbred and slept] that is, those that were true Christians, having sound
fruits of piety and sincerity in their hearts, and in their lives, knew their
estate was good, and therefore waited for their Savior with quiet and
peaceable hearts. Hypocrites also, seeing that they went beyond Atheists and
profane persons, thought their case was good, and thereupon they grew secure,
and never troubled themselves about the assurance of their election: Thus far
the wise and foolish Virgins accord. But here is the difference, that the
foolish Virgins have no more oil then they carry in their lamps: the world may
easily see all that is in them: but the wise Virgins have a lamp to carry
oil, and an heart to carry oil: they have two vessels, one for practice, and
another for store; that though the oil in the lamp should be spent, yet there
might be a new supply made.

Thus we see in how many things false-hearted dissemblers come near the
sincerest of Gods servants. Which serves,

Secondly, if those that go so far, what shall become of them that will not
endure any plowing at all, but bring forth briars and brambles, and all manner
of poisoned weeds? And if it went so hard with those that were Virgins, and
went with their lamps to meet the bridegroom, then what must their doom be
that are not Virgins, but adulterers, and adulteresses? that love the earth
more then heaven, and earthly things more then heavenly things? that would
rather be at a table of good cheer where their bodies may be pampered, then
at the Lords table, where their souls might be fed unto eternal life?
Certainly these men's judgment sleeps not, and when it ouertaketh them, woe
unto them; for their case will be most lamentable. Neither need they cry out
against hypocrites, for they are ten times worse then hypocrites, and their
punishment must be suitable.

Thirdly, Ier. 17.
but look whether our foundation be good: for the heart is deceitful above
all things, yet the word of God tries it: that sets it, as it were, upon
the rack, and is as a two-edged sword that divides between the heart and the
reins, and finds out all shifts and excuses whatsoever. But that we may more
plainly perceive the way how to get a sincere heart, let us observe these
directions following.

The first shall be taken out of the text, namely, How to get and tr^e an
upright heart.
that we must dig and search into our consciences, and when we find any
corruption therein,

This is contrary unto the Scribes and Pharisees practice, who had little to
say against the gifts of John Baptist, and of Christ; but when they came to
dig at their pride, and covetousness, and cruelty, they could not endure it.

Secondly another trial is, Jeremy made, Ier. 8.6.
that no man said, What have I done? but all the stir of hypocrites is, what
others have done. Whereas if we could come to this, I have lived in this sin,
I have broken promise, I have been unfaithful in Gods service: what way may I
take to get peace unto my soul?

This were the way indeed to get a sound heart: and this is a good argument of
a sound heart, when the sins of our own souls do more vex us, then all the
injuries that men have done, or can do against us, and therefore we are ever
busy in searching out the hidden corruptions that lie lurking within our
souls, that so our foundation may remain still immovable: for this is the
difference betwixt an earthly house and a spiritual, that the one needs but
once to have a sure foundation laid, but the other requires daily looking too.
There is some one corruption or other that must be cast forth: so that
Christians are searching and digging builders: who albeit they seem to
themselves to be very blind, yet they get the greatest measure of knowledge:
and though they be very dead in their own feeling, yet they carry away the
life of God and the life of grace.

Verse 47. [ Whosoever hears my words and does the same, etc. is like a man
that built an house, and dug deep, or (as it is in Matthew) is like a wise
builder] who before he be at any cost will be sure of a good foundation, or else
all his labor is lost. Now the foundation of a Christian is his practice,
whence arises this point: that

They are the blessedest hearers of the word, Hearing and doing must go
together.
Therefore is it that Christ Jesus pronounces such blessed, as hear the word,
and do it, Luke 11.28. Yea more blessed then the virgin Mary was for bearing
Christ in her womb; for that alone could not have saved her: whereas the word
of God heard and practiced, is sufficient to bring the soul to everlasting
life: and not so alone, but it also gives the parties right unto, and the
enioyment of all manner of outward blessings whatsoever, as is showed at large,
Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26. The reasons why such are blessed, are these.

First, because they shall be able to stand it out in all manner of temptations,
so that though all the devils in hell were turned loose upon them, they should
be more then conquerours over them all.

Secondly, John 7.17.
If any one will do his will he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God
or no. You shall have many, who before the receiving of the Sacrament, and at
such like times, will deal with their Minister, that he would not examine
them; for they are not book learned: and besides, they are old their memories
will not serve them. And will you know the true reason hereof? it is even that
of our Savior: They will not do the will of God, and therefore they know it
not. For their capacities and memories, and all the faculties of their souls
and bodies will serve them well enough for their covetousness, for crafty and
subtle dealing, and for such pleasures as they are addicted unto, etc.

Thirdly, of an honest heart: Luke 8.
for that is the property of it, to hear and receive, to understand and hold
fast the word, and to bring forth fruit with patience. Many doubt that they
have unsound hearts; let them bring themselves to this touchstone: Do they grow
to some fruitfulnes in good works by the hearing of the word, and are they not
discouraged though some heat of affliction do arise? Then our Savior
testifies that they have good and honest hearts. So long as one desires to do
his duty, and from his desire is drawn to prayer, and by prayer gets virtue
from Christ, whereby the commandments are made easy, so long he needs not
to fear his estate, for it is good and comfortable.

Seeing therefore that the doers of the word,

Secondly, not respect so much how exactly his child does any thing, as how
obediently he performs it: and though he cannot do as he would, if he grieve
and weep, and desire his father to help him to do better, it sufficiently
contenteth a parents mind; so if we be ready and desirous to do every thing
that is commanded, and to believe every thing that is promised, and to avoid
every evil that is condemned; Christ has said it, and we shall find it one
day, whatsoever we feel now, that we are blessed and happy people, members of
the Son of God, temples of the holy Ghost, and the sons and daughters of
the everliving God. Our Savior says unto his disciples, John 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing. Do we then something in truth of heart? then
we are in Christ branches of the true vine, and bringing forth fruit in him,
we shall be still purged to bring forth greater abundance thereof.

[And when the waters arose, the flood beat upon that house, and could not
shake it.] In that he commends the goodness of this building, because it
stood when the storms did beat upon it, the doctrine is: that

Every man is that in truth out of temptation, Trial shows what every man is.
which he shows himself to be in temptation. A wise builder is wise before
storms arise, though he be not put to it: but how shall that be known? by the
standing of his house in extremity of weather. If in the midst of all trials
he hold his own and stand it out, and prove the same man still, then is his
wisdom apparent to al: he that builds on the sand has (it may be) as fair
and goodly a house in show as the other; but when the winds arise, it quickly
tumbles down. And so it is with hypocrites, if troubles be approaching
toward them, especially if they once begin to pinch them, they are gone: one
puff of temptation; one show of promotion; one storm of affliction, makes all
their building in matters of religion to become altogether ruinous.

So for the grounds, what could the good ground say for it self for a time,
which the ill grounds could not? They were all plowed, they all received the
seed, and brought it above ground, those that did least. Whence was the
difference then? The bad grounds had not the stones dug out, nor the thorns
grubbed up; and therefore the seed springing up in the one sort, when the
parching heat came, withered away; and that in the other was choked by the
thorns, and so came to naught: each of them failing when their trial came:
whereas the good ground held out unto the end.

Peter was a good house, Judas was an ill house; therefore when a storm came,
though Peter lost a slate or two, as the best house may, yet the foundation and
the side-wals stood firm: he wept bitterly for his sin, and craved pardon
for it, and so all was repaired. But what of Judas? he stood indifferently well
for a while: but at length when Christ rebuked him, he was full of wrath; and
when the high Priests offered him money, he was full of covetousness: and so
thinking to gain more by selling of Christ, then by serving of him, he quite
forsook his Master, and sought how to betray him to his most mortal
adversaries.

So Joseph being good under his fathers government, continued good also under
the government of Infidels, where he had al means of damnation, but none of
salvation; yea though he were at first in an unchaste house, where he was set
upon by his unchaste mistres; and afterward cast in prison amongst the
notablest malefactors in all the country: yet look what manner of man Joseph
was in his fathers house, the same he was still, both in Potiphars house, and
in the prison; and the same he continued to be when he came to great
advancement in Pharaohs court, which was the most dangerous temptation of all
the rest. Hereunto we may add, that Joseph was a young man, and therefore
more likely to be carried away; but all was nothing: when his heart was sound,
all the powers of hell could not prevail against him.

On the contrary part it is said of Amaziah, 2. Chron. 25.5.
that he did that which was upright in the eyes of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart. Therefore mark what came of it: after that he had overcome the
Edomites, his heart was lifted up, and he (contrary to common sense) fell to
worship their Idols, whom he had vanquished in battle: he would not be so
precise any longer, nor be at the command of every Prophet, but would take his
liberty: and so being an hypocrite in the beginning, he manifested himself to
be a miserable hypocrite in the end. So Ioash all the while the good Priest
Iehoiadah lived, 2. Chron. 24.
that would not suffer him to take ill courses, was very forward, yea in some
things more forward then Iehoiadah himself: 2. Kings 12.7.
but as soon as Iehoiadah was dead, his religion was dead with him, and of a
professor, he became a persecutor; and nothing could stay him from his wicked
courses, until he was taken away by a violent death.

But that the point may be yet more clear, we will give instance in some
particular things, wherein men judge themselves to be very strong, when as the
truth is they are exceeding weak.

Many will thank God, that though in other things they come short, yet they
are endued with patience: but what do they when wrongs are offered them? why
then they take on as bad as the worst. Such need not brag of the abundance of
their patience, for they have never a jot more then they find when injuries are
offered them.

So others there are, that hope they love the truth: but let one of the Family
of love, or of the Brownists set upon them, and what will they do? presently
begin to think, and speak hardly of the servants and services of God, and of
the truth of God. This plainly argues that there was in the heart but little
love of the truth, but much pronenesse and aptness unto errors and heresies.
He is the truly courageous soldiers that will stand to it, when the skirmish
is at hottest: as for those that will brag much before, and betake them to
their heels, or join (for fear) with the adversary when the battle begins,
they are mere cowards, utterly unworthy of the name of soldiers.

Again, others are conceited that they have merciful hearts; but hereby they
manifest the quite contrary, that they give so little of their superfluity to
those that are in necessity, whose hearts might be gladded, and whose souls
might be stirred up to offer praises and prayers unto the Lord for them, in
regard of their liberality.

Others again will not be persuaded, but they make conscience of the Sabbath:
but if there be occasion of travel offered on that day, will they not rather
God should lose his glory, then they their commodity? yes surely, and thereby
they show themselves to be but profane persons, that did never conscionably
sanctify the Sabbath: for if they had done so, every slight temptation would
never carry them so far wide.

This serves for comfort unto those that have laid a sure foundation: 1. John
3.9.
This comfort the Apostle John gives us: saying, Whosoever is borne of God
sins not: and why? for his seed remains in him, etc. that is, he can never
be brought under the dominion of sin any more, because the immortal seed of the
word, sown in his heart, can never die. It is as possible to pull the Sun
out of heaven, as to pull grace out of such an ones heart: because all such are
kept by the power of God himself. Pet. 1.5.
Adam at first stood by his own strength, but every Christian now stands by
Gods strength; John 10.29.
Who is greater then all: so that none can take them out of his hand.

This then serves to answer the objections of diverse that are troubled with
doubts and fears. What if the pestilence should take hold of me,

But what if the pangs of death should be very bitter?

But what if religion should change, James 1.2.3.
that we should rejoice when we fall into diverse temptations. And the Apostle
yields two good reasons. First, because thereby our faith is refined. Other
weapons, the more they are used, the worse they are: but it is otherwise with
this shield of faith; the more blows it receives, the better it is. Secondly,
these trials do work patience, Romans 5.3.
as is plain in Job, who by his meekness and humble submission unto God
under his grievous crosses, did much honor the Lord; so that Satan is the liar
in all such conflicts.

Secondly, Prou. 10.9.
that those that pervert their ways shall be known: hypocrites shall be
sifted first or last: and then their filthy nakedness will appear. In the
Acts of the Apostles we read of many that made profession of Christ, Acts
26.11.
who when Paul brought amongst them the fire of persecution, to try what
metal they were, they in stead of standing for Christ, fell to blaspheming of
his name. Paul's cruelty was but the occasion of this, the cause was in
themselves: for if they had been faithful Christians, they would rather have
denied their life, then the Lord of life; and have endured a temporal death,
then an eternal.

Indeed Gods dear children may be somewhat frighted and terrified at first,
but they quickly recover themselves again: being therein like a pure spring,
which being trodde in by beasts, or any other way stirred, will be somewhat
muddy for a while; but come within an hour after, and you shall find it
settled again. Therefore Christians should not be discouraged, though they
find a passion of fear, and unbelief now and then, if so be ordinarily they
send forth pure water: for there is a great difference betwixt them and
hypocrites, who are filthy puddles, having a little fair water running on the
top; but if they be stirred and raked into, they will appear to be most
loathsome, neither will they be easily settled again.

[And it fell by and by, and the fall of that house was great.] Carnal men
make it a small matter for one to forsake the profession of the truth. But the
Lord esteems that [a great fall] yea greater then if the Sun and the
Stars fell from heaven: so that the point is, that of all falls the fall from
religion is the most woeful.

Nebuchadnezzars fall was great when he was stripped of his Empire, Apostasy is
a most grievous sin.
and in stead of ruling men was turned into the wilderness to live amongst
beasts, to eat and drink with the wild asses, and that for seven years
together: this was a marvelous great fall, yet not comparable to theirs, that
of professors become profane persons. For whereas Nebuchadnezzar went from men
to beasts, they go from godly men to wicked Atheists, that are worse then
beasts, yea to the company of devils, and of all the damned spirits. And
whereas Nebucadnezzar had a stumpe left in the ground, which after seven years
should sprout forth again, and so he should return to a better estate then he
enjoyed before; those that are reuolts and backsliders, have no stumpe at all
left in the ground, but are unrecoverable: Heb. 10.26.27.
For if we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and of a violent fire, which shall d^uoure the adversaries. Nothing
does so provoke the vengeance of God against men, as this wretched apostasy
does. For a man to fall from riches to poverty, from promotion to debasement,
etc. it is a matter of nothing; God loves him never the worse: but to fall from
profession to profaneness; from God to the Devil; from heaven to hell; from
life to death; this is a lamentable thing indeed. David did not sustain the
fall of his house, but had only some tiles, and a part of the roof blown off:
yet was that a greater loss then if he had been deprived of his kingdom:
Psalm. 51.
neither would that have so rent his soul, and crushed his bones, and grownd
his heart to powder, as the committing of those offensive evils did: nay, if he
had been set upon a steep rock with a millstone about his neck, and from
thence had been cast headlong into the sea, it had been but a trifle in
comparison of the other. Oh then how fearful must their case be that do
utterly forsake the living God? If his deadness and hardness of heart, and
inability to do duties to God and men, were more bitter then the most violent
death unto him; if I say, the very decay in grace did bring with it such
torture; what must they expect either in this world, or in that which is to
come, or both, who do not only part, but wholly lose that taste of good
things which once they had? and do not only in a passion, as Peter did, deny
Christ, but quite and clean forsake him?

Now the reasons to prove that this fall is the greatest,

1.

2.

And furthermore, the effects will prove as much, which are,

1. Achitophel and Judas did.

2. Judas; who did not only die a base kind of death, being his own
executioner, and having his filthy bowels, that had been so full of
covetousness and cruelty, gushing out: but also seeking to exempt himself
from the pains and gripings of an evil conscience, he cast himself into the
torments of hell, which are easelesse and endless.

For instruction,

Now if we would not have a great and shameful fall, let us take the direction
of Jude, Jude 20.
which he gives as a preservative against apostacy. But ye, beloved (says
he) edify your selves in your most holy faith. That is the first thing, that
we must still be building up of our selves, and strive to be better and
better: for we are like a boat that goes against the stream; if we labor
not with might and maine to row upward, we shall be carried violently downward.

A second thing is, that we must pray in the holy Ghost. Many will brag that
they say their prayers morning and night: but do they pray their prayers? A
parrot may say a prayer, but Christians must pray in the holy Ghost, that is,
with such petitions as the Spirit warranteth, and with sighs and groans which
it works in the heart. These two things whosoever can practice, namely, to
build up himself daily, and offer up faithful prayers unto God, he shall be
sure to stand fast and firm.

Secondly, be the greatest fall to fall from religion, then it is the greatest
rising to rise unto grace: and if they be cursed that fall away, then blessed
are those that draw near unto God, and with full purpose of heart cleave unto
him, growing daily in humility, and in contempt of the world, in conscience
toward God, and in care to lead a good and holy life before men. This is
indeed the greatest promotion: and therefore James says, Let the brother that
is of low degree, James 1.9.
rejoice in that he is exalted. Exalted (might some say:) what exaltation is
that, when they are as poor as ever they were? A marvelous great exaltation
it is; for they are made Christians, and so consequently kings, both in respect
of grace and glory. Revel. 1.6.
Caine and Nimrod, and many other reprobates, went beyond ten thousand of us
for outward things: but all that advancement was to their greater shame and
confusion. For earthly promotion is nothing else but an high stage, and if one
be an idiote, itwere better for him to play his part on the ground: if those
that are in eminent places have not power to master their own lusts and
carnal affections, they are but great fools upon an high stage. Therefore let
us seek for spiritual things more then for earthly, and be more thankful
and joyful when we find grace in our hearts, then if we should find many mines
of gold, which none could lay claim unto but our selves.

The end of the second Sermon upon the 6. of Luke.
THE THIRD SERMON, UPON THE FOVRTEENTH PSALM.
PSALM 14. Verse. 5. There they shall be taken with fear, because God is in
the generation of the just.

6 You have made a mock of the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his
trust.


IN the former part of this Psalm is set down the just complaint of the
Prophet, concerning the sinful and corrupt nature, and conversation of all
unregenerate persons; where is declared their horrible impiety against God, in
that they said in their hearts, there was no God: as also their bloody cruelty
against his servants, in that they devoured them as greedily as an hungry man
does eat bread. Both which, their impiety and cruelty, are sufficiently
proved: first, by their abominable practice and behavior, both in committing
evil, and in omitting good, verse. 1.3.4. Secondly, by the testimony of the
Lord, who took a survey of their disposition and carriage.

v. 2. Thirdly, by the evidence of their own consciences, Do not the workers of
iniquity know, etc?

Now in these words the holy Ghost shows what will be the end and issue of
such ungodly courses, and what judgment will fall upon such irreligious and
cruel persons; describing it 1. Verse 5.
First, by the manner of it [There they shall be taken with feare] that is, in
the mids of their sinful practices, horrible terrors shall take hold of them,
so that they shall be full of trembling and amazement. 2. Secondly, by the
principal causes for which this judgment is sent, which are two. 1. One in
respect of God, viz. his favor and love unto his people, which he manifests
by being in the congregation of the righteous: that is, among all righteous
persons; and that not with an idle presence, but standing with them and for
them, to uphold, direct, and comfort them according to their need, and to
confound all such as lift up their heads against them. 2. Another cause is in
regard of the enemies of God and of his people, to wit, their malice and
sinfulness: against which the holy Ghost inueigheth by way of insultation, You
have made a mock, etc. q.d. You shall assuredly be met withal; Verse 6.
and will you know why? You have made a mock of the counsel of the poor:
that is, at their resolute purpose to seek God, and their constant endeavors
to depend upon him, as the words following seem to imply. Because the Lord is
his trust. q.d. You are so far from taking good ways, and resting upon the
providence and goodness of God your selves, that you disgrace and despite
those that will do so; and therefore without doubt, woe and and misery shall
overtake and ouerwhelme you, when you little imagine any such matter.


Verse. 5. [There they shall be taken with feare] We may read in the former
part of the Psalm, how forward these men were unto al ungodliness, and
unrighteousness; Boldness in sin brings dastardlinesse afterward.
that those that are most bold to commit sin, are most cowardly when dangers
do approach. Hardiness, and venturousnes in evil courses, has commonly
dastardlinesse attending thereupon, when any occasion of fear is offered.
There they shall be taken with fear (says the Prophet,) that is, in the very
height of their impiety against the Lord, and of their cruelty against his
servants; even there they shall be surprised with horror and astonishment,
albeit they in their folly say, There is no God; and therefore rush into all
abominations, utterly casting off the yoke of obedience, and delighting in
nothing more, then in devouring Gods people: yet will he make them know that
there is a God in heaven, that takes notice of their works and of their ways;
and if nothing else will cause them to believe it, the very torments and
tortures which he suddenly and strangely inflicteth upon their consciences,
shall make them, will they nill they, to confess it. For when they presume of
all manner of safety, and do not so much as dream of any peril that is
toward, because of the weakness and baseness of their adversaries; then some
unexpected evil shall overtake them, and anguish shall come upon them, Psalm.
48.6.
Even as travel upon awoman that is with-child; that is, suddenly, grievously,
and unavoidably.

This is denounced as a part of the curse to be executed upon those that would
not obey the laws of God, nor fear the glorious and fearful name of the
Lord: Deuteronomy. 28.65.66
That he would give them a trembling heart, and a sorrowful mind: that they
should fear both day and night: that in the morning they should say, Would it
were evening; and at evening, Would God it were morning. Which very curse is
expressed in other terms in the book of Leuiticus, where the Lord threatens
those that would not be reformed, but would walk stubbornely against him,
Leuit. 26.36.
that he would send a faintness into their hearts, in so much that the sound
of a lease shaken should chase them, and they should fly as flying from a
sword, though none did pursue them.

This point may be made yet more plain by examples. 2. Chron. 18.23.
King Ahaz was marvelous bold in his idolatrous and wicked courses, rejecting
the ordinances of God, and bringing in heathenish abominations in stead
thereof, without any fear of God or of his judgments. But how was he
affected when danger was near? The Prophet Isaiah tells us, that when the
King of Aram and the King of Israel came against him, Isa. 7.1.2.
his heart (together with the hearts of his people (that were like unto him)
was moved as the trees of the forest are moved by the wind: That is, both he
and all his soldiers were even as Aspen leaves, or some such like, that in a
great tempest of boisterous winds are maruellously tossed and shaken, the fear
of their enemies that were near at hand, did make them, having no faith in
God, exceedingly to quake and tremble. The like whereunto the same Prophet
foretells concerning the unbelieving Jews, speaking of that which should
be, as if it were already done. The sinners in Sion were afraid, Isa. 33.14.
(says he) a fear is come upon the hypocrites. When Gods judgments do fly
abroad in the world, this is the use that sinful persons will make of them:
they will vex their hearts with hellish and desperate fears, and cry out, Who
among us shall dwell with devouring fire, Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? For so they conceive of God, that he is a consuming
fire, (as indeed he is unto such as they are,) and that he will not only
torment them presently, but everlastingly.

We may read of Saul, in what woeful perplexity he was when he must part with
his kingdom and his life at once. In the time of his prosperity he was a man
of great courage, and too too boisterous against David: yet when news came
unto him that he must die, the very report of it caused him straight way to
fall all along upon the earth like a beast, so that all that were present had
much ado to make him arise, and take a little food to refresh him. Belshazzar
king of Babel, Mat. 28.4.
Dan. 5. and the souldie^s that kept the sepulcher where Christ was laid, when
the Angel appeared in glory. But let us consider of the reasons hereof.

One is, Deuteronomy. 29.
and therefore crosses being unexpected, do find them unprepared, The
suddenness of their misery.
and so cast them into greater perplexity and anguish. It is said ( Psalm.
53.5.) concerning ungodly men: There they were afraid for fear, where no fear
was. Not but there was peril, and so cause of fear, but they had no
expectation thereof; they mistrusted nothing, but went on as boldly in sinning,
as a man would do in the works of his calling, and therefore were their
hearts so distracted with fears when troubles did light upon them,

A second reason why presumptuous offenders are so tormented with horror is,
Their judgments are very grievous.
because many times the judgments that God lays upon them are very grievous:
as they have pressed down others with heavy burdens, so the Lord pursues
them with heavy plagues. Those that offend only through infirmity, shall have
more mild and gentle corrections: but as for them that transgress with an
high hand, the Lord will visit them with sharper scourges: and as they have bin
more bitter against their neighbors, so the Lord will have them to drink more
deeply of that cup which they prepared for others.

Thirdly, Gods terrible justice is aprarant in their afflictions.
God in his justice will have his hand to be seen against those that make
war against him, and against his people: he will appear in his anger against
such, and that must needs be terrible unto them. There is no blessing so
small, but if it come with Gods favor, it is made very great: Isa. 33.14. of
whom mention was made before.

A fourth cause of their great terror is, The guiltines of their consciences.
the guiltiness of their consciences. They have imposed upon them grievous
burdens, which when the world went well with them, they scarce ever felt: but
in time of distress they are made sensible thereof; and then they have as it
were a hell within them, and are continually upon the rack.

But that we may not mistake the meaning of this point, we must understand,
that this faintheartednesse and cowardlinesse does not always come upon
presumptuous sinners when they behold imminent dangers: for though none of them
have true courage and fortitude,

First therefore let us hence learn not to embolden our selves to sin in
confidence of any outward helps:

Yet many are so foolish that they will trust in lying vanities for their
safeguard and protection. Some will say,

But was not Achitophel as deep a Politician as the best of us?

Others there are that rest upon the multitude, and think themselves
sufficiently sheltred from Gods plagues, if they have a great many to join
with them. They are all corrupt, all gone out of the way, there is none that
does good, no not one: so that there was as it were an universal conspiracy
in evil; yet it is said of them all: There were they taken with fear. And at
the last day, at the beholding of the terrible signs that shall appear, and
at the hearing of the roaring of the sea, al nations shall quake and tremble:
so that the multitude of offenders does no whit better their case, nay that
rather makes it worse: for sometimes even where there is no peril, the very
hearing of many sending forth bitter cries and lamentable complaints, is a
sufficient terror: how much more then would it be, if we were plunged in
misery with them? It is a cold comfort unto us to be told, You may safely go to
such a town; for there all the houses are generally infected with the
pestilence! and as small an encouragement is it for men to rush upon the
committing of any sin, because all the world is addicted thereunto, and
corrupted therewith. For, as the more are infected with the pestilence, the
more are likely to die; and those that go unto the^ are sure of more discomfort
among them, and in danger to perish with them: so by how much the number of
them is greater that are tainted with gross sins, the more likely to go to
hellish torments; and such as will be their companions in evil, shall certainly
be partakers with them in punishment: and the more reprobates are in hell
together, the more hideous and woeful will their state be.

Another sort there are that secure themselves with this,

But these stout-hearted champions shall find,

For what says the Prophet Zephany? Zeph. 1.14.15.
In the great day of the Lords wrath, the strong man shall cry bitterly. Now
crying is an argument of great perplexity and anguish, and of baseness of
mind, when it proceeds from outward causes; and yet the Prophet says, that
the strong men, and such as did profess fortitude, should cry, and that
bitterly: and the more courageous they had been in sin, the more cowardly they
should be when the Lord did visit them for sin.

Lastly, their high places, the multitude of their attendants, the largeness
of their substance, etc. If they say the word, who can hinder the deed? who
dare control them or cross them? If any think himself wronged (say they)
let him take his advantage, and seek his remedy, etc.

See the haughtiness of flesh and blood when once it is set on horseback:
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and Belshazzer, were as great and as proud as most of
these braggers: yet did not the Lord strike them with horror and amazement,
and make them see and know, that he was the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords?
Satan has all that worldly men can have, and a great deal more, both of wit,
and wealth, and company, and courage, and command; and yet for all this, the
very consideration of Gods indignation makes him to tremble: according to that
of the the Apostle James: Iam. 2.19
Thou beleeuest that there is one God, the devils also believe, and tremble.
And how then can they think to escape the terrors of the Lord, who though
they be great in the world, yet come far behind the Prince of the world in
greatness?

Let experience speak in this point: us from them both:) who were then least
troubled with fears? those that were great in the world, or such as were great
in Gods favor? And now that the Lord does visit our cities, and towns and
villages with the pestilence, who are they that are most courageous? surely
those that truly fear the Lord: they think it the safest course to exercise
themselves in the works of their callings, and not to run hither and
thither; and to come unto the public assemblies of the Saints, and not to
neglect the feeding of their souls for fear of endangering their bodies:
whereas the wealthy and great ones of the world, hide their heads in a corner,
being very unwilling to adventure upon any good work that either God or man
calls them unto, if there be but the least appearance of any peril.

Therefore (in the second place) if we would be void of those terrors that
wicked men are subject unto,

First, Remedies against hellish fears. 1. Fear to offend. See M. Duds book.
Com. 1. Psalm. 112.
let us beware of all manner of sins, that no iniquity have entertainment
with us; and labor to be at one with the Lord, that so our consciences may be
at one with us: which if we can attain unto, we shall be strongly fortified
against all unnecessary fears. According to that in the Psalm: Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, etc. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, etc.
Where the Prophet shows, that he is an happy man that is truly religious,
and shows it forth by fearing of God, and delighting in his commandments,
and by performing the duties of love and mercy toward his brethren: for as he
shall be freed from all hurtful evils, so shall he be exempted from all
passionate fear thereof. are fixed and established, and believe in the Lord.
That is the foundation whereupon they build their courage and confidence, even
the Lord himself, who is a sure stay to those that rely upon him. His
children know that nothing can befall them without his providence, and that
nothing shall betide them, but he will support them under it, and make them to
profit by it: and what cause then have they to be diste^pered? If therefore we
desire to have still and quiet hearts, when others shall be even at their wits
end, then let us get the brestplate of righteousness and innocence: for the
righteous is bold as a Lion. Let us fear sin before it be committed, Prou.
28.1.
and when we are tempted thereunto, say with Job: Are there not strange
punishments for the workers of iniquity? Job 31.
Will not the Lord be angry with me if I should commit this wickedness? will
not mine own heart be discomforted? will not my spirit be made sad within me?
how shall I be able to look the Lord in the face, if he should lay his hand
in any fearful manner upon me or mine, when I have so provoked him to his
face, etc? Thus if we could fright our hearts from offending the Majesty of
God, we should be as bold as Job was when the waves of adversity flow in upon
us on every side: The Lord (says he) has given, Job 1.21. Job. 13.15.
and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. And in another
place, Though the Lord should kill me, yet will I trust in him. He feared sin
which is the sting of crosses, and therefore were his crosses less terrible
unto him when they came: and so will they be unto us if we carefully eschew
those corruptions which otherwise will enuenome and poison them unto us. this
is the first means to arm us against fears, viz. to take heed of sin before
it be committed.

But if it be committed, Repentance for offenses committed.
the next remedy is, to stand in awe of Gods judgments due unto the same, and
so to be led on to true repentance. The best way to escape desperate fear is,
to fright our souls with an holy fear: For if we judge our selves, we shall
not be judged of the Lord. Excellent for this purpose, is that answer of
Huldah the Prophetess unto good Josiah: Because thine heart did melt (says
she) and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, 2. King. 22.19.20.
when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and against the
inhabitants of the same, to wit, that it should be destroyed, and accursed,;
and have rent thy clothes, and wept before me, I have also heard thee says
the Lord. Behold therefore I will gather thee to thy fathers; and thou shall
be put in thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil that
I will bring upon this place. And agreeable to this, is the speech of Habakkuk:
When I heard, my belly trembled, Habak. 3.16.
my lips shook at thy voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled
in my self. But what benefit had he by that? That I might have rest in the day
of trouble. So that we see the best way to be quiet and peaceable in our
selves in troublesome times, is to be disquiet in our hearts for sin before
troubles do approach.

A third remedy is, Fear of Gods judgments.
to fear Gods judgments when we behold them upon others; and if we have
been sinful before, yet then to seek a reconciliation with God before his
displeasure arife against us. It was the wisdom of the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.
when they saw Ierico and Ai vanquished and destroyed, not to stand it out with
Ioshuah, but to make a league with him: if they could deal so prouide^tly with
him for their bodies, much more should we, with the Lord for our souls. When
the wise captain came unto Elijah with his fifty men, considering how the two
former captains had been consumed with fire from heaven, he humbles himself
and says: O man of God, 2. King. 1.13
I pray thee let my life be precious in thy sight. In like manner when we hear
that the people of the land are taken away by hundreds and thousands, seeing
we are guilty of the same sins that they were; we should cast down our
souls before the Lord, and beseech him that our lives may be precious in his
sight, but especially that our souls may be spared: that though our bodies
should perish, yet our transgressions being pardoned, our better part may be
preserved, See the second Sermon on Lament. 3. v. 57. Fear not.
and everlastingly saved. This is the best receipt that any can take against
the venom of the pestilence, that he may be sure it shall never hurt him. And
thus much of the remedies against hurtful fears.

[Because God is in the generation of the just.] This is one reason why it must
needs go hardly with wicked men, that are deuourers and spoilers of Gods
people; because the Lord himself is among them, to take notice of all the
injuries and indignities which they sustain, and to revenge their quarrel upon
their enemies, that are stronger then they: Good men never want good company.


A good man never wants good company: for whersoeuer a Christian is, there
God himself is with him, and in him, and round about him: so that none are so
near unto one another, as the Lord is unto his people.

Now that he is always thus present with his children, Revel. 1.13.
appears in the Revelation. Where Christ is said to walk in the midst of
the seven golden Candlesticks: that is, of the seven Churches: so that it is
his ordinary walk to go in and out amongst his servants. Neither has he a
general care of the whole Church only, but he has an eye also unto every
particular member; as will appear in several examples. When Jacob was all
alone, traveling toward Padan Aram, there being no town near, and the night
drawing on, he was feign to take up his lodging in the open field: but that
night the Lord showed himself present with Jacob, and he saw that he had
acquaintance even in that solitary place; for God took notice of him, and
renewed with him his covenant made unto Abraham and Isaac, Genesis 28.15.
and made him a promise to be [with him] whithersoeuer he went, etc. So that
that night was one of the comfortablest nights that ever Jacob had.

The like we read of Eliiah, that when he fled from Iezabell, there was one
knew him in the wilderness, and brought him his dinner, even an Angel sent
from God: 1. King. 18.
and afterward when he was upon mount Horeb, the Lord took knowledge of him,
and called him by his name. What do thou here, Eliiah?

Yea Jonah found favor from God, where no body else could come unto him, even
in the bottom of the sea. Whence it is evident, that the Lord is every where
with his people. How God is present with his.
And that,

First, by his wisdom, to give them good direction: To direct them.
in which regard Christ that is called a counselor ( Isa. 9.) is said to be
in the midst of the seven golden Candlestickes, clothed with a garment down
to the feet, as was the manner of counselors in those times. Reuelat. 1.13.
So that he is evermore ready to resolve us in our doubts: to advise us in our
actions and in our speeches, and to direct us what and how to do and speak,
according as occasion shall be offered.

Secondly, To defend them. Isa. 53.1.2.
according to that of the Prophet Isaiah: When thou passest through the waters,
I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee:
When thou walk through the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. Where we may see that the Lord promises to
be with his Church in a wonderful manner, and to be a defense and safeguard
unto them in the most perilous times, even when they should pass through fire
and water.

Thirdly, To comfort them.
to refresh their hearts in all extremities. Christ foretells his Disciples,
that in the world they should meet with many sorrows, which should cause them
to mourn, when others did rejoice; but withal he promises to send them the
comforter, even the blessed Spirit of grace, Ioh. 14.6.
which should minister unto them abundance of consolation, even in the midst
of the persecutions and sufferings, which they endured for Christ his sake.

And that which was promised unto them, all the members of Christ shall feel
in themselves: for God is he that comfort the abject, 2. Cor. 7.6.
one as well as another, without exception.

By this now which has been spoken it may easily be discerned how the Lord
is present with his servants, viz. by his wisdom to direct them: by his power,
to preserve them; and by his Spirit, to comfort them, and that God has been,
and is thus present still, will be very evident, if we consider the state of
the Church what it is, what it has been: namely, still beset with many and
mighty adversaries, that have used, and do use, their wit, and wealth, and
power, and friends, and all means that possibly they can devise, for the
razing and utter overthrowing of Gods people: Isaiah witnesses: and why? Isa.
33.20.21.
because (as he says) the mighty Lord was their defense. Christians are even
as sheep, very impotent and feeble for the most part, in regard of outward
strength; and withal few in number: and their enemies are like raging Lions,
and besides for multitude very many: yet the flock of Christ still remains,
and the more the wicked rage against it, the more does it still increase, as we
have an experiment in the Israelites under Pharaohs tyranie. the Church of
Pergamus by Christ Jesus, Revel 2 13.
Thou keep my name, and have not denied my faith.

Yea further (which is of all other things most strange) the poor lambs of
Christ are so far from being torn in pieces by those Lions, that they become
Lions themselves, not for cruelty, but for courage. Mich 5.8.
For so says the Prophet Micah: And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the
Gentiles, in the midst ^f many people, as the Lions among the beasts of the
for rest and as the Lions whelpe among the flocks of sheep. The meaning of
which place is, that some few poor Christians standing in the cause of God,
and coming furnished with the grace and power of the holy Ghost, should be
able to daunt and terrify the hearts of many sinful persons, and cause them
even to quake and tremble, Act. 24.26.
as Paul did Felix, when he reasoned powerfully and effectually concerning
righteousness, and temperance, and the judgment to come. In so much that many
who are hypocrites in heart, will make a show of religion and piety, and seem
to conform themselves unto Christians whom they hate with a deadly hatred:
which plainly argues that there is a kind of Majesty of God,

This point ministers unto us a double instruction. therefore it is good
wisdom to join with them. It was the overthrow of Achitophel that he forsook
King David, to take part with Absolon. And it was the ruin of Abiathar and
Ioab that they withdrew themselves from Solomon, to set up Adonijah as king
over Israel. And why sped they so ill, but because they were of a contrary side
unto God himself, who stood for David and Solomon, and their adherents? and
certainly the Lord is as strongly with his church now, as he was with David and
Solomon then; and therefore it must needs be very dangerous for any to separate
themselves from his chosen: in which regard let us be careful evermore to
cleave unto them, and to take part with them.

Oh,

Fear not their adversaries, Psalm. 3.
though they be ten thousand to one: for God is their buckler, and the lifter
up of their heads: he will smite all their enemies upon the cheek bone, and
dash out their teeth, that seek to draw blood from his servants. All that hate
Sion shall perish even as the grass that grows upon the house top; which
though it make a bragging show for a time, yet suddenly withers and comes
to nothing. They that seek to root out the Israel of God, do, as it were, set
their naked shoulder, to remove an huge rock that will fall upon them, and
grind them to powder, Zach. 12.3.
be they never so many: and therefore we have little reason to be afraid of
them.

Another instruction hence to be learned, is, that seeing God is in the
generation of the righteous, therefore we should frequent their society, and
resort unto the assemblies of the Saints: for if the Lord be present with every
one of his, by his special providence and by his grace, then is he much more
forcibly and effectually present with a muItitude of them, that do worship him
in sincerity, and fill the heavens with zealous prayers, and strong cries.

Many are desirous to go to the Court, in hope (though they be not certain) to
see the King only, albeit he do not look upon them, or speak to them, or
they to him: how much more desirous should we be to come unto public Christian
meetings, where we shall be sure to see the King of Kings in his glory, and
to have him to take notice of us, to speak unto us, to grant us free liberty
to put up our suites unto him, and to estate us in all the good things, which
his son Christ has purchased for us by his precious blood?

Are our hearts frozen in the dregs of our iniquities, and so hardened that we
cannot mourn for the same? let us repair unto holy assemblies, and there we
shall meet with the weapons of God that will pierce and wound our hearts, and
cause them to be dissolved into tears: there shall we feel the virtue of the
spirit, effectually working upon us, so that we shall be constrained to say of
those that deliver the message of Christ unto us, 1. Cor. 14.25.
that God is in them indeed. Do we want faith in Gods providence and
promises? Do we want power and strength against our corruptions? In a word,
do we want any grace of God, or any blessing of God? let us have recourse
unto the congregations of the Saints, and there we shall meet the Lord himself,
who will be ready to supply our necessities whatsoever they be, and to grant
us above that that we can ask or think.

And as for our own private cases, so for the public state of the Church and
Commonwealth; if we would have the pestilence or famine, or any other judgment
removed, the way to procure this is, to repair thither, where we shall meet
with many of the faithful, that will be ready to join with us in prayer,
and to wrestle with the Lord by fervent and earnest supplications for the
removing of his deserved strokes. And this should much eucourage us, and add
life unto our prayers, as often as we have occasion to ask any thing in
public, that God will vouchsafe unto us his gracious presence, and they show
by good effects that he is in the generation of the righteous.

Verse. 6. Ye have made a mock of the counsel of the poore] In that the holy
Prophet does lay this unto wicked men's charge, as a heinous crime, and as the
cause of his strokes that were to be inflicted upon them, this doctrine
offers it self for our learning,

Jesting and scoffing at Gods children, Mockers are grievous persecutors. Heb.
11.
is a grievous kind of persecution, and such as the Lord take special notice
of.

In which regard the Apostle, Heb. 11.36. speaking of the wonderful great
trials which sundry of the Saints did by faith undergo, reckons up this as
none of the least of them, that they had been tried by mockings. In like sort
when the holy Ghost yields a reason of the utter overthrow of the kingdom of
Judah, and of their long and woeful captivity, he sets down this to be one
of the principal causes thereof, 2. Chro 36.26.
viz. That they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people,
and till there was no remedy.

This kind of persecution Ismael used against Isaac (as the Apostle witnesses)
for which he was cast out of the Church of God. Gal. 4.29. Genesis 21.9.
And this was one of the meritorious sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat.
26. and. 27. Psalm. 22.
that they spit upon him, and nodded their heads at him, and used taunting and
disgraceful speeches unto him, and put as it were a fools coat upon him to
disguise him, and called him in mockage, the King of the Jews, etc. This I say
was not the least part of his bitter passion, through which he purchased
eternal salvation for all his elect, namely, that he endured much contempt
and reproach both in the course of his life, and at the time of his death.

Now the reason why Satan makes choice of this weapon above others, therewith
to fight against Gods servants, is

First, endure to be vilified and disgraced by scoffing and reproachful
speeches and gestures.

Secondly, Ismael, 2 King. 2.
and in the two and forty children that were torn in pieces of two bears for
their mocking of the Prophet Elisha: the very scumme of the people, the
vagabonds and rogues that run up and down the country can do their master the
devil good service this way: those that were the children of fools, and the
children of villains, Job. 30.8.9.
(as Job speaks) who were more vile then the earth it self, could make Job
their song and their talk: Psalm. 69.12. Psalm. 35.
and in like sort did the drunkards and pot companions deal with David; and
the thief upon the cross with our Savior, Mat. 27.44.
even at that time when the fierce wrath of God was manifested upon his body
hanging on the cross, for that he had been a notorious and heinous malefactor.

First, that cannot gird at a Minister, and at such as usually resort unto
Sermons. But let us take heed of such nipping and biting speeches as tend to
the defaming of any of Gods servants or services; lest we be cast out from
having any communion and fellowship with God, as scoffing Ismael was, and be
exposed to such plagues and punishments as the wicked Jews were, who mocked
the messengers of God, and reviled our blessed Savior in such an opprobrious
and disgraceful manner, as the Scriptures do record.

Secondly, Heb. 13.12.13.
that seeing he has borne our reproach, we should bear his, and for the joy
that is laid before us, Heb. 12.2.
endure the cross, and despise the shame, and so at length we shall receive
the crown of glory, which is prepared for all those that in patience do wait
for his glorious appearing.

Now that we may be better enabled to bear these taunts and reproaches, How
we may be enabled to bear contempt. 1. Labor against pride.
let us take this direction following.

1. First, labor against that inbred pride that is naturally in every one of
our hearts, which makes us utterly unable to undergo disgrace: therefore was
it, that though many of the chief rulers of the Jews believed in Christ, yet
they durst not confess him, because of the Pharisees, who would have
excommunicated them, and disgraced them to the uttermost: and the reason is
rendered in that place, viz. That they loved the praise of men, Ioh. 12.43.
more then the praise of God: they stood upon their carnal credit and
reputation among their neighbors and countrymen, more then upon that true
credit and estimation which they might have had with the Lord and his children;
and therefore was it that they were so loath to expose themselves for Christ his
sake unto the shame of the world whereas if they had had humble and lowly
hearts, they would have denied themselves in their estimation among men, and
have taken up the reproach of Christ as an honorable crown: let this
therefore be our first work to labor against the hautinesse of our fleshly
hearts.

Secondly, Consider what scoffers are.
to the intent that we may more patiently endure to be vilified and disgraced,
let us consider what manner of men scoffers be, viz. the most abject, vile,
and contemptible persons that are, as we may see in those before mentioned, who
in this sort pursued Job and David, and our blessed Savior.

Oh but (will some say) they are men of great wealth, of great place, of great
parentage,

Grant that they be great men in all the former respects, Zenacherib was; for
when he sent a disdainful and scornful message unto Hezekiah, and the rest
of Gods people, he was indeed ignominious, because he was impious and
blasphemous: he was vile in Gods sight, and he made him appear vile both
before men and Angels, Isa. 37.22.
according to that of Isaiah, The virgin daughter of Sion has despised thee
and laughed thee to scorn.

Thirdly, Isaiah shows, saying, Fear ye not for the reproach of men, Isa.
517.8.
neither he ye afraid of their rebukes. For the moath shall eat them up like
a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wood. But (will some man say) what
great matter is this? which things are far otherwise with such sinful
persons as delight themselves in scoffing and deriding of the Saints of God:
their bodies are at best when they are devoured by worms: they can never
expect better, but that which is far worse shall surely come unto them.

Fourthly, Meditate on the reward.
let us seriously meditate on the reward which is promised unto them that can
so do. Mat. 5.11.12.
Blessed are you (says our Savior) when men revile you, and persecute you,
and speak all manner of evil against you for my names sake falsely. Rejoice
and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. And again, 1. Pet. 4.14.
the Apostle Peter says, If ye be railed upon for the name of Christ,
blessed are ye; for the spirit of glory, and of God rests upon you. This made
Moses to esteem the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt: for (says the holy Ghost) he had respect unto the recompense of the
reward. Heb. 11.26.
Therefore when we find our hearts beginning to be dismayed at the bitter
taunts and jests of profane scoffers, let us animate our selves unto patience
with these or the like considerations; why should I be discouraged at these
things? sinful men seek to vilify and disgrace me; but does God think ever
the worse of me? I am base and contemptible in their eyes, but do the Angels
of God, or any of his Saints, conceive any whit more hardly of me in that
regard? Nay, does not the Lord himself, and such as have his image most lively
shining forth in them, esteem me so much more honorable, by how much they
labor to make me more vile and abject in regard of my well doing? Why then
should I faint under the burden of reproach, wherewith they do still load me?
especially seeing that this momentanie disgrace which I sustain for Christ his
cause, shall bring unto me an eternal and inualuable weight of glory.

Of the poore] From which words note this Doctrine, The godly usually afflicted
that the estate of Gods people is commonly a poor and afflicted estate.
Therefore in the original the word [poore] is not used in the Plural number,
but in the Singular, and carries this sense [ye have made a mock of the
counsel of that poor one] implying thereby, what is the common case of al,
namely, to be full of calamities and distresses, through many tribulations to
enter into the kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. Romans 8.
and to be conformable unto their head Christ in afflictions and sufferings.

And this the Lord in his wise providence will have to be so for these reasons:

First, 1. Cor. 2.


Secondly,

Thirdly, Hos. 5.15.
In their affliction (says God.) they will seek me diligently. Before that
time they would rather sue unto any then unto the Lord: therefore was he
driven to break them with one breaking upon another, that so having no other
refuge to betake themselves unto, they might have recourse unto him. This is
clear in the example of Manasse, who being in bonds and in irons, humbled his
soul before the Lord, and prayed unto him for favor, and mercy, and found it
at his hands: whereas before such time as he was pressed down with grievous
misery, he obstinately refused to hearken unto the Lord, and to his
messengers, and was so far from calling upon his name, that he dishonored it
by all manner of abominations, 2. Chron. 33.2.
which he committed with an high hand, even to anger the Lord.

Fourthly, Zephanie, saying, Zeph. 3.12.
I will leave in the midst of thee an humble, and poor people, and they
shall trust in the name of the Lord.

This point makes for the confutation of an error which withholdeth diverse
from the profession of the Gospel: Is this the word of God? your good men that
do embrace the same? a company of simple base fellows, of poor Artificers,
and the like? who can imagine this to be the truth, which such kind of men as
these do give credence unto? How many Gentlemen, or Noblemen, or men of
learning and policy are of their minds? and for those that are, have they not
manifold afflictions in their hearts, or upon their bodies and estates? This is
just the cavil of the Pharisees against the doctrine of our Savior: Never
spoke man like this man (say the officers that were sent to take him, Ioh.
7.46.47.
but did not:) Then answered the Pharisees, Therefore let not us be deceived by
such vain words of men, that judge not righteous judgment, but according as
their own fleshly wisdom directs them, but let us rather build upon the
words of him that is the true witness, who as he received a commission to
preach unto the poor, Luke 4.
so he did accordingly perform it, and found good success thereupon, and
therefore bids John's disciples to tell him, Luke 7.22.
that the poor received the Gospel. They were the profitable and fruitful
hearers of Christ, who by reason of some outward calamities and distresses or
other, were humbled and abased in their own eyes, and had the pride and
stubbornness of the flesh somewhat mastered and taken down.

Secondly, servants, that are in poverty and distress any manner of way: it is
the common condition of the members of Christ, and therefore they must not from
thence draw any hard conclusions against themselves. It is the very high way
unto heaven, which has been trodden by Christ and all his Saints, to pass
through manifold troubles and grieuances, manifold straits and extremities, and
at length to attain unto that rest which is prepared for us in the kingdom of
God. 2. These. 1.7.
If any by reason of their necessities and miseries had ever missed of the
crown of life, we had some cause to fear our selves in that regard: but
sithence none ever did so, but rather have reaped benefit by their afflictions,
then taken any hurt thereby, we should be of good comfort; and be so far
from fainting in our trials, that we should rejoice in the same, making full
account, that then Gods own hand will most manifestly appear for our
preservation, and consolation, when humane helps do most of all fail us:
neither indeed could it be so clearly discerned that he is the vpholder of
his Church, if it had wealth, and power, and outward props and pillars to bear
up the same.

Ye have made a mock of the counsel of the poor: and why? because the Lord
is his trust: This is the very true cause, Wicked men have a quarrel against
godliness.
that true godliness is that which breeds the quarrel between Gods children
and the wicked.

Ungodly men may say what they list, as namely, that they hate and dislike them
for that they are proud and saucy in meddling with their betters: for that they
are so scornful and disdainful toward their neighbors: for that they are
malecontent, and turbulent, and I know not what: but the true reason is yielded
by the Lord in this place, to wit, because they make him their stay and their
confidence, and will not depend upon lying vanities, as the men of the world
do.

And the like reason is given by the Apostle Peter, who speaking of
unregenerate men, says, that it seems strange to them, 1. Pet. 4.4.
that the godly run not with them to the same excess of riot: and therefore
(says he) speak they evil of you. preaching, etc. when others are sporting
and dancing, and recreating themselves: I warrant you they are but mere
hypocrites and dissemblers: their hearts are as bad as the worst, and none are
more disloyal subjects to their Prince then such are. These are hard charges,
yet such as befell Christ Jesus himself, who among many other false
imputations was esteemed an enemy to Caesar. But whence proceed all these hard
surmises and censures? Surely from this, that Gods children do endeavor from a
true and faithful heart to serve and please the Lord in all things, and do
refuse to walk with the multitude in the broad way that leads unto
destruction. Here is the matter whereupon all their malice does work: and this
arises,

First, from the devil himself, Revel. 12.17.
which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Cain, who hated and murdered his brother Abel: and why? because his
own works were evil, 1. Ioh. 3.12.
and his brothers good.

Therefore let Gods servants never look to please the world by well doing,



Nay,

Secondly, overthrown, and never be long able to hold up our heads? let us
rest on the Lord still, and never be dismayed at their mischievous and malicious
speeches, and attempts against us, knowing and assuring our souls that they
that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, Psalm. 125.1.
that cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
ISAIAH, 30. Verse. 6.7. Verse. 6. The burden of the beasts of the South, in a
land of trouble and anguish, from whence shall come the old and young Lion, the
Viper, and the fiery flying Serpent, against them that shall bear their
riches upon the shoulders of the Colts, and their treasures upon the bunches of
the Camels, to a people that cannot profit.

7. For the Egyptians are vanity, and they shall help in vain: therefore have
I cried unto her, their help is to sit still.


IN these words is set down a sharp reproof of the unbelieving Jews, with
whom the Prophet Isaiah had to deal: wherein we may note two principal
things.

1. First, the danger that would ensue upon the following of their own
counsel. 2. Secondly, the profit that they should reap by following of his.
Concerning the former of these he tells them, that whereas they rested upon
Egypt for help and aid in a time of war, and for that end did send unto
them the beasts of the South, that is, Camels and Asses laden with riches, and
treasures, they should not only sustain the loss of their money, be utterly
disappointed of their expected aid, but also find great hurt from them: they
should prove by their own experience, not only that The Egyptians were
vanity, and a people that could not profit nor help them, but withal, that
they were Lions, and Vipers, and fiery flying Serpents; that is, furnished and
armed with all ability and willingness, to wrong and oppress them, to vex and
torment them, to spoil them, and prey upon them, and to do them all the
mischief that possibly they could: as they had in the times of old found Egypt
to be a land of trouble, and anguish, so does the Prophet threaten that they
shall find it still. This was the danger of following their own counsel, v.
6.7.

Now the benefit of following Gods advise is showed in the latter end of the
seventh verse: their strength is to sit still: as if he should have told them:
you are very desirous to be fortified against your enemies, and much ado you
make to get men and munition to defend you: but if you will hearken unto me, I
will show you an easier and a safer way; and that is, to cast off all
distrustful fears and cares; to spare your money and your pains, to sit
quiet and still at home in your s^uerall places and callings; and so e^pect the
salvation of God (as Moses exhorts the Israelites. Exodus 14.13. For though
this be not expressed, yet it is necessarily employed, as is plain in the
verses following, and then you shall find, that albeit the Egyptians be
flesh, yet God is a spirit; and and albeit they be weak, and as it were
vanity it self, yet the Lord is strong, and will communicate his strength unto
you, both for your protection, and your adversaries subversion. And thus much
briefly for the general drift of these words.

Verse. 6. First, We are most prone unto cuill.
that were very covetous and miserable in matters that did concern the worship
of God, or the relief of his servants, are now so frank and liberal in
sending of their riches and treasures into Egypt for the procuring of help
from them, which was a course altogether unwarrantable, as is evident in this
chapter: hence this doctrine may be collected, that our sinful nature is never
so forward unto any thing, as unto that which is merely sinful, and utterly
unlawful. See this point (Doct, 4. in the 6. Sermons.)

In a land of trouble and anguish, The 3. point following were of purpose
briefly handled.
etc.] This is to be understood of Egypt, where the people of Israel had
endured the wofullest affliction that ever they felt in any place: yet in their
misery whither do they go? even to this land of molestation and vexation:
where the persons inhabiting are compared unto Lions, for that they were
strong, and ravenous, and cruel: and to the most noisome Serpents, because
their stinging was fiery and deadly, and incurable. Now in that this people
having unholy and unfaithful hearts, did choose rather to sue unto these
Egyptians for protection, then unto the Lord. The point hence to be noted is
this, that

An ill conscience in the time of misery, An ill conscience shu^s Gods presence.


The Egvptians were enemies, yea vowed enemies unto the Israelites, insomuch
that when they were delivered thence, they had a charge never to have any more
dealing with them: yet we see here they will to Egypt for help: but entreaty
will not serve the turn; the Egyptians will do nothing unless they be hired:
why they shall be well paid for their labor; and if they will not take their
word, they shall have their wages before they have done their work; Camels and
Asses shall be sent unto them, with great plenty of gold and silver. Thus we
see how false-hearted hypocrites will rather be at great charges and pains to
get succor from their deadliest foes, then sue unto the living God for it,
though they might obtain it for the very seeking. So Judas being in grievous
horror and terror of conscience, betook himself unto the Priests, whom he
knew to be proud hypocrites, utterly unable to ease and relieve a distressed
soul, rather then unto Christ Jesus, who is a merciful and a faithful high
Priest, able and ready to pity and help every one that comes unto him with an
humble and broken heart. The like may be observed in Ahaz, that wicked King of
Judah, who notwithstanding that he had protection freely offered unto him from
the Lord together with a sign, such as he himself should choose, for his
confirmation in that behalf, yet refused to be beholding unto the Lord, and to
put himself into his hands, Isa. 7.12.
and would needs hire the King of Ashur with his army, for his defense and
safeguard, who did exercise great cruelty against him and his people. Now the
reason why sinful persons are so unwilling to fly unto the Lord in their
extremities, is,

Because there is a quarrel betwixt God and them. Exodus 20. Psalm. 11.5.
they hate him, and he abhorres them: and therefore they shun his presence
as much as may be.

Again, Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? Isa. 33.14.
Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

This teaches us first of all, God: that whereas in extraordinary crosses they
should use extraordinary good means, of fasting and prayer, and humbling of
themselves, they use extraordinary ill means, and so provoke the Lord to
inflict more grievous plagues upon them: these show themselves to be impious
persons, and men of very ill consciences; so should we esteem of them, and so
ought they to think of themselves, in that they forsake the Lord, who is the
fountain of all help and comfort, and sue unto his utter enemy by using
devilish and abominable practices.

Secondly, Hos. 14.
then these hypocrites did with all their Camels and Asses, and with all their
riches and treasures: for the Lord is near to all that call upon him in truth:
Psalm 145.18.19.
yea he will fulfill the desire of those that fear him: he also will hear
their cry, and save them: and that both from their sins and miseries.

Verse. 7. For the Egyptians are vanity, and shall help in vain.] In that
dissuading them from resting upon the Egyptians, he tells them that they were
vanity, and therefore such as they were, such must be their help: either they
should not do their best to defraud them, or if they did, it should not turn
to good, because Gods blessings went not with them: hence arises this
doctrine, that, all the comfort and help that worldly things can afford us,
Worldly help^ vain.
is vain and of no worth. The reasons hereof are these: First, because the
means themselves are vain: neither can they help us in the evil day. Prou.
11.4.
Do we trust upon men and munition, or any warlike force? A King is not saved
by the multitude of an host, Psalm. 33.16.17.
neither is the mighty man delivered by great strength. An horse is a vain
help, and shall not deliver by his great strength. The same conclusion may we
make of all other earthly things: Eccl. 1.4.
for of them al, the Wise man pronounces, that they are vanity and vexatio^ of
spirit.

Secondly, there is no peace to the wicked: one vile lust or other will be
raging in his heart, and disquieting his soul, Psalm. 1.
and he will still be tossed up and down as the chafe that the wind
drives too and fro. A sinful heart is evermore a restless heart, and
whosoever does not believe, whatsoever his outward props be, he shall not be
established, Isa. 7.9.
as the Prophet Isaiah avouches.

Thirdly, no earthly helps can keep off the plagues of God from a man, or
remove them where they are already. Suppose that the Lord intend to shoot his
arrow of pestilence to strike a man, or a family, a town, or a city, what
buckler can bear it off? what wit, or wealth, or friends can shelter us from
his strokes, and keep us from the grave when he calls for us? surely there
are no worldly means that can do it; and therefore we may well conclude, that
all the help that comes from them, is altogether vain.

Which should cause us not greatly to seek after, for though we have them in
never so great abundance, we shall find them to be but miserable comforters when
we stand in most need. Most men are of another mind; namely, that the
treasures and promotions of the world, and the countenance of great men, are
the only things to be looked after, and that the promises of God, and the
comforts of his word, are vain and frivolous: but when they have made trial
as Solomon did, they shall find, that to fear God and keep his
Commandments, is the only happiness, and that whatsoever the world can
afford, is mere vanity, and vexation of spirit.

Secondly, let this teach us in all our griefs to say as the Prophet David
does, Lord help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. q. d. I have
depended much upon the arm of flesh, but now I am grown to this resolution,
that if I had all worldly helps, I would not trust in them, because they are
vain; and if I want them all, I would rely upon thee, that do never fail
such as seek unto thee. Thus if we can do, we shall never be disappointed of
our hope: John 14.
but God will give us such peace and comfort, as neither the devil, nor the
world can take from us.

Their strength is to sit still.] That is, if they would be fortified and
sensed against their enemies, their best course was, to put away all vexation
and unnecessary fear, to tarry at home in their own country, every one in
his vocation, and so to rest on the Lord for defense. Whence the doct. is, that

The best way for men to have safety and protection is, All men are safest in
their own places.
to keep in their own places and callings.

He that would be freed from all hurts and dangers, let him not run hither
and thither without any warrant, as a masterlesse hound, but let him follow his
business with a quiet heart, and look for comfort from above, and he shall
be sure not to miss of it.

We read in the 11. chapter of John's Gospel, John 11.7.
that when Christ was about to go into Judea, his Disciples dissuaded him,
saying, Master, the Jews sought lately to stone thee, and do thou go
thither again? as if they should say, have you no more care of your own
safety, but to run even upon the swords point, and to cast your self into
the Lions mouth? But Jesus answered, are there not twelve hours in the day? if
a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this
world: as if he had said, though wicked men go about to kill me, yet seeing
God calls methither; for all their madness, they shall not be able to hurt
me: for I walk in the light all the while that I go about my fathers
business; and as there is no danger of stumbling so long as a man has the day
light to guide him: so is there no peril to be seared from men, so long as a
man has the light of a good confcience to assure him that he is about those
works which God calls him unto. Indeed if a man be otherwise employed, then
he walks in the night, as our Savior speaks, and then he may dangerously
indeed. Psalm. 91.11.12.
But so long as men keep in their ways, the Lord will have an eye unto them,
to preserve and keep them; and his Angels shall carry them in their hands,
that they hurt not their soot against a stone.

And there is good reason why it should be so: I have glorified thee upon
earth? How proves he that? I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do.

Here then are those to be reproved, your strength is to sit still: and
therefore it is your weakness to be over busy at such times, and to exceed
the bounds of your calling, in using unwarrantable shifts. To give instance in
some particulars, many are so afraid of poverty, that they will not be content
with that employment which God has given them, but will have an oar in every
boat, and be dealing in this trade, and in that, wherein they have not been
trained up; but what comes of it? they cast themselves into far greater
arrearages then they were in before, and entangle themselves in such sort, that
they know not how to wind out. Besides that, the cares of the world, and the
desire of riches do choke the word, that it cannot bring forth ripe fruit in
them, and marueilously hinder the peace and comfort of their consciences. Oh
but their meaning was good: they had an honest care to provide for their wife
and children; an honest care? nay it is a sinful care, that make men to be
such busy bodies: and just it is, that they that will not trust God with their
wives and children, should by tumbling and tossing up and down the world,
spending all, as these Jews did, and feel that which they feared, lying
heavy upon them: So others are afraid of the Pestilence, and what do they to
prevent it? cast about where they may dwell in safety (as they imagine) in being
many miles off from the places infected: though in the mean while they neglect
their callings, show little regard of their wives and children, and servants,
and least of all of their own souls: whereas their strength had been to sit
still, and never to forsake the works of their vocations, nor the ordinances
of God especially; and then either the infection should not come near them; or
if it did, it should be a means of great good unto them, either for the
perfecting of their graces, or for the ending of their miseries, and the
beginning of their eternal happiness. The like might be said concerning
fear of the sword, or of famine, or of any other judgment; they are here
sharply to be rebuked, that do leave those places wherein God hate set them,
for the avoiding thereof.

Secondly, your strength is to sit still: cast your care on God, 1. Pet. 5.
for he cares for you. Wait on the Lord and keep his way, and he shall exalt
you to inherit the land: for the salvation of the righteous shall be of the
Lord: Psalm. 37.34.39.
he shall be [their strength] in the time of trouble. Whether their means be
great or small it is all one unto the Lord.

Though our money and our friends, and our strength fail us; yet will he
never leave us, nor forsake us: therefore let us wholly cast our selves upon
him, and never be dismayed at any crosses: for so long as we serve him in our
places, our case is very good, and very safe. Let our little children be our
teachers in this point, and make us ashamed of our unbelief: for what if they
be hungry and none will give them a morsel of bread to refresh them? what if
their apparel be near worn, and they know of none that will give them so much
as a ragge to hang on them? yet will they comfortably depend upon us, and be
merry and cheerful; assuring themselves that their parents having merciful
hearts, will never see them want any thing that they can provide for them: can
they be thus confident upon the kindness of their natural parents; and shall
not we much more boldly rely upon our heavenly father, who knows all our
wants, and pities us under them, and is able and willing to supply the same?
let us condemn our selves if we cannot do this, and in all straits and
extremities say unto our hearts, as Moses did unto the Israelites at the red
sea, fear not but stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord. Exodus
14.13.
Which if we cannot do, we shall find by experience that he is alsufficient
to minister help and comfort unto us, and that in sickness as well as in
health; in wars as well as in peace; in scarsity, as well as in plenty; and
in a word, in the want of all things as well as in the abundance of all things.
Rules.


But now if we would be sure of this comfort, let us observe these rules.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly, mine: we know not how to bring the year about. Now you do not sit
still, as God would have you, but you take his burden upon your shoulder: for
do you that which God bids you, and he has said, I will care for you. The
reason why there is such carking and caring: such tumbling and tossing, is,
because men think there is none to care for them, but themslues: now if that
were true, it stood men upon indeed to bestirre themselves, and to busy their
thoughts day and night about the matters of the world: but seeing that the Lord
does protest that he cares for us, what need have we to perplexe our hearts
with some necessary vexations and distractions? surely it argues great
corruption in us, when we give way to such distrustful thoughts: for either
we do not believe that God does care for us; or at least we imagine that his
care is not sufficient for us: both which should be far from the hearts of
all true Christians. Let us therefore strive against our unbelief, and give
unto God the praise of his truth, of his mercy, and of his al-sufficiency, and
then fixing our hope upon him, we shall never be ashamed, but according to our
faith it shall be unto us.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
ISAIAH 30. Verse. 8.9. Verse. 8. Now go and write it before them in a table,
and note it in a book, that it may be for the last day for ever, and ever.

9. That it is a rebellious people, lying children, and children that would not
hear the word of the Lord.


WE heard in the words immediately going before, how sharply the Lord does
reprove and threaten the unbelieving Jews, for that they hearing of rumors of
wars, did not go unto God by prayer, but unto the Egyptians by gifts, as if
Pharaoh were more able, or more willling to help and succor them then the
Lord himself: as also how the Prophet Isaiah was sent unto them, to assure
them that the Egyptians would not help them, or if they would, they could not:
nay, that they should be so far from helping them, that they should do them
all the mischief that possibly they could, and therefore he proclaims unto
them that their strength was to sit still, that is, to keep themselves at home
in their places and callings, and to rest upon God, whose strength they should
find to be every way sufficient to defend and maintain them against all
their adversaries.

Now because they were drunken with passion and fear, and would not harken to
the proclamation of peace, therefore does the Lord send out against them a
proclamation of outlawrie; and charge them with rebellion and high treason
against his Majesty: and that it might be of more force with them, he
commands the Prophet [to write it before them in a table] that so every one
might take notice thereof: yea not only in a table to shame them for the
instant, but in a book, that it might be for the time to come, even for ever
and ever: that is, that it might stand in record for their perpetual desgrace
and reproach. Now because they would hardly yield unto this charge; to wit,
that they were traitors against God in seeking unto the King of Egypt for aid,
but would object that they did it in policy and in good meaning, for the
benefit of the Church and Commonwealth, and did rest on God nevertheless, he
puts off that, by faying that they were [lying children] full of hypocrisy and
dissimulation; pretending to send into Egypt in godly wisdom, whereas it
proceeded indeed from their wretched unbelief: and because it was not safe for
him to say this in general, unless he could prove it, therefore he alleges
against them this particular, that they would not hear the law of the Lord.
They were driven to hear now and then, but they did it not willingly, nor with
a good affection; and therefore they are justly condemned as rebels against the
Lord.

In all these words then is set down a grievous complaint against the nation
of the Jews, wherein we may observe,

1. First, Gods charge that he gives unto the Prophet that he should prefer
an indictment against them, not only for their present, but for their
everlasting shame, if they did persist in their evil course.

2. The reason why he takes this round course with them, viz. because they were
rebels against him: which rebellion of theirs was so much more grievous, in
that they were full of craft and cunning to defend their viie practices.

Verse. 8. Now go and write it, etc. In that the Prophet is commanded to
proclaim unto all men that these unbelieving Jews were rebels against God:
this is the point hence to be observed, that

Open sins must have open rebuke and dis. Open sins must have open shame.
and the persons never so great, yet that must not stop the mouths of Gods
Ministers and servants, but they must the rather be rebuked, that thereby if it
be possible, they may be truly humbled. As in this place we see, the Noble men,
and Ambassadors were very busy in raising large sums of money to send unto
the King of Egypt for help, yet though it were the sin almost of the whole
land, and the hand of the rulers was chief in it, the Prophet is charged to
speak against them, and to write against them, and to shame them, not only
for the present, but for ever, if they did not turn to the Lord by sound
repentance. The like is enjoined this same Prophet, chap. 58. verse. 1. Cry
aloud; Isa. 58.
spare not: lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. They pretended great zeal
and forwardness in religion: they would seek the knowledge of Gods word; they
would enquire after the ordinances of justice; they would fast also, and use
much strictness in outward show: yet because they were full of hypocrisy, of
cruelty and oppression, of impiety and Sabbath breaking, and such like heinous
crimes, he must openly exclaim against their ill courses; and as the trumpet
spares none, but wakens all, both great and small, so must he deal; letting
every one hear of his faults of what state and condition soever. This was also
laid upon Timothy. 1. Tim. 5.20.
Them that sin, rebuke openly, that the rest may fear, (says the Apostle)
and it was practiced by our Savior, who seeing that the Scribes and Pharisees
made more account of their own traditions, then of Gods commandments, and
that they sought themselves in ambition and filthy lucre, he does sharply and
openly reprove them, Matthew. 23.
and disgrace them, and pronounce woes and curses against them. The like does
John Baptist, Matthew. 3.
calling them a generation of Vipers: and Paul, meeting with Ananias, a
notorious hypocrite, who commanded him to be smitten on the face, for the
disgrace of his person, and of his cause, Act. 23.3.
he boldly sets upon him, saying, God will smite thee thou painted wall.

Now the reason why public offenses should have open rebuke, is;

First, that others hearing it, Them that sin, rebuke openly, 1. Tim. 5.20.
that the rest may feare] and so consequently be restrained from the like
courses.

Secondly, that if it be possible, The Cretians are always liers, evil
beasts, Tit. 1.12.13.
slow bellies: wherefore reprove them sharply, that they may be [found in the
faith.] For when men are set upon the stage, and exposed to open shame, they
will take it to heart, and if any thing will work upon them for their
reformation, this will: and if they prove incorrigible notwithstanding this,
yet this benefit will come of it, that they shall be more inexcuseable in the
day of the Lord, in that they heard their sins so much disgraced, and the
vengeance of God denounced against the same, and yet would not break off the
practice of them by sound repentance.

Thirdly, it makes greatly for the glory of God, gross and heinous offenses
inueighed against, and withal are witnesses of their wilful continuance
therein, they cannot but in their consciences justify the Lord in his
proceeding against them. That was it especially that caused David to shame
himself publicly, after that he had committed adultery and murder, that God
might be pure when he judged. Psalm. 51.4.
Otherwise men might have thought the Lord too severe, in inflicting such
punishments upon him as afterward he tasted of.

Here then in the first place is an instruction for Ministers, Steven knew that
most of those unto whom he was to speak would not take a reproof at his
hands: yet he saw that he had a calling to give it, Acts 7.
and they had need of it; and therefore he tells them roundly of their faults,
saying, Ye stifnecked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do you, etc. Indeed hereupon
they gnashed their teeth at him, and stopped their ears, that they might not
hear him, and so running upon him with great violence and outrage, stoned him
to death: but what lost he by that? he parted with a frail and miserable
life, and went presently to enjoy an everlasting and most blessed kingdom in
the heavens. Let us therefore be resolute and courageous as he was, and never
fear the faces of mortal men; knowing that there is no greater danger then
for a man to neglect his duty; nor greater comfort then to perform it, though
it be the loss of his life.

Secondly, there is no reason that his servants should make any reckoning of
our credit. Let men therefore be careful to avoid public evils, or else
prepare themselves for public rebukes, which are the best medicines for the
recovering of their sick and sinful souls.

8. Now go and write it before them in a book, that that it may be for the
last day, [for ever and ever.] Hence arises this doctrine, that

That testimony shall abide with every man, Gods testimony is everlasting.
which God gives him in his word.

Look what the Lord says of any one, that shall stand firm, and tarry with
him till death, yea after death, even for ever and ever. As here the Prophet
Isaiah from the Lords mouth charge these cowardly Jews to be dissemblers
and rebels: this has stood in record against them many hundred years, and
does still; their names are not yet healed, nor ever shall be, but all that
lived and died in their impenitency, shall have their shame increased in the
day of the Lord, and that shall tarry with them for evermore. This is also
evident in the Scribes and Pharisees, who though they carried away all the
praise and commendation among men, our Savior does disgrace to the uttermost,
calling them painted sepulchers, Mat. 23.
that had fair outsides, but within were full of corruption, and withal
denouncing many curses and woes against them: now who are more odious then
they? what name of greater infamy among men then the name of Pharisee? and
what is the reason hereof? surely this; the word of God does disgrace such kind
of people; and therefore it sticks so fast unto them, and shall do for ever.
So on the other side Paul was much slandered and reviled, counted a pestilent
fellow, a troubler of the world, and the ringleader of heretics, Act. 24.
and Tertullus made such a bitter oration against him, and brought such
witnesses to confirm his speeches, that a carnal man would have thought his
name almost incurable: yet who more honorable then Paul? his very name does
carry a wonderful reverence with it, and that in the very hearts of wicked
men. But how comes it to pass that he that was then so shamefully traduced,
should now be so highly magnified? this is the true reason of it; he did that
which the word of God did commend, though men did condemn it; and therefore
having a good testimony from heaven, all the calumniations and slanders of men
could nothing at all impeach his credit, but did rather cause it to shine out
more clearly. The Scriptures abound with examples of this kind, but I hasten
to the reasons, which are these.

First, so. If the course of a man's life be such as the Scriptures do commend,
though all the world speak against it, it is commendable: and if it be such
as the word discommendeth, though men and Angels should speak for it, it is to
be disliked and condemned: Psa. 12.6.
for the words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in the furnace of
earth, fined seven fold.

Secondly, inherit glory, Prou 3.35.
though they be vilified and debased for a time; so shall sinners inherit
dishonor (as the Wise man affirms) though they be exalted for a season.
Durable sins shall have abiding shame; and constant obedience shall have
everlasting glory: every man shall receive according to his works, whether
good or evil.

This then may serve to discover unto us their folly and madness, and of all
manner of iniquity: is this the way to get good estimation, and lasting credit?
nay, the Lord says, Psalm 119.21.
that the proud are cursed which err from his commandments: Prou. 10.7.
and that the name of the wicked shall rot. Do they think that if they can
go beyond others in wealth, in command, in outward dignity, and the like, that
then they shall carry away the reputation from them? nay, they are far
deceived if they so imagine: God makes no promise of commendation to them in
the Scripture; and therefore it is a vain thing for them to expect it: 2. Cor.
10.18.
for none is praiseworthy, but he whom the Lord praises; and therefore though
men magnify us, as they did Herod, Act. 12. yet let us think never the better
of our selves: for if we be impious persons as he was, the time shall come
when the Lord will cause us to be abhorred and loathed.

Secondly, Iam. 1.27.
for these things God himself does commend, and therefore we may assure our
selves that they will procure us eternal praise. And though sinful men may
try us by reproaches and slanders, and seek by all means to blemish our
names, as they dealt with our Savior, and his Apostles and followers in former
times, yet shall our memorial be blessed, and our goodness be had in
everlasting remembrance: Pro. 10.7. Psalm. 11^. Psalm. 37.6.
God shall bring forth our righteousness as the light, and our judgment as the
noone day.

Verse. 9. That it is a rebellious people] This is the crime that is charged
upon them being full of infidelity and disobedience, they are indicted of high
treason against the Lord, which was the heauiest imputation that could be laid
upon them. Whence note this point, that

They are the most miserable and wretched rebels, Those that rebel against God
are the worst rebels.
that are rebels against God.

Though it be an offense very grievous and odious for a subject to show
himself disloyal to his earthly Sovereign, yet this shall stand as a sure
conclusion when heaven and earth shall fall, that the greatest Sinner is the
greatest Traitor. Hence it is, that when the Prophet Samuel would set out the
heinousness of Saul's sin, in sparing Agag, the King of the Amalekites, and
the best of the sheep and oxen, and of the things that should have been
destroyed, E^^d. 22.18.20. 1. Sam. 15.22.
he compares it with those crimes that were most hateful and most punishable
by Gods law, saying, Rebellion (to wit, against the Lord) is as the sin of
witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness, and Idolatry: and therefore Saul
must needs be a notorious malefactor, that was found guilty thereof. Isa.
30.1.9.
So deals Moses with the stifnecked and perverse Israelites: Hear ye rebels
(says he) shall we bring you water out of the rock? Numb. 20.10.
as if more could not be spoken for the shame and disgrace of impious persons,
then to brand them with the note of rebels against the Lord of heaven and earth.

But that this point may be yet more clear and perspicuous, let us weigh these
reasons that follow for the confirmation thereof.

First, Romans 7.12.
then any subject in the world is the statutes of his Prince) are most equal
and just, and meet to be kept: and therefore the presumptuous breach thereof
must of necessity argue the most indigne and unworthy rebellion that can be
imagined. It was no small fault in the Israelites to renounce their alleagiance
to Rehoboam, and to stand up in arms against him, being their lawful King and
Governor, albeit he threatened to impose upon them rigorous and sharp laws,
1. King. 12.14.
to make his yoke more grievous then his fathers, so that whereas Solomon had
chastised them with rods, he would correct them with scourges: how heinous
then is their offense that do refuse to submit their necks unto Gods yoke,
who is a more absolute King then ever any was, or shall be to the end of the
world, whose laws are perfectly good and righteous, all of them tending, not
alone to his own glory, but to the present and eternal benefit and comfort of
such as do obey the same?

Secondly, Achitophels treachery against David more inhumane and barbarous:)
now what Kings favors can stand in the balance against Gods favors, which he
vouchsafes to the basest of the sons of men? for he it is that gives them
life and being, Acts 17.
and all things: in him they live, and move, and have their subsistence: and
without him they could not continue to breath so much as one hour, nay nor one
minute of an hour, much less enjoy the comfortable use of any creature under
the Sun: and therefore seeing the bounty and kindness of the Lord is so
exceeding great, their rebellion that do lift up themselves against him, and
cast of the obedience of his laws, is of all men most worthy to be condemned
and abhorred.

Thirdly,

First, the grieuousnesse thereof is evident by this, that whereas earthly
Monarchs can proceed no further against the most notorious malefactors, but to
the torturing and killing of their bodies, the confiscating of their lands and
goods, and the defaming of them and theirs for a season: so that if there be
unfeigned repentance in the parties offending, as there was in the good thief
on the cross, their souls may be saved, and their names healed, and both body
and soul eternally glorified) i^ is otherwise with the great King of heaven,
who will plague those that are traitors against his Majesty with all manner of
judgments in this life, and when he has done with them here, will call them
to a reckoning again at that great Assizes at the last day, and there expose
them to perpetual shame and infamy, and inflict upon their bodies and souls,
such torments as shall be easelesse, endless, and remediless.

Secondly, for the vnauoidablenes of these punishments, we must know, though
rebels against worldly Princes, when they have cast themselves into danger, may
by flying, or hiding of themselves, escape, or if they be apprehended, make
notable defenses and apologies to serve their present purpose, and so wind
themselves out of troubles, it is no boot to deal in that sort with the Lord:
for whither can they go from his presence, Psalm. 139.
but he will find them out? and what witty and cunning devices can they have
for the coloring of their treacherous practices, but he will descry and
discover the same, and that to their greater shame and punishment? Which being
so, Isaiah. 29.
the use shall be,

First, as any in the country, and will defy him that shall charge them with
treason: what say they to this? Do they not usually take the holy name of God
in vain? Do they not profane his Sabbaths? do they not defile their souls
and b^dies with many horrible pollutions? And when as they have been often told
of these faults, and sharply rebuked for them, do they not for all that
continue still in them, and undertake the defense of them? Yea do they not
fret, and fume, and chafe, at such as seek to reclaim them from their leaud
courses? If their consciences do accuse them of these, and the like crimes,
undoubtedly they are guilty of high treason against the Lord of heaven and
earth: they carry the devils badge, and fight under his banner, as professed
enemies unto God, and his truth: and whatsoever they think of themselves, such
the Lord will esteem them to be, and proceed against them accordingly.

Secondly,

Thirdly, unquiet and undutiful persons: yet so long as their consciences tell
them, that they are willing to attend to holy and wholesome doctrine, whereby
their sins may be reproved, and their hearts and lives reformed and
bettered, they may be sure that God accounts them good subjects; and those
that are such unto him, are of all other most loyal and dutiful unto their
rulers and governors: neither indeed can any be truly faithful unto men, that
has not first learned to be faithful unto God. Let us not therefore be
dismayed at the clamors of those that do unjustly charge us with disloyalty.
Athaliah cried out, treason, treason: 2. King. 11.14.
but in truth, she was the traitor her self: and the like may be said of many
that are so ready to traduce others in that sort: whatsoever their outward
behavior toward Magistrates, and such as are in authority be, they are
miserable and wretched rebels before the Lord, and such they shall appear to
be in the end, if they do not in time submit themselves under his gracious
gouemment.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
ISAIAN 30. Verse. 9.10. Verse. 9. And children that would not hear the law of
the Lord.

10. Which say unto the Seers, see not: and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto
us right things: but speak flattering things unto us, prophecy errors.


WE have heard in the former words, that notwithstanding the Jews did profess
themselves to be the only people that stood for God, and for his worship, yet
the Lord does proclaim them wicked rebels against his Majesty.

Now in these words the Prophet goes forward to prove them to be such, and
that he does by two maine reasons, viz.

First, from their ill affection that they had, both to the word of God (which
appeared in this, that howsoever they did by occasion hear it, yet they [would
not] have heard it, Verse. 9.
if they could have done otherwise for shame) and also to the Prophets of God,
which brought his message unto them: Verse. 10.
They said unto the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us
right things: they could not endure that they should take notice of every thing
that was amiss in them, and that they should press every part of Gods will
upon their consciences: this they thought to be too much strictness and
preciseness.

2. Secondly, he proves them to be rebels by their great affection that they
carried unto that which would do them most hurt, (...). flatteric and errors.
Thus much to d^ing the (...) and order of these words the meaning whereof shall
by Gods assistance) be (...) fully laid open in the handling of the several
doctrines. 11, 18, (...)


Verse. 9. And children that world not hear the l^^ of the Lord.] In that the
Prophet do the (...) meant prove them to be traito^s against the most high.
This is the doctrine (...), viz. that, It is a mark of an impious person to
reject the word.
it is an infallible note of an impious and rebellious person, to be unwilling
to hear the holy word of God.

Although men do ordinarily resort unto the assemblies where the Gospel is
pursely preached; yet, if they wish in their hearts that they were from under
those droppings, and if they might have their own choice, they would be from
under them, they are carnal and ungodly men, what appearances soever there be
to the contrary.

The same mark of wicked sinners is given by Job, Job 21.14.
where he says, They say unto God, Depart from us: for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways: not that there is any such wicked monster that will
directly use those terms unto the Lord: but his meaning is, that their lives
and practices do prone so much, viz. that they would not willingly have any
thing to do with God: which appears by this, that they desire not the
knowledge of his maies. Let them say what they will, those that care not to be
acquainted with Gods will, nor to learn from thence what is their duty, do
in effect bid the Lord depart from them, and therefore must needs be very
impious and irreligious persons. To the same purpose it is said in the Psalm.
Psalm. 81.11.
My people would not hear my voice: and what of that? Israel would none of me.
If one should have said to them, You are Apostaes, and hate God in your hearts,
they would have thought it the greatest wrong that could be: but we see what
the Lords testimony is concerning them; they would not attend to my voice,
therefore they would none of me: they rejected my word, therefore they rejected
me. Besides these places, and many moc that might be alleged, the causes and
effects of this unwillingness to hear the Lords message, will evidently prove
those to be sinful persons that are possessed therewith.

First then for the causes thereof, The causes.
there shall two only be named, though many other might be brought.

One of them the Prophet Jeremy makes mention of, saying: Unto whom shall I
speak, Ier. 6.10.
and admonish that they may hear? behold their ears are uncircumcised, and
they cannot hearken.

In the words going before he had denounced heavy plagues against them in
regard of their horrible and fearful transgressions, which did continually
flow from them, even as waters from a fountain, verse. 7. Now hereupon some man
might say, If their offenses be so grievous, wherefore do not you tell them
thereof? Why, (faies the Prophet) unto whom shall I speak, whom shall I
admonish? their ears are uncircumcised, that is, fleshly and carnal: so that
albeit good instructions be brought unto them, yet they (...) hearken
thereunto; but will be gazing hither and thither, and have their minds taken
up with other matters. Let a debtor of theirs come unto them to pay the^ money,
and they will not be looking on this thing and on that, when they should
receive it at his hands: but when the true treasure is offered unto them
freely, they are either idle, or ill employed, so that they have no mind to
accept of that. Tell them a tale of lucre, which they may get; or of some
injury done unto them; whereof they may take advantage, and their ears are
wide open for such matters: but let there be any speech used tending to the
glory of God, or the salvation of their souls, they are altogether deaf, and
cannot with any life or cheerfulnes listen to such things. Now how comes their
ears to be thus uncircumcised? because their hearts are uncircumcised: (which
is the second cause of their unwillingness to attend to the words of
wisdom:) And this appears in two things: the first is, that (as Jeremy
speaks) they delight not in Gods voice. Ier. 6.10.
The second, that they do take pleasure in unrighteousness, as the Apostle
witnesses. 2. These. 2.12.
And look how much delight any one takes in sin, so much hatred will he
bear against the word that checketh him for his sin: and in what measure any
man dislikes the word, in the same measure will he take pleasure in all manner
of iniquity, which is condemned by the word. And thus much for the causes of
this unwillingness.

The ill effects follow, 2. The effects.
which (to mention but a few of a great many) are three. The two former in
respect of men them felues, the last in respect of God.

Concerning themselves, David says, Lord how love I thy law? Psalm. 119.97.
my meditation is in it continually. What will follow then if a man do not
love Gods law? Surely, he will not at any time meditate thereon: which he that
does not, must needs be a very sinful creature.

Secondly, as he will never ponder upon it,

Now for the effect which they shall find from the Lord, it is this that he
will deal with them, 2. These. 2.10.11.12.
for because they receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God will send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies.
That all they may be damned that believe not the truth, but take pleasure in
unrighteousness.

This doctrine makes

First, for the terror of Papists, popishly affected, as being liable to this
judgment and heavy stroke of God, because they refuse to hear the word of
the Lord, and will rather hearken to erroneous and heretical doctrine, then to
the truth of God contained in the holy Scriptures; and rather lie in prison
amongst malefactors, then be in the Church amongst true Christians.

But though they do not hear the word preached, Prou. 28.9.
for Solomon says, He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even
his prayer shall be abominable. Let them pretend what they will for their
wilful absenting of themselves from our assemblies, as namely, that we
corrupt the word, and misinterprete and misapply the same, yet they shall
find, that they have refused to embrace the love of the truth, 2. These. 2.
and have believed lies; and that therefore the Lord has justly given them up
to be deluded by Satan, and so to be damned with him everlastingly.

Secondly, and distasteful unto them, then that of the God of heaven, when he
straightly enioyneth them with all speed to get out of their sins, and to turn
their feet into the way of his testimonies. And because they will be very
loath to acknowledge thus much, but are ready to harbor too good an opinion of
themselves, as if none were more forward hearers then they are, let their own
hearts be judges, what preparation they make before hand for the fitting of
themselves for such a great work; what attention they use when they are
present, and what meditation and conference they have concerning it when they
are departed. Of which points if they would without partiality examine
themselves, they should easily discern a great deal of backwardness in their
nature, and in their practice. If a man should protest that he goes to the
market with a great desire to buy food for himself and his family, yet if he
always played the unthrift with his money, and never brought home any
provision, we would not give credit to his words, but account him a mere
dissembler: and the like censure may we pass on such, as pretend they are
willing to reap benefit by the word, to the intent they may be able to help
both themselves and their families, and yet never carry away any thing to the
purpose, but if they ask them what points were handled, they can say nothing
but this, surely we heard a very good Sermon, God be thanked, but my memory is
very short, or, I cannot utter all that I have in my mind: my heart, I hope, is
as good as the best, though I cannot talk of the Sermon as others do: what is
this but to deceive their own souls with vain words? for certainly he that
has a heart willing to hear, will have a tongue ready to utter, in some
tolerable sort, that which he has heard, though not all of it, yet a good
part of it, as God has given to every one the measure of grace.

Another sort are here to be reproved, who do in a more palpable and gross
manner manifest their unwillingness to hear, in that they will take every
slight occasion to absent themselves, and that not only on the week days,
but on the Lords day also: so that when the Lord comes even to their doors,
and offers to power down his graces abundantly upon them, they refuse his
gracious offer, Act. 13.46.
and so judge themselves unworthy of eternal life.

Thirdly, Remedies against unwillingness to hear the word.
then of naturell strength by the other.

Now to the intent that we may do so, we must use these remedies following.

First, from the venom of all gross and presumptuous sins, yea from the
allowance and liking of the least infirmities: for otherwise if our souls be
clogged with poisoned humors of sin, we shall find no manner of appetite,
or affection to our spiritual food. Wherefore the Apostle James exhorting the
twelve tribes to receive the word with meekness, prescribes them what course
to take for the preparing of their hearts thereunto, Iam. 1.20.21.
viz. to put away wrathful and violent affections, and to lay apart al
filthiness and superfluity of malitiousnes. And the like direction the Apostle
Peter gives in his first Epistle, and second chapter, verse. 1.2. thereby
implying, that it is in vain for men to imagine that they can be profitable
hearers and receivers of the doctrine of Christ, till they have done their best
endeavor to cleanse their hearts and their hands from all manner of iniquity.

Secondly, pure, and holy and perfect it is every way: Psalm. 19.7. etc.
how it enlighteneth the mind, and gives wisdom to the simple: how it
conuerteth the soul, and frames the affections unto obedience: 2. Cor. 10.
Act. 26.18.
how it casts down the strong holds of the devil, sets men at liberty
from the power of darkness, Iam. 1.21.
and translateth them into the glorious kingdom of Jesus Christ: and in a
word, is able to save their souls that do in a conscionable manner attend
thereunto, and treasure it up in the secret of their hearts. Which things being
well considered, will set an edge on our affections, Psalm. 119.
and cause us to have as great delight in Gods statutes, as in all manner of
riches.

Thirdly and lastly, David, Psalm. 119. part. 5.
Lord incline my heart unto thy testimonies. Never discourage our selves, by
thinking, surely I shall never be able to master my affections, and to bring
my heart with cheerfulness to listen unto holy things, but go unto the Lord
that is greater then our hearts, and stronger then our sins, and beseech him
to give us a good affection to his testimonies, and if we ask in faith and
humility, we shall be sure to obtain our hearts desire: Psalm. 25.
for the Lord has promised to teach the humble his way: and if he undertake
it, it is neither our sinful nature, nor Satan's malice that can hinder his
work, but he will by degrees accomplish the same in us, a^ ^ee has done in
all his elect from the beginning of the world even unto this present time. And
thus much for the helps that we must use, that we may become willing and
cheerful hearers of the word of the Lord.

Verse. 10. Which say unto the Seers, see not, etc.
THe Prophet had charged them that they were unwilling to hear Gods word: but
they might object: We are as forward to hear as any other; yea (says he) you
hear indeed: but what doctrine are you most desirous of? would you not be
flattered, rather then reproved? would you not have falsehood preached unto you,
rather then the truth? Do you not say unto the Seers, see not, and to the
Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, but speak flattering things unto
us: prophecy errors? not that they were so brutish as in words to say thus
much unto the Seers; that is, to their faithful teachers, which had an insight
into Gods will; but their actions testified so much: for they would vilify and
persecute such as dealt faithfully with them. Whence observe, The most holy
doctrine is most distasteful unto unholy persons.
the more grievous is it unto the wicked sinners.

As any man of God preaches more soundly, and comes nearer the conscience,
so is he more abhorred of ungodly men.

This we may see evidently in sundry examples of Scripture, as first of all in
those of whom mention is made in the Revelation, where it is said, Revel. 11.
that there were two witnesses, that is, a competent and sufficient number of
faithful Preachers, which were like Olive trees, Verse 4.
to distill the oil of grace into men's hearts, and like Candelstickes to hold
forth the light unto those that lived in darkness and ignorance: but what was
the effect of their preaching? Verse. 10.
It is said that these two Prophets vexed them that dwealt on the earth: that
is, all earthly minded men: all such as were ignorant and proud, unchaste and
covetous: so that they could never be well, till they had killed them, and cast
out their corpses into the streets of the city: but then they were glad and
rejoiced, and sent presents one to another in token of their joy, hoping that
now these two witnesses were dispatched out of the way, they should go on
merrily in their leaud courses, and live at hearts ease.

So Ahab professes that he hated the Prophet Micaiah, and could not abide
him: how came that to pass? he could like well enough of those four hundred
false Prophets that were entertained at Iezabels table: this was the very true
cause; Micaiah never prophesied good unto him, 1. King. 21.20.
but evil. He would deal faithfully in delivering Gods message, and not
flatter him either for fear or favor, but when God proclaimed war against
him, (as he must needs being an impious Idolater) he would let him hear of
it, and give him no allowance in his wicked enterprises: whereas those four
hundred dissembling hypocrites had learned to frame themselves to the Kings
humor, and to speak not true but pleasing things unto him, and by that means
they insinuated themselves into his favor. And as he was affected toward
Micaiah, so was he also toward Elij^h: Have thou found me, O mine enemy?
(says he.) 1. King. 21.20.
Now what was the reason he should profess such emnity against him? even this,
that the holy Prophet of God came ever furnished with sharp rebukes, and
terrible threatenings from heaven, which he was to denounce against him for his
monstrous impiety against the Lord, and cruelty against his servants.

The like may be seen in Paul, who for delivering the holy and powerful
doctrine of the Gospel, was counted a pestilent fellow, Act. 24.
and a troubler of the whole world: not of the Saints that were in the world,
but of such as were men of the world, who could not endure to have their
ignorance, their Idolatry, their hypocrisy, the ill government of their
tongues, of their affections and of their families, laid open and disgraced,
and the reformation of these corruptions urged and pressed upon their
consciences. To this same purpose we may observe further how mad and outrageous
they were against Steven, Acts 7. when he came with sound doctrine to their
unsound hearts: Act 7.54. etc.
it is said when they heard the things that he delivered, their hearts brast
for anger, and they gnashed at him with their teeth, and so giving a shout with
a loud voice, and stopping their ears, that they might not hear him any
longer, they ran upon him with great violence, and carrying him out of the
city, stoned him to death.

unpleasant and unwelcome unto impure and unholy persons, are these:

First, Iam. 4.
that then the Lord will resist them, and at length confound them bodies and
souls: they would be always rooting in the earth, and scraping together the
pelf of this world; Revel. 22.
but the word tells them, that such swine shall be without, that is, excluded
from the heavenly Jerusalem, and have their portion in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone for ever. Now when they are resolved to be proud
still, and to be rooters still, and the Ministers of God are ever and anon
grating upon their consciences for the same, they are much imbittered and
incensed against them, and their doctrine, and if they can work them any
mischief, they shall be sure not to miss of it.

Secondly, Luk 9 45.46.
and said unto him, Master, thus saying, thou put us to rebuke also: as if
he should have said, Be advised what you speak: for this doctrine of yours
tends to our disgrace, as well as unto theirs. But what? does our Savior
forbear them hereupon? nay, he comes nearer unto them, and drives the
nail to the head, saying, Woe be unto you also ye Interpretors of the law: as
if he should say, Will you play the dissemblers, and must not a man speak
against your sin for fear of disgracing you? Yes surely, sin must have shame
wheresoever it is; and therefore woe unto you also ye Lawyers, for without
repentance your case is very dangerous.

Thirdly, Luke 10.18.
and to cast him violently out of their hearts, even as the lightening falls from
the cloud. And this we must make full reckoning of, that whatsoever dislikes
the devil, John 8.
the same will dislike the children of the devil. And therefore we may
observe, Act. 16.17. etc.
that when Paul at Philippi had cast out the devil of the maid that had a
spirit of divination, Satan himself being enraged thereby, all the city was in
an uproar against him and Silas, and commanded them to be grievously scourged
with rods, and after to be laid fast as close prisoners, with their feet in
the stocks.

This point serves,

1. For instruction to Ministers, that, if they be faithful unto the Lord in
teaching right things in a right manner, they must make full account that evil
men will be grieved, and tired, and quite wearied out therewith: they will be
unwilling to come to the Church, and think every hour two, while they are
there. Christ himself could not please carnal men; nay he displeased them
most, because his teaching was best. But what says he for his own and others
comfort? Luke 7.35.
Wisdom is justified of her children: so that albeit fleshly minded men
dislike and reject pure and plain doctrine, yet those that are wisdoms
children, that is, truly and spiritually wife, will approve it, and embrace it.

Secondly, Prophets, Isa. 30.10.
prophecy unto us right things: tell us plainly of our faults; make us to see
them, and to be ashamed of them: if you perceive us to be covetous, or
voluptuous, or riotous, etc. let us hear of these our corruptions, and of the
judgments of God due unto them, that so we may be terrified and reclaimed from
them. And when we feel in the duties of piety, or mercy, or of our callings,
let us be admonished and exhorted; let us have forcible and unanswerable
reasons, for the conuincing of our judgments, and the winning of our affection
to the love and liking of those good duties, which we have been formerly
negligent to perform. If we can come thus prepared to the preaching of the
word, we shall receive abundant fruit and profit thereby: and hence be
assured to our comfort, that we are not rebels and traitors against the great
King of heaven, but his true and faithful subjects and servants, in that we
are glad to know his statutes, and willing and desirous to yield all loyal and
dutiful obedience thereunto; and howsoever our own misinformed consciences,
or Satan, our subtle enemy, may persuade us that we do not love and fear
the Lord, but that we have unsound and unsanctified hearts, yet let us stand
upon the contrary: for if we have no other argument of our true and sincere
love toward God, yet this may be sufficient, viz. that we do unfeignedly
love and embrace his sacred word: it is an undoubted testimony of a good
stomach, to be delighted and refreshed with wholesome food: neither is there
a surer and better sign of a sound heart, the^ to be well affected toward a
sound ministry.

Verse. 10. But speak flattering things unto us, prophecy errors.]
IN that they desire such kind of preaching, we might note this doctrine,
that, Our sinful nature loves nothing so much as that which will do us most
hurt. But of this point, See verse. 6. Doct. 1. before.

Our wretched nature is never so forward unto any thing, All men are natural
most prone unto cuill.
as unto that which is sinful and utterly unlawful. All men are naturally
exceeding slack in attempting and executing that which is good: but very swift
in setting upon, and going through with that which is evil. Therefore is it
said of all the sons of Adam without exception, Romans 3.15.
that their feet are swift to shed blood. Many there are, who if they should be
pressed io fight in lawful war for God and their country, would be fearful
and dastardly, and if they could with any credit or safety, they would betake
them to their heels: and yet the same men in a private quarrel, or in robbing
by the high ways side, or in stealing somewhat out of their neighbors
grounds, will be very forward and swift to shed blood. Again, there are
diverse that are exceeding slow in going to a Sermon, or to any such holy
exercise, or service: but to run to a Bulbaiting, or a Bear baiting, or to a
Whitson-ale, none shall rise more early, nor hasten more speedily then they.
Examples will make this point yet more clear. When Nebuchadnezzar was minded
to pass an unjust sentence of death upon the Caldeans and Astrologians, Dan.
2.14.
for that they could not bring to his mind his dream, which he himself had
forgotten, he made great speed in the matter, in so much that he adjudged all
to die, not only those that had bin examined, but all such as were of that
profession, yea not only those that were Sorcerers and Coniurers indeed, but
Daniel and his companions, that were but only supposed to be such, whereas
they did in truth abhor all those unlawful and devilish Arts. If it had been
some matter tending to Gods glory, or the good of his Church, he would not
have been so ready to yield unto it, and if such a sentence had been past,
there would have been many objections and oppositions, so that the execution
thereof would hardly have followed so speedily, as this here did; in which
regard Daniel takes exception against it, saying, Why is the sentence so
hasty from the King? The like forwardness was there in the unbelieving
Israelites unto the foul and abominable sin of Idolatry: Exodus 32.3.
Moses had labored much to persuade them to make a covenant with God, and to
cleave unto him in faithful and constant obedience; yet when he had been a
while out of the way, they would needs have a golden Calfe in stead of Moses,
to go before them, and therefore all of a sudden they came with great violence
unto Aaron, urging him to make them one: he being afraid to cross them and to
displease them, goes about by carnal policy to stay them from their
wickedness, and therefore calls for their golden care rings, thinking that
they would at no hand have parted with them: but when it was for the erecting
of Idolatry, he could no sooner ask for them, but they presently brouget
them. So also in the days of Hoseah, Hos. 2.8.
the people were exceeding bountiful in bestowing their corn and wine, and
oil, together with their gold and silver upon Baal: they thought nothing too
dear or precious, that was to go that way; so that they were content to part
not only with their goods, but also with their sons and daughters, whom they
sacrificed unto devils.

And as for evil deeds, Psalm. 106.
so for sinful speeches, there is in our nature a very great aptness and
pronenesse thereunto, which unregenerate men do help forward by their
continual practice: in which regard Jeremy says concerning them of his time,
Ier. 9.3.
that they did bend their tongues like bows for lies, but they had no courage
for the truth. If they were to speak of hurtful and wicked things, they had
words at will, and boldness suitable thereunto: but if it were concerning good
and profitable matters, they had no heart unto them; their bow and their string
were both broken.

The reasons of this doctrine are these:

First, Genesis 6.5.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts are only evil, and that
continually. So that when we are about any wicked practice, we have the whole
force and strength of nature to help us forward: as on the contrary, when we
are about any goodness, we have the whole current and stream of the flesh
against us, still ready to stop and hinder us. We are never exercised in that
which is natural unto us, until we be plotting, or practicing some wickedness
against God, or some unrighteousness against men.

Secondly, onward unto that which is evil. In which respect it is said, that
the wisdom which is not from above, Iam. 3.17.
as it is earthly and sensual, so it is also devilish. The wisdom of the
flesh is enmity against God, Romans 8.
and so of it own accord too to prone unto all kinds of mischief: and
therefore being set forward by Satan, it must needs be very violent in the
pursuit thereof.

Thirdly, Ioh. 15.19.
for the world loves, as it own persons, so likewise it own works; such as are
those before mentioned: and whatsoever it loves, that it commends: now praise
is it which earthly minded men do much hunt for, and that makes them so eager
and swift of foot in following after those things which the men of this world
do affect and like of. They would feign have present payment, and are loath to
look after those things which are not seen: they would rather have their
fense satisfied, then their hope exercised, (that which they have, not being a
sound hope) and therefore they choose rather the practice of those evils,
whereby they imagine to obtain some present contentment, then the performance
of such good duties, as would hereafter procure them an eternal weight of
glory, besides the present peace and comfort which from the same would arise
unto them.

Hereby then (in the first place) is discovered their folly and simplicity,
Luke 10.
that it is an evil and damnable religion? Christ his flock is a little
flock, and he has but a few sheep that will hearken unto his voice, and be
ordered and guided by his Spirit: what doctrine then can we imagine that to be,
but the doctrine of devils, unto which such multitudes are ready to give ear,
and to conform themselves without any great contradiction?

Then further, as touching their liberality which they so much stand upon, and
boast of, what matter of commendation can we find therein, seeing it tends
only and wholly to the maintenance of Idolatry? to the furtherance of
superstition? and to the setting up of themselves in the room and stead of
Christ Jesus? Were not the idolatrous Israelites, before spoken of, every whit
as bountiful, Hos. 1.8.
yea more bountiful then they? What will they say to those that offered their
sons and their daughters unto Moloch, and such like abominable Idols? will that
prove there was any foundnesse and uprightness in them? Indeed this much may
be gathered from thence, that they had a great measure of love, which made
them so bountiful. But what kind of love was it? a Christian and well-grounded
love? nothing less, but a fleshly and devilish love, as is very apparent in
this, that it made them so forward in performing the works of the flesh and of
the devil. And the like may be said of Papists long and tedious pilgrimages,
and their cruel and vnnatuturall whipping of themselves, and other such bodily
exercises; it is no marvel to see them undertake and undergo the same with
all readiness and willingness, because they are things unwarrantable by the
word, and consequently services of the flesh and not of God: And it is an easy
matter for a man to spend his riches, his strength, yea and his blood also upon
his wicked lusts, and ungodly affections.

Secondly, and such company, where the wind of false doctrine, or of
devilish counsel and persuasion may blow upon us. Men will yield that the
flesh is frail: but why then will they rush upon the occasions of falling? if
the flesh be so subject to evil, why do they not crucify it by prayer, by
applying the threatenings of the word to their own souls, by keeping good
company, and the like?

This is it that makes a number to fall into Popery, into Brownisme, into
some such dangerous sects, or other, that when they give themselves to the
profession of the Gospel, they find it to be cross and contrary to their
corrupt and finfull nature, and therefore they are full of contradiction and
gainsaying, and at length fall to reading of the books of Papists, or
Brownists, or the like: and then they are carried unto their opinions with such
eagerness and violence, as a ship on the sea that goes with wind and sale.
Now what is the reason hereof? because the flesh is never strongly bent, until
it meet with an ill object, but then it passes on amain without any stop or
let.

Therefore let us be careful that we do not rush upon any such inducements
unto Idolatry, or schism, or any manner of impiety; for otherwise we shall
be sure to be intrapped and ensnared.

Oh but this is too much niceness and scrupulositie, nor so simple, but we can
choose the best, and leave the worst: be present at any popish worship, and yet
keep our hearts to God: converse with any company, and yet continue honest men
still.

Have you so good a persuasion of your flesh?

Thirdly, this may serve for a caveat unto us, or other, that makes us so
nimble and ready in the performance of it: let us (I say) look well unto our
hearts in this behalf; for all is not fire from the altar, that seems to be
such: it is a rare thing for us to be truly zealous of good works; and much
of our heat proceeds rather from our own flesh, then from Gods spirit; and
therefore when we perceive our violence and eagerness to arise rather from
some inordinate lust, then from any good and holy affection, let us curb and
restrain the same, and beseech the Lord to moderate our desires, that we may
do all our works in meckenesse and modesty, and with that good temper which
beseems Christians.

Fourthly, Romans 7.
and strive against it.

But why should Heretics be able to cleave more earnestly,

There is good reason for that: Lord, that while we have a natural life, we
should have also natural corruption: and albeit the flesh be in part
crucified, yet will it still rebel against the Spirit, and the devil and the
world will take part with it.

But what then is the difference between Gods servants, and the servants of the
devil,

Herein stands the difference, Galath. 5.
for they have the spirit in them which does always resist the sinful motions
of the flesh, so that as they cannot do the good which they would, because the
flesh lusts against the spirit, that is, against the regenerate part in them:
so neither can they do the evil that sometimes they would, because the spirit
strugleth and fights against the lusts of the flesh. Now concerning wicked
men, they are altogether fleshly, and therefore when they have vile motions
from nature, or bad suggestions from Satan, they like of them, and nourish and
cherish them, and if means and opportunity be offered, proceed to the
execution of them.

Herein then may Gods children rejoice that they are far unlike the limbs of
the devil, in that they mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, Romans
8.13.
and therefore shall live: whereas others walk after the flesh, and satisfy
it in the lusts thereof, and therefore shall die. In the meditation whereof
they should raise up their discouraged hearts, and fainting spirits to sound
joy, and due thankfulness, for that the Lord has by his good spirit, and
powerful word, wrought a change in their hearts, and made them that were
naturally set on mischief, and did drink in iniquity with delight, even as
beasts drink water; to be in any measure tractable unto holy duties, and to
carry a perfect hatred against all impiety and unrighteousness, albeit they
cannot get that masterie of their sinful lusts as they should, and as they
would. This is a wonderful work of God, for which we cannot sufficiently
praise his name: and therefore we should do as the Prophet David did when the
Lord had put it into his heart, and into the hearts of his subjects to be
liberal toward the building of the Temple: 1. Chro. 26.13.14.18.
Now therefore, our God, (says he) we thank thee, and praise thy glorious
name. But who am I, and what is my people that we should be able to offer
willingly after this sort? etc. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our
fathers, keep this for ever in the purpose, and thoughts of the hearts of thy
people, and prepare their hearts unto thee.

From which words it is apparent, that it is an admirable and supernatural
work to have a well disposed mind, and a well affected heart unto any thing
that concerns the worship of God, and his glory: to be frank and
free-hearted in bestowing ones substance upon sumptuous buildings, costly
apparel, great housekeeping, setting up Lords of misrule, and the like, is a
thing not worth the speaking of, because a mere carnal man in arrogancy and
vainglory may be very lavish and prodigal to such ends and purposes. But to
have a liberal heart for good uses, either for the furtherance of Gods service,
or for the relief of the distressed Saints, is a matter that we should take
special notice of, and be careful to magnify the name of the Lord for it,
and earnestly to entreat the continuance of it, as David does in this place.

And though we be not always alike, but now and then dull, and heavy, and
lumpish, and drowsy, when it pleases the Lord for our humbling to let the
flesh play it part; yet if we sometimes, and for the most part find
spiritual motions and affections, and from thence proceed to holy speeches and
actions, as occasion and ability is offered, we have great cause to bless the
name of God for his singular favor and goodness toward us in that behalf.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
ISAIAH 30. Verse. 19. Verse. 19 Thou shall weep no more: he will certainly
have mercy upon thee at the voice of thy cry: when he hears thee, he will
answer thee.


THe purpose of these words is, to comfort the elect Jews against those
sorrows and miseries that should fall upon the Church, and Commonwealth.
Wherein is declared, 1. First, what favor the Lord would show them, viz. 1.
That albeit they should taste of the common distresses which befell the rest,
and so be in heaviness for a time, yet at length they should be comforted and
refreshed; Thou shall weep no more. 2. More generally the Prophet affirms,
that he will have mercy upon them: not naming the particulars, because he
intended to enrich them with every good blessing needful for their souls or
bodies.
2. Secondly, what duty they were to perform, namely, to crave this favor at
the Lords hands, and that not coldly and slightly, but vehemently and
earnestly: and then at the voice of their cry God promises to hear them; yea
so to hear them, as to answer them, in granting that which they should desire
of him: he could no sooner hear their crying voice, but they should feel his
helping hand.


Verse. 19. Thou shall weep no more.] Whence observe this doctrine, that

All the sorrows and tears of Gods Children shall end in joy. All the
afflictions of the Saints shall end in consolations. Isa. 30.20.29. Psalm. 30.5.


As they have their times of feeding upon the bread of adversity, and the water
of affliction, so have they also seasons of rejoicing, and of singing Psalms
of praise for their happy deliverance out of troubles and miseries. Heaviness
may abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning. They may sow in tears
for a time, but they shall reap in joy. Eccles. 2. vlt.
This is the very patrimony and inheritance of the Saints, as the Wise man
says, Surely to a man that is good in his sight, to wit, through Christ, God
gives wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: this he may build on, and make full
account of, even in the midst of all his sorrow and anguish. And there is
good reason why it must needs be thus.

First, search what corruptions do lurk there, whereby the Lord is incensed
against them, that so those being removed by sound repentance, his heavy
displeasure may be turned away from them, and his loving countenance may shine
upon them. This is it that Gods children will sooner, or later come unto,
albeit for a fit they be passionate and discontented: they will at length
turn their eyes from looking upon their crosses, to see the true cause
thereof, and so be grieved for their offenses against God, Ier. 31.19.
and smite upon their thighs in a holy indignation against themselves, in
regard of their pride and unbelief and unthankfulness, and other the like
corruptions. They then leave off musing on other men's injuries, and begin to
bethink themselves of their own transgressions, that so casting down
themselves by godly sorrow, 1 Pet. 5.6.
the Lord may raise them up to pure and holy joy, which he will certainly do
in due season; neither shall all their sins and sorrows be able to keep
them down, when once they are thoroughly humbled under the holy hand of God.
It is his promise then to lift them up, and Christ his office to comfort them
that mourn: Isa. 61.
and therefore as those that in their miseries are passionate, and desperate,
full of murmuring against God, and of fretting against men, cannot expect any
joyful issue out of their troubles: so on the other side, they that are lowly
and broken hearted, much dejected and abased in the presence of the Lord, and
mild and peaceable in their carriage before men, they may be assured that all
their sighs shall end in songs, that all tears shall be wiped away from their
eyes, and that in stead of the spirit of heaviness, they shall in due time be
clad with the garments of gladness.

Secondly, Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the time of trouble (says God) and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. This Asa and Iehoshaphat had good experience of: for
when they being in a great strait, 2. Chron. 14. and 20.
had humbled themselves by fasting and prayer, their hearts were full of joy,
and their mouths full of the praises of the Lord for their wonderful
deliverance from their enemies. And the like may be said of Hester and
Mordecai, Hestor.
and the rest of the Jews in his time. John 16.20.
And our Savior tells his Disciples, Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye
shall weep and lament, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. But by what
means should they attain unto this? the words following do make it manifest,
Ask (says he) and ye shall receive, Verse. 24.
that your joy may be full. When Christians do enjoy wealth, and credit, and
ease, they are oftentimes made so dull and secure thereby, that they have little
mind to power out their souls before God in prayer: but when once they are
thoroughly pinched and pressed with miseries and calamities, then they begin to
renew their acquaintance with God, and so bringing before him abundance of holy
and heavenly prayers, he replenisheth them with store of sweet and celestial
comforts.

A third reason hereof may be taken from the end of Gods afflictions, that he
may do his children good in the latter end, that he may make them partakers
of his holiness, Heb. 12.10.
and so by consequent of the consolations of his spirit. When God will do his
enemies a notable displeasure, he sets them aloft in slippery places, Psalm.
73.
that so their fall may be more fearful and unrecoverable: even so on the
contrary, when he purposes some extraordinary benefits unto his servants,
he will lay them full low, and afflict them full sore, (as he did Joseph and
David) that so they may be more capable of his favors.

Here comes to be reproved that faint-heartednesse that is in many of Gods
children in the days of their affliction: not make alive? shall our faults be
more forcible to procure his displeasure, then Christ his merits to recover his
favor? Away with these unbelieving conceits, and distrustful thoughts and
speeches: for he that says he shall never live a comfortable life more, does
in effect say thus much, that either he is no true Christian, or the Lord no
true God of his word, who has said, Psalm. 97.11.
that light is sown for the righteous, and joy for all that are upright in
heart. Why then should we not sustain our selves with the expectation of
deliverance to come? and why should we not sweeten our present tears, with the
hope of future comforts? The Apostle James presses the example of the
husbandman, who though his barn be empty, and his seed that he has cast
into the earrh, not yet appearing above ground, Iam. 5.7.8.
yet he waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for
it, until he receive the former, and the latter rain. And what of this? Be ye
also patient therefore (says he) and settle your hearts, etc. And indeed all
Christians have reason so to do: for they are good seedsmen, that are evermore
sowing prayers and tears in the bosom of Jesus Christ: and therefore they
have a crop growing, that cannot possibly miscarrie; howsoever it fall out unto
others, they shall be sure to speed well, and to have an happy issue out of
all their temptations.

Oh but my crosses and trials are strange and extraordinary.

What of that? were not Jobs so, no instance could be given by him of any of
the Saints that had endured the like? yet the Lord made a good and happy end
of all his distresses and miseries, and so will he do of yours, if in faith
and patience you can wait upon him. And in truth it is a great dishonor and
indignity that we offer unto the Lord, when we imagine that he can do
somewhat for us in small and light afflictions; but if our case be any thing
extraordinary, that then there is no hope of help and succor from him: for
thereby we make the Lord such a Pilot as can do somewhat upon a shallow
river, where there is little or no danger: but upon the maine Ocean, especially
if the Sea begin to swell and rage, we dare not trust unto his skill. what
vile and base unbelief is this? The Prophet David was otherwise affected when
he says, Psalm. 46.1.2.3.
God is our hope, and strength, a help in troubles ready to be found.
Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the
mountains fall into the midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof rage,
and the mountains shake at the surges of the same. And therefore let us be
ashamed and grieved that we have been so heartlesse and hopeless in great
extremities.

Secondly, is it so, that all the perplexities and anguishes of the righteous
shall end in joy? Is this a privilege and prerogative peculiar unto them? then
how wretched and woeful is the condition of all the ungodly ones of the world,
whose sorrow shall end in sorrow, and who shall go from their present pain
and grief unto perpetual tortures and torments in hell fire? let them make
merry, and be as iocund as they will for a time, and seek to put away
melancholy fits, as they term them; they have a crop growing, as well as
Gods children: but what is that? even a crop of shame, and horror, and
anguish, which shall seize upon their souls at unawares, and that to their
everlasting ruin, and the utter destruction of their bodies and souls for
evermore. And therefore as the godly are to be exhorted not to envy the
prosperity of the wicked, though they flourish for a season; so are the ungodly
to be admonished that they do not esteem Gods Children to be miserable,
albeit they be in heaviness for a time: 2. Cor. 4.
for their light and momentanie afflictions shall be recompensed with a far
most excellent and eternal weight of joy and of glory: whereas the short and
vain delights of wicked sinners shall be infinitely ouerpeised and weighed
down with the unsupportable miseries, which, if not in this world, yet in that
which is to come, they shall most certainly meet withal.

Thirdly, that it shall go well with the righteous, Isaiah 4. Psalm. 37.
and that the end of such men shall be peace.

But if we would be assured of this good effect of our afflictions, we must
practice these two rules:

The first is, David, till he have reclaimed us, and healed our sinful souls
of those wounds that Satan has given them.

The second rule is,

He will certainly have mercy upon thee [at the voice of thy cry] Whence this
doctrine may be gathered, that, The way to have mercy from God, is to cry unto
God. But this point has been handled else where. See the second Sermon on
Lament. 3. Doct. 6.

When he hears thee, he will answer thee.] Hence note, that we are not more
ready to ask then God is to grant our requests. See book of the ten
Sermons, the fourth Doct. of the 4. Sermon, where this point is handled.

FINIS.
A BRIEF DISCOVRSE TOUCHING the extinguishing of the Spirit.
Of extinguishing the graces of the Spirit.
THe Apostle upon great and weighty consideration, 1. These. 5.19.
delivers this precept unto the Thessalonians, Quench not the spirit: for
though all those be worthily and justly condemned, that never tasted of the
spirit of God, yet a more fearful condemnation is like to come upon them,
that having once received some gifts thereof, do afterward lose the same
again.

Now as concerning this Church, when the Apostle says, Quench not the spirit,
it does evidently appear, that they had received the Spirit. For as fire
cannot be said to be quenched where it is not; so neither can the spirit in
those that have it not. Wherefore let us know that this precept does properly
belong to them that have received the spirit of God, and they especially are to
make use of it. As for others, it cannot profit them, unless that, as the seed
lying in the ground a long time, does afterward bud and become fruitful; so
this continue in their minds, till they have tasted (in some good sort) of the
spirit of God, and then breed in them some carfulness that they do not
quench it.

But for the further clearing of this text, two Questions may be answered.

The first is,

For answer to which we must understand,

First of all, Effects of the Spirit.
if there be nothing in a man but that which by nature and industry may be
attained unto, We have received the spirit, not of the world, but of God. 1.
Cor. 2.24.

Secondly, Ioh. 16.8.
Therefore the Evangelist John makes this the first work of the spirit, that
it shall convince the world of sin: which is so needful, that without it
Christ Jesus can never enter into the heart: for he promises to dwell only
with them, Isa. 67.25.
that are humble in spirit, and contrite in heart, through the sight of their
iniquities, and of Gods displeasure justly deserved for the same: and calls
those alone unto him that are weary, Matthew. 11.
and heavy laden, groaning and sighing under the burden of their sins. Thus
we see, that to be rebuked in our consciences in this sort, is the first work
of the Spirit, The Spirit works by degrees.
which is also wrought by degrees. For first there is a great and general
astonishment by reason of all those great and enormous sins that we have
committed; A general astonishment. Romans 8.15.
and this does strike us down, it does terrify us, and hold us amazed
wonderfully. Then it deals with us more particularly: it brings us unto a
special grief for special sins; it does bereave us of our chief desires;
Romans 7.8.
and brings us out of conceit and liking with the best things that are in us:
for then it does display before us the vanity and darkness of our
understanding, Weakness of understanding. 1. Cor. 2.14.
how unfit and unmeet we are to understand and conceive those things, which
do above all other most concern us: Then does it let us see the corruption of
our judgment, Corruption of judgment. Phil. 1.9.10.
how in things belonging to God we be as bruit beasts, not able to discern
things that differ, nor to put a sound difference between good and evil, Romans
8.6.7. The unreasonableness of reason.
then does it let us see that our reason is unreasonable, nay that it is
hurtful unto us, a great enemy to faith, and a great patron of infidelity and
unbelief. The sinfulnes of our affections. Act. 2. Iam. 4.
it turns our mirth into mourning, our pleasure into painfulness, and our
greatest delight into most bitter grief. If it do proceed further, and come
once to the heart, and to the stomach and courage that is in us, then it
cutteth us to the quick; then does it at once east us down in humility under
the hand of God, whereas when we had to deal with men, we were as stout as
any, and would nor start for the best. We had reason to say for our selves,
and courage to defend our selves against all them that did deal with us: but
now the spirit draws us into the presence of God; it lets us to see that
we have to do with God, and that our strength is weakness in respect of
him. Then do our hearts begin to fail us; then do we lay our hands upon our
mouths, and dare not answer. Job 39.37.
Behold here how the spirit works in conuincing men's consciences of sin:
which whosoever can find in himself, he may assuredly say, that the spirit
of God is in him indeed.

The third note and effect is, Justification.
for when the spirit has brought us thus far, then does it begin to open
unto us a door unto the grace and favor of God. It does put into our minds
that there is mercy with God, and therefore stirs us up to seek mercy at
his hands: afterward it does let us see how Christ suffered to take away the
sins of the world, that in the righteousness of Christ, we may look to be
justified before God. And this it does not let us see only, but does
effectually work a sure persuasion of it in our hearts, Effects of
justification.
and confirms the same by two notable effects.

The first is a joy most unspeakable and glorious, 1. Joy. 1. Pet. 1.8. Romans
5.2.
wherewith our hearts must needs be wholly taken up, and ravished, when we see
our selves by the righteousness of Christ, of the free mercy and grace of God,
redeemed from death, delivered from hell, and freed from the fearful
condemnation of the wicked.

The second is the peace of conscience, 2. Peace. Romans 5.1. Philip. 4.6.
which indeed passes all understanding. While sin, and the guilt of sin
remained, there was no peace, nor rest, nor quietness to be found, but fear
within, terrors without, and troubles on every side: but when once sin is
nailed to the cross of Christ: when the guilt thereof is taken out of our
consciences, and the punishment thereof far removed, then must needs ensue
great peace, because God is at one with us: and for this we have the warrant
and testimony of the spirit: for flesh and blood cannot work in us this holy
and heavenly assurance.

And hereof does arise a fourth note, 4. Readiness to do good.
to wit, the life and nimblenes that is in us to do good: for when a man does
find favor from God, for the forgiveness of his sins, then the love of God
constrains him, and that joy which he conceiueth enforces him, and puts
life into him for the performance of those things, which are pleasing unto God.
Then he begins to find himself, not only reclaimed from evil, but also
framed to that which is good. Then is his understanding enlightened to see into
the mysteries of godliness, then is his judgment reformed, so that he is able
to discern betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt that which is good, and that
which is evil. 1. These. 5.23.
Then are his affections in some good measure altered: his desire is set, not
upon earthly, but upon heavenly things: his joys are not in earth, but in
heaven: his anger is wasted and spent, not upon his own private cause and
quarrels, but his own sins, and upon whatsoever hinders the glory of his
God. This is the life of God in him: Ephesians. 4.18. Romans 8.2.
thus he lives that has received the spirit, and thus he leads his life
continually: for they that have received the spirit, are led by the spirit, and
do live accordingly, Gal. 5.22.
bringing forth the fruits of the spirit.

But this has frailty joined with it, and men through weakness may soon
fall: therefore if notwithstanding that, we will know whether we still retain
the spirit, we must try ourselves by these rules:

First, if through infirmity we have fallen, Iam. 3.1. Notes of the spirit
after slips. 1. Hatred sin.
(as who does not) and will know whether thereby we have lost the spirit of
God, or no, let us examine what liking or misliking we have of sin: for if
we still hold our former hatred of that, and the oftener we fall, the more
thoroughly and deadly hatred we conceive against it, undoubtedly that frailty
has not as yet deprived us of the spirit; for this holy detestation of sin is
a fruit of the spirit.

Secondly, 2. Sorrow for sin. 2. Cor. 7.
consider how it stands with thy sorrow: for so long as thy sorrow for sin
increases, it cannot be, that the spirit should be quenched in thee.

Thirdly, 3. Care to avoid it.
try thy care, and if thou find thy self more careful both to fight against
sin, and to prevent it, by avoiding the occasions of it, then know, Romans 7.
that not it, but grace has dominion in thy heart.

But the last is most certain, 4. Greater zeal in well doing. 2. Cor. 7.11.
Ephesians. 4.
and that is this, when thou art careful to redeem that, which by thy fall
thou have lost, and have a care to run so much faster forward, by how much
more thou have been let by thy fall: then it does appear that the spirit is
in thee, yea it is lively and mighty in operation, and such as shall never be
taken from thee, until the day of Christ.

Now further, when the Apostle says, Quench not the spirit, he implies that
the spirit is in some respects like unto fire; therefore if we do but a
little consider of the nature of fire, we shall a great deal better judge of
the spirit.

First of all, The properties of the Spirit whereby it resembles fire. Romans
8.13.
and therefore lighting upon straw, stubble, etc. it brings all to ashes: so
does the spirit in our souls waste, and at length bring to nothing all noisome
lusts whatsoever.

Secondly, and so does the spirit purge us from the dross of sin daily more
and more, Ioh. 15.2. Act. 159.
that we may be holy temples for him to dwell in.

Thirdly, 1. Ioh. 1.5.6.
ever giving light unto us in the midst of the darkness of this world.

And last of all, fire gives heat, Colos. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.1.
and then becomes active and nimble: even so does the spirit set us on heat,
and inflameth us with a zeal of Gods glory, with a care of our duty, and with
a love of all mankind; yea withal it puts life into us to walk in that good
way which leads unto life.

Thus we see what likelihood there is between the spirit and fire, for which
cause it is sometimes called fire: as Matthew. 3.11. Therefore as truly and
certainly as we may say there is fire where we see straw or sticks consumed,
gold or silver purged, great light in dark places, or great heat and
liveliness in bodies that were benumbed before: so truly may we say, and so
certainly may we persuade our selves that the spirit of God is in us, when we
see our corruptions consumed, our souls purged, our hearts enlightened, and
made hot in walking, and working according to that light.

The second question to be considered,

To this it may be said,

First then there is a lighter and lesser work of the spirit, Several
operations of the spirit.
which may be quenched: as appears in the two kinds of grounds, Luke 8. to
wit, the stony and thornie ground, Matthew. 13. Luke 8.
for they are said to receive the word with joy, and to believe for a time,
though after either the pleasures and profits of this life did choke the
graces of God, or else the fiery heat of persecution did dry them up, not
being such sanctifying graces as are bestowed upon the elect. If any would see
the truth of this more clearly, let him read, Hebr. chap. 6. verse. 1.2.3.4.5,

There is a second kind of working of the spirit, Peter describes, saying,
that the chosen of God are begotten again of the immortal seed of the word:
1. Pet. 1.23.
this is not a light but a deep tasting of the word, whereby men are
regenerated and begotten unto God. The Apostle John sets down another note
of this, 1. Ioh. 3.7.8.^
saying, that they that are thus borne again, do not sin, that is, they
cannot make an occupation of sin: they cannot fall flat away by sin: and
why? even because the seed of God abides in them, even that seed whereby they
were begotten again, which will abide in them even unto the end, so that they
shall neither by secret seducements, Matthew. 24.24. Ioh. 10.28.29.
nor by open violence be taken out of Gods hands.

Thus then we see the question answered: neither must it be strange, much less
offensive unto us that the Lord should take some, and leave others; or that he
should work effectually in some, for their eternal salvation, and more
slightly in others, for the increase of their condemnation: for thus has God
dealt even from the beginning, and that most righteously, because he may do
with his own what he will: Romans 9.20.21.

Let us see rather what use we may make of it.

First, let us take heed of quenching any grace of God.

Secondly, still labor to have a greater measure of gifts, seeing small gifts
may be taken away.

Lastly, let us learn to put a difference between hypocrites and sound
Christians: for the one sort endures but for a time, but the other lasts for
ever.

But if yet we require a clearer difference between these several operations
of the spirit, let us mark these rules: Rules to try whether the spirit have
wrought in us in a saving manner.


First, let us try what insight we have into the word of God; certain it is
that both the godly and wicked are enlightened, but diversely: for the knowledge
of the godly is certain and distinct, and therefore in particular things they
are able to apply the threatenings of God for their humiliation, Concerning
knowledge.


Again,

Lastly, the knowledge of the one continues with them unto the end; but the
knowledge of the other leaves them in the end. Therefore is the knowledge of
the godly for the cleerenesse, certainty, and sufficiency of it, compared to
the Sun: Heb. 6.
and the knowledge of the wicked to the lightning, which is only for a sudden
flash, and when it is gone, men are more dimme-sighted then they were before.
Thus we see one difference in their judgments.

Secondly, Concerning the affections. 1. Desire. Psalm. 78.34.
that the wicked do desire the help and favor of God, but the difference
stands in the cause why: they seek help only because of some extremity they
are in; and sue for the favor of God, because they would be freed from
grief: and therefore it is usual with them to say; Oh that I were out of this
pain! oh, that this my sorrow were taken from me! by which speeches they show,
that so they might be at rest and ease, they would little weigh of the help
and favor of God: but the godly find such sweetness in his live, that they
count it better then life it self: Psalm. 63.3.
in so much that for the obtaining thereof they can be content to forgo all
the pleasures of this life, Matthew. 13.4.
yea and to suffer whatsoever it shall please the Lord to inflict upon them.

Further, not the godly only, 2. Sorrow.
but the wicked also are grieved when they have sinned: but the wicked do
therefore sorrow, because their sin has or will bring some punishment upon
them: and the godly sorrow chiefly because they have offended God, Psalm. 80.7.
and given him occasion to withdraw his favor from them.

The third difference is in their love: 3. Love.
for though both of them do love God, yet it is after a diverse manner; the one
of sincerity, the other for wages only. A poor child that is taken up, fed,
and clothed, will love him that does thus feed and cloathe him: but if he
received no more of that man then of another, he would like him and love him no
better then another: even so it is with the wicked; if their bellies be filled,
their barnes stuffed, and they have their hearts desire, they love God indeed,
but only for their belly and their barnes. Thus did Saul love God for his
kingdom; Achitophel for his promotion; Judas for his place of Apostleship: but
what became of their love? Saul a little afflicted, forsook God; Achitophel
somewhat crossed in his devices, and disappointed of his hopes, hanged himself;
and Judas for gain betrayed Christ.

Some experience of this we may see among us: Courtiers will be professors,
and Scholars of ripe wits will be religious, if that Courtiers may become
Counselors, and Scholars may be preferred to the chiefest places; but if
promotion come not, then is their profession forsaken, and their religion laid
aside: and yet that is not all, for either they wax profane in their lives,
or heretical in their opinions. Do the children of God love on this manner?
No, the holy Ghost which they have received in effectual manner, does shed the
seed of love in their hearts, Romans 5.
and does work in them a special liking of his goodness, and of his
holiness, Psalm. 116.1.
so that they love him not for his blessing alone, but chiefly for himself: as
the natural child loves his father naturally, and though his father beat
him, yet he bears it, and still loves him. 2. Pet. 1.2.3.4.
They have powered and infused into them a godly nature, so that they do freely
love God their father: and though he afflict them, or cross them in their
desires, yet they love him, and in love perform their obedience unto him
continually. Job 13.
Therefore Job says, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. And this is
the third mark or rule whereby to prove and try our selves.

The last rule is in considering the effect of Gods mercies received.

First on the right hand, the mercies of God do work in them a wonderful
contentation, but not such as causes them to return the glory unto God, but
rather to ascribe it unto themselves: for the graces of God do puff them up,
and make them conceited in themselves. Hereof there arises a great security,
which brings first neglect, and after contempt of all good means. On the
left hand others offend, being never pleased nor contented with that they have:
nay indeed forgetting, or lightly esteeming that they have, and still desiring
new. These men besides that they are unthankful, they do also murmr and
grudge against God, and are never pleased with him. Between these two do the
children of God hold a middle and even course, and therefore we shall see
these things in them. First a sight and acknowledgement of their wants, which
cause them to long for the sincere milk of the word, that thereby their wants
may be supplied, and their graces increased: and so far are they from being
lifted up with pride, that they rejoice when their pride may be pulled down,
whether by rebukes, or threatenings, or corrections from the Lord. For they know
that if Paul needed means of humbling, (2. Cor. 12.) much more do they.

Besides, as they desire the word, so they wait until it please the Lord to
work further in them thereby: and this waiting is as earnest as theirs, who
having watched all night, do wait and look for the dawning of the day.

Secondly, as they see their wants, Psalm. 119.10.
so do they also see the graces they have received, and are for that time well
apaid and contented therewith: and therefore as their wants do humble them, so
Gods graces do comfort them: and as their wants do call upon them to seek
more, so the gifts they have, provoke them to be thankful for that they have
received. And thus much for the last rule of trial. These forenamed properties
whosoever can find in himself, he may be assured that the spirit has wrought
in him so effectually, as that it shall never be taken from him.

But what then? may such cast off all care? No, the Apostle says unto such,
Quench not the spirit. And not without cause: for though the spirit it self
can never be utterly taken from them, yet doubtless if pride, security, or
any other sin begin to take place in them, the graces of the spirit may
decay, and their clear understanding, and comfortable feelings may be gone, so
that in their own and others judgments, the spirit may seem to be quite
extinguished.

Neither must this seem strange: for if the Image of God which was more
perfectly placed in Adam, might be quite lost, then no marvel if the graces of
the spirit be drowned in us for a time. The Galathians were truly regenerated,
and had received Christ into their hearts: yet their graces were so choked and
quenched, that he was as it were without fashion or form: so that the Apostle
did as it were travel again, Gal. 4.19.
until Christ was fashioned anew in them. David also upon the committing of
his sin was brought unto that case, Psalm. 51.
that he prayed God to create in him a new spirit. What, was the spirit quite
gone? No, for by and by after he prays that God would not take his holy
spirit from him: but the graces thereof were wonderfully decayed, and therefore
he desires that they might be renewed.

But that none may abuse this doctrine, Evils that follow upon quenching of the
spirit.
let us consider what punishments do follow upon the quenching of the spirit
in this sort.

First of all we must know, that though the spirit be not gotten by our
labor,

Secondly, all that peace and joy,

Thirdly,

Moreover, though he will not take his mercies utterly from his children, yet
he will visit their sins with the rod, and their iniquities with scourges:
as he dealt with David.

Last of all, be to call to mind our former transgressions; to aggrauate them
by all circumstances, to apply the terrible threatenings of the law to our
stony hearts, and the like? The consideration of all which discommodities,
should cause us to beware how we quench the spirit.

Yet here is matter of comfort also: for though we may suffer a great decay of
Gods graces, yet by the rod or by the word, or by both, they shall be renewed in
us again.

A Discourse of murmuring in the time of affliction.
MAny men hearing of the often murmurings of the Israelites, do judge them the
worst people under the Sun: but such do little consider, either the
temptations whereby they were provoked to murmr, or the corruption of their
own hearts, which will as bitterly murmr upon less occasion. For albeit
they were an obstinate and stiff-necked people, yet herein they were
vehemently tempted, that they came from plenty in Egypt, to scarsity in the
wilderness, having neither meat nor drink for all that multitude, being six
hundred thousand men, besides women and children. Wherefore let us cease to
wonder at this people, and in them see our own corruption. For do not many
amongst us, beholding the abundance which the Lord has bestowed upon
Magistrates or Ministers, for the discharge of their duties, do they not (I
say) rather murmr at it, then show themselves thankful for troubles that
they are freed from, and for sufficiency that the Lord has given them to live
upon?

True it is, that notwithstanding the greatness of this peoples temptation,
their sin was very heinous; for Gods mercies had been wonderful toward them
even immediately before, and that the vnthankfullest of them had been driven to
confess: Psalm. 106.
yet did they wish to return to their former bondage, rather then to be
brought to such straits: but notwithstanding the grieuousnesse of this their
sin, many now adays come nothing behind them: for their eyes are so upon their
wants, that the want of one thing which they do desire, though it be but
small, does more disquiet them, then manifold blessings do comfort them, to
make them thankful.

But this coffeehouse we must be armed against: which we shall be if we
can receive the favor of God for it self, though it come alone, yea though
trouble do come therewith: for having it, we have all things, and wanting it,
we have nothing. Again, if we have it, no misery can make us miserable: and
if we have it not, in greatest prosperity we are most miserable.

But the Israelites here dealt after a clean contrary manner: for the want of
bread in the wilderness, being but for their bodies, did make them to despise
their great and wonderful deliverance out of Egypt, which was unto them a
sign of their spiritual deliverance. And this is the nature of all
worldlings; they had rather forgo many spiritual benefits, then one corporal
commodity: they grieve more at the losing, and rejoice more at the having of
wealth, then of godliness.

But to return to the point in hand, since murmuring is so great a sin, it
shall be profitable to consider of some remedies against it.

Now for as much as impatiencie proceeds from infidelity, Remedies against
murmuring.
the remedy thereof must be fetched from faith in Gods mercies, in the merits
of Christ, in the hope of the resurrection, and in Gods fatherly providence.

First (I say) Gods rich mercy, Moses applies it, Deuteronomy. 8.) but by the word of
God.

A second remedy is, of our sins, the imputation of Christ his righteousness,
and inherent sanctification.

First then if we can steadfastly believe that God for Christ his sake has
freely forgiven us all our sins, and given his son, that in him we might be
blessed, we cannot but be assured, Romans 8.
that with him he will give us all things. For seeing sin, which is the cause
of all misery, is taken from us, we may be sure that no cross shall ever
hurt us.

Again, if we could believe that as God does lay our sins upon Christ, so
he does impute his righteousness to us, how should we doubt of food or raiment,
etc? For by this means he is made our merciful and loving father, who is for
power, able, and for will, ready to help us in all extremities. And thus does
he abide for ever, and is never changed.

To these two former,

Further, a kingdom for us, and that he will raise us up at the last day in
body and soul to enjoy the same; how can we but be assured that he will
give us lesser matters, even the things of this life?

Another thing to stay our hearts upon when murmuring does assail us,

The general providence of God must be considered, first in the creation of
all things: secondly in the preservation of them.

Do we then believe that the Lord made all things of nothing, and shall we
doubt of his ability to provide for us? When God created light before the Sun,
Genesis 1.3.
the Moon, or the Stars: and caused grass to grow upon the earth, before
there was either rain or dew to water it, he did thereby teach us: first, that
we should not put too much trust in them whilst we have them: and again, that
rather then we should suffer hurt by the want of light, grass, or other such
things, the Lord both could and would provide for us without them. Yet now if
we should not have the Sun, we would think that light were taken from us:
and if we wanted rain, we would soon think we should neither have grass,
nor corn: but the Lord has ordained these means to serve his providence, not
for himself, for without them he can easily help us, but for our weakness,
who otherwise could not easily be assured of his goodness.

Secondly, we must believe that God preserves all: Matthew. 10.
so that a sparrow does not fall to the ground without his providence, and he
has a great care of beasts, and fowls: Matthew. 6.
does the Lord provide for these, and will he not provide for man, for whom
these were made, and are are preserved? Hereunto we must join the particular
providence of God: Has he made our bodies, and will he not cloathe us: has he
given us life, and will he not minister unto us food for the sustaining
thereof? He could provide for the Israelites in the barren wildernsse forty
years together: yea he could preserve Moses and Elias forty days without any
meat at all: which evidently proves that Gods blessing is all in all, whether
there be means or no means.

David observed by experience, that the righteous seed of the righteous was
never forsaken, Psalm. 37.
nor begged their bread: and if we could be righteous as then many were, we
should find the same true in our own experience as he did.

These things well considered, will work in us a patient mind, the properties
whereof are,

First, Properties of a patient mind. Philip 4.11
to be contented with whatsoever the Lord sends, always acknowledging
godliness to be great riches: for we ought not to seek great matters, nor
suffer our desires to be carried after high things: Ier. 45.4.
for this did the Prophet Jeremy rebuke in Baruck. And Christ would have us to
pray only for our daily bread: which also was Jacobs prayer, Genesis 28.
that he might have food and raiment, wherewith the Apostle would have us to be
content. 1. Tim. 6.
Let us first seek the kingdom of heaven, etc. and then, if the Lord give
plenty, let us be more thankful and serviceable: if not, his favor is
sufficient of it self, and we shall be more comfortable with a little, Psalm.
4.
then other, are in great abundance without that. But if we cannot rest in the
favor of God, though we want these outward things, it is certain we do not
truly esteem it, neither have we at that time any comfortable assurance of
the remission of our sins.

The second property of a patient mind is,

Abraham gave unto the Lord Isaac his son, which when the Lord did behold,
he quickly gave him his son again: and so will he deal with us still. The
readiest way to retain life, goods, etc. is to yield them up wholly into Gods
hands: not with this condition, that he shall give them to us again, (for that
were to mock the Lord) but without all care to have them, we must give them to
him, being heartily well content for his glory to forgo them, and then if they
be good for us, we shall receive them again: if not, we shall receive some
spiritual grace, which shall better supply the want of them. Yea the infinite
wisdom and mercy of God does wonderfully appear herein, that sometimes he
keeps us long without these things, because that if we had them, he sees
that we would abuse them, and prefer them before spiritual blessings. And
sometime the Lord, seeing our small regard of spiritual things, will by the
want of these outward things, bring us to make greater account of them, that
when we can well want the one, and highly esteem the other, we may have both
together.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ANNE, LADY WAINTVVORTH, increase of all true honor
and happiness, etc.
RIght Honorable, may it please you to take in good worth my bold attempt, in
presuming to recommend unto your favorable patronage these Sermons following.
Your honors undeserved respect of me, made me desirous to testify my unfeigned
thankfulness: which I could not imagine how with greater conueniencie to
express and manifest, then by taking hold of this present occasion; especially
considering that your constant and more then ordinary pains-taking to hear
such holy instructions, is a sufficient argument to euince your love and liking
of the matter therein comprised: and your good regard of the authors (well
known unto me) gave me ^ccasion to think that their labors, in this sort
offering themselves unto your eye, would be no less welcome then formerly they
have been, being in another manner presented unto your ear.

Concerning the Tract of Zeal annexed to these Sermons, it is a collection of
diverse rules which I heard and read touching that subject, principally of such
as were scattered here and there in Master R. Greenhams Works: which being
exceeding vsesull, I thought good to gather them into one (with an addition of
sundry prooses of Scripture) for the ease and help of those that are well
affected, especially of such whose ability will not reach to the price of that
great volume of M. Greenhams labors.

And thus humbly beseeching your Honor to pardon my boldness, and to bear
with my manifold defects which shall be found in the penning of these Sermons,
I recommend you to the gracious protection of the Almighty.

Your Honors according to my poor ability ready to be commanded, JOHN
WINSTON.

THE POINTS OF DOCTRINE HANDLED IN THE SERMONS following.
SERMON I.
DOCT. I. THe first step to true and sound repentance, is, to be wounded and
disquieted in our hearts for sin. 2 Lawful things must be done lawfully, and
good things in a good manner. 3 With confession of sin, must be joined
earnest requests for pardon thereof. 4 The more sinful any one is, the more
foolish he is. 5 It is a wonderful hard thing, to take down the pride of man's
heart. 6 The more speedily we judge our selves, the more mercifully the Lord
will deal with us.
SERMON II.
DOCT. I. Sin brings men into marvelous straits. 2. Gods servants never find
so great favor as with God himself. 3 God makes his judgments, suitable to
our sins. 4 When God sets in with his judgments they shall be far
dispersed in a short time. 5 As God appoints judgments to be inflicted on
his people, so he himself will see execution done. 6 A good man will lay a
greater burden on himself then on another.
SERMON III.
DOCT. I. ALthough humane helps and earthly friends do fail Gods people, yet
they are not helpelesse, nor hopeless. 2 No outward thing comes nearer the
hearts of Gods children, then the decay of good men. 3 Deceitful friends, are
worse then openfoes.
SERMON IIII.
DOCT. I. THe more skilfully and artificially any contriues his ill purposes,
the more fearful destruction shall fall upon him. 2 The more wicked men boast
of their mischievous intents, the nearer mischief is unto them. 3 No man has
the royalty of his own tongue, nor the ordering of his own speech.
FINIS.
The first Sermon.
2. SAMVEL. 24.10.11.12. Verse 10. Then David's heart smote him after that he
had numbered the people: and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned
exceedingly in that I have done: therefore now Lord I beseech thee, take away
the trespass of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.

11. And when David was up in the morning, the word of the Lord came unto the
Prophet Gad, etc.


IN these words is set forth the repentance of David, for his sin committed
in numbering the people, wherein the holy Prophet shows: 1. What means he
used to be reconciled unto God, Namely;

1. First, that he was touched with inward remorse and hearty grief for his
offense: [Then David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people.]

2 Secondly, that he made a particular and very earnest confession of his
fault:] I have sinned exceedingly, in that I have done.

3 Thirdly, that having bewailed and acknowledged his sin, he instantly
craved pardon for the same: [ therefore now Lord I beseech thee, take away the
trespass of thy servant, etc: as if he should have said, I have sinned very
hainouslie, I cannot deny it: yet I am thy servant, and one of thy family,
and therefore Lord cast me not off for one fault, but take notice of my sorrow,
and pardon my sin: for I have dealt veris foolishly.

2 Secondly, viz: that he sent unto him the Prophet Gad, a worthy man of God,
and David's Seer, who had been ready from time to time to lay open the will of
God unto him, and in that regard was more reverend in his eyes, and he
threatens and denou^ceth judgment against him, that seeing his heart had
been lifted up with pride, in regard of the multitude and strength of his
people, God would meet with him in his own sin, and make his punishment to
be suitable to his fact: and seeing he begun to be humbled for it already, and
yet needed still further humiliation, he tells him, that [the sword, or the
famine, or the pestilence] must pursue his subjects, and make wonderful
havoc among them, and therefore bids him make his choice which of them he
would have to come upon the land: for one of them he must needs undergo, to
further him in the work of humiliation, as also to bring the whole Church unto
the like, who then had incensed the Lords anger against them.

Then David's heart smote him] In that setting down the repentancce of David,
[his heart smote him] the Doctrine is, that.

The first step to true and sound repentance is to be wounded and disquieted
in our hearts for sin, Sound sorrow the first step to repentance.
until our souls be pierced, and as it were struck through with the feeling
of our corruptions, and of Gods displeasure, due unto us for the same, we have
not made any entrance into the ways of godliness, nor laid the very
foundation of the works of conversion, therefore the Prophet Joel exhorting the
Israelites to repentance, Joel. 2.13.
bids them, rent their hearts: that is, the first stone that must be laid in
this building: Act. 2.37. Acts. 2.
that They were pricked in their hearts] when they began the work of
repentance, the rebukes of God had wakened their drowsy consciences, so that
they saw their sins and Gods ven geance due unto them, Psalm. 45.
and the words of Peter had gone through their hearts, even as a two edged
sword, and then they were fit to be soundly healed and comforted, when they
had been pierced, and thoroughly wounded by the Arrows of God.

1 First, till the heart be broken for sin, Job. 11.
and therefore no repentance. Men naturally are like wild Asse-Colts, nothing
will work upon them, nor bring them unto any good frame or order; though they
hear often of their faults, they will not acknowledge them, but be still
unruly and untamed, as Paul was before his conversion; so long as he was
heart-whole in his own conceit, though he had heard many excellent Sermons (no
doubt,) yet he was like a beast still, Romans 7. Act. 9.
never bewailing nor confessing his grievous offenses, till the Lord had taken
him down, and thoroughly mastered him.

2 Nay further, delivered from them, nor make any reckoning of Gods mercy for
the pardoning of them: till such time as they become mourners for sin, they
cannot possibly hunger and thirst after righteousness. Math. 5.4.6.
And indeed what reason is there that they should esteem of that medicine
which will cure, when they do not feel themselves to be sick? they think it
a matter worth the looking after, to be freed from poverty, from infamy, from
the pestilence, etc. but as for the corruptions of their nature, and the
sinfulness of their ways, they were never much troubled with them, and
therefore they make little account to be delivered from them. See this point
more at large in M. Dods Sermon on Isa. 1. Doct. 1.

Seeing therefore that inward contrition for sin is the first step to
repentance, and that which kills the root of sin, and sets us free from
the power and dominion of it, and erecteth in our hearts a throne for Christ
Jesus; the use of this point is,

First for reproof of those that persuade themselves, Luke. 6. Revel. 6.16.
the more you are likely to have, if not here, yet in the world to come, and
at that day when you shall be most unwilling of it.

Secondly, David did, breaking forth into gross and foul evils, that every
body sees and knows, and condemns, and yet they pass them over slightly,
and carelessly, as if they were matters of nothing. When David did but cut off
the lap of Saul's coat, his heart smote him, and was grieved within him, in that
he was so near unto sin: what then shall we think of those that do not cut
off the lap of the coat of an enemy, but are injurious to their friends,
and cruel against their brethren, that break covenant and promise, sin
against God, blaspheme his name, profane his Sabbaths, and the like, and yet
none of all these do soundly work upon them, nor much trouble them? surely
such men are not of David's spirit, and therefore not being broken hearted
here, they shall be broken and crushed in pieces with the unsupportable weight
of Gods vengeance hereafter.

Thirdly,

First, let us in our hearts the weapon of God, Means to get tenderness of
heart.
even the sword of the spirit, whereby our hearts may be wounded, as often as
need requires: for unregenerate persons wanting that weapon, will rather
defend, then smite themselves when they have offended, and every child of God
has somewhat of old Adam in him, in which regard he must be more careful to
use the sword of the spirit, for the piercing of his heart when any sin is
committed by him: John. 16.8.
withal praying for the spirit of grace which will convince the conscience
when it is guilty, so that it shall have nothing to say in defense of it
self, but very much for the condemnation of it self: as is evident Ezec.
Ezeck. 36.
36.27. whereby we may observe, that when God has given his spirit unto his
elect, and (as it is in Jeremy. Ier. 31.
31 33.) withal written his laws in their hearts, then they shall remember
their own wicked ways, and their deeds that were not good, and shall judge
themselves worthy to have been destroyed for their iniquities, and for their
abominations. What is the reason they should pass such a heavy sentence upon
themselves? one would think they should rather rejoice now, and allow of
themselves and of their works? so they do rejoice at, and approve of
themselves and their works, so far as they are spiritual: but they
proclaim war against themselves and their works so far as either they are or
have been carnal and sinful, and that because the word of God, and the
spirit of God do bear sway in their hearts: they are at utter defiance with
their pride and hypocrisy, and all wretched lusts that fight against their
souls: being never so much tormented with those sins, as when they have
attained to a great measure of humility, and of sincerity. He that is most
lowly is ever most vexed with his pride, and he that is most upright and true
hearted, is most of all troubled with the guilefulnes and deceitfulnes of his
own heart, because the word and the spirit working together do cause him both
more clearly to see, and more thoroughly to hate those corruptions, than ever
he did before he had attained to that measure of grace.

Secondly, we must not content our selves when once we have gotten the word and
spirit of God within us, but we must still strive to keep our hearts humble
and lowly: for otherwise we shall not feel the strokes of the word and spirit
of God; therefore it is said Isay. 30.20.21.) Isa. 30.
that when the Lord had dieted his people a while [giuing them the bread of
adversity, and the water of affliction] and thereby taken down the pride and
stubbornenesse of their hearts, that then [their ears should hear a word
behind them, saying, this is the way walk in it, etc. that is when they were
thus humbled, as soon as ever they had committed any offense, they should
presently have a blow upon their hearts for it, and be full of fear and
anguish: though no man in the world tell them of it, yet the word in their
hearts will be like a good guide that is still following a little child, and
telling him, this is not the right way, leave it; there is the right way, walk
in it: but many have hearts pestered with pride, and lust, and covetousness,
and yet go a whole month, nay, many months and years together, and never
feel any rebuke in their consciences. How comes this to pass that others are
full of grief and full of tears for their sins, and they are never troubled
for them? is it beause there is greater vprightnes in them, then there is in
others? No surely it is because they have a more blind mind, and a more proud
and senseless heart then others have: for the more humble any one is, the more
often shall he hear the voice of the spirit, checking him when he goes out
of the way, and moving him to turn again into the right way.

Thirdly, we must especially beware of presu^ptuous sins: for if we live
therein our hearts will cease to smite us, or at least we shall be senseless
of these strokes: as may be seen in the case of David: when he had cut off the
lap of Saul's garment and numbered the people (which were but infirmities)
forthwith his conscience rebuked him, and he was humbled before the Lord: but
when he had committed adultery, and murder, either the checkes of his
conscience were none at all, or else they were so weak, 2. Sam. 12.
that he had no sense nor feeling thereof: so that Nathan was driven to fetch
about (as it were) and to use all the art that might be, to make him see his
offenses, and pass sentence against himself for the same. Let us therefore by
his example learn to beware how we presumptuously sin against our
consciences, especially in palpable and gross offenses, least our minds being
by degrees blinded, and our affections, by little and little corrupted, we
become in the end very blocks and stones, and have our consciences so darkened,
that they will not accuse us, or our hearts so benumbed, that they will not be
moved with the strokes of God, and with the checks of his holy spirit.

After that he had numbered the people.] Here is his special sin, that he
numbered his subjects, which may seem to be no such great matter, for which God
should so plague the land: and if there had been that measure of hypocrisy in
David, as there is in many of us, he would have pleaded thus for himself: What
need I to be so troubled for this? and what reason is there why God should
proceed so severely against me for the same? did not Moses and Joshua, holy
men of God, number the people in their days, and that warrantably? and why
then may not I do the like, having more absolute authority over them then
they had? but his heart stayed him from all such reasoning of the matter; and
told him, that though he did the same action which they did, yet the manner of
doing thereof was diverse; he performed it not in obedience to God (as they did)
but in pride and hautines of mind, in regard of the multitude and strength of
his subjects: before he esteemed Gods name a strong tower for his defense, but
now what need he run crying unto God? he had so many soldiers and valiant
warriors in his dominion, that he could make his part good against any foreign
power whatsoever. Thus was his heart lifted up unto vanity, when it should
have been lifted up to God in thankfulness: and therefore was he so humbled,
because he had an ill affection, God looks into the manner of our doing.
That it is not enough for to forbear things that are evil, and to make
conscience of gross sins, but men must do lawful things lawfully, and
perform good works in a good manner: otherwise the Lord may and will punish
them for doing lawful things, as well as for unlawful things. This may be
seen in that great enditement which Christ brings against the old world: They
did eat, Mat. 24.38.
and drink, marry, and give in marriage. A natural man would have thought
there could be no hurt in these: if they had been charged with whoredom,
murder, blasphemy, or the like, they had been matters of some moment: but for
those before named, what fault can be found with them? Indeed the things in
themselves are very warrantable, but the manner of performing them, does either
make or mar them: Jude. 12. 1. Tim. 44.5.
to eat and drink without fear, without prayer, and thanksgiving, as if the
creatures were our own, and nor the Lords, to abuse the blessings of God to
surfeiting and drunkenness, etc: these and the like corruptions, do turn
eating and drinking into sin, which in themselves are not only allowable,
but also necessary. The like may be said concerning marriage, Heb. 13.
it is a sanctified ordinance of God unto those that use it holily: but then it
becomes very sinful and hateful unto the Lord, Genesis 6.2.
when the Sons of God do join with the daughters of men, and professors are
yoaked with Infidels, for beauty, or commoditte, or any such carnal respect:
yet that is a horrible sin, too too common among such as profess
Christianity, that they make no scruple of matching their children with those,
whom they know by their works to be as yet the children of the devil; and so
in other matters, if they can prove them once to be in themselves lawful, they
make no conscience of the means they use, nor of the end they propose in
accomplishing of them.

The like is alleged by our Savior against the Sodomites, Luke 17.28.
as against those of the old world, viz: that they bought and sold, and built
in covetousness, pride and vanity, as if they had been ever to dwell upon the
earth, not caring what craft and fraud they used, nor what snares and grins
they laid for men, See M. Dods Sermon on
if they might satisfy their covetous and ambitious desires. More might be
said concerning this point,

This serves.

But was it not thus with David? who could now accuse him of any notorious ill
fact? surely none in the world: and yet he having grace in his heart, accuses
and condemns himself, for that he had done a good action in an ill manner,
and with an ambitious and vain glorious mind, and for the same is much abased
and confounded in himself: and therefore those are in a miserable estate, that
never disquiet their souls for their hidden corruptions, but think that all
goes well with them, when men's eyes can discern nothing amiss in them: as
they on the other side are in happy case, that do often take themselves
apart, and beseech the Lord to be merciful unto them in regard of their
failings, even in the most spiritual duties that they perform: such judge
themselves, and therefore shall not be judged of the Lord.

Secondly, let us consider wherefore we are come together, and what is required
of every one that is present this day, to wit, that we should put wickedness
out of our hearts, and out of our hands: and for that purpose, come with true
humiliatio^ on our part, that there may be a perfect reconciliation granted us
on Gods part.

This was practiced by the Ninevites, who hearing Gods judgments denounced
against them for their sins, Jonah. 3.8.9.
that within forty days Niniue should be destroyed, except they repented,
what did they? All of them, both King and people, humbled themselves in
fasting, bewailing their evil and sinful ways and works, and crying
mightily unto the Lord for pardon, and resolving to turn from the wickedness
that was in their hands, that so God might turn away from his fierce wrath.
Yet they had enjoyed but little teaching: they had heard only one Sermon from
Jonah, who was a man unknown unto them, and did not bring such testimonies of
Scripture to convince their consciences as are now alleged unto us, etc: and
therefore we should be much ashamed to come short of them in this holy
exercise, especially seeing we have not one Jonah, but many; not a judgment
threatened, but executed, and the sword of the Lord still drawn against us, and
devouring by hundreds and thousands in many quarters of our land. Let us then
search and examine our hearts, and grieve, and judge our selves for all our
former transgressions; and covenant with the Lord to avoid them hereafter,
craving strength from him for that purpose, that we may be enabled to subdue
and keep under all our corruptions: and then our hearts being broken with
godly sorrow, they shall be healed with godly joy; and being truly cast down
before the Lord, he will raise us up in due season, and make it known by good
effect, that he is appeased toward us.

Thirdly, those that spend their days in the continual practice of gross and
presumptuous sins: for if David were so grieved and punished for that
corruption which no man living could touch him for, even for doing a good
thing in an ill manner, how then shall they be able to stand, that have heaped
iniquity upon iniquity, and for many years together added one foul evil
unto another; and not only done good things in an ill manner, but ill things
in the worst manner, having many crying sins still to call for vengeance
against them? If David were brought to such a strait, that he was even at his
wits end, and in exceeding great anguish for doing one thing, which in man's
reason might seem very lawful; Oh what horrible terrors shall seize on their
souls, who do continually rush upon a multitude of heinous offenses, which
all the world cries out against especially when they shall be called to
answer, not before Gad, as David was, but before the Majesty of the great
Lord of heaven and earth; not for one sin, but for all their sins: not to
endure three days punishment in mercy, but everlasting woe and misery, and
that in judgment and heavy displeasure! David had great sorrow indeed for the
offenses which he committed; yet no more then he should have: how then do
they think to escape, that are not wrought upon at all with any remorse for
their grievous transgressions, but are even as a lump of dead flesh,
altogether insensible of any stroke of God, that is threatened, or inflicted
upon themselves, or others?

Verse 10. I have sinned exceedingly] Now follows the second step unto sound
repentance, Confession of sin, must follow grief for sin.
namely, a true, full, particular, and hearty confession of his sin that so
wounded his heart: which all that would obtain remission of their sins, must
be careful to bring before the Lord as David did. But this point has hene
more largely handled elsewhere [ in M. Dods Sermon. on Prou. 28. Doct. 2.

I beseech thee take away the trespass of thy servant, etc.

This is the third work of repentance, viz: that he craves pardon for his
fault; and that is the next point, that, with confession of our sins, David
in this place, as also Psalm. Asking pardon must be joined with confession. Luke
18.13. Daniel. 9.19. Nehem. 9.
51 so does the Publican, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: and in a word, so
does Daniel, Nehemia, and the rest of Gods servants, as may be seen in their
several confessions. And for encouragement unto the performance of this duty,
we have,

1 First, the name of God, which is to pardon iniquity, Exodus 34.
transgression, and sin: even all without exception, great or small, if we
repent for them, they shall be pardoned: if we acknowledge our misery, we
shall assuredly find Gods mercy.

2 Secondly, we have the covenant of God, Ezeck. 36.
that he will wash us from all our filthiness, by pouring the blood of his
son upon our sinful souls.

3 Thirdly, Mat. 1.
we have the name of Christ to incite and move us to become suitors for a
pardon: for he is called Jesus, because it is his office to save his people
from their sins.

This Doctrine serves,

First, for the confutation of the Papists, David went unto the Lord for
favor, and obtained it, they have still unsettled hearts, and restles
consciences: or hard hearts, and benumbed consciences, never getting any true
peace, or sound comfort in the assurance of their reconciliation with the Lord.

2 Secondly, David was, to ask and look for mercy from the Lord, but for
themselves, they are such heinous offenders, that they dare not do so, neither
can they conceive any hope to speed well if they should do so. But why should
we put in conditions where God does not, and as it were interline Gods
covenant? does not he promise without any exception, 1. Ioh. 1.9.
that if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness? It is therefore a great
fault, to think that any has more abundance of sin, then God has of mercy
to forgive it.

Thirdly, How we may attain to earnestness in asking pardon.
which David's example directs us unto: First, let us labor that our hearts
may thoroughly smite us, and that our consciences may evermore check us when we
do offend: for wheresoever there is the check of conscience, heart, and after
break forth into some horrible sin, which ouerwhelmeth them with shame and
confusion. Let us therefore observe when the Lord smites our hearts, and with
Peter get out of company speedily, and lament bitterly, that so we may turn
the rebukes of our souls into holy requests, that the Lord would for give us,
and not enter into judgment with us for our grievous prouocations against his
Majesty.

Secondly, when sin is so odious unto us, that our hearts do condemn us for
it, then let us strive to be persuaded that it is pardonable, yea and that it
shall be pardoned unto us: that though we deserve to be thrown out of service,
because we have dealt so foolishly, yet seeing we are Gods servants, he will
not go to extremities with us, but deal as a father with his own children,
this ancor of hope we had need still to hold fast by: for if we be not in some
good measure resolved, that we shall find the Lord gracious, and that we our
selves are not hypocrites, but such as to whom mercy belongs, we shall
presently give over prayer: for who would seek unto a Surgeon to cure him,
of whom he is afraid lest he should wound him, in that be has cause and
ability so to do? Therefore hold this for a firm ground, once Gods child,
and ever: once his servant, and never his enemy: in which regard we may come
with confidence unto him, and say, Lord, I am unworthy to be called thy son,
yet art thou my merciful Father: I have done thee ill service, yet am I thy
poor servant still: and though I be bad now, yet time has been when I have
bin better, and done better: when I have prayed in secret, and humbled my
soul, and shed tears for my sins in private, and have had an utter
detestation of those evils, which now through the corruption of my nature I
have fallen into, and therefore Lord be pacified toward me, and put out of thy
remembrance the trespass of thy servant. If any one want these testimonies of
Gods love toward him, and of his love toward God, when affliction ouertaketh
him for his sins, he will either flee from the Lords presence, as Adam did,
or if he adventure to come unto him, his prayers will descend as plummets of
lead upon him, and Satan and his own conscience will be ready to accuse him,
and to say, what have thou to do with God? he hears not sinners: thou shall
rather provoke his vengeance, then obtain his favor by thy petitions; and
because thou have been his enemy heretofore, he will show himself to be thine
now: and because thou have cast his word behind thy back, he will shut out thy
cries, that they shall not have any access unto him. Which uncomfortable
news, will be as a dart to strike through the liver of an hypocrite, and as a
two edged sword to pearse his soul: and therefore let us all labor to be
strongly settled in this point, that we are Gods servants, that so we may be
fervent and fiery in our prayers, and not be so daunted as sinners are when the
hand of God is upon them.

I have dealt very foolishly] This he speaks to make his sin more odious
unto himself: for by nature we are so proud, that we cannot abide that any
body should say, we have dealt foolishly and absurdly: therefore does he lay
lode upon himself, the more to beat down his pride, confessing that he had
dealt very foolishly, because he had dealt very sinfully: whence note this
doctrine, That the more sinful any one is, the more foolish he is.

Eve did eat of the forbidden fruit, The greatest sinners are the veriest
fools.
but did she get any thing by sinning against her makers commandment? No
surely: when she had a conceit that she should deal most wisely, she dealt
most foolishly of any that ever was in the world: for thereby she brought
sorrow and misery, yea eternal damnation of soul and body, not only upon
her self (had not God given her repentance and mercy) but upon many hundred
thousands of her posterity. So Achan thought it a part of wisdom to take up
the Babylonish garment and the wedge of gold that lay in his way: Joshua. 7.
he might thereby (as he imagined) enrich himself, and the matter never be
known: but was not that the ruin of himself and his household? In like manner
Jeroboam esteemed it a wise and safe way for him to set up the Calves, that the
people might worship at Dan and Bethel, and so not fall from him, to join
again to the house of David: he accounted this a surer course to establish his
throne, then for him to rest on Gods promise: but did he not get exceeding
dishonor and utter ruin hereby? in so much that when the Lord will set
forth a notable reprobate and firebrand of hell, he does describe him by this,
that he was like Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin: and
whereas he hoped by this means to set up himself and his seed for ever, he
caused them through his sins to be swept away as dung from the face of the
earth. The like may be said of Ahab in taking away Naboths vineyard. And this
must needs be so, that the greatest sinners are the veriest fools, Rehoboam,
that he would forsake the good counsel of the old men, and follow the rash
advise of young men: and are not they then egregious fools indeed, that leave
the counsel of the wise God, and follow the advice of Satan, his and their
utter enemy? We would esteem it a great madness, if we should see a man, his
barnes being full of corn, to set fire on the thatch, and to sit by and laugh
to behold all turned into a flame: and yet certainly this is not so great a
madness as for one to fire his soul with sin: for all the friends and
means that the world affords cannot quench this flame, nor recover this
loss, as they may the other: and therefore they are the fools of the world,
that are the sinners of the world: and there is no such frenzy, as for a man
to provoke his Creator: and whatsoever applause wicked persons have for a
season, yet at length all the world shall see, and they themselves shall feel,
that they have been notorious fools: Ier. 17.11.

This serves for instruction, David was wiser then his enemies, Psalm. 119.98.
then his teachers, then the aged, because he kept Gods statutes. What made
those in the Gospel to be foolish Virgins, but this, that they made not
provision for eternal life? And what made the other five to be indeed wise,
but that their hearts and lives were adorned and beautified with grace and
goodness? Achitophel was a deep politician; yet because he was destitute of
heavenly wisdom, he showed himself to be but a miserable base fool: for
when he had no means to help himself, he went and hanged himself: if one
had studied an hundred years, he could hardly have found out a readier way to
manifest his notable folly, then he took in that horrible murdering of
himself.

2 Secondly, is it so that the greatest sinners are the veriest fools? then
here is matter of singular consolation for Gods servants, that are vilified and
contemned, and accounted silly and simple, even for this, that they carefully
decline from the ways of sinners, though in show never so pleasant and
profitable: and conscionable, walk in the paths of righteousness, though
never so rough and dangerous: let vain men speak their pleasure of them, and
count and call them the fools of the world, yet God esteems and speaks
otherwise of them. It is no marvel that the world judges them fools, for
with them the doctrine of the Gospel (unto which the godly endeavor to
conform themselves and their courses) is accounted foolishnes. But as wisdom
is justified of her children, whatsoever men think or speak of it, so are the
children of wisdom justified by the infinitely wise God, whatsoever
slanderous and reproachful imputations carnal men do lay upon them: he says
that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Prou. 1.7. and that
those that obey his commandments are the only wise people under the Sun.
Deuteronomy. 4.6.

Verse. 13. Will thou that seven years famine come upon the Land? etc.

Here comes an objection to be answered. Cor. 11.31. that if we judge our
selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord: how comes it to pass then in
this place, that David confessing his fault, aggravating it, and asking pardon
for it, has notwithstanding such a heavy judgment denounced against him, as
the famine, or the sword, or the pestilence?

1 Though such as judge themselves, David's case here: this stroke was not laid
upon him in wrath, but in favor: he had set upon a good work, even the
pulling down of his pride, and by this means the Lord furthered him in ye
good work, and made a speedier way for abu^da^ce of grace, which was after
bestowed upon him.

2 Again, the people were not so reformed as they should be at this time, and
therefore God in this plague does aim at their humbling, thrusting David out
of the gappe (as it were) who had formerly by his prayers and tears stood in
the breach, to keep of the Lords wrath from them, so that all this while being
entangled with his own matters, he could not so freely deal for them.

Now in that David must have such a sharp corasiue to consume that proud flesh
that had grown about his heart, It is hard to beat down man's pride.
the Doctrine is, that it is a wonderful hard thing to take down the pride of
man's heart: it is no small affliction that will do it, as is plain Job 33.14.
etc: where is at large showed, that God uses all means, and that again and
again, and yet men will not profit thereby: then he finds out the cause of it
to be pride, verse. 17. and so lays corrections upon them suitable thereunto,
smiting them with sorrow upon their beds; so that the grief of their bones is
sore: pinching them with grievous sicknesses and diseases, and making their
bones to clatter, so that their souls draw near to the grave, and their life
to the buriers. Now when these or the like woeful distresses have tamed and
maistered their unruly affections, then do they begin to be somewhat more
tractable: and whereas neither dreams, nor visions, nor any of Gods ordinances
would do any good upon them before, after that, if God send unto them a
messenger or Interpreter one of a thousand, they will begin to hearken unto
them, and to learn how they may obtain mercy and reconciliation with God,
that they descend not into the pit of destruction. Further, we may observe what
a great deal of woe David sustained by reason of the hautinesse of his heart,
and his earthly confidence (which is a sign thereof) when he thought his
mountain so strong, Psalm. 30.6.7.
that he should never be moved: for God turned away his face from him, and he
was troubled, and even ready to go down into the pit, Verse. 9.
and to descend unto the dust, etc. Neither did God minister unto him a
stronger purgation then he needed: but his pride required full as much
affliction as the Lord laid upon him, this was also the case of vzziah, who
being in a moderate estate, did exceeding much good both for the Church and the
common wealth: but when he was grown mighty and strong, his heart was lifted
up, and then he could not content himself with his kingly dignity, but he
would needs take upon him the office of the High Priest also, and so went into
the Temple of the Lord, to burn incense upon the Altar of incense; but what
came of this presumptuous fact of his? When the admonition of the Priests of
the Lord would not prevail with him, but he grew wroth with those that
withstoode him, the Lord loving him, did forthwith smite him with Leprosy, and
so he was driven to live apart all his life long, that so the hautinesse of his
heart might be thoroughly cured. 2. Chron. 26. The like may be seen in Paul;
2. Cor. 12.
who albeit he were a man of wonderful graces, and had been continually
exercised with many and great afflictions, so that he had no great need of
further humbling, as we would have thought, yet had he Satan turned loose upon
him, to buffet him, and to beat him black and blew as it were, that so he
might not be lifted up with the multitude and excellency of the revelations
that he had received. He had been in the third heaven, and was endued with
exceeding rare gifts: and the Lord knew, that if he were not taken down, he
would be very conceited of himself, and then all had been lost: he would be
unfit to receive or do good, altogether unprofitable and unfruitful, and
rob God of his honor, and men of their due: and therefore to prevent this,
he gives Satan liberty to work upon his original corruption, and to
exercise him with strange temptations, which was a special preservative
against pride, and loftiness of mind.

Lastly, we may note in the 8. chap. of Deuteronomie, verse 2. what a great
ado the Lord had with his people, the children of Israel, to help them,
against this vile corruption that was in them: he was driven to keep them
forty years in the wilderness, and there to exercise them with many and
grievous crosses and judgments, and all to humble them, as there it is said:
and certainly, if fewer and easier afflictions would have done it, the Lord
would never have handled them so roughly and sharply; for mercy pleases
him, neither does he afflict willingly. Micah. 7. Lament. 3.


Now the reason why the pride of men's hearts cannot easily be removed, is,

First, because it does wonderfully harden them, and makes them even like a
Flinte: so that they are very hardly wrought upon, either by instructions, or
by afflictions. This is evident in Nebuchadnezzar, who notwithstanding that
divine dream that God had sent unto him, Dan. 4.24.
and the holy instructions and exhortations that Daniel had given him, after
his interpretation thereof; yet continued in his arrogancy still, and was full
of boasting and bragging: in so much that the Lord was feign to strippe him of
his wits, of his kingdom, of his soode, of his apparel, and of the society
of mankind, and to cause him, even for seven years together, to live as a
beast, among the beasts of the field: and all little enough to take down the
stoutnes and loftines of his finfull heart. Dan. 5.20.


Secondly, as pride makes men unteachable, and incapable of good by any means
that others can use, so does it make themvnable to use any means themselves,
for the humbling of their souls: for proud men cannot examine, and judge
themselves, because they are wise in their own eyes, and have an high conceit
of their own doings: they cannot pray, because they have no promise to build
upon, nor any heart to humble their souls before the Lord, as all that will
speed well with him must do: 2. Chron. 11. Iam. 4.8.
they cannot labor in a calling for conscience sake: because they only seek
and serve themselves in whatsoever they do: in a word, they cannot apply
themselves to use any of those holy remedies that God has ordained, for the
subduing and mastering of the pride, and haughtiness of their wicked hearts;
and therefore it must needs be concluded, that this dangerous sickness is very
hardly cured. And if we have yet any doubt hereof, let experience teach us the
truth of this point: for if we observe it in our selves or others, we shall
find, that those that have had most heartbreakings, and shed most bitter tears,
and gone through most fearful temptations, and most grievous distresses, have
yet still a great deal of pride in them, which is ready upon every occasion
to manifest it self, unto their grief and the offense of others.

Which makes first of all for the terror of all proud and arrogant men, Prou.
16.5.18.
that all the proud in heart are an abomination unto the Lord: though hand
join in hand, they shall not be unpunished. And again, Pride goes before
destruction, and an high mind before the fall. And in the 119. Psalm: thou
have destroyed the cursed proud: Psalm. 119. Pet. 3. Iam. 4.
and in the Epistle of James, God resists the proud. Let these and the like
terrible sentences fright their drowsy consciences, and unless they would
have the Lord to abhor them, to curse them, to fight against them, and
utterly to destroy them, let them sue unto him, who alone is able to heal them
of this loathsome corruption: otherwise their case is very woeful, and
lamentable, and the more account they make of themselves, the more cl^erely
will God manifest his heavy displeasure against them, as he did against
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, and such other lofty spirits as they were.

Secondly, times that they are afflicted every morning; that they are exercised
with wants, with sicknesses, with disgraces and the like: but better is it to
undergo some of these, or all of these, though it be all our life long, so we
be made more lowly thereby, than to ouerflowe with great plenty and variety
of outward things, and in the mean time to be pestered with that venomous
humor of pride and self-conceit. Therefore was it that Paul does profess
that he would rejoice in infirmities, in reproaches, 2. Cor. 12.10.7.
in necessities, in persecutions, etc: because he knew they were excellent
preservatives against his sin.

Now because men are ready to think that there is not in them such store of
pride, as that they greatly need Gods medicines to cure them of it, or if they
do see their pride, they are ready to sit down discouraged, as if it were
impossible to get the better of it, therefore will it not be amiss to set
down some fruits and effects of pride, whereby it may be discerned, and some
remedies and helps against it, by virtue whereof it may be cured.

Concerning the first point, Fruits of pride.
it were an infinite work to reckon up all the effects of pride, and therefore
I will only touch some few of the principal, Prou. 13.10.
And the first of them shall be that whereof Solomon speaks, saying, Only by
pride does man make contention: many there are that do ignorantly imagine
they were never proud in all their life; but let them consider better of the
matter; did they never brawle nor contend with any in all their life? if they
did, certain it is that they were proud: for look how much contention there
is, so much pride there is in every man. Which may be an evident argument to
prove that this sin does greatly sway every where: for if we look into most
families, and even into those of the purest sort (who think themselves most
free from pride) shall we not find many iarres betwixt husband and wife;
betwixt master and servants, betwixt brethren and sisters, betwixt neighbor
and neighbor? this is so palpable that none can deny it; and therefore let
not men deceive themselves, but see and acknowledge and bewail the wretched
hautines of their hearts.

Another fruit of pride is, impatiencie under crosses,

Again, this is an evident token that men are proud, David was otherwise
affected, 1. Sam. 12.13. Psalm. 51.
when the Prophet Nathan came unto him with a sharp reprehension, and when
A^igall met him with a wise admonition. And Job brings this as an argument of
his uprightness, 1. Sam. 25.32.
that he durst not contemn the judgment of his servant. No, not of his Maid
servant, Job. 31.13.
if they had any matter to object against him: and therefore let such as are
enraged, or imbittetered against their reproouers or admonishers, know, that
they are far from that modesty and meekness of spirit that was in these
holy men of God.

Lastly, this is a sure note of pride, 1. Tim. 6.17.
in which regard the Apostle wills Timothy to charge rich men that they be
not high minded, and that they do not trust in uncertain riches: Implying
thereby, that so much confidence as there is in wordlie substance, so much
high-mindednes there is in the parties so addicted. The more men trust in God,
the more humble they will be, but the more they trust in their wealth, the more
high-minded they will be. If men would try themselves by this touchstone,
they should easily discern abundance of pride in themselves: for who almost is
there but does think himself the better and safer for the very having of
earthly things? and who does not judge his case more miserable, merely for the
want of these deceitful vanities?

Let us therefore sifte our own hearts, and by these and the like fruits of
pride, learn to judge what abundance of this poisoned sap there is within
us. And then perceiving how liable we are unto many fearful strokes of God
by reason thereof, let us carefully use these remedies following against the
same.

First, let us often search and try our own hearts, and works by the right
rule, Remedies against Pride.
that is, by the holy law of God: for none are lifted up, but such as do not
know themselves: for if we rightly considered what we are, and what our
actions are, it would take down all that foolish conceitednes, that is
naturally ingrafted in us, and cause us to say with the Publican, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner: and with Paul, Miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death! Luke. 18.13. Romans 7.24.
he was alive; that is, thought himself alive, and in very good case, before
the law came, and co^uinced him of his wretched corruptions, he was even as a
blind man that fears nothing, though a man came running upon him with a
sharp sword, or he were ready to fall down violently from an high and dangerous
rock, he would never be daunted at the matter, nor one whit moved, because he
sees not that he is in any danger: such was Paul's case, and such is the state
of every unregenerate man: but when Gods law is once pressed upon the
conscience, by the lively working of the holy Ghost, it inlightens the mind,
and makes men see their own sinfulnes, as Paul did, which is an excellent
means to kill all proud and lofty conceits. If therefore we desire to be
rid of this hateful and hurtful companion, I mean pride, let us often and
earnestly examine our selves by this straight rule of Gods law: we are given to
try our selves often by examining whether we be not better than such a man, or
such a woman, but this is a false and a deceitful rule: for a man may be
better than such and such, and yet be stark naught.

But the proud flesh will be ready to object, and say,

Are you so? you may easily be deceived; do you not yet come far short of
that which the law requires? and for those gifts that you have, whence
proceeded they? are they not bestowed upon you out of the Lords mere bounty?
and if you have received them, why are you puffed up as if you had not received
them? If you did aright consider that you are no more worthy of the least
blessing of God than the vilest creature in the world, and that not your
goodness, but Gods goodness is the cause that you excel others, there would be
no place left for ouer-weening co^ceits of your self, but you would conclude
(as the truth is) that the better you are gifted, Romans 1.14.
the more you are indebted, and the more talents you have, the more thanks you
owe unto God, Math. 25.
and the more service unto his people. And thus much for the first remedy
against pride, which is, to try our selves and our actions by the true
touchstone of Gods word.

The second is, Abraham the father of Believers, and the most excellent of all
the Patriarks, Genesis 18.27.
to confess, that he was but dust and ashes: this was it that caused Isaiah, a
marvelous holy prophet, Isa. 42.6.
to cry out, that he was a man of polluted lips; and this was it that made Job
that worthy and renowned servant of God, Job. 42.6.
even to abhor himself, and to repent indust, and ashes. And assuredly if we
constantly and zealously accustom our selves to come before Gods glorious
throane, it will make us much ashamed to stand upon our own worth, and frame
us to a very lowly conceit of our selves. And on the contrary, we may boldly
conclude, that they that do not use reverently and faithfully to call upon the
Lord, are proud and hautie, and arrogant persons, and never yet knew what true
lowlines meant, where there are many and fervent prayers, there is much
humility: where there are few and weak prayers, there is little humility:
where there are no faithful prayers at all, there is no humility at all.

A third help against pride is, Eccl. 1.13.
for labor and travel (as the wise man says) are appointed unto the sons
of men to humble them thereby. As for idle persons, they are always proud and
conceited: A sluggard is wiser in his own eyes, Prou.
then ten men that can render a reason, for such kind of people having nothing
to busy their heads about, are very ready (Satan helping them forward) to
think of their own worth, to imagine high things of themselves, and so to
build ^astles in the air: besides that, idleness nourishes in them all manner
of vile lusts, and the more sinful any one is, the more proud he is; and
therefore is the devil more proud than any, because he is more sinful than
any. If then we would not be in bondage unto this vile sin of pride, let us
apply our selves diligently unto the works of our several vocations; and that
for conscience sake and in obedience unto God; not for filthy lucre sake, of
for envy, or the like, for if we labor and toil never so much for worldly
respects, we shall not be rightly humbled thereby, but rather puffed up in our
fleshly minds.

A fourth remedy is, viz. that it causes the Lord to abhor us, to resist
us, to curse us, and to plague us, yea and to deprive us of those things
whereof we are most proud and conceited: besides that, it causes us to pine
away with envy: to consume with malice, to fret and vex with anger and
coffeehouse, and upon every slight occasion to brabble and wrangle, to fall
out with this body and that, and in a word, to be very unquiet in our selves,
and very troublesome and hateful unto others; and who then would not be freed
from this hurtful sin, which has so many badde effects arising from it?

Then on the other side, the benefits issuing from the pure fountain of
humility, are very many and great: for besides the avoiding of the forenamed
mischifes, Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18. Psalm. 37.11. Isa. 57.15. Iam. 4.6. Math. 5.3.
lowlines will give us an interest in all the promises of God: meek men shall
inherit the earth; they shall have God to dwell with them, and grace to remain
in them while they live, and glory to inuest them, and to make them eternally
happy when they die.

These remedies of often examination, frequent prayer, diligence in our
vocation, and serious consideration of the hurts that come by pride, and of the
benefits that proceed of humility, we must constantly and conscionably use for
the humbling of our hearts.

And lastly, 2. Sam. 12. Psalm. 141.5.
The benefit hereof David found upon the prophet Nathans coming unto him; and
therefore does he so earnestly pray for it, saying: Let the righteous smite me
for that is a benefit, and let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil,
etc. And whosoever they be that do not thus desire the admonitions of Gods
servants, they carry too little hatred against sin, and do not with any
great earnestnes and indignation control and check their consciences for it:
and therefore they are likely to live and die in their pride, and may justly
fear those punishments that do belong unto proud persons.

Verse 12. I offer thee three things: choose thee which of them I shall do unto
thee.

In that the Lord puts him to this choice when he began in good earnest to
humble himself, the doctrine is, that

The more speedily we judge our selves, Speedy judging of our selves procures
favor.


This we see proved in this text, where God deals with David as a father with
his own son: First, letting him choose his own rod, when of necessity he
must be corrected: Secondly, The time being expired, this point was briefly
handled.
he gives him warning before hand, that the plague might not overtake him on a
sudden, which would wonderfully have discomforted him: Thirdly, he tells him
how long it should continue, so that he was sure three days would be the
longest. Which serves first for singular comfort unto Gods children that do
bewail their sins, David: for first they shall have warning thereof before
hand, and so be better prepared and armed for it. And further, if they strive
to humble their hearts before the Lord, though they have not the choice of
their particular scourge, yet it shall be as well with them in effect: for
although at first they think the rod very smart, and every blow two, yet when
they are grown to be stronger men in Christ, they shall be driven to confess,
that if they had chosen their own rods, there could have been none in the
world so fit for them as those wherewith the Lord has scourged them: So that
they shall be able not only to say with the Prophet, It is good for me that I
have been afflicted; but good for me that I was whipped with these and these
rods, yea and that I received thus many strokes from the Lords merciful hand.
No cross could have been invented to do me more good, then poverty, or
disgrace, or ill neighbors, or any the like, according as Gods servants are
severally tried. If God should have put it to Abraham's and Jacobs choice, they
would rather have parted with any outward thing, then with their children, that
were as dear unto them as their life: but when they saw Gods end in trying
them that way, when Isaac was spared, and Joseph advanced, and made an
instrument of humbling his boisterous brethren, and of releeuing his father and
all his family, besides many others, then they must needs acknowledge that it
was fittest for them to be crossed in their children, and that Cods ways are
the best, whatsoever we may judge of them for a while.

Secondly, Haman might have been the chuser, of all other miseries he would
not have chosen that which befell him: to wit, that Mordecai his enemy should
be advanced and honored, and that by himself, who did bear him such deadly
hatred for that he could not obtain honor and reverence from him: what an
horrible torment must this needs be unto his heart, that Mordecai now should
ride, and he go by him on foot? that now he must bow the knee to Mordecai,
that would so feign have had Mordecai to do it to him? that the gallows that
was by him prepared for Mordecai, must now serve for himself? etc. This must
needs be an exceeding torture unto him: and this shall befall all impenitent
sinners: What they are most loath to undergo, that shall light upon them, and
that at unawares when they least think of it, and shall continue with them,
and never leave them till it have either turned them unto God, or brought them
unto hell, the place of all such rebrobate sinners. And that we may apply this
to the present occasion, are there not many that are horribly afraid of the
pestilence? yea far more then they are of sin which brings it: in so much
that they absent themselves from Sermons, and from public prayers, lest they
should be infected. Are there not very many (I say) that are possessed with
such fears? Let them look to it: for of all other strokes the pestilence is
likely to fall upon them: if it were a sword in the hand of the Pope, or of
Satan, then it stood them upon to beware of Gods ordinances: but seeing none
but Atheists will deny but it is ordered by Gods ouerruling hand, they take a
bad course to escape his stroke: for where can they hide themselves, but he
will find them out? And whither can they flee from his all-seeing presence?

He can take away the infection where it is, and bring it even in a moment
where it is not: and therefore go where they can, they go in continual
danger: for where is the sword of God most likely to smite, but where he is
most displeased, and where there is most profaneness, and greatest contempt
of the means of salvation? therefore if they would escape, let them fall down
before the Lord, and humble themselves as David did: and not be so much afraid
of their neighbors that have the plague, as of sin that brings the plague:
and run not so much from the occasion of this sickness (though all good care
must be had that way) as from the cause: which if we can do, then either God
will spare us, and exempt us from this stroke, or else give us comfort under
it, and deliverance from it by life or death: making it a means utterly to
kill original sin, which all his ordinances could but only weaken: and who
would be afraid of such a cure? what child of God would not be more glad to sit
on a throne in heaven (though he be called thereto by a boisterous messenger)
than to be in a prison here on earth? to be where he shall be quite freed from
sin and sorrow and temptation, and have all happiness above that which his
heart can desire, rather than to be continually turmoyled here in the world,
and every day to taste of new tribulations.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon.
2. SAMVEL. 24.14. etc. Verse 14: And David said unto God, I am in a wonderful
strait: let us fall now into the hand of the Lords, (for his mercies are great)
and let me not fall into the hand of man.

Verse 15. So the Lord sent a Pestilence in Israel, from the morning, even to
the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan to Beer-sheba seventy
thousand men.

Verse 16. And when the Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem, the Lord
repented of the evil; and said to the Angel that destroyed the people, It is
sufficient, hold now thy hand, etc.

Verse 17. And David spoke unto the Lord, etc.


YE have already heard of David's sin in numbering of the people, of his
humiliation, confession, and craving of pardon for the same: also of the
message that was brought unto him by Gad; what offer the Lord made him, Namely,
that he should have the choice of his own rod: the sentence was already
past, and some one of the three judgments mentioned Verse 13. must needs light
upon the land: yet would God use as much mildnes as might be, and therefore
he referres the matter unto him, and bids him consider, and determine which
of them he would most willingly undergo.

Now follow the events that ensued both upon the sin that David committed,
and the message that God for the same directed unto him.

The first whereof, was the great distress wherewith he was perplexed, which
he bemoned to the Prophet, telling him that he was in a wonderful strait.

The second was the choice that he made, Verse 14.
absolutely passing over the famine, without so much as speaking of it, as
knowing it to be incomparably the sharpest scourge of the three: (for the
Scripture faith, that they that are slain by the sword, are better then they
which are killed with hunger) and rather also submitting himself to the
Pestilence, Lament. 9.
which was more immediately the sword of God, from whom he expected mercy and
favor, then to the violence and sword of man: in whom what else in such a
case is to be found, but crucltie and fierceness?

The third was the execution of that plague of the pestilence, Verse 15.
which he had yielded himself unto: which is declared as well by the manner,
as the minister of it: it being in so short a time, as in three days space,
dispersed thorough the whole Land, from North to South, and (though not
affirmed, yet implied) from East to West, Jerusalem only excepted, as may
appear by the circumstance of the Text: and in this time seventy thousand
being destroyed; which stroke was inslicted by the hand of an Angel, whom God
had thereunto appointed, as minister and executioner of the same.

The last was, Verse 16.
the ceasing and stay of this plague, even then when the stroke was lighting
upon Jerusalem, to have destroyed it. And hereof are assigned two causes: the
one, and that the principal, was the Commandment of God: to whom (for our
better apprehension of his providence) is ascribed an humane passion of
repentance: which properly befalls not him, because he cannot but do every
thing absolutely well, nor possibly at any time be weary of well-doing:
neither is he subject to perturbations, because he is free from all manner of
corruptions. But he is said to repent, when he withholdeth that which he
condicionallie promises, or threatens, or desisteth from that which he had
begun to do, sithence men many times break off their proceedings, with
dislike of the beginnings thereof, and their not doing of that which they
said, argues commonly that they are sorry, for saying that which now they
mind not to do.

The other cause, yet of an inferior nature, and mouent (as we call it) was
the prayer of David, Verse 17.
whereby he obtained the preservation of Jerusalem, and the rest of the
people, and herein he offers himself to be smitten, that they might be
spared, with acknowledgement that he was the offender, and they in this matter
altogether innocent.

Verse 14. And David said, I am in a wonderful strait]

The Doctrine that hence arises, is plain: viz. that

Sin brings men into great distresses, and into marvelous straits.

It is the proper nature of wickedness, Sin brings men into straits.
neither will God spare his own people, when they take liberty in provoking
his majesty; but either they shall be straited in their own hearts, or else
in regard of outward calamities, or both: and though the Lord will not condemn
them, yet will he afflict them. Iehoshaphat was so foolish, that he would make
affinity with Ahab: and lest he should break off that league of friendship
that was between them, he would adventure (contrary to the express word of
the Lord) to go against Ramoth Gilead to battle with him: now was not he in an
exceeding great straight, when the maine force of the battle was bent against
him, being supposed to be the King of Israel, concerning whom a command was
given to the Captains by the King of Aram, 1. King. 22.31.32.
that they should fight against none, neither small nor great, but only
against the King of Israel? Yet would not Iehoshaphat take warning by this: but
after that he had been rebuked by Iehu the Prophet, 2. King. 3.
for helping the wicked, and loving them that hated the Lord, he yet joined
with Iehoram the King of Israel, against the King of Moab: but was his success
any better then before? No surely: for howsoever they had the victory over the
Moabites with much difficulty, yet before that was effected, he was in a
greater straight, then when he went against Ramoth Gilead: for there his own
person only was endangerd: but here both he and his people, together with two
Kings and their armies besides, were like to perish for want of water. A
further proof of this point we have in Jonah, who discoursing with his own
reason, thought it would be to no purpose, but very dangerous for him to go to
preach at Niniue, and therefore refused to yield to the Commandment of the
Lord. But what woeful distress did this disobedience bring him into, when
being in that sore tempest, the sea did roar, his conscience accuse him, men
were against him, God was against him, and there was no way for him, but to be
thrown into the sea, and there to remain three days and three nights in the
belly of a whale? Judges. 16.
The like may be seen in Sampson, who being carried with boisterous lusts, and
immoderately and sinfully affecting that vile strumpet Dalilah, could hide
nothing from her, but discovered unto her very foolishly wherein his great
strength lay, namely in his hair: and so that being cut off, as a recompense
of his folly and sinful dealing, he was betrayed into the hands of his most
deadly enemies the Philistims, who pulled out both his eyes, bound him in
fetters, made him grind in the prison house, and besides made him a laughing
stock unto those into whom he had formerly stricken a great terror and
amazement by his admirable valor, and the strange enterprises achieved by
him. Thus we may in part perceive into what narrow straits sin does bring
Gods own children: but this is especially verified in wicked men, of whom it
is said, Psou. 22.5.
that thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: they are hedged in with
thorns, and all their walk is upon brakes: they run to hell with great
vexation: they are entangled in snares continually, and are never out of them:
they are caught in Satan's net, and held fast by hardness of heart, which
never leaves them till either conversion, or utter confusion do befall them.

But this will more fully appear in particular sins, as first to give
instance in drunkards, whose appetite does provoke them unto that beastly abuse
of Gods good creatures: the wine delights their eye, and pleases their taste,
and goes down merrily: Pro. 23.32.29.30.
but in the end it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a cockatrice: for to
whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? etc. Ever to them that tarry long at the wine,
to them that go and seek mixed wine: for they ruinate and overthrow their
estate, they blemish and stain their names, make their wives to fall out with
them, their children to contemn them, their companions to quarrel with them:
their best friends to loath them: and after all this, they are a burden unto
themselves, having their wits cracked, and their bodies diseased, and being
fit for no place, but only for hell.

The same may be said of proud men: does not their sin throw them into great
misery? Let us consider a little of Hamans fall, which was procured by his
insolency. God knew what cross would most vex his proud heart, and that he
sent him: for whereas all Hamans honor could do him no good, unless Mordecai
would rise up before him, and do him reverence, that was a thorn unto him,
when he could not make him do it: but when he must honor Mordecai, and be
as a servant unto him, that was a snare unto his soul, and therein was he
held fast, with horrible vexation and monstrous shame, till death and
damnation seized upon him.

The like may be seen in riotous and voluptuous persons, who are wholly
addicted to follow sporting, and gaming, and surfeiting, and chambering, and
wantonness, with such like sinful delights of the flesh: the world thinks
that such live a merry life: but judge not too well of them; they have not
paid all their shot as yet: they have misery enough behind, that still
pursues them, and at length will overtake them: for he that loves pastime,
shall be a poor man; and he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich:
Pron. 21.17.
and a Whore will bring a man to a morsel of bread: poverty shall follow at
the heels of such, Prou. 6.26.
as a swift Post, and shall set upon them as a strong armed man: they shall be
overcome and vanquished, and down shall their estate go, even to the ground.

Another instance may be in covetous persons, who have wealth in wonderful
admiration, so that it is made the common god, and most usual Idol of the
world: and when they have gotten it, they, and many others think they shall
have great credit with it: and many times it so falls out, that they are men
of great place, because they are of great substance: they have many to attend
upon them, many to flatter them, and to crouch unto them, and by their riches
they may procure almost what they list: does not this now seem to be an easy,
a pleasant, and happy life? Yet the Apostle tells us, 1. Tim. 6.19.
that they that will be rich, fall into tentation, and snares, and into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction: so
that when wealth (together with the love of it) flows in on every side, men
are as it were cast headlong into a sea of misery: and therefore it is added,
that the desire of money is the root of all evil: for it does not only poison
men's hearts, make them err from the faith, and bring them into the snares of
the devil, to be lead by him according to his will; but it pearseth them
through with many sorrows: for greedy wordlings are ever disconted and froward,
falling out with one, and chafing with another: so that those things which
seem to glad their hearts, do not indeed bring them any sound contentment,
because their desires can never be satisfied, but especially because they are
often times much crossed: as when their sheep or cattle miscarry, their
grounds prove unfruitful, their servants untrusty, thieves set upon them by
violence to spoil them of their goods, or subtle adversaries by craft seek
to defraud them of the same, with many such like occurrences, which will
neither let them rest quietly in the night, nor live comfortably in the day:
and the hearts of such covetous persons can tell them, that many times all
other things do them no good, sithence they cannot have some one thing which
they would, as the case stood with wicked Ahab in the matter of Naboths
vineyard.

But suppose, that these and the like sins should not bring men into snares
in their life time, yet at the time of their death when they must go out of
the world, they will: Job. 27.8.
for what hope has the hypocrite when God shall take away his life? though he
have heaped up riches as the dust, yet when God shall vnsheath his soul, and
put it violently from his body as a rustie sword out of the scabberd, what good
will all his substance do him then? It was his hope while he lived, that he
should still get more wealth: but when death sets upon him, he is past that
hope, and for better hopes he has none, and therefore must needs be full of
woe, and full of perplexity. Then though he call upon God, he will not answer:
Pro. 1.^6.8.
and though he seek him early, he shall not find him: but God will laugh at
his destruction, and mock when his fear comes. Because God called, and he
refused; he stretched out his hand, and he would not regard; therefore when he
cries, the Lord will shut out his prayer.

But set the case they be not in such perplexity at the time of their death,
but that they die securely, and go suddenly down to the grave as senseless
blocks, or stones, yet must they come before the judgment seat of Christ, and
then they shall be paid home for all. Ordinarily they meet with extremity of
anguish while they live, or when they die: but if they do not, they shall not
miss of it when they appear before the Judge of heaven and earth, Romans 2.
but tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that has offended, of
what estate and degree soever he has been. Then their distress and honor
shall be such, that when they arise out of their graves, they shall wish to
return thither again: yea they shall desire that the mountains and rocks
might fall upon them, and cover them from him that sits on the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb. Then they would think no pains nor torment too
much so they might perish everlastingly: they could rather desire that an huge
rock or great mountain might crush them in pieces, and that they might perish
as beasts, than to appear before Christ Jesus to receive that fearful
sentence, Go ye cursed, etc: This is the proper wages of sin: and of
disobedience against the Lord: it castes the committers of it into a woeful
Labyrinth of distresses and miseries: and good reason is there that it should
be so, because otherwise the hatefulnes of it, and the hatred of God against it
would not clearly appear, and so men would like better of the broad way, than
of the narrow, and choose to be rebels against the Lord, rather than obedient
subjects unto him: even the best would do this as well as the worst. Which
serves

First, kinds of sin, and consider what will come of it, before we presume to
rush upon it: let us look before we leap, lest afterward we repent us when
it is too late. Sin will make goodly shows of delight, and preferment, and
commodity that it will bring unto us: that if we will give entertainment
thereunto, it will never be a means of any disgrace unto us, but will hide it
self from the view of the world. But what does the Lord say of it? Does not he
tell us that it will break out, and fly abroad at length? The adulterer would
have his wretched pleasure, but not the just reproach of his filthiness. But
what says Job? Job. 31.3.
Are there not strange punishments for such workers of iniquity? And though
they may hide it from the eyes of men, Verse. 4.
does not God behold their ways, and tell all their steps? If Adam and Eve had
considered what mischief would have ensued on their eating of the forbidden
fruit, they would never have tasted thereof: but when they would believe the
serpent rather then God, did not they, and shall not their posterity for ever
smart for it?

The Prophet Micaiah bid Ahab take heed of his journey to Ramoth Gilead: yet
he would have his own mind, let the prophet say what he would: but when the
arrow was shot into his side, then he saw that Micaiahs counsel had been
worth the following: but then it was too late, and such is the folly and
madness of most men; they must have their own wills, and their own ways, and
will never hearken to those instructions that are given them, either by God, or
by godly men, till misery have overwhelmed their souls, and they be past
recovery. But let their folly teach us to be wiser, and let us take heed of
Satan's baits, and of his sugared poison: Math. 4.
he will make us profers (as he did unto our Savior) of marvelous great
honor, and pleasure, and gain that may be gotten by such and such sinful
courses: but let us never give credit unto him, John. 8.
for he is a liar from the beginning: but,

Secondly, Solomon, Prou. 5.22.
His own wickedness shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden
with the cords of his own sin. There is a judicial proceeding against him:
sin comes as an officer, and charge the party to stand: then it
apprehends him, and binds him hand and foot as a malefactor: (it spares
not the mightiest Monarch in the world, that is found guilty before the Lord)
after there is a proceeding unto arraignment and execution, if there be not
means used to stay the same: therefore let us get off the fetters of iniquity
as soon as we can: and if we find terrors upon our hearts for our
covetousness and cruelty, for our pride and insolency, for our filthiness
and impuritie, etc: let us labor with God for the obtaining of a pardon: and
then though we be plagued for our foolishness, and brought very low, yet
crying unto the Lord, he will deliver us out of our distress: Psalm. 107.
yea he will bring us out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death, and
break our hands asunder.

Here is also matter of comfort to them that proceed in the ways of the Lord
with a good conscience, lying upon them, yet let them be of good cheer: for
albeit they be afflicted on every side, yet shall they not be in distress,
they are not straightened, 2. Cor. 4.8.
but have elbow room enough, and do enjoy the best freedom and liberty. For
they may come into Gods privy chamber (as it were) and into his presence when
they will: they are not straightened in their souls, but have liberty to power
out their hearts before their heavenly father, who knows and pittieth their
distressed estate, and will work out their freedom and comfort in due time:
and in the mean while his hand shall defend and uphold them: his spirit shall
comfort and strengthen them: his word shall revive and refresh them, and (in a
word) his grace shall be every way sufficient for them, so that such as are not
chained and fettered with their own iniquities, and reigning sins, are of
all other the best freemen, and the most happy and blessed people: they walk
at liberty, and they keep the precepts.

Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord] That is, Let God proceed with the
pestilence according to his pleasure: which is called Gods sword and Gods hand,
because this pestilence proceeded immediately from him, without any second
causes, whereas many other judgments do not so. In that he makes choice to
fall into Gods hand, the Doctrine is, The godly find greatest favor with God.
that Gods servants never find so great favor as with God himself.

None can deal so favorably with Gods children as their heavenly Father.

He goes as far beyond earthly parents, as God is better then man. They,
when they are provoked, do oftentimes cease to be merciful: but God, when he
is most incensed, is perfectly favorable; and when he is driven to chastise
his children, he is exceeding moderate. Which is lively expressed, Hos. 11.8.
where the Lord speaks in this manner: Hos. 11.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I
make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? As if he should have told
them, You have deserved to be utterly destroyed, as Sodom and Gomorrah, and
the Cities near adioining: but my compassion that I bear toward you will not
suffer me to do it: Mine heart is turned within me: my repentings are rolled
together. Man repents after he has done amiss, but God before, so that he
can never do amiss: and therefore to manifest his infinite goodness, and care
for their preservation, he adds, verse 9. I will not execute the siercenesse
of my wrath: I will not return to destroy Ephraim; and the reason is added,
for I am God, and not man: and therefore though a man (if he were so
provoked,) would have done his best utterly to have spoiled them, yet the Lord
would not enter into their City, viz. for that end, but deal graciously with
them, notwithstanding all their offenses.

Moreover, earthly parents, when they set upon correction with best
staidness, do want knowledge and discretion, and therefore give their
children too little or too much: 1. Pet 1.6. Isa. 27.9.
but the Lord is of such infinite wisdom, that he ever proportioneth his
chastisements to the need of the party, and the nature of the fault.

Again, earthly parents, when they have laid on stripes, cannot take them off
again: when they see their children weeping, and grieuing, and humbling
themselves in good earnest for their offenses, they wish (but all in vain)
that their pain were over, and the smart removed: but as the Lord wounds,
so can he heal; as he cast Job down, Hos. 6.1.
so could he raise him up again: and whatsoever our distresses be, if we can
humble our selves, and cry unto the Lord, he is able and ready to relieve
and to deliver us. In which regard, we should be most willing, if we must
needs be corrected, to yield up our selves into his hands. For there is no
comparison betwixt the compassions of men, which are finite, and of Gods, who
is infinite.

Which may serve to discover unto us their folly that are so far from
submitting themselves to Gods chastisements, that they cannot endure his
rebukes. Let any man of God admonish them, and they are ready to fly in his
face. What has he to do with me? (say they) let him meddle with his own
matters. I will not take it at his hands: with many bitter speeches of that
kind, which argue in them great distemper and vexation of mind. And let a man
tell them in never so great love, that if they do not amend, their sins will
abroad to their disgrace: their friends will grieve at them, their adversaries
will reproach them, and all cry shame upon them; yet they will be no whit
pacified, but rather enraged against the admonisher, not caring what be thought
or spoken against them, so Christians may not reprove them.

Hence is it that men are so loath to be under any Christian government,
Pharaoh was, they will rather dwell with them, then with godly and religious
governors, that would use them most kindly, and reward them most liberally for
their service. Such were the Israelites. Moses (as the Lord testifies of him)
was the meekest man upon the earth, and withal a most wise and courageous
Ruler: yet would they rather have been every day under the whip in Egypt, then
under Gods gracious government which was executed by Moses. And as these are
here to be condemned of great want of wisdom, that will not submit
themselves to be admonished and ordered by the Lord; so are they also which are
unwilling to come under Gods correcting hand, which is indeed of al other most
desirable.

And because the present occasion requires it, it will not be amiss to show
that the pestilence, wherewith the Lord has now visited this Nation, is a
favorable and gentle correction, and that this sword of the Lord is nothing so
terrible as the sword of man would be if he should cause that to be drawn out
against us: and that for these reasons:

First, Reasons why the pestilence is a more favorable stroke then the sword.
because herein we may more immediately and clearly behold Gods hand, which
is a means to draw us to more speedy and earnest humiliation: whereas if we
were pursued by the sword of men, we should be more distracted, sometimes with
fears of and grief, for the enemies violence;

Secondly,

Thirdly, this is a marvelous great mercy,

Besides, now there is a continuance of the state of the commonwealth Lamen. 5.
whereas when the sword rages in a land, the face of the honorable is not
respected, the Magistrates authority is reckoned a matter of nothing, and all
laws must give place to the wills of violent men.

Again, in the times of war,

And as for our estate, needs be exercised with some heavy stroke or other,
that he then miraculouslie delivered us from the violence of the sword of man,
and smote our Nation with his own sword.

Now when this is said to be a favorable stroke, we must understand that it
is so only unto Gods children, not to the wicked: concerning whose departure
out of this world, it is said, that Hell follows death. If they be not
reconciled unto God, but live and die in their sins, Revel. 6.8.
their case is fearful. And therefore is it a just hand of God upon
impenitent sinners, that they should be horribly afraid of that sickness. No
sin, nor Satan himself, is so much feared of them as the pestilence, nay
nor Gods wrath it self: and therefore they care not what foul sin they
commit, whereby they are sure to incur the Lords displeasure, so their bodies
may escape this plague of God. But suppose they do escape it, if they be as
full of impiety, and injustice, and impurity, as they were wont to be, the Lord
has seven times greater plagues behind, Le^it. 26.
and his revenging hand will be stretched out against them still. Therefore let
them labor to make a good use of this, to humble themselves, and turn from
their evil ways: otherwise assuredly some greater punishment will light on
their souls, or bodies, or both.

Verse 15. The time allotted being welneere spent, the points following were
but briefly touched.
So the Lord sent a pestilence in Israel, etc. and there died of the people,
from Dan to Beer-sheba, seventy thousand men.] Ye heard the cause of this
before; to wit, because David, partly through pride, and partly through vain
confidence, had numbered the people: whence this point may be gathered, that



David was lifted up, Gods punishments are auswerable to men's sins. Joel. 1.5.
because he had so many strong and valient men: therefore does God lessen the
number of them. So ( Joel, 1.5.) it is said, Weep and howl ye drinkers of
wine, for the new wine shall be pulled from your mouth. This was a most just
correction, that they should be punished with scarcity of drink, seeing they
had before time so wretchedly abused the same. In like sort does the Lord meet
with proud men, turning their glory into shame, as we may observe in Tyrus.
Isa. 23.8. where the question is made, Isa. 23.
Who has decreed this against Tyrus (that crowns men,) whose Merchants are
Princes? whose Chapmen are the Nobles of the world? And the answer is made,
verse. 9. The Lord of Hosts has decreed this, to stain the pride of all
glory, and to bring to contempt all them that be glorious in the earth. So for
covetous men, they are many times brought to beggarie, according to that of the
wise man, He that makes have to be rich, Prou.
shall surely come to poverty. Albeit they use wonderful diligence, and be
exceeding painful, and have an excellent capacity, and a deep reach for
worldly things, and seem to want nothing that may make them prosper, yet
because God is displeased with them, he brings them down, both stripping them
of their wealth, which they most affected; and plaguing them with poverty,
which they most detested.

And a cause hereof is, David at this time, rather than any other, viz: that
he might more speedily and evidently see his fault, and more soundly and
heartily repent for the same. Which makes for our instruction, from us our
power, Ezekiel. 24.35.
the joy of our honor, the pleasure of our eyes, and the desire of our hearts,
even our sons, and our daughters. When men love to be commanders, God can
take their authority from them: if they stand upon their honor and
reputation, he can soon make it wither and vanish: if the delights of their
eyes do content them, he can quickly remove those from them: finally, if they
set their affections immederately upon their children, and lift up their souls
unto them, (as the words are in the original) that is, make them the desire of
their hearts, God can suddenly bereave them of their children, or so bring it
to pass, that they shall have little comfort in them.

Would we then have our houses and our children free from Gods strokes, and in
particular from the pestilence (as that many pretend that they are more
careful for their children, then for themselves;) then let us never commit any
sin to set them up, for that is the next way to deprive us of them: when we
carry more affection to them then to the Lord himself, we endanger our selves
and them both. The Lords will is, that you should in the first place serve him,
and so doing, you shall make your children, not Lords but kings, not of an
earthly, but of an heavenly kingdom.

The next thing here briefly to be considered is [the space] in which these
seventy thousand men died, namely in three days: Doctrine, that

Gods judgments very swift.
He can cause his plagues to fly fast, and make great speed. This is proved
in the Psalm, where speaking of any decree of God, it is said, He send^th
forth his commandment upon earth, Psalm. 147.15.
and his word runs very swiftly. What God determines to do, he can do it
out of hand, when it stands with his good pleasure. Exodus 12.
So we see how he could cause one Angel to go through the whole land of Egypt
in one night, and to slay the first borne in every house: Zath. 5.2.
and in this regard Gods curse is compared to a flying book, to note the
swiftness of it, that it comes as it were with two wings: but withal it is
likened to a talent of lead, that sticks fast where it sals: it makes speed
unto the place that God appoints, and tarrieth there where once it lights.

Furthermore we see, how quickly Gods curse was scattered over the whole earth,
Genesis 3.17.18.
when our first parents had sinned: the deformity came not upon the creatures
by degrees, but it ouertooke them presently and out of hand. And so at the last
day Christ shall come in the twinkling of an eye, as to call the godly forth
with unto glory, 1. Cor. 15.51.
so to draw the wicked immediately before Gods judgment seat, to receive
present and everlasting punishment and torment.

And the reason of this is, Noe, covered not one Nation one year, and an other
the next, and a long time after the rest which were far separated asunder,
but he in his wrath was present in every country, and so were they all
overwhelmed in few days: and who knows whether it seized not upon each of
them in one day? which makes,

For reproof of them that think, Though no infected person come near them,
cannot the Lords hand find them out? Yes certainly, let them climb up unto
heaven, Psalm. 1 39.
or go down into hell, or hide themselves at the center of the earth, Gods
eye is still upon them, and his hand near unto them: so that they can go safe
no where without Gods favor. If the pestilence were only in India, we should
as easily be infected in England, if God had a quarrel against us, and a
purpose to plague us that way, as if we were in the midst of ye infected
persons. Who would have thought that Gehazi should have been smitten with the
leprosy when his master and he were together? The like may be said of Miriam
when Aaron was with her. Nay who would have thought that King Vzziah should
have been plagued with that stroke in such an holy place as the Temple was,
where God would have no unclean thing to enter? Yet when he presumptuously
usurped the high Priests office, he was not spared, no not in the Sanctuary.
So that this may be surely concluded, that no place can shelter a man from
misery, if sin be harbored and entertained in his heart.

Verse 16. It is sufficient: hold thy hand.] Doctrine, that

As God appoints judgments to be inflicted on his people, God is present at
the execution of his indgements.
so he himself will see execution done.

He stands by in this place, and directs the Angel how far to proceed, and
where to make an end. God would have Jacob humbled, and therefore he sent him
to his uncle Laban: but withal he assures him of good success, and for that
purpose shows him a ladder, whereupon the Angels of God went up and down, to
signify, Genesis 28.12.
that they should guide him forth, and bring him back in safety: but (for
the present purpose) withal the Lord promises, Verse. 15.
that he would be with him, and keep him. So Psalm. 34.15. it is set down as a
great consolation unto the Saints, that the eyes of the Lord are upon
therighteous.

Instruction, Jerusalem, but to be of it: and then when Gods judgments are
abroad, we shall be in no danger. God will command his faithful Angels to do
us no hurt; wherein if they should refuse to obey, they must needs become
devils, and reprobate spirits, which is impossible. Let us labor therefore to
be of the number of those that mourn for the abominations of Jerusalem, that
so we may be saved when others are destroyed. Let us grieve for the impiety,
and blasphemy, and cruelty, and impuritie that is in our Land: so shall we
have a testimony unto our hearts, that we are Jerusalem: but as for those that
are Babels, Egyps, Sodomes, whose houses are full of voluptuousness, pride,
gluttony, drunkenness, worldliness, and the like, the Lord is likely to
command his Angel to smite at them with a full stroke: for where should his
sword light, but upon his enemies?

Verse 17. And David spoke unto the Lord, and said, Behold, I have sinned]
Whereas indeed the people had provoked the Lord most, yet David thought
himself most guilty, and therefore he would have Gods hand to have been on
him, and not on the people.

A good man will lay a greater burden on himself then on an other, and pass
sentence against himself, A good man is most severe against himself. 2. Tim.
1.15.
rather then against another.

So does Paul. Christ came into the world to save sinners, (says he) of whom I
am chief.

And as for matter of guilt, so also for matter of punishment. We see in Moses,
Exodus 32.
that because the people were many, and he was but one, he entreated God that
he might be wiped out of his book, rather then all his people should be
destroyed. But especially this point is verified in our Savior, who, when
mankind was utterly insufficient, either to put in sureties, Philip.
or to discharge their debt, did humble himself, to take on him the state of a
servant, and abased himself, that he might bring us unto glory; and endured a
shameful, and painful, and cursed death, that he might bring us unto
eternal life.

And this comes to pass, 1. Cor 13.
as the benefit of others, but to lay the more upon themselves, that others may
be the ratherspared.

Secondly,

This serves,

Here also are those hypocrites to be reprehended, that will lay heavy
burdens, and require strict obedience of others, especially of Ministers, and
yet they themselves make no conscience of any sin, be it never so contrary
to the Laws of God, or of man.

Others there are also, that may justly come under this reproof, that care not
who want, so they have plenty; nor who hunger, so they have sufficient; nor
who sink, so they swim; though it be by thrusting others vnderwater.

Secondly, Moses, and David, and Paul were, and therefore their reward in
heaven, and their praise on earth, shall be suitable.

Merciful men lose nothing: if Nehemiah had gotten together all the money in
that country, and had attained to be King of Persia, Nehem. 5.14.15.16.17.18.
he could not have procured himself so much true honor, as he did by not
taking all the stipend that he might have done, being a man of his place, and
by entertaining a great many that were in want at his table, which he needed
not to have done: and besides the good and deserved estimation that he got, he
could with comfort (and so may all that are like him) entreat the Lord to
remember him in goodness: which the Lord never failed to do.

The end of the second Sermon.
The third Sermon.
PSALM 12.1.2. Verse 1. Help Lord, for there is not a godly man left: for the
faithful are failed from among the children of men.

2. They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor, flattering with their
lips, and speak with a double heart.


THese words contain in them a prayer of David, when he himself was pursued
by Saul, and the Church of God was in great distress: when his friends
withdrew themselves from him, and few continued in that holy profession of
Gods name, which formerly they had made.

Now in this prayer of his, we may observe

1. First a petition, Help Lord; Seeing men's help failed, and their power was
bent against equity and Justice, which should have vpheld and maintained it,
therefore he appeals to an higher power, and entreats relief and succor
from the Lord.

2. Secondly, a complaint, and that

1. Of the decay of good men, and of goodness in them; There is not a godly man
left, etc.] Whereas superiors should have ministered refreshing unto the
distressed, or at least inferiors borne a burden with them, they were now
taken away, when there was greatest need of them: not that there were no good
men at all (for Gad, and Nathan, and Jonathan, were now in the Church) but in
comparison of the adverse part, they were so few, that they did scarce appear
to be any at all.

2 Of the deceitfulnes of bad men, They speak deceitfully every one with his
neighbor, etc: that is, every one of the contrary side, was full of craft and
cunning, using fair words, but intending much mischief: speaking with a heart
and a heart (as the Prophet says) that is, a heart that made show of one
thing, but meant the quite contrary: seeming to be for David, when in truth
they plotted against him.

Help Lord] here we see his refuge, Verse. 1.
he betaketh himself unto God, when he is forsaken of men. Whence observe this
Doctrine, that,

Although all humane helps and earthly friends do fail Gods people, yet they
are not helpless, Gods children never helples.
nor hopeless.

Albeit in regard of man's assistance, they be utterly destitute, yet the Lord
will be ever with them, and always stand for them. David's argument here is not
this, Lord help: for there be many that will join with thee: but this, Lord
help, for there is none else that will help: so that our case is not
according to men's affections toward us, but according to Gods love unto us.

This is evident in the prophecy of Micha, Micah. 7.2.
where it is showed, that friends failed: neither did they fail one man alone,
but the whole Church; good men were perished out of the earth, and there was
none righteous among men, etc: but the best of them was a briar, and the most
righteous of them sharper than a throne hedge: yet the Church is not quite
dismayed, but resolves to fly unto the Lord for succor. Therefore will I look
unto the Lord; Verse. 7.
I will wait for God my Savior: my God will hear me, though good men were
dead and gone, and hypocrites did put on their shape and likeness, that they
might mere freely practice mischief.

Yet the people of God determine with themselves not to cast off all hope, but
to rely upon the Lord, and though he delay to help them for a time, yet they
will wait upon him, knowing that at length he will deal graciously with them.

And for the further confirmation of this point, we have the example of Christ
Jesus himself, who being grievously perplexed and troubled within and without,
and on every side, uses this argument unto his father; Be not far from me,
Psalm. 22.11.
because trouble is near, for there is none to help me. And this is usual
with God, to relieve his people in extremities: and therefore when no man
calls for justice, no man contendeth for the truth, etc. then he himself will
take the matter into his hand, Isa. 59.4.16.
and he will save and deliver his servants as the Prophet Isaiah witnesses.

And the reasons hereof are these.

First, Jonathan, that it is not hard to the Lord to save with many or with
few: and in Asa, who says, 1. Sam. 14.6. 2. Chro. 14.11
it is nothing to thee to help with many, or with no power. They knew that
though they had few, or none at all on their side, they were in as good case as
if they had many millions, if God were on their side: for all power is his, and
that which men have, Psalm. 62.11. Math. 6.
is but borrowed from him: and though he sometimes use them, it is not because
he needs them: for who did help him in making of the heavens and of the earth,
and of all the creatures in them both? and what assistance has he now in
sustaining, and upholding of the same? now if he never needed the aid of any
creature in these greatest works of creation and preservation, surely he
wants not the help of men in matters of smaller importance.

Secondly, Gods mercy is no more lessened then his power is, by men's
withdrawing of themselves from us, the fatherless finds mercy. Hos. 14.
And then does he exercise the bowels of his compassion, when men show little
or no compassion at all.

When we see children to have rich and merciful parents to provide for them,
we do not much pity them: but as for those that are fatherless and
friendlesse, that are hungry and naked, and altogether destitute of relief, we
tender their case, and are ready to relieve them. Can we carry such an
affection toward other men's children that are distressed and helpless, and
will not the Lord our God have a greater care of his own children in the like
case? Will he leave them because men have forsaken them? No surely. But when
they are in distresses and straits, and that through their own foolishness
and disobedience, if they humble themselves, Psalm. 107.
and cry unto him, he will deliver them, though men dare not, or will not
speak, or deal for them.

Thirdly, when Gods servants are left destitute, David's example, who being in
great danger in the cave, did at first look about him, for help on this side,
and on that: but seeing that all refuge failed him, what did he? I cried unto
thee o Lord (says he) saying, thou art mine hope, and my portion in the Land
of the living. Psalm. 141.4.5.


Fourthly, Moses had brought the Israelites out of Aegipt by force of arms,
being aided with two or three millions of soldiers, much of the praise would
have been given unto them: but when Moses was naked and altogether destitute of
any power of man, the Lords mighty Arm was more clearly seen in the
deliverance of his people, and the subversion of their enemies. And that work
of his, has been, is, and shall be memorable in all ages.

So also, if Hezekiahs sickness had been such as any Physician could have
cured, his recovery should never ^aue been recorded in Gods book, as not
making so much for his glory: but when the prolonging of his ^ife was as much
as the giving of a second life, then notice of it was taken and given by the
holy Ghost, to the everlasting honor of Gods name. And as it was then, so is
it yet still, and ever shall be to the end of the world: the greater the
extremities and necessities of the Saints be, wherein God does relieve them,
and out of which he does deliver them, the more will it be for the magnifying
of his omnipotency, and of his tender mercy therein expressed.

This serves,

1. what God may do, as we see in David's enemies, who perceiving that many
did band themselves together, and rise up against him; concluded, Psalm. 3.1.2.3.
that there was no help for him in God. But what says David? Lord, thou art
a buckler for me, my glory, and the lifter up of my head. And in another
Psalm, Psalm. 71.10.11.
Mine enemies (says he) speak of me, saying, God has forsaken him: pursue
and take him, for there is none to deliver him. These speeches (no doubt)
pierced David's soul: but does he make the same conclusion? No, he is far
from that; he rather lays faster hold on God, Verse. 12.13.
seeing cruel men to be so violently bent against him. Go not far from me,
O God (says he) my God haste thee to help me: let them be confounded and
consumed, that are against my soul, etc. Indeed if men's opposing of
themselves against him, could have kept him from complaining unto God, or God
from giving care unto him, his case had been very lamentable: but seeing that
was impossible, whatsoever they imagined, there was safety enough for David,
and so is there still for all the elect of God.

Secondly, this is for instruction, Jacob did, Genesis 31.
when his brother Esau came with four hundred men against him: he was unable
to encounter him, and therefore he encountreth the Lord himself by prayers
and tears; and that which was his refuge, must be ours, and then we shall
have peace and safety: if once we can lay hand-fast on God, (as we may in
our houses, in our chambers, in our beds, in the night, or in the day) then our
case is good, we shall be protected from all the violent rage of the wicked;
so that none of the sons of violence shall be able to touch us for our hurt:
and therefore herein let us take comfort, that though men forsake us, and our
nearest friends reject us, yet the Lord will gather us up, and provide
sufficiently for us, Psalm. 27.
as he did for David: neither can men's persuasions withdraw his compassion
from us, nor men's threatenings terrify him from releeuing of us. For there is
not a godly man left, etc.

From this lamentable complaint of his, arises this doctrine, that

No outward thing comes nearer the hearts of God children, want of good men
much to be lamented.
then the decay of good men.

It much troubles the souls of godly men, to see a small number of
Christians. Hence proceeds that lamentation of the Prophet Micah: Woe is me,
for I am as the Summer gatherings, Micah. 7.1.2.
etc: or, I am in case, as in the destruction of the Summer fruits: as in
Hoseah it is said, Hos. 4.3.
The fishes of the Sea shall be gathered: that is, destroyed: and that this is
the sense, it appears in the words following, when it is said, There is no
cluster to eat: My soul desired the first ripe fruits: that is, I am as one
that has a fervent longing for them, and yet can get none of them; and what is
the reason of this his lamentation? The good man (says he) is perished out of
the earth, and there is none righteous among men, etc. So that the effect of
those words is thus much: that look how worldlings would grieve, if they
should see their grapes and figs (which were special commodities in those
countries) to fail, and their expectation that way to be utterly frustrate;
so, and much more bitterly did the Prophet bewail the loss of good and
righteous men. That was it also that did so pierce the heart of Elias. Lord
(says he) the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down thy
Altars, 1. Kings. 19.11.
and slain thy Propoets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my
life, to take it away. Which loss of the Prophets was so grievous unto him,
that he had no pleasure in his own life; and therefore he entreats the
Lord to take away his soul. Verse 4.
In which regard when the Lord would comfort him, he uses a fit remedy for
his disease: for whereas his grief was that there were no godly men left, but
all were declined to Idolatry, Verse. 18.
he tells him that he had reserved to himself seven thousand, that had not
bowed the knee unto Baal.

Yet further it may appear what a matter of heaviness the loss of good men
is unto those that are good themselves, by that speech of David, who says, All
my delight is in the Saints: for if they be his chief delight, Psalm. 16.3.
then the want of them must needs be an occasion of very great anguish unto
him: as is evident that it was. Psalm. Psalm. 42.
42.4 when he remembered how he had gone with the multitude, and had been as a
Captain to lead them unto the house of God, which then he could not do: this
cast him into wonderful grief, so that he poured out his tears, yea and his
very heart, as he there speaks, being (...) such extremity of sorrow, that
he is feign to restrain himself, why art thou cast down my soul (says he)
and why art thou disquieted within me? etc: yet godly men were not quite
abolished at this time, but Daui^ only taken from them and he knew that he
should come again unto them at length, and that they should be his flock: if
then he were so far^e cast down for that he might not be with them, what
grief would he have conceived if they had utterly been cut off, and ceased to
be any longer?

Now the reasons why the decay of Gods people is and should be such an
heartbreaking unto the rest of the Saints, are these:

First, because the glory of God is precious unto them, kingdom must needs be
a matter of grief to those that love and seek the honor of their King; then
can it not but go near the hearts of the godly, when they perceive the
soldiers and subjects of Christ to go to wrack.

Secondly,

Thirdly, the earth shall bring forth her increase, Psalm. 67.5.
and God even our God shall bless us. If there be but ten righteous men and
women in a City, or some few in a whole Country, all the rest shall speed the
better for their sakes: how much more then if there be multitudes of them? What
a grief therefore must it needs be to the wise and godly, when these props and
pillars of the Church and Commonwealth are taken away?

Which serves,

First, David was, who lamented that there were so few such: and these are
indeed utter enemies unto God, who esteems his people to be his chief
treasure under heaven: and therefore they shall bear their judgment,
whosoever they be that do thus malice the servants of God, and endeavor to
pervert them, or to diminish the number of them.

Secondly, David was, that crynight and day, Help Lord, for the godly perish,
etc: and that labor with God, by fasting, and weeping, and praying, that he
would uphold the state of his Church. If the prayer of David, being but one
man, were effectual for the continuing of Gods people, how much more forcible
shall the requests of many thousands be, who do incessantly entreat the Lord
with great earnestness to be favorable unto Sion, and to build up the walls
of Jerusalem, to save his chosen, and defend his own heritage against the
malicious plots and practices of all their enemies.

They speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor.]

Here he shows what manner of enemies were against him: not such as would
profess themselves open adversaries, (for though he had many such, yet here
he deals not against them) but such as would make show of good will, whereas
indeed there was in them nothing less. Now in that his chief complaint is
against them, the doctrine is, that

Deceitful friends are worse then open and apparent foes. Fained friends worse
then open foes.


David had diverse professed enemies, as Saul, and such as were near him: yet
none of their practices went so near his heart, as these men's that would
pretend to be friendly unto him.

To this purpose it is said by Solomon, Prou. 27.6.
that The wounds of a lover are faithful, and the kisses of an enemy are to
be prayed against: (for so the words must be read) When a faithful friend does
rebuke us, and seek to wound our hearts for sin, that is exceeding
profitable for us: but when an enemy under pretense of love (whereof by
kissing they then made show) does come against us, Indas, Matthew. 26.49.
and seek to undermine us, that is exceeding dangerous, and the hurt thereof
much to be prayed against.

The waters that run smoothly and mildly are commonly most deep and
dangerous, whereas that which roares is more shallow and safe.

The reasons of this doctrine are,

First, that such crafty foxes do more easily come within a man, and sooner
deceive him. An open enemy comes as it were before ones face, and so his
blows may be better warded off: but a false friend comes behind ones back,
and fasteneth a deadly blow ere a man be aware: and therefore Ioab, when he
would speed Abner and Amasa, did not bid open defiance unto them, but (being
therein more crafty and subtle, then either godly or manly) gave them kind
salutations, and, under pretense of love, most cruelly murdered them both. And
as it is for the outward man, so is it also for the soul. The most dangerous
temptations are those that proceed from fained friends under the color of
love, and desire of our good. If Satan had come unto Eve, and told her, I
charge you eat of the tree in the midst of the garden, and whatsoever the
danger be, stand not upon that, for I will have your husband and you to be
damned, she would never have hearkened unto him: but when he persuaded her,
that he was her friend, and meant her good, namely, that by eating thereof she
might be made like unto God himself, knowing both good and evil, then was she
overtaken by him, and so being overcome herself, she became the instrument of
the devil, to deceive her husband in like sort. And so it is with many, that
have held out well against raging and violent temptations, and yet have been
foulely drawn aside, and shamefully foiled by milder temptations, unto profit,
or pleasure, or credit.

Secondly, the false dealing of such counterfeit friends, David, where he
says, Surely mine enemy did not defame me, for I could have borne it, etc.
Psai. 55.12.13
but it was thou, o man, even my companion, my guide, and my familiar, etc.
When his words were smooth, and softer then butter, and yet proved deceitful,
they went through his heart even as swords: and this was just upon him, because
he had dealt in that sort with his faithful subject Vriah, seeming to favor
him by employing him in special services, when he went about to take away his
life, that he might cover his own iniquities.

First therefore let this instruct us to take another course: if we have inward
dislike, let us profess it:

Especially let us look unto this in matters betwixt God and us: let us not
play the hypocrites with him, pretending a love unto the Church of God, and to
the word of God, when there is no such matter; and drawing near unto him with
our lips, when our hearts are far from him: for in so doing we shall offer
great injury unto the Lord, and do more hurt at length then those that are
professed Papists or Atheists: for such as flatter with their lips, and dissemble
with a double heart in things that concern the holy religion of God, if any
persecution come, will quite renounce their profession, and betray the cause of
God, and grieve the servants of God, and harden the hearts, and open the
blasphemous mouths of the enemies of God, and make many to fall by their
reuolting and backsliding. Therefore let every one that takes upon him the
profession of Christianity, be a true, and not a fained friend of the same;
and bring a faithful, and not a guilefull heart thereunto; that the Lord may
witness for him, that he does heartily and unfeignedly seek him.

Secondly, let us hence learn this point of wisdom, never to trust those too
far, Let every man take heed of his neighbor, and trust not any brother:
Ier. 9.4.5.
(viz. that is not sound hearted) for every brother will use deceit, and every
friend will deal deceitfully, etc. for they have taught their tongues to
speak lies: they have exercised the trade of using fair words, when there is
within them nothing else but falsehood and deceit. And the like exhortation we
may read in the 7. of Micah.

Thirdly, this is for our consolation, when we find such hollow hearted
hypocrites and deceivers:

FINIS.
The fourth Sermon.
PSALM. 12. Ver. 3.4. 3. The Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue
that speaks proud things.

4. Which have said, with our tongue we will prevail: our lips are our own,
who is Lord over us?


IN the two former verses it set down the petition that David made unto God
for help, and his complaint that he put up concerning the decay of good and
righteous men, and the deceitfulnes of ungodly and unrighteous men.

Now in these verses is set forth an other part of his prayer, to wit, an
imprecation; The Lord cut off, etc: wherein he does by the spirit of
Prophecy, and according to the Analogy of faith, denounce judgment against
Gods and his enemies, to the end he might comfort himself, and refresh his
heart with hope that good men should be recovered, and wicked men confounded.
And as for this curse, we must understand that it is not uttered in bitterness,
but in zeal, and with warrant from Gods own spirit; and this is directed,

1. First against deceitful persons, who are called flatterers: the Lord cut
off the flattering lips.

2. Secondly, against proud persons, who are described:

1. In general by their speech, that they speak proud things. verse 3.

2. More particularly, that they say, with our tongue we will prevail. verse.
4. as if they should have said, look what we ask, we will obtain it: look
what we threaten, we will perform it: look what we set down, that shall
come to pass.

But it might be said unto them, you speak presumptuously,

They answer, our tongues are our own: as if they should say, who dare be so
audacious as to control us? we will speak what we list, in despite of them
all.

But some might say,

To that they answer, who is Lord over us? they think they may blaspheme
God, and revile his servants, and speak what they list, and yet none shall
have to do with them for it.

The Lord cut off all flattering lips] whereby are understood, Verse 3.
the most dangerous and subtle deceivers, who under pretense of friendship,
do seek a man's utter overthrow.

Now in that the Prophet prays against such as do so cunningly carry their
matters, that they will appear to love, where they hate with a deadly hatred,
and in praying does show, not only what is his wish, but what is Gods purpose,
viz. that the Lord will cut off the flattering lips: hence this doctrine may be
gathered, that,

The more skilfully and artificially any contriues his evil purposes, The
more cunning any is for mischief, the more fearful shall his ruin be.


The more fraudulent a deceiuer any one is, the more heavy shall the hand of
God be upon him, to cross and contrary him, and to bring him to such straits,
that he shall not for shame open his mouth again to speak as he has done:
and this is to have his tongue cut out, as it were, as is threatened in this
place.

Flatterers have a certain kind of dexterity in their enterprises, that they
will not be seen to be brochers of those things whereof they afterward become
practisers: but they speed never the better, but a great deal the worse for
that. Therefore does David conclude, Psalm. 52.4.5.
that God would certainly destroy Doeg, because he was a skillful worke-man,
and as it were a tradesman in mischief: he could flatter David, that he
wishes him well, and was sorry for his troubles, and would be ready to be
friend him in any thing he could: but when Saul complains how hardly he was
dealt with, in that no body would discover unto him the treacheries of David,
Deog changes his tune, and falls to accuse David, 1. Sam. 22.8.9. etc.
and most injuriously charge Abimelech to have conspired with him: and for
all this, he (no doubt) would have goodly pretenses: as, that duty bound him
to speak as he did: he respected the Kings honor and safety, and certainly
things were not well, but some mischief was a working; for he saw the son of
Ishai come unto Abimelech who gave him a sword, and asked counsel of the Lord
for him, and ministered food unto him, and to those that were with him, and that
extraordinary food too, even the shewbread: in which regard, he, as a loyal
subject, must needs advertise Saul to take heed, and to look well to himself,
that so he might prevent all imminent dangers.

So in the prophecy of Jeremy, Ier. 4.22.
this is set down as one cause of the utter subversion of the Jews, that they
were wise to do evil, but had no knowledge to do well. They wanted not
ordinary capacity, (which had been one degree of happiness unto them, for
then God would have showed them greater compassion) but they wanted grace to
use it well, and had cunning heads to plot mischief, and therefore does the
Lord threaten judgment against them. And in another place he says, that they
had taught their tongues to speak lies. Ier. 9.5.
And what follows? Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will
melt them, etc. Shall not I visit them for this, says the Lord? Or shall not
my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Their tongues were too much
inclined to lies of their own accord, so that they needed not to be taught
that language: yet did they set their tongues to school, as it were, that they
might be artificial in their leaud practices, and carry out their lies under a
color of truth, and so sin with less disgrace: which was a thing that the
Lord could not abide, and therefore he threatens to plague them therefore.

And good reason is there that it should be so:

First, such persons are extremely hurtful. Never is evil practiced with
such mischief, as when it is contrived by craft, and polished with deceit. The
Apostles were never so troubled in dealing either with the idolatrous Gentiles,
or with the superstitious and malicious Jews, as they were when they had to
do with those that pretended to be Christians, to be Ministers of the Gospel,
yea to be Apostles: and therefore Paul expostulateth the matter with the
Galathians, saying, O foolish Galathians, Gal. 3.
who has bewitched you? etc. As if he should have said, No man could deal so
dangerously as these false Teachers, who have as it were charmed your
affections, and bewitched your minds. And in the Epistle to the Corinthians,
he greatly complains of such deceivers: 2. Cor. 11.2.3.
I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy: for I have prepared you for one
husband, to present you as a pure Virgin to Christ. But I fear lest as the
Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity that is in Christ. Verse. 13.14.15.
For such false Apostles are deceitful workers, and transform themselves into
the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into
an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing though his Ministers
transform themselves, as though they were the Ministers of righteousness. Paul
had taken great pains to make a match betwixt Christ and them, and to fit them
for such a glorious husband: but he was much afraid lest it would be broken,
in regard of many of them, and that as the Devil deceived Eve, so the false
Apostles would deceive them, and that by transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, making show (as the Devil does,) of the greatest love and
care of their good, and of their eternal salvation: when the truth was, they
intended no such thing, but only the serving of themselves, in their carnal
credit and commodity.

Secondly,

Thirdly, their hearts are maruellously hardened:

Fourthly, who scatters the devices of the crafty, Job. 5.12.
so that their hands cannot accomplish that which they enterprise, (as Job
speaks) and that takes the crafty in their craftiness, causing those that
are cunning hunters and fowlers, to fall into the pit that they have dug for
others, and to be ensnared in the works of their own hands; Psalm. 7. and 9.
so that when they go about to take others, it falls out by the righteous
and wise providence of God, that they are taken themselves.

Since it is so dangerous to have a crafty and cunning head, Prou. 24.8.
He that imagines to do evil, men shall call him an author of wickedness.
All men shall point at such a one, There goes a crafty fellow, a subtle Fox,
etc: so that the name of a vagrant is not more odious then his: every one has
such in detestation, even the most contemptible of the people: Do you see
yonder man? (will they say) he is a perilous fellow, able to set a thousand
together by the ears; If any have an evil cause, he is a man for his turn:
Let him make him his Soliciter, and he will go as far as devilish and
crafty wit can reach. And as it is a blemish to the name, so it is the bane of
ones estate to be a fraudulent dealer. The bread of deceit (says Solomon) is
sweet to a man, Prou 20.17.
but afterterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Howsoever deceitful
persons do snatch here and there, and get much from others, yet few of them
thrive, but the curse of God lighting upon that which they have, makes havoc
of all. And therefore as we tender our estimation and good estate in the
world, let us beware of such practices.

Secondly, and flatter, and lie, and traduce us most shamefully, that the Lord
will cut off the lying lips. Grant that we have not liberty or skill to
encounter them, yet the Lord has: There is no wisdom, nor understanding,
Prou. 21.30.
nor counsel against him: that is, none of these shall take any effect against
him: and therefore the Psalmist says, Psalm. 33.10.
The Lord breaks the counsel of the Heathen, and brings to naught the
devices of the people. Though all the wisdom of all the nations in the earth
were laid together, yet God would bring all their consultations to nothing if
they made against him. When Achitophel fell from David to take part with
Absolon, it much troubled David, for his words were as Oracles, and none could
speak more in matters of policy then he, and he knew all David's heart, and
the state of the whole kingdom, and therefore he turns himself unto God: O
Lord (says he) I pray thee turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness:
and God heard his request, and did so, insomuch that no creature could deal
more foolishly for the procuring of his own everlasting woe and shame, then he
did in hanging himself.

The devil is still laboring to work mischief, and he wants not craft nor
subtlety, besides the experience that he has had from the beginning of the
world hitherunto: yet for all this, he has never been, nor shall be able to
procure the overthrow of one of Gods elect. The Church has been nothing the
worse, though he have been still warring against it. And why is this, but
because Gods wisdom is infinitely beyond all the subtilty of the devil? And
what cause have we then to fear crasty men, seeing their Captain has had no
better success, and seeing that the Lord has a quarrel against them as well
as against their head?

And the tongue that speaks proud things.]

In that the Prophet denounces judgment against such kind of persons, the
doctrine is, that

The more wicked men boast of their mischievous intents, The vvickeds boasting,
a torerunner of their ruin.
the nearer mischief is unto them.

When they brag most how well the world goes with them, and what hope they
have of effecting their badde purposes, some great evil is even at their
doors. When men boast in their talk, and swords are in their lips (as David
speaks) then the Lord will have them in derision, Psalm. 59.7.8.
and laugh at their destruction. When they fall to bragging, God falls to
laughing: and when their swords are drawn out against others, the Lords hand
is stretched out against them. When Pharaoh in the pride of his heart said, Who
is the Lord? God made him know who he was. Exodus 15.9.
And when the enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake them, (meaning the
Israelites) I will divide the spoil, etc: then the Lord set in against them,
and made the Sea to cover them, so that they sanke as lead in the mighty waters.

So when Saneherib insulted against God, 2. Kings. 18.
and against his people, and bragged what his forefathers and himself had
done, and what now he would do, if they would not yield up the City and
themselves into his hands, Chap. 19.28.
then did the Lord put a hook into his nostrils, and a bridle into his lips,
and brought him back again the same way he came, and caused him to fall by
the hands of his own sons.

And the reasons why it must needs be so,

First, when ungodly men do most vaunt of their malicious intents against Gods
people, then is the Lords compassion most stirred toward them: even as it is
with earthly parents, when any one threatens their children, that if he take
them, he will knock out their brains; this will cause them to preuide for
the safety of their children, and that such leaud persons be punished and
restrained.

This was David's comfort against Doeg: Psalm. 52.1.
Why boastest thou thy self in thy wickedness, o man of power? (says he) The
loving kindness of God endures daily. If the stock of Gods goodness were all
spent, then his children had reason to hang down their heads: but seeing that
is, and will be as much still as ever it was, they need not fear the
insultations of their wicked adversaries.

Secondly, O Lord God the auenger! O Lord God the aueng^r! show thy self
clearly. And why are they so instant and earnest with God? The reason is
yielded, verse 4. The wicked prate and speak fiercely: all the workers of
iniquity vaunt themselves. As if they should say, Lord, if ever thou will
awake and stand up for our defense, now do it, when ungodly men do so insult
and triumph over us.

Thirdly, All the proud [in heart] are an abomination unto him. But if their
pride appear in a more notorious manner in their tongues, and in their
behavior, they are much more hateful unto him: Psalm. 10.
for in making boast of their own hearts desire, they do contemn the Lord;
and in speaking against the Church, Psalm. 73.9.
they set their tongues against heaven it self, as the Prophet speaks.

Which point thus proved, ministers unto us,

First, an use of instruction,

Secondy, Haman, notwithstanding all his boasting of his greatness, and of his
honor, and of that favor which he had with the King, and of all the cuill
that he intended against the Jews, and against Mordecai especially; if (I
say) a man had known besore hand what should have befallen him, would it not
have made him laugh at his pride and folly? Yes certainly: and yet the case
of all boasters against Gods Church is little or better then his. And if we
could with the eye of faith behold Gods purpose concerning their ruin and
overthrow, all their bragging would seem unto us, and it is indeed, even
exceeding ridiculous. And this in particular should comfort us against the
blasphemies of the Church of Rome, and against all her insultations over the
Saints: for the Lord has set down her sentence: Revel. 18.7.8.
In as much as she gloried her self, so much give ye her torment and sorrow:
for she says in her heart, I sit being a Qucene, and am no widow, and shall
see no mourning. But what says God? Therefore shall her plagues come at one
day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire, etc.

Verse 4. With our tongues we will prevail: our lips are our owne] In that
they are here found fault with for thus speaking, because they affirm that
which is directly contrary to the truth, the point hence to be observed is,
that

No man has the royalty of his own tongue, No man has the ordering of his
own tongue.


Every man's tongue is in Gods hand, and his words at Gods disposing, he is
Lord over all men's tongues; which will evidently appear by this, that

First, men cannot speak what they would, Solomon: The preparations of the
heart are in man: that is, Prou. 16.1.
a man determines and prepares what to utter: but the answer of the tongue is
of the Lord. As who should say, When a man has done so, yet he shall speak,
not what he himself intended, but what God has decreed; as is plain in
Balaam, who came with a purpose to curse, and if the Lord had permitted him, he
would have vomited out horrible imprecations against the Israelites; for that
would have made for his credit and commodity: Number. 23.
but notwithstanding his intent, the Lord made him to bless his people in
stead of cursing them. And so Saul, he would have all men know that David was a
Traitor, and therefore he pursued him, to bereave him of his life: yet when he
met with him, he had no power so much as to rate him, or to rebuke him; but on
the contrary part, is driven to justify him: O my son David (says he) thou
art more righteous then I. And this we may observe in our own experience, that
oftentimes men, contrary to their minds, do utter things which do
exceedingly grieve them, and bury other things in silence, the speaking whereof
might have been very behoouefull unto them: whence do arise these and the like
speeches, How was I ouerseene in that which I said? What an advantage did I
lose at such a time? which does plainly prove, that God has the disposing of
men's tongues.

Secondly, Ephesians. 4.
how it should be ruled, that men should not speak blasphemously, nor
filthily, nor bitterly: whence it may be concluded, that it is Gods subject;
for Princes make statutes for none but for their own subjects.

Thirdly, With our tongues we will prevail; yet do they not prevail: for
whereas they forespeake others destruction, the wise man says, A fools mouth
is his own destruction. And whereas they say triumphingly, Prou. 18.7. Micah.
4.11.12.13.
Sion shall be condemned, and our eye shall look upon Sion, they know not the
Lords counsel, to wit, that they themselves shall be gathered as sheaues into
the barn, to be threshed and beaten in pieces by Gods people.

Fourthly, Mat. 12.36.37.
By thy words thou shall be justified, (says our Savior) and by thy words
thou shall be condemned: And, We must render an account for every idle word:
which evidently shows, that God has the sovereignty of men's tongues.

Now seeing that the Lord has the government thereof, this serves

First, Set a watch o Lord before my mouth, Psalm. 1.41.3.
and keep the door of my lips: God will have the ordering of them by his
providence, whether we will or not: but by his grace he will not guide them,
unless we sue unto him in that behalf: therefore let us beseech him so to
sanctify and purify our hearts, that out of the abundance thereof, our tongues
may speak unto his praise, and to our own, and others edification.

Secondly, Job. 5.21. Isa. 45.16.17.
so that no such weapons shall prevail against us: for the Lord made the
tongue, and the men themselves that speak therewith; and there is no voice,
nor sound that proceeds out of the mouth, but the Lord has the ordering
thereof: and therefore let us sue unto him, Act. 4.29.
as the Apostles did, saying, O Lord behold their threatenings, behold their
reuilings, and do thou judge betwixt us and them: and thou which have the
disposing of all men's tongues, preserve thy servants from the hurt that may
befall us through the same.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
A BRIEF TRACT CONCERNING ZEAL, wherein the properties of true Zeal are
decsribed, and the contrary discovered.
Godly zeal is a virtue very requisite and necessary for all Christans: not
so rare and seldom found: as precious and useful where it is found; as being
the very life and soul of sound Christianity, and one of the principal
Fountains and Well-heads, whence many other virtues of the spirit do spring
and issue forth.

The excellency of this grace does appear, as by many other arguments, so
by this, that the Saints are thereby described; where they are said to be a
people [zealous of good works:] this is the end of their redemption, Titus
2.14.
and this is one special effect and mark of their justification, that they
do not only desist from their for mer evil works, and fall to the practice
of the contrary good works, but that they are zealous, both to do them, and
in the doing of them: they shake off the sluggishnesse of the flesh, and strive
for the feruencie of the spirit, Romans 12.11.
in all duties that they owe either unto God or men.

For this virtue, amongst many others, are the penitent Corinthians commended:
2. Cor. 7.11.
Behold this, that ye have been godly sorrowful, (says Paul) what zeal it
has wrought in you! etc. Till such time as the Apostle had rebuked them by an
Epistle, they were either not at all, or very slightly touched with the sense
of their own sins, and therefore they set light by the offenses of others,
insomuch that when abominable incest (such as had not been heard of amongst
the Gentiles) was committed among them, yet they took it not to heart, nor at
all mourned for it, 1. Cor. 5.1.2.
nay they let the offender go uncensured, who should have been (as afterward
he was) excommunicated, and delivered up unto Satan, for the healing of his
own soul, the preventing of the like sins in others, and the stopping of
the mouths of wicked blasphemers, who would be ready hereupon to speak
evil of the holy name of God, and of the professors and profession of
Christianltie. Thus cold and careless were they, till the Apostle had sharply
reproved them: but after that they had well disgested his speeches, and
thoroughly considered of all matters, they fell to lament for their own
corruptions, and for the transgressions of others, and were zealous against all
wickedness, and for all manner of goodness in themselves and others. This was
the effect of holy grief in them, and this will be found in all that attain
to that repentance which is unto life: in which regard, when the Lord would
work a cure upon the lukewarm Laodicians, Reu. 3.19.
he bids them, be zealous, and amend. That was their sin, that they were
key-cold, and even frozen in the dregs of security, exercising themselves in
sundry good duties (for that must needs be, because they were a Church) but
never regarding with what love unto God or men they performed the same:
therefore the Lord urging them to reformation, wills them [to be zealous, and
amend] implying, that these two ever go hand in hand, to wit, sound
repentance, and godly zeal: yet so, that as every one is of greater growth in
the body of Christ, so this grace is of greater strength in him: as is evident
in David, who speaks thus of himself (and that by the inspiration of Gods
holy spirit, Psalm. 119.139.
and therefore cannot but speak truly) My zeal has even consumed me,
because mine enemies have forgotten thy word. Weaker Christians have some good
motions of grief for men's offances: but the Prophet was exceedingly wrought
upon by his zeal, so that it did even spend him, and consume him, in regard of
the fearful breach of Gods commandments, which he observed in his very
enemies. And the like we sind in another place: The zeal of thine house has
caten me: Psalm. 69.9.
and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee are fallen upon me. Thus was the
holy man of God touched, yea tormented with the things whereby Gods glory was
impaired, as if he had been laden himself with reproaches and disgraces.

But most admirable was the zeal of Moses and Paul, Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
who for that fervent desire that they had of advancing Gods glory, could have
been content to have had their names put out of the book of life, and to be
separated from the Lord, so that his great name might be magnified in sparing
and saving their brethren the Israclites.

Now because our hearts may easily deceive us in this matter of zeal, either
by persuading us that we have it, when we are far from it; or that we
altogether want it, when in some good measure we have attained unto it:
therefore will it not be amiss to set down some rules, whereby we may try
whether our zeal be ourrant or counterfeit.

First, Rules of true zeal,
therefore touching the matter about which this holy zeal is to be exercised,
it must be good: It is good always to be zealous in [a good matter:] The
matter must be good, Gal. 4.18.
and it was before showed, that Gods people must be zealous of [good works:]
otherwise, if the matter be evil, the more earnest any is, the more sinful:
neither is such earnestness worthy the name of zeal, being nothing else but a
devilish and fleshly heat, or rather a kind of frenzy and madness. Such
was the zeal of I dolaters that would mangle and cut themselves, and that
would offer their children in the fire in honor unto their gods. Such was the
zeal of the Scribes and Pharisees, 1. King. 18.28 Ier. 7.31.
who would compass sea and land to make one a Proselite: that is, one of their
own sect.

With this violent and mad zeal was Paul carried before his conversion (as he
himself confesses in plain terms, Acts. 26.11. and Phil. 3.6.) when he was
enraged against Christians, and spared no pains nor cost to make them deny
and blaspheme the name of Christ.

Here then is to be condemned the zeal of ignorant Papists and Brownists, and
such like, who are very hot indeed (for he must needs run whom the devil
drives) but in evil causes, as might easily be proved, and may hence, if by
no other arguments, be probably concluded, in that they use the devils own
weapons (to wit, lying, slandering, railing, cursed speaking, and the like) in
the pursuit of the same.

But much more damnable and vile is their zeal to be esteemed, who against
their knowledge and consciences, do violently and maliciously oppose
themselves against the Gospel, and the professors thereof, and stand for
falsehood and wickedness, and the practisers thereof: as did those wretched
Pharisees that set themselves against our Savior, and committed the sin against
the holy Ghost. We must know the thing to be good for which we are zealous.


A second rule is, that as the matter in which we are zealous, must be good in
it self, so it must be known unto us to be of that quality. True zeal must
begin where the word begins, and end where it ends: Romans 14.23.
for otherwise it cannot be of faith, which is ever grounded on theword; and
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. We must not therefore content our selves
with an honest meaning, and hope that we have a good zeal toward God, when
we have no warrant for our hope: but must so acquaint our selves with the
Scriptures of God, Romans 10.2.
that our zeal may be according to knowledge.

Which rule discovers the corruptnes of their zeal, whether close
hypocrites, or weak Christians, who are led on merely by the examples of good
men, whom they affect, much to like of, and earnestly to stand for such
things, as they perceive them in their practice to observe, and to make
conscience of: and if there be but a word spoken against any of the things that
they have taken a liking of, they are maruellously stirred with indignation
thereat, and grow passionate and vehement against the parties, though they have
never so good a meaning in that which they speak: Yet let them be urged to
prove out of the word the necessity of those duties which they so earnestly
press, they can say little or nothing to the purpose for them; and so grow
many times either to dislike and forsake all if they be hypocrites, or at
least to be discouraged, and to be at a stand, if they be weaklings in Christ
Jesus. And whence proceed these inconveniences but from this, that they are
zealous for things that in themselves, and unto others are good and holy, but
not thoroughly discerned of them to be of that nature: the consideration
whereof, should make us to sit sure in matters of godliness, not building upon
the example of good men, but upon the truth of the good word of God, and then
our foundation shall never fail us.

A third property of true zeal is, Zeal must begin at home.
for never can that man be truly zealous to others, which never knew to be
zealous to himself. Those are the most skillful Physicians and best able to
deal with others, that have first wrought a cure upon their own souls.
Therefore our Saviors advice is, Luke. 6.42.
Cast out the beam out of thine own eye first, and then shall thou see
perfectly to pull out the meat that is in thy brothers eye. We must then first
of all judge our selves, and cast the first stone at our selves, that so
finding how ugly and noisome a thing sin is, and that by experience in our
selves, we may be at defiance with it, wheresoever we find it, and neither
fiatter others in their evil courses, nor yet too rigorously and unmercifully
rebuke them for the same. Those that have been pinched with sickness and are
recovered, can by the smart which they have felt, pity others in the like
case: even so they which have been stung with sin themselves, can more
easily be moved to show compassion toward poor sinners like themselves,
because by the feeling of misery, men learn the practice of mercy, Heb.
2.17.18.
in that Christ suffered and was tempted, he is able to pity and to succor
those that are tempted.

Against this rule do all hypocrites offend, who will wade very deeply into
other men's souls, and very bloodily gore other men's consciences, who yet never
once purged their own unclean sincks at home, nor drew one drop of blood out
of their own corrupt hearts. Such were the Pharisees, who pleased themselves
much in judging and censuring our Savior and his Disciples; Luke 16.15. and
18.9.
but were so far from condemning themselves as faulty in any thing, that
they instified themselves before God and men. Such also are the Brownists,
which are ready to burst their bowels with crying out against disorders
abroad, and yet never reform their own souls at home: for if they did, they
would also reform their lives and their families. But what kind of zeal these
men's is, woeful and late experience still cries in our ears: for many of
them being so zealous to others, but only through some secret love of the
world, when they had that which they sought for, made known their hollow and
their rotten zeal, in that without grief of conscience, they could suddenly
rush into a profound worldliness: and without all godly sorrow, could (after
they had satisfied their greedy and fleshly zeal) not only more hardly
sear up their own consciences, but also be so changed, that they could sow
up their lips, and spare their words from speaking in like manner again to
others, and so are neither zealous to themselves nor others.

Here also are all such to be censured as faulty, that can pry and make a
privy search into the wants of others, accounting the same wants no wants in
themselves. The father says, this my child does amiss: and the child, in
this my father fails: the husband knows, what the wife should do; and the
wife, what the husband should do, etc: every one in the mean time neglecting
their own duties; whereas indeed every ones principal care should be, to
know and do his own duty, and to be grieved where he comes short of the
same. And thus much for the third rule, that true zeal must begin in our
selves.

Now further we are to understand, We must make greatest account of the
vveightiest matters. Matthew. 23.23.
that first and especially we make conscience of the principal matters of
the word, and after of the lesser, as our Savior tells the Scribes and
Pharisees: These things ought ye to have done, (that is, the weightier matters
of the Law) and not to have left the other undone: viz. matters of smaller
importance.

Which shows, that their zeal is very corrupt and faulty, who as our Savior
says, strain out a Gnat, and swallow a Camel; who are very hot about matters
of ceremony, but altogether cold in matters of substance: as also theirs that
(on the other side) will cry out against them that rob by the highways side,
and yet they themselves make no conscience of pilfring, and cosoning, and
secret defrauding of their neighbors: as if small sins were not to be left
as well as great.

Another rule of true zeal is, We must look to the inside, as well as to the
outside. Ier. 4.14. Iam. 4.8.
as to our carriage before men: for so the Lord commands, Cleanse thy heart,
o Jerusalem, etc: how long shall thy evil thoughts remain within thee? And
again, Purge your hands, ye sinners, and [your hearts] ye hypocrites.

Which serves to overthrow the hypocrisy of such Pharisees, as make clean the
utter side of the cup and platter, Matthew. 23.
but within are full of bribery and excess, of pride, disdain, self-love,
and hatred.

Now that we may the better try our selves by this rule, two things are to be
observed,

1. That we fear to commit any sin secretly, and when we are alone, as
well as when we are in the presence of men. Job. 31. Genesis 39.
So did Job, and so did Joseph: and this moved them so to do, even that the
Lord did behold them, and could punish them for secret, as well as for open
offenses.

Which condemns them of gross dissimulation, that are loath to be accounted
ill, and yet make no conscience to be ill. What is this, but to be painted
sepulchers, that are fair to look upon, but within full of rotten bones?
Matthew. 23.
We may deceive men, but God is not deceined: and therefore let us beware of
this hypocrisy: and so much the rather, because the Lord has fearfully
discovered and plagued them, that in outward show have borne a great
conuntenance of religion, and yet have lived in secret filthiness, and other
vile sins, which in time have come to light to their shame and ruin.

The second thing to be observed, and maintain continual war against them,
as Paul did, Romans 7. and this we should the rather do, because it is a
fearful, and yet an usual judgment of God, and that upon many professors,
that making no conscience of entertaining wretched lusts and vile affections
secretly, they have broken forth to the committing of the gross actions, and
so have shamed themselves publicly. And this is a just stroke upon those that
would rather seem to be, then in truth desire to be godly, that making no
conscience of their thoughts and inward desires, they should in time be so
given up, as to make no conscience of their words or deeds.

The sixth rule is, We must be more strict to our selves then to others.
and more severe against our selves, then against others, giving more liberty
unto them, then we will take unto our selves. And first concerning severity
unto our selves, such ought to be our acquaintance with our inward and outward
corruptions, and so grievous ought they to be in our eyes, that our heat being
spent upon our selves, we may think the sins of others more tolerable, and
so learn by the sight and sense of our own sores, Titus. 3.1.
to deal more mildely and meekely with others, whose corruptions (either for
greatness or multitude) we cannot so thoroughly see as we may our own.

Secondly, as we must deal most sharply against our selves, so must we be
ready to give more outward liberty unto others then to our selves. And for
this we have the example of Abraham, who was so strict to himself, that he
would not take of the King of Sodom so much as a thread or latchet, and yet he
would not deny Aner, Genesis 14.23.24.
Escol, and Mamre, their liberty. So Job, as he would not permit to himself,
so neither would he deny to his permit to himself, so neither would he deny to
his children their liberty of feasting. But especially the example of Paul is
notable for the confirmation of this point: for seeing that in some places he
could not so conveniently live of other men's charges, 1. Cor. 4.12. 1 Thessalonians.
2.9.
as at Corinth and Thessalonica, he would labor with his own hands, rather
then be chargeable to any of them: yet he would not that all men should be tied
by his example to do the like: 1. Cor. 9. 1. Tim. 5.18.
and therefore he labors much in his Epistles about this, that Ministers
ought to be provided for: so strict was he to himself; such liberty left he
unto others.

Whence we may easily perceive, that it is rather a Pharisaicall pride, then
any Christian zeal, to be too tetricall and rough in urging men so far, that
whosoever in every point is not so strict and precise as our selves, we cast
them off as dogs and profane persons, and such as are unworthy of any
account or countenance.

The next property of true zeal, Zeal condemns sin in friends as well as
in foes. Mat. 16.23. Gal. 3.1. 1. Cor.
but to discern and condemn sin, even in those that are nearest and dearest
unto us. That was it that made Christ so sharply to rebuke Peter; and Paul to
deal so roundly with the Galathians and Corinthians.

Many offend against this rule, who will never reprove sin in their friends,
till God revenge it from heaven; wherein they are far from true friendship:
for whereas they might by admonishing them of their faults in time, prevent the
judgments of God, they do, through a false love, pull the wrath of God upon
them whom they love most dearly. He loves most naturally, that has learned
to love spiritually: and he loves most sincerely, that cannot abide sin in
the party beloved, without some wholesome admonition.

But do not many now adays seem zealouslie to mislike sin in strangers,
who can wink at the same fault in their kindred, in their wives, in their
children, in their parents? as if the diversity of persons could change the
nature of the sin. This blind zeal God has punished, and does punish his
children. Isaac did carnally love his son Esau for meat, and for a piece of
venison. Genesis 15.28.
David was too much affected to Absalon and to Adoniah for their comely
personage, so as his zeal was hindered in discerning sin aright in them. Now
Jacob was not so dear to Isaac, and Solomon was more hardly set to school,
and made to take pains: but behold, God loving Jacob, and refusing Esau,
(howsoever Isaac loved Esau better then Jacob) made Esau more troublesome, and
Jacob more comfortable unto him. Absalon and Adoniah, brought up like Cocknies,
became corasiues to David's heart: Solomon more restrained and better
instructed, was his joy, his crown, his successor in his kingdom. This
disease is so hereditary to many parents, loving their children in the flesh,
rather then in the spirit, that the holy Ghost is feign to call upon them more
vehemently, to teach, to instruct, and to correct, as knowing how easily nature
would cool zeal in this kind of duty. Indeed many will set by their wives,
children, and kinsfolks, if they be thriftie, like to become good husbands,
witty and politic, or if they be such as for their gifts can bring some
revenue to their stock, or afford some profit unto them; how deep sinners
soever they be against God, that makes no matter, it little grieueth them:
whereby they bewray their great corruption, that they are neither zealous in
truth of Gods glory, nor lovers aright of their children, because they can be
sharp enough in reprehension if they fail but a little in thriftinesse, and
yet are too too cold in admonition, if they fail never so much in godliness.

Well, let these fleshly zealous men lay to their heart the blind affection of
Heli, 1. Sam. 2. and 3. and 4.
who being the dear child of God, was severely punished of the Lord, for that
he was not zealously affected to punish the gross and foul offenses of his
children: but blessed are they that can forget their own cause, and even with
icopardie of nature can defend the quarrel of God, laboring henceforth to
know no man after the flesh, nor suffering any outward league so to bleare and
dazzle their eyes, as that they should not epsy sin in their dearest friends
to reform it, or that they should not discern virtue in the greatest aliens
to reverence it.

Now whereas many have great courage to rebuke such as either cannot gainsay
them, Zeal opposes it self against the sins of the mighty.
or gainsaying them, cannot prevail against them, here comes another
property of zeal to be spoken of, and that is, that it fears not the face of
the mighty, neither is it dismayed at the looks of the proud and lofty. Such
was the courage of Job, who besides that he made the young men ashamed of their
liberty, and afraid of his gravity, made even the Princes also to stay their
talk, Job. 29.8.9.
and to lay their hands on their mouths. And yet here we must beware of their
hasty zeal, who will not stick to charge the children of God to be without
zeal, if presently and abruptly they rush not into an open reprehension of men
that are mighty in authority, as though no regard of time, place, or persons
were to be had: which opinion many by weakness of judgment defending, find
neither fruit in others, nor comfort in their own consciences, when they do
admonish in that presumptuous manner: for that hunting after feruentnesse
without the spirit of meekness, and casting off all consideration of a godly
opportunity, they rather exasperate then humble the parties admonished: and
they themselves rather depart with confusion and shame, for such posting on
without warrant of wisdom, then with comfort of heart for any duty done.
Neither am I here ignorant how great danger of trouble of mind comes to
many, in that they, being so curious obseruers and waiters of opportunity, do
for some ease of the flesh, under the cloak of this wisdom, altogether leave
off that godly duty. Wherefore, as we affirm that wisdom and love mixed
together do deeply enter into the most prefract and prodigious spirits; so we
mislike their fearful delay of duty, who having a mean occasion offered them
from the Lord, do not zealously and earnestly rebuke sin, though in some
higher personages.

Out of this may issue another frutit of holy zeal, namely when we are zealous
in their behalf who can never recompense us again, and that in defending
their right against oppressors that are craftier and mightier then they. Thus
Job delivered the poor that cried, Job. 29.12.
the fatherless and him that had none to help him. He was the eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame, at whose hands no reward was to be looked for.

Another most excellent and glorious property of pure zeal is, Compassion to
be joined with zeal.
to be humbled in our selves for those sins which we epsy and censure in
others, and so to nourish an holy compassion toward them.

Here is an excellent and infallible difference between godly zeal and
fleshly heat, viz. when our anger for our brothers falling does not feed it
self upon the party, because of our wrath, but upon his sin, because of our
zeal; we still retaining a tender affection toward the person of the
offender. When our Savior Christ went about to heal the man that had the
withered hand, the Pharisees that stood by murmured, because he would heal on
the Sabbath day: hereupon it is said, that he looked about him angerlie, and
yet it is added, that he sorrowed for the hardness of their hearts. Mark here in
this notable example, Mark. 3.5.
how anger and sorrow meet together: Anger, that men should have so little
knowledge of God, and love of there brother: Matthew. 23.37. Luke 19.41.42.
sorrow, that through ignorance they were so foulie ouerseene. So likewise in
zeal of his father, Christ looked on Jerusalem, with an hatred to their sin,
and yet with pity of their misery which was at hand, which appears in that
he wept over it.

Mark this in all the Prophets from time to time, as in Isay, Jeremy,
Ezekicl, Daniel, etc: whether they did not utter their message in heaviness of
spirit: and when they most threatened the people for their sins, observe if
they were not most grieved and feared, least they should be executed upon them.
This is a blessed temperature, thus to mingle grief with zeal: but that is an
ouer-reaching zeal, that feeds more on the person then on the sin.

Wherefore we must crave this special grace at the hand of God by prayer, to
be governed by a right zeal, and that we may truly discern the difference
between fretting anger, and pining zeal. Which if all sorts of men would
labor for, receiving this rule in judgment, and observing it in practice, it
would breed a great deal more conscience in ministers, magistrates, and
masters, when they are to admonish their inferiors. Alas we see many, who
can mangle and martyr a man for some offense, who never learned for conscience
sake to mourn for those infirmities, which so bitterly they inueigh against in
others. The Apostle Paul was of another temper: 2. Cor. 12.21. 1. Cor. 4.
I fear (says he) to the Corinthians, lest when I come, my God abase me
among you, and I shall bewail many of them, which have sinned already, etc: he
knew nothing by himself, (as he tells them in another place) yet could he
not but lament and be humbled for their offenses, who were a part of his
Apostolic charge. So Samuel, in the zeal of Gods glory, spares not flatly to
tell Saul of his sin, notwithstanding his great authority: 1. Sam. 15.35.
and yet in love and compassion to his person, he was always bent to lament
Saul's case, and earnestly to pray for him, till the Lord forbad him to do so
any longer. 1. Sam. 16.1.

If we could keep this golden mixture, we should stop the mouths of the
adversaries, who accuse us to be full of rancour and malice, if we be angry
as enemies to their sin, but grieved in that for sin they are become
enemies to God.

Further, we must know, True zeal makes men desirous of admonition.
and that not only of our superiors, which is an easy thing, because there
we must of necessity yield: but also of our inferiors, whom we may seem to
contemn. All men will grant, that a child ought willingly to be admonished
of his father, or a servant of his master: but few will in practice give
this, that a father should listen to the advertisement of his son, or that a
master should receive an admonition of his servant. Howbeit Job says, he
durst not contemn the judgment of his servant or of his maid, Job. 30.13.
when they did contend with him, because in a duty of piety, he looked to
them, not as servants, but as brethren; he looked not to the speaker only,
which in respect of his calling was his inferior, but unto the things spoken
in the ordinance of God, unto whom Job himself was an inferior, and before
whom he knew there was no respect of persons.

Howbeit to correct the preposterous boldness of some, we add thus much,
that inferiors must rather advise than admonish: advertise rather then
reprehend their superiors, that so still they may offer their pure zeal of
the glory of God in unfeigned humility, lest through their corrupt zeal, they
do not only not profit their superiors, but most justly exasperate them
against them.

Another rule is, We must be most fervent in Gods causes
but hot and fervent in Gods causes. Many can be as hot as fire in their
own private matters, who are as cold as ice in things that concern Gods
honor and glory.

But it was otherwise with Moses: When any private wrong was offered unto him
by the Israelites, he was meek as a lamb, and would with wisdom speak
mildly unto them to pacify them, and pray earnestly unto God to pardon them:
but when they fell to Idolatry, and worshipped the golden calfe, (a matter
which nearly concerned the glory of God) his wrath waxed hot, Exodus 32.19.20.
and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them in pieces, and burnt
the calfe in the fire, and ground it to powder, and made them drink of it,
being strewed upon the water; and after caused a great number of the principal
doers in this wickedness to be slain by the sword. This also is the
commendation of the Church of Ephesus, that they had much patience, and yet
could not forbear those which were evil, Revel. 2.2.
but examined them which said they were Apostles, and found them liars.

This rule well observed, would sow up the lips of the adversaries, who though
for a time they think us to be cholloricke, and men out of our wits, madly
revenging our private affections, yet one day they should confess, that we
sought not our own commodity, but Gods most precious glory.

And to stretch this examination of our hearts one degree further, let us
beware of that corruption, which, springing from self-love, will give us leave
to rejoice in good things, so long as they be in our selves, but repineth at
the sight of them in others: which will permit us to be grieved at evil things
in our selves, and yet make us to rejoice to see the same in others.

True zeal (having Gods glory for the object thereof) loves good wheresoever,
and in whomsoever it is: true zeal hates sin wheresoever and in whomsoever.
True zeal loves friends as they be Gods friends: true zeal hates
adversaries, so far as they be Gods adversaries: true zeal loves a good
thing in the most professed enemy: true zeal hates sin in the most assured
friend.

If we be persuaded that our enemies be Gods children, howsoever we disagree
in some particulars, yet we must swallow up many private injuries, and more
rejoice in them as they be Gods servants, then be grieved at them, as they have
iniuried us.

Indeed true Zeal is most grieved at the sins of the godly, because so much
are their sins more grievous then the sins of others, by how much they came
nearer to the image of God then others.

The last rule is, Zeal must be constant in all estates.
We must especially look to that whereunto we are most ready, that is,
whether we be more zealous in prosperity, and fall away in adversity; or
whether we be more fervent in affliction, and ouer-whelmed in abundance:
whether by the one we are not puffed up with security and secret pride, and
whether by the other we be not too far abased and discouraged; or, which is
worst of all, quite driven out of the way: for many in time of peace are
religious, who seeing persecution to follow the Gospel, Luke. 8.13.
begin (like those that are compared to stony ground) top step back, and at
last utterly to renounce their former profession.

Others so long as they may have credit by embracing the Gospel, will seem to
go far; but when discredit comes, they forsake all: contrary to the
practice of David, who says, Psalm. 119.61. Verse. 161.
The bands of the wicked have robbed me, yet have I not forgotten thy Law.

And again,

Princes did persecute me without cause, Verse 141.
but mine heart stood in awe of thy Word.

And for disgrace he says,

I am small and despised, Verse. 141.
yet do I not forget thy Word.

Others on the contrary part, so long as God exercises them with any cross,
are zealous professors, who being set alost, and coming once unto promotion,
begin to grow secure and careflesse of all duties toward God or men, as is to
be seen in the Israelites from time to time.

We see many in time of their misery to be much humbled; Psalm. 68.34. etc.
Iudger.
and whiles they want livings and preferments, we see both Preachers and people
in outward appearance very godly, who having obtained that which they sought
for, have their zeal utterly choked.

Do not many pray for the continuance of the peace of the Gospel, that they
themselves might continue in peace and prosperity? Do not many mourn in the
adversity of the Gospel, because they are grieved for their own adversity!
Oh great corruption of our hearts! Oh bottomless pit of hypocrisy! If we were
ashamed that we are no more grounded on the word, and that we can be no nore
holy and upright in our hearts, surely the Lord will so govern us, that he
would not suffer either prosperity to quench our zeal, or adversity to
discourage our hearts.

This is then our trial herein, if when we are in greatest prosperity, we can
mourn with them that mourn in the Lord; and when we are in greatest
adversity, we can rejoice with them that rejoice in Christ.

This is a sure token we love not the Gospel, nor favor the word, because
we have a love to prosperity, neither are zealous to see the word contemned,
because we have an hatred of adversity. Daniel concerning outward things was
an happy man, as being near to the Crown: and yet when he saw the God of
Isreal's glory to be defaced, and his servants and services to be trodden under
foot, he could content himself with nothing so much, as with fasting,
weeping, and prayer. Dan. 9.


And Paul on the other side being in bonds for the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and concerning his outward man in a miserable case, rejoiced greatly, and was
as it were revived when he heard that the Gospel flourished, and that the
faith and love of the Saints was still continued. 1 Thessalonians. 3.6.7.8.
This zeal should we much labor for, that in all estates we might be rightly
affected toward God and men.

FINIS.

