C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

royal blazon or coat of arms By the King.
A Proclamation against the disorderly Transporting His Majesty's Subjects to
the Plantations within the parts of America.
THe Kings most Excellent MAJESTY being informed that great numbers of His
Subjects have bin, and are every year transported into those parts of America,
which have been granted by Patent to several persons, and there settle
themselves, some of them with their families and whole estates: amongst which
numbers there are also many idle and refractory humors, whose only or
principal end is to live as much as they can without the reach of authority:
His Majesty having taken the premises into consideration, is minded to
restrain for the time to come such promiscuous and disorderly departing out of
the Realm; And does therefore straightly charge and command all and every the
Officers and Ministers of his several Ports in England, Wales, and Barwick,
That they do not hereafter permit or suffer any persons, being Subsidy men,
or of the value of Subsidy men, to embarque themselves in any of the said
Ports, or the members thereof, for any of the said Plantations, without License
from His Majesty's Commissioners for Plantations first had and obtained in that
behalf; Nor that they admit to be embarked any persons under the degree or
value of Subsidy-men, without an Attestation or Certificate from two Justices
of the Peace living next the place where the party last of all, or lately then
before dwelt, that he has taken the Oaths of Supremacy, and Allegiance, and
like Testimony from the Minister of the Parish of his conversation and
conformity to the Orders and discipline of the Church of England. And further
His Majesty's express will and pleasure is* That the Officers and Ministers of
his said several Ports, and the Members thereof, do return to His Majesty's
said Commissioners for Plantations every half year a particular and perfect*
List of the names and qualities of all such persons as shall from time to time
be embarked in any of the said Ports for any of the said Plantations. And of
these His Majesty's Royal Commands, all the Officers and Ministers of His said
Ports, and the Members thereof are to take care, as they will answer the
neglect thereof at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the last day of April, in the thirteenth
year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1637.


