royal blazon or coat of arms By the King.
A Proclamation for restraint of excessive Carriages, to the destruction of the
High VVayes.
WHereas in the Reign of Our most dear and Royal Father, King JAMES of
blessed memory, and since Our access to the Crown, several Proclamations
have been published for the restraint of excessive Carriages by common
Carriers or others, to the destruction of the High Ways of this Realm; and
yet We find by daily experience, those great abuses are still continued and
increased; whereby if timely remedy be not provided, those public Nusances are
like to hinder much the general commerce of Our people, and become
vnrepaireable, without excessive charge and burden to the Country. We
therefore, by the advice of the Lords and others of Our Privy Council, do
hereby straightly charge and command, that from henceforth no common Carrier,
nor other person whatsoever, upon the common High Ways do go or travail
with any Wagon, Weyne, Cart, or Carriage, whereon is or shall be laden at once
above twenty hundred weight; Nor that for the draught or carrying thereof,
there be used above five horses, or above four Oxen and two horses, or above
six Oxen without horses at any one time, to the end that by these means the
occasion of such excessive carriages may be prevented. All which We do
straightly charge and command to be duly observed, upon pain of Our heavy
indignation, and such other penalties and punishments, as by the Laws or
Statutes of this Our Realm, or otherwise, may be inflicted upon the Offenders
therein.

And because such extraordinary Carriages as of late years have been used,
have heretofore by the opinion of Our Judges been held to be general
Nusances, and therefore the same ought by the Law to be severely punished, as
that wherein the public has an interest: We do straightly charge and command
all Our Judges and Justices, that in their several places they do carefully
and diligently enquire of all these Offenses; and as much as in them lies, do
punish the Offenders.

And We do hereby admonish, and straightly charge and command all those whom
it may concern, that they be careful from time to time to repair and
maintain the High Ways, Bridges, and Causeys throughout this Our Realm,
according to Our Laws and Statutes in that behalf, as they tender Our
pleasure, and will answer the contrary at their perils.

And because there may be no pretense for any to excuse themselves, We
straightly require and charge, that Information from time to time be given to
Our Attorney general, of obstinate and notorious Offenders against this Our
Royal command, which so much imports the common good and ease of Our people;
To the end, that by a legal course they may be proceeded with, and receive
such punishment as their contempts and offenses shall deserve.

And lastly, We do hereby will and require all Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes,
Justices of peace, and all other Our Officers and Ministers in all Our Counties
and places whatsoever within this Our Realm, whom it may concern, that they
use their uttermost endeavor for discovery and punishment of all Offenses and
Offenders against this Our pleasure and Royal commandment.

Given at the Court at Hampton Court, the first day of November, in the
eleventh year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1635.


