The copy of the Queens highness Commission.
ELizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Irelande,
defendour of the faith. etc.
To all and singular our Justices of peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes,
Constables, and other our officers, of what estate, degree, or condition he or
they be, and to every of them, greetyng.
Whereas in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the.xxxiii. year of the
reign of our late father of worthy memory, king Henry the eight, one act or
statute was then and there made for the mayntenaunce of artillery, and
debarryng of unlawful games: By the which good statute, amongst many other
things, it was provided, that the fathers, governors, and masters of the
youth of this our Realm, should in diverse and sundry sorts, train and bring
up their youth in shootyng in the long bow, and should have for that purpose
several bows and arrows, in number and quantity according to their ages and
years, upon such pain and penalty as is expressed in the said statute: as by
the same statute more at large it does and may appear. And being given to
understand, that for lack of due search whether every person or persons in
form abouesayde have bow and arrows according to the tenor of the said
act, the said good statute is in that behalf in the most parts of this our
Realm utterly forgotten, and not accomplisshed. We have therefore thought it
good for diverse good considerations us specially mouyng, to nominate, assign,
and appoint our well-beloved Subjects A B. C D. and every of them to give
diligent and good attendaunce to the execution as well of that part and branch
of the said Statute, as also to all and every other matter and thing contained
in the same: geuyng them and every of them full power and authority by virtue
of these presents, in our name, not only from time to time as often as need
shall require, to make due and lawful search in every place within our County
of S. as well within liberties as without, as well for such as use unlawful
games, as also for such as keep houses or alleys for unlawful games: and also
whether every several person or persons for him self, his servants, and
other youth in his or their several houses, have sufficient furnitute and
provision of bow and arrows, and have and do use and occupy the same
according to the true meaning of the said statute. The which bow and arrows
shall be brought to some convenient place or places, within the several towns
and parishes where such parties dwell, by the discretion of you our said
Justices or other officers aforesaid, there to be viewed and seen by our said
subjects above named: but also upon cause necessary, and where need shall be,
to require you and every of you our said Justices or other officers inhabityng
or dwelling within the said County, as well within liberties as without, to
aid and assist them and every of them in doing and executyng the premises.
Upon which search, view, and examination by our said subjects above named, or
any of them if there shall be found any person or persons offendyng in any the
premises contrary to the form of the said statute: then our pleasure is,
that such of our said subjects above rehearsed as shall find the said
offenses, shall present the same, with the names and dwelling places of all and
every person so offendyng, and the time and continuance of their said
several offenses, in writing, under their hands and seals before you our
said Justices, at the general Sessions of the peace to be holden within the
said County next after the fyndyng of the said defaultes: To the intent that
you may thereupon certify us into our court of Chauncerie, whereby we may
further proceed against such offenders, as shall be most agreeable to the order
of our laws provided in that behalf. Wherefore we will and command you our
said Justices and other officers, and every of our subjects appointed to the
service of these presents, to give faithful and good attendaunce to the
execution of this our Commission in all things as appertains accordyngly. In
witness whereof, we have caused these our letters to be made patentes.

Witness our self. etc. Per ipsam Reginam.

Printed at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Jugge and John Cawood,
printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


