A CATALOGVE OF THE DVKES, MARquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Barons, that
sit in this Parliament,

BEGVN AT WESTMINSTER the 3. of November, 1640.

LONDON, Printed for Tho: Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign
of the flying Horse, between Britains Bursse, and York House. 1640.

A CATALOGVE OF THE DVKES, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Barons, that
sit in this PARLIAMENT.
GEorge Villiers, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Buckingham, and Coventry,
Viscount Villiers, Baron of Whadden, K. James Infra aetatem. John Paulet
Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire* Baron St. John of Basing. Created
Marquess of Winchester, in Anno quinto, Edward 6. Thomas Howard Earl of
Arundell, and Surrey, priemere Earl, and Earl Marshall of England, Baron
Howard, Mowbray, Segrave, Brewes, De Gower, Fitz-Alan, Clun. Oswaldestre,
Matravers, and Graystock, Knight of the Garter, in H. the 2. was created Earl
of Arundell, Lord high Steward. Awbery Vere, Earl of Oxford, Baron Bulbeck,
Samford, Escales and Badlesmere, created Earl of Oxford, in H. the 2. Infra
etatem. Algernon Percy, Earl of Northumberland Baron Percy, Lucy Poynings,
Fitz-paine, and Brion Latimer, and Knight of the Garter, created Earl of
Northumberland, Anno primo R. 2. Lord high Admiral of England. John Talbot,
Earl of Shrewesbury, Washford and Waterford, Lord Talbot, Cominde, Badnough,
Valence, Montchensie, Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Gilford of Brimfeild,
Lord Clifford of Corsham, Furnivale, Verdon, and Lovetoft, created Earl of
Shrewesbury in Anno 20. H. 6. Anthony Gray, Earl of Kent, Lord Gray of Ruthin,
Hastings, and Weisford. Edw. 4. William Stanley Earl of Derby, Lord Stanley,
Strange of Knocking, and of the I Will of man, Knight of the Garter, created Earl
of Derby, in Anno primo, H. 7. Henry Somerset, Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert
of Ragland, Chepstone, and Gower, created Earl of Worcester in Anno 5. H. 8.
George Manners, Earl of Rutland, Lord Ros of Hamlake, Belvoir, and Trusbut,
created Earl of Rutland, in Anno 17. H. 8. Francis Cliford, Earl of
Cumberland, Lord Cliford of Sckipton, Westmerland, Bromslet, Vipont, and Vesey,
created Earl of Cumberland, in Anno 17, H. 8. Edward Radcliffe, Earl of
Sussex, Viscount Fitzwater, Lord Egremont and Burnell, created Earl of Sussex,
H. 8. Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntington, Baron Hastings, Hunger-ford, Homet,
Botreaulx, Mulis, Molins, and Peverell, creared Earl of Huntington, in Anno
21. H. 8. Henry Bourchier, Earl of Bath, and Lord Fitzwaren, created in the
28. year of H. 8. Earl of Bath. Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of South-hampton,
and Baron Wriothesley of Tich-field, created primoted Edward. 6. Francis
Russell, Earl of Bedford, Lord Russell of Tavestock, and Lord Russell of
Thornough, created Earl of Bedford, Anno primo, Ed. 6. Philip Herbert, Earl
of Pembroke and Montgomery, Baron Herbert of Cardiffe and Shirland, Lord Parre,
and Roos of Kendall, Lord Fizhue, Marmion, and St. Quinton, Lord Chamberlain
of his Majesty's Household, and Knight of the Garter, created Earl of Pembroke,
in Anno quinto Ed. 6. William Seymour, Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp,
and Baron Seymour, created Earl o^ Hartford, Anno 29. H. 8. et primo Eliza.
Robert Deveroux, Earl of Essex, and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of
Chartley, Bourchier and Lovaine, created Earl of Essex, Anno 14. Eliza.
Theophilus Fine, Earl of Lincoln, and Lord Clinton, created Earl of
Lincoln, 14. Eliza. Charles Howard, Earl of Notingham, and Lord Howard of
Effingham, created Earl of Notingham, in 39. Eliza.
Earls made since the first of King. JAMES.
James Howard, Earl of Suffolk, Lord Howard of Walden. Edward Sacvile, Earl
of Dorset, and Baron Buckhurst, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Chamberlain to
the Queens Majesty. William Cecill, Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Cramborne,
and Baron Cecill of Essinden, Knight of the Garter. David Gecill Earl of
Exeter, Baron Burley. Robert Carre Earl of Somerset, Viscount Rochester, and
Baron of Branspath, Knight of the Gar. John Egerton, Earl of Bridgwater,
Viscount Brackley, and Baron Ellesmere, Lord President of Whales. Robert
Sidney, Earl of Leicester, Viscount Lisle, Baron Sidney of Ponshurst. Spencer
Compton Earl of Northampton, Baron Compton of Compton. Robert Rich Earl of
Warwick, and Lord Rich of Leeze. William Cavendish, Earl of Devonshire, and
Baron Cavendish of Hardwick. James Hamilton Earl of Cambridge, Master of the
Horse to his Majesty, Knight of the Garter. James Stuart Earl of March, Baron
of Leighton, Knight of the Garter. James Hay, Earl of Carlisle, Viscount
Doncaster, Lord Hay of Sanley William Fielding Earl of Denbigh, Viscount
Fielding, and Baron of Newnhampadox. John Digby Earl of Bristoll, and Baron
Digby of Shirborne. Lionell Cranfield Earl of Middlesex, and Baron Cranfield
of Cranfield. Charles Villiers Earl of Anglesey, Lord Daventry, Infra aetatem.
Henry Rich Earl of Holland, Baron Kensington, of Kensington, and Knight of the
Garter. John Hollis, Earl of Clare, Lord Houghton of Houghton. Oliver St.
John, Earl of Bullingbrooke, Lord St. John of Bletso. Mildmay Fane Earl of
Westmerland, Lord le De Spencer and Burghwash.
Earls made since the first of King CHARLES.
Henry Montague Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandevile, and Kymbolton, Lord
Privy Seal. Thomas Howard Earl of Barkshire, Viscount Andover, and Lord
Charleton, Knight of the Garter. Thomas Wentworth Earl of Cleveland, Lord
Wentworth of Nettlested. Edmond Sheffield, Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Sheffield of
Butterwike, and Knight of the Garter. Henry Danvers, Earl of Danby, Lord
Danvers of Dantsey, Knight of the Garter. Robert Carry, Earl of Monmouth, Lord
Carry of Lepington. James Ley Earl of Marleburgh, and Lord Ley of Ley. John
Savage, Earl of Rivers, Viscount Colchester, and Rock Savage, and Lord Darcy
of Chich. Robert Bartu Earl of Lindsey, and Lord Willoughby, Beak and Eresby,
Lord great, Chamberlain Knight of the Garter. William Cavendish Earl of
New Castle, Viscount Mansfield, Lord Boulfover and Ogle. Henry Carry, Earl of
Dover, Viscount Rochford, and Lord Hunsdon. John Mordant, Earl of
Peterborough, Lord Mordant of Turvey. Henry Gray, Earl of Stanford, Lord Gray
of Groby. Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsey, and Viscount Maidstone. Infra
aetatem. Robert Perpoint, Earl of Kingston upon Hull. Viscount Newarke upon
Trent, and Lord Perpoint of Holmes Perpoint. Robert Dormere, Earl of
Carnarvan, Viscount Ascot, and Lord Dormere of Wing. Mount Joy Blunt, Earl of
Newport, Lord Mount-Ioy of Thurveston Philip Stanhop, Earl of Chesterfield,
and Lord Stanhop of Shelford. John Tufton Earl of the I Will of Thanet, and Lord
Tufton of Tufton. Vlicke de Burgh Earl of Saint Albans, Viscount Tunbridge,
and Baron of Somerhill. Jerome Weston, Earl of Portland, Lord Weston of
Neyland. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, Viscount Wentworth, Baron
Wentworth of Wentworth Wood-house, New March and Oversley, Raby, Lord
Lieutenant of the Realm of Ireland.
Viscounts.
Francis Brown, Viscount Montague of Cowdrey.
Viscounts made by King JAMES.
John Villiers Viscount Purbecke, Lord of Stokepoges, William Fines Viscount
Sey and Seal, Lord Sey and Seal.
Viscounts made by King CHARLES.
Edward Conway, Viscount Conway, and Killultagh, and Baron Conway of Ragley.
Edward Noell Viscount Camden, and Baron Noell of Ridlington. William Howard
Viscount and Baron Stafford.
Bishops.
WIlliam Laud Archbishop of Canterbury his grace. Archbiwop of York his
Grace. William Iuxon Bishop of London and Lord high Treasurer of England.
Thomas Morton Bishop of Durham. Walter Curle Bishop of Winchester. John
Thornburgh Bishop of Worcester. John Bridgeman Bishop of Chester. John Williams
Bishop of Lincoln. John Davenant Bishop of Salisbury. Robert Wright Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield. Godfrey Goodman Bishop of Gloucester. Joseph Hall Bishop
of Exceter. Richard Montagu Bishop of Norwich. Barnabas Potter Bishop of
Carlisle. John Owen of Saint Afaph. William Pierce Bishop of Bath and Wells.
John Bancroft Bishop of Oxford. George Coke Bishop of Hereford. Matthew Wren
Bishop of Ely, Deane of his Majesty's Chapel Royal. Roger Manwaring Bish. of
S. David's had no writ. Robert Skinner Bishop of Bristow. William Roberts Bishop
of Bangor. John Warner Bishop of Rochester. Brian Duppa Bishop of Chichester.
John Towers Bishop of Peterborough. Morgan Owen Bishop of Landaffe.
Barons.
Henry Howard, Lord Mowbray, Eldest son of Thomas Earl of Arundell and
Surrey Multravers. Henry Clifford, Lord Clifford, only Son of Francis Earl of
Cumberland. Henry Nevill, Lord Abergavenny, Ric. 2. James Touchet Lord Awdeley
of Highleigh, Ed 1. James Stanley, Lord strange, eldest son of William Earl of
Derby. Charles West, Lord Delaware, infra aetatem. Ed. 1. Mountague Bartu. Lord
of Eresby, eldest son of Robert Earl of Lindsey. Ed. 2. George Barkley, Lord
Barkley of Barkley Castle. Hen. 5. Henry Parker, Lord Morley and Montegle, Hen.
5. Richard Lennard, Lord Dacres of Hurstmonseux. Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley of
Dudley Castle. Hen. 6. Edward Stourton, Lord Stourton of Stourton. Ferdinando
Lord Hastings, e^dest son of Henry Earl of Huntington. 4. Edw. the 4. Edward
Vaux, Lord Vaux of Harrowden. H. 6. Thomas Windsor, L. Windsor of Stanwell.
Hen. 8. Thomas Lord Wentworth of Nettlested, Hen. 8. only son of Thomas Earl
of Cleveland. Thomas Cromwell, Lord Cromwell of Ockham. Hen. 8. William Eure,
Lord Eure of Whitton. Hen. 8. Philip wharton, L. Wharton of Wharton, H. 8.
William Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham. Ed. 6. William Paget, Lord Paget
of Beaudesert. Ed. 6. Dudley North, Lord North of Carthlagel. Q. M. George
Brudges, Lord Shandoes of Sudley, Q. M. John Carry, Lord Hunsdon, son to Henry
Carry Earl of Dover, Q. Eli.
Barons made by King JAMES.
William Peter, Lord Peter of Writtell, Infra aetatem. Dutton Gerard, Lord
Gerard of Gerards Bromley. Infra aetatem. William Spencer, Lord Spencer of
Wormleighton. Infra aetatem. Charles Stanhop, Lord Stanhop of Harrington.
Thomas Arundell, Lord Arundell of Wardour. Christopher Roper, Lord Tenham of
Tenham, Infra aetatem. Edward Montague, Lord of Kimbolont, eldest son of Henry
Earl of Manchester. Basil Fielding, L. of Newnham Paddocks, eldest son of
William Earl of Denbigh. Robert Grevill, Lord brook of Beaucham-Court. Edward
Montague, Lord Montague of Boughton. Charles Howard, Lord Howard of Charlton.
William Gray, Lord Gray of Warke. Francis Leake, Lord Danecourt of Sutton. John
Roberts, Lord Roberts of Truro.
Barons made by King CHARLES.
William Craven, Lord Craven of Hamsteed Marshall. Thomas Bellasise, Lord
Fauconberge of Yarom. John Lovelace, Lord Lovelace of Hurley. John Pawlet, Lord
Pawlet of Hinton St. George. William Harvey, Lord Harvey of Kidbrooke. Thomas
Brudenell, Lord Brudenell of Stanton. William Maynard, Lord Maynard of
Estaynes. Thomas Coventry, Lord Coventry of Alesborough. Edward Howard, Lord
Howard of Estcrick. George Goring Lord Goring of Hustperpoint. John Mohun, Lord
Mohun of Okehampton. Thomas Savill, Lord Savill of Pomfret. John Butler, Lord
Butler of Bramfield. Francis Leigh; Lord Dunsmore. William Herbert, Lord Powys
of Powys. Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert of Chierbury. Francis Contington, Lord
Cottington of Hanworth, Master of the Court of Wards, and Chancellor of the
Exchequer. John Finch; Lord Finch, Baron of Fordwich Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England.
Some Lords as privy Counselors and not Pears of this Kingdom called
thither for their assistance sit upon Woll-sackes.
Richard Boil Earl of Cork, of his Majesty's Privy Counsel. Charles
Wilmot, Viscount Wilmot of Athlone, of his Majesty's Privy Counsel. Edward
Barret, Lord Newburge Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and of his Majesty's
Privy Counsel. The Kings Learned Judges. The Master of the Rowles. The four
Masters of the Chancery, their attending according to the Direction of the Lo.
Keeper of the great Seal of England. The Kings learned Council. His Serjants
at Law. His Attorney General.
The Officers of the higher House of Parliament.
The Clarke of the Crown of Chanceri^. The Clarke of the Parliament. The
Usher. The Yeoman Usher.
FINIS.

