By the Queen.
WHere of late time there has been a certain stay and intermission of the
ancient free intercourse for marchaundise, betwixt this Realm and the low
Countries belongyng to the King of Spain the Queen's Majesty's good brother,
and for that also certain differences have arysen concerning some ordinances
pretended to be now of late years made on either part, prejudicial to the
ancient vsages of the said intercourse: Her Majesty wylleth all persons to
understand, that by reason of the sincere and effectual amity that is
betwixt her Majesty and the said King her good brother and confederat, both
their Majesty's are accorded, that the intercourse of marchaundise betwixt this
Realm and the said low Countries, shall upon the first day of January,
otherwise called Newyeres day, and from thence, be and continue free, open,
and as mutual, as it was immediately before the late interchangeable stays and
prohibitions thereof. And likewise that such new ordinances as have been made
on either part sense the first of January in the first year of the Queen's
Majesty's reign, by the which the former usage of the intercourse have been or
may be impeched or interrupted, shall remain on both sides suspended from
execution, until their Majesty's shall by order of certain their faithful
and trusty counselors, take further order therein by way of a colloquy, to be
shortly had by their directions. And therefore the Queen's most excellent
Majesty, by this Proclamation, charge and commands all manner her
officers, ministers, and other her subjects, having charge upon the Sea, or in
any Port, Haven, or Creke, of her dominions, to suffer all manner of persons,
from the beginning of the first of January, to carry out of this her Majesty's
Realm into any parts of the said low Countries, or to bring into any part
of this Realm from the said low Countries, any manner of goods, wares,
marchaundises, handycraftes works, or victuels, in like manner and sort, as the
same might have been done the said first day of January, in the said first year
of the reign of her Majesty. And that no person, directly or indirectly, do
attempt to molest by arrest or otherwise, any other for the carrying out or
bryngyng in, as above is said, of any manner of thing, by color of any such
ordinance as has been made sense the said first day of January, in the said
first year of the reign of her Majesty, nor put in execution any of the said
ordinances being now for the causes abouesayde suspended, upon pain of
punishment due to such as shall contemn her Majesty's express commandment
given in causes concerning the amity betwixt her Majesty and other Princes,
her confederates and allies.

Yeuen at her hyghnes palaice of Westminster, the.xxix. of December, in the
seventh year of her Majesty's reign. 1564.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


