By the King.
A Proclamation concerning Assart lands.
WHereas by our Proclamation given at our Palace of Westminster the xvii. day
of February, in the second year of our Reign of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, We did publish and make it known to our loving Subjects, that for
their Common good and quiet, and for avoiding of chargeable and tedious Suits,
we had by our Commission under the great Seal of England, given full power and
authority unto certain Commissioners in the said Commission mentioned, for
Us, and in our name to bargain, sell and conclude for diverse our Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments called Assarts, Wastes or Purprestures,
which are or were within the limits of some of our Forests, to and with any
person or persons, and their heirs in Fee-ferme, or other estate of
inheritance, with a discharge of the mean profits, as by our said Proclamation
may more at large appear: Whereupon we doubted not but our loving Subjects
whom it did concern, and who have been long in possession of the said Lands at
very low Rates, would have taken care in time to have provided for their own
profit, safety and peace therein. And nevertheless we are of late informed,
that hitherto very few of them have appeared before our said Commissioners to
compound or conclude for any of our said Messuages, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, and was expected, presuming (as it seems) that they may take
their own times and leisure for it, and in the mean time some others never
possessed of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, have in
their default offered to compound and conclude with us for the same. Wherein our
desire is, that the long and ancient possessors of the said Lands, should
herein be preferred before all others.

These are therefore to signify our further pleasure, That all such as be
possessed of any the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, and do
purpose or think good for their own profit, safety and quiet, to compound or
conclude with our said Commissioners for any the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments called Assarts, Wastes, or Purprestures, which are or
were within the limits of any of our Forests or Chases, shall come in and
attend our said Commissioners concerning the same, betwixt this and the first
of October, now next ensuing, otherwise in their default we will dispose
thereof to others as we shall see cause.

Given at our Manor of East-Greenwich the xij. day of May, in the third year
of our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Robert Baker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1605.


