By the King.
Trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well:
Although there be nothing more against our mind then to be drawn into any
course that may breed in our subjects the least doubt of our unwillingness to
throw any burdens upon them, Having already published both by our speeches and
writings, our great desire to avoid it in the whole course of our government:
yet such is our Estate at this time, in regard of great and urgent occasions
fallen and growing daily upon us (in no sort to be eschewed) as we shall be
forced presently to disburse greater sums of money then it is possible for us
to provide by any ordinary means, or to want without great prejudice. Jn which
consideration, seeing no man of any indifferent judgment or understanding, can
either plead ignorance how much woe found the Crown exhausted by the accidents
of Foreign wars, and inward rebellions, Or on the other side does not
observe the visible causes of our daily expense ever since we came into this
Kingdom, We think it needless to rose any more arguments from such a King
to such Subjects: But that as our necessity is the only cause of our Request,
So your love and duty must be the chief motive of your ready performance of
the same. To which woe may further add one thing, which is no less notorious
to the Realm, that since we came to this Estate, no one means or other of
extraordinary help has been affourded us, notwithstanding more
extraordinary occasions of large Expense, one falling on the neck of another
without time or respiration, then ever lighted upon any King of this Realm. A
matter whereof we make not mention as proceeding from the coldness of our
people affections, of whose service and fidelity in the highest points we
have had so clear proof, But rather as a circumstance the better warranting
this course, seeing the ordinary form of Subsidies offered to Princes in
Parliament, carried with it now that inconvenience of burthening the poorer sort
of our people, which we do endeavor to eschew by all the ways we can. You
shall therefore understand, that in this consideration, and in respect of our
opinion of your good mind toward us, howsoever the omission in the former
time to repay some loan, in regard of unexpected violent necessities, might
make a doubtfulnesse now that promise should be kept, we have persuaded
oneselues that you will no way measure our Princely resolution by the precedent
accidents, nor ever doubt of us when we engage that word yet never broken to
any, which now we do hereby give for repayment of whatsoever this Privy
Seal of ours shall assure you. That which we require therefore is, that within
twelve days after the receipt hereof, you will cause the sum of Twenty
pound to be delivered to (...) Charles Cornwallis knt* whom we have appointed
to be our Collector in our County of Norffolk: The loan whereof, we do
desire to be until the four and twenty day of March which shall be in the year
of our Lord God 1605. For assurance whereof, we have directed these our letters
of Privy Seal unto you, which, with the hand of our said Collector
testifying the receipt of the same sum of Twenty pound shall bind us, our
heirs, and successors, for the repaiment thereof, and shall be an immediate
warrant to our Exchequer to pay the same unto you, or your Assigns, upon the
delivery of this our Privy Seal (...) our said Receipt.

Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster the last day of
July, in the second year of our reign (...) Ireland, and of Scotland the
eight and thirtieth. (...)

