By the Queen.
WHere as the Queen's most excellent Majesty by her highness Proclamation in
November last, did apoint and limit the reading of the Lotterie within her
City of London this.x. of January. And by the same did give straight charge
and commandment to all and singular her officers, ministers and subjects
having therein to do, to prepare them selves accordingly, as by the said last
proclamation may appear. Her majesty perceyueth, that of some mystrust or
doubtefull interpretation of the proceedings in the said Lotterie, the first
intention (to have the collection and adventures to have amounted to a certain
mass and sum of money, (wherewith a great number the Adventurers might have been largely benefited, according to a Charte thereof published in August. 1567.)
is not nor can not be accomplished: Whereupon it is thought meet (without any
further, expectation or delay) to proceed to the publishing of the said
Lotterie for so much as is already Collected, and to cause every Aduenturer to
be truly, indifferentely, and ratably answered, according to the mass
Collected, without any indirecte dealyng toward any person. And to the intent
that every person having any interest herein, may understand what in reason
to expecte for his Adventure. It is to be understand to all Adventurers in the
same Lotterie, that the very certain sum of Money Collected, and chargeable
to the same, is a Twelfth part of the whole mass first by the said Charte
appointed, and no more, as by due Certificat and good account thereof (by her
highness Commissioners and Treasurers, being persons of special credit in
that behalf) made, her Majesty is certainly informed. Whereupon all
Adventurers shall be duly answered of their Prises accordyngly after the said
rate: That is to say, To him that shall win the best and greatest Lotte, the
sum of Four Hundred and Sixtene Pounds, Thirtene shillings and Four pence,
which is the just Twelfth part of Five Thousand pounds, before appointed to
have been given, if the whole Sum had been Collected. And so consequently
every person to be answered of the several Prises contained in the said
Charte, after the said Rate.

Gyuyng also to understand, that for the supplying of the full Number first
appointed by the Chart, every person having adventured any one Lotte of the
value of Ten Shillings, shall be admitted to Twelve adventures or hazardes,
after which adventures or hazardes, the said rate of a Twelfth part, shall be
duly answered and paid in ready money. And whosoever has adventured more
than one Lot, after the said rate of Ten Shillings, shall be answered and paid
in like sort: which several adventures, hazardes, or prises growing of the said
Lotterie, shall be duly answered and paid (after the Rate of the said Twelfth
part) according to the appointment and promise contained in the said first
Charte.

And for this purpose, all persons having interest herein, shall and may begin
to give their attendaunce this present Tenth day of January, and so to
continue.

Yeouen at her highness Honor of Hampton Court the ninth day of January.
1568 and in the Eleventh year of her Majesty's most prosperous Reign.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight Rider streate, at
the sign of the Marmayde.

Cum gratia Regiae Maiestatis.


