THREE SERMONS PREACHED BY THAT LEARNED and reverend Divine Doctor EEDES
sometimes Deane of WORCESTER.

For their fitness unto the present time, now published, by ROBERT HORN
Minister of Gods WORD.

The several titles and Texts follow on the next page.

ECCLES. 12.10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that
which was written, was upright, even words of truth.

LONDON: Printed by G. M. for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith, and
are to be sold at the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1627.

The Christians Admission and foundation in Gods household.
The Text. EPHESIANS. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Ye are no more strangers and forreiners,
but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God:

And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone, etc.

The Christians Guide to a wise Conversation.
EPHESIANS. 5.15, 16. Take heed that ye walk circumspectly; not as fools, but
as wise:

Redeeming the time: for the days are evil.

The short prosperity of the wicked, and the Happy estate of the JUST
PSALM. 37.35, 36, 37. I have seen the wicked in great power: and spreading
himself like a green Bay Tree.

Yet he passed away, and lo he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not
be found.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace.

THE PVBLISHER to the READER.
GOOD Reader: the substance of these Sermons was long since preached by a
reverend and learned Deane, Doctor Eedes Deane of Worcester; which being given
me in sundry broken and cast papers after his death, I perused at my times of
leisure; and perceiving they might be of use to many by Printing, I was very
unwilling to engrose them for private use from public benefit. And that made
me thus to set them together as I could, with some supply where any thing was
wanting, and where the reading was troublesome, with some small alteration.
Thou have them (therefore) not altogether as they were preached, but as I could
copy them from the Authors first lines. They concern the times we live in as
directly and particularly as if they had bin set unto them by the Preacher. If
any thing, here set down, may (any whit) further thy walking in the way of
grace, I think my labor this way well paid for. God bless thy reading in
this, and other good Books, specially in the Book of God, for which I pray,
who am

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, ROBERT HORN.

THE CHRISTIANS ADMISSION into the household of GOD, and his foundation in the
same.
EPHESIANS. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Ye are no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God:

And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone,

In whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in
the Lord:

In whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God through the
spirit.


YE are no more strangers and forreiners, but Citizens, etc. Great was the
goodness of God in creating, great in continuing the world for man's sake: his
power in the one, was more then the wisest of the world could express: his
love in the other, is more then the best of Christians can conceive: but
neither was the creation of the world more then the election of his Church; nor
the continuing of the one, which is great, beyond the preservation of the
other, which is greatest. It was much that he created the world of nothing,
more that he redeemed it of nothing: the one he did for us, when we were his
own, and that without cost: the other, when we were his enemies, but not
without the death of his only son. Therefore, how much the greater a benefit
it was that God should save us, then that he should make us, that we should be
borne anew, then that we should be borne; so much the better it were for us not
to be borne, then not to be chosen; and not to be, then not to be of his
Church. Wherein, howsoever Jacob had a privilege, and Judah the prerogative;
so that they were chosen as the Lilly before the flowers of the field, as the
sheep before all the beasts of the earth, as the Vine before all the trees of
the Forest, as the Dove before all the birds of the air, and as his peculiare
people before all the Nations of the world: yet was the benefit to the Gentiles
no less, and the mercy of God, to them, a great deal more, that they which
were no people should be called a holy people, and which were wild by nature,
should by grace, become natural and legitimate branches in the true Olive,
which is the Church of God.

For which cause the Apostle, in this place, commends to the Ephesians, and,
in them, to us, not only the estate of their calling in Christ, but the ground
and end thereof in him. In the speaking whereof, that I go no farther then the
words lead me; three things may well and chiefly be observed: as first, the
calling of the Gentiles: secondly, their foundation, being called: and thirdly,
their building up. In their calling we are to consider from whence, and to
what they were called: in their foundation, by whom, and upon whom they were
laid: and in their building up, how and to what end they were built. They were
called from being strangers and forreiners, to be citizens with the Saints, and
of the household of God. They were laid by the Prophets, and Apostles, upon
Christ: and they did grow; for the manner, as coupled together, and for the
end, to be a holy Temple in the Lord, and the habitation of God by the spirit.

For the first: there is no one thing that does more move a man, to consider
what he is, then to remember what he was. So great a light to our judgments,
does this light of comparing our selves, with our selves, bring, and so deep
an impression in our hearts, does the conscience of that which is past being
set to the present, make. For, as there is no misery greater, then to have
been happy: so is it not the least part of happiness to remember that we have
been miserable. Adam, the better he was in Paradise, the worse he was out:
contrarily, the Gentiles, the further they were from the Covenant promise, the
greater was their benefit in it. And therefore, as the Church of Ephesus was
bidden to remember from whence she was fallen, Apoc. 2.5. that, remembering her
great fall, she might sorrow, and be more ashamed, then if she had never been
mounted so high, in that love, which the Apostle (there) calls her first
love, verse 4. so (here) the Ephesians are bidden to remember, to what they
were raised, as from being Gentiles in the flesh, and strangers in Israel, to
be worshippers in spirit, and of the Israel of God, that they might think
more highly of that excellent estate, to which they were called, and in him
that called them, endeavor to walk more worthy of it. For although health be
welcome to all men, yet to them it is ever most welcome, that have been most
sick, and though peace be ever seasonable, yet never more then after War: so
the grace of God, though it cannot come amiss to any; yet where sin has
abounded, there it abounds much more. Romans 5.20.

And (therefore) not without good cause, the Apostle, in this place, describing
the vocation of the Gentiles, does (as also in the beginning of the Chapter)
put them first in mind of that estate from which they were called, not to
look back, as Lots wife to Sodom: Genesis 19. and some Israelites to the
fleshpots of Egypt; but that, by looking into the misery of their first soul
condition, they might be brought the sooner to a loathing of it; and in the
baseness of their old man, might more perfitly see and admire the excellent
worthiness, of their new estate in Christ. Further, if it pleased God, when
he had brought his people out of Egypt, and was about to bring them into
Canaan, to make that their delivery out of Egypt so great a benefit, as that at
the giving of the Law, he took it for a piece of his style, saying; I the
Lord that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: and if afterward, having
brought them out of Babylon, he would be remembered by the name of that God,
that delivered them from the land of the North, that is, from the Babylonian
yoke, as being a work of so great salvation. Ier. 16.15. How can it be, but
that he would have us, who are called to a better inheritance, and from greater
dangers, to be so much the more mindful of our old estate, by how much we
are delivered from a blacker darkness then that of Egypt, and a more terrible
prison, then that of Babylon? For besides the natural infection of our first
parents, whereby (with all mankind) our souls and bodies were made the
vessels of corruption, and our persons the bond-slaues of sin; and besides
that, by them, the image of God was defaced in us, and we deprived of all good
thereby, it was added, in the secret, but just judgment of God, to this misery
of our lost estate, that our father should be an Amorite, and our mother an
Hittite: that, in our nativity, when we were borne, our navel should not be
cut: that, no eye should pity us, and that we should be cast out in the open
field, to the contempt of our person, in the day that we were borne. Ezech.
16.3, 4, 5. Also that we should be as the Mountains of Gilboa, upon which
must neither come deaw, nor rain; 2 Samuel 1.21. that is, neither deaw of grace,
nor rain of righteousness. For, (almost) for four thousand years, none of
the fatness of Heaven fell upon the soil of the Gentiles; a little sprinkling
there was upon Melchisedech, Iethro, Job, the people of Niniue, and some
others, but the fruitful rain fell upon the fields of Israel, and God watered
his own garden only, not voutchsafing any of his influences to the common
fields of the Heathen. And they (generally) sat in darkness, save that here
and there God opened the eyes, now of one, and then of another, who saw the
light, though more darkely, then the children of the light did. The table was
for Israelites, and not for Canaanites; yet some crummes fell from the table of
the children, at one time, to a Canaanite a woman of singular faith, at another
time to a woman, converted at Jacobs well, and otherwhiles to sundry others,
both men and women, strangers from the knowledge, and love of the true God;
nevertheless, there were not many such, till the wall of partition was broken
down, and men might as easily have numbered them, as a man may a poor man's
sheep. All the rest of the Heathen were in palpable darkness, and ignorance,
given up to strange lusts, and alienes from the promise of life.

Which though they did least feel, that had most cause, (because as every man
is furthest from the knowledge of that happiness which is in Christ, the
further he is from the acknowledging of his own great misery without him,)
yet there was no man given up to so reprobate a mind, but that by the Divine
light of his dark nature, he might perceive and see, that he wanted fig
leaves to cover his nakedness, knowledge to direct him in his blind way,
ability to strengthen him in his weak apprehensions, and that in himself (as
of himself) it were an endless labor to seek for, and find true
happiness. And those wants of nature, as they made them by nature fearful,
so did their fear engender in them a kind of reverence, to worship whatsoever
they thought was able to help them, as not only the Sun and Moon (which
they made their Gods) but whatsoever was more unworthy the name of God.

We read of Columbus, a trauailer, that when in the West Indyes he could not
obtain victuals for his army, of a certain people that worshipped the Moon,
he used this stratageme. Foreseeing by Astronomy that an eclipse would
shortly be, he threatened them, that unless they did relieve his army by such a
day and hour, he would remove their god out of Heaven. Which though they
made light of when they heard it, yet, because even light things, in so great a
matter were not to be neglected, they waited both for the day and hour, that
he had spoken of, and finding the face of the Moon then to be darkened,
thought that he had power (as he said) to remove their God: and therefore,
besides that they made almost a god of him, they yealded not their victuals
only to his army, but themselves to his government.

That which Columbus found in the god of those Indians, may be thought of the
other gods of the Heathen; what affiance soever they put in them, there is a
time when they will be eclipsed. To this opinion of false gods that was joined
(ordinarily) great wickedness of life, and so, as there was nothing so vile
and wicked, that at one time or other, by some one or other of that blind world
of Gentiles, was not made lawful. But to bury them, specially the prophaner
sort of them, in their own mire, and not to speak more of them among
Christians; let us examine whether the light of reason, which the more civil
people among them did live in, be not mere darkness. For which of them did
ever go so far with the sharpness of their wit, and reach so high, or wade
so deep with the ripeness of their judgment, as to come (I do not say) to
the knowledge of the true, and great God, whom (as it is written of Simonides)
the more they sought, the less they found: but that even in those things which
they most studied, might not justly say, that the greatest part of that they
knew, was the least of that they knew not? And as for honesty and virtue,
whereof they opened the school, (besides that, most of them who spoke as
though they hated vice, did live as though they hated virtue;) it was the
judgment of those (whose judgment was most received) that the nature of good,
and of that which we call honest, was not so much in deed, as in opinion, and
custom. Yet, could they not deny that to be true which Tully, in one of his
books de natura Deor. Of the nature of Heathen gods, speaks of, that many
did summa improbitate vti, non sine summaratione; that is, commit notorious
crimes, but not without great help of reason. Neither could they but err in
other matters, who erred so much in that, which was chief, to wit, the end of
man's life, as that there were scarce two found of one opinion.

But we, upon whom it has pleased God, in the riches of his mercy, to shed
the beams of his loving and bright countenance, and to lighten the darkness
of our reason, with the day star of his grace, have learned out of the
school of Christ, that the natural man, (whose members are weapons of
unrighteousness, and foolish heart is full of darkness, Romans 1.21.) does
not perceive the things of the spirit of God: 1 Cor. 2.14. And seeking, we
have found, that his life is vanity, his understanding blindness, his
judgment opinion, his reason foolishness, and his being in the World, but a
kind of being in a Wilderness, wherein he is estranged from the City of the
living God. For ever since he was, not only, cast out of the garden of God,
but kept out by the Cherubim, Gene. 3.24. he has been a stranger to Heaven,
having had no other access or entrance thereunto, then it has pleased him,
that cast him out, to give him by effectual vocation.

Now what it is, in this sense, to be a stranger, or banished man, to be
denied the privileges, and liberty of our natural soil, and to go exile,
into flat Atheism, and opposition to the true God, it may be somewhat
discerned by the bitter, and heavy days that go over their heads, who are but
put out of their earthly country by Tyrants, and but for some short time. The
natural affection, that every man feels toward his own country, and proper
home, may sufficiently teach us what it is to be strangers, from our country
of Heaven, and not for a short time, or life, but for ever. In other
banishments, we may find some remedy, one place to us, may be as good as
another, and we are (all) Socrates his country men, that is, (as he was wont
to say) Citizens of the World, and therefore banished but out of one part of
our country, into another: but he that is thrust out of this City, is thrust
out of all, and though he dwell in the fairest Cities of the World, yet does
he but live the life of one that wanders in a Wilderness, and has no City to
dwell in.

Again, whereas in other banishments, we are denied but a temporal freedom,
and suffer only the loss of goods and livings, in this our banishment from
heaven, we are put from an everlasting freedom, and loose, not uncertain, but
true riches; nor some temporal, but an eternal inheritance, nor living only,
but life also; and not this short life, but the life that endures ever, the
life of salvation, and the blessed life of the Saints in glory. And where in
other cases, our banishment may be unjust, and our exile for righteousness,
and so, we (the banished) may have, for the supply of our natural soil, the
pleasant paradise of our good conscience to walk in: in this case, to be cast
out of Heaven, is worthy to be cast out; and, in the punishment of it self,
what good conscience can relieve us, when it is just, and deserved? And now, as
the state of them, who are strangers from the city of the blessed, is
miserable enough, seeing they are denied the liberty that is so much worth; so
is their misery doubled by this, that they have made themselves worthy of it,
being deprived of the glory of God, because they have sinned, Romans 3.23. partly
by not understanding, which was the darkness of their mind, and partly (but
principally) by not seeking after God, which was the frowardness of their
will, and because they would have it so. Romans 3.11. For, they gave themselves
over to work all uncleanness, even with greediness. Ephesians. 4.19.

But, what this is we shall better understand, if we examine those titles, with
the which the Apostle, in this Chapter, does describe and style those
Christians, that were Gentiles: where, he calls them (first) Gentiles in the
flesh, Ephesians. 2.11. which name, though it were a common name to the Nations of
the Earth, yet was it (now) and was holden a name of as great reproach to them
of Gods city, as the name of Barbarian to a Grecian, and the name of Turk to
a Christian. The reason was, the Gentiles were great Idolaters; and the things
which they sacrificed, they did sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. 1 Cor.
10.20. Also, for that world of wickedness which they were given unto, it was
such, as might not be named, that is, which they could not speak of for
shame. 1 Cor. 5.1. And when our Savior Christ would put them to the worst,
that would not hear the Church, the worst name he gave them, as the worst,
that could be given them, was the name of a Heathen: Mat. 18.17.

So the Apostle, in this Epistle, exhorting these Ephesians to watch over their
lives, and themselves with some care and diligence, forbids them to walk as
other Gentiles, that is as the worst sort of men. Ephesians. 4.17. No less
opprobrious was the name that the Apostle gave them in the second place, Ephesians
2.11. by calling them the uncircumcision; it being the mark, by which they
were distinguished and known, from Gods peculiar people. And therefore it is
said, that no stranger that is uncircumcised in heart, or uncircumcised in
flesh shall enter into the Sanctuary of God; accounting all to be strangers
from God, and Gods peculiar inheritance, that are such. Ezech. 44.9. For this
cause, does David call Golijah the uncircumcised Philistim: 1 Samuel 17.26. and
Saul desired his Armor-bearer to kill him, least he should fall into the
hands of the uncircumcised Philistims: 1 Samuel 31.4. and Steven drawing a
Metaphore from hence, Act. 7.51. calls the desperate Jews, men of
uncircumcised hearts and ears. Thirdly, he calls them (when they were
Heathen) men without Christ; Ephesians. 2.12. that is, without the hope and grace
of the blessed Seed in Christ: and not so only, but alienes from the common
Wealth of Israel; that is, from the external profession, and outward
fellowship of the Church; and thereby, strangers from the Covenant of Promise,
because they knew not his judgments. Psalm. 147.20.

And hereof ensues, that which is reckened in the last place, that they were
not (only) without hope; because without the Law, and Word, in which were the
Promises, by which Hope is perfited; but without God in the World, because
without Christ, by whom, and by whom (only we know him.) Thus by their names,
we see their deeds, as we see a face in a glass. Their wisdom, was but the
wisdom of the flesh, and they did sin in the best things, that they best
did. For, they had not faith, and without it, it is impossible to please God:
Hebr. 11.6. the Scripture says so, though the Church of Rome say otherwise,
because they would establish, if not the freedom of Man's will, yet, at the
least, the pureness of their impure naturals, thereby. And therefore we say
with Saint Augustine, that virtutes Gentium quadam indole animi ita delectant,
vt eos, in quibus fuerint, vellemus praecipue ab inferni cruciatibus liberari,
nisi aliter sensus humanus, aliter Creatoris iustitia se haberet: the virtues
of the Gentiles for a certain good intent they seem to bear, do so delight
us, that we could wish them free from Hell torments, but that there is one
reason of man's thinking, and another of the Divine justice. For, if the
regenerate and believers themselves, while they are at home in the body, are
absent from the Lord, 2 Corinthians. 5.6. how can they be near him, that are not
yet called, and whose estate, in respect of their savage life, is compared to a
desert, and the men in it, to Dragons and Ostriches in the wilderness? Job
30.29.

And who are called, in the Scripture, not workers but servants of
unrighteousness? And not sick, but dead in sins, and trespasses? And not
people of God, but children of wrath? And given up, not to the darkness, but
blindness of their understandings? To walk in all, not wantonness only, but
uncleanness; not through infirmity of nature, but with greediness of will
and affection? Which being so, and a great deal worse then either the tongue
of man can express, or his heart conceive, my words, nay my thoughts are
swallowed up with the due consideration of this first benefit, being the
new birth of our Christianity, that we are no more strangers, and no more
forrainers; and yet, what is this to that which now follows, that we should
become.

Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God? Though these two are
coupled together, with so necessary a chain of coherence, that he who leaves
to be a stranger, begins to be a Citizen, and he that is no more a
forrainer, is forthwith one of the household of God; yet, as God, when he
passed by and saw his Church, in her infancy, polluted in her own blood,
thought it not enough to wash her with water, and to anoint her with oil,
spreading over her his skirts of love to cover her filthiness; but clothed her
with Silks, and decked her with Jewels, and other beautiful ornaments, that
she might grow into a Kingdom; Ezech. 16.8, 9.12, 13. So, though it were much
that God should take from us the evils of our old estate, yet he thought it not
enough, unless he gave and adorned us with the riches of our new calling; and
though it were an exceeding great benefit, and more then we could hope for, to
be delivered from being any longer strangers and forrainers; yet, he that is
rich in giving, would not here stay, as if he had done enough, unless he had
(also) made us Citizens with his own household people, and of his own family,
and peculiar charge. Where, if the disproportion between God and man seem so
great, as that it must needs seem a hard matter, for flesh and blood to
conceive, how God should give so vile a creature as man, so worthy an estate,
as of being a Citizen with his Angels, and household people, let us know that,
as Alexander told a private mean person, to whom he gave a whole City, that
though it were beyond the proportion of his estate, yet he should consider, not
what he was to take, but what became him to give: so this benefit, (which is
great indeed) is to be measured with the yard of the giver, and not by the
baseness of us on whom it is bestowed: and that (here) it was considered, not
what we deserved to receive, but what stood with Gods good pleasure to give,
without desert, to us that have received so much: the rather, because he who is
rich in mercy, holds himself to be neither rich nor great, except he make us
rich in receipts, and himself great, by giving to us: therefore, he is said to
make us worthy of that estate to which he calls us. And yet further (which
makes the benefit great in it self greater to us) we are not only admitted
into this City, as free-Denisons, but adopted into the family as Sons, and
of the household of God. Neither are we sons only by (such) adoption, but
heirs, yea, fellow heirs with Christ. Besides, in the manner of our adoption,
we have no small advantage: for, whereas men do rather find them fit whom
they adopt into their house, then make them so: to be adopted in Christ, is to
be made worthy, in him, of the inheritance to which we are called, and with
the gift of the son is joined the grace of new birth. So the Apostle; Whom he
foreknew, them he predestined to be made conformable to the image of his
Son, that he might be the first borne among many brethren, Romans 8.29. and
therefore, God did not only make us sons, but make us fit to be sons in an
inheritance that fades not, reserved in heaven for us.

Again, whereas adoption among men, takes effect only by succession, and so
as the adopted does not succeed in the inheritance, till he be dead that
adopted him: he that is adopted to this spiritual inheritance of Saints, is
presently possessed of it with him that gave it. To this may be added that
notable saying of Saint Austin, haereditas in qua Christi cohaeredes sumus, non
minuitur multitudine filiorum, nec sit angustior numerositale cohaeredum; sed
tanta est multis, quanta paucis, tanta singulis, quanta omnibus; that is, the
inheritour of Christ is neither diminished by the multitude of sons, nor made
narrower by the number of heirs; but it is as great to many as to few, and as
much to every one as it is to all: for, since the Lord did enlarge the place of
his tents, and spread out the curtains of his habitations, the Churches in
which he dwells with glory, Esaias 54.2. since he removed the wall of
partition, and opened the door of faith to the Gentiles, there has bin no
respect either of Jew or Gentile, bond or free, male or female, but of a new
creature: which, as it cannot be without God the Father, so neither can it
stand without the Church the Mother; more then he may have Christ to be his
head, that is not a member of his body, the Church. And this carries such a
necessity with it, that as there was no safety without the Arc, nor hope
without the Covenant: so, neither is there any liberty without this City, nor
inheritance but in this family: to which necessity there comes this dignity,
as it were recompense; that this City is the fellowship of Saints, and this
fellowship of Saints the very household of God. And, what greater prerogative;
seeing that, hereby, he who dwells above the heavens vouchsafes to have an
habitation upon his footstool, the earth; and by such a consociation with his
people, to unite the true members of this earthly house to that Jerusalem,
which is above, and free, the mother of us all?

And, albeit there be in this City (many times) enemies as well as friends,
and strangers as Citizens; also, vessels of honor and dishonor, children of
promise and children of wrath; yet of this City there are none, nor of this
house, but they that are sealed with the blood of the Lamb, and with the word
of his testimony to newness of life, and to be holy, and without blame before
him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. who, because they are the true members and lively
parts of this spiritual habitation of God, therefore, and for their sakes, it
is called the City of the Saints, and household of faith; and by David the
Prophet, the congregation of the just, Psalm. 111.1. the benefit whereof,
howsoever they that little know do less regard, yet they that have any
feeling of the Spirit must needs confess, and say with the same Prophet; that
they are blessed that may dwell in this house; and that (for the time) one day
in those Courts is more worth then a thousand years elsewhere, Psalm. 84.4.10.
yea, here, they will wish rather to be doore-keepers, that is meanest in
office, and least in place, then to be great or highest in the tabernacles of
wickedness, ver. 10. the reason is; here, the Lord God is sun and shield
unto them; their sun in the mists of adversity, and their shield of defense
in trouble, ver. 11. here they may behold the beauty of the Lord, is to see
his goodness in the face of Christ: and to be satisfied with his pleasures, is
to receive of his fullness, that grace or measure of grace that causes true
joy, and brings entire and sound comfort with it to the perplexed spirit of
man: both which imply a change of our vile estate, and (as it were) a new birth
in it; by the which not only the blind eyes of our understandings are opened,
and the old man cast off with his works; but our hard hearts are softened to
the will of God, and the new man raised up in us to righteousness and true
holiness, in the obedience of faith according to the Gospel.

They that thus behold the beauty of the Lord, are no longer in darkness; for
in his light, shall we see light: and, as it fared with the children of Israel,
who had light in their quarters, when the rest of Egypt was covered with
palpable darkness: so, howsoever the Prince of darkness does cast a mist of
error, and spread a cloud of ignorance upon the children of unbelief; yet the
Sun of righteousness, in this City of his spiritual Israel, and in the
proper horizon of the children of faith, shall make continual daylight; so
scattering all clouds, mists, and ouercastings, that no night shall be therein,
neither any going down of the Sun, Esaias 60.20. which Sun, because he
shines in our minds, and gives his word to this City, as his beams in our
hearts; therefore would he have us to frame our selves to this clear light of
the Gospel, which is preached to us, and to walk as in the day; furnished with
the armor of the light in the true knowledge of the same Gospel, with faith
and sound obedience, and warring against the darkness of our ignorance, and
the Prince thereof, so as we may be called (no longer) darkness, but light in
the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. And therefore the Church, in the Revelation, is said to be
clothed with the Sun, and to have the Moon under her feet, Apoc. 10.1. so
the inhabitants in the Church must be clothed with Christ and his works; and
tread down the world and his vanities, as contemptible things. They that do
so, that is, put on Christ, do fully, by that faith they have in him, enjoy
all the liberties and whole freedom of this City: as that there shall be no
condemnation to them, Romans 8.1. that all things, even their very sins and the
devil, their tempter to sin, shall work to the best for them: that they
have the right of sons, and by such right, a lawful interest to Christ and
his merits: that the handwriting or obligation of Laws that was against them,
is done away, and an acquittance sealed to them in his blood and death, who
took up their bond, and (as a book utterly cancelled) fastened it to his
Cross, never to be of force any more: that they behold a most severe Judge in
the face of a Savior, and by him may challenge their general pardon, in his
death: that they have free access to God the Father by Jesus Christ, and may
be sure to receive whatsoever they ask in his name: that, besides large
immunities from all kind of bondage to sin, they are endowed plentifully and
richly with the graces of the spirit to righteousness: that, by the Word and
Sacraments rightly administered, they get and retain that peace of conscience,
that no man (ever) well conceived, but he that first received it: and, in a
word, that they have for assurance of salvation in the God of their salvation:
these are, and are sure to be the franchises of Citizens and sons, that are in
Christ, and are followers of Christ.

And, who rightly considering this in heart, may not cry out with the Apostle,
O altitudo? O, the deepenesse of the riches both of the mercy and love of God
to mankind? Romans 11.33. that when we were nothing, he should make us? and when
we were worse then nothing, he should do so much, so exceeding much, for us?
that, when we lay polluted in our blood, he should wash us with his own
precious blood? and when we were sold under sin, redeem us with a price, from
the condemnation of sin? that he should give himself, for so vile creatures,
and undertake so shameful a death for so shameless offenders? or, as Cyprian
notes, he should be that which we are, that we might be that which he is: It is
a strange thing that the Poets feign of Amphion, that with the sweetness of
his Music, he drew trees and stones together to the building of Thebes: the
moral is; that by his wisdom and sweet elocution, which was as music to
their cares, he drew a rude people, that dwelt in woods, to civility and
manners; and to live in society, that lived sauagely before. That which the
Poets have fained of Amphion and Thebes, is most true in Christ and his Church:
for, with his word, as with the music of heaven, he called the Gentiles, and
of them, as of stones, raised up children to Abraham, Mat 3.9. and he made them
that were Gentiles, no longer Gentiles, that is, strangers, but sons: and
those that were uncircumcised in the flesh, circumcised in the spirit: and the
old men of sin, the newborn of God: and those without Christ, the very
members of Christ: and those heirs of promise, that had no hope: and those
that were aliens from Israel, partakers with Israel of the covenant of life:
and strangers, Citizens: and far of, near: and without God in the world,
Gods children: and no people, a glorious people.

Yet because, he is not a Jew, that is outwardly one; and because many that
are called, few are chosen; therefore, we that are Citizens, must live as
Citizens; not the worlds Citizens, but Citizens with the Saints. Jerusalem is
builded as a City that is compact together, Psalm. 122.3. this was spoken of
the earthly, and may well be applied, both to the spiritual Jerusalem, the
Church of Grace, and the heavenly, which is the Church in glory: for, we must
not think that Gods delight was any way, set upon timher and stone; or, at any
time, upon fair and well compacted buildings: but this was rather to admonish
the Citizens, then to praise the City, teaching them, that if God be pleased
with such an uniformity and compactednesse in material buildings, much more
will he respect in them (his own building by grace) spiritual order and
compactednesse of mind. And so, if the Citizens at Jerusalem must be in order
to God; shall the Citizens in the Gospel break order, and live in no
conformity to him? Are we (then) Citizens of God? we must keep Gods order, and
not what rule we list in his City: we must honor his person and word,
reverence his name and Sabbaths, bow to him only and to no creature with him;
keep his ordinances, and observe his laws.

The Magistrates that watch his gates, must see that no profaneness be either
practiced or countenanced within them: they must see that the good be
encouraged, and the evil taken away, or reformed: also, that all within their
authority (as it were gates) serve the Lord, or be made to serve him.

The Ministers must faithfully execute their charge in the watch of this City:
they must not be blind guides, nor sleepie watchmen: and, they must eat the
roll, and go and speak to the house of Israel, Ezech. 3.1. they must warn
the people of their danger, with the trumpet at their mouth, Ezech. 33.3, 6.
and feeding them with good and sound teaching, lead them to the pure streams
and river of life.

The people, the Citizens, must be ruled by the good word of God, and by
human ordinances and laws agreeable to it: not resisting government, and
giving honor to God, by honoring those powers that are of him. Thus if we be
Citizens, we must live as they that dwell in Gods City, and not in the worlds
forest. So if we be of the household of God, we must live as his household
servants and sons, and not as servants of sin, and sons of Belial, and so
shame our Masters house, and discredit our Masters service: or, we must live,
that is, holily live, as his servants and sons. Now, holiness becomes Gods
house, Psalm. 93.5. and they that are of his household must be holy.

Many get in that are not so, but they shall be turned out, as he was, that
had not on his wedding garment, Mat. 22.11.13. for God cannot endure that any
unclean person, that any Moabite, Cananite, Ismalite, or other son of Belial
should be witness of his praise. The gates of the Lord are gates of
righteousness; and the righteous shall enter into them, Psalm. 118.19. His
house is the house of his honor, and they that be of his household, must do
him service; which dogs and swine cannot do; and therefore, though such be
sometimes in the house, yet they are but strangers* and none of the household:
which is true in all that profane rabble of swearers, drunkards, filthy
adulterers, and other notorious offenders; and in all hypocrites, of whom the
Apostle Saint John speaks thus, they went out from us, but they were not of
us, 1 John 2.19. and generally in all contemners and despisers of God, who,
though they live in his house, have no inch of privilege, neither any
allowance therein.

Gods household is the household of faith, and of faithful men; or it is the
Church of Gods Saints, and not a stable of beasts, or cage of unclean birds.
In a word, Gods house it is the house of good people, and of goodness, and
will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn
your incense to strange Gods, and come and stand before the Lord, in the house
whereupon his name is called, though ye commit all these abominations? Ier.
7.9, 10. If ye be of the household of God, ye must not conspire against him in
his own house, as a household of rebels, and increase of sinful men; and ye
must be ruled by him, and do reverence to him, that has the key of the house
of David.

Some live in his house, that both dishonor him and his house; and many arm
themselves with the name of the Church, when yet (save for name) the Church
has no greater enemies then they are: therefore, least in stead of the Arc of
the Church, we fall into a ship of Pirates, and in stead of the Lords house,
upon a den of thieves; we must (as follows) see, that our Christian outward
calling have a good and sure foundation.

VERSE. 20. Built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and Jesus
Christ (himself) the chief cornerstone.


THat is grounded, by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, upon Christ.
The Rhemists, in their annotations upon the new Testament, would wrest this,
which is here spoken of the foundation in Christ, to the persons of the
Prophets and Apostles, his servants. But besides that it makes flatly against
the supremacy of Peter, to have that given to all, that they would appropriate
to him; it seems to have no shadow of that, that they would have it in
substance to be: for, whether by the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
be meant (as some understand it) that the vocation of the Gentiles had the same
ground, which the Prophets and Apostles had; or (which seems to be nearer to
the Apostles mind) that the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, was the
foundation of their calling in Christ, in neither can it any way favor their
absurd opinion: or, if there had bin any respect of persons, in this recital
of names; the Apostle might as well have mentioned the Patriarks, to whom the
promise was made, and the worthy Kings, by whom it was continued, as the
Apostles and Prophets by whom it was (but) spoken. And (here) first he names
them that were last, to wit, the Apostles; not that they preached any other
doctrine then was agreeable to that of the prophets, which were before them;
but because they witnessed that to be done, which (before) was but promised to
be done; and were immediately sent to manifest that clearly (as it were in the
open sun) to the world, which by the Prophets) so long before, was but
shadowed: for, albeit the fathers in the old Testament, had (at all times) the
Prophets (as it were the lesser stars of heaven) to give them light; yet was
it, in a manner, night with them all, till the sun of righteousness (Christ
Jesus) did arise unto them. Whose light, because it was in great measure
bestowed upon the Apostles, as also because (after his ascension) the holy
Ghost in visible manner, came down upon them, therefore was the doctrine, which
they taught, a necessary mean, by which to lay the foundation of the Church
upon Christ. This, though the Church of Rome does labor to avoid, by proving
that there was a Church, before the word was written with ink or engraven in
stone, and so making it to be more probable that the Church should give
authority to the Word, then take any from it: yet because we know that,
howsoever there was light in the world before the Sun was placed in his
tabernacle in heaven, Genesis 1.3.16. yet when the Sun, the chief of the two
great lights was made, there was no light that was not derived from it: we are
persuaded that though the heaven of the Church had her light of knowledge,
within, before the light of letters came; yet as soon as the word was written,
which was written when that Law, imprinted at the first in Adam and Eues heart,
began to wear; all the light the Church had was to be borrowed from the Word;
first of the old Testament, and after of the old and new. And this we may
learn of the Apostles themselves, whose Church was, (it self) grounded upon
the doctrine of the Prophets, which is here added, as another part of the
Churches foundation in Christ.

But because the doctrine was not theirs, but his that sent them, and who when
the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4.4. came himself, and brought his
everlasting Gospel with him; therefore Christ (as follows) is mentioned and
spoken of by an excellency; as Jesus Christ himself; and Christ the chief
corner stone: for, though the Gentiles, in their vocation to the City and
household of God, were built upon the foundation, that is, doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets; yet were they not built upon them, but upon Christ, who,
as he is the ground of all faith, so is he the matter and end of all Scripture:
and therefore upon him, the Gentiles and all Churches were, and are (properly)
laid by their doctrine.

And whosoever builds (I do not say) upon any other but him, but upon any
other with him, has the less hold of this foundation, and the less assurance
of his own building. This stone, this chief stone, laid in Sion, was and is
contemptible in the eyes of the world, and therefore refused by worldly
builders, Psalm. 118.22. yet was it made the head of the corner, and (here) the
chief cornerstone: not by comparison with others; as our adversaries would
have it, that they may make them to be of the foundation that are scarce of the
building, and heads that are no sound members of the Church; but because, to
him, that is (only) high, all things are ascribed in the highest degree.

And he is called the cornerstone, because both sorts of people, Jews and
Gentiles are reconciled, and (equally) founded in him: for, he is the Son,
whom we must kiss when God is angry, Psalm. 2.12. It is his face, in whom we
must, and only can behold the glory of God: to him was given a name above all
names, Phil. 2.9. neither is there any other name under heaven, by which we
must be saved, Acts 4.12. Tertullian calls him the seal to both Testaments; and
Saint Austin the knot, in the which all the Articles of our Faith are bound up,
or which holds them altogether: and (therefore) are the righteous said to be
as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but remain for ever, Psalm 125.1.
Because they are grounded upon that stone, in Sion, in which, whosoever
trusts, shall not be ashamed, Esai 28.16. and 1. Pet. 2.6. which stone, is
not only so elect and precious, that we cannot have a better, but so
necessary and so singular that we may have no other. For other foundation no
man may lay, then that which is already laid, Jesus Christ, 1 Corin. 3.11. in
him is the sum of our salvation, and all the parts. He is the author and
finisher of our faith, Hebr. 12.2. the beginning and the end, the Alpha and
Omega thereof, and of whatsoever is between. Apoc. 1.8. And (to be short) he
alone is all in all unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption: 1 Cor. 1.30. and in him do the Gentiles trust. Romans 15.12. But
were the Gentiles, and are we, that sometimes were as these Gentiles, laid by
one continual and constant doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, upon Christ?
Then is there but one rule, both to them and us, of faith unto salvation, by
the doctrine of the Scriptures. For did not (all) eat of the same spiritual
meat? And did not (all) drink of the same spiritual drink? and were not
(all) baptized unto Moses, in the cloud, and in the Sea? 1 Cor. 10.2.3, 4. That
is, was not one Law (as it were Moses) and one Gospel, as it were spiritual
meat, and spiritual drink in Christ, to Jew and Gentile? To these Gentiles,
and to us that were Gentiles, and are Christians? So, the Gospel is said to be
the power of God unto salvation to every believer, to the Jew first, and also
to the Grecian. Romans 1.16. Not one to them, and another to us, but one to both.

The people before Christ, and we now in Christ, were of one household, and
under one governor: now the people of one Kingdom, and (much more) private
persons of one house have but one law. For the great God of Israel, is not like
that great King of the Macedons, of whom it is written, that as many nations as
he had under him, so many kinds of service he received of them: but so
ielous rather he is of his glory, and true service, that as he admits no God
but himself, so he vouchsafes no service but his own; and acknowledges no
service of his own, but what is done by his own Word, and tendered in his own
Son.

Abraham's creed, and ours are one; and the book which Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel had in their heart, as it was, hidden in the Wall. 2 King. 22.8. We
(their posterity) who walk in the steps of their faith, have in our hands;
save that they had but an epitome of Christ, and we the volume at large. God
spoke by his Prophets in the old Testament, by his son in the New. Heb. 1^1;
2. Is not the tongue of God always the same, and one to all? Or did he speak
contrarily to our fathers and to us? In diverse manners I grant, for he lisped
(as it were) by Moses to them, in sundry tipes, figures, and shadows of things
to come: Exodus 4.10. But to us he has spoken plainly by Christ in the
Gospel. So that we have the same Word that they had, but more legible, and in
a fairer letter; and they have the same Law that we have, but more veiled with
ceremonies, and darker to them then it is to us. The Church and people of Rome,
who say with those Jews, which pursued Christ to death, we have a Law: Ioh.
19.7. Have another rule, not drawn upon the ground, nor according to the rule
of faith, neither yet built upon the foundation that is (here) spoken of, but
of Popes and Councels.

The great things of Gods Law they count as a strange, thing or thing they much
respect not: Hos. 8.12. only, their own dreams please them. But there is
enough (least written) for the guiding of every true believer to Christ, and to
life in him: John 20.31. and they that will not hear Moses and the Prophets,
how shall other things perswad them? Luke 16.31. Here also we have no building,
but upon the Apostles and Prophets, Ministers; and Christ the Master, upon
their Doctrine, and his person: and what warrant (then) for additions to these
by such as they were, of whom God complains by Ezechiel; that they set their
threshold by his thresholds, and their posts by his posts. Ezech. 43.8. I
speak of our adversaries, who adding to that which is written, so many
unwritten fabulous vanities, to which they give the countenance of Scripture,
do set the threshold of tradition, by the threshold of the Word written,
making the Lords silver dross, and mingling his Wine, with worse then water.
Esai. 1.22.

But we that have a most sure Word of the Prophets, let us take heed unto it,
2 Pet. 1.19. and be wise in that; not above that with Heretics, nor against
that with Atheists, that is able, and therefore sufficient enough of it self,
to make us wise to salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15. Let us not with the Papists, whom we
hear condemned, make it only a partial rule of our lives, but (impartially)
set our ways to it, with respect to all Gods Commandments. Neither let us
presume to give our selves a dispensation for any thing forbidden by it, though
never so small; which is but to erect a court of faculties in our own bosoms
against it. For some will commit a sin, and then stretch the Word, to make it
a little sin, if it be great: and if it be little, to make it nothing. But
good Christians must be builded, as well in their conversation as faith, upon
the Apostles, Prophets, and Christ, that is, upon the whole Word of God, that
they may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works: 2 Timothy 3.17.
that is, made perfect indeed, and furnished thoroughly to the power of godliness.

And therefore, they are justly reproved, who seek to any thing in their
corporal and spiritual distress, rather then to the Scriptures. In the
worship of God, some more esteem their own opinion and the tradition of their
Elders, then the rules of the Word. If they be sick, they will go (first) to
carnal means, and (lastly) to Scripture. In their apparel, they are rather
led by the fashion, in their recreation by the company, in eating and drinking
by their appetite, then the Scriptures. And (generally) in their lives, it is
esteemed a course too strict, and of too much niceness to stand to the
direction of the Scriptures. Gods intent in writing and giving his Word, was
the settling of our hearts in the truth, and the grounding of our affections by
the nature thereof: if therefore we care not to build our faith upon it by the
Ministry, nor to direct our course by it in our ordinary way, that it may be
said, though in a better sense, this was done that the Scripture might be
fulfilled: John 19.36. we frustrate Gods purpose of inditing holy Scripture,
and make our selves guilty of a prodigious sin, or a sin, as bad as the
sin of Witchcraft. 1 Samuel 15.23.

Besides, in our obedience this way, our own good is sought; but we over
throw it, and our selves by odious disobedience. Therefore the Lord by Ezechiel
speaks thus; Statutes and ordinances have I given them, which (if a man do
he shall live in them, Ezech. 20.11. Lo, the doing of them is our life, or our
gain; as the not doing of them must needs be, and justly, our destruction.

Lastly, not to build upon the Word, is to build upon ignorance; and so to
build Popery in us: which in stead of building in Conscience, is to build in
Hell: for, there is no conscience, that is, good conscience, without it; and
without good conscience what are we, but unconscionable sinners? So much for
our building upon the foundation: but, what manner building must this be? for
the manner, it must be a coupling together: and for the end, it must be a holy
Temple in the Lord: as it follows.

VERSE. 21. In whom all the building coupled together, grows unto an holy
Temple in the Lord.


THE common knot that coupleth us to God, and one to another, is the spirit:
and in the spirit, this building must be coupled, as with the foundation by
Faith, so in it self by love: for it commonly falls out, that that which is
divided in it self, is easily from it self divided also. And therefore as we
have one God and Father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in us
all: one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. so must we provide to be
knit together in one mind, and in one judgment, 1. Cor. 1.10. and to be (as
the primitive believers were) of one heart, and of one soul, Acts 4.32.
endeavoring to keep (as much as we may) the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace, Ephesians. 4.3.

They dwell near together that inhabit in one City; but Christians (who are
holy Citizens, are Citizens with the Saints) should dwell nearer in heart then
men do in their houses. The communion of Saints is as an undivided City; and
Cities in unity are goodly Cities: so is it a goodly thing for brethren to
dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133.1. Again, Christ's Coat had no seame; and
shall his body be divided? was Jerusalem compact in it self? and shall
Ierusalems Citizens jar? must her buildings touch together? Psalm. 122.3. and
shall not Christian brethren touch nearer, who are linked in faith, and joined
in Christ? must our houses be uniform? and shall we, that live in such
houses, live in no agreement? One says well, the Church leaves to be, when
she leaves to be one. And, therefore, they do not a little deceive
themselves, who think they can grow in the root, and be torn from the
branches: or, hold the foundation, and be rent in the roof; for, the branches
must be united that will grow in the root; and the roof must be sound and well
coupled, that will, any while, keep the foundation.

This would be considered of all, both house and builders; but specially the
builders, or laborers in this building, should consider that it much
concerns them to be at peace among themselves, and with the Church: therefore
should they study, not only, to be quiet among themselves, but to sow among
those that hear them, the seeds of peace.

And to this they may take some light from the very Prince of darkness; who
knowing that his Kingdom can no longer continue then he makes it hold
together, does therefore, he and his, conspire to divide us, but can never be
persuaded to divide themselves: all their labor is to make a rend in our
Church, and to stop every little chinke in their own; also, to keep their
own foundation, and to shake ours. How much more should the builders of Gods
Church, both build themselves, and it, with loving exhortations to peace; that
peace may be within their walls, and prosperity (the consequent of godly peace)
within their palaces? Psalm. 122.7.

And for the spiritual house, which is builded by them, how should it hold
agreement with the truth, and with it self; not carried into faction and
parts, according to these divided tongues, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos and
Cephas, and I am Christ's, 1 Cor. 1.12. seeing even the children of hell and
household of Belial, do agree so well (ill I might say) both against us, and
with error and lying vanities, against God, and his righteousness?

And yet, that we may not take the dry bones of peace for that peace which is
coupled with holiness: the marrow being gone; it is to be considered, that
every peace is not to be followed: for, what peace, where Iezabel and her
fornications are? 2 King. 9.22. what peace with the Iezabel of Italy? and what
peace with the Romish witchcrafts? better open war then such peace: but I
spoke of peace among our selves: wherein (yet) we must take heed of having
peace with the unfruitful works of darkness; and, so, general persuasions
to peace must be linked, which made the Apostle to say, if it be possible, and,
as much as in you is, have peace with all men: now, what we may do possibly,
that we may do lawfully; and sometimes we may seek peace and not find it, at
a churles hands: if, then, man's incorrigiblenesse break the peace, and some
man's frowardness will have no peace, we are in no fault, if we live not
familiarly with such: but we must be in charity with them, and pity them in
their evils, praying for their amendment, and ready, upon it, to be reconciled;
else we (our selves) are not children of peace. And in this sense, we must have
peace with all men: and yet not sit upon one, or the same stool with the
workers of iniquity: for, if we see a thief, we may not run with him; we
must, here, divide our selves from him in his sin, but not in our charity:
and vile persons we must hate, Psalm. 15.4. that is, as sinners, not as men. To
be short (therefore) if we will have peace with men, I mean such peace and in
such manner, as may make it lawful and good; we must, first, see it be not
against God, and so have no peace, to wit, of familiarity, with Papists, Deuteronomy.
17.21. Deuteronomy. 13. chap. whole. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. 2 Cor. 6.14. secondly, that it be
not against the Commonwealth: for, what peace with Traitors? thirdly, that it
be not against our brethren, whom we must not hurt, but love as our selves.
Fourthly, that it be not against our selves, our souls, or bodies by evil 1.
Cor. 5.9. Ephesians. 5.11.
fellowship: for, to touch the pitch of the wicked, is to be defiled with the
1. Cor. 5.6.
company: and peace with the wicked, is called by Hilarie, a slavery, but no
true peace.

All these kinds of peace are carnal and impious, or peace more cruel then
any war, which I leave to those who cry with one voice, let him be crucified,
Mat. 27.22. the peace required here, is the peace of charity, the brotherly
peace of Christians, and this we owe to all, even to good and bad; to the good,
for that they have; and to the bad, for that they may have: so much the rather,
because that the unity required in this building, is not that we should be
coupled only, that is, knit, or glewed, or artificially made fast one to
another; but, as follows:

Grow, as it were into one, or so together, that we may be as unwilling to be
divided from our brethren, as we would to have our own limbs torn from us:
and for this cause, and in this sense, are the parts of this building called by
Saint Peter, not dead stones that must be fastened with mortar, but lively, 1
Pet. 2.5. which receives from the corner stone, as from their root, sap and
life sufficient, though not in one measure, yet as is fittest for every ones
calling, and best for the whole building. And therefore it is not enough to be
in the foundation, and united to the building, unless we daily grow (as it
further follows) unto an holy Temple in the Lord: which is also meant by the
stone in Daniel, which being cut out of the Mountain without hands, grew, and
became great, and filled the earth, Dan. 2.35. for, by such increase, we come
to be the Temple, or habitation of God: by it God dwells in us, not as he is in
his eternal godhead, every where; but as he is specially in the faithful by
his Spirit; and yet we are not many, but one Temple: and the same spirit which
is wholly in every one, is but wholly one in all: so we have the meaning of:
the rest of the Text.

And now seeing we are called from so base an estate; as we would rise from
baseness in the worldly birth, to more and more greatness, and would also
depart further and further from an obscure parentage to a better stock and
family: so in the heavenly new birth, our desire (whatsoever it be greater)
should be no less to grow and increase more and more in spiritual and true
greatness; and further and further to be removed from the parentage of sin,
to the noble stock of Christ, which is the divine generation of the Son of
God. This growing must be in the Lord, or in the sundry statures of his fear,
from glory to Apoc. 22.11.
glory. For the estate of a Christian in regeneration, is not a retrograde or
standing still, but a going forward therein, Philip. 3.16. And as children grow
by the milk that they receive: so, and upon this condition we receive the
milk of the word, but it is, that we may grow thereby. 1. Peter 2.2. Or if we
have tasted how bountiful the Lord is; this tasting of him, how can it but set
us on a longing, till we be filled with him? verse 3. That is, filled with the
knowledge of him, when the Word dwells richly in us, and not in a beggarly
manner? Colos. 3.16. And filled with the obedience and love of the truth, when
we walk no longer in the flesh, but in the spirit or good way of life: and
lanch forth, Luke 8.22. or sail forward, (as a Ship gone out of the Haven)
from the shore of the new birth, to the Haven of our peace in death. Many are
at a stand in knowledge, and rather go back-ward then forward in the way of
grace. Such grow but untowardly, and prove dwarfes, and not men of any stature
in Christ. But in via virtutis, non progredi est regredi; in the way of true
virtue, not to go on, is to go back: and, as it cannot be a member of a
growing body, that grows not, as the body does: so neither can it be any
lively member of a true Church, that prospers not, as that Church does with
the increases of God. All non proficients (therefore) in the degrees and
school of regeneration, are bad Christians, and not members growing into
Christ, but members pro forma, that is, for fashion only; and so, are as far
from the end, as they fall short of the means of being as it follows.

An holy Temple in the Lord, etc. For, how can that be a fit Temple, or
habitation for God by his Spirit to dwell in, which grows not into a
building? What man can conveniently, and will contentedly dwell in a house that
is but begun to be built, and before it have any, either roof or cover? And
will the high God dwell in any house in his Jerusalem below, whose neither wall
is builded, nor roof covered? but to proceed: the words that follow have two
points in them of special consideration: as the quality of this Temple, it
must be holy: and the reason thereof; it is the habitation of God by his
Spirit. It is called a Temple, by allusion to the Temple that was at Jerusalem,
which was a type of the spiritual Jerusalem and Church of Christ: and this is
either of all the stones together, which is the Church; framed with the
cornerstone, which is Christ: or of the stones considered separately by
themselves, every one of which makes a singular temple, as all together makes
an universal in Christ. So many Christians, therefore, so many lively stones
toward the building of the general Temple: and yet every true Christian is a
Temple to God, 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. And this Temple, both the whole, and
every stone in it, must be holy, that is, endewed with holiness, and purged
from the lust of concupiscence, which was the lust of those which knew not God,
1 These. 4.4, 5. which work of reformation, though it shall be hindered by many,
as the second Temple at Jerusalem had many adversaries, Neh. 4.1, 2, 7, 8, and
2.19, 20. yet shall it proceed to the perfection of the body of Christ, as
that other building went forward, and was finished, notwithstanding all that
either malice or craft could do against it.

Only, let us not hinder it our selves, by living in uncleanness, and by
neglecting to purge our selves, that we may be a peculiar people to God,
zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. And, what we believe let us practice; we
believe a holy Catholic Church, let us therefore practice holiness, that our
practice be not against our faith. Let us labor to be holy, as he is holy
that has called us. 1 Peter 1.15, 16. And seeing he has washed us, who has
given himself for us, let us not plunge our selves again in the mire, Ephesians.
5.25, 26. to wit, in the mire of our first corrupt nature.

VERSE. 22. In whom you all are builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit.


FOr, who will prepare for a great man (his friend) in a foul house, or lodge
him in a stable? And is any person greater, or friend better to us then God?
Or, is any house, or room of the house, fowler then an unpurged conscience?
And what stable is more loathsome, then the loathsome stable, or rather stie of
a wicked heart? But, how does God dwell in us? Resp. Ministerially by his Word
and Sacraments, and (principally) by his Spirit. For his Word (therefore)
seeing he dwells in us by it; we must resolve to give to it, as to
himself, our best entertainment: lodging it in the best room of the house,
the heart, and not in the out-house of the ear. And for the Sacraments;
chiefly that of the Supper, the chamber must be trimmed, wherein Christ will
eat that Sacrament with his Disciples. Mark 14.15, 16. And, for that which is
chief, and expressed in my Text, the Spirit, seeing it is the Spirit of God,
and very God; we must take heed how we sin against it, that is, the good
motions of it in our hearts, wilfully, and dispitefully: for that is a
sickness to death, for which there is no Physic by repentance.

This is a sin of men enlightened with the truth. The Gentiles, without God,
cannot commit it, neither the Jews, that are without Christ. A sin, wherein
a man falls away, generally, and maliciously from God, yea, for ever and
utterly from him, in all the effects of a reprobate heart, and heart that
cannot repent. This is that great sin, which Satan has so blacked, that it
can never be made white: a sin that shall not be forgiven to a man, either
in this World, or in the World to come; that is, never. Mat. 12.32.

Quest. But is not the sin against the holy Ghost, a sin against the
Father, and Son as well as him?

Ans. This sin, if we consider the person of the holy Ghost, it is no more
against it, then it is against the persons of the Father and the Son: but
because the holy Ghost immediately, both conuinceth conscience, and enlightneth
it; therefore when we sin against knowledge, and the light of our hearts, we
are said properly, and directly to sin, not against the Father, or Son, but
holy Ghost. But a Christian may sin against the Spirit, though in a far
lesser degree of sin against him, then by this, which is so bitterly
offensive against all his graces in our hearts.

To know how; we must first know how, and in what respect, the holy Ghost may
be said to dwell in a Christian, or God by him. And this is not in regard of
substance (for the whole substance of the holy Ghost, which cannot be divided,
cannot be shut up within the body or soul of man) but in respect of some
particular work or operation. Now a Christian may sin against this work of
the Spirit in him; either when grace is offered, and not accepted of; or
accepted of, and not well used. For example, grace was offered to the old World
by Noah, and he warned them (for a hundred and twenty years) by preparing the
Arc: but they had neither ears to hear it, nor hands to receive it, and so
the Arc, that is, the time of repentance, offered by it, condemned them. Heb.
11.7. Sodom was exhorted to repentance by just Lot, and a pleasant land: yet
she rejected the Spirit that spoke by these unto her. 2 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8. The
ghests that were bidden to the supper, were bidden by the Spirit to it; but
they refused to come. Luke 14.18, 19, 20. Steven spoke by the Spirit to the
Jews, but they stopped their ears, Act. 7.57. neither vouchsafing to hear
him, nor the Spirit, by which he spoke.

Many times, the Ministers of the Gospel knock at our hearts by their
exhortations, and warnings to repentance, yea, many biddings we have, by
sickness, and other ways, and we do as much. But this is to refuse grace,
when the Spirit offers it, which cannot but grieve the Spirit, by the which
we are sealed to the day of our redemption. Ephesians. 4.30.

And this is one kind of sin against the Spirit: another is, when we make
the Spirit weary of us, having received it, or grieve it by our wicked
behavior, not using our Ghest well. Which made the Apostle in the forth
Chapter of this Epistle, and the thirtieth verse (as we heard) to exhort these
Ephesians, not to grieve, or make sad the Spirit in them. Where he compares
the holy Ghost to a ghest, and our bodies and souls to Innes.

Now, as men will use their ghests well, that they may come again: so would
the Apostle have all Christians, in these Christian Ephesians, so to entertain
a good motion, as a good ghest, when it is offered, that it may come again,
and bring more company with it, to enrich this, shall I say Inn? Nay Temple of
the Spirit, the heart, with the abundance of spiritual wealth, and blessings
in heavenly things in Christ.

But the children of God (themselves) do not always keep one tenure in
receiving the Spirit, when by it, grace is offered to them, for the avoiding of
some evil, or the doing some good. For sometimes, they are less apt to pray,
less sit to hear, and less prepared to the Sacrament, then at some other
times they be. Yea, they may have less fear of sin, care of well doing,
zeal in prayer, and comfort in the Word at one time then another.

This indeed, is a tempting of the Spirit, which though it make him not
desirous to be gone, yet somewhat cooles his love toward us, as in David and
others. And therefore, we must strive with prayer, against all manner of decay
in these spiritual riches, and omit no opportunity to do well, as he that
means to be rich in his trade, will omit no means of gaining by it. And
(here) let us consider what a shame it is for the children of God, though they
cannot loose the Spirit, to loose, for some season, any graces (which they once
had) of the sanctifying Spirit. For was it not a shame for Lot, who was so
chaste in Sodom, to commit such incest, out of Sodom, in a Cave in the
Mountain? Genesis 19.33.35. And did it not greatly blot David's Chronicle, that in
the days of peace (which he did not in the time of war) he should fill his
eyes with adultery, and stain his hands with blood? 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4, 5.15.

How weak was Sampson that was so strong, and how ridiculous, that was so
feared, when the Lord departed from him? Judge. 16.20.25. So Peter, loosing by
the denial of his Master, much of that courage he had, when he cut of
Malchus right ear; John 18.10. how was he posed, and overcome of two silly
maids? Mat. 26.69.71. And surely, if it be a matter of discredit, being rich,
to become poor in worldly substance, what greater shame is it, being rich in
grace, to decay in the Heavenly treasure?

This should make us to purge our selves (daily) from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. not to be careless, as if in prosperity we
could not be moved, Psalm. 30.6, 7. for, a man may take a dangerous surfeit after
a full feast of grace: and to be humbled, when we have done our best;
confessing that we are unprofitable, Luke 17.10. the best have their
infirmities: and in every Christian womb, as in Rebeccahs, there is an Esau of
flesh, and Jacob of spirit struggling together, Genesis 25.22. we are sanctified
but in part, and corruption goes not out but with our last enemy.

In a word, in all the regenerate, there is a mixture of sleeping and waking,
Cant. 5.2. of sin and grace: it concerns us (therefore) that put on our
harness, not to boast, as he that puts it off, 1 King. 20.11. and so to
take heed that we give the spirit no occasion, by fainting, or becoming
secure in that war, which is between the flesh and spirit in every Christian
soul, Gal. 5.17. It is sure that the elect can never quite loose the spirit,
that is, the saving graces of the spirit that dwells in them: and yet it is
as sure that the same may, by sinning against it (sundry ways) loose the
feeling, the comfort, the joy and peace of it, for a season; which made David
to pray unto God, that he would not take his spirit, that is, the joy of his
spirit from him, as appears, Psalm. 51.11, 12. They that take him to speak
otherways, say, that he spoke but as a distempered sick-man, who speaks, he
knows not well what himself; and what marvel that a guilty prisoner at the
bar (the water standing in his eyes) should miss in reading of his own pardon.

But I take it, that David was come to himself, when he penned that exemplary
Psalm of his sin for the Churches instruction; and that therefore he knew
what he said, not distrusting any total loss of the spirit of adoption, but
only desiring that his feeling might come again unto him, and that he might
have (as he once had) both a free and joyful spirit in worshipping toward God.
Yet, let his example be a warning to us who have received a far lesser
portion of sanctifying grace then David had: for, where such a Cedar fell, let
him that stands, take heed least he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. if so excellent a
man, so highly exalted, as upon his strong hill, Psalm. 30.7. was so quickly
upon the lo ground in his adultery and murder, as appears by his
penitential Psalm, we had need to take heed that we grieve not the spirit,
who stand upon so lo a bank already.

How this may be, and how this our most worthy Ghest may be grieved, after
we have received him into house, and so our light eclipsed, though not
quenched as in the darkness it self; we may see it, though somewhat darkely,
in certain earthly similitudes: for, as if, when some noble Ghest should offer
to come unto us, we should receive him but in some out or back house, not in
our best lodgings, we should constrain him with indignation to leave us.

So, for this Lordly Ghest (the Spirit) who comes to us in his Word
gloriously, as in his Charet: if we turn both it and him contemptuously into
some forsaken corner, as it were backe-romes of the heart, what hope is there
he should tarry with us, and his Word, any while, abide among us? How much
less, if we receive his Word into our hearts, as into some prisonhouse,
holding the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. or, behead it as John was in
prison? Mat. 14.10.

Secondly, if we shall not receive a great man (our friend) chearefully, or
with good well-come, we shall give him good cause, with contempt, to pass by
us, another time: so, if we shall not receive gladly and willingly the Spirit
of comfort, how can we but drive away the Comforter? If we do not flow unto
him, as the Sea, after such an ebb and low water of knowledge and true
goodness; how can we retain that God, who will not tarry, any while, but
where he finds a cheerful giver?

Thirdly, though a man receive his great friend into his best rooms, yet if he
do not dress up those rooms, and make them sweet, removing all noisome
savors, he shall greatly offend that person, his friendly stranger: so, though
we should receive the Spirit into our hearts in some graces, yet if we
prepare not for his coming, nor make ready our hearts for his abode among us,
removing our filthy and unsavory sins that offend so much; how can we but
give just occasion to that same Spirit to forsake us? For what greater despit
can be offered to the Spirit of Grace, and of Glory, then to see sin (his
most deadly enemy) in his own habitation? 1 Samuel 2.32.

Fourthly, though a man receive some great man (his friend) into a house swept
and garnished, that is, well prepared for him, yet if afterward, he bring his
enemy (the greatest he has) to outface him, and to vex him in the same
place, how can he but be moved against, and offended with such an host? So,
though we entertain the Spirit, for a time, in some good motions, and in a
heart reformed in many things, as Herod's was, yet if after some time, we
return (being thus washed) to our wallowing again in the mire, and begin to
lick up the vomit that we cast; how can we think to retain the Spirit, and
this form of sinning together? For, as if one should set up a rebel in that
Kings own dominions: so are they who bringing sin into the heart, Gods own
Throne, or (further) into any of their outward senses, his own dominions, do
vex him (as it were) at home in his own possession.

Fifthly, though one receive a noble man, into a fair and well furnished house,
and possess him quietly of it, yet if he provide not conveniently for his
person, and train, how can he please him? So, who can please the Spirit,
though he make never so godly a show of being zealous in the Law, if he
abridge him of the diet and ordinary that belongs to his good keeping in him?
If he care not to nourish his good motions at Sermons, and in the point of
hearing, scantle him by attending upon the Word, but at certain times only,
and so become (as Master Latimer merrily said) but a Straw-berry-hearer? And,
may not the Spirit say to such, as Christ to those on his left hand, at the
last day; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink?
Mat. 25.42.

Lastly, though this great man should be received in all conditions and
manner, answerable to his great place and companies, yet if after a day or two,
(as being weary of our Ghest before he be willing to leave us) we withdraw
things necessary from him, we cannot but much offend him: so howsoever we
begin in the Spirit, yet if (waxing weary of well doing with those foolish
Galatians that ran well) Gal. 3.3.
we end in the same, in the flesh, we must needs grieve the holy Ghost, and
shall hear, the last state of these men is worse then their first, Luke 11.26.
then shall we be seven fold more the children of the Devil.

And thus we have heard how many ways, the Spirit (after it is received) may
be made sad by us, and caused with grief to leave us. Let us bewar how we so
offend, lest we turn the habitation of God, into an habitation, or hold of
unclean spirits.

And (now) to conclude with that which is full of singular comfort; seeing we
are the habitation of God by his Spirit we may learn that God is not in us, as
a stranger in another man's house, but as at home, in his own; and therefore
will not loose us, as no man will loose his inheritance that is able to keep
it: and, who so able, as he that is Almighty? Neither (being the habitation of
God) can we lack any thing that is good; that is, that is good for us. For,
what want can there be in the Kings house? And as all good things are brought
to the court: so, what so ever is excellently good, is to be had here. Here is
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, against which there is no Law. Gal. 5.22, 23.

Here is no Winter, nor fall of the Leaf, but a perpetual Springtime: and
he that would have what he can wish (if he will wish lawfully and well) let
him come hither. Let him build in grace, and set his house upon Wisdoms
pillars, Proverbs 9.1. and no enemy shall hurt him. For it is the Bethel of
God, or house upon the Rock: Matthew 7.24. And he that is in it will keep
it, when they that come against it, shall fall down before it: for, who dares
interrupt Gods possession? Or, if he dare, shall not perish?

Thus the security is great, and the walks are strong, where God is the
inhabitant: and, he that is a wall of defense about his people, will be a
wall of fire against his peoples enemies. Zecharie 2.5. Esa. 4.5. He that
builds Sion, will throw down Babel: and he that saues Jerusalem, will
ouerturne Palestina. The reason is, his Tabernacle is in Salem, and his
dwelling at Sion. Psalm. 76.2. But Babel and Palestina were Countries, wherein
he never vouchsafed either to dwell, or be, as in his Church.

So I conclude; make God your inhabitant, and ye are sure, but if he dwell
not in you by his Spirit, ye shall never dwell in safety.

And now, he that dwells in us, and in his elect by promise, keep us and
his whole Israel: yea, bless us, and save his Israel, the Church which he
has purchased with his own blood; that, being the habitation of God by his
Spirit, it may be a temple of holiness dedicated to his glory, in the grace
of Christ, and love of God the Father, to both which, with the holy Spirit of
both, be rendered and given all praise and glory, now and ever: Amen.

FINIS.
THE CHRISTIANS GVIDE TO A wise Conversation.
EPHESIANS. 5. VER. 15, 16. Take heed that ye walk circumspectly; not as fools,
but as wise:

Redeeming the time: for the days are evil.


TAke heed that ye walk circumspectly, etc. It is written of Cardinal Pole
Cardinal Pole, that being demanded which was the best way to understand the
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans; answered, to begin with the study of the
former part, and practice of the latter; because the first is a demo^stration
of the grounds, the second an exhortation to the fruits of Faith. That which he
spoke truly of that one Epistle, may be observed in all the rest, and
generally in all his writing: for, he planteth by doctrine, and waters by
exhortation in every Epistle, laying the foundation by teaching, and building
upon it by exhortation to a holy life; that the true Christian rooted in faith,
and strengthened through hope, may by the sanctification of the spirit, grow to
a perfect man in Christ. Herein the proportion he uses is not always alike,
nor the same, as standing (sometimes) more upon doctrine then exhortation,
namely in that large Epistle of his to the Romans: sometimes more upon
exhortation then doctrine, as in this to the Ephesians; yet does he apply both,
and use either, as one becomes more needful then another to profit with.
And surely, if ever there were a time wherein there was more taught then
followed, more known then practiced, and therefore more need of exhortation
then doctrine, it is ours, and it is now: for even now, and at this time, we
are (a great number of us) better Scholars then men; and under the full sails
of our science, what do we but make ship-wracke of all good conscience?
Therefore I have not thought it amiss to entreat of that part of the Apostles
exhortation, wherein he generally advises the Ephesians, and in them us, that
seeing they were called from being strangers and forreiners, to be Citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God; and seeing they were made of
enemies, sons, and translated out of darkness into so great light, they
would (therefore) as Citizens and sons, or as sons and children of light,
take heed, not only (though carefully) to the doctrine which they had
received, but circumspectly to their ways, walking not only directly therein
in regard of themselves, but wisely in respect of others, and not as fools in
the vanity of their opinions, but as wise, understanding what the will of the
Lord is: not neglecting the grace then offered, but redeeming the season, or
buying it back again, like good chapmen of time.

Now, in these words, the Apostle requires (first) diligence, take heed: then
the ordering of our ways by diligence, how ye walk; after, all avoiding of
offense in walking, that ye walk circumspectly, and circumspectly with
discretion; not as fools, but as wise: and lastly, that we take all occasion
to do good, not loosing but redeeming the opportunity: the reason is, the
days are evil, or we live in a bad age, and with men of bad conditions; so
evil and naught, that they have even tainted time it self, and the very days
in which we live. To take heed, and not to our walking, is no diligence; to
walk, and not circumspectly, no discreet diligence; to be circumspect, and not
wise, is great folly; to be discreet and wise in other things, and not for
time, is vanity, and no godly discretion: but so to take heed that we walk;
so to walk that we be circumspect that we be wise; so to be wise that we
redeem the time, or bin out for well doing, that precious commodity that
others despise (who therefore are no good husbands of time but spendthrifts of
it) is the way (indeed) to make the days that are evil to others, good to us.

Take heed) is as much as watch over your Christian state, that you receive
not the grace of God in vain: of this duty, as there are many causes to move
us to it, so there are many occasions to withdraw us: for whether we look into
the world that was made to serve us, or into our selves who were made to serve
the Lord; whether we cast our eyes upon things without us, or call to mind the
things that are within us; what are they (take them at their best) but causes
to move us to walk worthy of our vocation? but take them in their corruption,
and what are they but occasions of evil? what, but snares in the world, and
the chains of the Prince of darkness to hold us in wickedness?

And both these, as they are of no small force, the one to bring us to our
duties, if well considered, the other to lead us away from them, to all vanity
of mind and error of life, if not well watched and taken heed unto, so do
they exact at our hands no small labor and diligence, duly and well to
observe both one and other; for albeit godliness be of it self, so great
riches, that it need nothing but it self to commend it to us: and sin be of
it self, so great (not gain but) loss and loathsomenesse, that it has
enough in it self to make it vile unto us: yet that there may be nothing
wanting to stir up our diligence, by all means in this matter, many things
are spoken of the one to make us to seek it with more care, and as much is
noted of the indignity of the other, to make us avoid it with more contempt:
for the first consideration, if we would enter into the soul of it,
acknowledging the great care that God has of us, how can it but move us to
double diligence, and heed in the matter? specially, being thereby waged, and
with some hire, to seek that which is so worth the seeking? for to speak
nothing of our creation, which was of nothing, nor how he made all things
subject to us, that we (for whom he made all things) might be subject to him
alone: when we were worse then nothing he redeemed us, and when we had less
then nothing, he endued us with the graces of his spirit, that being dead to
sin, we might live unto righteousness, and being delivered from the hands of
our enemies, we might serve him without fear, all the days of our life, in
righteousness and true holiness before him, Luke 1.74, 75.

Now that he delivered us from so great a bondage as we were subject unto, not
only generally by the fall of Adam, but more particular by being cast out of
the common wealth of Israel, was such a benefit as deserves whatsoever service
we are any way able to perform unto him: but that he should redeem us with so
great a price, as the death of his first and only son, and call us also to
so high an estate, to be Citizens with the Saints, and heirs with him of an
inheritance immortal, undefiled, that fades not, reserved in heaven for us:
this is a blessing that is many degrees greater then the service of our whole
life can attain unto: but beyond all this, that he should endue us with those
gifts, and blessed graces that make us to walk worthy of this vocation, and
able, as it would seem, to pay him with his own lent love, by making us so
rich in him; what heart created can conceive what this is? and if it cannot be
conceived by us, how does it concern us to take heed (seeing these benefits
of God are so much more then we can deserve or conceive) not to receive so
great grace in vain; nor to think, where we can deserve nothing, we can serve
more or better then we ought; or to play the unthrifts with so rich a treasure
committed to our keeping and use? He that has committed to us our life, and
his money, to be recalled at his pleasure, and has divided amongst us his
blessings, and his talents to occupy till he come, will one day, most
certainly, require again his coin of life that he lent us, and reckon with
us particularly for the several pieces of his stock of grace; both, which we
have ill employed, and which we have not employed to their best end, which is
his glory: then, neither the hiding of our talent in the ground by an
unprofitable life, shall be able to deliver us from our account to damnation:
nor the smalnesse of his gift, and of our receipt, as it were the single talent,
excuse us, if we have bin unfruitful in the least matters: nor others ill
using of greater graces be a cloak for us; but the secrets of all hearts, as
it were the books of the Lords accounts, shall be laid open, every leaf of
them, and hidden thing in them: and a just, I do not say equality, but
proportion of increase shall be exacted at our hands according to the measure
of grace which we have received: for as it is in the fifth of the second to the
Corinthians ver. 10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of God, that
every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to that
he has done, whither it be good or evil: and therefore they do not a little
deceive themselves, who having a greater measure of grace dealt unto them, and
more of the Lords money in their hands then others, do abuse all that
bountisulnesse of the Lord, and turn his grace into wantonness; and yet
think they shall as easily pass their accounts, as they who have received
smaller sums both of time and spiritual riches to answer for; as if to
receive much, were rather a privilege to greater security, then the charge of
a greater burden.

But it fares not with the heirs of heaven as it does with the Lords of the
earth, who because they are borne to greater rents and possessions then others
are, think they may live more idly then others, and (as they use the matter)
more wickedly: but the more that every one receives here, the more will be
required of him; and the better his calling is, the more seemly must his
walking be in it: for we are all of us unprofitable servants; even the best of
us, when we have done our best, are so: and if we were many degrees better
then we are, we were many more degrees worse then we should be. And, in this
respect, we are called stewards of God, not owners of his gifts; and therefore
not to abuse them to our pleasures, but to answer for not using them in his
sernice.

But as we are to take heed to our Christian life that it be godly and
righteous, in respect of the causes that should move us so to do so in regard
of the many occasions that stand in our light and way to withdraw us from a
good course, we should take this pains for the ordering of our Christian life,
much more: for, how many are they, and how many ways offered? I would we were
as willing to prevent them, as we are sure they do daily, nay every hour,
and moment of our life, circumuent us: for, who can open his eyes, and not see?
his ears, and not hear occasions of evil in all places? who can think, and
not amiss? walk, and not walk in death? or, (which is less) but step out
of doors, and not step into a great puddle of sin? Not only by the
corruption of our vile nature, by which we are carried to all evil, but also
by the subtle inticement of our old enemy, who has spread his nets of deceit
over all the world, and baited his hooks with every part of our flesh, and
has so many lures of imposture for our eyes, charms for our ears, vain
thoughts for our hearts, and by-ways for our feet, we are so engirt and beset
daily on every hand and side of us, that we are easily caught, and no sooner
assailed, then taken: neither is he sure that thinks he comes into this
field of assaults best appointed for them: the world, what is it but a Sea,
which swells with pride, fometh with lust, boileth with desires, and has
many contrary tides and tempests to turn us from the port to which we sail?
Our life, what is it but a life of battles, and a perpetual warfare, in the
which we are to strine against the world and the Prince thereof, yea against
our own flesh, and the lusts therein, and not to have one minute of truce with
them; but in a calm to look for a tempest, and to be most distrustful, when
the enemy seems most quiet and still? for, besides those many weapons which
Satan has to assault us, the many occasions that he has to withdraw us; his
skill in using his weapons, his policy in applying and taking his occasions;
he is well acquainted with the humors, not of every age only, but of every
estate also: and therefore can fit every one with and in that to which he is
most inclined. He tempts young men with beauty, middle age with glory, and
old age with money: he stirs up contempt in superiors, envy in inferiors,
and malice in equals: If any be strong in faith, he will teach him to presume;
and if any be weak, he will drive him to despair. He cloatheth his foul
practices with tolerable names; making lust but a trick of youth, ambition a
spur to virtue, desire of money honest provision, and whatsoever is of it self
evil, and for it self hateful, a thing merely indifferent: yea, where he
cannot hinder the course of godliness, he will so advance it in the followers,
that he will make them proud of that they do. And to be short, when he
perceives that he cannot work so grosely in the children of light, as to
persuade them that darkness is light, and light darkness; he fetches about
under hand to persuade them, that though they may not do as the wicked do,
yet it is no harm to keep them company; and though they be ashamed of many
things in the light, yet in the dark they need not, seeing no man sees them.

Further, to this his skill and policy, he adds no less diligence: and for
this, he is said to be a Dragon that never sleeps, and Lion that never lies
still, seeking whom he may devour; he sowes tares in the night, and attends
their growing in the day; he gains the time that we loose, and where we are
careless, he works; what we scatter he gathers, and what opportunities we
give, he takes. And what he does in person by himself, the same he does by
his Ministers, making them more watchful to build up the Synagogue of
Antichrist, then they are to build Gods house; and more zealous for a temple of
idols, then they are zealous for the Temple of God. None does faint or fall
among them; none slumber nor sleep; neither is the girdle of their loins
loosed; nor the latchet of their shoes broken, Esa. 5.27.

Wherefore it is, that though our case be never so good, and our enemies case
desperate, yet he will be in hope to overcome us, if by no other means, yet
with his importunities. And to this, as to all other his attempts against us,
he is much encouraged and set on by our own corruption, which gives him no
small hope, while we carry that about us, which is as ready to open the gate,
as he to enter.

For, as Bernard notes very well: Quot quot degimus in regione vmbrae mortis,
etc. As many of us as live in this shadow of death, in this infirmity of body,
as it were seat of temptations, we have our inconveniences; we are easy to be
seduced, faint to do good, weak to resist evil. Whereby it comes to pass,
that when we would judge between good and evil, we are deceived, when we
would do good, we cannot, and when we would resist evil, we yield unto it.

This the Apostle Saint Paul, calls the Law in our members, rebelling against
the Law of our mind, and leading us captive to the Law of sin. Romans 7.23. A
Law of such force and spite against us, while we dwell in this earthly house,
that we need no other enemy to maintain battle with us, and to keep us
this way doing. Therefore, seeing we have so many causes to seek a thing which
for it self, is so worthy; seeing also our ancient enemy besets us with so
many occasions, and so much skill and diligence, going so far beyond us in
his advantages, to our spoil and utter destruction: how should these things
move us to be well appointed, at all assaies, to take heed to our Christian
state, and particularly (as follows) to our walking.

That ye walk, etc. Albeit, we are to take no small heed to our Christian
state, that it stand upon matter of sound doctrine, so that not only we
believe nothing contrary to the Word, but believe whatsoever is contained in
it: yet are we so to look to it, that we fashion our walking to it, and so to
believe, that we live there-after. And therefore, where we are willed to take
heed of false Prophets that come in Sheep clothing, and to try the Spirit,
because some that seem of God, may prove Sathanicall: we are taught to know
false Prophets by their fruits, and lying Spirits by their Doctrine: and the
Apostle who exhorts Timothy to look to his Doctrine, exhorts the same
Timothy also to look to himself. For true it is, that as our eyes desire
light to the end they may see, and yet withal desire it, that by seeing they
may receive and give direction to the body: so the eye of the soul, the
understanding, desires the Doctrine, as it were light of the will of God, that
it may know; and yet so should desire to know, that good affections may follow,
and knowledge, so gotten, may direct our life. Also, as it is said of Christ
that he knew no evil, when it is meant he did none: so may he truly be
said, to know the will of God that does it.

For in vain do we keep his Commandments in our heads, if we keep them
not in our lives. And here, the Prophet David, that he might stir us up to
the deeper study, and meditation of the Law, pronounces them happy, not that
are learned, but that are undefiled in the way, not that know the Law, but that
walk in it. Afterward, he calls the Law a Lantern, not unto our eyes, but
unto our seete: and a light, not to our minds, but to our paths. Which he
does, that we might understand that fruitless knowledge, and an idle
profession of the Law without fulfilling it, is a damnable, both knowledge and
profession.

And if any shall think that obedience to the Commandments, was so required
under the Law, as that it was abrogated with it, (which is the opinion of many
Atheists at this day, that by it they may cloak their liberty of life, and of
some Professors, that yield too much to their lusts:) let them know that
Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; Math. 5.17. and that he
was so far from taking any edge of rigor from it, that he whetteth it to a
seuerer exposition, adding more quickness to it, then the Pharisees would
confess to be in it in restraining the natural Man. For, where the Law
forbad to commit murder, he expounded the Law rightly, to forbid anger: and
where it forbad to commit adultery, he expounded it, to forbid all looking upon
a woman to lust after her: Math. 5.27, 28. Where it forbad forswearing, he
expounded it, to forbid swearing at all, to wit, vainly, and in common talk:
Math. 5.33.34. and where it commanded to love our neighbor, he expounded as a
commandment to love our enemies. Math. 5.43, 44.

So he laid more weight upon the Law, rather then took off any; for, he
himself was to fulfill it. How much the more injury do our adversaries (the
Papists) to us, and to our Doctrine, while they go about to persuade the ruder
multitude, that our Doctrine of faith, takes away good works, and brings in a
greater liberty, or rather license of life, then is to be found among the
Turks, and Infidels. For where we say that faith alone does justify; we do
not require that faith should be alone, because it iustifies alone, but
confess with the Apostle, that faith without works is dead. Iam. 2.17. And so
grant him any thing rather then faith, that can speak as though he hated
vice, and yet live, as though he hated virtue, It is the saying of our Savior
Christ; not every one, that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.
Math. 7.21.

For, the fig tree in the Gospel made a fair flourish by leaves; but, having
nothing but leaves of seeming, withered; Math. 21.19. after Christ had said,
never fruit grow on thee any more. The foolish Virgins had Lamps of a
glorious profession, as well as the Wise; but lacking the Oil of faith and a
good conscience therein; were shut out. Matthew. 25.1.3.10.11. The Pharise had
the Law of God in his mouth, and in the skirts of his garments, no man oftener,
or more; and yet when he went into the Temple to pray, the silly Publican, was
preferred before him: for, he went to his house more justified, rather then he.
Luke 18.14. By all which we learn, that it is not enough to come near to God
with our lips, except our hearts come near him, and our hands touch him. Math.
15.8. and 9.20. To be hearers of the Law, and not doers, is to deceive our
selves: Iam. 1.22. For, so we shall make our ears to accuse us, and our own
mouths to speak against us. And they, who (like Monsters) have longer tongues
then hands, that is, can say more then they will do, are not unfitly compared
to leaves without fruit, lamps without oil, clouds without water, having a
show of godliness, but denying the power thereof. 2 Timothy 3.5. To these (as
Gregory notes in his moralles) it comes to pass in the just judgment of
God, that by the wickedness of their lives they loose the opinion of their
faith. For, though we are to confess with the mouth, as we do believe with
the heart; Romans 10.10. Yet (as Cyprian says in his book de Duplici Martyrio)
effica^ius est vitae quam linguae testimonium: more speaking is the Testimony
of our life, then the witness of our tongue. And, in the same book further;
habent and opera suam linguam, habent suam facundiam (etiam) tacente lingua.
Our works can speak, and that eloquently for us, though we hold our peace. In
the end he concludes, that as our good works profess God, so our evil do
say for us, that we think there is no God. It cannot be denied, but that the
Word of God is like unto fire; and therefore as able to work in us, not only
the knowledge of Gods will, but obedience to the same, as fire gives unto
water, not only heat but motion, making it not only hot, but to boil over.
Yet as fire it self, though never so hot, does not burn the hand that
lightly touches it, passing quickly through the flame: so neither does the
Word work where it is little regarded, or passes presently through us. And
here their negligence comes to be reproved, who, though they acknowledge
the Doctrine of Christ, and can be content (in their manner) to give their
names to the truth, do not much trouble themselves in showing it forth by
their deeds, how so ever (other ways) they will be wary enough to do nothing
directly against it. But, though they think it good to sleep in a whole and
warm skin, and to pass through this life, as a Ship through the Sea, that
leaves no sign of her being there: yet they shall find, how so ever they can
reasonably clear themselves of doing no evil; that they shall answer for not
doing of good, and further, for not doing as much good as they might.

And therefore, let them that live in no particular vocation flater themselves
as much as they list, because in doing nothing, they do no evil (though
indeed, it be evil to do nothing, and idleness be (as Bernard proves) as
well the mother of vice, as the stepmother of virtue) they shall hear, one
day, that sentence of condemnation read against them; I was hungry, and ye gave
me no meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink; I was naked, and ye
clothed me not. Math. 25.42.43.

It is not said, that when Christ, in his poor members, was hungry, ye took
away his bread, but it is said, ye did not feed him: nor that ye took away
his drink, when he was thirsty, but that ye gave him no drink: neither that
ye unclothed him, but that ye clothed him not when he was naked. So Saint
Augustine, but as we must walk, so we must so walk, that we be
circumspect.

Walk circumspectly, etc. Because there is but one way right, and the same
narrow, Mat. 7.14. where there are many by-ways, and broad withal, it is
necessary, and required, that in our walking, we be circumspect, looking about
us, and to our feet, where we set them: and that as well in respect of our
selves, that we do not err, as in respect of others, that we do not offend.
For our selves we shall not do amiss, if, as the Sailor has always the North
pole, and the Archer his mark in his eye; so we ever have in the eye of our
mind, the end at which we should aim in our whole course; even that which is
the North pole of our Christian Navigations, and white or level of our best and
holiest endeavors here. And therefore if we did well consider to what end we
were created, and since the image of God was defaced in us, to what end we
were redeemed; it would move us to take that course that could best bring us to
that end, and to think all that labor lost, that is bestowed to the contrary,
or impertinently thereunto.

The rather (also) should we so do, because it is not in our power or choice
to propose to our selves, in our Christian walk, what end and manner we list;
but have the same pitched and set unto us by the will of God, whose will in his
Word, is our sanctification, and that every one of us should know how to
possess his vessel in holiness and honor. 1 These. 4.3, 4. Now this
holiness of life, being the chief end, or white at which the regenerate
should aim and bend unto, in their Christian conversation, does set a price
upon it, and all other things else, which (though lawful and needful in our
mortal life) we should much less esteem then it, and it (being chief) much
more then them all. For this cause it behooves us to be very circumspect, that
(seeing temporal blessings are necessarily, and may lawfully, in a sort, be
desired) we be not carried away with the tide of our affections, to set our
hearts upon them, or to esteem them, either for themselves, or for any other
end, and with any other mind, then for the exercise of godliness.

For as the Moon is darkened and Eclipsed, when the Earth does come between
her and the Sun: so the minds of the godly suffer, and are in a certain
Eclipse of Piety, when earthly cogitations, come between them and the Sun
of Righteousness, Christ Jesus. Therefore well was it noted by Gregory in his
Morals, that solus in illicitis non cadit qui se aliquando, and a licitis cante
restringit; that is, that he only does not offend in things unlawful, that
now and then restraines himself from things lawful.

And now, if we must be so circumspect in things indifferent, and lawful, as
not to desire them, either more or other ways then we should; how much more
circumspect, ought we to be in those things, that (of themselves) are unlawful
and wicked? There is no fellowship between light and darkness, between the
works of the Spirit, and the deeds of the flesh. 2 Cor. 6.14. If we will live
in the Spirit, we must walk in the Spirit: Gal. 5.25. And if we be Christ's,
we must crucify the flesh with the affections and the lusts. Gal. 5.24.

One says well; if we would be of the mind before we sin, of the which
we commonly are, when we have sinned, and did mark our pleasures (as
Aristotle does advise) not as they come, but as they go away; we would not
commit such gross sins, and so with greediness, as we do; nor drink
iniquity as the most do, who drink it, as the beast does water. Neither are
we to be wary or circumspect only in the greater evils, but in smaller
offenses (also) we must stop their course when they are a beginning, and root
them up when they are young. For little sparks may prove great fires, and
small springs rise to great ponds.

The least infirmities we have, do bring (as Saint Hierom notes) though not
death, yet sickness to the soul, and though they do not quench, yet they
make sad the Spirit of God. And (therefore) as they that love their bodily
death, do not only prevent death, but the diseases that make way to it: so
they that care for the health of their souls, will be as diligent to prevent
the disease, as they would the death of it, when they see it coming. For, if
it be true in the life of the body, it is much more true in the life of the
soul, that vita, non est viuere sed valere; that is, it is not life to live,
but to be in health, and many live by breathing, that are dead in sin. If
(therefore) we did as constantly believe that, which we cannot deny to be
most true, which is that our adversary winnoweth us as wheat, and that we shall
give an account of every, not only wicked, but idle, not only deed, but
word, Mat. 12.36. we would (as Saint Ierom counsels us) minima pro maximis
cauere, be as circumspect in small things as in great, specially since the
least sin committed is made greater then we can answer by the greatness of
him against whom it is done.

This should make us careful to prevent, not sin only but the occasions
thereof, that we be not ouer-taken ere we be aware, and take the disease before
we suspect it. Animus vereri qui scit, scit tuto vadere; the mind that knows
how to fear, knows how to walk safely, and without fear: and it is care to
be provided against occasions, that make us secure. As (therefore) it is
written of the Africans, because their Country is troubled much with Snakes,
that they tread lightly in every place, and, if they chance to feel any cold
thing, do more then half suspect it is a Snake; and as they that ride with a
charge in the night, do (because of the darkness, and their fear furthered
by it) take every bush for a thief: even so we, who by reason of a greater
charge, go in greater danger, and are threatened with the bitings of sharper
teeth then Snakes have any, should much more suspect upon every occasion;
thinking every place we tread on, to be a net to snare us, and every thing we
do, to be a bait to catch us; in every grass we should fear a snake, and in
every bush a thief of our salvation: as well against small as great sins we
should come well appointed with the armor of light, having about our loins
the girdle of truth, in our hands the shield of faith, and sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God; for the cover of our feet, the preparation of the
Gospel, and the helmet of salvation on our head; righteousness for our
breast plate, and for all parts, prayer, which is the button, or knot, that
holds all the pieces together that we loose nothing. These we have in the
armory of Scripture, by the key of Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
chapter 6. verses 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. If we take these pieces from thence,
arm with them upon all occasions, and use them as we ought, we shall not
run into evil: and when the enemy assaileth us, we shall be ready both to
give him battle, and to send him back.

And yet it will not be enough for our circumspect walking, that we she all,
not only sin, but occasions of sin our selves, except we so bear our
selves in respect of others, that we give no occasion of just offense to them
by word or deed. I say just offense; because, many times, an offense may be
taken when it is not given. So the adversaries of the truth are offended at our
doctrine which is true, and at the fruits of it, which are good: like as the
Jews, when Stephen did truly charge them to be men of uncircumcised hearts
and ears, such as ever resisted the holy Ghost as their fathers did, were
(even) cut to the heart, and gnashed at him with their teeth, Acts 7.51, 54.
But how can we help it? the offense is taken by them, not given by us. Now if
the malice of the wicked be such that they will take offense at that which is
well done; how circumspect should we be, and how circumspectly should we walk,
that by our evil deeds we give them no just occasion?

This occasion, though it may be given diverse ways, either when we teach some
false or uncertain doctrine, contrary to that which we have received; or when
in things indifferent we abuse our Christian liberty, eating with offense, and
wearing our apparel so as may justly give offense: yet is it chiefly meant in
this place, as spoken of that offense that is given by our evil life: for, we
ought to have an honest testimony even of them that are without: and our light
should so shine unto others in our godly conversation, that they may see our
good works through it; and by it, or beholding it, glorify our father which
is in heaven, Mat. 5.16. we must not be an occasion that the name of God be
blasphemed through us, Romans 2.24. the rather, because they that are without,
and also because they that are weak within, have their judgment led by no
other rule, nor esteem of the doctrine further, or otherwise then they see it
fruitful in the followers: therefore does the Apostle exhort the Ephesians,
since they were called in hope, to adorn the calling with their good lives;
and, being renewed in the spirit of their mind, to cast off the old man, and
to put on the new in holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. since they were lightened,
he bids them to lay aside the works of darkness, and in an honest
conversation, to do the deeds that will not fly the light. So he wrote to the
Romans, who also had bin called, by God, out of darkness into his marvelous
light; bidding them, since that night was past, to walk honestly, as in the
day, Romans 13.12, 13. that is, to do the works of the day of the Gospel, not
the unfruitful works of the night of ignorance, and of sin. The same
Apostle writing to the Church at Corinth, does in great zeal, and with many
reasons charge them to give none offense, either to the Jews, or to the
Gentiles, or to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. but to edify one another with
their good example, as well as doctrine, ver. 33. 1 Cor. 14.12. and in his
former Epistle to the Thessalonians fifth chapter, and 22. verse, for this cause
he exhorts them to abstain, not from evil only, but from all appearance and
show of evil; for, the common sort takes every one to be as he seems, and
will take a small occasion to condemn him and his profession that seems not.

I do not speak this, as if men should live to opinion and show, and that
every thing were best that seems best, or that the common sort thinks best:
but I speak it to the end we should not utterly neglect the vulgar report, or
(which is the disease of an impudent face and heart) never regard what men say
of us: for, that which Tullie spoke of friendship, is true of reports; grave
est amicitia vere accusari, sed si falso accuseris, non est negligendum. In
friendship it is a grievous thing justly to be accused, and not to be neglected
if we be accused falsely: for, albeit a clear conscience be a brazen wall;
yet, as Saint Austin notes, duo sunt necessaria conscientia, and bona fama;
conscientia propter te ipsum, bona fama propter Proximum: that is, two things
are needful in a (peaceable Christian life) good conscience, and a good name;
good conscience for our own sakes, good name for our neighbors sake. And this
later is said by Solomon to be above great riches, Pro. 22.1. that is, more
then any or all the commodities of this life. In another place, by the same
wise King in Jerusalem, it is preferred before the best ointments, and esteemed
with the most precious things, Eccles. 7.2.

David was careful not to seem delighted with Saul's death; and therefore to
satisfy others as well as to content himself, he greatly mourned for it, 2 Samuel 11.17, 19. etc. The like satisfaction he was careful to give about the
death of Abner, 2 Samuel 3.31. he would not have the suspicion of that
treacherous deed to come near him, but remoues it by making great lamentation
for him, though he had been his enemy: though it be not in our power to
bridle the tongues and pens of ill disposed persons, yet it much concerns us
to bear off their strokes with our innocence, and to be sure that we give
them no just occasion.

The true light that came into the world, entered with this condition, that men
should not only sit still in darkness, but love darkness; and not only so
much, but more then light, John 3.19. so ordinary a thing it is for truth it
self to hear ill, and where there is most need, not to be received. Christ
is termed but the Son of a Carpenter, though the Son, and great power of
God: the Apostles men of excellent tongues and speech, are said to be full of
new wine, Acts 2.13. Paul most sober, is said to be mad and beside himself,
Acts 26.24. John Baptist, to have a Devil, Mat. 11.18. the Primative
Christians to believe in a Galilean and hanged God: these did well, and yet
heard ill in the world that was not worthy of them: so true it is that the
world speaks no language so much and perfectly, as reproach and slander: and
hence it is that of late, the execution of Justice is called persecution for
the Gospel; punishment of Traitors, martyring of Saints; the preaching of
Faith, the preaching of looseness, is not our division among our selves come
to this, that on the one side all zeal is made hypocrisy, and all learning
judged vanity on the other: on either side, what is so good, but it is made
ill? and what so ill, that is not made worse?

These things (as I have said) well considered, have we not great cause to
look to our ways, and our selves circumspectly? and seeing we are to regard
our brethren in our example, as well as to clear our selves in our doings, how
wary should we be both of doing evil our selves, and of being any occasion
that evil be done by others? The Heathen Lawgiver appointed a double
punishment to a public ill-doing Magistrate: the one for doing evil, the
other, for giving an evil example. And so Christians, when they do amiss,
stand doubly charged before the Lord; once for the evil they do, and again
for the hurt that comes of it. So David bore a double sin in his sins of
adultery and murder; one before God, that was put away, 2 Samuel 12.13. another
by which he made the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme: and this was visited
with certain sharp chastisements temporal: the child that was borne must
dye, and the sword of trouble must be walking, verse 14. and verse 10.
Therefore though this counsel of a heathen man be good, Ne te quaesi veris
extra, that is, let no man seek himself in other men's mouths: yet that which
another says is necessary; viuendum recte cum propter plurima, tunc has
(precipue) ob causas, vt linguas mancipior, contemnas: we ought to live well, as
for many other reasons, so for this chiefly, that we may contemn the tongues
of railing Martius. And it cannot but be necessary for every one that does
tender his credit, though in the first place to take heed that he deserve no
evil, yet in the second to be no less careful that he be not evil spoken of
without deserving.

So we see that he had need to have as many eyes as Argus, or rather to be
full of eyes, as an Angel of God, that will be circumspect enough in an age so
full of temptations, and in days so evil: to which let me add this one
reason more, and that is, the small encouragements that this froward world
affords to those that follow after things of best report; the disgraces that it
casts upon grace in the children of light; and the no account that it makes
either of godliness or of godly persons, able to make them to turn out of their
good way, if they walk not circumspectly. And here the admonition that Christ
gave, would be remembered, it is a good antidote against carnal weakness:
blessed is he that shall not be offended in me, Mat. 11.6. and we shall have
need of it for our more comfortable passing through this vale of Baca. It is a
hard condition that we are put unto; hard (I confess) to flesh and blood to
bear the cross with patience, when our good conversation in the world is not
only left without honor, but filled with reproach: for, will it not much
trouble a man in his way (who yet walks weakly) when he shall hear with his
ears, that that which is most precious and above all worldly treasure, shall
bear no price, or be reckoned nothing in the balance, that is, in the opinion
of the greatest, and greatest part of worldly men? Besides, what encouragement
is there for good things and good men, when no rewards (here) are ascribed to
them? when no nobility is given to the new birth? no honor to the service of
God? no beauty to the beauty of the daughter of Sion, whose glory is all
within? no joy external to a good conscience? no glory to the cross? no
wisdom to the knowledge of Christ? and no riches to true godliness, which
(yet) is of so great gain, that the Merchant of this Pearl was content to
sell all, himself and all, to buie it, Mat. 13.44. If a man walk not
circumspectly, how can he out be offended at these things? how can he but
either refuse the narrow way of grace, or (being entered into it) go back with
discouragement? It is necessary therefore, and more then convenient, that we
so walk, and further (as it follows) that we walk;

Not as fools, but as wise.) By wisdom, the Apostle (here) means Christian
wisdom, and godly wariness: not such wisdom as has no folly in it: for,
who is so wise, but is in some things foolish, and at some times deals
foolishly? Hence this saying; stultor, plena sunt omnia; that is, all things
and places are full of fools and folly; or the wisest are fools in some
things: and no man so wise, that does not sometimes trip, and in some things
halt down right in his wisdom. Nevertheless good Christians may and ought
to carry themselves wisely and with good discretion in all companies, and at
all times. And in the Apostles dialect, he is counted wise, not that has no
folly in him in respect of heavenly knowledge and matters, but that has the
least folly in him, in regard of them. But fools are they that understand not,
nor will know, what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5.17. And of all fools,
there is no fool to him, and yet no folly so much followed as his, who says
in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. For such an one, if he might be seen
in his own likeness, and not masked and disguised in so many professions, (as
it were) shapes, in the which he puts himself, we should find sin a
peerless fool; yea him a fool, that so varnished with colors goes for
wise. And this couert-folly does chiefly reign in the worldly Politic, who
having learned of his Master Machiauel, that Religion was devised but to fray
fools (though Statesmen, that must not be esteemed fools, must (necessarily)
seem religious) is yet very circumspect to be reputed wise and religious,
thereby to abuse the simplicity of them that are religious indeed.

Of this kind I would there did not abound in our own State too many, who
under the name of Religion, are ready to cut the throat of Religion; and
therefore condemn Churches and Colleges, as cages of unclean Birds, that
they may make them the nests of Cormorants. Hence it is, that having shorn the
wool of our Ecclesiastical preferments; the most of our best revenues, in
many places, are by Gods heavy hand upon our sins, made but threadbare
pensions; but the stubble that they have conceived will bring forth chafe for
the unquenchable burning, and that which they seemed to have, shall be taken
from them, Luke 8.18.

Others there are, who (also) would seem wise, and are fools: and these are
(rather) negatiuely, then positiuely, religious: fools, that can reason
against all Religions, but for none: who (therefore) make Religion the Butt for
their tongues to shoot at.

And there are another sort of fools, who think they walk as warily as is
required, if they can so walk that man's Law can take no advantage of them,
though they break Gods Law daily; swearing horribly, spending time wickedly,
and mispending Gods Sabbaths. It may be said of such as Seneca said of the like
in his time: Quam angusta est innocentia ad legem bonum esse? that is, how
nearely go they to work with their honesty, that will be no better then the
Law compels them? specially that Law that enters not into the heart, but
staieth without, as it were, in the utter court of words and deeds? In this
case every man should be a Law to himself, remembering that the prauitie (even
of thoughts) has a Judge, the Judge of thoughts; and good men will do that
which is good, rather of conscience because they know it to be good, then of
constraint because it is commanded: For thus they free themselves from that
folly by which many think they walk circumspectly, when they walk closely;
and are wary, when (indeed) they be crafty: but this damned policy of the
Papists, Si non cast, tamen caute: if you cannot live chastely, at least live
charily; let us leave to the Mowles and to the Bats, Esaias 2.20. to Papists, and
to Papisticall persons: for sin is sin, though it be shut up; I do not say
in the secretest corner of our chambers, but in the very closet of our hearts:
and those cloakes that we seek to cover it with, are but the figge-leaues of
Adam, or rather nets, in the which fools think they dance unseen: but who can
conceal fire, which will manifest it self by it own light? so, who can hide
sin, that will not be hidden, though it be never so closely pent up in our
thoughts? yet the foul of the heaven will carry the voice, and that which has
wings will declare the matter, Eccles. 10.20. we have seen the happy
experience of it in our days; where nothing was, or could be practiced against
Jacob by any Esau, but it was known to Q. Elizabeth.
Rebecca, our mother in Israel, Genesis 27.42. and the Ravens of the Valley have
picked out the eyes of many of her haters, Pro. 30.17.

But say, that the light of our secret sins did not break out before men:
yet, what hope is there to hide them, when he always beholds them, who can
enter when the doors are shut, John 20.26. and those eyes I mean of
conscience, see them, that are more, in this case, then a thousand witnesses?
It may be said of these circumspect fools, vix quenquam inenies qui aperto
ostio possit viuere, ianitores conscientia, non superbia opposuit. Seneca
Epist. 96. That is, ye shall scarce find one of them that dares live with his
door open, which proceeds rather from the guiltiness of his conscience,
then for any pride to keep a porter.

To this folly, let me add another not much unlike; and this is the folly of
those that are strict in small matters, and in greater loose girded: and these,
if they were measured by the same thread that they measure others, would be
found little better then Pharisaicall fools, that strain at a Gnat, and
swallow a Camel, Matthew. 23.24. they tithe Mint, and Cummin, but leave the
weightier matters of the Law. verse 23. Dainty they are in a ceremony, but not
dainty to commit sin; and (as we use to say) they stumble at a straw, and
leap over blocks. But of all fools, they are fools of record, who think
they are circumspect enough, if they can cloak their own faults by finding
fault with others. And this folly runs like a spreading Canker; it has
ouer-taken the most part of men, who seek themselves, rather every where, then
in themselves; and who (like that woman, of whom Plutarch makes mention) sit
blind at home with their eyes in a basket, but put them on when they go
abroad. But there are none, that look less into themselves, then they that
look so much into others.

For, whereas the honest mind, the better it is it self, the less it
suspecteth others to be evil, and either looks not at all upon others, or
looks on them as on a glass, in the which her own infirmities are reflected
upon her self, and therefore is as far from judging ill of others, as she is
from thinking her self to be good: the mind that is fouled with sin, and
thereby enforced to loathe her own filthy home, is glad to fly out, and to
wander among others; and there, either by discovering their sins to cover her
own, or by reproving them, to gain to her self an opinion, and seeming not
to be as she is.

To conclude all these follies in one, and many other not spoken of, which to
single out by one and by one, were an endless labor; they walk as fools
that walk after their own sancie, and not as they have direction from God in
his word; and therefore, in the next place, it is required that wisdom be
the Guide to our circumspect walking.

But as wise.) Here, least any man might be deceived in the word, or mistake
what true wisdom is, in the 17. verse, that follows, it is said to be that,
which understands what the will of the Lord is: excluding all wisdom of the
flesh, and judging none wise, but who are made wise by the word to salvation.
Where (yet) the Apostle does not so oppose between that wisdom which is of
God, and that excellent faculty of understanding, which is a gift of the
spirit of God common to good and bad, to the spiritual, and in the natural
man, as if none were able to conceive the things of God but men unlearned, and
men not trained up in human knowledges: for, howsoever moral wisdom is
mere foolishness with God, when in the surges of her own conceit, she is
lifted up above that which is meet; yet when she holds her own proper
course and channel, in sobriety, she proves an instrument of much service to
Gods glory, and Church: and therefore (as one speaks of many) si vtiscias
ancilla est, si nescias, Domina: that is, if thou can tell how to use her,
she is thy servant, but if thou can not, she will be thy mistress: so may it
be said of wisdom acquired with industry; being sanctified thou may command
her; not directed aright, she will not serve but command thee. To be wise then,
is so to be by the word of God: more generally, to be wise, is to walk in a
contrary way to fools. How they walk we have heard: and so we have heard how
we ought to walk: that is, as Antipodes to them, and (as was said) in
contrary ways.

It is sole wisdom to fear God, and one maine point of it is, to walk in
his Commandments, Eccles. 12.13. Psalm. 111.10. Pro. 1.7. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Job
further, the fear of the Lord it wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding, Job 28.28. It was once said by one, that it was res ingeniosa
esse Christianum: a matter of wit to be a Christian: now it may be said (all
things well considered) that it is a point of great wisdom to be a good
Christian: for though the rules of Christian life be so constantly true, as
that they all draw the variety of our ways, and the differences of our
callings to that one thing which is necessary, Luke 10.42. as to their proper
center, yet are there in the world courses of our natural life, so many cases,
and some of conscience, which require a right judgment, in regard of
circumstances and manner of doing: that he had need of more then a mind to
do well, that will walk as he ought in things honest toward them that are
without, and in things indifferent toward them that are weak within: for we
must not think that it is perfect wisdom only to understand the will of
God, but perfect and true wisdom is, to express it to the life, in all the
actions of our life. To do ootherwise, or contrary, is not to walk wisely,
but as fools.

And therefore has the Scripture concluded all unrighteousness under the name
of folly; whether it be of ignorance in the mind, or perverseness in the
affections and will: so Miriams sin of grudging against her brother and Lord
Moses, is called a foolish sin, Number. 12.11. so the Israelites a froward
people, are said to be a foolish people, Deuteronomy. 32.6. and Samuel told Saul, when
he had done wickedly, that he did foolishly, 1 Samuel 13.13. David confesses as
much against himself, after he had numbered the people, saying: I have done
very foolishly, 2 Samuel 24.10. the Princes of Zoan are called fools, Esaias
19.11. so are the wicked people in Jeremy, 4.22. and the Pharisees that were
hypocrites, Mat. 23.16, 17. and the rich man that was covetous, Luke 12.20. and
the two Disciples that believed not, Luke 24.25. The Gentiles also are called
fools that knowing God, glorified him not as God, Romans 1.21, 22. and Paul
says to the Apostate Galathians, foolish Galathians, Gal. 3.1.

And thus it is plain that all unrighteousness is folly, and that all workers
of iniquity are fools. If therefore we will be truly wise, we must be wise
to do good, and simple to that which is evil. The heart of a wise man is at
his right hand: but the heart of a fool is at his left, says Saloman, Eccles.
10.2. It is properly understood of the good and bad success that follows the
actions of the wise, and foolish: and yet it may not improperly be referred to
their different courses of life; as that the heart of the wise is ever
inclining to good, and the heart of fools ever declining, as by a left hand
from it. And this seems to be the reason why the Philosopher, as he
accounted wisdom the Queen and life of all moral virtues; so he did shut up
all vices in that one of folly. Where he thought not enough to do bona, the
things that were good, except we did them been, that is, wisely and well in
every circumstance: for if we err but in one circumstance we do ill; and we
cannot do perfectly well, unless well in all: therefore in the not perfection
of our ways, whose very perfection (as Hierome says) is to acknowledge how
far we are from perfection. Our first point of wisdom is, not only to
commit no folly, but to have an eye to the good we do, and to that which we
would do wisely, that it be good both in substance, and in manner of doing,
and thoroughly and in every part good; yea, well and good; well, as from us, and
good to our neighbor.

Further, we may be said to walk wisely, when we not only seem, but are
Religious; and walk, both as the Law requires, and as good conscience directs;
not thinking it enough to walk closely, unless we walk innocently. And our
walking is with wisdom, if we have the greatest care of the greatest
matters: if we turn our eyes from others to our selves; for the just man is
the first accuser of himself; and if we follow what is commanded, not what we
fancy in Religion: for folly has this misery, to be pleased with it self:
and it is hard to find a man so foolish, that thinks not himself wise: so
incurable is the sickness of those that are wise in their own opinion.

But what wisdom is in us, rejecting the word of the Lord? Ier. 8.9. and how
can we be said to walk wisely, who walk not after true wisdom, but after
Machiauell? In Christian virtues we do our duties to halues, and therein
profess our selves wise: is this to walk wisely? We draw examples into
rules, and presume that every thing is lawfully done, that is done commonly.
Many think it to be a safe and good plea to say, that either they were not the
first that did so, or that they do no more then others; Is there any wisdom
in this? but such shall one day find, that as they have sinned with the
multitude, they shall be punished with the multitude, and bear them company in
their destruction, as they bore them company in their sin: they finned by
example, but they shall be punished in their own persons, when it will be but
cold comfort to them to go to hell with company. And then what wisdom will
it be to seek a defense either in the example, or custom of evil?

Here, I would we that should teach others, could teach our selves: wisdom
should be in our mouths, and the virtue of it in our ways: but do we not
follow the drove to the shambles, that should lead the sheep of the slaughter
to Christ? We that should turn others from the world, do we not cleave to
the world our selves? and have we not our conversation in covetousness, that
say to another, thou shall not covet? We should conquer the world, and has
not the world made a conquest of us? We are not under that tyranny that did
Cloister the Ministers of the Gospel from these outward things, and from all
liberty in them: but are we so circumspectly wise, as to use this our
liberty without scandal? Do we govern our families to the example of
others? Do we use the World as if we used it not? Or rather do we not use
it, as if we had skill to use nothing else? Or, as if it were our charge, and
not the flock of Christ committed to us? Many have a mind to enter the course
of godliness, who still stand at the gate, or go back, taking a longer day.
For, they defer the resolution, thinking they can never begin to late,
where true Christians think, they can never begin too soon. One speaking of
folly, speaks well of such: Inter caeter a mala hoc quoque habet stultitia,
semper incipit viuere; among many other evils that folly has, this is one,
she is ever beginning to live. Do such walk wisely? To these we may add
another kind of fools, that walk no better. And they are such as make
(indeed) more haste to begin, but with as ill speed: for they dwell upon
their beginnings, and are never led forward to perfection. Hebr. 6.1. Having
gotten the reputation of forward men, they spend upon the stock of that poor
credit of theirs, till all be gone. And these, in steed of walking wisely,
walk as foolishly as any: for, besides that they leave to be good, they
desire to be no better; and they left (but) the World with Demas, to return
more violently to it; before they held it in one hand, now they embrace it with
both. 2 Timothy 4.10.

Quest. But is every walking wisely walking well? Ans. Every walking wisely
according to the word; wherein, and wherein only is true wisdom, is safe
walking and walking well: not else, for wisdom in her corruption is the mother
of heresy for opinion, and of disobedience for action: yet humbled under the
spirit, and directed by the word, she becomes both a bulwark for truth, and a
guide for well doing. So the Apostle understands wisdom, Ephesians. 1.8. saying,
that God was abundant toward us in all wisdom and knowledge. And here he
makes these two, to wit, sapience, whereby we understand heavenly things; and
prudence, whereby we rightly apply whatsoever we understand of God in heavenly
things, to the duties of our Christian life, these (I say) he makes two maine
props of faith: by which it is plain that policy and true religion are not
such strangers as some would make them. Indeed craft and true religion can
never meet, but wisdom and godliness may: and Christian policy in
Christians is sometimes, and for some purposes necessary: therefore our Savior
Christ, when he sent his Disciples, as Sheep among Wolves, bidding them to be
wise as Serpents: not wise Serpents, that is, craftily wise; but yet wise as
Serpents, that is, politiquely so. He requires (I grant) simplicity of them:
but it is the simplicity, not of Asses, but of Doves, Mat. 10.16. that is,
innocent: simplicity, not silly simplicity. And this wisdom Paul used in
the council, when he cast a bone between the Sadduces and the Pharisees, Acts
23.6, 7. saying, I am a Pharise, the son of a Pharise, of the hope of the
resurrection of the dead am I accused: and so set them together.

This, no way justifies that mystery of iniquity that works in those
faithless and crafty Jesuits, whom the father of errors sends over unto
us; men of as many souls, as Proteus had faces: Quo teneam vultus mutantem
Protea nodo? says the Poet: that is, how shall we lay a net for such
changelings? or catch, as in a knot, such slippery Eeles, and flies of Rome,
that break through all Laws, and have half in their lips, and half in their
heart and conscience?

These are not godly but wickedly wise, nor without guile wise, but wise to do
evil. But wherein (chiefly) consists spiritual wisdom, and circumspect
walking? in, and by redeeming the time: for it follows.

VERSE. 16. Redeeming the time: for the days are evil.


THey that redeem the season, making every time the time of repentance, are
spiritually wise, and do circumspectly walk. Not they that apply themselves
to all times, nor they that vainly spend the good hours of time: for such
pour out their time, as water that is spilt, which cannot be gathered up
again; and do not redeem time, but loos (...) To redeem the time
(therefore) is, not to neglec^ (...) grace that it offers: for though the
time be (...) too late, when a man does repent, and God be of (...) suffering
and great patience; yet have we no patent of that acceptable time of grace:
and he that bids us, while we have the light, to believe in the light, John
12.36. gives us to understand that the having of the light is no inheritance.

Gods peculiar people (the Jews) had the light of the world first offered to
them in Christ's Preaching and Miracles, but when they loved darkness more
then light, because their deeds were evil, John 3.19. their light was put out
in deep darkness, in which they wander from the Lord of life, to this day:
the day of salvation, or acceptable day, that was offered them, they regarded
not; then came this long John 9.4.
night of their banishment from the privileges of Gods people: and God has
given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that
they should not hear, Romans 11.6. the darkness that was upon the Gentiles is
cast upon them; and they are a people that know not whether they go, John
12.35. This came upon them, because they would not know (by way of redemption)
in their day, those things which belonged unto their peace; and now they are
hid from their eyes, Luke 19.42. Acts 13.46.

The seven Churches of Asia were seven golden Candlestickes, and had goodly
lights burning upon them: but when by careless negligence, they fell away from
better to worse, who should have proceeded from good to better; not redeeming
time, but making large pennyworths of it for pernicious errors and carnal
looseness, by which they fall away more and more, Esaias 1.5. their Candlesticks
were removed, and their glorious light put out, and they made a prey to the
darkness of Mahomet. It is an high point of wisdom (therefore) to keep
even reckoning with our time, and not to run behind hand with good hours;
for occasion is bald behind, and they that are wise will take hold of her
fore-locke: though the Lord be always to be sought, yet then specially, while
he may be found, Esaias 55.6. and though always to be called upon, yet chiefly
and most, when he is near, ibid. There was nothing more importantly objected
to Jerusalem, then that she remembered not her latter end, Lam. 1.9. and God, by
Jerusalem, reproves his peoples negligence in taking hold of times and seasons
for their turning to him, making the simple creatures of the air, in their
kind, to give sentence against them: for they know their appointed times, and
keep the time of their coming, says the Lord, (he speaks of the Storke,
the Turtle, Crane, and Swallow that observe this order) but my people know not
(says he) the judgment of their God, Ier. 8.7. Though he that came at the
eleauenth hour, had his penny, Mat. 20.9. yet trust not to that: for, thou
may be in hell long before thou see that hour, and that is set down to keep
us from despair, not to harten us to presumption.

As (therefore) wise Merchants take the present fittest time for the buying of
their commodities: so wise Christians, the best Merchants of time, should take
the present season for the making of it theirs, by well-doing: and having
neglected (already) many good hours, and yet having more offered (though they
cannot call back one minute of time past) they should double their pains and
diligence about the gainefull employment of those that are before them, thereby
to make (as it were) some amends or satisfaction for their losses before, doing
as much good now, as they might have done, both now and then. To move us to
this; let us consider (first) how nimble and fleet time is, and how soon it
passes away: the time past is gone, the time to come is not yet: only the
present may be called time, and what is it? or of what continuance, being no
sooner come, then it is gone again? Then what fools are they that so much
trouble themselves with the getting away of time that passes so quickly,
nothing more? But such thoughts wise men are eased of, and fools may spare;
time will go fast enough without driving; and therefore let our greatest care
be to gather up the fragments and very crummes of time that nothing be lost,
John 6.12.

Secondly, let us consider how precious time is, and therefore how worthy to be
redeemed. Good husbands know this, who will loose no time for their wealth and
markets: And Philosophers, who knew not any life hereafter, how were they set
for the redeeming of time in matters of no worth? How loath were they to unbend
their vain studies for their very meals and natural rest? And shall we
think the time long, and the husbandry ill spent that is bestowed upon wares
of better nature then worldly riches, that is, that is laid out upon heavenly
wealth, and the true treasure? Shall the heathen so occupy time for uncertain
markets; and shall we seeing the markets we deal in, are of our certain
redemption, tarry at home in our idleness, and loose so precious hours?

Thirdly, let us consider how little of our time is in our own power: only
the time present is ours, and how small a thing that is we have heard; the
time past is gone from us, and for hereafter, who has power of that, that may
be? For, our life is a vapor, and in a moment we may be taken away.

Fourthly, let us consider how short our time is; and learn of Moses, the man
of God, by so poor an Arithmeticke of our days, to number them wisely, not by
the Church-booke, but by the true fear of God. Psalm. 90.12. Every day winds
up some part of the thread of our life, which is of no great length in the
longest liver. The farther we pass from the first day of our birth, the nearer
we draw to the last hour of our life: and so we go but to death, and not a
foot from it,; therefore says the Apostle Saint Paul, while you have time do
good to all. Gal. 6.10. As if he had said, you have no such great abundance of
it, that you can spare any.

Fifthly, let us consider, that our adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion
walks about seeking whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8. that is, the Devil
will loose no time to destroy us, and therefore let us redeem all hours of
time to save our selves and others. I speak to such as have the charge of
others in the ministry, or (more generally) in the Gospel. This Apostle of
ours did so: for writing to Timothy he says: These things write I unto thee
trusting to come shortly, 1. Tim. 3.14. He was unwilling to loose any time,
which he might husband profitably for Gods glory and the Churches service;
else he might have said, because I mean to come shortly I will not write now.
But that that may be done to day, must not be put off till the morrow or the
next day: and the Apostle would loose no time, that the devil might not be
any gainer by him. Which should stir up negligent Ministers, who give Satan
time too much, to spoil the Lords inheritance. But look what we loose, the
Devil gets; if we scatter time, he will gather it; and where we are idle he
works.

Sixthly, let us consider that time must be reckoned for, though (here) we
make no conscience to loose whole days, and weeks, and months, yet we shall
one day pay to God the shot of time, in the strict account of our hours, when
our poor souls shall be committed to torments, and body and soul shall be
cast into hell. This should make us enter into a trembling consideration with
our selves about our great arrerage of time; as to think how much is upon the
book for excessive sleep, for immoderate gaming, for our carnal fellowship,
for much idle talk, vain thoughts, and inordinate worldliness: and finding
so much lost and spent already, do as wise husbands in such a case should do;
that is, grieve for that which is past, and be better husbands hereafter of
all our hours, redeeming the time behind, and beginning prouidently to save,
before all be gone.

Seventhly, let us consider and call to mind the example of Christ, whose
doings, as our light we should follow, and to whose person, as our best
precedent, we should conform. he says, John 9.4. I must work the works of
him that sent me, while it is day: he says, he must, and it is sure he did;
for he spent the day in teaching, and the night in prayer. Luke 6.12. and
21.37.

Let us (eighthly) consider, that as God has appointed that good should be
done; so he has set the opertunities and seasons wherein to do it; and
therefore has made every thing beautiful in the time thereof. Eccles. 3.11.
Now, if we neglect this time with Jerusalem, what can we look for, but that
the line of Jerusalem should be spread over us for such our negligence, and more
then brutish contempt of good hours? Luke 19.42, 43, 44.

And now, to cast up the reckoning of all that has been spoken, let us put
these together; the nothing of our flight time: the price it carries with the
children of wisdom: how little of it is in our own power; how short and
flitting it is; how much Satan (to teach, or shame us) sets by it for his
own ends; that hours, and minutes must be accounted for: that Christ (for our
imitation) lost no hour of time for his Fathers service, and Glory: and that
good is to be done, in that time and season, that God (most wise) has
appointed to it; and having made this account, let us deny (if we can) that
time is to be redeemed.

O (then) let us not suffer any good occasion of doing good to slip away from
us, but let us lay sure hold of it, exhorting one another, while it is called
to day. Hebr. 3.13. Every moment of our life, is the opportunity given for
amendment of life, it is that acceptable time, and day of salvation, spoken of,
2 Cor. 6.2. that time of life, wherein God visits us with his Word and
Gospel, speaking to us by his Word, and knocking at our hearts by his mercies,
and judgments: Oh, let us not suffer the blessing of these golden times to be
lost, or in vain to be bestowed upon us.

Some good things reach not unto, nor may be done at all times, as the hearing
and reading of the Word, the reading of good books, conference, solemn, and
set prayer, admonition, reproof, alms: For, these must have, and enjoy their
own oportunities; but every time, is a time of turning to God, all times are
fit times for the exercise of our faith, for repentance of sins, for
amendment of life, and for reconciliation with God: Oh (therefore) let these
seasons and oportunities of times in Gods mercy, be ever dear unto us, let us
defer no means or time, that the Lord shall offer (fitly) to us for these
duties, but redeem them with our present industry, and labor of love, not
receiving so much grace in vain.

Let us consider our misspent time, and by greater diligence in well doing,
fetch as much of it (as we can) back again by running the way of Gods
Commandments. Psalm. 119.32. Let Saul run to the harp of his pleasures, and
they that are drunken with the delights of life, as with that wine wherein is
excess, let them make themselves music with merry fellowship, to drive away
dumpes: but let us, to whom God has given a better mind, and another spirit,
take heed how we forfeite the opportunity of repentance, for such vain
matters: and let us remember, that time well past, is the best pastime in the
World. He that other ways, passes his time, turns his pastime into sin.

And because as was said, our time goes away fast enough, faster then a Post,
and as soon as a thought, what need we (so much and ordinarily) in vain
sports to seek remedies against it? The years we have seen are gone, the few
that are behind, will not tarry long after; and one end shall be unto all.
This end is death, the common end of the living, and the happy end of the
righteous. Let it be our care (therefore) to redeem time, not to cast it
away, and our souls with it, upon the pleasures of sin, as they, who do
more service to their bellies in one day, then they do, in a whole year of
days, to God.

Wary and wel-thriuing husbands, having had some great loss, will watch all
Markets, and oportunities to recover it. Now what greater loss, can come to a
(truly) and welthriuing Christian, then his great loss of the time of the
Gospel, which is the time of repentance: and should not this force him to
follow earnestly, and continually, all the Markets and oportunities of Religion
that he can hear of, thereby to make up his former great loss, at such
Christian assemblies?

The wayfaring man, having slept too long in bed, or sat too late at dinner,
will make amends for it by making more haste (afterward) in his way: so we
that travel to our own Country of heaven; having before, either slept out
our good time in an idle life, or sat it out in pleasures, should be (by so
much the more) careful hereafter, to quit the way faster, by giving all
diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. for it is
sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of our life after the lust
of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, 1 Peter 4.3. Now it is high time, that
we bestow that well and carefully in Gods service, that is to come; redeeming
with our bodies, goods, and life (if need were) that which is past, We heard
how our Savior Christ bestowed all his hours, to the glory of his Father and
good of mankind: at great feasts he would loose no time; and at one feast,
how many things taught he concerning the feasts of Christians, and bread of
heaven? Luk 14.15, 16. etc. At Jacobs Well, when he talked with the woman that
was a harlot; how did he forget his own need of the water of the Well, to
satisfy her necessity with the waters of the Well of life? John 4.7, 10, 11,
12. etc. how after did he neglect his own meat, to do that (which was his
meat and drink) the will of his Father? John 4.34. What occasion did he omit
to do good? by occasions of the harvest, how did he provide and speak for his
fathers spiritual harvest? Mat. 9.37.38. And by occasion of leaven, how did
he warn his Disciples of the leaven of corrupt doctrine and corrupt men? Mat.
16.11. And what is this but to teach us to redeem time by his example that
lost none?

And if filthy persons can take all occasions of filthy talk and doings; shall
we (that are Saints by calling) loose any occasion of speaking well, and doing
good, to the edification of our selves and others? so much the rather (as it
follows in the last place) because

The days are evil.) No day considered in it self, is evil; and all days,
considered in their Creator, and first creation, are good, Genesis 1.31. Here then
we must confess a trope, and that the days are not properly, but by a figure,
evil; that is evil, for the evils in them: or, because they are infected with
the pitch and canker of the world, that lies wholly in wickedness, 1 John
5.19. So the days here are said to be evil, because the men in them were
evil. And this is reason enough to persuade the children of God to be good
husbands of their hours, and to take heed into what places and companies they
come, least they take the infection, as a man may coming into a plaguy-house:
for no plaguie air can so soon infect the body, as the air of evil company
may the soul, This is plain by the examples of Lot, and Joseph, and of David
among the Philistims. Lot learned to drink liberally in Sodom, and did so out
of Sodom, Genesis 19.33.35. Joseph in the Court of Pharaoh, courted it with
dissembling, and swearing by the life of Pharaoh, Gen 42.15. and David, who
suffered much, and learned great obedience by the things which he suffered;
being but a while among the uncircumcised Philistims, learned to lie and to
dissemble, 1 Samuel 27.10.11.

Seeing (therefore) the days are so evil, that is, the men in them; how
circumspectly should good men walk, and wisely pass their time, least they be
circumuented? seeing so many thorns are about them, how wary should they be
both what they touch, and how they go? The world will say, because the days
are evil, let us be evil for company: but the spirit says not so; but
redeem the season, because the days are evil: that is, though others be
naught, and stark naught, yet be you good and very good: good your selves, and
means to make others good: and some say, the days are evil, therefore as the
days are, so be ye: but the spirit says, the days are evil, therefore take
heed ye be not as they are; that is, naught as they be. But were the days
evil when the Apostle wrote? then what should let us to call them evil now?
or were they (then) in the positive, evil? they are (now) in the suparlatiue,
worst: for that that was full then, runs over now; iniquity I mean, that
has gotten the upper hand, and works with both hands.

At the reformation of the Gospel, by the zeal of blessed Queen Elizabeth,
one devil was cast out, but seven have returned since, Luke 11.26. we have
seen the growth of spiritual Esau among us, Genesis 25.27. the evil men and
deceivers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. but
we grow not as Jacob, from good to better: we are turned from Popery, but are
we turned to the living God? and not turned rather from him to Atheism: that
is, from the false God, to no God? the furnace of strange lusts, as that of
Nabuchodonosor in Babylon, is it not come from one heating, to be heated seven
times more in our days, then in any age before us, Dan. 3.19. that is, is not
lust (the furnace) seven times more lustful? Pride seven times more proud?
Wantonness, seven times more wanton? Adultery, seven times more adulterer?
Drunkenness, seven times more drunkard? and every sin, is it not seven
times more sinful? and do we grow as Jacob? or rather do we not grow as
Esau, from evil to worse? Genesis 25.27. What treasons in Court? What poisonings
at Court? What unwonted profaneness in Court and Country?

In our Saviors days men sold and bought in the Church; in our times,
Churches themselves are bought and sold, John 2.24. In the Apostolic and first
times of the Gospel, the Heathen only persecuted Christians: in our age of
it, Manasseh Ephraim, Ephraim Manasseh, and both against Judah, Esaias 9.21.
Jesuits and Priests one against another; and both against the Gospel: nay
(which is a war more unnatural) Judah against it self: and the divisions of
Rubin have bred great thoughts of heart, Iud. 5.15. I cannot contain, to
remember what mischiefs this bitter war of brethren has already, and is
like further to bring forth: and what Christian heart can abstain from sighs
and lamentations, to see so many grave, wise, and learned Christians to molest
one another? The Shepherds to be at variance? the poor Sheep (for whom the
Lord Jesus shed his most precious blood) to be so turned out to Wolves and
spoil? the common people to be so distracted? errors and Atheism so to
abound, and get head? the cause and glory of the Gospel so to be weakened; and
men also discouraged by them, by whom they should be lured and begotten to the
truth; that it may truly be said in our days, which was spoken long since;
Quae modo matter erat, formam capit illa Nouercae; and quos lacte aliut,
conficit illa flagris: that is, She that was a mother becomes stepmother, and
whom once she suckled with milk, she torments with stripes?

Our contention is hotter and hotter, our enemies increase that trouble us;
they that hate us laugh, but the Church weeps that should be comforted by us;
and though she bleed in a vein of ignorance through our common distraction;
yet no man says to his brethren at variance; Why strive ye? why do ye wrong
one to another? Acts 7.26. O! that it were considered what great loss the
Church (daily) suffers by this plague of dissension? O! that we had betimes,
or would yet in time remember, How good a thing it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity? If we did, or had done so, the storm that waxes thicker
and thicker had bin scattered, and we should have seen a fair calm of peace
in the Churches of England, at this day: but our breach is as the Sea, and
these evil days know nothing of the ways of peace.

But to go on: in the Apostles days, and near them; what running to the
Gospel? now, what running from it? then, what plainness in teachers? now,
what equivocation? then, what obedience to heathen Caesar? now, what practicing
against Christian Caesar's? then, what strengthening of the Gospel? now, what
vnder-mining it by the builders themselves? It were infinite to speak even of
general evils, that are infinite; and therefore I will come to an issue with
you, and draw to an end.

Seeing the days are (thus) evil; the greater wisdom is required of us, and
must be used by us, for our avoiding of the infection of that corrupt
fellowship and misgouernment that (like venom) sheds it self upon all that
come near it. So far off we must be, because the days are evil; from being
evil as they are, that we must take the more pains, and heed to be good.
And here, we should rather go alone in the narrow way, then follow a multitude
to do evil, Exodus 23.2. If it be of the fashion to be evil; we must be like
unto Christ, and resemble good Christians, who do not fashion themselus like
unto this world, Romans 12.2. but are in their Masters fashion, and conform to
him. But some will do as the world does, and go whither the most lead them;
and whither is that? even to the house where the dead are, Pro. 9.18. and what
to do? to be mad with the company, to be baited with their allurements, and to
eat of such things as please them: but no example should prevail so far
(though of thousands that so do) as to draw us into ways of wickedness with
follies children: and if we would not be damned with such mates, we must not
follow their damnable ways, their pipes of smoke, and pots of excess.

Again, some fear not the contagious air of any company: why, what is their
confidence? No company (say they) can do us hurt. Can it not? and why can it
not hurt them? Is it because they are (already) so bad, that no company can
make them worse? or have they forgotten, what company was able to do against
Peter himself (a far holier man then themselves) in Caiaphas hall? Mat.
26.70, 72, 74. Likewise, how it prevailed against righteous Lot, virtuous
Joseph, and David, Gods own King? If these were entangled, shall they go
free? if these carried with them a smatch of the company, that yet they liked
not; shall they that run desperately upon the sharp of this worldly
fellowship, and take pleasure in it, keep their state still? It cannot be: and
therefore (to make my end here) I beseech you remember your great danger, and
forget not your holy calling in these evil days; so evil, that you may not
be moved from your hope: for this cause, take unto you the whole armor of
God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day: and, having finished all
things stand fast. Ephesians. 6.13. The God of power give you to be so minded: and
to this, God the Father, with his holy Son Christ Jesus, and the Spirit of
both; three persons in Trinity, one God in unity, be rendered all glory,
dominion, and honor, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE SHORT PROSPERITY of the Wicked: AND THE HAPPY ESTATE of the JUST.
PSALM. 37. Ver. 35, 36, 37. I have seen the wicked in great power: and
spreading himself like a green Bay Tree.

Yet he passed away, and lo he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not
be found.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace.


I Have seen the wicked strong, etc. There are two things obseruable in this
Scripture: the unstable prosperity of the wicked, verse. 35, 36. and the
certain and constant felicity of the righteous, verse. 37. Albeit that the
wicked man be never so strong, and in the pride of his heart, spread abroad,
like a green Bay Tree, never so fair; yet he suddenly passes, and is little
marked, he vanishes speedily, and is as little remembered: whereas the just and
upright man, though his life be a kind of warfare on earth, finds peace at
the last; and after his red evening a fair day follows, Mat. 16.2. This is
the sum and scope of these three verses. A point (if ever) necessary, now most
needful for our present times and state; and such as can never be too much
urged, or enough considered, specially since it is a thing incident to the
best, to look but on the outside of things, and to measure the secret
judgments of God with the scant yard of his outward blessings: whereas indeed
his very chastenings are blessings; and that (which we account blessing) but a
fatning to the slaughter: for, not to say any thing of mere flesh and blood,
who say in their hearts there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. or at the best no
Providence of God, Quod malis been est, and bonis male: seeing it goes well
with those that are evil, and ill with those that are good, it is a temptation
greater then the very children of God can overcome or resist, as long as they
are clothed with this earthly and mortal tabernacle, to see the wicked so
greatly and high to rise above the head of the righteous; and to have, not a
large measure, but such an ouer-measure of these commodities and blessings that
they so much want; whose godliness (notwithstanding) has the promise of the
life present, and not only, of the life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. for albeit
godliness be great, of it self (I do not say) riches, but gain, and have
enough in it self, to commend it for it self, to all that are godly-wise; yet
I know not how it comes to pass, that we praise the thing, but labor for
the reward, and stand more upon the fruit, then the conscience of a good work.

We can be content with the old people and children of Israel, to give an ear
to the Commandment of loving the Lord, and of fearing him, and swearing by his
name, as we find it of record, in Deuteronomie chapter 6 and 8. but our chief
respect and special eye is to the promises there spoken of; as the prolonging
of our days in the Land, our increase therein, and prosperity in the
blessings thereof; our having of Cities which we builded not, houses full of
goods which we filled not; Wels which we dug not; Vineyards and
Oliue-trees which we planted not, Deuteronomy. 6.2, 3, 10, 11. We can be content to
seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, Mat. 6.33. but not in the
first place, and with our first care, and our zeal will soon wax cold if all
other things be not added to us. In a word, we can be content to think that
godliness is great riches; but if the promises which it has of this life, be
not presently performed to it, we think we have cleansed our hearts in vain,
and washed our hands in innocence, Psalm 73.13.

Howbeit, the want of these outward things in the godly, though it be a
tentation very grievous, does not so much trouble them, as that they are poured
out in so great plenty and fullness upon the wicked: for howsoever there are to
be found, that have so far profited in the School of the cross, that they
can suffer many things for Christ, and for his name and testimony, with great
patience and sound joy: yet who is he that is not moved beyond his patience,
and afflicted even above the measure of his affliction, to see the wicked, not
only free from troubles, in the day of his trouble, but a worker of his woe,
and of the straits that he is in; and not only armed with power against him,
but insulting with pride over him? Nay, what greater indignity and heavier
cross can there come to the godly, then to have the foot of pride to come
against him, and the hand of wickedness to be upon him? Ps. 36.11. Who more
exercised then David, and therefore more like to endure troubles then he? yet
in this case, his feet were almost gone, his steps had well near slipped, Psalm.
73.2. Who more patient then Job, that mirror or rather miracle of patience?
yet in this very case, he was so far from silence (one of the truest signs
of patience) that he questioneth why the wicked should live, wax old, and
grow in wealth? Job 21.7. Who apter to melt into tears, for the daughter of
Sion in affliction, then weeping Jeremy? yet in this point also he grows to
a degree of choler, and reasons with God himself about the matter, asking
why the way of the wicked should prosper, and they be in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? Ier. 12.1. Because God is of pure eyes, and cannot
behold evil; therefore, as if he were bound to give an account of his matters
to man, Habacucke calls him forth, as if it were before the bar to answer him,
Why he looks upon the transgression, and holds his tongue, when the wicked
deuoures the man that is more righteous then he? Hab. 1.13.

So great an eyesore is the greatness of the wicked to the consciences of the
godly* which infirmity in them (to call it as it is) as it grows from no
other cause, and as it were root, but that we measure them by their present
estates: so has it no other remedy, but to examine them by their ends; in the
which we shall find as great cause of comfort for the one, as we take of
grief at the other.

And therefore against all such discomforts and vnsetlings, caused by a wrie
consideration of Gods straight and just ways in all that he does (who can do
nothing but that which is equal and good) let us take David's experience, and
David's word here, I have seen: as if he had said; but I see it not now: or
the wicked man was strong, but is not: and was great, but is nothing now and no
where, save in some strong prison, or judged to some base death: for, therefore
has David the King set down thus much for our learning, drawn (as it were)
out of the bosom of his own experience, that we should not be offended too
much at the prosperity of the ungodly, as he himself once was: because,
howsoever (for these outward matters) he be strong and in power, and (which is
the effect of worldly power) spread, and vaunt himself like a green Bay,
which can hardly wither: yet he passed away and was gone: neither could he be
found with seeking: where yet the upright and just man, though his present case
seem miserable, his everlasting estate is not so, and his end is peace.

And this kind of arguing from the experience of Gods Saints, in the
Scriptures, must needs be of force (if any) to settle and quiet us in the
strongest assaults of the wickeds prosperity, which is so short and miserable
at last: for, though the wisdom of the world make experience but the Master
of fools, and reason the wisest teacher: yet in the right search of Gods
judgments, it is of force to set Reason it self to Schcole, and to convince
the best wisdom in Schools, of folly: for it is not to be doubted, but that
as whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning: so the
experience of David in this place, and of others in other Scriptures, is set
down and registered for a direction and rule to our judgments upon like
occasions as this was: not that the judgments of God, in these our days, are
not legible by a weak eye, as written in capital letters, that all may read:
but that they may be less doubted of, having the consent and witness of other
times. And if it be true which one speaks of other stories; that, nescire
quid, antequam natus sis, gestum fuerit, quid est aliud quam semper esse
puerum? not to know what was done before thou wast borne, what is it, but still
to be a child? How can they, who are not acquainted with the experiences of
Gods children, in the Bibles story (matters that were done long before their
cradle) but be very babes in knowledge?

It is but a small thing that any one can observe and see in so short a life as
we now have, whereof the one part is gone before we think, and (while we
think) the other: and (therefore) to enrich our observation, it is necessary
that we should be acquainted with Gods marvelous works, done before our time,
and written for our learning. It pleases God (sometimes) to set some upon
Stages, in whose persons he (lively) acts his judgments for the instruction
of an age (our memory and age has seen some, and some (yet) it may behold at
this day:) yet does he it not to the end we should content our selves with our
own experience, but that we should compare wisely together what has bin done
in our own days, and in the times before us. But now to the matter.

David says, He saw, etc. He had not only experience by reading what God
had strangely done before his time, but was an eyewitness of many great
alterations which happened even in his own time, as in the story of his own
life, and in the books of Samuel and the Chronicles may be seen: He himself
saw the power and weakness both of Saul and Absalom; He saw them green as a
Bay Tree, and lived to see them as the green grass, that being cut down
withers. In the 73. Psalm, he saw that which much offended him, to wit, the
wicked far exalted above the godly: for their bodies he saw them lusty and
strong, and in no peril of death: free from those troubles in their mind that
others feel; the plague not once touching them that consumes others. He saw
how they drunk large blessings of a full cup: how their eyes were swollen, and
stood out with fatness, which made many weak and simple ones to follow them:
and how (notwithstanding that their desires were enlarged as hell) yet they had
more then heart could wish: and as he saw their prosperity, so he beheld
their destruction which came suddenly: who (therefore) might more fitly be
compared to green grass then to a green Bay.

Job saw the like, for speaking of the wicked, he says; Their seed is
established in their sight, and their generation before their eyes: their
houses are peaceable without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them: they
send forth their children as sheep, and their sons dance: their Bull
gendreth and fails not, their Cow calueth, and casts not her calfe, Job
21.8, 9, 10, 11. These were great blessings, and here was a goodly Bay Tree:
but how soon they vanished, and it was gone, they saw: and therefore he
adds that, suddenly they went down to the grave, verse 13. their bodies to
the earth, and their souls to hell.

And (therefore) though their prosperity were as great as that of that famous
Polycrates among the Grecians, of whom it is written, that all things went so
well with him, that when, in despite of that which they called Fortune, he
cast a Ring of no small account into the Sea, it was brought again unto him in
the belly of a fish, which was presented to him by a poor fisherman: yet the
curse of God is in the mean while digging at their root; and their house, with
all that they hold precious, shall suddenly fall upon themselves: and of that
house it shall be said; the fall thereof was great, Mat. 7.27. For further
proof in this point we shall not need to go far: Let us but consider what
has bin done at home lately, and it cannot but be fresh in our memories, how
that some great in favor at Court, and greatly feared for their Princes favor
in the Country; though they were nestled among the Eagles, and gat up into the
sides of the North with that Son of the morning; though they joined land to
land, as if they would live alone, and builded houses as if they would live
ever, making no conscience, by the commodious lying of Naboths Vineyard to
their own fair demaines, to take it from him, 1 King. 21.1. yet came down
suddenly, and their nests with them in one day: one day in the Court of
prosperity, and the next day in the prison of sorrow, or hand of death.

In the worlds opinion very strong, and spreading very far; when in Gods
doom they had their MEAN written upon the wall, and their TEKEL told them in
their ear, Daniel 5.5, 25. And how suddenly came they down, like Ionahs
Gourd, which grew in one night, and withered in another, Ion. 4.6, 7. when
their flatterers thought them eternal? And no marvel, for what was their
strength, and in whom were they strong, and in whose account? With what arms
spread they, and from what root? their strength it was not the strength of
stones, Job 6.12. and they trusted in flesh; and fools (only) thought them
happy: their arms were (but) arms of worldly largeness, and their root
rottenness; their bags were stuffed with stolen wares; their houses built upon
a ruinous soundation of violence, and they enlarged their lands with spoil:
they flew to honor upon wings of a proud and ambitious heart, and rode post,
as upon some Pegasus, or winged horse, to promotion: and in them the Proverb
proved true; soon ripe, soon rotten: for the poor, they grinded their faoes;
that is, they used them as cruelly as if they had taken a poor man's face, and
ground it upon a grindle-stone: and for the rich, they fed upon him, as beasts
in a fat pasture, till all was bitten bare also; as if they had learned of
Neuissan a better Lawyer then honest man, that he that will not venture his
body, shall never be valiant; nor he that will not venture his soul, be rich:
they made spare of neither, for wicked greatness and execrable wealth. They
sought outward things, but sought not the Lord in them, which made them to
think no way so near and ready, as by the steps of wickedness to ascend unto
them: and so, as by evil they grew to be great, so by greatness (the child
of evil) they grew to be worse.

Not content to be strong, they must spread like a green Bay: or (as some
render it) like a tree that grows of it self, having forgotten that root of
princely grace out of which they first came. How can such look for any other
end, then some sudden cutting off? though they be as strong as the strong Oaks
of Bashan, and as tall and spreading as the Cedars of Libanus; how can it be
but the Lord must needs destroy their fruit from above, and their root from
beneath, and leave them worth nothing, as he took them with nothing when he
first advanced them?

Among these, there are some ambitious Churchmen, who continually and
altogether study a rising by Ecclesiastical dignities, either shamefully
begged, or Simoniacally bought: but when they are with Satan upon the pinnacle
of the Temple, they tarry not there long, but down they come, not orderly by
the stairs, but suddenly some other way, Mat. 4.5, 6. And so in their highest
pitch of worldly increase; Tolluntur in altum, vt lapsu grauiore ruant: they
are lifted up for a while, but to their greater fall: while that sweet morsel
of greatness is in their mouths, the wrath of the Lord is kindled against
them, Psalm. 78.30, 31. as it is against all, who by such stairs of pride, will
needs climb to promotion.

Into the heart of this consideration if we would (indeed) enter, and
(impartially) compare the vanity of these things with the which they so swell,
with the sudden and unlooked for loss and departure of them, when they take
them to their wings, we would be so far from envying, that we would rather
pity their prosperity; seeing that for the same abuses, God will run upon
them as with more fury, because they have covered their face with fatness,
and have collops in their flanks, Job 15.26, 27. That which we read in the
Book of Wisdom, that the mighty shall be mightily tormented, Wisd. 6.6. can
give them but poor and small comfort; if they dye without confession in their
mouth, and repentance in their hearts, though they dye never so great and
mighty. And that we may not doubt of their fickle estate in these outward
uncertain things, the Prophet (therefore) adds.

VERSE. 36. Yet he passed away, and lo, he was gone, I sought him but he could
not be found.


Where he shows both what his eyes saw, and his experience got: namely, how
he found that the man, who trusted to the weak staff of worldly Pomp and
greatness, was suddenly gone, and before he could be known; and utterly, so
as he should never (after) be remembered. For, howsoever that little time,
which was lent unto him to slorish and spread in, seemed so long in the
judgment of worldly men, that they counted it answerable to the greenenesse of
the Bay; yet was it so short indeed, and in the judgment of wise men so
quickly gone, that it was liker (I said it before, and I say it again) liker
to the green grass, and the green herb that is mowen, and suddenly
withers, or as the corn that is blasted before it be grown. 2 King. 19.26.
For this cause, the wicked are compared, in the Scriptures, with things of
smallest continuance, as to the sat of Lambs, which is (clean) consumed, and
(suddenly) as smoke, Psalm. 37.20. to wax before the fire, Psalm. 68.2. to a
dream when one awaketh, Psalm. 73.20. and in Esa. 41.11. to nothing. The
rejoicing of the wicked (says Job) is short, and the joy of hypocrites is but
for a moment. Job 20. He says it is short, and (after) tells how short: and
further, he says; though his excellency mount up to Heaven, and his head
reach the Clouds, yet shall he perish like his dung, verse 7. which is lest
for ever, as a loathsome thing; yea, he shall so be forgotten, that they, who
have seen him, shall say, where is he? verse 8. that is, what is become of him
now? whither is the state he held, the cappes and knees he had, gone? his
honors in Court, as dust before the wind, how are they scattered? Psalm. 1.4.
and the stubble or chafe of his possessions, how and whither is it carried,
and how has the storm of God taken it? Job 21.18. And what marvel, seeing he
put all his trust in that which was nothing worth, and woue those webbes which
will make no garment, and bestowed his labor, upon that which will not cover
him? Esa. 59.5, 6.

All this may teach us, that the wicked (which are great) can leave neither
flourishing roots, nor lasting name behind them. For besides that their
strokes shall be at once, Psalm. 64.7. and God will suddenly visit them, as in
a rain of snares, fire and brimstone, and stormy tempest, that will make a
quick hand and riddance where it falls, Psalm. 11.6. Their very name after
their death shall feel a greater stroke of God upon it, in that wound of
reproach that it shall bear, and dishonor that shall not be done away: then
they that see it shall say; How are the things of Esau sought out, how are his
hidden things (or as some read) treasures searched? Obad. 6. Their name shall
be put out, says one, Psalm. 9.5. It shall be written in the dust, says
another, Ier. 17.13. My text says, they pass away and cannot be found: or
there are but certain roots of houses, where goodly houses stood: What was
the memorial of Amaleck? Exodus 17.14. What but a fearful overthrow and thing
forgotten? such a reward from God shall the memorial of the wicked have, where
the remembrance of Josiah (a virtuous Ruler) shall be sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine; Eccles. 49.1. The name of the
wicked shall rot, Prou. 10.7. And where the Lord said to Moses, I know thee by
name, Exodus 3^.12. David says of the wicked, I will make no mention of their
name with my lips, Psalm. 16.4.

And thus their glory is turned to their shame, and their name above ground
has no better smell, then their carkesse in grave: and what marvel, seeing
they are in no credit with God, the only thing that purchases true credit
with men? for God will dishonor them that would not honor him; and they that
despise him, shall be despised, 1 Samuel 2.30, Besides, it is just that men
should have their estimation according to their deeds: for, speak well and
hear well, do well and have well, and earne a good name and take it: but he
that sins must needs take shame, he shall not continue in honor; and when
he dies, his name shall perish with him: or, he shall go hence, as a candle
ill put out, that leaves a stink behind it: for so shall his beauty
consume, when he shall go from his house to grave, Psalm. 49.14.

Let great men consider this, and ye that call your Lands after your own name,
forget it not. They that would have a good name when they are gone, must
deserve it here: for such shall be well spoken of, or they have wrong if they
be not: but what wrong has a godless Atheist, a covetous varlet, and impious
sinner to be buried in the dust of his own shame? And what lie is it, not to
speak well of him or her that never did well? we have an ill proverb among
us, spoken in jest, but practiced in earnest; which is, that Plain dealing is
a Jewel, but he shall dye a beggar and poor that uses it. And (therefore) as
we read of Dionysius, that because he never sailed more prosperously then when
he had robbed the Church of Diana, he concluded, that the way to have the favor
of the gods, was to rob their Churches: so by a false interpretation of Gods
secret ways, some persuade themselves, that because the wicked here flourish
for a while, wickedness is the way to flourish with them; and therefore putting
their Masters coming far off, they smite, to wit, with the fist of
wickedness, and of many wrongs, their innocent fellow servants. Mat. 24.48,
49. Some (again) think to get a name, and to be famous, if it be but for
mischief, that is, such a name, and such glory as Erostratus gate by burning
Diana's Temple. But neither that Tyrant, nor this Incendiarie, live in any
other name now then such as the Devil himself may be ashamed of.

And for those who were much applauded in their times for wise, and valiant,
and ouer-topping men (being (otherwise) vicious and sinful) what did after
times, and what do ours say of them? We read what the time once thought of
Haman, and how fresh his root was before his Soueraign. Hester 3.1, 2. But
because it was set in evil Works, how short a time had it? And who does not
(now) honor godly Mordecai, who was once so poor and base, not regarding, but
(greatly) contemning that other proud Courtier, whose name so shon, for a
while, covered with the robes of the Kings favor? Who had such an opinion for
goodness and holiness, as the Pharisees once had? And now, who can patiently
endure the name of Pharise, that knows what a Pharise was? And did not wicked
Herod, who (alive) was reputed a God; dying give up his name with his life to
the worms? Acts 12.23. So Achitophels politic head after it had bin in a
halter, what name did it leave? 2 Sa^. 17.23. how glorious was Wolsey and
Gardener once? and how did Boner, the Popes slaughterman, once ruffle, when he
sent so many Innocents (so cruelly) by fire, to martyrdom? and (yet) what are
their execrable names now, to the blessed names of those whose life they
thought to be madness, and their end without honor, Wisd. 5.4. and who (now)
had not rather be a Hooper, a Cranmer, a Latimer, Bradford, and Ridley, then
the greatest of these? also, Naboths name, is it not now far better then
Ahabs that was sold to sin, and Iezebels that was given to Dogs? and they
that stoned him, do (I doubt not) now wish that they had bin stoned for him.

May it not be said of all these, and of all like these, that they are past and
gone; their houses, their Empires, their names and all, leaving their
posterity, the heirs of their dishonor? have they not all in their names of
discredit, made their just account for all the pleasures and unjust peace of
their life past? and what is left unto them of all their former glory and
unruly greatness, but that which they are the rightest owners of; reproach and
insamie throughout all ages? But let us pass to that other part of this
Scripture, the most certain and constant happiness of the righteous, leaving
the wicked in their shame, and eternal black night.

VERSE. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just: for the end of that man
is peace.


THese are worthy the marking and seeing, and the end they come unto, is worth
the having: for they are upright and just men, and their end is peace. By the
upright and just man, we may understand the man that is godly, both in habit
of mind and behavior; or good, both in heart and conversation: and by peace,
the Prophet means tranquillity here, and eternal rest from our labors in
heaven; this tranquillity is of mind, and in Christ: for in the world we shall
have affliction, John 16.33. The effect of all is: the prosperity of the
wicked does quickly come, and suddenly pass: but the peace of the righteous
comes in their latter end, and continues world without end. Where the Prophets
meaning is, that the godly must first meet with troubles, and then have peace:
(first) sow in tears, and then reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. and (first) be
racked, and then delivered, Heb. 11.35. so much he gives us to learn in this
verse: for the tenure that Christians hold by, is the Cross; and this Cross
of Christians triumphs not here: here, all that will live godly, must suffer
persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. and from afflictions, not from our beds of case, we
are taken to heaven: for through many afflictions, as through the straight
gate, we must pass thither, Acts 14.22. and great reason, we should climb
with some difficulty this mountain of bliss, Psalm. 15.1. for why should not
we (the members, of Christ) be like our head as well in his crown of thorns
as in his crown of glory, and as willingly in his cup, as in his precious
salvation? or, how can we think that God should wipe away our tears in
another life, when we have shed none in this? Apoc. 21.4. and how can we be
taken out of misery, when (here) we know no woe? Affliction (then) being both
our beginning and middle, as peace is our end, if we be right Christians; our
way to heaven is marked out unto us, and the marks of our direct way thither,
are persecutions in this world, before we can obtain eternal life in the
world to come, Mar. 10.30. But do we swim in delights, that should swim
through a Sea of burning glass? Exodus 15.2. Is our beginning peace? are our
mid-dayes all in peace? that is, have we perpetual peace and quietness in our
bodies and souls, goods and good name: when peace in all these is promised at
our end, not before and after our warfare accomplished, not while we are in the
field? then we go not as we are directed by our marks, to salvation. It is a
narrow way of little ease, and we are in a broad way of pleasures, Mat.
7.13.14. it is vp-hill thither, and we go downe-hill, that is, not toward it,
but from it: and it is a way of many troubles, but we live at ease in Sion.

By all this we may well know that we are out of that one right and plain way
to life. Where on the other side, if in our names we suffer, for our zeal in
the Law: if we mourn (in our souls) for the sins we behold in the world,
and cannot master in our selves: if we will loose our goods, rather then a good
conscience in any commandment: and put not up the sword of the spiritual
battle till corruption be done away, which will never be whiles we be here,
Romans 8.7. Gal. 5.17. we know by this our way to happiness so painful and
troublesome, that we are not far from the kingdom of God. And so we may
conclude that they are fools, and not wise, who think those best that are at
best ease here, and those freest from misery, that are furthest from troubles.
But what Ox is likest to come, first to the Butchers axe? That which is fed in
the best pastures, or which is kept in the barest grounds? Surely the fat Ox
is nearer the slaughter, then that which is kept low for store, or service. So
Christians, fatted with ease, and pampered with the pleasures of life, are in
greater danger of the Butcher of Hell, then they that are kept low with
troubles, and have the World for their enemy, and not at their will, as Satan's
stalled men have. And here let all that are oppressed of those fat kine of
Bashan, that feed in the Mountains of Samaria: Am. 4.1. all that are thrust
at by the fat and strong sheep of these Worldly pastures. Ezech. 34.21. All
that are trodden down by the mighty and proud, that so spread among us, never
faint in their troubles; or, when they suffer for righteousness, in so direct
away to Heaven, go back with fear and discouragement, because of these
beginnings: For, peace will come, at least when their end comes; for, their end
is peace. Hitherto serves that comfortable, and most sweet exhortation of our
Savior Christ to the Christians of his time, and (in them) to us at this day:
Fear ye not them which kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul, but
fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. Math. 10.28.
Because the heart of man will ever fear some thing, Christ tells us whom we
should fear, and what, that we may not fear, where there is no cause, nor,
where there is cause, he senseless. At any hand, he will not have us to
fear man too much; for, that is a note of them that fear him too little. And
if we need not to fear mortal man, living in the true fear of the immortal
God, what cause is there that we should be shaken with their wrongs, as
leaves shaken with the wind, when they are so moved against us? For, when
they have done their worst, peace shall come, the more they force us, the
sooner they send us, out of our houses of clay, to our house above; and what
harm is it to die once, that we may live ever? Yet, they that are so cruelly
bent to harm us, have but a borrowed power over us, and we no more Masters of
our lives, then the least Spider is of theirs, which by permission can kill
them, as soon, and deadly, as by power given them, they can kill us. Which
being well and rightly considered, how weak is our faith, and how little
worth, that will be so much dismaide with the silly blasts of simple men,
whose power is mortal, and bounded by a higher power? Some, in a little
thunder from the Court, turn as drink in a vessel, not keeping their
righteousness, longer then they can quietly hold it with the good liking of
greatness: and some, if they be but threatened by these men of might, fall
down, as if they were killed by them. But he that looks for peace from him
that can give it, and up to him from whom only comes his help, will not be
amazed for any thing that man can do. For he knows that, if he keep in
with God, man's evil will shall either be reconciled, or shall do him no hurt.
And he that knows so much, will never turn from man a smoke, to turn upon
God a consuming fire, or make man his friend with Gods enmity. Joseph, Daniel,
and Daniels three fellows, had great knowledge this way: therefore Joseph,
when he was tempted to wickedness, would (in no case) yield; Genesis 39.10. God
was his delight, and he could not take pleasure in that which God abhors;
neither would he set God against him, to make his Mistress his friend. Daniel
feared the King (as was fit) but feared the Lord more then all Kings; and
therefore when the King commanded that which was dishonorable to God, the
highest King, he rather yielded his body to the Lions, then his obedience in
such a matter. Dan. 6.10.16 Also Daniels three fellows must either bow to an
Idol, or burn in a fiery furnace, seven times heated: Dan. 3.15.19. but what
of that? Not doubting but the God whom they served would deliver them, as they
knew he was able; they denied to serve any but him, that is Lord of all: and
yet (if he should not deliver them) they would never be drawn to do the
Kings commandment against his. Dan. 6.17.18. Thus they resolved, and no
threatenings of Tyrants, nor injuries of men could alter them. The reason was,
they took his word for their peace, who promises to deliver his; and
therefore they fainted not, in any affliction. They knew that it cannot but be
well with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before him; that is, well
at the last: Eccles. 8.12. Though not so with the sinner whom God spares long,
though he do evil an hundred times; that is, sin without end or measure,
for it shall not be well to him, neither shall he prolong his days. ver. 13.
But to proceed further with you, in some further benefit of this Scripture:
here it is apparent what an interest they have in God, and to his gracious
providence, that are upright and just men. Their end is peace, that is, they
cannot miscary, and they shall be sure to speed well at the last, that make
him their confidence. And that Gods children (just and upright men) in whose
heart his Word is, shall not want safety and comfort long, David in another
Psalm teaches us, for speaking of such, Psalm. 34.9. he says that nothing
shall be wanting to them, that is, nothing that for them shall appear to be
(absolutely and necessarily) good. For the Angel of the Lord shall keep them,
verse 7. and they can take no hurt, and the Lord himself will deliver them,
ver. 18.19. and how can they perish, ver. 22. his eyes are upon them, verse 15.
he sees their troubles, and ears open to them, he hears when they cry.
Does he see and hear, and will he not regard? Nay, but he redeemeth the
souls of his servants, and they shall not be desolate, but they that hate
them* shall. ver. 21. And though David himself was in many perils, at home by
Saul, abroad by other enemies; yet neither Saul nor they could take his pillow
from him at night, but he did lie down in peace, and sleep, having his
dwelling in safety. Psalm. 4.8. And this, because he had the promise of God for
a wall about him. Daniel among the hungry Lions, came out safely: Dan. 6.23.
and Daniels three fellows in a very hot furnace walked securely, and without
hurt. Dan. 3.25. So Paul's deliverances were as many as his troubles, afflicted
on every side, yet not in distress; in poverty, but not overcome of poverty,
persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but he perished not. 2 Cor. 4.8, 9.
For he shook off these vipers with safety, Act. 28.5. and they had no power
against him, to hurt him. Thus the just have been, are, and shall be
delivered, and it cannot be other wise; for the Lord being their shield, they
that strike at them, must strike through him, before they can be touched; they
are those faithful servants, and loyal subjects, whom a good Master, and
gracious Prince will countenance. And where they that are obedient servants to
a good Master, are in favor, and grow in wealth: shall we think that
upright, and just men (the good servants of God) can long live in misery, and
die unrewarded? Has godliness, the promise of this life, and of that to come?
1 Timothy 4.8. And shall the godly miss of their peace, here and hereafter, now
and continually? Surely, if the Covenant that God has made between the day
and night can be broken, Ier. 33.20. this may be: or, if it can fail to be
day and night in their season, the upright man's peace may fail, when his end
is come. David knew this, and therefore in another Psalm, stood upon it, with
a verily, there is fruit for the righteous, as surely, as there is a God that
judges in the earth. Psalm. 58.11. Here is a plaster of much virtue, and of as
much good use, for the sores of those broken consciences, which Satan has
wounded for well-doing. With the storm in their faces they cannot see how it
should be peace, where there are so many skirmishes in the house, and without
doors; so many alterations and breakings, and so much a do, to obtain a
days truce with the enemy of their peace. But mark the upright man, and
behold the just; that is, look upon them with a Spiritual eye, and as when
men mark a thing that they still keep their eye upon; and ye shall find
nothing but peace in all their ways. Their falls make them wary and
circumspect, how, and where they walk: their buffetings humble them, that they
may be raised; their bitter draughts, are compounds of the Lords own making
to purge them: their complaints of the want of faith, are the best kind of
faith; and lest they should decay in zeal, afflictions are the bellows to
blow the fire. Also we know that all things work together for the best, unto
them that love God, and are called of his purpose. Romans 8.28. And if all
things, then afflictions, then Satan's rage, and the Worlds unjust malice for
good deeds. For what are these, other then certain bitter remedies to
correctour corruptions, or exercises of Gods graces in us, to try how much we
will suffer for his sake? And who can deny the name and work of peace, to
these temptations that are sent not to consume us like dross, but to refine us
like gold? Or, is this end of them, any other then peace? But (specially) this
concerns the troubles that are inflicted upon the righteous, by the Worlds
spite, and by Tyrants that seek their life. And it assures them, whatsoever
their troubles are, and of what malice or greatness so ever they be that
trouble them, their deliverance (which is their peace) shall come. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous, yea, great, and many; yet the Lord delivers him
out of them all. Psalm. 34.19. And the Apostle S. Paul, speaking of the
afflictions which came unto him at Antiochia, at Iconium, and at Listri, says,
but from them all the Lord delivered me. 2 Timothy 3.11. The Church stories afford
us a large reading in this argument, and the book of God is plentiful in this
matter; also, I have spoken sufficiently hereof (already) for comfort. But now,
if we will have our parts with just and upright men in these deliverances, and
in their peace; we must walk uprightly, and by steps of righteousness come to
receive our parts in them, with the people whom God will save. The Lord that
promised his Angels to us in our ways, Psalm. 91.11. has made us no promise of
safety by them in other ways. In the good way of a Christian life, we are
sure to be kept: but it is the Devil that tells us, we shall be so in any way.
Math. 4.6. The upright and just men shall have peace, shall it therefore be
well to the wicked? We have heard God, by Solomon, to say no: and Esaias says
there is no peace to the wicked, Esa. 57.21. that is, none either with, or for
them. Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? 2 King. 9.31. Iezebel (that painted
doggesmeate) could tell he had nor. And indeed, what peace (as Iehu said to
Iehoram) where Iezebel and her fornications, the wicked, and their wicked
deeds are? 2 King. 9.22. Do men gather grapes of thorns? Math. 7.16. That
is, will the grape of peace, grow upon the thorn of wickedness. Let there be
no root among you (says Moses) that brings forth gall and wormwood. Deuteronomy.
29.18. And why no such root of bitterness among them? He (after) gives the
reason, because there is no blessing in it: it is that root of sin, whose
doom is the curse, and whose end is to be burned. Heb. 6.8. For he (says
Moses) when he hears the words of the curse, blesses himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace, though he walk in the stubbornes of his heart, and
add drunkenness to thirst. But shall it be so? Shall he have peace that
walks in his sins stubbornely? No says that man of God; the Lord will not
be merciful to him; but the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke
against him, and every curse that is written in the book of the law shall
light him, till it have put out his name from under heaven. Deu. 29.19.20.
Therefore it is but the poison of flattery (a poison which strikes to the
heart) that persuades the sinner that he may live in sin, and die in peace.
For God, by Ezechiel tells us, that, seeing he has so done, he shall die the
death, and his blood shall be upon him. Ezech. 18.13. And how can we think,
that having had (all our life time) war with God in our sins, we should
easily be reconciled to him on our death bead? Yet fools and unwise so
think; or, what is their hope when they lie a dying? Surely, their hope is as
the dead hope of a Malefactor in prison, who puts of the getting of his pardon,
till the Judge be come to condemn him. But we are called to a better hope; let
us therefore walk as the upright man, and not put off, as sinners: so shall
our end be peace, when theirs shall be in destruction. In this mind and
course, though the world shall count us unhappy, yet we must think our
selves, and the wise will judge us the most happy men. And I pray you, who was
more happy, Lazarus going from his sores, and poverty to heaven: or the rich
man, that went from his purple, and delicate fare to Hell? Luke 16.22, 23. We
say that the end makes all; and Philosophy says, that no man is either happy,
or miserable, that is, truly so, before his end. If we cannot be so wise as
Christians should, yet it is shame, to be more foolish the^ the heathen were
And what reason (then) to judge of men by their present states, when it is not
the present, but future, nor this temporal, but that other eternal condition
of bliss, or unhappiness that must give us our just standard, or measure in
these matters? And therefore it is said to good purpose, by the Prophet further
in this verse.

Mark and behold, etc. These two words are added as a bridle, to keep us in,
that we run not into rash judgment, when we hear of the many troubles of
the godly, and of the few of those that offend, even with purpose of heart to
do wickedly. For great foolishness is bound up to our judgments, so far
forth as we consist of flesh, and see as natural men: our reason is
exceeding weak: and for our natural light, what is it but darkness and
error? And therefore great need we have of this bridle or bit, from hasty
opinion. Great need I say, lest we bind a false note (not only) to man's
courses which we understand not, (but even) to Gods most wise counsels, which
no man can know, For this cause, the Prophet bids us to mark and behold, as it
were, to look with both eyes, diligently to consider, and faithfully to lay up
the experience that we gather in such high matters: not to take things as they
appear presently, but as the end leaves them. When a man runs very fast and
swiftly, his eyes will dazzle at things; so will they not when he goes fair
and softly, or with a deliberate pace. In like manner, let us go deliberately,
and wisely forward in our judgments, and they will not dazell at the
prosperity of the wicked that are suddenly set up; and where others make more
haste then good speed to salute them, as happy, we will take leisure and
time to our opinion of them, and say, their end is not yet. From hence we
learn not to judge any man, by his present outward estate, to be happy, or
miserable. For whatsoever we see in men to day, may be much altered to morrow,
and the last may be first. Matthew. 20.16.

And this true judgment in things and of persons, if it were rightly
considered, and if we would wisely judge of them by their ends, and not as
they seem; would stay us from being offended to a fretting at the wicked for
their sudden prosperity: or to a condemning of the just for their present
distress. The contrary must needs make us stumble in judgment, and to be
offended with our troubles when they continue long. I say stumble in judgment;
for what man, if he should judge of Jobs election by that which he sometimes
spoke, and of David's by that which he once did; the one when he spoke so
unadvisedly against God, Job 3.6.10.13. chapters: the other when he lay in so
foul sheets having defiled his bed with adultery, and the murder of his
dearest servant Vriah 2 Samuel 11.4 5.15.17. or if he should weigh Jeremy at the
rate of that which he spoke in his distemper: and Christ himself at that,
which (as man) in the hotest furnace of his passion he complained of his to his
father, namely that he had forsaken him, Ier. 12.1. and 20.14.15, 16, 17, 18.
Mat. 27.40. What man (I say) if he should thus judge, should not condemn
(even) the generation of Gods children, and the son himself? who would
think that Moses and Aaron, two old men (the one fourscore, the other above)
Exodus 7.7. could, going to Pharaoh with a little rod in their hand, bring the
children of Israel out of Egypt in despite of Pharaoh, the King thereof? Exodus
6.26. yet they refused not the service at Gods commandment, being old men, and
furnished with simple means: where if they had rested on no more then that
which they saw or was present, they would never have believed they could have
forced a great King in his own Kingdom to let his prisoners go; but they saw
him, and in him (that was invisible) great salvation, and greater power then
either Pharaoh, or all the Pharaohs of the earth could resist; and therefore
suspended all judgment of flesh to the contrary. Whose heart would not fail
him (if he should trust his eyes) to see the success of a battle to hang
upon a youth, fighting (hand to hand) with a great armed Giant, and man of war;
and not with spear or shield, but with a sling in his hand, and five smooth
stones? 1 Samuel 17.33.40. Saul doubted how it could be, but David doubted not,
ver. 33. Saul could believe no more then he saw; David believed God, and had
seen his power before, ver. 35.36. which he also (then) saw in a sort,
waiting for the end: and this end was it, that his eyes were upon by faith, by
which he received it before it came. Gideons men that were left, were but 300.
but his enemies lay in the valley like Grasshoppers, Judge. 7.6.12. and what must
these three hundred have in their hands? nothing but Trumpets in one hand, and
empty pitchers with lamps in another: and what must they do? blow their
Trumpets and break their pitchers: and what shall ensue when this is done? The
Lord will set variance in the host, and setting every man's sword upon his
neighbor, cause them to sly, ver. 16, 20, 22. And now, who measuring these
things with the eye, can think that so few should be able to drive so many
with so weak pursuers? But Gideon looked to the end, and stayed not in the
means, and so marked and beheld till the end came. So Joshua before him, must
break down the walls of Ierico: but with what warlike engine, with what rain
of iron must he do it? with blowing seven Trumpets of rams horns (seven
times) with a shout, and with no other power, Josh 6.13, 15, 16. God spoke it,
Joshua believed it; and the walls of the City, at the appointed time, fell
down, ver. 20. To heap up more examples would be too long and needelesse in
so plain a matter.

The consideration of this that has bin spoken, as it is a reproof of all
hasty and rash judging of matters and persons before the time: so it cannot but
minister great consolation to the godly, where there is little in the means
and time to give them hope; for though presently they can see nothing that is
for their help, and though in troublesome difficulties, all things (seemingly)
make against them; yet comfort and deliverance will come from one place or
another, Hest. 4.14. And so we have heard how we may fail in judgment, if
we judge things or persons rashly, or before the time. Now as we may err in
judgment, so we may be offended at the things that come, if we wait not for
the end; that is, offer not our obedience in waiting for it: which would be
considered of those, who if the Lord suspend his answer and helping of them
after some time that they have prayed for a hearing, do through an impatient
spirit, forsake all, both attendance, and hopes. And (here) some, who can be
violent at first and for some time, are even cut to the heart when they are put
to a longer day: but to be vehement a while, and not importunate long for the
good things that we ask according to the good mind of God in his word, is
(besides the loss of our labor) a deserved falling from the fruit of our
requests, which (by the means of such faintings) must needs fail us. To
remedy all this, we must wait (continually) by the word for our enlargement in
troubles when they tarry long. But besides this sin of impatience in matters
that concern our selves: we may sin against God by fretting against others,
namely, the wicked that are lift up, if we fondly measure them by their
present estate, and not wisely by their end. David, because he (once) measured
them with the wrong measure of that that was present, confesses that he was
foolish and ignorant this way, Psalm. 73.22. And how many besides him
(otherways no ill men) has this false interpretation of happiness, in her
short and quick blaze (such as she makes in wicked men) put into intolerable
fits of choler against God? How much have they bin offended, and how ill have
they taken it that the wicked should fare so well, and the godly no better? It
appears by the first verse of this Psalm, that in David's time, many were
overcome of this temptation, who in other things could stand sure: and (all)
because they forgot the wicked man's miserable end, and the happy end of the
righteous. But this I touched sufficiently in the beginning, because it is the
maine scope of this whole Psalm, and therefore I leave it (and all that has
bin spoken besides) to God, and to the work of his grace, who is able to build
you further, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified,
Acts 20.32. The God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus
the great shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in all good works to do his will; working in you
that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

