HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown and
flanked by the Tudor rose and Scottish thistle
By the King.
THE care of the Kings of this Realm Our Progenitors, for the restraint of
exportation of Gold and Silver into foreign parts, appears unto Us in sundry
Laws, containing both severe penalties, and strict provisions and cautions to
prevent and punish that offense; in so much as the same for diverse years, (and
those not long past) was made in degree of Felony, and that very justly, being
an offense to the Public, which deserves more then the defrauding of a
private man: And yet such is the presumption of the time, as, although many of
those Laws are still in force, it is visible and notorious, that great
quantities of Our Coins of Gold do pass ordinarily in paiments, in foreign
Nations, nay, (which is a thing very unnatural) that Our Gold at this time is
more stirring abroad in parts beyond the seas, then here at home in Our own
Island, to the disgrace of Our Government, and notorious inconvenience of Our
Subject. For remedy whereof, and as a part of Our Royal Office, We called
before us and Our privy Council, (desides diverse Gentlemen of quality and
discretion) sundry Merchants of every Trade, Officers of Our Mint, and
Goldsmiths of the best sort, that We might the better ground Our resolutions
upon such informations and discoueries, as either Art, Experience, or the
knowledge of the affairs abroad, could affoard; And joining the consideration
of former events, with the present opinion and advice which We have taken, We
made this conclusion, That it is in vain to strive with this disease, except
the cause be removed, which is confessed by all to be the great gain which
the Merchant (especially the Stranger) makes, by the exportation of Our Gold,
which gain likewise is a consequent of the disproportion between the price of
Our Coins of Gold abroad, and here within Our own Kingdoms: For the case
standing so, as that our Unite which is current here but for twenty shillings,
is valued in foreign parts at two and twenty shillings, which is a full tenth
part more, and other Our Coins of Gold ratably; The gain is so extreme, and
so swift in the return, that the sweetness thereof, joined with the hope of
concealements, in regard of the infinite shifts to avoid the search, makes
the effects frustrate of all Laws and Policies that have been used, or can be
used against the exportation, as long as that violent Adamant of Lucre draws
men's desires to offend: And therefore finding no other remedy competent or
effectual, We resolved (preserving still the weight and finenesse of Our
Standart,) to raise the price of Our Gold to be of equal value with that it
bears in foreign parts: And yet that it may not be conceived, that We would
make the remedy larger then the inconvenience, We would be thus clearly
understood, that We have absolutely concluded with good advice and
deliberation, not to make any manner of alteration in the price, or otherwise,
of Our Silver, with which all Trades and payments are so much driven and made,
as the raising the price thereof would give both color and cause to raise
prices of all commodities and things vendible, which We seek by all means to
avoid. And because it may appear to the world, that in this Our proceeding,
Our eye is single, and not bent upon any benefit to Our selves, although We
might have taken a reasonable occasion, in respect of the diversity of the
pieces of Gold which are current within Our Realm, and their several finesses
to have set this increase of price upon such Coins only, as should have been
newly stamped, whereby much profit might have grown to Us by the coynage; yet
to avoid all commixture of Our own benefit, with matter of reformation for
the public good, We have given the price as well to Gold heretofore coined,
as hereafter, so as if any profit by accident should fall out, it will be
rather Our Subjects, then Ours:

We do therefore hereby publish, declare and authorize, all the several
pieces of Gold hereafter mentioned, to be current within this Our Realm,
respectively hereafter at the values following. The piece of Gold called the
Unite, At xxij. s. The piece of Gold called the double Crown, At xj. s. The
piece of Gold called the Britain Crown, At v. s. vj. d. The piece of Gold
called the Thistle Crown, At 4. s. 4. d. ob. q. The piece of Gold called the
half Crown, At ij. s. ix. d. The coin of Gold of Scotland, called the vj.li.
piece, At xj. s.
Not current in Scotland.
The piece of Gold of our own coin, called the Rose Royal xxxiii. s. The
piece of Gold of our own coin, called the Spurre-Royall xvj. s. vi. d. The
piece of Gold of our coin called the Angel xj. s.


All other pieces of Gold, of the Coin of any former Kings of this Realm, Our
Progenitors, and at this time current, to bear the like increase of price in
proportion with Our own Coins above specified, That is to say; Every piece of
Gold formerly current For xxx. s. xxxiij. s. For xx. s. xxij. s. For xv. s.
xvj. s. vj. d.
Every piece of Gold formerly current For x. s. xj. s. For v. s. v. s. vj. d.
For ij. s. vj. d. ij. s. ix. d.


And forasmuch as the greater price is set upon our Coins of Gold, which is
like also to be a means to draw forth Gold to be more usual in payments then
of late it has been, the more convenient it is, that no pieces of Gold which
are become light by any clipping or washing, or the like practices, be put
upon Our loving Subjects, in any payments to their prejudice, if the defect be
not within that small abatement, which must be by reason of the incertainety of
the shearers at the Mynt; We have thought good according to the President of a
Proclamation made in the nine and twentieth year of the Reign of Our late
dear Sister Queen Elizabeth, which continued in force till her decease, to
declare, and by these presents We do declare, that it shall be free and
Lawful for all and every Our loving Subjects, to refuse in any paiments all
pieces of Gold, which shall be lighter then according to the remedies, or
abatements hereafter following.

The Abatements or Remedies, which the several pieces of Gold may not exceed.
In every piece of Gold current for xxx. s. The Remedy and abatement shall not
exceed iiij. gr. di. In every piece of Gold current for xx. s. The Remedy and
abatement shall not exceed iij. gr. In every piece of Gold current for xv. s.
The Remedy and abatement shall not exceed ij. gr. di. In every piece of Gold
current for x. s. The Remedy and abatement shall not exceed ij. gr. In every
piece of Gold current for v. s. The Remedy and abatement shall not exceed j.
gr. In every piece of Gold current for ij. s. vj. d. The Remedy and abatement
shall not exceed di. gr.


Furthermore we do not so rest upon this course of policy, for the stay of
the exportation of Gold out of Our Kingdoms, as We do in any sort lay aside
those Legal remedies, which by Our Laws and Statutes in force have been
provided for the repressing of the said offense, in exporting both Gold and
Silver: But contrariwise, Our will and pleasure is, and We do make known the
same to all Our loving Subjects, and straightly command all Our Officers and
Ministers, to whom it may appertain, that the Statutes and branches of
Statutes, hereafter particularly expressed, be duly put in execution; that is
to say, the Statutes made at York, in the ninth year of King Edward the
third, called the Statute of Money, first, sixth, ninth, and tenth Chapters,
whereby is provided that from thencefoorth none should carry away any sterling
out of the Realm of England, nor Silver in Plate, nor vessel of Gold or
Silver, upon pain of forfeiture of the same Money, Plate, or vessel. And that
the Mayor and Bayliffes in every Port, where Merchants and ships should be,
should take an Oath of the Masters and Merchants of Ships, going, and coming
again, that they should do no fraud against the provision of that Law in any
point. And that good and strait search should be made in all places upon the
Sea coasts, in Havens and elsewhere, where any arrival should be, by good and
lawful men thereto sworn, that in the Kings name they should make diligent
search, that no man of what estate or condition soever, should carry out of
this Realm, Sterling Money, Silver or Plate, nor Vessel of Gold or Silver
without the Kings License. And that the searcher shall have the fourth part for
their labor of as much as they shall find so forfeited, and to loose all his
goods if he dispense with any man, and be thereof attaint; As by the same
Statute among other things more fully does appear.

And one other Statute made in the second year of Henry the fourth, the fifth
Chapter, whereby the King did ordain and establish, that from thenceforth that
any searcher of the King might find Gold or Silver in Coin or in Mass, in the
keeping of any that should be passing, or upon his passage, in any Ship or
Vessel, for to go out of any Port, Haven, or Creek of the Realm, without the
Kings special License, that Gold or Silver should be forfeited to the King,
(saving his reasonable expenses) As by the same Statute it does and may more at
large appear.

And We do specially charge and command, that the Mayor and Bayliffes in every
Port, where Merchants and Ships shall be, and all such to whom the same shall
or may in any wise appertain, do from henceforth carefully take the Oath of
Masters of Ships, and Merchants, according to the true meaning of the said
Statute, made in the said ninth year of King Edward the third: And that all
Customers, Searchers, Comptrollers, and all other Our Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, to whom it appertains, do so carefully and diligently execute
their several Offices, as the said Statutes and all others in any sort
concerning the Premises, may without any default or negligence in them, or any
of them, be duly and effectually executed upon pain of the greatest
punishment, that by Our Laws may be inflicted upon them for their default,
negligence, and contempt in that behalf.

Given at Newmarket the three and twentieth day of November, in the ninth year
of Our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1611.


