EVODIAS AND SYNTYCHE: OR, THE FEMALE ZELOTS OF THE Church of PHILIPPI:
Miss-led, miss-guided, seduced by those of the Concision; those evil workers
of the said CHURCH.

Set forth in a Sermon at Brent-wood in Essex; Febru: 28. 1636.

At the Metropoliticall Visitation of the most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

By JOHN ELBOROVV Vicar of S. Pancras, alias, Kentish-towne by London.

HIERON. Veteres Scripturas scrutans, invenire non possum, scidisse Ecclesiam,
and de domo Dei populos seduxisse, praeter illos qui sacerdotes a Deo positi
fuerant, and Prophetae. 2 TIMOTHY 3. 6. For of this sort are they, which creep
into houses, and lead silly women captive. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN
CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1637.

Evodias and Syntyche.
PHIL. 4. 3. And I entreat thee also my true yoke fellow, help those women
which labored with me in the Gospel.
THe Text at the first reading may seem strange for a visitation Sermon; yet
let no man prejudge it, and I doubt not, but in the opening, handling, and
prosecuting of it, to make it good, to suit well with the present State of the
Church, with this convention and occasion.

In the former Chapter S. Paul instructed the Philippians touching
Circumcision, Justification, and Sanctification.

In this he concludes his Epistle with certain exhortations to them, and
salutations of them: The first part is Pareneticall, and exhortatory; and his
exhortations are some general, and some particular.

In the first verse his exhortation was general to the whole Church of
Philippi, to stand fast in the faith; and (...), therefore to do it, because
of those of the Concision, those evil workers that were amongst them, as in
the former Chapter.

In the second, his exhortation is particular, to two godly women, Evodias and
Syntyche, the fema^^ factious zelots zelots of the said Church; that they be
^^^ne mind in the Lord. And S. Paul, as the Visitor of the said Church, (for
on him lay the care of all the Churches) in the words of my Text, continues
his exhortation to the Minister there, (for it lies much in us Ministers, by
our good or bad example, to hinder, or further the Churches peace) whom he
calls (...), his yoke fellow, to assist him, and to put to his helping hand,
to set those two women at rights, to compose their differences, and to stitch
up those rents and breaches, which by their faction and dis-unanimity were
occasioned in the Church of Philippi: (...). And I entreat thee also my true
yoke fellow, help those women which labored with me in the Gospel.

Before I come to the parts; first let me show you the meaning and
explication, who this (...) was, for there needs no explication of anything
else in the text.

There is a great stir about it with Expositors; first 1. Faber. Stapulensis.
Zuinglius. Erasmus. Cardinal Cajetane.
some would have here meant S. Paul's wife, and read it in the feminine,
Germanae conjux. Others, and the most read it in the masculine, as Theodoret,
Haymo, Cornelius a Lapide, Oecumenius, Lyranus, and Carthusianus: And most of
the Greek, and Latin Fathers; yea Calvin and Beza so expound it.

Paul's wife: here is a further question among Expositors, who it was. Vatablus,
and Velasques the Jesuit on the Text assents with him, that Epaphroditus is
here meant (whom S. Paul called (...) commilitone^) who was with Paul at Rome,
and carried these his letters thence to the Philippians. But most are of a
contrary mind: and I shall determine this with Chrysostom, Parum interest
siv^ ^^c, sive illud sit: It matters not much who it was; but according to the
unanimous consent of the most and best Expositors, it is certain it was not S.
Paul's wife, nor yet Epaphroditus, but some other godly Minister, then in the
Church of Philippi, (...), Socius ejusdem operis, as Estius notes on the Text,
whose helping hand S. Paul here entreats for the dissolving that female faction
in the Church of Philippi, And I entreat thee also, etc. So you have the
Explication: We now come to the parts: the words you see are an Exhortation,
wherein be pleased to observe 3. General parts:

1. The Matter of it. 2. The Motives to it. 3. The manner of S. Paul's
proceeding.
The Matter of it; Help those women, wherein observe 1. Genesis
2. particulars.

1. The persons for whom S. Paul craves help, described

1. From their sex, women. 2. By name, Evodias and Syntyche, (...), those
women.
2. Is the work wherein, that is unanimity, Help those women (...) To be of
one mind in the Lord.

The Motives to it,

1. In respect of the women. 2. Genesis
2. In regard of his function. 3. For the credit of the Gospel.
For they have labored with me in the Gospel.

The manner of S. Paul's proceeding in settling peace 3. Genesis
in the Church of Philippi: It was in the spirit of meekness, by entreating on
every hand.

1. Those factious female zelots; I pray Evodias, and I beseech Syntyche, ver.
2. 2. The minister of that Church, his yoke fellow, (...) And I entreat thee
also my true yoke fellow, etc.
So you have the generals and their severals; and by the assistance of the
Almighty, and your patience, I shall speak something of every one, and briefly
of them all.

Of the first general, the matter of his exhortation, 1. Genesis Matter.
Help those women. And there of the 1. particular: described from their sex,
women, by name Evodias and Syntyche. (...) Those women.

In that S. Paul names no man in this breach and faction, Note.
but two women, I note the propension and proclivity of that sex to take up
errors; that women are more easily seduced than men, and have their judgments
first, and soonest poisoned. In Acts 16. 13. it seems, the first that embraced
religion in Philippi were women; for there it is said that Paul preached unto
the women that resorted thither. And here it appears, that women were the first
that made a side, led a faction, that were seduced in the said Church. The
truth of this appeared in Paradise, in our great grandmother Eve: Adam was
first formed, but Adam was not first deceived: the woman was first in the
transgression, not the man. Viro mulier, non mulieri 1 Timothy 2. 14
vir author erroris. The arch-seducer the devil, first set upon Eve the woman,
and seduced her, then she the man. And S. Paul speaks of hypocrites which 2 Timothy 3.
creep into houses, and lead silly women captive. Ever learning, (like many of
our female zelots) continually hearing all the Sermons they could come at; yet
for all that he said, that they never came to the knowledge of the truth; they
acquired a jangling knowledge, holding of opposition, a knowledge falsely so
called. So the seditious Jews in the Acts of Apostles Act. 13. 50.
stirred up devout, and honorable women, and the chief men of the City, and
raised up persecution against Paul, and Barnabas, Women first. So those of the
concision, those evil workers in the Church of Philippi, mis-guided and
seduced those good women in my Text. And there are a generation of such evil
workers every where in our Church of England (evil workers I call them in the
point of discipline and conformity) otherwise perhaps blameless in their
lives, and painful in their Ministry: Amongst whom many are clamorous,
schismatic Scripturients; most of them sermonizing tre^cher Paraphrasts;
such as degorge discipline at full tables, (...) full of tongue, and excellent
to talk, yet unable to speak much to the purpose, who make a noise in vulgar
auditories, like sounding brass or tinkling Cymbals, Vere scioli inter
mulierculas, as S. Jerome writ of Domnio, women's preachers, and jolly fellows
amongst silly women, and in great esteem and admiration with them: who though
they have scarce a fag end of a gift, yet will boldly be perking up into the
pulpit, and can make a shift three or four times a week to throw over such
stuff, as workmen that well may be ashamed; carrying a bold face instead of
savoury provision, and think it sufficient that the people hear thunder, hear
them loud and earnest, though they see no rain. These have learnt this method
from the devil, to lead silly women captive: they have their mulieres
Calvinianus (as Maldonat the Jesuit called the French women at the siege of
Sancereo) their she disciples, and female proselytes in every place, and as S.
Jerome writ of Nicolaus Antiochenus, that he had his feminine troops. They lay
the foundation of their credits in the minds of silly women, insinuate
themselves into the favor and affections of their women, Plautus Asin.
and so get them Patronos satis dicaculos, such patrons as will prattle enough
in their cause, and justification: Who (as S. Jerome writ against Ruffinus) do
Procacitate^ disertitudine^ and maledicere superioribus bonae co^scientiae
signu^ arbitrari: that is, out of their credulous simplicity, do verily
believe such their procacity, and satyricall liberty in speaking evil, nay in
downright railing against those of authority, to proceed from zeal, and a good
conscience. And in their private conferences with and Catechizations of them,
do obtrude upon their women as Gospel, their own fanaticall asseverations,
(...) and the Basil. ep. 6.
novell imaginations of their own brains, and tooth and nail speaking, and
preaching against the government and discipline of our Church, against the
order of Bishops, against our Church-liturgy; yea, and Letany too, against the
use of the Surplesse, the ring at marriage, the cross at Baptism, kneeling at
the Communion, bowing at the name of Jesus, as popish and Antichristian. And
silly women being thus seduced, seduce their husbands, as Eve did Adam: Hinc
fundi nostra calamitas, dangerous champions in a schism; and there be no such
ensnaring attractives to errors and factions, as women are. As they are weak,
so are they wilful, weak in capacity and judgment, less strength to resist,
less judgment to discern errors from truth, not so able as men to reach the
depths and mysteries of knowledge: as they are first in faction, so the last
out: as out of their credulous simplicity they are first, and easily seduced;
so out of their peevish obstinacy they are last, and with more difficulty
reclaimed; and I dare say, a man may sooner convert five men from the errors of
their ways, than one woman. But I will rake no longer on this sore ( Cynthius
aurem vellit and admonuit) Virg.
only I could wish, that the Evodiaes and Syntyches of our Church, our female
zelots would not so busily intermeddle with Church Matters (which are too high
strains for them to reach) not listen to every deceiver, not hearken to every
spirit; but to try the spirits whether they be of God or man: So I have done
with the first, the female factious zelots, the disturbers of the Churches
peace at Philippi: (...) Those women.

Paul craveth the Ministers help, that is unanimity, (a blessed work to settle
peace in the Church) Help those women, (...) To be of one mind in the Lord.
(...). Chrysostom. hom. 1. in 1. ad Cor.


Unanimity is a work worthy of all our best helps.

1. In respect of the essentiality, and absolute necessity to the (...) the
been esse, the well being of the Church. 2. In regard of the dangerous
consequents that follow upon the want, and defect of it.
Unanimity is the life and soul of the Church; Ecclesia nomen est consensus and
concordiae: A Church is a name, not of division, but of unity and concord. And
Erasm. paraph in Act. 1.
Ibi non est Ecclesia, ubi non est unanimitas, says Erasmus: without it no
Church; Da unum, and populus est; toll unum, and turba est. The Church may
fitly be compared Plin. lib. 2. Not. hist.
to that Lapis Tyrrhenus of which Pliny writes: Lapis Tyrrhenus grandis
innatat, comminutus mergitur; that stone Tyrrhenus, while it is whole and
entire, it swims aloft; but if it be broken into pieces, every piece and
parcel sinks to the bottom: so the Church by unanimity flotes, and swims
aloft, and is supported, and kept above water; but if it crumble into sects and
factions, it is near to destruction. In Genesis 15. 10. Abraham Before the Temple
was built.
by the appointment of the Lord, having taken a heifer, a ram, and a goat, and
a turtle dove, and a pigeon; it is said of him, that he divided the beasts in
the midst, but the birds he divided not. Quare hoc fratres? Aug 54. Sermon. de
Temp.
(S. Aug. puts the question, and resolves it) Divisit Abraham tria animalia,
aves non divisit, quia in ecclesia catholica carnales dividuntur, spirituales
non. dividuntur. Teaching us, as that father does moralize it, that they are
beasts, not Christians that are divided one against the other, that are not of
one mind in the Lord.

In 1 King. 6. we read, that at the building of the 2. At the building of the
Temple.
Temple all the stones were smoothed, hewn, and fitted, and then brought into
the Temple, and laid; and there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of
iron heard there; to teach us, that in Gods house, there should be neither
schism nor rent.

Again, when the glorious Temple was built at Jerusalem, 3. After it was built
God would have but one Altar there: To show, Quod unum, eundemque cultum inter
omnes esse vellet; Vt vinculum esset sacrae unitatis; that it might be unto the
rude people a bond of sacred unity: 4. Under the Gospel.


And under the Gospel, those primitive and first Christians that ever were,
those 3000. souls converted by Peter's Sermon: It is said of them, that they
Act. 2. 46. Act. 4. 32.
were all of one heart, and of one soul, and that they all continued daily in
the Temple with one accord; when they prayed, they prayed all together; when
they heard, they heard altogether; when they brake bread, they did it
altogether, unanimously, uniformly: Tria millia domum unam, mensam unam, animam
unam Chrysostom. 30. Hom. on Mat. 16.
habuerunt.

And that multiplication of unities, one body, one 5. Ephesians. 4. 3, 6.
spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of us
all, declare that we should be all of one mind in the Lord, all keep the unity
of the spirit through the bond of peace, all stand fast in Phil. 1. 27, 28.
one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel. If
this will not do it, in the 2. The dangerous consequents upon the defect of it.
next place, look with the other eye upon the dangerous consequents that follow
upon the want, and defect of it; and by that time I dare say, you will all
assent with me, that it is a work worthy of all our best helps.

1. As Unanimity is the life and soul of the Church, 1. Jam. 3. 16. (...).
Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 11.
so schism and faction is a dangerous malady in the same; for where strife is,
there is confusion, and every evil work. Which made S. Chrysostom Hom. 11 on
the Ephesians. so earnestly protest against it, (...), etc. I say and protest, that
to make schism in the Church, is no less evil, than to fall into heresy.
Indeed it is the next way to it; schism is a green heresy, and heresy is a
grown schism. And non semper servatur unitas in credendo, ubi non est unitas
in colendo: there will not always be unity of doctrine in that Church, where
there is not uniformity of discipline.

of the Kings, but of Gods, and the Churches peace; It causes distraction,
hinders devotion, chills the spirits of men, deads, and indisposeth them unto
religion, and clouds the understanding in the disquisition of the truth;
whereby our assemblies in Gods house become gregations, not congregations: The
con is gone, disgregations rather, and Turba gravis paci, placidaeque inimica
quieti.

solutio continui, a discontinuation of parts, a disjoynting, a dislocation,
and dissociation of the members of the body of the Church. It is a routing of
our ranks, puts us out of temper, order, out of joint, and makes us fall a
pieces one from another. S. Paul employed as much, when he 1 Cor. 1. 10
saw such siding amongst them in the Church of Corinth; some to hold of Paul,
some of Cephas, some of Apollos, some of Christ, that they were out of joint,
when he exhorted them, (...), that they Beza annot. in loc.
be set again: for, (...) signifies properly to set a bone that is out of
joint. For as joints are in the natural Greg. mor. l. 19 cap. 14.
body, so is unity in the Church; Sancta Ecclesia sic consistit in unitate
fidelium, sicut corpus nostrum u^^ tum est compage membrorum. Take away joints
in the body, and the body will be dismembered; take away unity in the latter,
and the Church will be distracted, and there will follow rents, schisms,
disorders and fractions.

For instance and example: 1. What a stir made Corah, 1. Israel. Number. 16. 3.
Dathan, and Abiram in the congregation of Israel?

What contentions were there in the Church of 2. Church of Corinth.
Corinth, and how did they one swel against the other? some would pray and
prophecy bare-headed, others with their head covered; and when they came unto
the Lords supper, one was hungry, and another was drunken; in as much as S.
Paul wrote his first Epistle to dissolve those factions, and repress those
dissentions that were amongst them.

In the Church of Philippi, what broiles, and fractions 3. Church of Philippi.
were there by reason of the variance, and strife, and dissension (and that not
O economicall about meum and tuum, but Ecclesiastical, and in matters of
religion) of Evodias and Syntyche, the female zelots in my Text (otherwise
godly and religious) that by their over-credulity were misled, mis-guided, and
seduced by those of the Concision; those evil workers, as S. Paul calls the^.

So in our Church of England, (to come home to our 4. Church of England.
selves) what lamentable fractions, and miserable distractions are now amongst
us? what scandalous and irreligious libels? what indiscreet, and satyricall
pamphlets have been lately dispersed against the Governors and government of
our Church? what heartburning betwixt Minister and Minister, betwixt Minister
and people, and how do you one swell against another? For Sions sake I cannot
hold my peace, and with Moses, Liberabo animam meam: You must pardon me if I be
down right, and speak home in the Churches cause. And here I cannot but lament,
and deplore the want and defect of the practice of this ancient, and heavenly
duty of unanimity amongst us, in the words of S Bernard: Vbi, ubi nunc illud
unanimit at is exercitiu^? How disunanimous, disuniform, disorderly are ye in
the house, at the service of God? what rude contentions, and uncivil
contestations are in your Churches? how unservice-like is your service there?
how homely are ye in speech and gesture with God, in, and at the participation
of Gods ordinances, as if Arrian like ye were hail fellow, and familiar with
him? how stout are your hearts, and how stiff are your knees, that will not
bow at the name of Jesus, no more than the seats you sit on, or the pillars of
the Church? how is the authority of the Church out-faced? how are the Canons
and Constitutions of the same neglected, and vilified by every ignorant
illiterate Artizan, Mechanic, high-shooes; by every self-willed, peevish
Evodias and Syntyche, Quasi lege putant se teneri nulla. Yea, and by too too
many ministers too, ( O tell it not in Gath) they who should be ringleaders in
obedience, and conformity, yet ( proh dolor) become factionum and discordiaru^
duces, as it was said of the Syndichs of Geneva. It is lamentable to consider,
that abundance of knowledge should produce such ill effects; as rebellion,
disunanimity, disuniformity: that every woman will be a Bernice, and dare to
interpret Scripture, which is not of private interpretation; that every Evodias
and Syntyche will busily intermeddle with the Rites and government of the
Church, and teach the Magistrate to rule, and the Minister to preach; that Sic
dicit hom^, so says such a Reverend minister, should sway and preponderate,
and prevail more with them than Sic jubet Ecclesia; that suffer the opinions
of private men and ministers to over balance with them the public and
deliberate determinations, Canons and constitutions of such a national Church.
It being thus my brethren, as thus it is, I appeal to you all whether this (viz
Uniformity) be not a work worthy of all your help; to compose the differences,
and to stitch up those rents and breaches, which faction, disunanimity,
disuniformity has occasioned at this present in our Church of England. So much
of the first general, the Matter of his exhortation, Help those women, and of
the persons for whom he craveth help, (...) Those women. 2. Of the work
wherein, unanimity.

I now come to the motives to it, which S. Paul here 2. Genesis Motives to it.
used to the Minister of the Church of Philippi, to excite and stir him up to
help forward so good a work as the Churches peace, (and the same I shall use
to you my brethren in the ministry) as it follows in the Text: For they have
labored with me in the Gospel.

Non parvi pendendae, says Anselme: Evodias and Syntyche, 1. Inregard of those
women.
the women in the Text, were not to be slighted or neglected; they were godly
and religious, and by their over-credulity, misled, mis-guided, seduced by
those of the Concision, those evil workers that were amongst them, even to the
hazarding of their precious fouls: and the Lord, as he has committed to our
trust the dispensation of his Gospel, so the care and charge of their souls:
and herein you shall show your selves skillful artists in saving of souls, by
helping your women out of their errors, as S. James expressly: Brethren, if any
of you do err from the truth, and one convert James 5. 19, 20.
him; let him know, that he which converts a sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death.

For your functions sake: As if Paul had said, those 2. Inrespect of his
function.
women have labored with me in the Gospel, do thou take some pains and
labor with them. As it is a notable wyle, and stratageme of the devil, when
he cannot hinder the truth amongst us, to disturb our peace; So it is none of
the least parts of our Ministration in the Gospel, to settle and establish it:
We are praecones pacis, and it is not enough that we be Pacati, peace keepers,
(which I fear all of us are not) keepers of the Churches peace, by our
conformable obedience; but we must be Pacifici too, peacemakers: not actively,
but factively too; we must convert men and women from their errors, compose
their differences, rectify their judgments, and set them at rights, help our
women out, not further into errors.

For the Gospels sake, They have labored with me in 3. For the credit of the
Gospel.
the Gospel, Athletice decertaverunt, as Cornelius a Lapide on the Text, they
have stood stoutly for the defense of the Gospel; O help them for the credit of
the Gospel, It is a great blow to religion, to see Gods dear children together
by the ears, at strife and variance in matters of religion; to see our Mother
the Church like Rebecca, grieved and pained, and troubled in her womb, with
the strivings, oppositions, and reluctancies of two children of contrary
dispositions, as the Conformitan and Inconformitan: God and his Gospel are
wounded through the sides of such factious and schismatic gospellers, they
make the word of God to be evil spoken of, and bring a scandal upon the
glorious Gospel, which we and they preach and profess. Hanc ob rem deridiculi
facti sumus Iudaeis, and gentibus; dum Ecclesia in mill parts scinditur: For
this cause are we become a laughing stock to Jews and Gentiles, even by reason
of our many fractions and divisions. As the division of tongues hindered the
building up of Babel; so division of hearts, disunion of minds, and
disuniformity of posture and gesture, the building up of our Jerusalem, the
building up of one another in an holy faith. I beseech you then my brethren,
suffer a word of exhortation, and be entreated for the peace of the Churches
sake, for your peoples souls sake, for your own functions sake, for the
glorious Gospels sake, to put to your helping hands to set forward the Churches
peace: So while there is peace within our walls, God will send plenteousnesse
within our palaces; and God, even our God will give Ps. 122. 7.
us his blessing. So much of the 2. General: The motives to it.

I now come to the 3. General: The manner of 3. Genesis
S. Paul's proceeding, in settling peace in the Church of Philippi; not
commanding (though over them in the Lord) but entreating.

1. Those factious female zelots; I pray Evodias, and I beseech Syntyche. 2.
The Minister of the said Church: (...) And I entreat thee also my true
yoke fellow.
Good natures (such as are in them that are truly religious) 1. Monendo potius
qua^ minando. Tert.
are sooner woone by lenity, than serenity, Citius leni spiritu, quam dura
manu, by gentle obsecrations, then terrible comminations; many will lead, that
will not drive, may be persuaded, that will not be compelled; when fulsome
potions, and bitter pills are sweetened with sugar they will the sooner be
swallowed, and the better digested. The Apostles where they come once with a
rod, they come ten times with the spirit of meekness, with I pray, I beseech.

This was S. Paul's course with all the Churches, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you,
but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. In his Epistle to Philemon, ver. 8, 9. Though I Philemon 8, 9.
might be much bold in Christ to command thee that which is convenient, yet for
loves sake I rather beseech thee. So Zanch. in loc.
here in the Church of Philippi; non imperat, he does not command, nec
carcerem minatur, neither does he frighten, and threaten them with
imprisonment, sed rogat, as Zanchy notes on the Text. I pray Evodias, and I
beseech Syntyche.

In the old Law, the high Priests and the rest, which were appointed in some
cases to be Judges of the people, were sprinkled not with oil alone, or blood
alone, but blood and oil mingled together; to teach, Neque habere sine
misericordia justitiam, neque sine justitia misericordiam: So S. Paul, Shall I
come unto you with 1 Cor. 4. 21.
a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness. S. Ambrose Amb. lib. 7. in
Luc.
in his 7. lib. in Luc. tells us: Paulus virgam mi^atur, sed in spiritu
mansuetudinis visitat delinquentes; Paul shows and threatens the rod, but
yet he visits delinquents and offenders in the spirit of meekness.

This, even this is the manner of our Churches proceeding: the discipline of
the Church is advisedly, and deliberately exercised; not rashly precipitated,
and therefore much too blame are many clamorous Inconformitans, that cry out of
persecution, persecution in every place. As S. Ambrose advised in the Amb. ep.
44.
like case in his time, is now performed in our Chur: Si quis suspectae sit
infirmitatis, indulge aliquantulum, if ministers or people be not only
suspected, but convinced of inconformity; the Church bears and forbeares with
a great deal of patience. There wants no fatherly admonitions, no gentle
persuasions, no beseechings, intreatings, or obsecrations.

We may truly say of the Governors of our Chur: Amb. de obitu Theod.
as S. Ambrose spoke of that good Emperor Theodosius, Cum haberet supra omnes
potestatem, quasi parens expostulare malebat, quam quasi judex punire; vincere
volebat, non plectere: When he has command over all, he had rather expostulate
as a Father, than punish as a Judge, he desires to win by lenity (if it may
be) not to force by extremity: Diu tractatur putrida pars, si sanari potest
medicamentis: si non potest, a medico bono abscinditur: Sic Episcopi boni
affectus est, ut optet sanare infirmos, serpentia auferre ulcera, adurere
aliqua, non abscindere, postremo, quod sanari non potest, cum dolor
abscindere. The putrified part is a long time gently handled, that it may be
healed; if it cannot, or will not, it is cut off by the good Physician. So
this, you see and know is the manner of proceeding of the Governors of our
Church, with our peevish, factious, schismatic Non-conformists: Optant
sanare infirmos, they desire to heal the sick, endeavor by all fair means
to take away errors, schisms, those spreading ulcers out of the Church; to
sear some by suspension, in terrorem, and exemplum, not to cut them off.
Postremo, quod sanari non potest, what through peevish obstinacy, and
contumacious pertinacy cannot, or will not be healed or reclaimed, to cast out
of the Church (and that deservedly) by Excommunication, or to cut off by
degradation, and deprivation: Durities vincenda^est, non suadenda: Contumacy is
to be roughly handled, and Melius est ut pereat unus, quam unitas; yet, cum
dolor Ber. 102. ep.
abscindunt: the Church correcting her obstinate rebellious children, as
tenderhearted mothers do their stubborn babes, with tears in their eyes,
and with grief and sorrow of heart: So you have S. Paul's manner of proceeding
with those female factious zelots, I pray, I beseech.

One word of S. Paul's like proceeding with the Minister of that Church (whom he
calls (...), his yoke fellow) in so needful a work, and I have done; and that
is by entreating too: (...). And I entreat thee also my true yoke* fellow.

And this is all that I have further to say; with S. Paul, to pray, beseech,
and entreat every one of you in your several ranks and stations, even from
the highest to the lowest, to put to your helping hands (as the times require)
to set forward so good a work as the Churches peace.

Running from their own parish and minister, a great abuse in our Chur:
from their own minister (to his no little disanimation) unto other parishes,
to hear some Allobrogicall disciplinarian* or some Genevian Passavant^an. This
same gadding and madding after the persons of men, is a maine hinderance to the
Churches peace, and the ground and cause of so much schism, faction, and
sedition in the Church of England.

Next, I entreat your help, (...) my true yoke-fellows, my reverend brethren
in the Ministry; remember we are (...), like oxen, we should all look one way,
and draw orderly in the same yoke. If we then draw one way, you another; if
we be for conformity, you against it, we are not (...), the Lords work will
not on, we shall draw all asunder.

And here I cannot be silent in the Churches cause, I must crave leave without
offense, to reprove two sorts of ministers in our Church; who since they will
not be entreated, deserve to be reproved.

1. Such as are not (...), yoke-fellows. 2. Such as are not (...), true
yoke-fellows.
The first sort set back to back, and draw contrary to us.

The second sort draw very slowly, and need the goade, admonition at least, and
that from the mouth 1. V^teres Scripturas scrutans invenire non possum s^idi*
se Ecclesia^ and de do* mo Dei, pop^los seduxisse, prae^er ^llos, qui
sacerdotes a Deo positi fuerant, and Prophetae. Hieron. Ephesians. 4. 13. Acts 20.
30. Aug. 2. li. de ^^pt. cont. Donat.
of authority, to quicken and enliven them to it.

For the first, there are ( proh dolor) too too many pull-backs in the Church
of England, that helps the clean contrary way; that were appointed for the safe
guarding of the Church, and yet prove the smiters and wounders of her* that
have taken sacred orders, and were purposely ordained in the Church, for the
bringing of men into the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the son of
God: yet out of a spirit of contradiction, and singularity, many do arise that
speak perverse things, to draw away disciples after them; that hinder, not help
forward the Churches peace; why is it thus my brethren? let me expostulate you
our mothers cause in the words of S. Augustine, Vos engo, quare sacrilega a
separatione pacis vinculum dirupistis: Is it because our ceremonies are not
commanded in the word of God? Tell me, where are they forbidden? And S.
Augustine in one of his Epistles may satisfy Ep. 86. ad ^asul.
you in that; In quibus nihil certi slatuit Scriptura, mos populi Dei, and
ins^^tuta m^j^rum pr^ lege ten^da sunt, where the word of God determines no
certainty, as in Rites and ceremonies, there the custom of the Church, and the
constitutions of her governors, are to be taken for a law. And Mr. Calvin
says, things Calvin. lib. 4. Instit.
indifferent are in ^^clesiae liberate posita, referred to the Churches
discretion. If not this, is it rather, because our* ceremonies to you seem
unlawful, and inconvenient; and you, and godly people are troubled at the? you
suppose it, and to you they seem so: well, will Malu^t perversis voeibus
veritat^ reluctati, quam confessis erroribus pa^i restitui. Aug. 3. li. de
^apt. cont. D^^t. 1.
you therefore for seeming suppositious inconveniences, stubbornly draw
contrary to your yoke-fellowes, that you will rather lose your living, liberty,
country, than your opinion? I am sure Calvin never taught you that doctrine,
neither

1. In the point of wilfulness. 2. Nor in the case of seeming inconveniences.
Not in the point of wilfulness: For when the consistorian discipline did lie*
a bleeding, ready to expire, and the whole matter betwixt Calvin, and the
Syndichs of Geneva was referred to the four Helvetian Cities, to the
Magistrates, and ministers thereof: Calvin secretly and speedily sent letters
by Budaeus to Bullinger and the rest, wherein amongst other things he thus
wrote; N^c mor^sitate nos^r^ fiet, ^t loco potius cedamus, quam sententia: that
is, neither are we so wilful, and stifned in our opinions, that we will
rather lose our place, than our opinion. I could wish that all of our Church
were of his mind in this.

Nor in the case of seeming inconveniences; For 2. Bezain vit. Calv.
instance, the wafer Cake of Geneva, the communionbread seemed inconvenient to
Calvin himself, and godly people were grieved at it, and was more scandalously
abused in Popery, than any thing that our Church enjoynes, yea than the Cross
it self: Yet mark, Calvin advised his friends not to make any tumult for a
thing indifferent, esteeming the wafer Cake to be a thing indifferent. And in
his 370. Epistle, answering to certain questions of discipline, professed that
he misliked the frowardness of those men, which for such light scruples depart
from the public consent. And my brethren, were I either able, or worthy to
advise, I should give you the same counsel that Augustine gave to Casulanus:
When there are diverse Rites used in the same Church; (though the Chu: enjoynes
one and the same) namely, when we bow at the name of Jesus, and you will not;
we stand up at Gloria Patri, you sit, and so of the rest; when there is our
yea, your nay; what is in this case to be done, whom should we follow? His
advice is, Aug. 84. ep. ad Casul.
Episcop^ tuo in hac re noli resistere, sed quod ipse facit, sine ullo
scrupulo, aut disceptatione sect are: that is, to follow them and their
directions to whom the government of the Church is committed; and not the
example, direction, fancy of every private minister.

There is another sort too, not true yoke* fellows in the point of confirmity,
and, I believe, even here amongst us some of that condition, that draw slowly,
Movere vide^, at non promovere: that are conformable in judgment, and somewhat
in practice; yet are easy and remiss in the Churches cause, which prefer
the favor and good opinion of their Evodiaes and Syntyches, of their female
zelots, their good dames before the Churches peace: Ahabs friendship, that is,
the favor of some great man in your parish, or country: or Esaus portion,
that is, your good meals, and free entertainment; or I wot not what else you
are loath to be without, that which follows after, that is thrust into your
hand, or sent home after you: the charity of your good dames, makes many of you
(for such base and sinister ends) to betray God in his service, and to lay the
reins on your peoples necks, to do what they list, and like lawless
libertines to serve God after their own fashion.

I beseech you (for the close of all) (...), my true yoke-fellowes, take to
heart the lamentable fractions, and miserable distractions of our mother the
Church: And suffer a word of exhortation: be entreated by the womb that bare
you, and the paps that gave you suck, to put to your helping hand to set
forward so good a work, as unanimity, uniformity, the Churches peace; and that,

1. Praecepto. 2. Exemplo. 3. Prece.
Praecepto, by your public Ministry; preach stoutly, and stand stiffly for
it; O, not against it; help those women in your several charges, in matters
of ceremonies (as Calvin did instruct the weak in Geneva, that were troubled at
the wafer Cake) possess them with the power and authority of the Church, with
the nature and indifferency of a ceremony, rectify their judgments, compose
their differences, and stitch up those rents, and breaches that are amongst
them, and persuade them to obey them that have the rule over them, and to
submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

Exemplo, help it forward by your own examples: There is a great force in
examples; Walk, says S. Paul as you have us for an example: Many times, when
reason will not persuade, example will; this is a ready way to it, this would
do it, if you would be persuaded to it: In the 9. Judges 48, 49. When the
people saw Abimelech cut down boughs of trees, all the people by his example
did the like. Be you my brethren exemplary to your people, in your several
charges, in all religious comportments, reverend prostrations, genu-flexions,
incurvations in the service of God, and then this work will forward apace.

Pr^ce, help it forward by your prayers too; Adjuva 3. Psalm. 122. 6.
illas, tam orationibus, quam exhortationibus, says A^selme: O pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee; let us beg of God to put
to his helping hand in so needful a work. Help Lord, else vain is the help of
man. O thou God of peace, give us all peace through Christ our Lord: Thou Lord
that make all to be of one mind in one place, grant us all to be
alike-minded one toward another in Christ Jesus: Thou that art a God of unity,
give unto us the Deus unitas, unitatis omnis effectrix. Dionys. Areopagito.
spirit of unity, that we may keep the unity of the spirit through the bond of
peace. And we beseech thee to grant that all we, which profess thy holy name,
may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in unity and godly love; that
with one heart, mind, mouth, manner, unanimously, uniformly, we may serve and
praise thee in this Church militant, that hereafter we may be made members of
that, which is Triumphant; whither he bring us, that has so dearly bought us,
Jesus Christ the righteous: To whom with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be
ascribed, as most due is, from the grounds of all our hearts, all honor, and
glory, praise, power, might, majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore.

PErlegi Concionem hanc, cui titulus est, [Evodias and Syntyche.] eamque typis
mandari permitto.

Apr. 2. 1637. Ex aedibus Land: SA: BAKER.


