By the Queen.
WHere as the Queen's Majesty by her Proclamation did adiourne the Term of
Saint Michaell last past, until the first day of Hyllary Term next coming,
then to begin at Westminster, as in times past has been accustomed, having then
good hope that before that time the plague in the Cities of London and
Westminster would have ceased. And forasmuch as the same plague does not so
much diminishe, as thereof any assured account may be made, that the assemblye
of her loving Subjects may without peril be made at Westminster aforesaid, at
the said time appointed: Therefore her hyghnes has thought it expedient, by
thaduice of her Counsel, to adiourne the said Hyllary Term, from Westminster
aforesaid, unto her hyghnes Castle of Hertford, in the County of Hertford,
there to begin Quindena sancti Hillarii next coming. Which her hyghnes does
signify unto all her loving Subjects by this her Proclamation, wyllyng and
commaundyng them and every of them, to whom it does apperteyne, to observe and
keep their assemblyes and apparaunces, in all and every her hyghnes Courts at
the said Quindena, there to be holden in like manner, form, and condition, as
they would, should, or ought to have done, if the same Term and Courts had been holden and kept at Westminster, as they and every of them will answer at
their peryls: any thing in her Majesty's former Proclamation to the contrary
notwithstanding. And nevertheless her Majesty's pleasure is, that two of her
Justices, that is to say, of either Benche one, shall the first day of this
next Hyllary Term, called Octabis Hillarii, according to the ancient order of
her laws, keep the essoynes of the said Octab. Hillarii. At which vtas of
Saint Hyllarii, writtes of adiournement shall be directed to the said Justices,
geuyng them authority to adiourne the said Hyllary Term from Westminster
aforesaid, unto the said Castle of Hertford, there to begin Quindena sancti
Hillarii, then next ensuyng: and the same adiournement shall be made the first
day of the said vtas, commonly called the day of the essoynes.

And further, her Majesty considering, that if there should happen to be any
access and apparaunce of her loving Subjects at the said Castle or Town of
Hertford, during the said Term, of such as have been latelye infected with the
plague, or otherwise of such as have had the plague in their houses, there
might ensue great peril and danger to those that have as yet ben clear
thereof, and so a further inconvenience might grow thereby to the rest of the
Realm: Wherefore her hyghnes in aduoydyng thereof, does strayghtly charge and
command, that no such person or persons that so have been infected, or have
had the plague in their houses, of what estate or degree he or they be of,
shall repair unto the said Castle or Town of Hertford, during the said
Hyllary Term, except he or they be or shall be commanded by process, or
otherwise has special commandment to be there. And that every such person
so infected, upon his repair to the said Castle or Town, shall before he
enter into any house within the said Town, or into the said Castle, openly
notify and declare his estate touching his infection, and shall after, during
the time of his abode there, bear and hold up in his hand one white rod of
the length of one yard, upon pain of her Majesty's displeasure, and
imprisonment of their bodies during her hyghnes pleasure. And further, her
Majesty strayghtly charge and commands all Justices of peace of the said
County of Hertford, dwelling within twelve miles of the said Town and
Castle of Hertford, and all Constables, Baylyffes, and head officers of any
Borowes, Towns, Vyllages, or Hamlettes, within eight miles of the said Town
and Castle of Hertford, that they and every of them, shall from the day of
the proclaymyng of this Proclamation within the said County, do their best
endeavors to make and set forth such good orders, as by the goodness of God may
tend most to the preservation of all places within the same circuit of eight
miles, from infection of the plague, and for that purpose to assemble them
selves together wekely, from the time of the proclaymyng of this Proclamation,
until the end of the said Hyllary Term, in some places convenient, as well
for the deuysyng, as for the execution of such good orders. And that the said
Justices of peace, shall in the first day of the said Hyllary Term, signify
and declare to the Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, all that they
and the said Constables, and other the said officers, shall then have done in
and about the premises.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Castle of Wyndsor the.x. day of December, in the syxt
year of her Majesty's reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted by Richard Judge and John Cawood, printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

And further, the Queen's hyghnes pleasure is, that her Majesty's Court of Th
exchequer shall likewise be adiourned from her house of Syon, where it now is,
unto the said Castle of Hertford, and there to begin Octabis Hillarii, next
coming. And that all accomptauntes and other persons, which have or shall have
day by process out of the same Court to appear Crastino Hillarii next, shall
likewise keep their day and appearance at the said Castle of Hertford, in the
said Octabis Hillarii next, upon such pains as in the same process is
limited.

Yeuen at her Majesty's Castle of Wyndsor the tenth day of December, in the
syxt year of her Majesty's reign.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted by Richard Judge and John Cawood, Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


