Funeral Elegies.

OR THE Sad Muses in Sables, singing the Epicediums OF HIS Highness Prince
Maurice, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, etc. James Duke of Lenox
and Richmond. John Earl of Rivers. John Cleveland, the much-cry'd up Poet.


Written by S. H.

depiction of a skeleton with a skull and crossbones

London, Printed by Tho. Wilson at the Three Foxes in Long-lane. 1655

To the Reader.
I Hope I shall not be pestered with those stubborn precise Puppies, that turn
all useful and allowed contentments into scabs and scruples, they are very
fairly set out indeed, and so are fore-horses, Aristotle's Problems and
Powder'd-Beef, are rare diet; But I shall not care to tell the World, that I
despise such painted Momes, such gaudy trifles, indeed these men when they
speak, speak Oracles, for no man understands them, nor themselves neither such
Gim-cracks made of mops and motions, a true noble Gentleman is a brave thing,
and to such generous Souls I only vail my Bonnet; the honest and ingenious
Citizen shall also command me, but I have Armor of proof to protect me from
the proud scornings of the first sort of shallow Pates; These Elegies have
taken wing with a full gale, and will fly in the faces of those that shall
obstruct their travel about the World. I hope there are some that will give
free leave that the sense of these Elegies may sink into their considerations,
to such I am

A sincere Servitor.

An Elegy on the report of the Death of the most renowned Prince (as well for
Virtue as Magnanimity.) Prince Maurice, etc.
PRompt me you Imps of Jove and Memory,
I sing his Exit, whose Infinity
Of virtues merit an Angel-like Muse,
O be propitious, please for to infuse
Tragic Melpomene (while I comprise
His large sized Volume) thy best Rhapsodies;
He that made Valor slave to Martial skill;
He that knew how for to command his will
More then his Myrmydons, and could with ease
Teach Talbot, Scipio, and Themistocles;
He the great Master of the Dorick Quire,
The Drum, the Trumpet, and the Phrygian Lyre;
He that like Thunder still his passage wrought,
Who led like Caesar, and like Sceva fought,
Is stooped unto the Grave (be proud thou Earth)
More splendid then that Queen that gave him birth;
Forbear ye giddy gang, who Witchcraft prove,
And rip up Tellus womb for Treasure trove,
No more of inhum'd treasure will we babble,
We know where lies a Jem inestimable;
Glory of Princes, swept away to sat
The insatiate avarice of greedy Fate:
Let Eastern Princes offer unto thee,
Their Crowns, their Scepters, and their Sovereignty;
And at thy Tomb (the glory of thy years)
Pay a due tribute, blood commixt with tears:
Does not the Genius of the World comply
With Jove himself, to howl thy Elegy?
Saturnus, as when his Sarpedon fell,
(That Lycian, who save thee wants parallel)
Distilled salt tears, Homer no doubt complied
With Prophecy, and thou were typifi'd
In his mysterious Poem, Heaven's eye did weep,
While thou were hurried hence by death and sleep,
Worthy Psymnaticus his Sepulcher,
Thy body Mars, and Pallas did interre,
Whose Virtues, Fame, alternately resounds,
Even from Ganges to Alcides bounds;
Now near Joves throne with an internal eye,
Thou sit'st and menacest Mortality,
Having by the indulgent will of Fate,
Immolumated the Palatinate:
This he that weeps thy worth is proud to tell,
And he that doubts it, is an Infidel.
AN ELEGY On the death of the most illustrious Prince JAMES, Duke of Lenox and
Richmond, etc.
WHat balefull sounds are these salute mine ear?
What sadness is it that triumphs every where?
Each loyal face is clouded over, each eye
Rains tears, what may this sorrow signify?
Speak thou that take a pride to tell of deeds
Dire and deformed; what mischief's this that leads
A general ruin? crack thou mighty frame!
LENOX is dead! LENOX whose honored Name,
Gave life to virtue, not so great as good,
And more Allied to Kings in worth then Blood:
Had not the Midwise wrapped his Infant Limbs
In Purple studded with the choicest Gems,
Nor Princes Gossipt at his birth; his mind
(So near of kin to Heaven) had assigned
Large Provinces unto his open hand,
For Wise and good men only should command;
But it was time to travel hence, when we
Have reduced all unto a Paritie:
What Hero's heart but cracks, when he must give,
Worship to Wood-Mongers, or cease to live?
Or if he but sigh out his discontent,
Have his bright Star torn from his Firmament?
He that is the God of Honor takes a pride,
To have some more then others dignifide;
Nor can his luster radiate the Earth,
That is not raised by Virtue, or by Birth:
But thou (illustrious Prince) were born to all
Those glories that illuminate thi^ Ball,
Wealth worthily imposed, a glittering pomp
Befits a heart so blessed as thine, whose stamp
Was all Aetheriall; every act of thine
Proclaimed a perpetration most divine:
We were not worthy longer to detain
Such Excellence on Earth, things that are vain
And empty, best befit this sin-swoln Time,
When to be virtuous is a mortal crime;
Peruse the starry Gallery, and there
Behold this semi-Deity appear,
A Constellation shining 'bove the Poles,
More bright then Myriads of Sainted Souls.
On the Death of the Right Honorable and excellently accomplished, John Earl
of Rivers.
TO speak our griefs over thy sacred Urne,
(Unless the whole World were at once to mourn)
Were trivial; could we pin upon thy Hearse
The sense of Salust, and the scul of Verse,
We were but lame admirers at the best,
And learnedly our Ignorance confessed;
He that thy death unto the life would moan,
Must claim that very Genius thou did own;
Hyperion, and the Daughters of high Jove,
We may invoke in vain, for it is above
The Epoch of Poesy to tell,
Or find a sit and genuine parallel
For thee, whose life and death shall give renown,
To the great Monarch of the Triple Crown;
A man (though born to fill bright Honors Throne)
Yet humble unto admiration:
No Saffron-guilded Pomp, or gaudy Tire,
Could lift thy constant soul one cubit higher,
Then Piety admits such as might well,
Make the Court-Standard subject to the Cell:
Incomparable Hero! in thy fall,
All Honor, Worth, and Wit finds funeral:
Time that had sprain'd his feet, now wants his eyes,
Foundered in thy funebrious Exequies:
Nor since great CHARLES forsook the earth for Heaven,
Has any Hero trod his path so even
As thou have done; this then our bliss shall be,
We cannot err while we contemplate thee,
Whose great and good example shall create
Catholic Christians (who will accumulate
A Roman constancy) Champions that can,
Rout Armies of the Solifidian,
And (next to Heavens glory) seek no fame,
Save the protection of thy honored Name.
On the death of the High-priz'd Poet JOHN CLEAVELAND, Esquire
WHat, are all silent! are the Sons of Art,
Afraid to mention this dead Ascapart?
This Colbrand of Castalia, he whose strength,
Takes up nine Acres at the least in length:
Like Titius, every line of his might well,
Serve Faustus, or Agrippa for a Spell;
Nor durst the Romanist his Numbers mind,
Till with the Cross he had his forehead signed;
Thou great Gargantuan, huge Colossian Bard,
Who shall dare sing thy worth unless prepared
With Sack and Sulphur, every word should pierce
Like Thunder through the wondering Universe;
Although thou art inhum'd (to fancy Fate)
Yet still to us thou do tonitruate,
Thy words want each an Atlas; we can Rant,
It Is true, but not like thee (our Termagant)
Whose every syllable a sentence is,
Each word an Axiom, thou have searched Abyss,
(The Muses Hercules) and shown to us,
That triple-headed bandog Cerberus,
So by the Magic of thy haughty Rhimes,
The Powers celestial cringe to mortal crimes:
No marvel thou could cramp so many Pens,
Whose face and belly were as big as Bens:
Giant of Wit as well as Bulk, thy Quill,
(That Maule of minds) rests on the Muses Hill
A sacred Trophey; ye small Wits bow down,
Give worship to this Bashaw of the Gown;
Grand Vizier to Apollo, the Vice-King
Of fair Castalia, when thy Soul took wing,
Why did thou not appoint who should succeed?
Who now shall dare to wear thy Regal weed?
To put the Laurel on, or to give Law
In Verse that would keep Lucifer in awe;
Like Alexanders Captains, wanting thee,
We now shall quarrel for Supremacy;
For thou have left a world of wit behind,
For those to share whom blessings cannot bind;
Thus like some mighty Potentate that dies
Without an Heir, those Laws and Liberties
So often confirmed by Phoebus Parliament,
Shall be made void, yet on thy Monument
We will presume this Epitaph to grave,
Here Cleveland lies, whose Wit went wondrous brave.
FINIS.

