ANNO QVARTO HENRICI VIII.
THe King our soueraygne lord Henrye the viij. after the conquest, by the
grace of God king of England and of France and lord of Irelande, at his
parlyamente holden at Westminster the iiij. day of November, in the fourh year
of his most noble reygne, after the prorogation to the honor of God and holy
church, and for the common weal and profit of this his realm, by the assent
of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this presence
parliament assembled, and by aucthoritye of the same, has, do, to be
ordained, made, and enacted, certain statutes and ordynaunces in manner and
form following.

THE TABLE.
AN act concerning making of bulwarks on the seaside. Cap. i. An act
concerning punishment for murder. Cap. ii. An act concerning iuryes in London.
Cap. iij. An act of proclamacions to be made before exigents be awarded in
forrayne countyes. Cap. iiii. An act repelling penaltyes for geuinge of wages
to laborers and artificers. Cap. v. An act concerning customers and
comptrollers for sealyng of cloth of gold, silver, and al other manner of silks
and corses. Cap. vi. An act concerning peuterers, and true weightes and beams.
Cap. vii. An act concerning Richard Strode. Cap. viii.
FINIS TABVLAE.
HENRICI OCTAVI.
An act concerning making of Bulwarks on the sea side. Cap. i.
PRayen the commons in this present parliament assembled, that for as much as
the land of Britayne, and also the haven of Breast lies straight against the
South sea costs of the county of Cornewal and that the Frenchmen (our ancient
ennemies) and Britaynes enemies, by reason of their fishyng upon the sea
costs, know as well every haven and creek within the said county, as every
la^ding place, in as large manner as any subject of our sovereign lord the
kings does. And that the said countye is lxx, mile in length, and the
substance thereof right little more than vi. mile in bread from the south
sea to the north sea: by reason whereof they also know that great multitude of
people cannot shortly resort to put them of at their landing: and that in
diverse and many of the said landinge places, another pile, blockhouse, ne
bulwark is made to grieve or annoye them at their landing, which
consideracions, unto our said enemies great audacitie comfort and courage,
geeueth to arrive and land in the same parties, to the great annoyaunce of our
said sovereign lord his subjects there, and to the utter undoing of diverse
and many of them, unless a remedy be the sooner provided.

Therefore be it enacted by the king our sovereign lord, his lords spyrituall
and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled and by
auctority of the same, that the Justices of the peace and sheriff of the said
county, do ride and view all the said South cost, from Plymmouth westward to
the lands end. And that done, incontinent to appoint within themselves such
boroughes, towns, and paryshes, as they shall think reasonable to make
bulwarks, brayes, walls, ditches, and all other fortifications for the same
cause, in manner, form, and fashion, as shall be thought by their discretion
in every of the said landing places between this and the first day of March
next now coming. And farther be it enacted, by the said authority, that
every Mayre and constable of the said county, by the said Justices of peace
or sheriff appointed, do command all thinhabitauntes within the precinct of
their office, to be at the sea side with such instruments as they have or can
get for the making of ye said bulwarks and other the premises, in such
la^ding places, as shall be assigned by the said Justices of the peace or
Sheriff. And that the said maire or constables do commit to ward all such
wilful persons as will not obey, come, nor send any other person to the sea
syde^, to make the said bulwarks, and other the premises, at the day and time
by the said Maire or constables to be appointed, and there to remain
without bail or mainprise by the space of ten days or less, at the
discretion of the said Mayre or Constables: And if any of the said Mayres or
Constables do not their duty, as is aforesaid: that than the Iusticees of the
peace next adjoining, do commit to ward the same Mayre or Constable, so
offending, there to remain without bail or maynepryse by ye space of a
month, or else at the discretion of the Justice of peace.

And also be it enacted by the said auctority, that good and substanciall
bulwarks, braies, walls, ditches, and all other fortifications in every
la^ding places (in manner form and fashion as is aforesaid) as well from
Plimmouth aforesaid by the sea costs Estward, as in all other parts within ye
realm of England, be made there, as the Justices of the peace and Sheriff
within that shyre, where any such landing places be, shall think nedeful. And
that every Justice of peace, Mayre, and constable within every shyre, where any
such landinge places be, have like and as good auctority by this present act
to command the inhabitants of every borough, town, and parish adioyninge to
the sea side or else where, after the discretions of the Justices of peace, to
make the said bulwarks and other the premises: and also commit to ward all
such wilful persons as will not obey, in like manner as the Justices of the
peace, Maires, and constables of the said county of Cornwall may do by any of
the acts aforesaid.

And over this be it enacted by the said auctority, that it be lawful for
every of the kings subjects within this realm of England, by the advice and
assignement of the said Justices of the peace or sheriff to make all manner of
bulwarks and other the premises in every man's ground, of what estate or
degree he be of: and also to dig and to delue as well for earth stones and
turfes, as to cut and to hew heth in any man's ground for the making of any
such bulwarks and other the premises, as often and as many times as need
shall require, and the said earth, stones, turfes, and heth to take and occupy
and carry away out of the said ground to any other man's ground, for the
making of any such bulwarks and other the premises: in whose ground so ever
the said earth, stones, turfes, and heth happen to be, without any
interruption or let of any person or persons being lord or lords of any such
ground, or having any other interest in the same. And without any manner of
payment to be demanded for any of the premises, or any manner of action by any
manner or person or persons, at any time hereafter to be attempted, or in any
wise mainteyned against any of the kings subjects for any such matter or
cause. And this act to endure to the next parliament.

An act for punishment of murder. Cap. ii.
WHere as robberies, murders and felonies daily increase more and more, and
been committed and done in more heinous open and detestable wise the^ has been
often seen in times past: And the persons so offendinge little regard the
punishment thereof, by the course of the common law, ne by reason of any
statute heretofore made, but bear them bold of their Clergy, and imagininge
and pleadinge of feygned and untrue foraine pleas, triable in foraine cou^tyes,
to thinfe^t to be removed from place to place, by colorable and untrue
suggestions and for to be untruly acquit by favor might and corrupcion: so
that they live in manner without fear or dread. For reformacion whereof, and for
ye commonwealth of this realm, and to put the said murderers, felons, and
offenders in more fear and dread so to offend: Be it ordained established and
enacted by the king our sovereign lord, the lords spiritual and temporal,
and the commo^s in this present parliament assembled, and by auctoryty of the
same, that all person or persons, hereafter committinge murder or felony in
any church, chapel, or hallowed place, or of and upon malice prepensed, rob
or murder any person or persons in the kings highewaye, or else rob or
murder any person in his house, the owner or dweller of the house, his wife,
child, or servant than being therein, and put in fear or dread by the same,
that such persons so offending, be not from henceforth admitted to his or their
clergy, such as been within holy orders only except. And over that be it
enacted by the said auctority, that if any murderer or felon, upon his
arrainment, hereafter do allege, that he had taken any church or churchyard
for murder, felonye or other place preueleged for the same in a foraine county,
and against his will taken out thereof: that than the kings attournay, or any
other person that will sue or aledge for the king: that the said murderer or
felon so arayned, was taken at large in the same shire, where he is so arayned:
that than the same allegeaunce and issue to be tried by thenquest that should
try the said murder or felony within the same shyre, and before the same
Justice, where the said murderer or felon is arrained, as though the said
foreign plea had not be pleded by the said felon. And if it be founden by ye
same inquest, that the said murderer or felon was taken within the same shire
(as is aforesaid) that than he to have none auantage or benefit of ye matter
alleged by him for taking out of the church or churchyard, or other place
privileged, in any such foraine shire. And this act to endure to the next
parliament.

An act concerning Iuries in London. Cap. iij.
WHere at a parlyamente holden at Westmin. the.xj. year of the reign of king
Henry the.vij. for the good due administracion and expedition of Justice, it
was ordained, and among other things enacted, that every person hereafter to
be enpanelled or sommoned to appear in any Jury or inquest, in any court
within the city of London, before any Judges of the same city, making default
at the first sommons, should lose and forfaite.xij.d. And at the second
defaut.ij.s. And so at every such defaut after that, the issues and penalties
to be doubled. And also such issues lost in ye Maires court should be
forfaited levied, and perceived to thuse and behoue of the maire and ye
comminalty of the said city. And that all such issues lost in the sheriffs
court or courts, should be forfayted, leuyed, and perceived to the use of the
sheriffs of the same city, for the time being, toward their fee ferme, as by
the same act more plainly does appear: in the which act is not expressed,
how or by what means ye foresaid issues, so lost and forfayted, for none
appara^ce of the persons so impanelled and sommoned, should be levied. The
lack whereof is the cause, that such persons as have been impanelled and
sommoned, as well for the king as between party and party (being substanciall
and indifferent) have made many times defaut, and would not appear. And so it
remains in like mischief as it was before ye making of the foresaid act, to
the greatlet of Justice, and the delay as well in the kings causes, as in
other causes between parties, wherefore for ye good execution of the said
statute and pertit remedy in this behalf to be had. Be it established
ordained, and enacted by the king our sovereign lord by thassent of ye
lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present Parlyamente
assembled, and by the auctority of the same, that for all such issues (in form
aforesaid) hereafter to be lost or forfaited in the maires court, it shall be
lawful to the said mayre, and to his successors, to distreine, and the same
distress to retain till he or they be satisfied of the said issues. And in
like manner that it shall be lawful to ye foresaid sheriffs, and their
successors, to distraine for such issues lost in their court or courts, and
the said distress to retain till they be satisfied of the said issues. Item
for as much as after issues ioigned in actions and suits commenced taken or
dependinge in the kings courts before him self in his bench, and before his
Justice of the commen benche: And also in his escheker at the kings suite, or
at the suite of the parties triable in the said city of London, as well ye
king as the parties have suffered great delay many times for defaulte of
apparau^ce of the jurors impanelled to try the said issues, and many times
for lack of jurors not having lands and teneme^tes of the yearly value,
of.xl.s.

Be it ordained and enacted by the said auctority of this present parliament,
that the sheriffs of London (for the time being) have full auctority and
power to return in panelles or arraies of all actions and suites now
dependinge, or that shall depend in any of the said courts or escheker,
persons being citizens having goods to the value of.C. mark or above, to
try the issues ioygned or to be ioygned in every such action or suite. And
the persons so returned (having goods to the value of.C. mark or above)
shall be sworn and do in all such iuries in likewise in every thing, as other
persons shall do having lands and teneme^tes of the yearly value of.xl.s.
over all charges. And over that be it ordained by the said auctority, that the
sheriffs of the said city (for the time being) shall return upon ye first
distress in every such action or suite upon every of the iuries impanelled to
try the issues thereof.xx.d. And upon the second distress, upon every of
the same jurors.xl.d. And upon every distress after that, upon every of
the same Jurors the double, till a full Jury in every such Action and suite
shall appear and be sworn to try the issues ioygned in the same. And that the
sheriffs, that shall make any return upon such distress contrary to the
form aforesaid, shall forfayte for every such defaulte.x.li. the one half
thereof to be to the king, and the other half thereof to the party that will
sue therefore. And that the defendaunte in any such action be not admitted to
wage his law, nor protection therein for him allowed.

An act of proclamations to be made before exigentes be awarded in foreign
countries. Cap. iiij.
THe king our sovereign lord, calling to his most gracious remembrance,
how that before this time diverse of his subjects of this his realm of
England, have been grievously vexed and troubled by reason of outlawries had
against them in foreign counties and sundry action personelles, at the suite
of diverse malycious persons, which cruel mind attempted such actions
personelles, more for malice than for any just cause of action that they had
against the parties defendauntes named in the same. And of the which outlawries
so had in foreign counties, the party defendaunte, named in such forrayne
actions, had never knowledge ne monition, to such time as the outlawrye were
against them had and certified, and some of the^ never came within the countye,
where such actions were against them sued, ne never were dwelling ne
conuersau^t within the said county. Nevertheless the parties (so outlawed in
foreign counties) have lost their goods and substance to their utter
undoing. Wherefore in auoydinge of such malicious and foreign suites
hereafter to be sued, the king our sovereign lord intending the restfulnes of
his said subjects, and that indifferente Justice should be admynistred to
every person, as well to the poor as to the rich, and that every person
should have lawful knowledge and monition of such actions, as hereafter be, to
be attempted and sued against him in any of the kings courts, by the assente
of the lords spyrytuall and temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parlyamente assembled, and by auctorytye of the same, has ordained established
and enacted, that from hencefoorthe at the same day that any exigente is
awarded or to be awarded against any person or persons in any action
personell, if yt do appear by the vsinge of the same action, that the party
defendaunt is dwellinge in another countye, than in the same countye where the
same action is sued: that than the Justices, before whom any such exigend is to
be awarded, award one writ of proclamacion, to be direct to the sheriff of the
counti where it does appear by the using of such action, that the party
defendau^t is dwelling, the which writ of proclamation shall contein theffect of
the same actyon. And that the sheriff of the countye, to whom any such wryt
of proclamation shall be dyrected, make proclamation.iij. several days in
his plain county, whereof one of the said proclamations to be made at the
general sessions in those parties, where the said party is supposed to be
dwellinge, in that the party defendaunt yield him self to the sheriff of the
foreign county, to whom any such exigende in any action personal shall be
awarded, so that the sheriff of such foreign county may upon his yealdinge
have the body of the defendaunte before the Justices, before whom any such
exigende is awarded at the day in the same exigende comprised, there to answer
to the plaintiff in the same according to ye law. And that every such writ of
proclamation have the same day of return, as the writ of the exigende upon
such forrayne actions so awarded shall have: and that every such writ of
Proclamation be delivered of record to the shyryffe or his deputye of the
county, into the which any such writ of proclamation is to be awarded. And that
the sheriff of the same county duly execute the same, and thereof make due
retourn at the day in the same writ appointed upon peine to forfaite such
amerciament, as by the Justices, before whom such action is used, shall be
sessed. And that the felissour or exige^ter, in whose office such suit is
taken, make out the said writ and writs of proclamacion, as after shall be
awarded in any of the said courts. And that the same felissour or exigenter
take no more for the making of any such writ of proclamation and the enteringe
of the same record, but only six pence.

And if any outlawry hereafter he had or promulged against any person or
persons, in any action personal in a foreign county, and no writ of
proclamation, as is before said awarded, returned: that than all and every
such outlarie to be utterly void and of no force ne effect in the law.

And this act to begin and take effect at the feast of the Purificatio^ of
our Lady saint Mary next coming, and not before.

And also be it enacted by the said auctoritye, that in all actions hereafter
to be taken in London, or in ye county of Midd. wherein process of outlarye
lies against any person or persons, calling or naminge them late of London,
that before the exigende be awarded in the same action, that ye party
plaintiff or his attorney, after the.iij. capias returned, sue a like wryt of
proclamation, in manner and form as is before specified in the county, where
the same person or persons so sued or to be sued, be conuersau^t or dwelling at
the time of the said wryt awarded, or else all outlawrys so had made pronounced
or returned against all such persons, to be void and of none effect. And
this act to endure to the next parliament.

An act reapeallinge penalties for geuinge of wages to laborers and
artificers. Cap. v.
PRaien the commons in this present parliament assembled, that wherefore defaut
and lack of due execution of the statute laborers because of a statute and
ordinance had and made in ye.xij. year of the reign of king Richard the
second, that gives penaltyes, peynes and forfaytures against the Master and
geuer, as well as against Servants, Laborers, Artificers, and craftismen,
so that the master and giver for fear thereof, dare not put the said estatute
and other estatutes thereof made in execution: wherefore by ye king our
sovereign lord and by thassent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the
commons in this present parliament assembled, and by auctority of the same, be
it established and enacted, that all penaltyes, peynes, and forfaitures
contained in the said estatute, and in all other estatutes had and made
concerning servants laborers of husbandry, laborers, artificers, and
craftesmen, be only to and against the said master and geuer for henceforth
void and of none effect. And this act to endure to the next parliament.

An act co^cerninge customers and comptrollers for sealinge of cloth of gold
and silver, and all other silks, Cap. vj.
WHere at a parliament holden in the.xij. year of ye reygne of king Edward
ye.iiij. among other it was ordained established and enacted, that the
collectours of the subsidye and the comptrollers. should at all times be redye
wha^ they should be required, to seal any manner of cloth of gold, of silver,
baudekin, velvet, damask, saten, sarsenet, Cartron, Chamlette, and every
other clothe of silk, and every corse of sylke and gold, and every corse of
sylke of the making beyond the sea, and the same marchaundises should seal
at every time when they should be required without delay, taryinge, or any
thing for their sealinge to take by any mean, upon the pain of forfayture to
the owner of such marchaundises xx.s. by every of the said collectours and
comptrollers at every time when they refuse to seal any such marchandises
after such request made, or take any thing for sealynge of any such
marchandises, as by the same act among other things more plainly
appears. Sithen the making of which act the said collectours and
comptrollers, and their clerks, not fearinge the penaltye limited in the same
act, have used and daily use to take for sealinge of every piece of the same
marchaundises, above rehearsed.ii.d. to the great hurt and damage of the
merchants owners of the same. For the same marchantes at many times bring
and conueighe in one ship.iii. or.iiii. M. pieces of the same marchaundyses,
which amounts to.xxx. or.xl.li. after the rate of ii.d. a piece. And for as
much as the foresaid penaltye, expressed in the said statute, is but.xx.s.
therefore the said collectours, co^ptrollers, nor their clerks fear not to
run in ieoperdy of the same: wherefore be it ordained and enacted by the king
our sovereign lord, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in
this present parliamente assembled, and by the auctority of the same, that from
henceforthe the collectours and comptrollers of the said subsidy, nor their
clerks, nor any of them, take for the sealyng of any piece of the said
marchandises (above rehearsed) any thing, upon peine of forfaiture at every
time.xx.li.

And also be it enacted by the same auctoritye, that if and as often as the
same collectours and comptrollers, or any of them, vnreasonablye delay or tarry
the said merchants, or any of them, for and about the sealinge of the same
marchandises: that than and as often the same collectours and comptrollers, and
every of the^, so unreasonably delaying and taryinge the same marchantes, or
any of them, to forfait for the same.xl.s. The one moite of every of the said
penalties (so forfaited) to be to the king our sovereign lord, and the
other moity thereof to the marchaunte so grieved, that will sue for the same by
way of information in the kings eschequer, or by actio^ or byll of debte after
the order of the common law, as in other actions of debt is used: in which
action the defendant shall not be admitted to wage his law, nor protection, nor
essoyne to be to him allowed in the same suite, for the said forfaiture.

An act concerning peuterers and true weightes and beams Cap. vij.
FOr as much as a certain act was made and establyshed, in the parliament
holden at Westminster the.xix. year of the reign of the late most famous king
your father Henry the.vij. whom god pardon, concerning peauterets, and
brasiers, hauking and walkinge about the countries, and also concerning false
beams, scales and weightes, with a provision for casting of fine metal and
of perfect goodness: Which act was made to endure to the next Parliamente,
the tenor whereof hereafter ensues: That where many simple and evil
disposed persons of this your realm of England (using the said crafts)
dayelye go about this your realm from village, from town, and from house to
house, as well in woddes and forestes, as other places, to bye peauter and
brass, and that knowing, thieves and other pickets, that steal as well peuter
and brass, belonging to your hyghnes, and under your mark, and to the
lords spiritual and temporal, as to your subjects of this your realm,
bring such stolen vessels unto them in such hid places to sell, and sell it
for little or naught, and about they bring it to priuye places, or into corners
of cities or towns, and there sell much part of it to strangers, the which
carry it over the sea by stelth. Also the said persons (so goinge about) and
diverse other vsinge the said crafts, use to make new vessels, and mix good
metal and bad together, and make it naught, and sell it for good stuff,
where in deed the stuff and metal thereof is not worth the fourth party that
is sold for, to the great hurt, disceipte and loss of your subjects. Also
diverse persons, using the said crafts, have disceyuable and untrue beams
and scales, that one of them will stand even with.xij.li. weyghte at the one
end, against a quarter of a pound at the other end, to the synguler
advantage of them self, and to the great disceite and loss of your
subjects, biers and sellers with them. For reformacion of the premises it
would please your highness of your most abundant grace, with thaduise of your
lords spyrituall and temporal and the commons in this present parliamente
assembled, and by auctoritye of the same, to enacte and establishe, that no
person nor persons, vsyng the said crafts of peauterers and brasiers, from
henceforth shall sell or change any peauter or brass, new or old, at any
place or places within this your realm, but only in open fayres or markettes,
or in their own dwellinge houses, but if they be desired by the sand biers of
such wares, upon pain of forfaytuee to our sovereign lord the king for every
such default x.li. Also by the same authority it may be enacted and
established, that no person nor persons, of what condition or degree soever he
or they be from henceforth within the city of London and York, or without
either cast or work any pewter vessels or brass at any place or places
within this your realm, but that it be as good fine metal, as is the peauter
and brass cast and wrought after the perfect goodness of the same, within ye
city of London, and by the statutes of the same owe to be, upon peine of
forfaiture of all such peauter and brass, so cast and wroughte of worse
peauter or brass than ought to be wrought in the same cities: the one half of
every such forfaiture to be to the use of your highness, and the other half to
ye use of the finders thereof.

Provided always yt this forfaiture in no wise stretch ne extend to brass or
peauter, being in the possession of any person, other than the workers of the
same, or such as have the same to sell, and being of the crafts or mystery.
Also that it may by the same authority be enacted and established, that no
manner of person or persons, of what degree or condition soever he or they be,
from he^ceforth make no hollow wares of peauter, that is to say saltes and
pottes, that is made of peauter called lay metal, but that it may be after
thassise of peauter lay metal wrought within ye city of London. And that ye
makers of such wares shall mark the same with several marks of their own, to
the intent that the makers of such wares shall auow the same wares by them (as
is abouesayd) to be wrought. And that al and every such wares, not sufficiently
made and wrought, and not marked in form abouesayd founde^ in the possession
of ye same maker or seller to be forfayted: and if the same ware be sold, the
said maker to forfait the value of the same so unlawfully wrought and sold,
the one half of ye said wares, or the value thereof, to be the use of your
highness, and the other half to be to the use of the finder or serchers of the
same. Also that it may by the said auctority be enacted and establyshed, that
if any person or persons hereafter, vsyng bying and selling of peauter or
brass, that hereafter occupy any disceiuable or false beams or weightes of
the said wares, that every such person or persons, using or occupyinge such
dysceyuable and untrue beams or weyghtes, to forfaite.xx.s. the one half to
the king, and the other half to the party that therefore shall sue by action
of det: and that in the said action no protection nor essoyne shall be allowed.
And also the said party so offendings, shall forfaite his beam to him that
shall cease it: and if the said offender or offenders be not sufficient to pay
the said sum or sommes by them so forfayted, that then it shall be lawful
to the Mayres, bayliffes, or other head officers of such place or places,
where any such offenders shall be found to put them in the stocks, and them so
to keep till ye next market day next adjoining, and in ye market place to put
them in the pillorie all the market time. And furthermore that it be lawful by
the said auctority, that the master and wardeins of ye said craft of
peuterers wtin every city and borough of this realm, where such wardeins are,
and where no such wardens are, the head officers or governors of ye same city
or borough, to appoint certain persons most expert in knowledge of ye same, to
make search within ye said cities or boroughes where they dwell. And over this
ye Justices of peace within every shyre at the general sessions holden at
Mighelmas, shall assign and appoint two certain persons, having experience
therein, to make search in the premises in every part of that shire, as well
within the frau^ches as without, saving in cities or borowes, where serchers be
appointed by the heds or governors of the same. And that all such unlawful
peauter or brass, as the said searchers shall find, the one half to the use
of your grace, and the other half to the said serchers. And that in the defaute
of the said masters and wardeins of the said occupacions, not serching inform
as is aforesaid, and whereby that any such unlawful mettels is cast or made,
or unlawful weightes used: that then it shall be lawful to any person or
persons, having sufficient cunninge and knowledge in the said occupacions, by
oversight of the maire bayliffes, or head officers of the said cities,
boroughes and towns, to search all the said places, and to put said authority
and act in execution in form aforesaid. Pleases it therefore your grace and
wysedomes, in so much as the said act is thought good and profitable, that it
be ordained enacted and established, by the lords spyrituall and temporal,
and the commons in this present parliamente assembled, and by the auctority of
the same, that ye said act may endure for ever. And over that be it enacted by
the said auctority, that if any untrue or deceyuable mettell or workmanship
of Tin or peauter, be founden either in platters, chargers, disshes, saucers,
potengers, trenchers, basins, flagons, bottels, pottes, saltesels, goblettes,
spones, cruettes, or candelstickes, or any other such wares of tin or
peauter, wheresoever it be cast, made, or wroughte within this realm or
without, and brought to be sold within the same realm: that than it shall be
lawful to the mayre of the city of London, and the master and warde^s of the
craft of peauterers (of the said city for the time being) and their deputies,
to have search of the same within the city of London, and the suburbs of the
same. And that in all other cities, boroughes, and towns, where any wardeins
be or shall be, the Mayres, bayliffes, or head officers, and wardeynes to
have like authority. And where no wardeins be, than the head officers or
governors of the same cities, boroughes, and towns to appoint certain
persons most expert and cunning in knowledge of the same, to make search within
the said cities, boroughes and towns where they dwell. And if any such new
wares wrought of tin and peauter, as is aforesaid, be found defectise, and
being in the possession of the sellar, that then same person or person that
puts any such new wares of peauter to sale, shall forfaite the same wares,
the one half to the use of our sovereign lord the king, and the other half
to the serchers or finders of the same.

Provided always that this act concerning the forfayture be not prejudicial nor
hurtful to any person or persons, having grant of our sovereign lord the
king, or of any of his noble progenitors by his letters patents of such
forfayture, but that they and every of them shall and may enjoy the same
according to their former grauntes and libertyes.

An act concerning Richard Strode. Cap. viii.
LAmentably complayneth and shows unto your most discrete wysedomes in this
present parliament assembled, Richard Strode gentleman of the county of
Deuonshyre, one of the burgeis of this honorable house, for ye burghe of
Plimton in the county aforesaid, yt where ye said Richard condescended and
greed with other of this house, to put forth certain villes in this present
parliament against certain persons, named tinners in the county aforesaid,
for the reformacion of ye perishing, hurting, and destroying of diverse ports,
havens, and creekes, and other villes for ye common weal of the said county,
the which here in this high court of parliament should and ought to be
commended and treated of.

And for because the said Richard is a tinner, for the causes and matters before
rehearsed, one John Furse tinner, vnderstewarde of the Steimerie in the said
county, in and at four courts of the said Steimerie at diverse places and
times before him severally holden in the said county, he and other have
condemned the said Richard in the sum of clx.li. That is to wete at every
court day xl.li. and that by the procurement of the said John Furse, at the
said four several courts and lawdayes, in the said Steymerie by him holden,
in this manner published and said, that the same Richard at the last parliament
holden at Westminster, would avoided and utterly destroyed all liberties,
privileges, and frau^ches concerning the Steimerie: by reason whereof the
said Richard, upon four bills had and made thereof by the said John Furse
and other, caused yt the said Richard was presented and founden guilty of the
premises in every of the said courts in xl.li. to be lost and forfaite by
him, by reason of an act and ordinance by tinners made and had at a place in
the said county called Crokerentor: the tenor of the which act appears in
Cedule to this bill annexed: to the which the said Richard was never warned
nor called to make answer to the premises, contrary to al laws, right
reason, and good conscience. And for the execution of the same, one John
Agwilliam upon a surmise by him made to the kings highness to the said
condempnacio^ to be to his grace forfaite, thereof attainted a bill assigned of
xx.li. percel of the said clx.li. to be to him granted by the said kings
highness: whereupon ye said John Agwilliam and other caused the said Richard was
taken and imprisoned in a dongeon and a deep pit under the ground in the
castle of Lidford in the said county, and there and else where remained by the
space of three weeks and more, unto such time he was delivered by a writ of
privilege out of ye kings eschequere at Westminster, for that he was one of
ye collectours in the said county for the first of the two quindeims granted
at and in this present parliamente: the which prison is one of the most
annoious, co^tagious, and dtetestable places within this realm: so that by
reason of the same imprysonment he was put in great parell and ieoperdy of his
life, and the said Richard so being in prison, and the said John Agwilliam
seeing the same cruel imprysonment of the said Richard, entreated and instantly
desired one Philip Furse) tha^ being keeper of the said prison) straightly to keep
the said Richard in prison, and to put yrons upon him to his more greater pain
and ieoperdy, and to give him but bread and water only, to thentent to cause
the said Richard to be feign to content and pay him the said xx.li. And for the
same promised ye said keeper four marks of money: for the which four marks
the said Rychard for to be eased of his yrons and peyneful imprysonment
aforesaid (for sauegarde of his life) promised and granted to pay the said
keeper four mark: whereof he paid the said keeper in hand xiii.s.iiii d. And
over that the said Richard for to be eased of his said paynefull imprysonment,
was also of necessity driven to be bounden to Thomas Denis, deputy unto sir
Henry Marney knighte, warden of the said Steimerie, in an obligation of the
sum of C.li. Upon co^dicio^ whereof party is as hereafter follows: that is
to say, that if the above bounden Richard Strode, defend and save harmeles
the said Thomas Denis, and to use himself as true prisoner, duringe the time
it shall please the king to have him prisoner in the castle of Lidforde, and
also to do nothing, whereby he shall in the law be deemed out of prison, and
other articles comprised in the said condition, the which the said Richard
perfectly reme^breth not: wherefore the premises by your great wysedomes
tenderly co^sidred, the said Richard humbly prays, that it may be ordained,
established and enacted, by the king our sovereign lord, and by the lords
spyrituall and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled,
and by auctority of the same, that the said condemnacion and condemnacio^s of
the said clx.li. and every parcel thereof, and judgments and executio^s had
or to be had for the premises or any of them, to be utterly void against the
said Richard and of none effect.

And over that be it enacted by the said authority, that all suites,
accusements, condemnacions, executions, fines, amercementes, punishments,
corrections, grauntes, charges, and imposicions put or had, or hereafter to be
put or had unto or upon the said Richard, and to every other of the person or
persons before specifyed, that now be of this present parliament, or yt of any
parliament hereafter shall be, for any bill, speaking, reasoning, or declaring of
any matter or matters, concerning the parliament to be co^muned and treated of,
be utterly void and of none effect.

And over that be it enacted by the said auctority, that if ye said Richard
Strode, or any of all the said other person or persons, hereafter be vexed,
troubled, or otherwise charged for any causes, as is aforesaid, that tha^ he or
they and every of them so vexed or troubled, of and for the same, to have
action upon the case against every such person or persons, so vexing or
troubling any contrary to this ordinance and provision, in the which action
the party grieved shall recover treble damages and costs. And that no
perotection, essoyne, nor wager of law in the said action in any wise be
admitted nor received.

BE it inquired for our sovereign lord the king, that where as at the
parliament holden at Crokere^tor, before Thomas Denis, deputy to sir Henry
Marney knight, warde^ of the Steimerie, the xiiij. day of September, the second
year of the reign of king Henry the viii. It was ordained established and
enacted, that (from the day aforesaid) it shall be lawful for every man to dig
tin within the county of Deuonshyre, in all places where as tin may be
founden. And also to carry the water to their works without any let or trouble
of any person or persons, according to our vsages and confirmacio^s of our
charter, and according to our custom out of mind. And if any person or
persons let, trouble, or vex any man to dig tin, or to carry water for
the same, contrary to our old custom and usage, and if it be founden by
verdite of xii. men at the law day, he that so lets, vexes, or troubles
any such person or persons, shall fall in the penalty of xl.li. as often as he
so vexes or troubles: the one half to my lord Prince, and the other half to
him yt was so let, vexed, or troubled. And a Fieri facias to be awarded, as
well for my lord prince as for ye party, if one Richard Strode of Plimton
tinner, at the parliament holden at Westminster the fourth day of February last
past, let, vexed, and troubled one William Read the younger, and Elis Elforde
tinner, and al other tinners in the same parliamente for digging of tin in
the several soil of the said Richard and other persons contrary to this our
act made.

God save the king.

