decorative border

ANNO PRIMO REGINAE ELIZABETHE. AT THE parliament begone at Westmynster, the
xxiii. of January in the first year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady,
Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England, France and Ireland. Queen,
defendoure of the Faith. etc. And there proroged till the.xxv. of the same
month, and then and there holden, kept, and continued until the dissolution
of the same, being the eight day of May, then next ensuynge, were enacted as
follows. Anno. 1.5.5.9.

printer's device of John Cawood

The Table.
AN act restoring to the Crown the ancient iurisdictyon, over the State
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolyshynge all forrayne power repugnaunt
to the same. Capi. i. An act for the uniformity of common Prayer, and Service
in the Church, and thadministration of the Sacraments. Capi. ii. An act of
Recognition the Queen's highness title to the imperial Crown of this Realm.
Capi. iii. An act for the restitution of the first Fruits and Tenthes, and
rentes reserved nomine decime, and of personages impropriate to the imperial
Crown of this realm. Capi. iiii. (...). Capi. v. An act whereby certain
offenses be made treason. Capi. vi. An act for the explanacion of the Statute
of seditious words and Rumors. Capi. vii. An act to revive a Statute made in
the.xxiii. year of the reign of king Henry theight, touching the conueying of
Horses, geldings, and Mares into Scotland. Capi. viii. An act touching
Shoemakers and Curryors. Capi. ix. An act touching Tanners, and the selling of
tanned Lether. Cap. x. An act that the cariyng of Leather Tallowe, or raw
H^des out of the Realm for Marchaundize shall be felony. Capi. xi. An act
limitinge the times for laieng on land Merchaundize from beyond the Seas, and
touching Customs for sweet wines. Ca. xii. An act against the deceitful
using of Linen clothe. Ca. xiii. An act for the shipping in English Botomes.
Ca. xiiii. An act for the continuance of the making of Woollen clothe in
diverse towns in the county of Essex. Cap. xv. An act that timber shall not be
felled to make coals for the burning of Iron. Ca. xvi. An act to continue the
act made against rebellious assembles. Cap. xvii. An act for the preservation
of Spawn and frye of fish. Ca. xvii. An act for the continuance of certain
Statutes. Cap. xix. An act of a Subsedy of Tonnage and Pondage. Capi. xx. An
act of a Subsedye, and two fyftenes and Tenthes, granted by the Temporaltie.
Ca. xxi.
An Act restoryng to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the state
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolyshyng all forreyne power repugnaunt to
the same.
MOST HVMBLYE beseech your most crcellent Majesty, your faithful and
obedient subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this your present Parliament assembled: That where in time of the reign of
your most dear Father of worthy memory King Henry the eight: diverse good
laws and statutes were made and establysshed, as well for the utter
extynguishement and putting away of all usurped and forreyne powers and
aucthorities out of this your Realm, and other your highness dominions and
countries: as also for the restorynge and vnytynge to the imperyall Crown of
this Realm, the ancient jurisdictions, aucthorities, superiorities, and
prehemynences to the same of right belonging and apperteynyng, by reason
whereof, we your most humble and obedient subjects, from the.xxv. year of the
reign of your said dear father, were continually kept in good order, and were
disburdened of diverse great and intolerable charges and exactions before that
time unlawfully taken and exacted by such forreyne power and authority, as
before that was usurped, until such time as all the said good laws and
statutes by one act of Parliament made in the first and second years of the
reigns of the late king Phyllyppe and Queen Mary, your hyghnes sister entytled
an Act repealyng all statutes, articles and provisions made against the Sea
Apostolic of Rome, since the.xx. year of king Henry theyght. And also for the
stablyshement of all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical possessions and
hereditamentes conveyed to the laytie, were all clearly repealed and made
void, as by the same Act of repeal more at large does and may appear. By
reason of which Act of repeal, your said humble subjects were eftsoon
brought under an usurped forreyne power and authority, and yet do remain in
that bondage to the intolerable charges of your loving subjects, if some
redress (by thaucthoritie of this your high court of Parliament, with
thassent of your highness) be not had and provided.

MAY IT THEREFORE please your highness for the repressyng of the said usurped
forreyne power, and the restoryng of the ryghtes, jurisdictions, and
preheminences apperteynyng to Thimperiall Crown of this your Realm, that it
may be enacted by thaucthoritie of this present Parliament, that the said Act
made in the said first and second years of the reigns of the said late king
Phillip and Queen Mary, and all and every branch, clauses, and articles
therein contained (other then such branches, clauses, and sentences, as
hereafter shall be excepted) may from the last day of this Sessio^ of parliament,
by authority of this present parliament, be repealed, and shall from
thenceforth be utterly void and of none effect.

AND that also for the reviving of diverse of the said good laws and statutes,
made in the time of your said dear father, it may also please your hyghnes,
that one act and Statute, made in the.xxiii. year of the reign of the said
late king Henry the eight, entitled: An act that no person shall be cyted out
of the Diocese where he or she dwells, except in certain cases. And one
other act made in the.xxiiii. year of the reign of the said late king,
entytuled: An act that appeals in such cases as has been used to be pursued
to the sea of Rome, shall not be from henceforth had ne used, but within this
Realm. And one other act made in the.xxv. year of the said late King,
concerning restraynte of payment of annates and first fruits of
Archbysshoprykes, and Byshoprykes to the sea of Rome. And one other act in the
said.xxv. year, entytuled: An act concerning the submyssyon of the clergy
to the kings Majesty. And also one act made in the said.xxv. year,
entytuled: An act restrayning the payment of annates or first fruits to the
bishop of Rome, and of the electyng and consecratynge of Archebysshoppes and
bysshoppes within this realm. And one other act made in the said.xxv. year,
entytuled: An act concerning the exoneration of the kings subjects from
exactions and impositions heretofore paid to the sea of Rome, and for having
licenses and dispensations within this realm, without suyng further for the
same. And one other act made in the.xxvi. year of the said late king entitled.
An act for nominacion and consecration of Suffragans within this realm. And
also one other act made in the.xxviii. year of the reign of the said late
king, entitled: An act for the release of such as have obtained pretended
licenses and dispensations from the Sea of Rome, and all and every branches,
words, and sentences in the said several acts and statutes, contained by
authority of this present parliament, from and at al times after the last day
of this Session of parliament, shall be revived, and shall stand and be in full
force and strength, to al intentes, constructions, and purposes. And that the
branches, sentences, and words of the said several acts, and every of them,
from thenceforth shall and may be judged, demed, and taken to extend to your
highness, your heirs and successors as fully and largely as ever the same acts
or any of the^ did extend to the said late king Henry theyght your hyghnes
father.

AND THAT it may also please your hyghnes, that it may be enacted by
thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that so much of one act or Statute
made in the.xxxii. year of the reign of your said dear father king Henry the
eight entytuled: an Act concerning precontractes of marriages, and touching
degrees of consanguinitie, as in the time of the late king Edward the syxte,
your highness most dear brother, by one other act or Statute was not
repealed. And also one act made in the.xxxvii. year of the raygne of the said
late king Henry theyght, entytuled: an Act, that Doctors of the Civil law
being married, may exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and all and every
branches and articles in the said two acts last mentioned, and not repealed
in the time of the said late king Edward the syxt, may from henceforth likewise
stand and be reuyued, and remain in their full force and strength, to al
intentes and purposes, any thing contained in the said act of repeal before
mentioned; or any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND that it may also please your hyghnes that it may be further enacted by
thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all other laws and Statutes, and the branches
and clauses of any act or Statute repealed and made void by the said act of
repeal, made in the time of the late king Phyllyp and Queen Mary, and not in
this present act specially mentioned and reuyued, shall stand, remain, and
be repealed and void, in such like manner and form as they were before the
making of this act, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND THAT IT may also please your hyghnes, yt it may be enacted by thauctorite
aforesaid, yt one act and statute made in the first year of the reign of the
late king Edward the syxte, your majesty's most d^re brother, entitled: an
Act against such persons as shall irreverently speak against the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, commonly called the Sacrament of the altar,
and for the receauyng thereof under both kinds, and all and every branches,
clauses, and sentences therein contained, shall and may likewise from the last
day of this Session of parliament, be reuyued, and from thenceforth shall and
may stand, remain, and be in full force, strength and effect, to al intentes,
constructions, and purposes, in such like manner and form, as the same was at
any time in the first year of the reign of ye said late king Edward the sixth,
and law, statute, or other matter to ye contrary in any wise notwtsta^ding.

AND THAT also it may please your highness yt it may be further establyshed and
enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that one Act and Statute made in the first
and second years of the said late king Phyllyp and Queen Mary, entitled: an
Act for the reuyuyng of three statutes made for the punishment of heresies,
and also the said three statutes mentioned in the said act, and by the same
act reuyued, and all and every branches, articles, clauses, and sentence
contained in the said several acts or statutes and every of them, shall be from
the last day of this Session of parliament, demed and remain utterly repealed,
void, and of none effect, to all intentes and purposes, any thing in the said
several acts, or any of them contained, or any other matter or cause to the
contrary notwithstanding.

AND to the intent that all usurped and forrayne power and authority
spiritual and temporal, may for ever be clearly extinguished and never to be
used or obeyed wtin this Realm, or any other your majesty's dominions or
countries: May it please your highness yt it may be further enacted by
thaucthoritie aforesaid, yt no foreign prince, person, prelate, state, or
potentate, spiritual or temporal, shall at any time after the last day of
this Session of parliament, use, enjoy, or exercise any manner of power,
jurisdiction, superiority, authority, pre-eminence, or privilege spiritual
or ecclesiastical within this realm, or within any other your majesty's
dominions or countries that now be or hereafter shall be, but from thenceforth
the same shall be clearly abolyshed out of this realm, and all other your
hyghnes dominions for ever, any statute, ordinance, custom, constitutions, or
any other matter or cause whatsoever to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

AND that also it may likewise please your highness, that it may be establyshed
and enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that such jurisdictions, privileges,
superiorities, and preheminences spiritual and ecclesiastical, as by any
spiritual or ecclesiastical power or authority has heretofore ben, or may
lawfully be exercysed or used, for the visitacion of the ecclesiastical State
and persons, and for reformation, order, and correction of the same, and of all
manner errors, heresies, scismes, abuses, offenses, contemptes, and enormities,
shall for ever by authority of this present parliament, be united and
annexed to the imperial Crown of this Realm. And that your hyghnes, your
heirs and successors, kings or queen's of this realm, shall have full power
and aucthorite by virtue of this act by letters patentes, under the great seal
of England, to assign, name, and aucthorise, when and as often as your
hygnesse, your heirs or successors shall think mete and convenient, and for
such and so long time as shall please your hyghnes, your heirs or successors
such person or persons being natural borne subjects to your highness, your
heirs, or successors, as your majesty, your heirs or successors shall
think mete to exercise, use, occupy, and execute under your hyghnes, your
heirs and successors, all manner of jurisdictions, privileges, and
preheminences in any wise touching or concerning any spiritual or
ecclesiastical jurisdiction within these your realms of England and
Irelande, or any other your hyghnes dominions or countries, and to visit,
reform, redress, order, correct and amend al such errors, heresies, scismes,
abuses, offenses, contemptes, and enormities whatsoever, which by any manner
spiritual or ecclesiastical power, authority, or jurisdiction, ca^ or may
lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended, to
the pleasure of almighty God, thencrease of virtue, and the conseruacio^ of the
peace and unity of this realm. And that such person or persons so to be
named, assigned, aucthorised, and appointed by your hyghnes, your heirs or
successors, after the said letters patentes to him or the^ made and delivered
as is aforesaid, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this act
and of the said letters patents under your hyghnes, your heirs or successors,
to exercise, use, and execute all the premises, according to the tenor and
effect of the said letters patentes. Any matter or cause to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

AND for the better obseruacion and maintenance of this act, may it please
your hyghnes that it may be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
al and every Archebyshop, Bishop, and all and every other ecclesiastical
person, and other ecclesiastical officer and minister, of what estate,
dignity, prehemine^ce or degree soever he or they be or shall be, and all and
every temporal Judge, Iusticer, Mayre, and other lay or temporal offycer and
minister, and every other person, having your highness fee or wages within
this Realm, or any your highness dominions, shall make, take, and receive,
a corporal oath upon the Evangelist, before such person or persons as shall
please your highness, your heirs or successors, under the great Seal of
England, to assygne and name, to accept and take the same, according to the
tenoure and effect hereafter following. That is to say:

I A. B. do utterly testyfie and declare in my conscience, yt the Queen's
highness is the only Supreme gouernoure of this Realm, and of all other her
highness domynyons and countries, as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical
things or causes: as temporal, and that no forrayne prince, person, prelate,
state, or potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power,
superiority, prehemine^ce or aucthorite ecclesiastical or spiritual within
this realm, and therefore I do utterly remounce and forsake all foreign
jurisdictions, powers, superiorities, and aucthorities, and do promise that
from hence forth I shall bear faith and true allegiaunce to the Queen's
highness, her heirs and lawful successors, and to my power shall assist and
defend all jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and aucthorities granted
or belonging to the Queen's highness, her heirs and successors, or united and
annexed to thimperiall Crown of this realm, so help me God, and the
contents of this book.

AND that it may be also enacted, that if any such archbishop, bishop, or any
other Ecclesiastical officer or minister, or any of the said temporal judges,
iusticiaries, or other lay officer or minister, shall peremptoryly or
obstinately refuse to take or receive the said other: That then he so refusyng,
shall forfeyt and lose only during his life, all and every Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual promotion, benefice and office, and every temporal and lay
promotion and office, which he has soly at the time of such refusal made, and
that the whole title, interrest, and incumbencye in every such promotion,
benefice, and other office, as against such person only so refusing, during his
life, shall clearly cease, and be void, as though the party so refusyng were
dead. And that also all and every such person and persons so refusyng to take
the said oath, shall immediately after such refusal, be from thensforth during
his life disabled to retain or exercise any office, or other promotion,
which he at the time of such refusal has jointly or in common with any
other person or persons. And that al and every person and persons that at any
time hereafter shall be preferred, promoted, or collated to any Archebysshopryke,
or Bysshopryke, or to any other spiritual or ecclesiastical benefice,
promotio^, dignity, office, or ministry, or that shall be by your highness,
your heirs, or successors, preferred or promoted to any temporal or lay
office, ministry, or service within this realm, or in any your hyghnes
dominions, before he or they shall take upon him or them to receive, use,
exercise, supplye, or occupy any such archebyshoprike, byshoprike, promotion,
dignity, office, ministry or service, shall likewise make, take, and receive
the said corporal oath before mentioned, upon the evangelist, before such
persons as have or shall have authority to admit any such person to any
such office, ministry, or service, or else before such person or persons as by
your highness, your heirs or successors by co^missio^ under the great seal of
England, shall be named, assigned or appointed to minister the said oath. And yt
it may likewise be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
such person or persons as at any time hereafter shall be promoted, preferred, or
collated to any such promotion spiritual or ecclesiastical benefyce, office,
or ministry, or that by your highness, your heirs or successors, shall be
promoted or preferred to any temporal or lay office, ministry, or service,
shall and do peremtorilye and obstinately refuse to take the same oath so to
him to be offered, that the^ he or they so refusing, shall presently be judged
disabled in the law, to receive, take, or have the same promotion Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, the same temporal ofsyce, mynistery, or service wtin this
realm, or any other your highness dominions, to all intentes, constructions,
and purposes.

AND THAT it may be further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all and
every person and persons Temporal, suyng lyuery, or Oustre le main, out of
the hands of your highness, your heirs, or successors, before his or their
livery or Oustre le maine sued forth and allowed, and every Temporal person or
persons, doing any homage to your highness, your heirs or successors, or
that shall be received into service with your hyghnes, your heirs or
successors, shall make, take, and receive the said corporal oath before
mentioned, before the Lord Chancellor of England, or the lord keeper of the
great seal for the time being, or before such person or persons as by your
hyghnes, your heirs or successoures shall be named and appointed to accept or
receive the same. And that also all and every person and persons taking orders,
and all and every other person and persons, which shall be promoted or preferred
to any degree of learning in any university wtin this your realm or
dominions, before he shall receive or take any such orders, or be preferred to
any such degree of learning, shall make, take, and reseaue the said oath by
this act set forth and declared as is aforesaid, before his or their
Ordynary, Commissarye, Chancellor, or vicechauncellour, or their sufficient
deputyes in the said university.

PROVIDED always, and that it may be further enacted by thauctoritie
aforesaid, that if any person having any estate of inheritance in any
temporal office or offices, shall hereafter obstinately and peremptoryly
refuse to accept and take the said oath as is aforesaid, and after at any time
during his life, shall wyllyngly require to take and receive the said oath, and
so do take and accept the same oath before any person or persons that shall
have lawful authority to minister the same: That then every such person
immediately after he has so received the same oath, shall be vested, judged, and
demed in like estate and possession of the said office, as he was before the
said refusal, and shall and may use and exercise the said office, in such
manner and form as he should or might have done before such refusal, any
thing in this act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND FOR THE MORE sure observation of this act, and the utter extinguyshement
of al foreign and usurped power and aucthorite may it please your hyghnes that
it may be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, dwelling or inhabytyng within this your Realm, or in any other your
hyghnes Realms or dominions, of what estate, dignity, or degree soever he or
they be, after thend of.xxx. days next after the determinacion of this session
of this present parliament, shall by wrytinge, printing, teaching, preaching,
express words, deed or act, advisedly, maliciously, and directly affirm,
hold, stand with, set forth, maintain, or defend thaucthoritie,
pre-eminence, power, or jurisdiction Spiritual or Ecclesiastical of any
forreyne Prince, Prelate, Person, State, or Potentate, whatsoever heretofore
claymed, used, or usurped within this Realm, or any dominion or country being
within or under the power, domynyon, or obeysaunce of your hyghnes, or shall
aduysedly, maliciously, and directely put in ure or execute any thing for
thextollyng, advancement, setting forth, mayntenaunce or defense of any such
pretended or usurped jurisdiction, power, pre-eminence or authority, or any
part thereof: That then every such person and persons so doing and offending,
their abbettours, aydours, procurers, and counsaylours, being thereof lawfully
convicted and attaynted according to the due order and course of the commen
laws of his ^ealme, for this or their first offense shall forfeyte and lose
unto your highness, your heirs and successors, all his and their goods and
cattelles, as well real as personal. And if any such person so convicted or
attaynted shall not have or be worth of his proper goods and cattelles to the
value of xx. li. at the time of such his conviction or atteyndour: that then
every such person so convicted and atteynted, over and besides the forfeiture
of all his said goods and cattelles, shall have and suffer imprisonment by the
space of one whole year without bail or mainprise. And that also all and every
the benefyces, prebendes, and other Ecclesiastical promocions and dignities,
whatsoever of every Spiritual person so offendyng and being atteynted shall
immediately after such atteyndour, be utterly void to all intentes and purposes
as though thincumbent thereof were dead. And that the patron and donour of every
such benefice, prebend, spiritual promocion and dignity shall and may lawfully
present unto the same, or give the same in such manner and form as if the
said incumbent were dead. And if any such offendour or offenders after such
conviction or atteyndour do eftsoon commit or do the said offenses or any
of them in manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duly convicted and
atteynted as is aforesaid: That then every such offendour and offenders shall
for the same second offense incur into the dangers, penalties, and
forfeytures ordained and provided by the Statute of provision and Preminire,
made in the.xvi. year of the reign of King Richard the second. And if any
such offendour or offendoures, at any time after the said second conviction
and attayndoure, do the third time commytte and do the said offenses, or
any of them, in manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duelye convicted
and attaynted as is aforesaid: That then every such offense or offenses shall
be demed and adjudged high treason, and that thoffendour and offenders
therein, being thereof lawefullye conuycted and attaynted, according to the
laws of this Realm, shall suffer pains of death, and other penalties,
forfeytures, and losses, as in cases of high treason by the laws of this
Realm.

AND ALSO THAT IT MAY likewise please your hyghnes, that it may be enacted by
thauctoritie aforesaid, that no manner of person or persons, shall be molested
or impeached for any thoffences aforesaid, committed or perpretated only by
preaching, teaching or words, onles he or they be thereof lawfullye endicted,
within the space of one half year next after his or their offenses so
committed And in case any person or persons shall fortune to be imprisoned for
any of the said offenses committed by preaching, teaching, or words
only, and be not thereof indicted within the space of one half year next
after his or their such offense so committed and done: That then the said
person so imprisoned shall be set at lybertye, and be no longer deteyned in
prison for any such cause or offense.

PROVIDED ALVVAIES AND BE IT enacted by thaucthoritye aforesaid, that this
act or any thing therein contained shall not in any wise extend to repeal,
any clause, matter, or sentence contained or specified, in the said Act of
Repeal, made in the said first and second years of the reigns of the said
late king Philip and Queen Mary, as does in any wise touch or concern any
matter or case of preminire, or that does make or ordeine any matter or cause to
be within the case of preminire, but that the same, for so much only as touches
or concerns any case or matter of preminire shall stand and remain in such
force and effect as the same was before the making of this act. Any thing in
this act, contained to the contratye in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO AND BE IT enacted by thaucthorytye aforesaid, that this act or
any thing therein contained shall not in any wise extend or be preiudycial
to any person or persons for any offense or offenses committed or done, or
hereafter to be committed or done, contrary to the tenor and effect of any
act or Statute now revived by this act, before thend of xxx. days next after
thend of the session of this present parliament, any thing in this act
contained, or any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstanding. And if
it happen that any pere of this Realm shall fortune to be endicted of, and for
any offense that is revived or made preminire or treason by this act, that
then he so being indicted shall have his trial by his peers, in such like manner
and form, as in other cases of treason has been used.

PROVIDED ALVVAIES and be it enacted as is aforesaid, that no manner of order,
act or determination, for any matter of religion, or cause Ecclesiastical,
had or made by thauctoritie of this present parliament, shall be accepted, demed,
interpretate or adjudged at any time hereafter, to be any error, heresy,
scisme, or scismaticall opinion: Any order, decree, sentence, constitution, or
law, whatsoever the same be to the contrary notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALVVAIES AND BE it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid. That such
person or persons to whom your highness your heirs or Successors, shall
hereafter by letters patentes, under the great Seal of England, give
aucthority to have or execute any jurisdiction, power or authority Spiritual,
or to visit, reform order, or corect any errors, heresies, scysmes, abuses or
enormities by virtue of this Act, shall not in any wise have aucthority or
power to order, determyne, or adiudge any matter or cause to be heresye, but
only such as heretofore have been determined, ordered, or adjudged to be heresy
by thaucthority of the canonical Scryptures, or by the first four general
Counsels, or any of them, or by any other general Counsel wherein the same
was declared heresy, by ye express and plain words of the said canonical
Scriptures, or such as here after shall be ordered, judged, or determined to be
heresy, by the high Court of Parliament of this Realm, with thassent of the
Clergy in their convocation. Any thing in this act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND BE IT FVRTHER enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaied, that no person or
persons, shall be hereafter endicted or arraigned for any the offenses, made,
ordained, revived, or adjudged by this act, unless there be two sufficient
witnesses or more, to testify and declare the said offenses, whereof he shall be
indicted or arrained. And that the said witnesses, or so many of them as shall be
living, and within this Realm at the time of the arraygnemente of such person
so indicted shall be brought forth in person, face to face, before the party so
arrayned, and there shall testify and declare what they can say against the
party so arraygned, if he require the same.

PROVIDED ALSO and be it further enacted by thaucthority aforesaid, that if any
person or persons shall hereafter happen to give any relief, aid, or comfort,
or in any wise be aiding, helping, or comforting to the person or persons of
any that shall hereafter happen to be an offendour in any matter or case of
Preminire or treason revived or made by this act: That then such relief,
aid, or comfort given shall not be judged or taken to be any offense, unless
there be two sufficient witnesses at the least, that can and will openly testify
and declare that the person or persons that so gave such relief, aid, or
comfort, had notice and knowledge of such offense, committed and done by the
said offendour, at the time of such relief, aid, or comfort so to him given
or ministered: any thing in this act contained, or any other matter or cause
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND WHERE ONE PRETENSID sentence has heretofore hene given in the
consistory in Powles before certain Judges Delegate, by the authority
Legantine, of the late cardinal Poole, by reason of a forreyne usurped power and
authority against Richard Chetwod Esquier, and Agnes his wife, by the name
of Agnes Wod^, at the suit of Charles Tyrrel gentleman, in a cause of matrimony
solemnized between the said Richard and Agnes, as by the same pretensed
sentence more plainly does appear. From which sentence the said Rychard and
Agnes have appealed to the court of Rome, which appeal does there remain,
and yet is not determined. May it therefore please your hyghnes that it may be
enacted by the aucthority aforesaid, that if sentence in the said appeal, shall
happen to be given at the said court of Rome, for and in the behalf of the
said Richard and Agnes, for the reuersyng of the said pretensid sentence before
the end of three score days next after the end of this Session of this present
Parliament: That then the same shall be judged and taken to be good and
effectual in the law, and shall, and may be used, pleded and allowed in any
court or place within this Realm, any thing in this act, or in any other
act or statute, contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And if no sentence
shall be given at the court of Rome, in the said appeal for the reuersing of
the said pretensid sentence before thy end of the said three score days,
that then it shall and may, be lawful for the said Richard, and Agnes, and
either of them at any time herafter to commense, take, sue, and prosecute
(...) said appeal from the said pretensed sentence, and for the reuersing of
the said pretensed sentence within this Realm, in such like manner and form
as was used to be pursued or might have been pursued within this realm, at any
time since the.xxiiii. year of the reign of the said late king Henry the
eight, upon sentences given in the court or courts of any Archbishop within
this realm. And that such appeal as so hereafter shall be taken or pursued by
the said Richard Chetwod and Agnes, or either of them, and the sentence that
herein or thereupon shall hereafter be given, shall be judged to be good and
^fectuall in the law, to all intentes and purposes: any law, custom usage,
canon, constitution or any other matter or cause to the contrary
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED ALSO AND BE IT enacted by thaucthorytye aforesaid, that where there
is the like appeal now depending in the said court of Rome, between one Robert
Harcourt, Merchaunt of ye staple, and Elizabeth Harcourt, otherwise called
Elizabeth Robins of the one party: And Anthony Fydell Merchant Stranger, on
the other party, that the said Roberte, Elizabeth, and Anthonye, and every of
the^, shall and may for the prosecuting and trieng of their said appeal, have
and enjoy the like remedy, benefitte, and advantage, (...) like manner and
form as the said Richard and Agnes, or any of (...) has, may, or ought to
have and enjoy, this act or any thing (...) contained to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.


