ANNO XIIII. ET XV. HENRICI VIII.
THe King our soueraygne lord Henrye the viij. after the conquest, by the
grace of God king of England and of France and lord of Irelande, at his
parlyamente holden at London, the xv. day of April in the xiiii. year of his
most noble reygne: and from thence adiourned to Westminster the last day of
July the xv. year of his said reign, and there holden to the honor of
Almightye GOD and of holy Church, and for the wealth and profytte of this
his Realm, by the assent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons
in this present parliament assembled, and by aucthoritye of the same, has,
do, to be ordained, made, and enacted, certain statutes and ordynaunces in
manner and form following.

THE TABLE.
AN act concerning broad white woollen clothes. Cap. j. An act concerning
strangers artificers, for taking of apprentices, Journey men, and covenant
servant. Cap. ij. An act concerning worstede weauers of Yarmouth and Lynne.
Cap. iij. An act concerning Englishmen veynge sworn to forreyne Princes.
Cap. iiij. An act concerning Physicions. Cap. v. An act concerning the high
ways in the wild of Kent. Cap. vj. An act for shoting in crosbowes and
handegonnes. Cap. vij. An act for ye six clerks of the Chau^cery to be
married. Cap. viij. An act co^cerninge the liberty of Cordewayners or
shoomakers. Ca. ix. An act for huntinge of the Hare. Cap. x. An act concerning
clothes called Vesses made in the countye of Suffolk. Cap. xj. An act
concerning coyners, that shall coin and make money at any mint within this
realm of England. Cap. xij. An act for the haven and port of Southampton.
Cap. xiij An act for such as be in the kings wars over or upon the sea. Ca.
xiiii.
FINIS TABVLAE.
HENRICH OCTAVI.
An act concerning broad white woollen clothes. Cap. i.
FOr as much as merchant strangers, studiyng and ymagining the policies,
ways and means set aworke the people inhabited in foreign countries and
regions, with and by ye commodityes of this realm, and to bring the kings
natural subjects from occupacion to idleness, do daily conveigh, transporte
and carry out of this realm of Enlande (for their own singular lucre) a great
number of broad white wolle^ clothes, to be colored died and wrought in diverse
and sondrie parts beyond the sea: to the great increase comfort profit and
advantage of the people inhabited in the said outward and foren regions, and
to ye utter ruin decay, impouerisshing and undoing of a great number of the
kings own natural subjects. And for the effectual furtherance of the said
evil ententes and purposes in the premises the said merchant strangers, as
well by color of enhansyng of price of the said clothes for long days of
payment as by fair promises and subtle adulacyons, have herefore gotten and
regrated into their hands an innumerable number of the said clothes upon their
credence, amou^ting unto great sums of money far exceeding their own
valors and substance which sommes of money many and oftentimes they have not
paid according to their appointmentes, whereby the makers of the said clothes,
subtly compassed by and with their fair and flattering promises, have
sustained importable losses, to the great impoueryshing of this the kings
own realm, and to the enriching of the regions and countries of foreine
princes.

For remedy whereof be it enacted by ye king our sovereign, lord and the
lords spiritual and temporal and the commons in this present parliament
assembled, and by authority of the same, that from the feast of saint Mighell
the archangell next coming no person or persons, inhabited with in this
realm, of what estate, degree or condition so ever he be of, shall sell or
deliver, or cause to be sold or delivered within this realm, by contracte
covenant bargain gift or any of them or otherwise to any merchant or
merchants strangers, being borne in any of the parties beyond ye sea or else
where, out of the kings obeisance, or to any of his or their factoures
deputies, or attourneis, strangers, or Englyshmen, to the use of the said
merchant or marchantes strangers any manner of broad white woollen clothes, made
or hereafter to be made within this realm of England, upon peine to
fortaite.xl.s. for every clothe sold or delivered after the said feast of
saint Mighell, contrary to the effect and form of this present act, the one
half of every such forfayture to be to the use of our soueraygne lord ye king
and the other half thereof to be to the person or persons other than the
offender that will first sue for the same, by original of debte bill, playnte
or informacion, in any of the kings courts, after the usual course of the
laws and customs of the realm: In which suit or actio^ the defendaunt of
defendantes shall not be admitted to wage their law, ne any Essoyne, license or
protection shall be allowed.

Provided always, that if any person or persons being the kings natural
subjects conueighe and bring, or cause to be conueighed and brought, any broad
white woollen cloth or clothes to the common market, kept and holden in
Blackwelhal within the city of London, and do not there cor else where bargain
utter and sell the said cloth or clothes thither brought to or with some
English marchante or merchants within.viii. days, next after the said cloth
or clothes shall be brought and showed to sell in the said market: That than it
shall be lefull to any such person or persons immediately after the said.viii.
days, and not before, to contracte, bargain utter sell and deliver his or
their said cloth, or clothes, so brought and showed, at and in the said
market, as is before said, and bring unsold, to any and every merchant
stranger or strangers, being priuileged and having liberty to contract and
bie woollen clothes freely and openly within the liberty of ye said city of
London. So that the said merchant or merchants strangers do pay and deliver
for the said cloth or clothes so by him or them to be bought without couin or
male ingin, at and upon the receipt of the said cloth or clothes, or within one
month next ensuynge the said sale and delivery of the said cloth or clothes,
or within less time, at the will of the seller thereof, all such hole and
entier sommes of ready money or wares, or ready money and wares, or any of them,
as was agreed and contracted to be had for the said clothes, by the said
sellers or seller of them, without any other or further respite or days of
paimente to be had, made or agreed, in any behalf, any thing before contained
in this present act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding

Provided also that this present act or any thing therein contained be not in
any wise hurtful or prejudicial to any of the kings subjects for or
concerning the delivery of any such woollen clothes to any merchant, or
merchants strangers, by reason of any bargain or sale made by them or any
of them, of the said clothes before the twenty day of Iulye in the.xv year of
king Henry the.viii. But that the said kings subjects may freeely and
quietly deliver or cause to be delivered the said clothes, so bargained and
bought before the said.xx. day of July without any penalty or forfaiture, any
thing in this present act contained to the contrary thereof not withstanding

And be it enacted by auctority aforesaid, that no person or persons at any
time hereafter, and before the said feast of saynct Mighell, bargain or sell
to any merchant or merchants, straungers-any such broad white woollen
clothes, to be delivered unto the said merchant or merchants strangers at
any time after the same feast of saint Mighell to the intent to defraud the
effect and true meaning of this estatute, upon the pain before limited and
expressed.

And furthermore be it provided that every of the kings natural subjects, at
their liberties and pleasures, may any time hereafter sell and deliver for ready
money or wares, or for ready money and wares, or any of them to be paid and
delivered as is aforesaid to any merchant or merchants strangers, al manner
of broad white woollen clothes made or to be made in Coggishal, Bockyng,
Blanctre, or any of them, and white clothes called Eleinforthes, and all manner
of white broad woollen clothes with cru^pillistes, otherwise called bastardes:
so that every of the said white wolle^ clothes, contained in this prouise,
contein in length.xxvii. yardes at ye least or above at the water, any thing in
this present act contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding

And over this be it further provided, ordained and enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that it shallbe lefull to every person or persons, being the
kings natural subjects, to utter, bargain, contracte, selle and deliver all
manner of white broad woollen clothes to any merchant or merchants strangers,
in and at all common faires to be holden and kept, within any place or places
in this realm: And also to all and every marchaunte stranger or strangers,
repairing from foreign countries by the sea, to any ports or crekes within
this realm with any vittail, or other marcha^dise, at al times from time to
time: So that all such clothes, so or in any otherwise hereafter to be
bargained and sold to any marchaunte or merchants strangers as is before
said be always sold and delivered with out couin or make ingin for ready money
or wares, or for ready money, and wares or any of them, to be paid and
delivered at such time or times, as is before limited without any other or
further respite or days of paymente to be had accorded and agreed in any
behalf, any thing in this present act contained to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that no person or
persons, which do sell their woollen clothe or clothes to any citizen and free
man of London, without the liberty of the said city and before the said
cloth or clothes be conueighed and brought within the same city shall not be
compelled by any person or persons to bring their said cloth or clothes sold
in form above said to the market called Blackwellhal within the said city ne
to pay any toll custom or other imposicion for any liberty or ease to be had
in the same Halle, for any such clothe or clothes so sold but may freely at
their pleasure, bring conueigh and deliver their said clothe or clothes
immediately to the house or houses of such citizen and free men, as did bye the
same in form aforesaid without any let or disturbance in any behalf.

And if any clothmaker, or other person be let or disturbed contrary to
this act tha^ the letter or disturber to forfait to the owner of ye said cloth
or clothes, for every cloth let or disturbed to the contrary hereof.xii.d.
for which forfaiture ye said owner shall have his remedy against ye said letter
or disturber, by action or plainte of debt in any of the kings courts. in
which action or plaint ye defendant or defendantes shall not wage their law ne
any essoine, license, or protection shallbe allowed, this act to endure unto
the last day of the next parliament.

Provided always that this act extend not to northern whytes commonly named
and called dosins, made in ye North parties of this realm.

An act concerning strangers artificers for taking of apprentices,
iourneimen, and covenant servants. C. ii
BE it enacted by the king our sovereign lord and the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by
auctoritye of the same, that no manner of stranger borne out of the kings
obeisaunce be he denize^ or not denizen using any manner of ha^di craft with in
this realm, shall take from hensforthe any aprentise except the same
apprentise be borne under the kings obaisaunce, upon peine to forfait for
every apprentice, that he shall take contrary to this act x.li. the one half
thereof to our sovereign lord the king, the other half to him or them that
will sue for it, be it by action of dett, byl, plainte, informacion, or
otherwise: in which suit the defendant shall not be admitted to wage his law, ne
any essoine, license, or protection to be allowed.

Be it also enacted by the authority before said, and under like peine to be
forfayted and recovered as is aforesaid that no stranger being alien born, and
using any manner of handye craft within this realm, from the feast of al
saints next ensuing, shall in any manner of wise, use, take. retain or keep
into his or their seruises any manner of iourneimen or covenant servant above
the number of ii at one time, except the same iourneiman or covenant servant
be borne under the kings obeisaunce

And over this be it enacted by authority aforesaid that all manner of persons
bring aliens borne, using any manner of handye craft, be they denizens or not
denizens and inhabited within the city of London, or suburbs of the same
within the town of westminster, the parish of sayncte Martins in the field,
the parish of our lady of the Stronde, faince Clement of Danes, without temple
bar, saint Giles in the field, saint Andrews in holburne, in the town and
borough of Southwarke, Shordiche, white Chapel parish, saint John street,
the parish of Clerkenwel saint Bottolphes parish without Algate, saint
Catherins, Barmondsay street or within two miles compass of the said city of
London, or the parishes aforsaid shall be under the search and reformacio^ of the
wardens and the felowshippes of handy crafts within the said city of London
with one substancial stranger being an householder of the same craft, by the
same wardens to be cho.sen that is to say every such stranger, occupying any
mystery or ha^di craft as is aforesaid shall be under the search and reformacion
of the wardens and one substanciall stranger, being an householder of that
craft that they shall so occupy. And that the wardens of the said city of
every such handy craft with one stranger or householder as is aforesaid of the
same craft, have full power and authority, by this present act to limitte and
appoint to every stranger of the mystery and handy craft that they be of,
inhabitinge within the said city, suburbs, places or precinct, above
remembered, a proper mark, without taking any thing therefore by the which their
wares, vessels and workmanshippes that they make, may be known. And that the
wardens of every such handy craft, and misterye aforesaid calling to the^ one
stranger of ye mystery and occupacio^, that they be of being an householder,
shall have full power and authority, to search view and refourme, as well within
the said city of London. as in all other places and limittes before said all
manner of wares of workmanshippes made by any manner of such handy craft men
being aliens borne, as is before said.

And that no stranger borne out of the kings obeisaunce vsinge any of the
mysteries or occupacions of smithes, ioigners, or coupers shall make any manner
of wares, or vessels, concerning the same mysteries or occupacions, except
that they and every of them put to such marks to every of the same wares and
vessels before they shall be put to sale, or use as the wardens of their
occupacions, crafts, or mysteries shall limitt and appoynte, without taking
any thing therefore upon pain of forfayture the double valor of the same
wares and vessels: The one half of which forfaiture to be to the king our
sovereign lord the other half to the party that first will sue for the same
by action of debt, bille, plaint or informacio^ in which the defendaunr shall
not wage his law, nor any essoyne shall be cast, or protection allowed.

And further it is enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if upon any such
search or view to be made by ye wardeins and one stranger of any craft or
mystery, beforesayd, after the form of this estatute, in vessels or wares
to be found in the possession of the workers, or owners thereof putring the same
vessels or wares, to workmanship of any stranger falsely and disceitfully
made, to the hurt of the kings liege people, and so adjudged by the said
wardens and one stranger: that then such worker or owner, in whose possession
the same false and disceitfull wares shall be found, shall forfait the same
wares, the one half thereof to ye king our sovereign lord and ye other half
thereof to the first finder thereof suing for the same in any of the kings
courts by action of detinue, in which action ye defendant nor defendantes shall
not be admitted to wage their law nor protection ne essoyne be to them herein
allowable.

Be it also enacted by the auctoritye before said, that all wardens, and
masters of felowshippes of all and every such handy crafts within any such
city, boroughe or town corporate within this realm where any such wardens
happen to be, and in such boroughes and towns corporate, where no wardens of
handy crafts are the bayliffes, or ye governor or governors of the same
boroughes or towns, so lacking wardens, shall have like power and authority
with the bailiff or bailffes of the libertyes with them where any such liberty
shall be, being content so to do, to view, search, and refourme strangers, borne
out of the kings obeisaunce, inhabitinge and vsinge within any such city,
boroughe, or town, corporate, any manner of handy craft, in as large and ample
manner as the said wardens and felowshippes of ye said city of London may do
by virtue of this present act. And that all strangers using any of the said
handy crafts in any of the said cities boroughes or towns, corporate, be
bounden to do and obey in every thing, according to the tenor of this present
act upon like peines and forfaitures as is above remembered, to be had and
recovered in form above rehearsed.

Provided alwaie that if ye wardens of any fellowship or mystery beforesayd,
bayliffes governor or gouernoures beforesayd, wrongfully will entreat any
stranger in executinge of this act, or any thing therein contained: that than
the stranger so grieved, may by auctoritye of this act by byll or
informacion, complain to the lord Chancellor and Tresorer of England, or
the Justices of assise in the county for the time being, which by their
examinacions shall have full power and authority to hear and determine the same
complaynt, and award to the party compleinant such amends, as by their
discrecions shall be thought reasonable.

Provided also that it shall be lawful for and to every the said strangers borne
out of the kings obeisaunce, being a householder to have and retain as well all
and every such strangers borne out of the kings obeisaunce. being the time of
this parliament with him retained as a iurneiman as to have and retain every
such stranger being borne out of the kings obeisaunce being a prentise with
him the time of this parliament this act not withstanding. This to endure to
the last day of the next parliament.

Provided also that this act extend not to thinhabitauntes strangers that now
be or hereafter shall be, in the vniuersytyes of Oxforde, or Cambridge or within
the sainctuarie of saint Martins le graunde, within the said city of London.

Provided alwais, that if the said wardens of the said city of London, with a
stranger, or governor or governors, of any city or borough corporat within
this realm, refuse to make the wares of any stranger, after that they be
required so to mark that tha^ it shall be lawful to ye same stranger or
strangers, to who such refusal shallbe made to sell and put to sale his said
wares, so required to be marked and refused this act notwithstanding. Provided
also, that this act extend not to any other handicrafte, than to the crafts
of ioigners, pouchmakers, coupers, and black smithes, for or concerning the
foresaid article of marking of wares of the said estra^gers. Also that it
shall be lawful to any lord of the parliamente, and every other of ye kings
subjects having lands and tenementes to the yearly value of one, C, pounds,
to take and retain estraungers ioigners and glasiers in their service, from
time to time, to and for the exersisyng with them their crafts, this act
notwithstanding

An act onccrnyng worstede weauers in Yarmouth and Linne. Ca. iii.
BEcause it is discretely considered in this present parliament, that the true
making and draping of worsteds, sais, and stamins is one of ye most profitable
occupacions of this realm: And that the same worstedes, says and stamins
truly and substancially made and wrought, been right acceptable and
commodious marchaundises, as well in this realm of England, as in other foreine
regions and countries, For establishment and good order whereof, diverse good
and lawdable estatutes, acts, and ordinances, heretofore have been made and
enacted: and namely in a parliament. holden at westminster the third day of
June, in the seventh year of the raygne of the late king of famous memory
Edward the fourth. Sithe^ which parliamente ye making of the said worstedes,
sais, and stamins has much increased and been multiplied, in the city of
Norwiche, and in diverse towns and places in ye county of Norffolke And
because the towns of great Yarmouth and Linne in the said countye ben towns
corporated and the inhabitauntes of ye same towns now daily pratise and use
the making and draping of the said clothes of worstedes, says and stamins,
more busely and diligently than they have done in times paste, to whom it is
peinefull and costly to transporte and conueighe their said clothes to the said
city of Norwich, or to places within the said county of Norffolke, which ben
far distaunt from either of the said towns to be serched and sealed by ye
wardens of the worsted weauers of the same city of Norwick or county according
to the said act of parliament made the said vii. year of king Edward the
fourth. It is therefore ordained, established and enacted, by the king out
sovereign lord, and by the lords spiritual and temporal and the commons in
this present parliament and by auctoritye of the same, that the crafts men
called worsted weauers inhabited in the said town of great yarmouth shall
have power and auctoritye by this present act from henceforth to elect and
chose yearly for ever in the monday next after the feast of penticost one
honest man of ye same mystery and occupacion being and househoulder within the
said town of great yarmouth and having of his proper goods and cattells to
the value of.x.li. at the least, or lands and tenementes to his own vie, of
the estate of freehold at the least to the clear yearly value of.xx.s. to be
warden of the same craft and mystery for the year next ensuing, which man so
elected and chose^ shall personally appear before ye mayre of the said city of
Norwich, for the time being the monday next after the feast of Corpus Cristi
than next. ensuing, than and there to be sworn and charged by like oath,
concerning the true and substancial making of ye said clothes within ye said
town of great Yermouth, as ye four wardens of ye said city of Norwyche, by
virtue of the said act or parliament made in ye said vii year of king Edward
the iiii. been charged and sworn for the same city of Norwich And if ye said
maire happen to be absent ye said monday after Corpus Christi or else than
refuses to receive or take the said oath: than the said warden so elect,
within four days next after the same monday shall come before the bayliffes
of the said town of great yarmouth for the time being, or before one of them,
the other being absent: and than and their receive a corporal oath for the true
exercising of the same office of wardenship, after the tenor of the oath
accustomably used to be given to ye said wardens of the said city of Norwich.
And tha^ ye said warde^ of the said town of great Yarmouth for that time
being, so elect and sworn may ordain and apoynt a seal with this letter.Y.
to be graue^ in the same seal, and may have full power and auctoritye to
view, search, cease, and seal in lead with the same seal, so to be appointed
and engraven and none other, all worstedes, says and stamins within the said
town of yarmouth, and suburbs of the same, made or to be made and not else
where, in as large and ample manner, as the said warde^s of the said city of
Norwich, and wardens of ye said countye of Norff. or any of the^ has or have
within the said city, or county, or in any wise may do in that behalf, by
auctoritee or virtue of the before remembered act, made in the said vii. year of
king Edward the fourth, any thing in the same act contained to ye contrary
notwithstanding. And that no person inhabited within ye said town of great
yarmouth, or suburbs thereof weaue any worstedes says or stamins within the
same town, exepte he be an English man borne and have be^ apprentise to the
said occupacio^, and without he weaue there such proper mark as shall be
limited and appointed by the said warden of the said town, for the time
being, elect and sworn, as is before said upon peine of forfayture thereof to
the king our soueriagne lord: And that every warden of ye said town shall
limitte destincte and several marks to every of the said worstede weauers of
ye same town of great yarmouth, and ye same marks by the said warden to be
regestred in aboke.

And also be it enacted by the auctoritee aforesaid, that if and whatsoever
hereafter ye said town of Linne shall be inhabited with ten sondri householders,
or more number of houshoulders, exercising and using ye said craft or
mystery of worsted weauers, tha^ and from thensforth, that is to say as long
as the same town of Linne shall be inhabited with the number of te^ such
householders at the least, it shallbe lefull to the same inhabitauntes of the
said town of Linne yearly in the monday next after the feast of Pentecost, to
elect and choose of them self one warden of the said craft and mystery of
worstede weauers, to be of the value in lands and goods as is beforesaide of
the warden of yarmouth: which warden so elect shall yearly be sworn and
charged at the said city of Norwich, in like manner and at like day, as is
before limited to the wardens of yarmouthe Or in defaute of the said mayre of
Norwich than the said warden so to be elect for ye said town of Linne to
take a corporal oath before the maire of ye said town of Lynne, within such
time, and after such form, as is before limited unto the warden of yarmouth.
And that the said warden of the said town of Linne or ye time being, so elect
and sworn, by him self may ordeine and apoinct a seal, with this letter.L.
to be graven in the same seal, and may have full power and auctoritye to
view, search, cease, and seal in lead with the same seal, so to be engraven,
and with none other, all worstedes, says, and stamins, within the said town
of Linne, and suburbs of the same, made or to be made, and not else where, in
as large and ample manner as the said warden of the City of Norwich, and
Wardens of the said county of Norff. or any of them has or have within the
said City of countye, or otherwise may do by auctority or virtue of the before
remembered act, made in the said.vij. year of king Edward the fourth, any thing
contained in the same act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And that no person enhabited within the said town of Linne, or suburbs
thereof, make any worstedes, says, or stamins within the same town, except he
be an Englishman borne, and have been apprentise to the same occupation, and
without he weaue therein such propre mark as shall be limited and appointed by
the said warden of the same town of Lin, for the time being, upon peine and
forfaiture thereof to the king our sovereign ne lord: And that every warden of
the said town shall limit distinct and several marks to every of the
worstede weauers of the same town, and the same marks by the said warden to
be regestred in a book.

And be it further enacted by the auctority aforesaid, that from the feast of
saint Michaell tharchau^gell next coming, unto such time as the said town of
Lin shall be inhabited with the said number of ten householders of the said
craft of worstede weauers, and always after, when that number of ten
householders shall happen to fail, and not be inhabited in ye said town of
Lin, the said wardens of the said city of Norwiche, and their successors, shall
procure and cause one of them selves, or one of the wardens of ye said craft
of the said county of Norffolke, personnally to come and be every.xxviij day
from and after the said feast of saint Michaell the archangell, in and to the
said town of Lyn, or within six days next after every such.xxviii. day, and
there to continue and abide by so long time as he may search and seal all
such worstedes, says, and stamins, made in the same town of Lynne, as than
shall be brought to him to be sealed, within the space of one hole day. And
the said Inhabitauntes of worstede weauers, of the same town of Lyn being,
shall content and pay to the said warden of Norwiche or Norff. which shall so
come to Linne, in the said.xxviij. day or within six days next after the
said.xxviij. day, for his costs and expenses, for every time that he shall so
come to Lynne, between the feasts af Saint Michaell the archangell, and the
Annunciation of our Lady saint Marye.iii s and for every time that he
shall so come to the said town of Linne between the feast of the Annunciation
of our Lady, and the feast of saint Michaell the archangell.ii.s. And if the
said inhabitauntes of worstede weauers of the said town of Lin, do not content
and pay to the said warden coming to Lyn, in form aforesaid, for the said
costs and charges, the said.iii.s. or.ii.s. as is above lymytted, than the
same inhabitauntes shall forfaite and pay to the said warden, or to his
executours, for every such default of payment xl.s: And if none of the said
wardens of Norwich and Northfolke, come to the said town of Linne, for ye
cause aforesaid, in manner and form above remembered: than the said wardens of
the said city of Norwich shall forfaite and pay to the said inhabitauntes of
Linne, of the said mystery of worstede weauers, for every such default xl.s.
For recompense of which penalty and forfaites the said wardens of Norwich or
Norff, being thereunto entitled by this present act, by his proper name with
this addicion. That is to say: Vnius gardianorum, or nuper vnius gardianoru^
artis sieve misteriae textorum panni lanei vocat. VVorstedes in ciuitate
Norwich, vel commit. Norffolke, as ye truth requires, shall and may have action
of det by writ, bill, or plaintee in any competent or lawful court of this
realm against the said inhabitauntes of Linne, of the said mystery for the
time being by their sundry proper names. And the said inhabitants by their
said names, with this addicio^ Textorum pannilanei voc. VVorstedes,
inhabitants ville de Linne, shall and may have like actions of debt against
the said wardeins of Norwich, by the name of Gardiani artis sieve misteriae
textorum pannorum laneoruin voc. VVorstedes infra ciuitatem Norway. com. Norff.
To be used in good congruities of laten, and form of the laws of this
realm. In which actions, or any of them, none essome, protection, or wager of
law shall be suffered or allowed. And that the particular bodies or goods of any
of the said wardeines or inhabitauntes, being condemned in any of the said
actions, shall and may be put in execution, after such manner and form as is
used in actions of debt, by course of the common law of this Realm.

And moreover be it enacted by the auctority aforesaid, that al clothes of
worstedes, says, and stamins, made or to be made within any of the said
towns of Lyn and great Yarmouth, or suburbs of the same, or any of the^, and
marked with such marks as shall be limited to the makers, by ye said wardens
of the said town in manner and form abouesayd: and weaued and sealed by any
of the wardens of the said towns of Lyn and Yarmouth in form above
remembered: by force and virtue of this present act may be lawfully put to sale
by the owners and makers of the same, without any other marking or sealinge
upon the said clothes, or upon any of them to be had or made by any other
wardens, dwelling or abiding without the said town, and without any arrest,
seizure, or forfaiture to be had or made of or upon any of the said clothes,
for lack of any other seals or marks, any thing contained in the said
former act, made in the said seventh year of king Edward the forth, to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And over this be it enacted by the auctority aforesaid, that every crafts man
of the said mystery and occupation of worstede making, dwelling within any of
the said towns of Lin and great Yarmouth, and suburbs of the same at their
own free wylles and lyberties from he^ceforth for ever, may have and take
apprentice or apprentyces (being male) of the age of.xiiii. years and upward,
and beying the kings natural subjects, for the term of.vij years and not
under, so that none of them excede the number of two at once to learn, use, and
exercise the said craft within either of the said towns of Lyn and great
Yarmouth or suburbs of the same: All be it the father of the same apprentises
or apprentise, may not expende in any lands and teneme^ts to the yearly value
of xx.s. any act or ordinance to the contrary made or to be made
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this present act nor any thing therein contained, be not
in any wise hurtefull or prejudicial to the mayre of Norwiche, or to his
successors, or to the wardens of the said City and county, or to their
successors, in any point article, power, or auctority, other tha^ for weuinge
serching and sealinge of worstedes, says and stamins made or to be made only
within the said towns of Linne and Yarmouth or suburbs of the same, or to any
of the^. And for limittinge of marks to the maker of worsteds, says and
stamins, only enhabited in either of the said towns or suburbs thereof and
taking of appre^tises, in form above remembered: but tha ye said maire of the
said city of Norwiche, and wardens of the said city and county, and every of
them may have and use all other poinctes, articles, power, and auctorityes
contained and specified in the above remembered act, made in the said, vij.
year of king Edward the iiii. as well for ye search, sealynge, correction and
reformation of the said wardens newly to be elect by virtue of this present
act, and every of them, according and after such form as they may do or use,
any of the said wardeins of the said city or county, by force of the said act,
made in the said.vii. year of king Edward the fourth, as all and every other
inquiries, corrections, serches, sealynges, and reformations to be had, for the
true making of worstedes, says, and stamins, in and upon any person or
persons, as well within the said towns of Linne and Yarmouthe as without,
without trouble, let, or vexatio^ of any of the inhabitauntes of the said
towns, in as large and ample wise as they might have done before the making
of this present act, any thing contained in the same present act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And also provided and be it enactad, by the auctoritye aforesaid, that the
said crafts men of worstede weauers inhabited or hereafter to be inhabited
within either of the said towns of Linne and Yarmouth, or suburbs of the
same, and the merchants or any other persons, which shall happen to bye of
the same crafts men or any of them, or of any other person, any of the said
clothes of worstedes, stamins, or says, made or to be made within either of
the said towns of Lin and Yarmouth, and sealed by the said wardens of the same
town to be elect and sworn as is aforesaid, and any of them, shall not
shere, die, or put in color, or calendre, any worstedes, stamins, or says,
made or to be made within either of the said towns of Lin and Yarmouth, or
suburbs of the same, in any other place or places, but only within the said
city of Norwich, or suburbs of the same upon peine of forfaiture of every
piece of worstede, says, or stamins to be made within any of the said towns
of Lyn and Yarmouth, or suburbs of the same, or the value thereof, shorn, died,
colored, or calendred by enye of the said crafts men, biers, or merchants
in any other place or places than in the said city of Norwich or suburbs of the
same: the one half thereof to be to the king our sovereign lord, and the
other half thereof to such person or persons as shall cease the same: so that the
said worsteds brought to the said city of Norwich to be shorn, died,
colored, and calendred, without couin or craft of any of the said
inhabitauntes and merchants, may be shorn, died, colored, and calendred at
and by as convenient price or prices and in as ready wise as the said
inhabitau^tes of either of ye said towns of Lyn and Yarmouth, and marchantes
biers of the said worstedes, or other of the said city or county has had in
times past, or hereafter shall have.

And also that the inhabitauntes and merchants and every of them, so
bringinge their said worstedes to ye same city for to be shorn, died, colored
and cale^dred, be reasonably and lawfully entreated according to ye said act
made in the said.vij. year of king Edward the fourth, and the ordinances made
and affirmed, or hereafter to be made and affirmed for the said mystery,
without let or disturbaunce, contrary to the same act or ordinance in that
behalf.

And be it enacted by the auctority aforesaid, that no person or persons any
time after co^uey or transport into any of the parties of beyond the sea any
manner of clothes of worstedes before the same clothes be shorn, died, colored,
and calendred, upon peine of forfaiture the value thereof: the one half to the
king our sovereign lord, and tho there half thereof to the party that will sue
therefore, by action or plaint of debt in any of the kings courts: In which
action or suite no protection or essoyne shall be allowed, nor the offe^der
admitted to wage his law. This act to endure to the next parliament.

An Act concerning Englishmen being sworn to foreign princes. Cap. iiii.
PRaien the commons in this present parliament, that where many and diverse
persons being the kings subjects naturally borne within this his realm, have
wdrawen the^ selves out of the same realm, and transported them selves with
their wives, children and goods, into Hollande, zeland, Barband Flaunders, and
into other countries of foreign princes, and there be sworn to the obeisaunce of
the princes, and lords of the countries, where they be now inhabited, making
their great buildinges, and be contributories to all manner of charges, as ye
subjects of those countries be: and thus they maintain as much as in the^ is,
the cities, boroughes, and towns of those countries and many mo of the kings
subjects intend to do the same, if remedy therein be not provided: Which
subjects borne in England, notwithstanding, that they this estraunge them
selves from the kings obeysaunce, yet they occupy here in all the ports,
havens, and crekes, cities, boroughes, and towns of England, as freely and as
free in custom and subsidy as the kings subjects do occupy, and not only
for them self, but also colourably for other strangers, their friends, and
partiners, and also make them selves quite and exempte from all charges within
this realm, in prejudice and decay of the cities, towns and boroughes of
England: and as for beyond the sea they will obey to none auctority granted
to ye English nation, by the kings highness and his noble progenitors, under
the great seal of England and by auctority of parliamente, but they give the^
selves over to ye protection and defense of those outward princes, to whom
they be sworn subjects And by these manner of persons much coin is conveyed out
of the Land. Wherefore be it ordained and enacted, by the king our soueraygne
lord and the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliament assembled and by the auctority of the same, that all and every such
subjects borne in England, and sworn to be subjects to foreign princes and
lords of outward parties, from he^ceforth (as long as they shall so abide,
and be as subjects to foreign princes and lords) that from he^ceforth so long
they and eueriche of them shall pay such customs, subsidy, toll, and other
imposicions within this realm of Englade. as other strangers of those parts
where the said Englishemen make their inhabitacion: pay or use to pay within
this said realm: And that the knowledge of all and every such person or
persons inhabitau^tes, and sworn in manner and form as is before rehearsed
within the Archedukes countries, that is to say, Holand, Zeland, Brabande and
Flaunders only, shall be had by certificat thereof made by the governor of the
merchant auenturers, and the assistens there for the time being: and also for
all other reamels and countrees of foreign princes to be certified by the kings
most noble imbasidours, being at such time there as they shall happen to be
in the said countries upon the kings affairs, shall likewise certify, as is
beforesayd under their seal into the chau^cery of our sovereign lord the
king: and thereupon out of the said chau^cery writtes to be made and directed
unto the customers, controllers, or other officers of the kings custom, in
every port, haven, or creke wtin this said realm, to perceive, leuy, and take
all manner of such customs, subsydies, tolles, and other impositions, as is
before specified, of all such goods and marchaundises, as shall belong unto
any such person or persons inhabited and sworn, in manner and form above
written, as well inward as outward.

Provided always, that if hereafter it shall happen any such person or persons
to return into the realm, and here to tarry and inhabit: that than he or
they shall be restored to all such liberties and fredoms in paying of customs or
subsidies and other charges, as all other Englishemen does use to pay, and to
have a wryt out of the chauncery for the same, this act or any thing therein
made, to the contrary notwithstanding.

An act concerning Physicions. Cap. v.
In their most humble wise shows unto your highness, your true and faithful
subjects and liege men, John Chamber, Thomas Linacre Fernandus de Victoria,
your phisicions, and Nicholas Halsewell, John Fraunces, and Robert yaxley, and
all other men of the same faculty within the city of London, and.vij miles
about, that where your highness (by your most gracious letters patentes,
bearinge date at westminster. the.xxiij day of Septe^bre the.x. year of your most
noble reign) for the common wealth of this your realm, in due exercisinge and
practisinge of the faculty of physic and the good ministracion of medicines to
be had, have incorporat and made of us and of our company aforesaid, one body
and perpetual co^mynalty or fellowship of the faculty of Physic, and to have
perpetual succession and common seal, and to chose yearly a president of the
same fellowship and comminalty to ouerse rule, and govern the said fellowship
and comminalty, and all men of the same faculty, with diverse other liberties
and pryuileges, by your highness to us granted, for the common wealth of this
your realm, as in your said most gracious letters patentes more at large is
specified and contained, the tenor whereof follows in these words.

HENRICUS dei gratia, rex Angliae, and Francie, and dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus,
ad quos praesentes litterae pondenerint, Salutem. Cum regii officii nostri
munus arbitremur ditionis nostre hominum foelicitati omni ratione consulere: Id
autem vel in primis fore, si improborum coratibus tempestiue occurramus,
apprime necessarium duximns. improborum quaque hominum, qut medicinam magis
auaritae suae causa quam vllius bone conscientiae fiducia profitebuntur, vnde
rude and credule plebu^lurima incommoda oriantur, audaciam compescere. Itaque
partim been institutarum ciuitatum in Italia, and aliis multis nationibus
exemplum imitati, partim grauium virorum ductorum Ioannis Chambye, Thomae
Linacre, Fernandi de Victoria medicorum nostrorum, Nicholai Halswell, Ioannis
Franciscei, and Roberti Yaxley, medicorum, ac precipue reuerendissimi in
Christo patris, ac domini, domini Thomae Tituli sauctae Ceciliae, trans Tiberim
sacrosanctae Romanae exclesiae presbiteri cardinalis Eboracensis Archiepiscopi,
and regni nostri Angliae cancellarii charissimi precibus inclinati, collegium
perpetuum doctorum and grauium virorum, qui medicina^ in vibe nostra Londino
and suburbibus intraque septem millia passuum, abea vrbe quaqua versus public
exerceant, institui volumus atque imperamus, Quibus tum sui honoris tum public
vtilitatis nomine cure, vt speraenius crit, maliciosorum, quorum meminimus
inscritam temeritatemque, tam exemplo grauitateque sua deterrere quam per leges
mistras nuper editas, ac per constitutiones per idem collegium condendas
punire. Quae quo facilius rite peragi passint memoratis doctoribus Ioanni
Chamber, Thomae Lincare, Fernando de Victoria medicis nostris. Nicholai
Halsewell, Ioanni Francisco, and Roberto Yaxley, medicis co^cessimus, quod ipsi
om^esque homines eiusdem facultatis de and in ciuitate pradicta, sint in re and
nomine vnum corpus and communitas perpetua, sieve collegium perpetuum Et quod
eadem communitas sieve collegium singulis annis in perpetuum eligere possint and
facere de communitate illa aliquem prouidum virum and in facultate medicinea
expertum in praesidentem etusdem collegii sieve communitatis, ad superuidendum,
recognoscendum, and gubernandum pro illo anno collegium, sieve commumitatem
praedict. and omnes homines eiusdem facultatis and, regotia eorudem, Et quod
preasidens and collegium sieve communitas habeant successionem perpetuam, and
commune sigillum negotii dict. communitatis and praesidentis in perpetuum
seruiturum Et quod ipsi and successores sui in perpetuum sint person habiles
and capaces ad perquirendum and possidendum in feodio and perpetuitate terras
and tenementa, redditus and alias possessiones quas^u^que

Concessimus etiam eis and successoribus suis pro nobis and haeredibus nostris
quod ipsi and successores su^ possint perquirere sibi and successoribus suis,
ta^ in dicta vrbe quam exrta terras and tenta quaecunque annuu^ valorem
duodecim librar. non exceden, statuto de alienatione ad manum mortuam non
obstante. Et quod ipsi per nomina praesidentis collegii, seu communitatis
facultatis medicine, Land, plitati and impritati possint coram quibascunque
iudicibus in curiis and actionibus quibuscu^que. Et quod praedict. praesidens
and collegium sieve communitas, and eorum successores congregationes licitas and
honestas de se ipsis ac statutae and ordinationes, pro salubri gubernatione
superuisu and correctione collegii, seu communitatis praedictae, and omniu^
hominum eande facultate^ in dictae ciuitate seu per septem miliaria in circuitu
eiusde^ ciuitatis exercen. secundum necessitatis exigentiam (quoties and quando
opus fuerit) facere valiant licite and impune, sine impedimento nostri,
haeredum vel successorum nostro riusticiarioru^, escaetorum, vice comitum, and
aliorum balliuorum, vel ministrorum nostrorum haeridum vel successorum
nostrorum quorumcunque. Concessimus etiam eisdem praesidenti and collegio, seu
communitati and successoribus suis quod nemo in dicta ciuitate, aut per septem
miliaria in circuitu eiusdem, exerceat dictam facultatem, nisi ad hoc per
dictu^ praesidentem and communitatem, seu successores eorum, qui pro tempore
fuerint, admissus sit per eiusdem praesidentis and Collegii litteras sigillo
suo communi sig illatas, sub poena tentum solidorum pro quolibet mense, quo non
admissus eandem facultatem exercuit, dimidium inde nobis and haeredibus
nostris. and dimidium dicto praesidenti and collegio applicandum.

Praeterea volumus and concedimus pro nobis and successoribus nostris (quantum
in nobis est) quod per praesidentem and collegiu^ praedictae communitatis pro
tempore existen. and little successores imperpetuum quatuor singulis annis per
ipsos eligantur, qui habeat superuisum and scrutinium correctionem and
gubernationem, omnium, and singulorum dictae ciuitatis medicorum vtentium
facultate medicinae in cademciuitate, ac a^liorum medicorum forinsecoru^
quorumcunque facultatem illam medicine aliquo modo frequentatium and vtentium
infra eandem ciuitatem and suburbia eiusdem, five intra septem miliaria in
circuitu eiusdem ciuitatis, ac punitione eorundem pro delictis suis in non been
exequendo faciendo and vtendo illa. Nec non superuisum and scrutinium omni modo
medicinarum and eorum reception, per dict^s medico^, seu aliquem eorum
huiusmodi sig eis nostris pro eorum infirmitatibus eurandis and sanandis dandis
imponendis, and vtendis, quotiens and qua^do opus fuerit pro commodo and
vtilitate eorundem ligeoru^ nostrorum. Itae quod punitio huiusmodi medicorum
vtentium dicta facultate medicine, sic in praemissis delinquentium per fines,
amerciamenta, and inprisonamenta corporum suorum, and per alias vias
rationabiles, and congruas exequatur.

Volumus etiam and concedimus pro nobis haeredibus and successoribus nostris
(quantu^ in nobis est) quod nec praesidens, nec aliquis de collegio praedicto
medicorum, nec successores sui, nec eoru^ aliquis exercens facultatem illam,
quoquo modo in futur. infra ciuitatem nostram praedictam, and suburbia eiusdem,
seu alibi summoneantur, aut ponantur, neque eorum aliquis sommmoneatur, aut
ponatur in aliquibus assisis, iuratis, inquestis, inquisitionibus, attinctis,
and altis recognitionibus infra dictam ciuitate, and suburbia eiusde^
imposterum coram maiore ac vicicom^ seu coronatoribus dictae ciuitatis nostrae
pro tempore existen. capiendum, aut per alique^ officiarium, seu ministru^
suum, vel officiarios sieve ministros suos summonend. licet iide^ iurati,
inquisitiones seu recognitiones sommon fuerint super breui, vel breuibus
nostris, vel haeredum nostrorum de recto, sed quod dicti magistri, sieve
gubernatores, ac communitas facultatis antedicte and successores sui et eorum
quilibet dictam facultatem exercentes, versus nos, haeredes, et successores
nostros, ac versus maiore^ et vic^comites ciuitatis nostrae praedictepro
te^pore existente) et quoscunque officiarios, et ministros suos sint inde
quieti, et penitus exonerati imperpetuum per praesentes.

Prouiso quod litterae nostrae, seu aliquid in eis content, non cedent in
praeiudicium ciuitatis nostrae Land. seu libert eiusdem. Et hoc absque fine seu
feodo pro praemissis, seu sigillatione praesentium nobis facienda, soluenda,
vel aliqualiter, reddenda, aliquo statuto, ordinatione, vel actu in contrarium
ante haec tempora facto, edito, ordinato seu prouiso in aliquo non obstante In
cuius rei testimonium has litteras fieri fecimus patentes. Test me ipso apud
westmonasterium.xxiii. die Septembr. Anno regni nostri decim. Per ipsum re^ gem
et de datae praedictae auctoritate Parliamenti.

Tunstall.

ANd for so much that the making of the said corporatio^ is meritorious and
very good for the common wealth of this your realm, it is therefore expedient
and necessary to provide, that no person of the said politic body and
comminalty aforesaid, be suffered to exercise and practice Phisike, but only
those persons that be profounde, sad, and discret, grou^dly learned and deeply
studied in Physic.

In consideration whereof, and for the further auctorisinge of ye same letters
patentes, and also enlargeyng of further articles for the said common wealth to
be had and made: Pleases it your highness with ye assente of your lords
spiritual and temporal and the commons in this present parliament assembled,
to enacte, ordain and establish that the said corporacion of the said
comminaltie and fellowship of the faculty of Phisike before said, and all and
every grant, article and other thing contained, and specified, in the said
letters patentes, be approved, granted, ratified, and confirmed in this
present parliamente, and clerly auctorysed and admytted by the same good,
lawful, and auailable, to your said body corporat, and their successors for
ever in as ample and large manner as may be taken, thought, construed by the
same. And that it please your highness with the assent of your said lords
spiritual and temporal and the commons in this your present parliament,
assembled, furtherly to enacte, ordeyne, and stablishe, that the six persons
beforesayd, in your said most gracious letters patentes named as principalles,
and first named of the said comminaltye and felowshyppe, chosinge to them two
more of the said comminaltye from henceforwarde, be called and cleaped electes.
And that the same Electes yearly chose one of them to be president of the said
comminalty, and as often as any of the roumes and places of the same Electes
shall fortune to be void by death or otherwise, than the superuysours of the
same Electes (within xxx. or xl. days next after the death of them or any
of them) shall chose, name, and admit one or more, as need shall require, of
the most conning, and expert men, of and in the said faculty in London, to
supply the said room and number of eight persons. So that he or they that
shall be so chosen, be first by the said superuisors straightly examined, after a
form devised by the said Electes, and also by the same superuisours approved.
And where that in diocises of England out of London it is not light to find
always men able sufficiently to examine (after the statute) such as shall be
admytted to exercise Phisike in them: that it may be enacted in this present
parliament, that no person from henceforth he suffered to exercise or practyse
in Physic through England, until such time that he be examined at London by
the said president and three of the said Electes and to have from ye said
president or Electes letters testimonials of their approuynge and examination,
except he be a graduate of Oxforde or ca^bridge, which has accomplished all
things for his form without any grace.

An act concerning the high ways in the wild of Kent. Ca. xi.
IN humble wise besecheth your highness your true and faithful subject George
Gilford squier for your body, that where there is and of time whereof mind of
man is not to the contrary has been an old common way or street for
cariers, and all other passages and business for you and your progenitoures
and you and their people in the hundred of Cranebroke, in the wild of your
county of Kente, leading and extending between and among the lands of the
manner of hempstede of the said George in the said hundrede of Cranbroke, fro
the bridge called hempstede bridge dividing the said hundred of Cranbroke and
the hundred of Roluinden in the same weld of your said county to a cross
called Contenden cross standinge nighe to a great Oak, named Hempstede oak
which is in length upon a hundred four score and ten perches: which common way
so used is in diverse places thereof right deep annoyous for the passage of
your people, and also is not so directely leading between the said bridge and
cross neither so cominodious for your people as an other way of like breadth in
other places within and over the lands of the said manner might be made.

In consideracion whereof, in may please your highness of your blessed
disposicion with the assente of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the
commons in this present parliamente assembled and by the auctoritye of the
same to enacte ordain that it shall be lefull to your said besecher his heirs
and assigns, owners of the said manner of Hempstede, at his and their propre
costs and charges at any time on this side ye.xxvii. day of May which shallbe
in the year of our lord god.M.D.xxvii. by the ouersighte and assent of two
Justices of peace of the said county of Kente and.xii other discrete men,
inhabitauntes within the said hundredes of, Cranbroke and Roluiden, to
assign, limitte and lay over and though the lands of the said manor one
other way, for cariages and passages of your grace and of your people and your
and their heirs and successoures, of as great largeness in bredeth or larger
than the said old way now being is, and as commodious for the said cariages
and passages, as the same way now being is or better extending and leading
dyrectly between the said bridge and cross, so that your grace and your
people by the said new way so to be assigned and laid out, shall have the more
easy carriage, and passage, than is or of late time has been by the said old
way. And that after the said new way so laid out and assigned the said
cariages, passages and other business there may be as liberally, commonly, and
freely from thens forth there used and had for ever, and every other thing
there exercised and kept, as before this time has been had and used, exercised
and kept in the said old way with out let or interrupcion of the said George
his heirs or his assigns, or any other person which hereafter shall have.
hold, or possede ye said manet. And that immediately after that the said new
way (as is beforesayd) to be assigned and limited shall be as is abouesayd laid
out and fully made, it shall be lefull to your said besecher, his heirs, and
assigns owners of the said manor to enclose the said old way and eueri party
thereof: And that fro hensforth to hold in seueralty to them, and to their
heirs and assigns to their own use and profit for ever as parcel of the said
manor, without any common way or passage their fro thensforth to be had or
claimed any prescripcio^ or use to the contrary heretofore had not
withstanding.

And in consideracion that many other commom ways in the said weld of Kent be
so deep and noyous by wearing and course of water and other occasions that
people can not have their cariages or passagss by horses upon or by the same:
But to their great peines, petil, and ieoperdye: it may be by the said
authority enacted and established, that if any other person or persons any
time hereafter in any place within the said weld of your said countye, of his
good mind and disposicion, without any value of good by him or them to be
received for ye same, will for the common weal of your people assign and lay
out a more commodious way in and over the lands thereunto adioyninge whereof the
person or other to his use shall be ceased of fee in estate of inheritance that
the same new way so to be assigned and laid out, by oversight and assent of two
Justices of peace of ye said countye, and.xii. other disecrete me^ inhabitinge
within hundred, where any such new way shall be limited and laid out, or
inhabiting within the same hundred and other hundreds to that hundred next
adioyninge shallbe from thensforth, holden, occupied, and used in like manner as
the old way there now is or before has been

And that also the same person or persons, so disposed, willing, and
accomplishynge the same, shall and may for the said new way so assygned and
used, retain and hold in way of recompense for the same new way so to be
given, ye soil and ground of ye old way in seueralty as is above said, to
him or them and to their heirs for ever. in like manner as is above said of the
said new way to be assigned at Hempstede. And that ye said two Justices of
peace, and.xii other discrete persons by whose oversight and assent, the said
new way at Hempstede, or any other way by virtue of this act shallbe
hereafter assigned, limited and laid out, shall within three months next
after the assignement limittacion, and laying out of the same make certificate
into the kings most honorable court of Chauncery under their seals, of the
length and bredeth of the same new way or street and of other things adjoining
or concerning the same as by their discrecions shall be thought most expedient or
requisite for ye common wealth of the country to be certified: And that
certificat to be made from time to time as often as any such new way or
street shall be assigned, limited, and laid out in form above written.

Provided always that if any person, or persons, or body politic, have or
ought to have, or hereafter shall have any church way or other what so ever
way or passage, over or through any manner lands adjoining to any of the said
old ways or streets, which shallbe taken, and used by force ol this act, as
several soil and free hold in recompense for any new way to be made and
laid out, in form aforesaid, or have or ought to have hereafter shall have
lands or tenementes adjoining to the said old way that they and every of
them, their heirs, and successors, shall and may have and use their said
way or ways, out of and into the said new way over and through the land of
the said old way, or street, into or over the said land or tenement
adjoining to the same, and so to pass and repasse as shall appertain over the
same old way at such convenient place or places thereof, as therefore shall be
limited and assigned by the said two Justices of peace and other.xii. men, and
by them to be certifyed into the chauncerie among other things by the^ to be
certified in form aforesaid: any thing in this acce above written
notwithstanding.

An act concerning shoting in crosbowes and hand gonnes. Cap. vii
BE it enacted by the king our soueraige lord, by the assent of his lords
spiritual and temporal and the commons in this present parliament assembled
and by authority of the same, that every person and persons having lands,
tenementes, hereditamentes, fees, anuities, or other yearly profits in his
own right or in his wives to the yearly value of one hundred pounds, from
hensforth may lawfully use and shote in crosbowes and hand gonnes, and in every
of them, and retain and keep the same: Any thing contained in the act made at
a parliament holden at westminster, in the sixth year of the raygne of our
sovereign lord, for reformacion of shotyng in crosbowes and hand gonnes, and
for keeping of the same notwithstanding.

And further be it enacted by authority aforesaid that al licenses grauntes,
and placardes made by our said sovereign lord to any person or persons,
before the.xx. day of August in the.xv. year of his reign for showting in
crosbowes or hand gonnes, or for keeping of the same, or any of them, shall be
from the feast of saint Michael the archangel next coming utterly void and of
none effect.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid that every person, not
having in use or possession, lands, teu^tes, fees, annutties, or other yearly
profits, to the yearly value of.C. pounds (as aforesaid) offending contrary
to the said act, made in the said.vi. year, shall forfaite for every time that
he shall so offend, but only.xl.s. and the crosbowes and hand gonnes to he
had. recovered, seized, and levied according to ye said former act any thing
contained in the said former act of or for any greater penalti
notwithstanding. And that it shall be leful to all Justices of peace in their
sessions and stewardes and bailiffes, in their leetes, to enquire of every
person, and persons other than be provided for by this present act, offending
contrary to the said form^t act, of or for any great penalty notwithstanding.

And that it shallbe lefull to all justices of peace in their sessions, and
stewardes and bailiffes in their leetes to enquire of every person and persons
other than be provided for by this present acre, offendinge contrary to the
said former act: and that upon all presentmentes had before justices of peace
in their sessions, processes shall be made for leuiynge of the said.xl.s. to the
kings use, in such form and in like manner as is made vpon^ enditeme^ts of
riottes, and upon every presentmente had in any leetes the lord and owners of
the leetes to levy and have the said penalty if.xl.s by way of distress,
accion of debt, or otherwise in the which the offender shall not be admitted to
wage his law, ne any essoyne or protection to be allowed.

And be it further enacted by auctoritye before said, that no lords or owners
of leetes bear or mayntaine any of their tenauntes or servants within the
jurisdiction of their leetes to do or offend contrary to the said former act,
upon peine to forfane for every time so doing.xl.s. the one half thereof to ye
king our sovereign lord, and the other half to the parti that will sue for
the same by action of debt, byl plaint or informacion in which suit no wager
of law ne essoyne or protection shall be allowed or admitted. The old act in all
other points, not otherwise provided for in this act, to be of force and
effect.

An act concerning the six clerks of the Chauntery to be married. Cap. viii.
IN most humble wise besecheth your true and faithful subjects and daily
servants the six clerks of your high court of Chau^cerie, that whereas of
old time accustomed has been used in ye said court ye al manner clerks and
ministers of ye same court writing to ye great sease, should be unmarried except
only the clerk of the crown: so that as well ye coursetoures and other
clerks, as the six clerks of ye said Chauncerie wear by the same custom
estrained from marriage, whereby all those that contrary to the same did mary,
were no longer suffered to write in the said Chauncery not only to their great
hinderance, losing thereby the benefit of their long study and tedious
labors and peines in youth, takine in the said court, by also to the great
decay of the true course of the said court.

And for as much as the said custom takes no place nor usage, but only in
the office of the said six clerks but that it is permitted and suffered for
maintenance of the said court, that as well the said coursetoures as the other
clerks aforesaid, may and do take wives and mary at their lybertye after the
laws of holy church, and of long time have so done, without interruption or
left of any person: It may therefore please your highness of your most
abundant grace, with the assent of the lords spiritual and temporal and the
commons in this present parlyamente assembled, and by auctoritye of the same,
in consideration of the premises, and also for that the said custom is not
grounded upon any law, to ordeine enacte, and establishe, that John Treuerthen,
Richard Wells, Oliver ^der, Johan Croke, Wyllyam Iessen, and John Lemsey,
now being in the office of the six clerks of the Chauncery, and every of
them, and all other which in time to come shall be in the same office, and every
of them, may and do take wives and mary at their liberty, after the laws of
holy church.

And that they and every of them so married may have, hold, and enjoin, their
said office of six clerks in as ample, large, and like manner, as they did or
should do before the said espouselles, or as if they had never ben married, the
said custom or any other custom or ordinance heretofore had or made to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that by any thing in this act contained the master of the
Rolls (for the time being) be not prejudiced either in the giving and
disposicion of the said offices from time to time, as has been heretofore
accustomed, the forfaiture of that office by reason of marriage only except.
And that the said officers, which now be and hereafter shall be, do give such
attendance unto the said master of the Rolls for the tune being, as
heretofore in the said offices has been accustomed.

An act co^cerninge the liberty of Cordwainers or showmakers. Cap. ix.
PRaien the commons in this present parliament assembled, that where in the
parliament holden at Westmin. in the fourth year of the reign of the excellent
prince of famous memory Edward the.iiij. late king of England your noble
graunfather, among other things it was ordained, established, and enacted, that
no person cordwainer of the city of London, or within three miles next about
the same, upon any sunday of the year, in the feasts of the Nativity or
Ascencion of our lord, or Corpus Christi, should sell, command or make to be
sold any shows, boots, or galeges, or upon any of the said sondaies or
feasts, should put upon the foot or legs of any person or persons any
shows, boot^, or galeges, upon peine to forfaite and lose twenty shillynges
sterlitge, as often and whansoeuer any person shoule do contrary to the said
ordinance, or any parcel thereof.

And where by the same estatute it is ordained and provided, that the same act
should not extend to the damage or prejudice, nor any manner be hurtefull or
prejudicial to the Deane and Chapter (for the time being) of the free
chapel of the king, of Saint Martins le graunde of London nor to any person
or persons, Dwellinge, Abidinge, or Being within any place or places in saint
Martyns lane in London, or within any place or places within the precinct,
fee, or fraunchyse, of the said Deane, or of the said Deane and chapter.
Wherefore to the honor of almighty god and to the intent that the kings
subjects may be hereafter at their liberty, as well as the said inhabitauntes
within the liberties and precinct of the said saint Martines the graund, be it
enacted by the auctority of this present parliament, that the said estatute,
made in the parliament holden at westminster in the said fourth year of the
reign of king Edward the fourth, stand and be from henceforth utterly void
and of none effect.

An act concenigne the huntinge of the Hare. Cap. x.
FOr as much as our soueraygne lord the king, and other noble men of this
realm of England, before this time has used and exercised the game of
hunting of the Hare, for their dysporte and pleasure, which game is now
decayed and almooste utterly dystroied, for that, that diverse persons in diverse
parties of this Realm, by reason of the trasinge in snow, have killed and
destroyed, and daily do kill and dystroy the same Hares, by.x.xij. or.xvj. upon
a day, to the dyspleasure of our said sovereign lord ye king and to other
noble men of this his realm Wherefore be it enacted by our said sovereign
lord, by the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
Parlyamente assembled, and by auctoritye of the same: that no person or
persons of what estate degree, or condition they be, from he^ceforth trace,
distroye, and kill no Hare in snow with any dog, bytche, nor otherwise. And
that the Justice of the peace within every shire, at every sessions of the
peace, and stewardes of leetes shall have full auctority anb power to power to
inquire of such offenders. And after such inquisitions found, the said Justices
of the peace and stewardes of leetes for every Hare so killed, shall seasse
upon every such offender.vi.s.viij.d. to be forfaited to our said soueraygne
lord, that shall be so founden by the Justices of peace in their sessions, and
the forfaiture found in every leete to be to the lord of the leete.

An act concerning clothes, called Vesses, made in the county of Suffolk.
Cap. xj.
HVmbly shown unto your highness your true subjects and clothiers of your
Cou^ty of suffolk, that where in ye sixte year of your most noble reign, it
was and is enacted among other things, co^cerninge making of cloth, ye any
person or persons shall not put any cloth to sale, which when it is full wet,
shall shrink more than one yard in length, and one quarter of a yard in
breadth, for ye more part thereof: and clothes called narrowes or straits after
the rate, upon peine to forfaite for every cloth otherwise put to
sale.vi.s.viij.d. and beside to deduct of his price for ye same, to be rebated
to the bier thereof as much after the rate, as the same cloth so otherwise put
to sale (being full wette) shall be shronke more than one yard of that it was
in length, time of the same sale, and as it shall (being wette) lack of the
bread of one yard and three quarters of a yard. And in the same act was and is
a prouiso made, after the form following.

Provided always, that this act extend not to woollen clothes, called
kendalles, nor clothes called carpenell whytes, commonly made for lyning of
hosen, nor to any clothes called Tostockes, made in the countye of Deuonshyre,
nor to any woollen clothes made in the county of Cornwall, nor for any Cottons
or plain lininge or frise, made or to be made in wales, Lancasshyre, and
Chesshyre, or any of them.

So it is most gracious sovereign lord, that Vesses, otherwise called Set
clothes of diverse colors, be made in your said county of Suffolk which be
made to be worn, and be worn in far countries, and not in England, and be
of small prices not above xl.s. a clothe, that do not hold the length nor
breadth when they be wet, which the buyers do know well wha^ they bie them, so
that therein is no deceit. which clothes in the third year of the reign of
your most noble father king Henry the seventh, were provided for, so that they
might lawfully be sold without any penalty or forfayture, though they lacked
in length or breadth when they were full wet and so they have used to do time
out of mind.

And in the prouiso made in the said act of the sixte year of your most
noble reygne they were forgetten and not provided for, which should be to ye
utter impoueryshinges of the clothiers of your said county, and all other that
be wrought by reason of clothe making within the said countye of Suffolk, if
no remedy should be therefore provided.

Wherefore your humble subjects humbly beseech your highness, that it be
enacted by all the lords spiritual and temporal, and all the commons in this
present Parliament assembled, with your most royal assente to the same: that
all clothes called Vesses, otherwise called Set clothes, what color so ever
they be of, not being above the value of.xl.s. a clothe, shall not be forfait,
for that they lack in length and breadth when they be full wet after the iale
of them before this time made or hereafter be made. The said act made in the
sixte year of your most noble reign, or any other act heretofore made to the
contrary notwithstanding.

An act concerning coiners, that shall coin and make any money at any mint
within this realm of England. Ca. xij.
BE it enacted by the king our sovereign lord, and the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by
auctoritye of the same: that all such coiners, as shall coin and make any
money at any mint with in this Realm of England, shall make and coin of
every hundred pounds woorthe of Goolde, that they shall strycke into coin
xx.li. in the coin of half angels, commonly called pieces of gold of.xl.d.
And of every hundred pounds worth of Bullyon, Plate, or Silver, that they
shall strike into coin, as many grotes as shall amount to the sum of fifty
pounds sterlinge: as many half grotes called pence of two pence, as shall
amounte to the sum of.xx.li. sterlinge: as many pence as shall amounte to the
sum of.xx.li. as many half pence as shall amount to the sum of ten marks
sterling and as many farthinges as amount to the sum of five marks
sterlinge. And that at any time that any coyners, in any minte within this
realm, shall do contrary to this act, the master and keeper of that minte,
for the time being, shall forfayte and lose.x.li. The one moity thereof to be
to the king our soueraygne lord. ye other moyty to the party that shall sue
for the same, by bill, information, action of debte, or otherwise: wherein the
said mais^er shall not be admitted to do his law, and no protection ne Essoyne
to be allowed for the defendant.

And for as much as at this present time Farthinges and half pence be stricken
all with one coin, so that the common people of the realm many times take
these that be farthinges for half pence. Be it therefore enacted by the
auctority aforesaid, that all such farthinges (that from henceforth shall be
made within this realm) shall have upon the one side thereof the print of the
port colice, and upon the other side thereof the print of the Rose with
acrosse, upon like peine.

And furthermore be it enacted by the auctority aforesaid, that all manner
persons refortinge to ye said mint with any plate or bullion, under the value
abouesayd, to be coined, shall have and receive at the said mint ye tenth part
of all such plate and bullion in half pence and farthinges.

Provided always, that this act or any thing contained in the same, be not in
any wise prejudicial to the Coyners, and minte masters of York, Duresme, and
Canterbury, ne to any of them, for any money to be coined there, other than
heretofore has been accustomed. This act to begin to take effect at the
feast of saint Michaell the archaungell next coming, and not before.

An act co^cerninge the haven and port of Southampton. Ca. xiij.
WHere in aparliament holden at westmin. the.xiiij. day of Octobre, the.xj.
year of the reign of king Henry the.vij amongs other it was ordained,
established, and enacted by the king our sovereign lord. with the assent of ye
lords spirytuall and temporal and ye commons in the same parliamente
assembled, for the reformation and remedy of the decay of the haven and port of
Southampton, had by reason of diverse weres and ingins for fyshynge, made and
levied in the same haven, between a certain place called Calshare, and
another place called Reedbridge, that it should be lawefull to every man to
abate, pluck, and take away all and every of the said weres and ingins, at all
times at their pleasure, being in the said haven, between the said places,
called Calshare and Reedbridge, directly, without trouble, let, or vexation of
any man, with diverse penalties and forfaytures to all such persons as
hereafter should make or leuye any such wears or ingins, as in the same act
more plainly may appear: The which act was made to endure only the space
of.xx. years than next ensuyng, during which act the said weres and ingins were
pulled down, and the said haven greatly amended, to the succor and comfort of
all the merchants there resortinge, the which years be now expired and paste,
and the same act in no force by the space of.vii years now passed during
which.vii. years diverse new weres, gores, stackes, and ingins have been levied
and enhaunsed, by reason whereof, the said haven is greatly decayed again, and
likely to be lost for ever, to the kings disherison, and hurt of the common
weth of all those parties if remedy therefore be not shortly had and provided:
wherefore be it now enacted by auctority of this present parliament, that the
same act and every thing therein contained, shall be from he^ceforth good and
effectual according to the purporte and intent of the same, and to continue
for ever.

And furthermore be it enacted, that every owner, fermer, and occupier of the
said weres, gores, and ingins, and every of the same, do puldowne and put away
the same, a this side the feast of saint Michaell tharchaungell next coming,
without leuiyng, mainteining, making, or repayringe ye same from henceforth,
upon peine of a hundred pound, to be forfaited and levied likewise and in
like manner, as in the same former act is contained. This act to endure for
ever.

An act concerning such as be in the kings wars over or upon the sea.
Cap. xiiij.
THe King our soueraygne Lord of his most blessed dysposition well
consideringe, that now he is brought into War of necessity with his
ancient enemies, the French king and the Scotts, and has had and shall
have daily the humble service in his said Wars, as well of his nobles as
other his true subjects: of his most especial grace and benign favor,
that he bears unto his said subjects, and for their more suretye and
profit, and for other reasonable considerations him especially mouinge, by the
assent of his Lords spyrytuall and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliamente assembled, and by auctoritye of the same has enacted, ordained
and established that every person and persons, of what degree or condition he
be of, that shall pass over the sea, or that abides upon the sea, or beyond
the sea, and be in the kings wages or service of war at this time, or
hereafter shall be in any other place during his said wars in service of
war, that every of them, which have lands and tenements holden of the king
or any other to their only use, shall now lawfully make thereof alienation,
feoffements and transmutacion of possession, by deed or deeds, fine or fines,
recouerye or recoueries, for the perfourmaunce of his or their will or wills,
without any fine or fines, for the said alienations, feoffements, fines,
recoueries, or tra^smutacion of possession therefore, or for any of the^ to be
made: And that they and every of them, their heirs and assigns, and the
heirs and assigns of every of them, by auctority of this present act, be
discharged of all and every such fines, without letters pate^tes of license or
pardon, or other discharge in that behalf. And furthermore be it also ordained
and enacted, by the said auctority, that if any person or persons, so being in
the said service of war, which hold lands, tenements, or hereditame^ts of
the king or of any other by knights service or otherwise, wherefore his heir
or heirs ought or might be in ward, and fortune in the said service to
decease beyond the sea or upon the sea, or else where, in the service of the
king in his wars against his enemies, or that any feoffement of the same
lands and tenements, be supposed to be made by collusio^ the heir or heirs
of the owner of the same lands and tenements being within age: that than the
feoffees or executours of every such person and persons so deceased, have the
ward and marriage of the heir or heirs, so being within age, until they come
to their full and lawful age. And the lands and tenementes, and other
hereditaments so holden, during the nonage of every such heir or heirs to the
perfourmaunce of the will of the said person or persons so deceased without any
account or sommes of money, or other thing therefore to be yelden, payinge
therout yearly the rentes of the chief lord or lords of the fee of the same,
sauinge to every person or persons, other then the said person or persons,
that shall make any such alienation, feoffement, fine, or suffer recovery to be
had against him, without paying therefore any fine to the king, or the lord
or lords (of whom the said lands be holden) for the same such right, title,
use, and interest, as they had before the said feoffement, alienation, fine,
recovery, or transmutacion of possession, or any of them made or suffered of
any such lands, tenements, or hereditamentes, whereof any such feoffeme^t, fine,
recovery or alienation so shall be made. Provided always, that this act extend
not to any captain or capitaines, soldier or soldiers, that now be or
hereafter shall be reteygned within the towns of Calis, Hammes, Guines,
Risebanke, Berwike, Wales, or any of them, or marches of the same. Except they
or any of them proceed in army royal against the kings enemies.

God save the king.

