TRUTH FLATTERS NOT: PLAIN DEALING THE BEST.
Lively demonstrating the true Effigies, life, and habit, of a selfe-exalting
Clergy; noted down in English and Roman Characters, easily spelled and
construed by a mean capacity.
The wife its truth well knows,
The ignorant may learn,
The guilty snuffes his nose,
And pricked, thereat will spurn.
search the and try the reins

I exalt the humble and bring down the proud look personification of verity
Learn of me to be meake and lo^v^ie

scorner a silly rubb precher

priest prelate If my cap my uesture too

personification of heresy depiction of battle

1. POPE.
WHo will have honors, and renown resort to me,
Riches, and Honor, is my Gown and Livery.
The World well know my Servants grow great Potentates,
Though busy wights, their force unites, to work their fates.
Who shall my holy Laws observe, and Church obey,
A dwelling place in Heaven shall have, or Hell for aye.
2. PRELATE.
Your proffers fair, and promise large, if they were true,
Your oath, and promise, once discharge, give me my due;
And help me now, who bears for you so much disgrace,
Mock, scorn, and flout, yea casting out, of name and place.
If this be Heaven, or entrance in, where they shall dwell,
Who loves, obeyes your Church and Laws, what place is Hell.
3. PRIEST.
I hate the Pope, his poisoned cup, and trinkets all.
The Bishops deeds, and Romish weeds, to me are gall.
Yet well I know, what Layickes owe unto our Coat,
Reverence all way, good livings pay, is our just lot.
Sects and unlearned, up-start Jackes does us defraud,
Who to our shame, our power and name, have over-awed.
4. TRVTH.
Your bitter seeds, ambitious deeds, declares your heart,
On such ill weeds, eagerly feeds; a Spirit tart.
Wealth, Rule, and Fame, has such a name, with you obtained,
What Is taught, or worn, may well be borne, if those be gained,
Throw off that cap, let drop that bag, put up that sword,
Learn of me to be meek and low, preach free this word.
The wise all-seeing, glorious Majesty,
Beholds each Action, Plot, Conspiracy,
That sinful men contrive, against him, and his,
Laughes them to scorn, but crowns his Saints with bliss.
The Pope in state, presents a poisoned Cup,
The Bishop's foiled by a poisoned sup;
Ambition nere his place, has raised another,
By gesture, cap and face, a larding Brother.
The Sword and Bishops Casp he will approve,
The other Robes his patience much does move,
They Are known for Papal, and he is very loath
To eat their meat, yet likes well the broth:
He Is whispered in the ear, that Gold will make him,
Whose rich grows great, honors still overtake him,
Whilst simple Truth in threadbare garments go,
Eyed with a scorn, and geered by her Foe.
Thus temporizing with his wind-turn'd brain,
Fanticies that best, which most is for his gain
Purs from him that, which should him better teach,
Indow with wisdom, riches, power, to preach;
Verity hates the worlds vain ways and toys,
They down are hurled, their sight her soul annoyes,
She reads, learns, leads, the way to God above,
His live, her move, to live in peace and love.
By T. P. a Well-willer of Verity, and honourer of Humility.
Jmprimatur, G. M.

LONDON, Printed by J. Coe, 1647.


