ANNO. XXVIII. HENRICI VIII.

ACTS MADE IN THE parliament bego^ne and holden at Westminster, the.VIII. day of
June, in the.XXVIII. year of the reygne of our most drad sovereign lord king
HENRY the.VIII. and there continued and kept till the dissolution of the same
parliament the.XVIII. of July, to the honor of God, and for the common weal
and profyt of this realm.

THO. BERTHELET REGIS IMPRESSOR EXCVDEBAT, CVM PRIVILEGIO.

THE TABLE.
AN act that felons abiuring for pety treason, murder, or felony, shall not be
admitted to the benefit of their clergy. cap. i. An act for continuinge of
two statutes made in the last parliament, touching such as go away with
caskettes, jewels, goods, or plate of their masters. capit. ii. An act
giuinge the kings highness authority newely to allotte the towneshippes in the
shyres and marches of Wales, at any time within.iii. years next ensuing. capi.
iii. An act repellyng the statute lately made for the bringing in of doulas
and lockerams. cap. iiii. An act for avoiding of exactions taken upon
prentyces in the cities boroughes and towns corporate. cap. v. An act for
continuance of the statutes for beggars and vacabundes, and against
conueiaunce of horses and mares out of this realm, against Walshemen,
making affrayes in the counties of Herff. Glou. and Salop^, and aganst the
vice of buggery. cap. vi. An act for the establishment of the succession of the
imperial crown of this realm. cap. vii. An act for contynuaunce of the
statute ayenste the carriage of brass latenne and copper out of this realm:
and for making of cables and ropes: for the wyndyng of wolles, and against
kyllyng of weinlinges under the age of two years. cap. viii. An act for
continuance of the statutes of perjury, for making of iayles, for peuterers,
and for sowynge of flax and hemp. cap. ix. An act extynguyshynge the
authority of the bishop of Rome. cap. x. An act for restitution of the first
fruits in time of vacation to the next Incumbent. cap. xi. An act declarynge
the lymyttes of the kings palace of Westminster. cap. xii. An act compellynge
spiritual persons to keep resydence upon their benefices. cap. xiii. An act
limitting the pryces of wynes. cap. xiiii. An act for punishment of pirotes
and robbers on the sea. capit. xv. An act for the release of such as have
opteyned pretended lycences and dyspensations from the sea of Rome. cap. xvi.
An act giuynge authority to such as shall succeed to the crown of this
realm, when they come to the age of.xxiiii. years, to make frustrate such
acts as shall be made before in their time. cap. xvii. An act concerning
treason in certain cases. cap. xviii.
FINIS TABVLAE.
An act that felons abiuringe for pety treason, murder, or felony, shall not
be admytted to the benefyte of their clergy. Capi. i.
WHere in the last parliament begone and holden at London, the third day of
Nouembre, in the.xxi. year of the kings most gracious reygne, Abiuration.
and from thens adiourned to Westmynster, and there holden and continued by
diverse and sundry prorogations, It was enacted among other things, that such
person and persons, Sainctuary
which did ^ee or resort to any paryshe church, cimitory, or other like
hallowed place for tuition of his life, by occasion of any murder robberye or
other felony by the same person committed, and thereupon confessed any murder
felony or other offense before a crowner: for the which the same person by
the law of this realm before that time used, should abjure and pass out of
this realm, should be dyrected by the crowner to take his abiuratyon to any
one saynctuary, being within this realm, which the same person would decte and
chose, there to remain as a saintuary man abiured, duringe his natural life.
And if after such abiuration, any person so abiured, came out of the same
saynctuarye, to the which he was assygned, and be taken without the same
saynctuary, not having the kings special pardon or license so to do, that
then every such person abiured, and after abiuration taken without
saynctuarye, whereunto he was assigned, should suffer like pain of death, and
after like manner should be ordered, as he should have done and ^den, in case he
had abiured this realm for murder or felony, and after such abiuration had
returned again into this realm, contrary to ye laws of this land. And it
was further ordained by the same act, that if any such saynctuary person so
abiured, or any other person or persons, which then were, or at any time
after should happen to be in any sainctuary of this realm, for doing of any
pety treason murder or felonye, or for being accessarye to any such offenses:
or if any person or persons, which at any time after the making of the same
act, should take, any sayntuary of this realm for any pety treason murder or
felony, or for being accessory to any such offenses, or upon abiuration: and
so being in sainctuary for any such cause matter or offense, afterward commit
any pety treason murder or felony within the same sainctuarie, or be accessarie
to any such offenses, or goo out of the same sainctuarie, and committee any
petye treason, murder or felonye, or be accessory to any such offenses, and
afterward come again to the same sainctuarie, or take any other sainctuarie for
the same: that every such person and persons, being indicted for any of the
said causes or offenses, should lose the privilege of the saintuary by him
taken, and of every other saintuary within this realm for any such cause of
pety treason, murder, felony, or abiuration, or for any accessory to any such
offenses.

And it was further ordained by the same act, that al foreine plees, triable
by country, which should be pleded by any person or persons arrayned upon any
indictment for any pety treason, murder, or felonye, should be tried before the
same Justices, before whom such persons should be arrayned, and by the same
jurors of the county, that shall try the petye treason murder or felony,
Challenge
without any further respite or delaie, And that no person arrayned for any
pety treason, murder, or felony, should be admitted to any paremptorye
challenge above the noumbre of.xx. which act was made to endure to the end of
the next parliament, as by the said act among diverse clauses and provisions
contained in the same more plainly is expressed.

And where also in the same parliament it was enacted, that no person or
persons, which should happen to be found guilty after the laws of this realm,
for any manner of petye treason, or for any wilfulle murder of malice prepensed,
or for robbinge of any churches, chapelles, or other holy places, or for
robbyng of any person or persons, in their dwellinge houses or dwellinge
place, the owner or dweller in the said house, his wife, his children, or
servants then being within, and put in fear and dread by the same: Or for
robbing of any person or persons in or nere about the high ways, or for
wilful bourninge of any dwellinge houses or bernes, wherein any corn or grain
shall happen to be: nor that any person or persons, being found guilty of any
abbetrement; procurement, helpinge, maynteyning, or counsaylinge of or to any
such petie treason, Benefyt of clergy.
murders, or felonies, should be admitted to the benefyte of their clergy
(such as be within holy orders, yt is to say, of the orders of subdeacon or
above, all only except) with many other clauses and provisions contained in
the said act, as by the same act more plainly appears: which act was also
made to continue and endure to the last day of the next parlyament.

And where also in the same parliament it was further enacted, that every such
person and persons, which should happen to be indicted of any pety treason,
wilful burninge of houses, murder, robbery, or burgularye, or other felonye,
according to the tenor and meaning of the said estatute next above
rehearsed, Standing muet.
and thereupon arrained, did stand muet of malice, or froward mind, or
challeng paremptorie above the number of.xx. or else will not answer directely
to the same indictment and felony, whereupon they shall be arrayned: that then
every such person and persons, should lose the benefit and privilege of their
clergy.

AND IT WAS ALSO ORDAINED by the same act, that if any person or persons, be
indicted and found guilty for stealing of any goods or cattelles, in any
county of this realm, or being indicted, stand muet of malice, or challenge
paremptorie above the number of.xx. persons, or will not answer directely
to the law, should also lose the benefit of their clergy, in like manner and
form as they should have done, if they had be endyted, arrayned, and
found gyltye in the same county, where the same robbery or burgulary was
done, if it shall appear to ye Justices, by evidence or examination, that the
said felons or robbers arayned before them, should or ought to have lost their
clergy by force of the said estatute in case they had be found gyltie of
the same felonies or burglaries, in the same shyre where they were committed,
as by the said act among other things more at large is expressed.

And where also in the said parlyament it was further ordained, that the
detestable vice of buggery, committed with mankind or beast, Buggery. Felony.
should be felony, and that the offenders therein should lose the privilege of
their clergy: which act was made to endure to the last day of the next
parlyamente, as by the same act amongeste other things it appears more at
large. For as much as the said acts, be beneficial and profitable for the
common welthe of this realm, Be it therefore enacted by authority of this
present parlyamente, that the said acts and every of them, and all clauses
and provisions contained in the same, shall stand in full strength and
virtue, and from henseforthe to continue and endure unto the last day of the
next parlyament.

And also be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that such as be within holy
orders, shall from henseforth stand and be under the same peines and dangers
for the offenses contained in any of the said statutes, Orders.
and be used and ordered to all intentes and purposes, as other persons not
being within holy orders: Any provision or exception specified in any of the
said acts, or any other usage or custom of this realm to the contrary thereof
not withstanding. This act to endure unto the last day of the next parliament.

An act for continuing of two statutes made in the last parlyament touching
such as go away with caskettes, jewels, goods, or plate of their masters.
Cap. ii.
WHere in the last parlyamente begone and holden at London, the third day of
Nouembre, in the.xxi. year of the kings most gracious reygne, and from thense
adiourned to Westmynster, and there holden and continued by diverse prorogations
unto the dissolution thereof, it was ordained and enacted amongst other
things, that if any servants, Servants, Caskettes, Jewels.
to whom any caskettes jewels money goods or catalles, should be delivered to
keep by his or their masters or maistresses, do go away with the said
caskettes, jewels, money, goods, or cacalles, or any part thereof, to the
intent to steal the same, and defraude his or their said master or maystres
thereof, contrary to the trust and confidence to him or them put by his or
their said masters or maistresses: Or else being in service without assente
or commandment of his said master or maystres embesile the caskettes,
iewelles, money, goods, or cattalles, Embesiling.
of his said master or maistresse, or any part thereof, or otherwise convert
the same to his own use, with like purpose to steal, than if the said
caskets, jewels, money, goods, or cattalles, that any such servant shall go
away with or which he shall embesyle with purpose to steal it (as is before
said) be of the value of.xl.s. or above: that then the same false fraudulent
and untrue act and demeanor should from henseforth be demed and adjudged
felony. And that he or they so offendyng, Felony.
should be punished as other felons be punished for felony committed by course
of the common law, which act was then made to endure to the next parliament.

And where also in an other act made in the said parlyament, it was enacted,
that if any servant for the time being in service with any person or persons,
happen to steal, or felonousely take away any jewels money plate or other
goods or cattalles of his master or maystresse: or if any servant, to whom
any caskette jewels money goods or cattalles were delivered by his master or
maystresse, and goo away with the said casket money goods or cattalles, or
any part thereof, contrary to the trust and confydence to him or them put:
or without the assente or commandment of his said master or mastresse
embesile any caskette, iewelles, money, goods, or cattalles, or any part
thereof, or otherwise convert the same to his own use, with purpose to steal
it, if the said caskette, money, jewels, goods, or other cattalles, be of the
value of.xl.s. or above: that then the offendour in such case should lose the
benefitte of his clergy, Benefit of clergy. Sainctuary.
and the privilege of al saintuaryes, as by the said several acts more
plainly appears. For as much as the said acts be^ thought necessary for the
commonwealth of this realm, Be it therefore enacted by authority of this
present parlyament, that the same acts, and every of them, and al and every
clause article and prouiso therein contained, shall from henseforth stand good
and endure and continue for ever.

An act gyuynge the kings hyghnes authority newly to allotte the
towneshyppes in the shyres and marches of wales, at any time with in three
years next ensuynge. Cap. iii.
VHere in the parlyamente begone and holden at London the third day of
Nouembre, in the.xxi. year of the reygne of our most drad soueraygne lord
king Henry the.viii. and from thense adiourned to Westmynster, and there
holden and continued by diverse prorogations unto the.iiii. day of Februarye,
in the.xxvii. year of the reygne of our said soueraygne lord, and then and
there holden and continued unto the dyssolution thereof, one act and ordynance
was made in the session of the said parlyament, holden the said.iiii. day of
February, Shires newly made in Wales.
whereby among other things diverse shyres and counties were newely made and
named within the dominion and principality of wales, and diverse towns
paryshes lordeshyppes commotes and cantredes within the said dominion and
principality, were allotted appointed and lymitted to the said several shires
and counties, as by the same act more plainly and particularly among other
things appears. And for as much as by credable information it is commen to
the kings knowledge sythens the making of the said act, that some
lordeshyppes, towns, paryshes, commotes, hundredes, and cantredes, be not
indyfferently allotted and lymytted to the shires named in the said act, for
the commodity of the kings ^ectes therein inhabyted: Be it therefore enacted by
authority of this present parlyament, that the kings hyghnes (during the
time of three years ^t after the end of this present parlyament) shall have
power and authority, by writing under his great seal, Allottyng of townshyps
in Wales.
to allotte appoynte assygne and ly^te to every of the shires named in the
said act, such and so many lordshyps towns parisshees hamlettes hundredes
commotes and cantredes, as his majesty by his most high wisdom shall
think most convenient and agreeable for the ease and commodity of his louinge
subjects the inhabitants of his said dominion and principality.
Principality of Wales.
And shall likewise have power and authority to name and assygne the shyre
towns in every of the said shires named in the said act. And that every
such limitation apointment nomination and assignement to be made by the kings
hyghnes in that behalf, by authority of this act, shall be as good and
effectual to all intentes and purposes, as though it had been done and made
plainly and particularly by authority of parliament: any thing contained in
the said act, made in the last parliament, or any other thing or things to
the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

An act repellyng the statute lately made for the bringing in of doulas and
lokerams. Cap. iiii.
WHere in the parliament holden at Westminster the third day of November, in
the.xxi. year of the reign of our soueraygne lord king Henry the.viii.
amongst other things it was enacted and established, that no person nor
persons, english nor stranger, denisen or alien, from or after the feast of
saint Mighel tharchangel than next following, should bring or convey, or cause
to be conveyed or brought by any manner of means into this realm of England,
any linen clothe, called doulas or lockerams, Doulas and lockerams.
on^es every hole piece of doulas contained in length five score else of
assise, accounted to every elle, one inche of assise, and in breadth one yard
of assise: And every half piece fyfty else in length, and one yard in
breadth of like assise, and all the hole piece and half piece of one goodness in
making. And also it was there enacted and establyshed, that every hole piece of
lockerams should be of like length, as the hole piece of doulas: and every
half piece of lockerams should be of like length as the half piece of doulas:
and every such hole piece and half piece of lockerams to be in breadth a hole
yard, lackyng a nail of the yard: and every piece and half piece to be in
like goodness by all the length of the same piece, upon pain of forfeyture of
the same doulas and lockerams so to be brought or conveyed into this realm,
not conteynyng the full length breadth and goodness, or the value thereof, as in
the same statute more plainly at large does appear. Since the making of
which act a great nombre of kings subjects, that is to say, weauers,
tuckers, spynners, dyers, and wulpikers, and many others have been ydell and
without work, to their great impouerysshynge, which more and more is like
daily to encreace, if remedy be not provided, for as much as the clothemakers,
which before the making of the said act, were wont to convey their said
clothes into Britain, where the said lynnen clothe called doulas and
lockerams is made, and from thense to bring with them the said lynnen clothe
called doulas and lockeram, which they can not do sythens the making of
the said act, without danger and forfayture of the said lynnen clothe by
reason that there shall no english man be suffered to carye or convey any of
the said clothes, called doulas or lockerams, from the parties of beyond the
sea into this realm of the length contained in the said act: which will make
the said cloth makers to leave the making of their cloth, to the greatte and
manyfolde perils of the kings subjects: Be it therefore enacted by the king
our soueraygne lord, with the assente of the lords spiritual and temporal,
and the commons in this present parlyament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that the said act, made in the said.xxi. year, be to all intentes
pourposes and constructions in the law, made utterly void and of none
effect, as if this said act had never ben had nor made. Nevertheless to
the intent that the buyers of the said lynnen clothes, shall not at any time
hereafter be deceived by the length of the said clothes. Be it therefore enacted
by the authority before said, that after the feast of sayncte Myghell the
archangell next coming, no manner of person english nor stranger,
denysen nor alyen, put to sale any hole piece or half piece of the said
lynnen clothe called doulas and lockerams, one less there be mention expressed
upon every of the said hole piece or half piece of the said lynnen clothe
called doulas or lockeram, so put to sale, as is aforesaid, the hoole and
entier noumbre of the yardes or else, that is contained in every such hole
piece or half piece, upon pain of forfeyture of the same hole piece or half
piece, not containing the noumbre of yardes or else, so mentioned upon every
of the said hole piece or half piece, so put to sale as is before said. The
one half of every such forfayture to be to the king our soueraygne lord,
and the other half to him that shall sease and will sue for the same by action
of det, byl, plaint, information, or otherwise: in which action, suite, or
information, no wager of law nor essoyne shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always, that this act or any thing therein contained, be not
prejudicial ne hurtefull to any person or persons, that before the first day
of this parlyamente, has made any seaser, or put in any information, in to
any of the kings courts, for any manner of forfayture, done or committed by
any person or persons, contrary to the said estatute, made in the said
third day of Nouembre, the.xxi. year of the reygne of our soueraygne lord
king Henry the eight.

An act for auoydinge of exactions taken upon prentices in the cities
boroughes and towns corporate. Cap. v.
WHere in the parliament begone at London the third day of Nouembre, in
the.xxi. year of the reign of our most drad sovereign lord king Henry
the.viii. and from thens adiourned and proroged unto westminster, the.xvi. day
of January, in the.xxii. year of the reign of our said sovereign lord, and
there then also holden. It was and is recited, that where before that time it
was established and enacted in the.xix. year of our late sovereign lord king
Henry the.vii. that no master wardeynes and fellowship of crafts, or any of
them, nor any rulers of the gyldes or fra^ities should take upon them to make
any acts or ordinances, ne to execute any acts or ordinances by the^ before
that time made, or then hereafter to be made, in disheritance or diminutio^ of
ye prerogative of the king, nor of other, nor against the common profit of the
people: but if the same acts or ordinances were examined or approved by the
Chancellor, treasorer of England, or chief justice of either bench, or three of
the^, or before the Justices of assise in their circuit or progres, in ye
shire where such acts or ordinances be made, upon peyn of forfaiture of.xl.
fi. for every time that they do the contrary, as more plainly in the said act
does appear. wardenies of felowshyps.
Sith which time diverse wardens and felowships have made acts and ordinances,
that every prentice should pay at his first enter in their common hall to the
wardens of the same fellowship, Apprentice.
sum of them.xl. s. some.xxx. s. some xi. s. some.xiii. s.iiii. d. some.vi.
s.viii. d. some.iii. s.iiii. d. after their own sinister minds and pleasure,
contrary to the meaning of the said act, made in the said.xix. year of the
reign of the said late king Henry the.vii. and to the great hurt of the
kings true subjects, putting their children to be prentises. It was therefore
in the said parliament, holden at westminster in the said.xxii. year of the
reign of king Henry the.viii. established and enacted by the king our
sovereign lord, Fraternitie^
by the advice of his lords spiritual and temporal, and of the commons in
the same parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that no
master wardeines or felowships of crafts, or masters, or any of them, nor
any rulers of fraternities, should take from thensforth of any prentice or of
any other person or persons for ye enter of any prentice into their said
fellowship, above the some of.ii. s.vi. d. nor for his entree when his years and
term is expired and ended, above iii. s.iiii. d. upon pain of forfaiture
of.xl. li. for every time that they do to the contrary, the one half to the
king our sovereign lord, and the other half to the party that therefore
shall sue by action of debt information or otherwise, and that in the action
before said no protection or essoyne shall be allowed: As by the same act among
other things therein contained more plainly may appear. Sithen which said
several acts establisshed and made (as is before said) diverse masters
wardeines and felowshippes of crafts, have by cautel and subtle means
compassed and practiced to defraude and delude the said good and holsom
statutes, causinge diverse prentises or young men immediately after their years
be expyred, or that they be made free of their occupatio^ or fellowship, to be
sworn upon the holy Evangelist at their first enter, that they ne any of the^
after their years or term expired, shall not set up or open any shop house
nor sellar, nor occupy as freemen, without the assent and license of the
master wardens or felowshippes of their occupations, upon peine of forfaitinge
their freedom, or other like penalty. By reason whereof the said prentices and
journey men be put to as much or more charges thereby then they before time were
put unto for the obteininge and entering of their fredom, to the great hurt and
impouerishement of the said prentices and journey men, and other their
friends. For remedy whereof be it now, by the authority of this present
parliament establisshed, ordained, and enacted, that no master wardens or
felowshippes of crafts, nor any of them, nor any rulers of fraternities gildes
or brotherhedes from hensforth co^pel or cause any prentice or journey man by
oath or bond heretofore made or hereafter to be made, or otherwise, that he
after his apprentiship or term expired, shall not set up nor keep any shop
house or sellar, Journey man.
nor occupy as a free man without license of the master wardeines or
fellowship of his or their occupation, for and concerning the same, nor by any
mean exact or take of any such prentice or journey men, nor any other
occupieng for them self, nor of any other persons for them, after his or their
said years expired, any sum of money or other things for or concerning his or
their fredome, or occupatio^, other wise or in any other manner the^ before is
recited limited and appointed in the said former act, made in the said.xxii.
year of the reign of king Henry the viii. upon the pain to forfaite for every
time that they or any of them shall offend contrary to this act.xl.li. The one
half thereof to the king our sovereign lord, and the other half to the party
that will sue for the same in any of the kings courts, by actio^ of det,
informatio^, or otherwise: in which suite or action no protection nor essoine
shall be allowed for the party defendant.

An act for continuance of the statutes for beggars and vacabundes and against
conueyaunce of horses and mares out of this realm, against Welshe men making
affrayes in the counties of Herff. Glouc. and Salop^, and against the vice of
buggery. Cap. vi.
WHere in the parliament begone at London the third day of Nouembre, in
the.xxi. year of the reign of our most drad sovereign lord king Henry
the.viii. and from thense adiourned to westmynster, and there holden and
continued by prorogation unto the.xvi. day of January in the.xxii. year of our
said sovereign lord, it was then in that session of the said parliament, an
act made and established, declaring and concerning as well how aged, poor,
and impotent persons, Vagab^
compelled to live by al^rs should be ordered, as how vacabundes and mighty
strong beggars should be whipped and punished: which act was then made to
endure and continue until the last day of the next parliament. And where
also in the said session of the said parliament, one other act was made for
the restraint of carieng and conueyinge of horses and mares out of this realm,
Horses and mare^.
which act was also made to continue and endure to the last day of the next
parlyament, as by the said two several acts more plainly appears. And where
also at the said parliament continued and proroged unto the third day of
Nouembre, in the.xxvi. year of the reygne of our said soueraygne lord, it was
then in that session of the said parliament, welshemen.
an other act made and establyshed, for punyshement of welshemen, attemptynge
assaults or affrayes upon any the inhabitauntes of Hereforde, Gloucestre,
Shropshyre, which act was also made to endure unto the last day of the next
parlyament, as by the said act more plainly appears. And where also in the
said parlyament, continued and proroged unto the.xv. day of January, in
the.xxv year of our said sovereign lord, it was then in that session of the
said parlyament one other act made and establyshed for punishment of the vice
of buggery, declarynge such offense to be felony, Buggery.
which act was than also made to endure to the last day of the next
parlyament, as by the said act more plainly appears. For as much as the
said.iiii. several acts be beneficial and profitable for the common weal of
this realm, Be it therefore enacted by authority of this present parliament,
that the said.iiii. acts and every of them, and al clauses, articles, and
provisions therein contained, shall from hensforth be observed and kept, and
continue and endure unto the last day of the next parlyament.

An act for the establyshement of the succession of the imperial crown of
this realm. Capi. vii.
IN their most humble wise shown to your most royal majesty, the lords
spiritual and ^mporal, and al other your loving and obedyente subjects, the
commons in this your most high court of parliament assembled, that where in
your last parliament, begone and holden at London the third day of
Nouembre, in the.xxi. year of your most gracious reygne, and from thens
adiorned to Westminster, and there holden and continued by diverse and sundry
prorogations unto the.xv. day of January, in the xxv. year of your most
noble reygne, and than there holden, It was made and ordained an act
concerning among many things; as well for ratification and confyrmation of
your marriage, Lady Anne Boleine.
than had and solempnysed between your hyghnes and the late lady Anne Boleyne
Marquis of Pembroke, as for the lymittation of the succession of your imperial
crown of this realm, to the issue of your body begoten and to be begoten of
the body of the said lady Anne, with diverse remaynder over for defaute of
such issue, as in the said act plainly and particularly more at large is
expressed and mentioned. Oath.
And where also by the said act it was ordained and establysshed, that all
and syngular your subjects should take a corporal oath for the fulfyllynge,
maynteynynge, and defending, the hole effects and contents of the said
act. And it was further ordained by the said act among other things, that
if any person or persons, subject or resiant within this realm, or within
any your gracis dominions, after the first day of May than next ensuynge, by
writing, prynte, deed, or act procured or did, or caused to be procured or
done any thing or things to the prejudice, sclander, dysturbance, or
derogation of the said matrymony, solemnised bitwen your majesty and the said
lady Anne, or to the peril, sclaunder, or disherison of any the issues and
heirs of your highness being lymytted by the same act to inherit and to be
inheritable to the crown of this realm, whereby any such issues or heirs of
your hyghnes might be destroyed, disturbed, or interrupted in body or title
of inheritance to the crown of this realm, as to them is lymytted in the same
act: that than every such person and persons, and their aydours,
counsaylours, maynteynours, and abbettours, and every of them, for every such
offense, should be adjudged high traitors, and that every such offense,
should be adiuged high treason. And the offenders and their aydours,
counsaylours, maynteynours, and abettours, and every of them, being lawefully
conuycte of such offense by presentment, verdicte, confession, or process,
according to the customs and laws of this realm, should suffer peynes of
death, as in cases of high treason: as in the said act among many other
articles, clauses, and provisions, is more at large mentioned and specified.

AND also in the said parlyamente holden at Westmynster by prorogation in the
third day of Nouembre, in the.xxvi. year of your most noble reygne, an
other act was made for declaration and ratification of the said oath, which
diverse of your subjects then had taken, and all your subjects after that
were bound to take for due observation of the said act of the said
Succession, Succession.
as by the same act among other things is also specified and expressed. And
all be it most dradde soueraygne lord, that the said acts were then made,
as it was then thought by your majesty, nobles and commons, upon a pure
perfect and clear foundation, thinking the said marriage then had between your
highness and the said lady Anne in their consciences to have been pure sincere
perfect and good, and so was reputed, accepted, and taken in the realm, till
now of late, that god of his infinite goodness (from whom no secret things
can be hid) has caused to be brought to light euidente and open
knowledge, as well certain, just, true and lawefulle impedimentes unknown
at the making of the said acts, and sithen that time confessed by the said
lady Anne, before the most reverend father in god Thomas Archebysshoppe of
Canturburye, Metropolytane and prymate of all England, sitting iudicially for
the same: by the which plainly appears, that the said marriage between your
grace and the said lady Anne, was never good nor co^so^ante to the laws, but
utterly void and of none effect. By reason whereof, your highness was and is
laufully deuorced and separated from the bo^des of ^e said marriage in the life
of the said lady Anne. And this not withstanding most gracious sovereign
lord, the lady Elisabeth your daughter, being borne under the said unlawful
marriage, by virtue and authority of ye act of your succession above
remembered, for lack of heirs males of your body, should immediately succeed as
your lauful heir in ye most roial estate of your imperial crown of this
realm, against all honor equity reason and good conscience, if remedy should
not be provided for ye same. And over this most dradsouerayne lord, al be it
that your majesty not knowing of any lauful impedime^tes, entered into ye
bonds of the said unlawful marriage, and auanced ye same lady Anne to the
honor of the sovereign estate of queen of this realm: yet never the less she
inflamed with pride and carnal desires of her body, putting a part ye dread of
god and excellent benefits receives of your highness, confederated her self with
George Bolein late lord Rocheford, her natural brother, Henry Norreis esquier,
Fraunces weston knight William Brereton esquier, gentillmen of your privy
chaumbre, and Mark S^ton Grome of your said privy chaumbre, and so being
confederated, she and they most traiterousely committed and parpetrated
diverse detestable and abominable treasons, to the most fearful peril and
danger of the ^truction of your most royal person, and to the utter loss
disherison and desolation of this realm, if god of his goodness had not in due
tim brought their said treasons to light: for the which being palmely and
manyfestely proved, they were conuicte and atteinted by the due course and
order of your common laws of this realm, and have suffered according to
their merytts, as by the records thereof more at large may appear.

And al be it most gracious and most dred sovereign lord, diverse and sundry
honorable just true and reasonable clauses be contained and expressed in the
said act, made for the establishement of your succession, which be very
necessary and profitable for the common welthe of this realm: yet never ye les
because certain articles and clauses contained in the same, concerning the
ratification of your said unlawful marriage, between your highness and the said
lady Anne, and the limittation of your succession to the issues of your body
had by the said lady Anne, and the oath expressed and mentioned in both the
acts above remembered, for the defending and maynteinynge the holle effects
and contents of the said act, which clauses and artycles be now become of
late so dishonorable, and so far distaunte from the due course of your common
laws of your realm, and also so much against good reason equity and good
conscience, that they can not be sustained nor tolerated to continue and
endure without greatte peril of dyuision hereafter to be had by occasion of
the same, among us your said most humble louinge and obedient subjects and
our posterities. It may therefore please your highness of your most excellent and
accustomable goodness, and for the entier love favor and hearty affection, that
your majesty has alwais borne and bears to the common welthe of this your
realm, and for the conservation of the good peace unity and rest of us your
most bounden, and obediente subjects, and of your said posterities, that it
may be enacted by authority of this present parlyamente, that the said two
acts and every of them, and al clauses articles and provisions therein
contained, from ye first day of this present parliament, shall be repealed,
adnulled, and made frustrate, and of none effect.

Repele.
Provided always, that the said repeal and adnullaion of the said act, which
was made for the establysshemente of your succession, shall not be taken
expounded nor understand, to discharg any person or persons, which have done
or committed any offenses of treason, or misprision of treson, contrary to the
same act, or any part thereof, at any time before ye first day, of this
present parliamente: but that such offenses of treason and misprision of
treason, done and committed by any person or persons, contrary to the same
act, before the first day of this present parliamente, shall be and remain
in the same degree and quality to be punisshed by authority of the same act,
as if the same act had not ben repealed: the repeal and adnullation of the
same act by authority of this present parlyamente in any wise not
withstandinge. Never the less the kings most royal majesty, most
gratiouselye considering, that diverse and many of his most loving and
obedyente subjects now lately before the beginning of this present
parlyamente, have spoken, done, practysed, procured, and attempted, as well by
words writing and pryntynge, as by exterior acts, not only against the
said unlawful marriage, solempnised between his highness and the said lady
Anne, and to the prejudice sclaunder disturbance and derogation thereof, but
also to ye peril sclaunder and disheryson of the lady Elysabeth the kings
daughter illegyttimate borne under the same marriage, and to the let
disturbaunce and interruption of the said lady Elysabeth to the title of the
crown: and also to deprive ye said lady Anne late Queen, and the said lady
Elysabeth, and every of the^ of their dignity title and name of their royal
estates, contrary to the tenours purportes provisions and ordynaunces, as well
contained in the said act made in the last parliament for the establishement
of the kings succession, as in an other act made in the last parliament for
punishment of treasons. Which words doings practices procurementes and
attemptes of his said subjects, all be it they proceeded of no malice, but upon
true and just grounds, for punyshement of the said late lady Anne, according
to her deserts, and for reformation of the said unlawful marriage, for the
surety of the kings highness, and for the unity and welthe of this realm:
yet nevertheless the kings said subjects might hereafter happen to be
empeched troubled and vexed for such their words doings acts procurementes
and attemptes, as well by reason of the said estatute, made for the
establyshement of the kings succession, and now repealed by this act, as by
occasion of other statutes heretofore made for punishment of treason and
misprision of treason, to the greatte danger and perils of the lives lands
and goods of the kings said subjects, which only for hearty goodwill and
faithefull obedience, that they bear to the kings majesty, incurred into the
said dangers and peryls: The kings highness thefore of his most bountyfull
mercy and benignity is pleased and contented, that it be enacted by authority
of this present parliament, that all and singular his loving subjects, which
have spoken done practiced committed or attempted, or procured to be done or
attempted directely or indyrectely, by words, Pardon.
writings, printes, or any exterior act, any thing or things what so ever
it be against the said marriage, solempnysed between his highness and the said
late Queen Anne, or for the settinge forth or preferremente of the deuorce or
dissolution thereof: or against the said late queen Anne, or the said lady
Elisabeth, or to any of their sclaunders perilles, or disheriso^s: or have
wished willed or desired by words or writings, or inverted imagined practiced
or attempted any bodily harm to the said late queen Anne, or lady Elyzabeth,
or to deprive the same late queen Anne, or lady Elizabeth, or any of them, of
the dignity title or name of their royal estates, or have spoken done or
procured to be done any other words writi^ges printinges wishing willinge,
thing or things, act or acts, against the said late queen Anne or lady
Elizabeth, which is or moughte be demed or interpreted for treason, or
misprision of treason by any construction upon any of ye statutes of this
realm heretofore made, shall be freely and clearly pardoned discharged and
released by authority of this act of al those and such treasons, and
misprisions of treasons above mentioned. And that none of his said loving
subjects for any of ye said treasons or misprisions of treason above me^cioned
and specified, shall hereafter at any time, by any manner of means be empeched
vexed or troubled in their bodies lives lands goods or cattalles, any thing
in this act, or in any act or acts heretofore made for treasons or misprisons
of treason, to the contrary thereof not withstandinge.

And that it be further enacted by authority before said, Atteinder of queen
Anne, and other.
that the said late Queen Anne, George Boleyn, late lord Rocheforde, Henry
Norreis esquier, Fraunces Weston knight, William Brereto^ esquier, and Mark
Smeton, for their abominable and detestable treasons, by them and every of
them most abhominably and traitorously committed and done against your
majesty and the realm, shall be by authority of this present parlyament
convicted and atteinted of high treason, in such manner and form and
accordingelye as they be, by the dew course and order of your laws of this
realm. And that the said late Queen Anne, George lord Rocheforde, Henry
Norreis, Fraunces Weston, William Brereton, and Mark Smeton, and every of
them, shall lose and forfaite to your highenes and to your heirs, al such
their manours, meases, lands, tenementes, rentes, reuersyons, remaynders,
uses, possessions, offices, ryghtes, condycions, and all other hereditamentes,
of what names natures or qualyties so ever they be, which they or any of them,
or any other to their uses, or to the use of any of them had or ought to have
had of any estate of inheritance in fee simple or in fee tail, in use or
possession at ye days of their several treasons, committed limited and
expressed in their inditemente, or at any time after. Saving to every person
and persons, and bodies politic, and to the heirs assigns and successors of
every of them (other than to ye said late Queen Anne, and the other traitors
before named: and their heirs and assigns of every of them and all and every
other person and persons claiming by the^ of or any of them, or to their uses,
or to the uses of any of them, or to the use of any of their heirs) all such
right title use possession interest condition fees offices rentes annuites
commons, and all other commodities and hereditamentes, what so ever they or
any of them moughte should or ought to have had, if this act had never ben had
ne made.

And over this most gracious sovereign lord, for as much as it has pleased
your most royal majesty, not withstandinge the great and intolerable
perils and occasions, which your highness has suffered and sustained, as well by
occasion of your first unlawful marriage solempnised between your highness
and the lady Katheryne, Princes Dowager
late princes dowager, as by occasion of the said vnlafull marriage between
your highness and the said late queen Anne, at the most humble petition and
intercession of us your nobles of this realm, for the ardent love and fervent
affection, which your highness bears to the conservation of the peace and
unity of the same, and for the good and quiet governance thereof, of your
most excellent goodness to enter in to marriage again, and have chosen and
taken a right noble virtuous and excellent lady queen Jane to your true and
lawefull wife, Queen Jane.
and have laufully cellebrated and solemnised marriage with her, according to
the laws of holy church: Who for her convenient years, excellent beauty, and
pureness of flesh and bloudde, is apt (god willinge) to conceive issue by
your highness: which marriage is so pure and sincere, without spotte doubt
or impediment, that the issue procreated under the same, when it shall please
almighty god to send it, can not be laufully trewely nor justly interrupted or
disturbed of the right and title in the succession of your crown: It may
therefore now please your most gracious majesty, at ye most humble petition
and intercessyon of us your nobles and commo^s, assembled in this present
parliamente, as well for the clear extinguisshement of all ambyguities and
doubts, as for a pure and perfect unity of us your most humble and obedient
subjects, and of all our posteryties, that it may be enacted by your most
gracious and royal majesty, by consent of us ye lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same in manner and form as hereafter in articles ensues.

FIRST FOR AS MUCH as the marriage here to fore solempnised between your
hyghnes and the said lady Katharine, late princes dowager deceased, which
before was lawefull wife to your natural brother prince Arthur, and by him
carnally known, as has duly been proved by ^fficient witnesses, at al times
was is and ought to be demed and determined, to be against the laws of
almighty god, and not dispensable by any human authority, and so has be
demed and determined, as well by the hole clergy of this realm, in both
conuocations, and by both the universities thereof, as by the universities of
Bonony, Padua, Paris, Orleaunde, Tolowes, Angiew, and diverse other, and also by
a great nombre of private wrytinges of many right excellent well learned men:
Be it therefore enacted by authority of this present parliamente, according
as it was ordained and enacted in the said act made in the last parlyament for
the establyshement of your succession, that the said marriage heretofore had
and solempnised between your highness and the said lady Katherine, which was
before laufull wife, to the said prince Arthur your elder brother, and by him
carnally known, as does dewely appear be sufficient prove in a laufull process
had and made before the said most reverend father in god Thomas, by the
sufferaunce of god archebisshoppe of Caunturburye, Metropolitan and prymate of
all England, shall be by authority of this present parliament diffinitiuely
clearly and absolutely declared demed and adjudged to be against the laws of
almighty god, and also accepted reputed and taken of no value ne effect, but
utterly void and adnichiled: And that the separation thereof made by the said
archebishoppe shall be good and effectual to all intentes and purposes, any
license, dispensation, or any other act or acts going before or ensuinge the
same, or to the contrary thereof in any wise not withstandinge. And that every
such license, dispensation, act or acts, thing or things, had made done or
to be done to the contrary thereof, shall be to al intentes void and of none
effect, and so shall be reputed and taken by and among al us your true
subjects and inhabitauntes, our heirs and successors of and in your realm
and dominions for ever. And that the issue borne and procreated under the same
unlawful marriage, made and solemnised between your highness and the said lady
Katherine, shall be taken demed and accepted illegittimate to all intentes and
pourposes, and shall be utterly forclosed excluded and barred to claim challenge
or demand any inherytaunce as laufull heir to your highness by liniall
dissent.

And also for as much as the marriage solempnised, between your highness and the
said late queen Anne upon true and just causes was and is demed and adjudged
by the said most reverend father, to be of no value ne effect, and a deuorce
and separation thereof had and made by the due order and process of the laws
of the church of England, before the said reverend father, Be it therefore
enacted, by the authority of this present parliament, yt the same marriage
between your highness and the said late queen Anne, shall be taken reputed demed
and adjudged to be of no force strength virtue nor effect: and that the
separation and deuorce thereof had by the sentence and judgment of the said
most reverend father, shall be good and effectual, and so here after shall be
taken and reputed for ever by all your subjects, their heirs and successors.
And that none appeal repeal reuocation or adnullation thereof, or any part of
the same, shall here after be had taken allowed or admitted in any behalf.
And that all the issues and childrene borne and procreated under the same
marriage between your highness and the said late queen Anne, shall be taken
reputed and accepted to be illegittimate to al intentes and purposes, and
utterly forclosed excluded and barred to claim, challenge, or demand any
inheritance as laufull heir or heirs to your hyghnes by lyniall descent, the
said former act made in the last parlyament, for the stablyshement of your
succession, or any thing therein contiyned, or any other thing or things to
the contrary thereof in any wise not withstanding.

Degrees of marriage prohybyted by gods laws.
And further more syns many inconveniences have fallen, as well within this
realm as in others, by reason of marieng within the degrees of marriage,
prohibited by gods laws, that is to say, the son to marye the mother, or
the stepmother carnally known by his father, the brother the sister, the
father his sons daughter, or his daughters daughter: or the son to marye
the daugher of his father procreate and borne by his stepmother: or the son to
mary his aunte, being his fathers or mothers sister: or to mary his uncles wife
carnally known by his uncle: or ye father to mary his sons wife carnally
known by his son: or the brother to marye his brothers wife carnally known by
his brother: or any man married, and carnally knowinge his wife, to marye his
wyfes daughter, or his wifes sons daughter, or his wyfes daughters daughter,
or his wyfes sister.

And further to dilate and declare the meaning of these prohibitions, It is to
be understand, that if it chance any man to know carnally any woman,
Prohibitio^s of marriage.
that then all and singular persons, being in any degree of consanguynitie
or affinity, as above written, to any of the parties so carnally offendinge,
shall be demed and adjudged to be within the cases and limittes of the said
prohbiitions of marriage. All which marriages all be it they be plainly
prohibit and detested by the laws of god, yet nevertheless at some times they
have proceeded under colors of dispensations by man's power which is but
usurped, and of right ought not to be granted admitted ne, allowed. For no
man, of what estate degree or condition so ever he be, has power to dispense
with gods laws, as all the clergy of this realm in the said conuocations,
and the most part of all the vniuersyties of chrystendome, and we also do
affirm and think.

BEIT therefore enacted by auctorytie before said, according as it is declared
and contained in the said act, made in the last parliament for the
establishement of your succession, that no person or persons, subjects or
resyauntes of this realm, or in any your dominions, of what estate degree or
dignity so ever they be, shall from henseforth mary within ye degrees before
rehearsed, what pretense so ever shall be made to the contrary thereof. And in
case any person or persons, of what estate dignity degree or condition so ever
they be, has been heretofore married within this realm, or in any other the
kings dominions, within any the degrees above rehearsed, and by any the
archebishoppes or ministers of the church of England be separate from the
bonds of such unlawful marriages: that then every such separation shall be good
laufull fyrme and permanent for ever, and not by any power authority or means
to be revoked or undone hereafter. And that the children proceeding or procreate
under such unlawful marriage, shall not be lauful ne legitimate: any foreyn laws
lycences dispe^sations, or other thing or things to the contrary thereof not
withstandinge. And that in case there be any person or persons within this
realm, or in any the kings dominions al ready married within any of the said
degrees above specified, and not yet separate from the bonds of such unlawful
marriage, that then every such person, so unlawfully married, shall be separate by
the diffinitiue sentence and judgment of the archebishops, bishops, and other
ministers of the church of England, and in other your dominions, within the
limittes of their jurisdictions and auctorities, and by none other power or
authority. And that all sentences and iugementes given and to be given by any
archbishop bishop or other minister of the church of England, or in any other
the kings dominions, within the limittes of their jurisdictions and
authority, shall be diffinitiue firm good and effectual to all intentes, and
be observed, and obeyed, without suing any prouocations, appeles, prohibitions,
or other process, from or to the court of Rome, to the derogation thereof, or
contrary to the act made sithen the beginning of the last parliament for
restrainte of such prouocations, appeles, prohibitions, and other processes.

And also be it enacted by authority before said, that all the issue hereafter
to be had and procreate between your highness, and your said most dear and
entierly beloved laufull wife Queen Jane, shall be your laufull children and
heirs, and be inheritable and inherit, according to the course of
inheritance and laws of this realm, the imperial crown of the same, with
all dignities, honors, preeminences, prerogatives, auctorities, and
jurisdictions to the same annexed or belonging, in as large and ample manner, as
your highness at this present time has the same as king of this realm, the
inheritance thereof to be and remain to your said children and right heirs in
manner and form as here after shall be declared, That is to say.

First the said imperial crown and other the premises, shall be to your
majesty and to your heirs of your body laufully begoten, that is to say,
Establisshement of the kings highness succession.
to the first son of your body between your highness and your said lawefull
wife queen Jane begoten, and to the heirs of the body of the same first son
laufully begoten. And for defaute of such heirs, than to the second son of
your body, and of the body of the said Queen Jane begoten, and to the heirs of
the body of the same second son laufully begoten, as aforesaid and so to
every son of your body, and of the body of the said queen Jane begoten, and
to the heirs of the body of every such son begoten, according to the course of
inheritance in that behalf.

And if it shall happen your said most dear and entierly beloved wife queen
Jane to decease without issue male of the body of your highness to be begoten
(which god defend) then the same imperial crown, and all other the premises
to be to your majesty, as is before said, and to the son and heir male of
your body laufully begotten by any other laufull wife, and to the heirs of the
body of the same son and heir male laufully begoten. And for defaute of such
issue, than to your second son of your body laufully begoten, and to the
heirs of the body of the same second son laufully begoten: and so from son
and heir male, to son and heir male, and to the heirs of the several
bodies of every such son and heir male laufully begoten, according to the
course of inheritance, in like manner and form, as is above said.

And for defaute of such sons of your body lawfully begotten: and of the
heirs of the several bodies of every such son laufully begoten, that then
the said imperial crown, and other the premises, shall be to the issue
female between your majesty and your said most dear and entyerly beloved
wife Queen Jane begoten: And for lack of such issue, than to the heirs
females of your body, laufully begotten by any other lawful wife: that is to
say: First to the eldeste issue female, and to the heirs of her body
laufully begotten, and so from issue female to issue female, and to their
heirs of their bodies one after an other by course of inheritance, according
to their ages, as the crown of England has been accustomed and ought to
succeed and go, in case when there is heir female inheritable to the same.

And for as much as it stands at this present time in the only pleasure and
will of almighty god, whether your majesty shall have heirs begoten and
procreated between your highness and your said most dear and entierly beloved
wife queen Jane, orelles any laufull heirs and issues hereafter of your own
body begoten by any other laufull wife, and if such heirs should fail (as god
defend) and no provision made in your life, who should rule and govern this
realm for lack of such heirs: that then this realm after your transitory
life shall be destitute of a laufull governor: Or else parcase encombred with
such a person, that would covet to aspire to the same, whom the subjects
of this realm shall not find in their hearts to love dread and obediently
serve as their sovereign lord. And if your grace before it may be certaynely
known, whether ye shall have heirs or no, should sodaynely name and declare
any person or persons to succeed after your decease, and for lack of heirs
of your body lawefully begotten, into the royal estate of the imperial crown
of this realm: thanne it is to be doubted, that such person that should be so
named, might happen to take great heart and courage, and by presumption fall to
inobedience and rebellion by occasion of which premises great division and
discention may be and is very likely to arise and spring in this realm, to
the great peril and destruction of us your most humble and obedyent
subjects, and of all our posterities, if remedy for the same should not be
provided. For reformation and remedy whereof, we your most bounden and loving
subjects, most obediently knowleginge, that your majesty most victoriously
prudently po^kely and indifferently has maynteyned defended governed and ruled
this realm, in good peace rest quietness and obedience, during all the time of
your most gracious reign, which we most heartily desire moughte continue for
ever, puttinge all our hole trust and confydence in your highenes, and
nothing doubting, but that your majesty, if ye should faylle heirs of your
body laufully begotten (which god defend) for the hearty love and fervent
affection, that ye bear to this realm, and for auoydinge all the occasions of
division before rehearsed, so ernestly minds the wealth of the same, that ye can
best and most prudently provide such a governor for us and this your realm,
as shall and will succeed and follow in the just and right trade of all your
procedinges, and maynteyne keep and defend the same, and all the laws and
ordinances establisshed in your most gracious time for the wealth of this
realm, which al we desire, whereby we your said most louinge and obedient
subjects, and our heirs and successors shall and may live, as nere as may be,
in as good peace unity and obedience after your decesse, as we have lived in
the time of your most gracious reign, ^o therefore most humbly beseech your
highness, that it may be enacted, for avoiding of all ambiguities, doubts
deuisions and occasions in that behalf, by your most royal majesty, by the
assente of us the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this your
present parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that your highness
shall have full and plenar power and authority, to give dispose appoynte
assign declare and limitte by your letters patentes under your great seal, or
else by your last will made in writing, and assigned with your most gracious
hand, at your only pleasure from time to time, hereafter the imperial crown
of this realm and all other the premises thereunto belonginge, to be remain
succeed and come after your decease, and for lack of laweful heirs of your
body to be procreated and begotten as is before limited by this act, to such
person or persons in possession and remaynder, as shall please your highness, and
according to such astate, Letters pate^
and after such manner form facion order and condition, as shall be expressed
declared named and limited in your said letters patentes, or by your said
last will. And we your most humble and obedient subjects do faithfully
promise to your majesty by one common assent, that after your deceasse and for
lack of heirs of your body laufully begotten, as is before rehearsed, we our
heirs and successors shall accept and take, love dread serve and alonely
obey such person and persons, males or females, as your majesty shall give your
said imperial crown unto by authority of this act, and to none other, and
holly to stick to them as true and faithful subjects ought to do, to their
regal rulers governors and supreme heads.

And for sure corroboration thereof be it further enacted by authority before
said, that such person and persons, as to whom it shall please your majesty
to dispose limitte and assign your said crown, and other the premises thereto
apperteininge, by your letters patentes, or by your last will, as is
aforesaid, shall have and enjoy the same after your decease, and for lack of
heirs of your body lawfully begotten, according to such astate, and after
such manner form facion order and condition, as shall be thereof expressed
mentioned and contained in your said letters patentes, or in your said last
will, in as large and ample manner, as if such person and persons had be your
laufull heirs to the imperial crown of this realm, and as if the same
crown of this realm had be given and limited to them plainly and
particularly by special names and sufficient terms and words by the full and
immediate authority of this your most high court of parliament.

And it is further enacted by authority aforesaid, that if any of your heirs
or children hereafter do usurp the one of them upon the other in the crown
of this realm, or claim or challenge your said imperial crown in any other
form or degree of discente or succession then is before lymytted by this act:
Or if any person or persons, to whom it shall please your highness of your most
excellent goodness, by authority of this act to give and dispose your said
crown and dignity of this realm, or the heirs of any of them, do at any
time hereafter demand challenge or claim your said crown of this realm,
other wise or in any other course form degree or condition, then the same
shall be given disposed and limited unto them by your highness, by virtue and
authority of this act. Or if any such person or persons, to whom your
majesty shall hereafter give or dispose your said crown by authority of this
act, or any of their heirs, do interrupte or let any of the heirs of your
majesty, that is or shall be begoten, borne, and procreated under your laufull
pure sincere and undoubted marriage now had and solempnised between your highness
and your said most dear and entierly beloved wife queen Jane, or any other
your laufull heirs here after to be begoten of your body by any other laufull
marriage, peasably and quietly to keep have and enjoy the said imperial
crown, and other the premysses, by course of inheritance according to the
limitation thereof, expressed and declared by this act, that then all and
singular the offenders in any of the premises contrary to this act, Treason.
and all their abbetours mainteinours fautours counsaylours and aydours therein,
shall be demed and adjudged high traitors to the realm. And that every such
offense shall be accepted reputed and taken to be high treason, and the
offenders therein, their aidours maynteinours fautours consaylours and
abettours and every of them, for every such offense shall suffer such judgment
and peines of death, losses and forfaitures of lands goods and privileges of
sainctuary, as in any cases of high treason. And over that as well your said
heirs and children, as every such person and persons, to whom your highness
shall limitte your said crown, in form as is aforesaid, and every of their
heirs for every such offense above specified, by them or any of them, to be
committed, shall lose and forfaite as well all such right title and intereste,
that they may claim or challenge in or to the crown of this realm, as
heirs by descent, (...) by reason of any gift or act that shall be done by your
highness, for his or their advancement, by authority of this act, or other
wise by any manner of means or pretense what so ever it be.

And be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, of what astate degree dignity or condition so ever they be, at any
(...) hereafter, by words writing imprintinge, or by any exterior act or
deed, maliciously or willingly procure, or do or cause to be procured or done
directly or indirectly, any thing or things, to the peril of your most
royal person, or to the peril of the person of any your heirs or successors
ha^ng the royal estate of the crown of this realm: or maliciously or
wyllingly give occasion by words writing print deed or act, whereby your
highness or any your said heirs or successors, having the royal estate of
the crown of this realm, might be disturbed or interrupted of the crown of
this realm: Or by words writing print deed or act procure or do, or cause to
be procured or done any thing or things, to or for the interruptio^ repele or
adnullation of this act, or of any thing therein contained, or of any thing
that shall be done by your highness in the limittation and dispotion of your
crown by authority of ye same. Or by words writing print deed or act procure
or cause to be procured or done any thing or things, to the prejudice sclander
disturbance or derogation of the said laufull matrimony, solemp^ised between
your majesty and the said queen Jane, or any other your lauful wife or wives
hereafter by your highness to be taken: Or to ye peril sclander or disherison of
any of the issues and heirs of your highness, being lymitted by this act to
enherite, and to be inheritable to the crown of this realm, in such form as
is aforesaid: Or to the interruption or disherison of any such person or
persons, to whom your highness shall assign and dispose your said imperial
crown by authority of this act, as is before remembered: whereby any such issues
or heirs of your highness, or such other person or persons, might be distroied
disturbed or interrupted in fame body or title of the inheritance to the crown
of this realm, as to them is limited in this act, inform above rehearsed, or
as to them shall be limited and assigned by your highness, by virtue and
authority of this act. Or if any person or persons by words writing
imprinting or any other exterior act directly or indirectly accept or take,
judge or believe any of the marriages had and solempnised between the kings
highness and the said lady Katharine, or between the kings highness and the
said late queen Anne, to be good lauful or of any effect. Or by words writing
printinge or any other exterior act directly or indirectly, sclander
interrupte empeche gaynsaye or impugn the lawefull judgments and sentences
of the said most reverend father in god, Thomas archbishop of Canturbury and
primate of all England, for and concerning the deuorces and separations of the
said unlawful maryages or any of them. Or by words writing print or any
other exterior act directly or indirectly, take, accept, name, or call by any
pretense any of the children borne and procreated under any of the said
unlawful marriages, to be legittimate and lauful children of your majesty. Or if
any person or persons craftily ymagine inuente or attempt by color of any
pretense to deprive the kings highness, the queen, or the heirs of their
bodies begotten, or any other the heirs of the kings body laufully begotten,
or any person or persons, to whom the kings highness shall dispose give and
limit the crown of this realm, by authority of this act, of any of their
titles styles names degrees or royal estates or regal power. Or if any person
or persons at any time hereafter, being required or commanded by the kings
highness, or by such person or persons, as shall be auctorised by his grace or his
laufull heirs to make or take an oath, to answer to such questions and
interrogatories, as shall be objected to them, upon any clause, article, sentence
or word, contained in this act, do contemptuously or utterly refuse to make
or take such oath, or without frustratorie delay do not make or take the same
oath: or after the making or taking such oath, do contemptuously refuse directly
to answer to such questions and interrogatories, as shall be objected
concerning the same or any part thereof: that then every such person and
persons, of what astate degree or condition so ever he or they be, and their
aydours, counsayllours, maynteynours and abettours, and every of them, for
every such offense before declared, Treason.
shall be adjudged high traitors. And that every such offense before especified,
shall be adjudged high treason, and the offenders therein and their aidours
counsailours mainteinours and abettours, and every of them being laufully
convict of any such offense by presentment verdite confession or process,
according to the custom and laws of this realm, shall suffer peynes of death,
as in cases of high treason. And that also every such offendour, being conuicte
as is aforesaid, shall lose and forfaite to your highness, and to your heirs or
successors kings or regal rulers of this realm, all such manours lands
tenementes rentes annuities and hereditamentes, which they had in possession as
owners, or were sole seized of by or in any right title or means, or any other
person or persons had to their use of any estate of enheritance, at the day of
such treasons and offenses by them committed and done. And shall also lose and
forfaite to your highness and your said heirs, as well all manner such estates
of freeholde and interest for years of lands and rentes, as all other goods
cattalles and dettes, which they had at the time of their conviction or
atteinder, of any such offense: Saving always to every such person and persons
and bodies politic, to their heirs assigns and successors, and to the
heirs and successors of every of them (other then such persons as shall be so
conuicte or atteinted, and their heirs and successors, and all other
clayminge to their uses) all such right, title, use, interest, possession,
condition, rentes, fees, offices, annuities, and commens, which they or any of
them shall have in or upon any such manours lands tenementes rentes annuities
or hereditamentes, that shall so happen to be lost and forfaite by reason of
any conviction or atteynder, for any the treasons and offenses above rehearsed,
at any time before the said treasons and offenses committed.

Be it also enacted by authority aforsaid, that no person or persons,
offending in any the treasons contained and limited by this act, or in any
other treasons, shall in any wise have and enjoy the privilege or immunitie of
any manner sainctuarie within this realm, or else where, within any the kings
dominions: but shall utterly lose, and be excluded of the same: any use, grant,
Sainctuary.
custom, prescription, confirmation, or any other thing or things to the
contrary hereof in any wise not withstandinge.

And be it also enacted by authority aforesaid, that if your majesty shall
happen to deceasse before any such your issue and heir male of your body,
which should inherit the crown of this realm, shall be of his age of.xviii.
years, or before that such your issue and heir female, which should inherit
the crown of this realm, shall be married, or be of the age of.xvi. years,
which almighty god defend) that than the said issue and heir male to the
crown, so being within the age of.xviii. years, or your said issue and heir
female to the crown, so being unmarried, or within the said age of.xvi. years,
shall be and remain, until such time as such issues and heirs shall come to
their said several ages before limited, at and in the governance of their
natural mother, and of such other your counsaylours and nobles of your
realm, as your highness shall limitte and appoint by your last will made in
writynge, sygned with your most gracyous hand, if it shall be thought by
your highness most conuenyent so to be: or else the said yssues and heirs
shall be at and in the governance of such of your counsaylours and nobles of
your realm, as your majesty shall name and appoint by your last will made in
writynge, and signed with your most gracyous hand, as is aforesaid. And if
any person or persons, by writing, Treason.
printing, or exterior deed or act, directly or indirectly, procure or do, or
cause to be procured or done, any thing or things, to the let or
distourbance of the same: that than every such offense shall be high treason,
and the offenders being thereof convicted, shall suffer such peynes of death
and loss of inheritance, privileges of sainctuaries, freeholdes, interestes
for years, goods, cattalles, and dettes, in such manner and form as is above
specified in cases of treason before mentioned.

AND for the more sure establishment of the succession of your most royal
majesty, according to the tenor and form of this act, Be it further
enacted by auctorytie aforesaid, that as well all the nobles of your realm
spiritual and temporal, as all other your subjects now living and being,
or that hereafter shall be at their full ages, by the commandment of your
majesty, or of your heirs or successors, Oath.
at al times hereafter from time to time wha^ it shall please your highness, or
your heirs or successors to apoynt, shall make a corporal oath in ye presence
of your highness, or your heirs or successors, or before such other as your
majesty, or your heirs or successors will assign for ye same, for the
kepinge observing defending auowynge and maynteynynge of this act, and of all
things that shall be done by your hyghnes by authority thereof, according to
the tenor of an oath hereafter ensuinge, That is to say: Ye shall swear, to
bear faith truth and obedience all only to the kings majesty, supreme heed
in earth under god of the church of England, during his life, and to his
heirs of his body of his most diere and entierly beloved lauful wife queen
Jane, begoten and to be begoten and procreated: And further to the heirs of
our said sovereign lord, according to the limittation in the statute made for
surety of his succession in the crown of this realm, in the parliament
begone and holden at Westminster in the.viii. day of June, in the.xxviii.
year of the kings most gracious reign. And also for lack of such heirs, to
such person and persons as the kings highness shall limitte and appoint to
succeed to ye crown, by virtue and authority of the same act, and not to any
other within this realm, nor foreine authority power or potentate. And in case
any other oath be made, or has be made by you to any person or persons: yt
then ye to repute the same as vain and adnichilate. And that to your counninge
writ and vttermooste of your power, without gyle, fraud, or other vndewe
manner, ye shall observe keep maynteine and defend the said act of succession
made in the said parliament, begone and holden at westmynster in the said.viii.
day of June, in the said.xxviii. year of the kings most royal reign, and all the holle effects and contents thereof, and al things that shall be done by
the kings highness by authority of the same, and all other acts and statutes
made in confirmation or for execution of ye same, or of any thing therein
contained: and this ye shall do against al manner of persons, of what estate
dignity degree or condition so ^uer they be: and in no wise do or attempt,
nor to your power suffer to be done or attempted directly or indirectly any
thing or things privily or appertely, to the let hinderaunce damage or
derogation thereof, or of any part of the same, or of any thing or things,
that shall be done by the kings highness, by virtue or authority of the said
act, by any manner of means, or for any manner of pretense, so help you god, al
saints, and the holy Euangelistis.

And it is also enacted by authority before said, that all manner your
subjects, as well spirytuall as temporal, suynge lyuerey, or ouster le main,
out of the hands of your highness, or of your heirs or successors, or
doing any feyltie to your highness, or to your heirs or successors, by
reason of tenure of their lands, shall swear the said corporal Oath above
mencyoned. And that they nor any of them, shall here after have any lyuereys,
oustre le main, or restytution out of your hands, nor out of the hands of
your heirs or successors, tylle they shall have made the said corporal
Oath, in form above rehearsed. And if any person or persons, being
commanded by auctorytye of this act, to make the said Oath before lymytted,
obstynately or wylfullye refuse that to do, or will proteste and say, when
they shall be examyned upon any interrogatories, that shall be objected to
them, for or concerning this act, or any thing therein contained, that they
be not bound to declare their thought and conscience, and styffely thereon
abide: that then every such person so doing, for every such offense shall
be taken and accepted for offendour in high treason.

And that every such refusell shall be demed and adjudged high treason,
Treason.
and the offendour therein, being as before is limited, lawefullye convicted or
attemted thereof, by the laws of this realm, shall suffer such peines of
death losses and forfaitures, and also lose privileges of saintuaries, in like
manner and form as is above mentioned, for the treasons before limited by this
act.

And be it further enacted by authority of this present parliamente, that if
it shall please the kings majesty at any time here after, by his letters
patentes under his great seal, or by his last will made in wrytinge, Letters
patentes.
and ligned with his most gracious hand, to auaunce any person or persons of
his most royal blood to any title style or name, of any estate dignity or
honor, what so ever it be, and to give to them or to any of them any castelles
honors manours lands teneme^tes liberties fra^cheses, or other
hereditamentes, in fee simple fee tail or for term of their lives, or ye life
of any of them: that then al and every such letters patentes and last will of
his highness, so to be made to any such person or persons of his blood, shall be
good and effectual to them and every of them, according to the tenor
purporses and effects of every such letters patentes and last will. And that
the said person and persons, and every of them, shall have and enjoy as well
all such titles style and names of honor dignity and estate, which shall be
contained, and expressed in any such letters patentes or last will of the
kings hyghnes, as such castelles honors manours lands tenementes lyberties
francheses, and all other hereditamentes, which shall be specifyed and
mencyoned in every such letters patentes or last will in such manner form
fation and condition, and according to such estate or estates in the law, as
shall be expressed and limited in every such letters patentes or last will, in
as large and ample manner, to all intentes and purposes, as if the titles styles
and names of honor dygnitie and estate, and the castelles honors manours
lands tenementes lyberties francheses and other hereditamentes, which shall
be comprysed in any such letters patentes or last will to be made, were all
redye yeuen by good and sufficient letters patentes to such person or
persons, of the kings blood by their special names and surnames, and ratyfyed
and confyrmed by authority of this present parlyame^te. Or as if the names of
such person and persons, so being of the kings bloudde, and such titles
styles names castelles honors manours lands tenementes lyberties francheses
or other hereditamentes, had been specially named and expressed in this act,
and given to such person and persons of the kings blood by their propre
names and surnames, by sufficient words terms clauses and sentences,
immediately by authority of this present parliament. Sauinge to al and every
person and persons and bodies politic, and to their heirs assigns and
successors other than to the kings highness, his heirs or successors, al
such right title interest possession rentes annulties fees offices comens
rightes interestes petitions conditions, and all other hereditamentes, which
they or any of them may or might claim of in or to any the said titles styles
names, castelles honors manours lands tenementes liberties fra^cheses and
other heredytamentes contained or mentioned in any such letters patentes or
last will, in as large and ample manner, as if this act had never be had nor
made.

AND BE it finally enacted by authority before said, that this present act,
and every clause article and sentence comprised in the same shall be taken, and
accepted, according to the plain words and sentences therein contained, and
shall not be interpreted nor expounded by color of any prete^se or cause, or
by any subtle arguments inventions or reasons, to the hynderance disturbance
or derogation of this act, or any part thereof: Any thing or things act or
acts of parlyament here to fore made, or here after to be had done or made to
the contrary thereof not withstanding. And that every act statute law
provision thing and things heretofore had or made, or here after to be had
done or made, contrary to the effect of this statute, shall be void and of no
value nor force.

An act for continuance of the statutes against the caryage of brass
latenne and coper out of this realm, And for making of cables and ropes: for
the wyndynge of wolles, and against killing of weynelynges under the age of
two years. Cap. viii.
WHere in the last parlyamente begone and holden at London the third day of
November, in the.xxi. year of the kings most gracious reign, and from thens
adiorned to westminster, and there holden and continued by diverse prorogations,
until the dissolution thereof, it was ordained and established amongst other
things one act for restrayning the caryages of brass, Brass, laten and
copper.
latten, and coper out of this realm: And also one other act was made in this
parliament for the true making of cables halsers and ropes: Cables, halsers
ropes. wynding of wolles. Killing of weinlynges.
One other act for the true windinge of wolles: and one other act to
restrain killing of weinelinges bullockes steres or hester, being under the
age of two years. All which four several acts were made to continue and
endure to the next parliament, as by the said acts more plainly appears. For
as much as the said several acts, and every of them, be necessary for the
commonwealth of this realm, be it therefore enacted by authority of this
present parliament, that the said four several acts, and all clauses
articles and provisions therein contained, shall from hensforthe be and stand
good and effectual, and to endure and continue until the last day of the
next parlyament.

In act for continuance of the statutes of petiurie, for making of iayles, for
pewteres, and for sowynge of flax and hemp. Cap. ix.
WHere in the parliament begone and holden at London the third day of
Nouembre, and from thense adiourned to westminster, and there holden and
continued by prorogatio^ unto the.xv. day of January, in the.xxiii. year of
the reign of our most dradde sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. Atteynt.
Perjury. Iayle.
it was then in that sessio^ of the said parliament one act made and
established for the atteintes to be sued for punissheme^t of periurye upon
untrue verdictes, which act was then made to endure to the last day of the
next parliament. And where also in the said session of the said parliament
one act was made and established, for making of iayles in diverse shires of
this realm, which act was than made to continue and endure for one year
next after the end of the same parliament. And where also in the time of the
same parliament, Pewterers
one other act was made concerning pewterers, which act was also made to
endure to the last day of the next parliament. And also in the time of the said
parliament one other act was made concerning sowinge of flax and hemp, Flax
and hemp.
which act also was made to continue and endure to the last day of th next
parliament, as by the said four several acts more plainly appears. For as
much as the said four acts be good and beneficial for the commonwealth of
this realm, be it therefore enacted by authority of this present parliament,
that the said four acts, and every of them, and al clauses articles and
prouisio^s therein contained, shall stand continue and endure in their force
and strength, and be observed and kept to the last day of the next
parliamente.

An act extinguishing the authority of the bishop of Rome. Ca. x.
FOr as much as not withstanding the good and wholesome laws ordinances and
statutes heretofore made enacted and established by the kings highness our
most gracious sovereign lord, and by the hole consent of his high court of
parliament for the extirpation abolution and extinguissment out of this realm,
and other his graces dominions seignories and contreis, of the pretended power
and usurped authority of the bishop of Rome, Byshope of Rome.
by some called the pope, used within the same or else where, concerning ye
same realm dominions segniories or countries, which did obfuscate and wreste
gods holy word and testament a long season from the spiritual and true
meaning thereof, to his worldelye and carnal affectyons, as pomp, glory,
auaryce, ambytion, and tyranny, covering and shadowinge the same, with his
humayne and polytike devises, traditions, and inventions, set forth to
promote and stablyshe his only domynion, both upon the sowles and also the
bodies and goods of all Christyan people excluding Christ out of his kingedome
and rule of man his soul, as much as he may, and all other temporal kings
and princes out of their dominions, which they ought to have by goddis law,
upon the bodies and goods of their subjects: whereby he did not only rob
the kings majesty, being only the supreme head of this his realm of England
immediately under god, of his honor, right, and preemynence, due unto him by
the law of god, but spoiled this his realm yearly of innumerable treasure,
and with the loss of the same, deceived the kings loving and obedient
subjects, perswadinge to them by his laws, bulls, and other his deceiuable
means, such dreams, vanities, and fantasies, as by the same many of them
were seduced and conveyed unto superstitious and erroneous opinions: so that
the kings majesty, the lords spirytuall and temporal, and the commons in
this realm being ouerweried and fatigated, with thexperience of the infinite
abominations and mischefes procedinge of his impostures, and craftily
coloring of his deceites, to the great damages of souls bodies and goods,
were forced of necessity for the public weal of this realm, to exclude
that foreign pretended power jurisdiction and authority, used and usurped
within this realm, and to deuyse such remedies for their relife in the same,
as does not only redounde to the honor of god, the high praise and
aduaunceme^t of the kings majesty, and of his realm, but also to the great
and inestimable utility of the same. And not withstandinge the said wholesome
laws so made, and heretofore establisshed, yet it is commen to the knowledge of
the kings highness, and also to diverse and many his loving faithful and
obedient subjects, how that diverse sedicious and contentious persons, being
impes of the said bisshoppe of Rome and his see, and in heart, members of his
pretended monarchy, do in corners and else where, as they dare, whisper
inculke preach and persuade, and from time to time instill in to the ears and
heads of the pore simple and unlettered people, the advancement and
continuance of the said bishops feined and pretended authority, pretending
the same to have his ground and original of gods law, whereby the opinions of
many be suspended, their iugementes corrupted and deceived, and diversity in
opinions augme^ted and increased, to the great displeasure of almighty god, the
high discontentation of our said most dred souerain lord, and the interruption
of the unity love charity co^corde and agreement, that ought to be in a
christen region and congregation. For avoiding whereof and repression of the
folyes of such sedicious persons, as be the means and authors of such
inconveniences, Be it enacted ordained and established by the king our
sovereign lord, and the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in
this present parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, that if
any person or persons, dwelling demurring inhabiting or resiant within this
realm, or within any other the kings dominions seignouries or countries, or
the marches of the same, or else where within or under his obeisance and power
of what estate dygnitie preeminence order degree or condition so ever he or they
be, after ye last day of July, which shall be in the year of our lord
god.M.D.xxxvi. shall ^ writing cifring printing preching or teching, deed or
act obstinately or ^aliciousely hold or stand with, to extol setforth
maynteyne or defend the ^ctoritie jurisdiction or power of the bishop of Rome,
or of his see, hereto (...) claymed used or usurped within this realm or in
any dominion or cou^^ye being of within or under the kings power or
obeysaunce, or by any ^tence obstinately or maliciousely invent any thing for
thextollynge a^cement setting forth mainteinance or defense of the same, or any
part ^of, or by any pretense obstinately or maliciousely attribute any manner of
jurisdiction authority or preeminence to the said see of Rome, or to a^ bishop
of the same see for the time being, within this realm or in any the ^ges
dominions or countries: that then every such person or persons so doing or
offendinge, their aydoues, assistentes, comforters, abbettours, procurers,
maynteyners, fautours, counsaylours, concelours, and every of the^, being
thereof laufully convicted, according to the laws of this realm, for every
such defaulte and offense shall incur and run in to the dangers penalties
peines and forfaitures ordained and provided by the statute of provision and
praemunire, made in the.xvi. year of the reign of the noble and valiant prince
king Richard the second, against such as attempt procure or make provision
to the sea of Rome or else where, for any thing or things to the derogation or
contrary to the prerogative royal or jurisdiction of the crown and dignity
of this realm.

And to the entente that this act at all times may be well and trewly executed,
and the offendoues thereof have and receive condign punishment according to
their demerites, It is enacted by the authority before said, that as well
justices of assise in their circuites, Justices of assyse and peace.
as justices of peace within the limittes of their commission and auctorities,
or two of every such iusticiers of peace at the least, whereof one to be of the
quorum, shall have full po^ and authority to enquere of all offenses contemptes
and transgressions, parpetrated committed or done contrary to this act, in
like manner and form as they may of other offenses against the kings peace:
And shall certify every presentment before them or any of them had or made,
concerning this act or any part thereof, before the king in his benche,
within xl. days next after any such presentment had or made, if the term be
then open: And if not, thanne at the first day of the term, next following
the said.xl. days, upon peyn that every of the iusticiers of assise, or
iusticiers of peace, before whom such presentment shall be made, making
defaulte of such certificat contrary to this statute, to lose and forfaite
forty pounds to the kings highness.

And it is enacted by the authority before said, Certificat.
that the Iusticiars of the kings bench, as well upon every such certificat as
by enquery before them selfs within the limittes of their auctorities, shall
have full power and authority to here order and determine every such offense,
done or committed contrary this act, according to the laws of this realm,
in such like manner and form to all intentes and purposes, as if the person
or persons, ayen^ whom any presentment shall be had upon this estatute, had be
presented upon any matter or offense expressed in the said estatute, made in the
said.xv^ year of king Richard the second.

Visitations.
And it is also enacted by the authority before said, that al and every
arc^byshoppes bishops and archedeacons within this realm, their commissaries,
vycars general, and other their ministers, in every their visitation ^seanes,
Seanes.
shall make diligent insearche, enquerie, and examination of al and every
ecclesiastical and religious person within and of their jurisdiction, which
shall be suspected accused or demed to be a transgressour or offendour of this
act. And if upon such search inquiry and examination any ecclesiastical or
religious persons shall be presented suspected accused, or found culpable by
witness or confession, of any offense contrary to this act, and be present at
the time of such presentmente examination or accusation: that then every the
archbisshoppes bishops and archedeacons, their commissaries, vicars general,
and other their ministers, before or to whom any such person shall be presented
suspected accused or found culpable (as is before said) shall commit every
such person so presented suspected accused or found coulpable, if he be
present (as is aforesaid) to the next common iaile of the shyere, where such
enquitie examination or accusation shall be had or made, or else by good and
sufficient sureties, to be bounden by obligation to the kings use, shall let
every such person to bail by their discretions, to appear before the king
and his counsel in the sterre chaumbre at westmynster, within.xv. days next
after such inquiry presentment or accusation, if the term be then open and
kept, or else in the first day of the term next following after the same
enquerie presentment or accusation. And at the same day lymitted for such
apparaunce, they shall certify in to the said sterre chamber by writing
under their seals, as well the said bond and obligation taken for such
appearance, as the presentment examination accusation or conviction of every
such person, and all deposytions and circumstaunces thereof, and the name of
the iayle, where unto they have committed the said person. And if any such
ecclesiastical or religious person, being presented suspected or accused in
any seane or visitation, be not present at the time of the said seane or
visitation, as is before said, that then never the less every the said
archebisshoppes bishops and archedeacons, their commissaries, vicars
general, and all other their ministers, before or to whom any such
presentement suspection or accusation shall be had or made, shall certify every
such presentement suspection and accusation, and al circumstance thereof (as is
before said) in to the sterre chaumbre at westminster within.xv. days next after
such presentment suspection or accusation had or made, or in the first day of
the term next folowinge after such presentment suspection or accusation, in
such manner and form as is before rehearsed. And in case any ecclesiastical or
religious person, being presented suspected or accused of any offense done or
attempted contrary to this estatute, be thereof convicted by confession or
witness before any archebisshoppe bishop or arch^n, or before any the
commissaries, vycars general, or other their mini^, in their seanes or
visitations, or before the kings counsel in the (...) Chaumbre at
westminster: that then every such spiritual and religi^ person, so being
conuicte, shall suffer such peynes penalties and forfai^s, as be expressed in
the said statute made in the said.xvi. year of king ^harde the second.

It is also enacted by the authority before said, Ecclesiastical Judge.
that if any ecclesiastical ^ge or visitatour, do voluntarily concele cloak
hyde or color any present^ accusation or confession, Visitour.
that shall be made to him concerning this sta^, and do not certify every such
accusation presentment or confession be^ the king and his counsel in the
sterred chaumbre at westminster, in ^ch manner and form as is above specified
in this estatute: that then e^ry such ecclesiastical judge and visitatour, so
wilfully offendynge, for e^ry such default shall forfaite.xl. li. the one half
thereof to the kings high^s, the other half to such person as will sue for the
same by original wryt (...) plainte or information in any of the kings
courts, in which suite no ^yne protection or wager of law shall be admitted
nor allowed.

AND FOR stronger defense and mainteynaunce of this act, it is ordained and
enacted by authority before said, that all and every ecclesiastical judge,
ordynary, chancellor, commissarye, offycyall, vycar general, and other
ecclesiastical officer or minister, of what dignity preeminence or degree so
ever they shall be. And all and every temporal judge, iusticyar, ^yer,
bayliffe, shereffe, vndershereue, eschetour, alderman, iurate, constable,
hedborowe, Thyrdborow, borsolder, and every other lay officer and minister, to
be made created elected or admitted within this realm or any other the kings
domynyons, of what estate order degree or condition so ever he shall be, from and
after the said last day of July, shall before he take upon him the execution
of such office, Oath.
make take and receive a corporal oath upon the Euangelystes, before such
person or persons, as have or shall have authority to admit him, that he from
hensforth shall utterly renounce refuse relynquisshe or forsake the bishop of
Rome, and his authority power and jurisdiction: And that he shall never consent
nor agree, that the bishop of Rome shall practice exercise or have any manner of
authority jurisdiction or power within this realm, or any other the kings
dominions, but that he shall resist the same at all times to the vttermooste
of his power. Supreme head of the Church of England.
And that from hensforth he shall accept repute and take the kings majesty
to be the only supreme hedde in earth of the church of England. And that to
his cunninge wit and vttermooste of his power, without gyle fraud or other
vndew mean, he shall observe keep maynteyne and defend the holle effects and
contents of all and synguler acts and statutes made and to be made within
this realm, in derogation extirpation and extynguyshemente of the bishop of
Rome and his authority. And al other acts and statutes made and to be made in
reformation and corroboration of the kings power of supreme head in earth of
the church of England: and this he shall do ayenste all manner of persons, of
what estate dignity degree or condition they be, and in no wise do nor
attempt, nor to his power suffer to be done or attempted directly or indirectly
any thing or things pryuely or apartly, to the let hinderaunce damage or
derogation thereof, or of any part thereof, by any manner of means, or for any
manner of pretense. And in case any oath be made or has been made by him to any
person or persons in maynteynaunce defense or favor of the bisshoppe of Rome
or his authority jurisdiction or power he repute the same as vain and
adnichilate, so help him god all saints and the holy Euangeliste.

And it is also enacted by the authority before said, that all and every
person and persons spiritual and temporal, suyng lyuere restitutions or
utter le main out of the king, his heirs, or successors hands, or doing
any fealty to his highness his heirs or successors, or which shall be sworn
to the king his heirs or successors, or that shall have any office fee or
room of the most gracious gift of the kings majesty, his heirs or
successors, or shall be retained in service with his grace his heirs or
successors, shall make take and receive the said oath. And that also all and
every religious person, at the time of his or their profession or entree into
religion, and every other ecclesiastical person at the time of his taking
of orders, and all and every other person, which shall be promoted or preferred
to any degree of lernyng in any university within this realm or other the
kings dominions at the time of his promotion or preferment, and every of them,
shall make take and receive the said oath before his or their sovereign,
ordinary, or the commissarie of such university.

AND IT IS ALSO enacted by the authority before said, that if any person or
persons, lymitted or commanded by authority of this act to make the said
oath, or commanded by any other person or persons, auctorised by the
kings highness commission under his great seal, or his seal ordained for
causes ecclesiastical, Treason.
to make the said oath, obstinately refuse that to do: that then every such
offense and contempt shall be high treason, and the offenders thereof being
laufully convicted, shall suffer peynes of death and other forfaitures
penalties and losses, as is limited and accustomed in cases of high treason by
any laws or statutes of this realm heretofore made.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted, that this act nor any thing or things in
the same rehearsed mentioned or comprised, be in any wise prejudicial hurtefull
or derogatorie to the ceremonies uses and other laudable and politic
ordinances, Ceremonies.
for a tranquillity, discipline, concord, devotion, unity, and decent order
heretofore in the church of England used instituted taken and accepted, nor to
any person or persons accordingly using the same or any of them.

Provided always and be it enacted by authority of this pesente parliamente,
that this act, concerning the bishop of Rome or any thing to be done by
his usurped authority, shall no further bind nor extend to and upon the
kings subjects of his isle of Iersey, Gernesey, Iersey and Gernsey.
and Alderney, in any other manner form or condition, than it shall please the
kings highness, with the advice of his most honorable counsel, upon
consideration and examination of the state and disposition of his said Isles,
and the common welthe of the same hereafter to establishe, ordeyne, and declare
unto them by his gracious letters pate^tes, under his great seal: And that the
said letters patentes and every thing therein to be contained, shall be of the
same effect, strength, and virtue, as if they had been passed and enacted by
authority of parliament, any thing in the said act contained to the contrary
in any wise not withstandinge.

An act for restitution of the first fruits in time of vacation to the next
Incumbent. Cap. xi.
FOr as much as in the statute of the payement unto the kings majesty, his
heirs and successors, First fruits.
of the first fruits of spiritual promotions, offices, benefyces, and
dignities within this realm, and other the kings dominions, expres mention
and declaration is not had ne made, from what time the year shall be accounted,
in which the first fruits shall be dew and paiable to his highness, that is to
wit, whether immediately from the death resignation or deprivation of every
incumbente, or from the time of admission or new taking of possession in
every such promotion. And also by reason that in the same statute it is not
declared, who shall have the fruits tithes and other profittes of the said
benefices offices promotions and dignities spiritual, during the time of
vacation thereof, diverse of tharchebisshoppes and bishops of this realm,
have not only when the time of perceiving and taking of tithes, (that is to
say, wolle, lamb, corn, and hay, and tithes vsuallye paid at the holy
time of Easter) has approached, differred the collation of such benefices, as
have been of their own patronage, but also have upon presentations of clerks
made unto them by the just patrones, protracted and deferred, to institute,
inducte, and admit the same clerks, to the entente that they might have and
perceive to their own use, the same tithes growinge, during the vacation: So
that through such delays (over and above the first fruytes, which be justly
dew to the kings highness) they have been constrained also to lose all, or the
most part of one years profits of their benefices and promotions, and to
serve the cure at their and their friends propre costs and charges, or utterly
to forsake and give over their benefyces and promotions, to their great loss
and hynderaunce. For reformation whereof, it is ordained and enacted by the
king our sovereign lord, with the assente of the lords spiritual and
temporalle, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that the said year, Vacation.
in which the first fruits shall be paid to the kings grace, sha^ begin
and be accounted immediately after the auoydaunce or vacatio^ of any such
benefice or promotion spiritual before rehearsed. And that the tithes, fruits,
oblations, obuentions, emolumentes, commodities, aduauntages, rentes, and all
other what so ever revenues, casualties, or profits certain and uncertain,
affering or belonginge to any archedeaconry, deanery, prebende, personage,
vicarage, hospitalle, wardeyneshippe, prouosteshippe, Chantries.
or other spiritual promotion, benefice, dignity, or office, (chauntries
only except) within this realm, or other the kings dominynions, growinge,
rysinge, or coming, during the time of vacation of the same promotion
spiritual, shall belong and affere to such person, as shall be thereunto
next presented, promoted, instituted, inducted, or admitted, and to his
executours, toward the payment of the first fruits, to the kings highness,
his heirs and successors: Any usage, custom, liberty, privilege, or
prescription to the contrary had used or being in any wise notwithstanding.

AND IT IS also enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any archebisshoppe,
bisshoppe, archedeacon, ordynary, or any other person or persons, to their
uses and behoof, at any time heretofore sithe the first day of May last
paste, have perceived, received, or taken, or at any time hereafter do
perceive, receive, or take the fruits, tithes, obuentions, oblations,
emolumentes, commodities, revenues, rentes, aduauntages, profittes or
casualties, coming, growinge, or belonging, or which hereafter shall comme
grow affere or belong to any archedeaconrye, deanrye, prebende, personage,
vycarage, hospital, wardeyneshippe, prouostshippe, or other spiritual
promotion, benefyce, dignity, or office (chauntries only excepted) within
this realm or other the kings dominions, during the vacation of such
archedeaconry, deanery prebende, personage, vycarage, hospital, wardeyneshippe,
prouosteshippe, or other spiritual promotion, benefice, dignity, or office
(chauntries only excepted) And the same upon reasonable request from
hensforth to be made, does not render, restore, satisfy, Incumbent.
content, and pay to the next Incumbent, being laufullye instituted,
inducted, or admitted to such archdeaconrye, deanrye, prebende, personage, or
vycarage, or other promotion, benefice, dignity, or office spiritual, except
before excepted: or do let or interrupte the said Incumbente to have the same:
that then every archebisshop, bishop, archedeacon, ordinary, or other person
so doing, shall forfaite and lose the treble value of so much as he shall then
have received of the fruits of every prebend, personage, vycarage, hospital,
wardeyneshippe, prouosteshippe, or other spiritual promotion, whereof he so
shall perceive, receive, or deteyne, let, or interrupte the Incumbent, to
perceive, receive, and have the fruits, tithes, obuentions, oblations,
emolumentes, commodities, revenues, rentes, advantages, profittes, or
casualties: The moytie of which forfayture shall be to the king our
sovereign lord, and the other moytie thereof to the Incumbent of the same
prebende, personage, or vicarage, or other spiritual ^tion, to be recovered in
any of the kings courts by action, bylle, ^nte, information, or other wise,
in which action or suite the defendante ^ll not be admitted to wage his law,
nor any protection or essoine shall be (...) the defendaunte allowed.

Provided always, that it shall be lefull to every archbishop, bishop,
arch^con, and ordinary, their officers and ministers, to retain in his or
their ^todie, so much of the tithes, fruits, obuentions, oblations,
emolumen^s, commodities, aduauntages, rentes, revenues, casualties, and
profits, ^s shall amount to pay unto such person or persons, as has or shall
serve (...) keep the cure of such archedeaconry, deanery, prebende, personage,
Salary.
or vi^age, or other spiritual promotion, during the vacation, his or their
reasonable stypende, or salarie. And also for the collection gathering and
leuing of such tithes, fruits, emolumentes, rentes, and other profittes, ry^ge
and growing during the vacation aforesaid: any thing in this act ^teyned to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in
case any of the incumbentes aforesaid, happen to dye, Glebe lands.
and before his death has caused any of his glebe lands to be manured and
sown at his propre costs and charges with any corn or grain: that then in
that case all and every of the same incumbentes may make and declare their
testamentes of all the profits of the corn, growing upon the same glebe
lands so manured and sown: Any thing contained in this present act in
(...) wise notwithstanding.

And where also before this time diverse and many persons, vicars, and other
spiritual persons, being seized, for term of their lives, of and in the
said spiritual promotions before named, Leases.
as well for great sommes of money to them before hand paid, as for other
causes and considerations, have let in ferme for term of years, by sufficient
writings, their said personages, vycarages, and other spiritual promotions,
or part thereof, unto diverse and many of the kings subjects, and after such
leases by them so made, the leassours thereof have often times used to resign
their said benefices or spiritual promotyons, so demysed and letten in ferme:
Personage or vycarage, let to ferme.
by reason of which resignation and other the acts of the said leassours, the
said benefices and other spiritual promotions have been void, and the title
and interestes of the said leasses, has been thereby adnychylate, and of none
effect in the law, contrary to right and good conscience. For reformation
whereof, and for a quietness the better hereafter to be had and continued
between the kings subjects. Be it enacted by authority of this present
parliament, that from the foresaid first day of May last pass, no manner
of such lease, by sufficient wrytinge heretofore made, nor hereafter to be
made by any spiritual person within this realm of England, Wales, or the
marches of the same, to any lay person, of any personage, vycarage, or other
spiritual promotion aforesaid within this realm upon which leasse the rent
and services reserved, with other the yerly char^ges of the leasse, as in
serving the cure and otherwise, shall amount within fortye shillinges by the
year, of as much as the said personage, vycarage, or other spiritual
promotion aforesaid, so letten, is rated and valewed at, upon the kings
books, for payinge the first fruits, shall be adiuged void adnichilate or
determined, by reason of any such resignation or other auoydance of the said
benefice or spiritual promotion so letten by the only act of the said
leassour, but that every such leassee or grauntee of any such benefices or
spiritual promotions aforesaid, their executours or assigns, shall have and
may enjoy their terms and interestes of and in the same, for ye term of six
years to be accounted next and immediately after the said auoydance, if the
said leassour do so long live, and the lease so by him before made, do so
long continue and endure. And that after such auoydaunce, the successor or
successors of every such leassour, shall and may distreyne for the rent and
services so reserved, and have their actions of debt and all other advantages
by way of action enter or otherwise, against the said lessee, his executours,
or assigns, for recouerye of the said rent and couenauntes upon the said
lease reserved, as the lessour thereof might have had, if no such auoydance
had been had.

And further be it enacted by the authority before said, that if hereafter it
happen any such lessour to deceasse and dye before the end of the term by him
so made, and that there be one year at least to come of the said term: that
then it shall be lawefull to the lessee thereof, his executours or assigns, to
hold and enjoy their said leasse to thend of the same year, wherein he is so
entered at the time of his said lessours death, if his said lease do so long
continewe, bearinge and payenge unto the successoure of every such lessour all
such rent and services, as for the remenaunce of the said year, shall upon
every such lease be dew: for the recovery whereof the said successor shall
and may have all such ways and aduauntages as before is limited and given
to the successoure, where his predecessor makes such lease and resygneth.

Mansyon ^ouse of personage or vyrage.
Provided always, that every successor after the death of his predecessor may
and shall have upon one months warning after the time of his induction, the
mancyon house of every such personage, vicarage, or other spiritual promotion
aforesaid, with the glebe belonginge to the same not being sown at the time
of his said predecessors death, for mayntenaunce of his householde, deductinge
therefore in his rent as heretofore has been borne for the same, or as it is
reasonably worth: any thing in this said act contained to the contrary not
withstandinge.

Fruits of vacation.
Provided always, that if the fruits of the vacation of the said spiritual
promotions be not sufficient to pay the curates stypende and wages for seruyng
the cure the vacation time, Curate.
that then the same to be borne and paid by the next incumbent within.xiiii.
days next after that he has the possession of any of the said promotions
spiritual.

An act declarynge the lymittes of the kings palayce of westmynster. Cap. xii.
FOR AS MUCH AS THE KINGS palayce at Westmynster, builded and edyfyed there,
Kings parlee sa^ce at westminster.
before the time of mind, by and nygh unto the monastery, and abbey of saint
Peter of Westmynster, in the county of Myddelsex, is and of long time has been in utter ruin and decay; And that our most drad sovereign lord king
HENRY the eight, king of England and of France, defendour of the Faith,
lord of Irelande, and Supreme head in earth of the Church of England, has
lately opteyned and pourchased one great mansion place and house, sometime
parcel of the possessions and inheritance of the Archebishopriche of york,
sytuate and being in the town of westmynster, in the same county, not much
distaunte from the same ancient Palayce. And the kings highness as we of late
upon the soil of the said mansion place, and house, and upon the ground
thereunto adioyninge, most sumptuousely and curiousely has builded and
edified many and distinct beautyfulle costely and plesaunte lodgings,
buyldynges, and mansyons, for his gracys syngular pleasure, comfort, and
commodytie, to the greatte honor of his hyghnes and of his realm, and
thereunto adioyninge has made a Park, walled and enuyronned with brycke and
stone, and therein has devised and ordeydeyned many and syngular commodious
things, pleasures, and other necessaries, most apt and convenient to
appertain only to so noble a prince, for his singular comfort, pastime, and
solace: Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present parliament,
that all the said soil ground mansion and buyldinges, and the said park,
with all other things commodyties and plasures thereupon made builded and
devised, as is aforesaid, and also the soil of the said ancient palaice,
shall be from hensforth ye kings hole palaice at Westminster, and so to be taken
demed reputed called and named the kings palaice at westminster for ever. And
that ye same palaice shall from hensforthe extend and be as well within the
soil and places before limited and appointed for the same, as also in all the
street or way ledinge from Charinge Cross, unto the seintuarie gate at
westminster before said, and in all the houses buyldinges lands and tenementes
on both the sides of the same street or way, from the said Cross unto
westminster halle, situate lyinge or being between the water of the Thames of
the east part, and the said park wall of the weste part, and so forth
through all the soil precinct and limittes of the said old palace.

AND THAT the said palayce now made by the authority of this act, shall from
hensforth have and enjoy within the precinct, limittes, and bounds before
expressed and declared of and for the same, al such and like prerogatives,
lyberties, preemynences, iurisdyctions, and pryuyleges, as to the kings
aunciente palaice within this realm, have at any time heretofore belonged used
or of right apperteined. And that the same old and ancient palace of
westminster from hensforth be reputed demed and taken only as a member and
parcel of the said new palaice, made by this act, as is aforesaid: any
prescription record or usage heretofore had used or allowed to the contrary
notwithstanding. Sauinge to al and singular person and persons, bodies polyke
and corporate, their heirs and successors, and every of them, al such right
title interest possession rentes reuertion remaindre distress actio^ lease
leases grau^tes annuiries suites petitions and conditions in such manner and
form as they or any of them, their heirs and successors, or the heirs and
successors of any of them, have had, should, might, or ought to have had in
the premysses or any parcel thereof, if this act had never ben had ne made:
any thing in this act contained to the contrary not withstanding.

Provided always that this present act, nor any thing therein contained, be in
any wise preiudicyall or hurtful to Wyllyam Babyngton, keeper of our old
palaice of westmynster, his heirs nor assigns, for or concerning his said
office, but that it shall be lefull to the said Wyllyam Babington, his heirs,
and assigns, to have hold, occupye, exercise, and enjoy the said office of
keeper of the said palaice at westmynster, with all commodities, profytes,
aduauntages, and other emolumentes, rysynge or growinge of the same office, in
as large and ample manner as if this presentt act had not benne made: any
thing in this present act to the contrary heretofore not withstanding.

An act compellynge spiritual persons to keep residence upon their
benefices. Cap. xiii.
WHere as in the parliament begone at London, the their day of Nouembre, in
the.xxi. year of the reine of our sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. and from
thens adiorned and proroged to ye palaice of Westminster, the.xvii. day of
Decembre than next ensuinge, amongst other good acts and ordinances, then
and there by the authority of the said parlyament, it was establyshed,
ordained, and enacted, that as well every spiritual person, then being promoted
to any archdeconry deanery or dignity in any monastery or cathedral church,
or other church conuentual or collegial or being beneficed with any personage
or vicarage, as al and every spiritual person and persons, which should after
the feast of saint Mychaell tharchaungell, which was in the foresaid.xxi.
year of the reine of our said sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. Residence.
be promoted to any of the said dignities or benefices with any personage or
vicarage, should from the said feast of saint Mychaell tharchaungell, be
personally residente and abydinge at and upon his said dignity prebende or
benefice or at one of them at the least. And in case any such spiritual person,
at any time after the said feast, kept not residence at one of his said
dignities prebende or ^ices (as is before said) but absent him self wilfully by
the space of one ^eth together, or by the space of two months, to be
accounted at several times in any one year, and make his residence and
abidinge in any other places by such time: that then he shall forfayte for
every such defaulte (...) sterlynge, as in the same act more plainly does
appear. In which a^e among other provisions contained and specyfyed in the
same, it was ^uided, that the said act of none residence should not in any
wise extend (...) be preiuditiall to any scholar or scholars, Scholars
being conuersaunte and abi^ynge for study without fraud or couyne at any
vnyuersytie within this realm or without, as by the same prouysyon does also
appear more at ^ge. Sythens the making of which good act and statute, diverse
and many persons, being benefyced with cure of soul (as is before said)
and being not apt to study, by reason of their age or other wise, ne never
^tending before the making of the said act to travail in study within any of
the said universities for the increase of lerninge, but rather mynding and
^tending their own ease, singular lucre, and pleasure, by the same provision
^ourably to defraude the same good statute, and ordinance, do daily and
commonly resort and repair to the said universities of Oxen^ and Cambrige and
to either of them, where they under the said pretense and color of study does
continue and abide, lyuinge dissolutely, nothing profitinge them selfs by
study at all in lerning, but consume the time in ydelnes, and in other pastymes
and insolente pleasures, giuinge occasion and euylle example thereby to other
young men and students within the said vnyuersities, ^tell or nothing
regardinge their cure and charge of soul, contrary to the minds and entente
of the makers of the foresaid good statute and ordenaunce. And also diverse and
many old beneficed men have and do continually remain there, never exercisynge
nor practisynge their lerninge, to the example of virtue and mayntenaunce of
the common weal, in dyscharge of their conscience, according to their duty,
having nevertheless and occupieng such romes and commodities, as were institute
and ordained for the mayntenaunce and relief of poor scolers, to the great
hinderance and detriment of the same. Be it therefore enacted by the king our
soueraygne lord, with the assente of ye lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons in this present parliament assembled, that all and singular
spiritual person and persons, which now be or hereafter shall be to any
benefice or benefices promoted as is aforesaid, being above the age of.xl.
years, the chancellor, vychancellour, co^missary of the said universities, or
any of them, wardens, deanes, prouostes, presidentes, rectours, masters,
principals and other head rulers of colleges, halles, and other houses or
places corporate, within the said universities, or any of them, doctors of the
chair, reders of divinity in the common schools of divinity, in any of ye
said universities only excepted, shall be reside^t and abiding at and upon one
of their said benefices, according to the intent and true meaning of the said
former act, upon such pain and penalties as be contained in the said former
act, Benefices persons.
made and appointed for such beneficed persons for their none resydence. And
that none of the said beneficed persons, being above the age aforesaid, except
before except, shall from hensforth be excused of their none residence upon the
said benefices, for that they be students or resiaunt within the said
universities or any of them, any prouiso, or any other clause or sentence
specyfyed or contained in the said former act of none residence, or any other
thing or things to the contrary hereof in any wise not withstandinge.

And over this be it enacted by thauctoritie beforesaid, that al and singular
such beneficed persons being under the age of.xl. years, resiante and abiding
within the said universities, or any of them, shall not enjoy the privilege
and liberty of none residence contained in the prouiso of ye said former act,
made for the scholars and students of the said universities or any of the^,
unless he or they be present at the ordinary lecture and lectures, as well at
home in their houses as in the common schole or schools, and in their propre
persons keep sophemes, problemes, disputatio^s, and other exercises of
lerninge, and be apponente and respondent in the same, according to the
ordinances and statutes of either of the said universities, where he or they
shall be so abydinge or resiaunt, any thing contained in the said prouiso or
former act to the contrary not withstanding.

Provided always that this act shall begin to take effect at the feast of
saynct Mighel tharchaungell next coming, and not before.

Provided always, that this act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend
to any person or persons, which now is or hereafter shall be readers of any
public or common lecture in diuynitie, law cyuile, phisyke, philosophy,
Reeders of Public, Lectures.
humanity, or of any of the lyberall sciences, or publyke or common
interpretours, or techers of the Ebrewtong, Caldey, or Greek, in whatsoever
college or place of any of the said universities the said persons for the time
being, shall read the said common or public lectures: Nor yet to any person
or persons, which after or about the age of.xl. years, which shall resort to
any of the said universities to proceed doctors in divinity, law civil, or
phisike, for the time of their said procedinges, and executynge of such
sermons dispucions or lectures, which they be bound by the statutes of the
universities there to do for the said degrees so obtained.

An act lymyttinge the prices of wynes. Cap. xiiii.
BE it enacted by authority of this present parliament, that no person or
persons shall sell any Gascoyne Guyon or French wynes above.viii. d. the galon,
Price of wines.
that is to say, a penye the pynte.ii. d. the quarte.iiii. pence the potel,
and.viii. pence the galon, upon pain of forfaiture for every pint to be sold
above the said price.iiii. d. and for every quarte sold above the said
price.viii. d. and for every pottel so sold above the said price xii. d. And
for every galon so sold above the said price before limited.ii.s^. And that
no Malmeseys, romneys, sackes, nor other sweet wynes, shall be ^de by retayle
above.xii. d. the galo^.vi. d. the potel.iii. d. the quarte, and.i. (...) the
pynte, upon pain to lose and forfayte.iii.s^.iiii. d. for every ga^.xx. d.
for every potell.xii. d. for every quarte, and.vi. d. for every pynte that
shall be sold contrary to this act.

Provided always, that the lord Chancellor, lord Treasourer, lord President
of the kings most honorable counsel, lord Privy seal, and the two chief
Justices of either benche, or.v.iiii. or.iii. of them, shall have power and
authority by their dyscretyons, to set the prices of all kind of ^ynes,
that is to say, of the pryces of the butte, tonne, pype, hogs head, ^cheon.
teers, barrel, or rundelet, when it shall be sold in gross, so that they or
any of them cause the prices by them set to be written, and open proclamation
thereof to be made in the kings court of Chancery openly in the term time, or
else, in the city boroughe or town, where any such wy^s shall be sold in
gross: any thing contained in this act to the contrary hereof not
withstanding.

And it is further enacted, that if any person or persons, after such prices
beset and put in writing by the said lord Chancellor, lord Treasourer, lord
President of the kings most honorable counsel, lord Privy seal, and
the.ii. chief justices, or by.v.iiii. or.iii. of them, and proclamation there
if had (as is before said) do sell any wines in gross by any fraud or co^,
contrary to the said prices so set and proclaimed: wines sold in gross.
that then every offendour in that behalf shall lose and forfayte for every
vesselle by them sold in gross contrary to the said prices.xl.s^. the one
half of al which forfaitur^ (...) be to the king our sovereign lord, and the
other half there of, if it be within any city borowghe or town corporate, to
be to the mayres, shireffes, bailiues, or other head rulers of such cities
boroughes or towns corporate. And if it be without city, boroughe, or town
corporate, then to be to such of the kings subjects as will sewe for the
same. And that every such forfaiture shall be recovered by original writ of
det, byll, plaint, or information, In which suyte no wager of law shall be
admitted, nor any protection or essoyne allowed.

And it is also enacted, Justices of peace. Head officers.
that the Justices of peace in every shyre of this present realm, and all
maires shereues bailyues and other head officers in cities boroughes and towns
corporate, that is to say, every of them wtin the limitties of their
co^missions and auctorities, as well within frauncheses as without, shall have
power and authority to examine here inquire and determine the defautes of such
as shall attempt to sell any wines in gross or by retayle contrary to this act,
and to punyshe the offenders by imprysonment or otherwise by their discretions.

And where as in the parlyament holden at westmynster in the first year of the
reign of king Richard the third, Tonne of wine.
among other things it was establyshed, ordained, and enacted, that every
tonne of wine should contain CClii. galons, every butte of Malmesey should
conteyne.Cxxvi. galons, every pype.Cxxvi. galons, every tercyan or
poncheon.lxxxiiii. galons, every hogs head.lxiii. galons, every teerce.xli.
galons, and every barrel.xxxi. galons, and di^. and every rondelette.xviii.
galons, and di^. And that no vessel should be put to sale, tille it were
gauged, upon pain of forfayture, as by the same statute it does appear more
at large. Never the less great dysceyte is daily used in sellinge of wines
and oils in caskes and vessels, not bearinge the contents above limited,
to the great loss of the kings poor subjects. For remedy whereof, it is
enacted by the authority of this present parliament, that the said estatute
made in the first year of king Richard the third, and al other estatutes
heretofore made for true gawginge and measuringe of wines, Gaugynge of wynes
and other licours.
oils, honey, or any other lycours, which estatutes before this time be not
repelled nor expyred, shall stand in their strength and virtue, and be put in
due execution, according to their tenors and effects in every behalf.

AND over that be it enacted by authority of this present parlyament, that
every gauger within this realm shall trewelye and effectually within the
limittes of his office, gauge all the said tonnes, buttes, pipes, terses,
poncheons, Gaugeour.
tercyans, barrelles, hogs head, and rundlettes, and shall plainly and
trewly make upon the head of every such vessel the content of the same,
upon peine to forfaite to the party, to whose use the wine oil or other
thing therein being shall be sold, four times the value of that that ye
vessel so marked shall lack of his laufull content above written: the same
forfayture to be recovered over and besides the costs of the sure, by the
kings original writ, or by byll in any of the kings courts of his common
laws, or in any competente court, having iurisdyciyon in the place, where
that offense shall be committed, by action or bill of debt, in which action or
suite, none essoyn, protection, nor wager of law shall be accepted admitted or
allowed to the defendant or defendantes. And that every marchaunte or other
person, sellinge the said wine, oil, or other thing contained in the said
vessel marked, shall allow of the price thereof to the byer of the same, for
every quantity of wine, oil, or other thing contained in the said marked
vessel, the full valewe of the lack thereof, being by reason of defaute of
full gauge of the vesselle, marked, or of defaute of fyllynge of the same
vessel, or by reason of defaute of any of them, after the rate of the hole
price of the wine, oil, or other thing, so being sold by that vessel
marked: and that upon pain of forfayture to the same byer the dowble value of
the same vesselle and wine, oil, or other thing therein being so sold: the
same forfayture to be recovered to gether with the costs of the suyte, in
manner and form as the forfayture last before written is lymytted to be
recovered.

An act for punyshement of pyrotes and robbers on the sea. Capit. xv
WHere traitors, pirotes, thieves, robbers, murderers, Pirates.
and confederatours upon the sea, many times escape unpunished, because the
trial of their offenses has heretofore ben ordered, judged, and determined
before the Admiral, Admyrall.
or his lieutenaunt or commissarie, after the course of the civil laws, the
nature whereof is, that before any judgment of death can be yeuen against the
offenders, either they must plainly confess their offenses (which they will
never do, without torture or peynes) or else their offenses be so plainly and
directly proved by witness indifferente, Robbers on the sea.
such as saw their offenses committed, which can not be gotten, but by
chance at few times, because such offenders commytte their offenses upon the
sea, and at many times murdre and kylle such persons, being in the ship or
bote, where they commit their offenses, which should witness against them
in that behalf: and also such as should bear witness be commonly maryners and
shipemen, which because of their often vyages and passages in the seas, depart
without long tarienge and protraction of time, to the great costs and
charges, as well of the kings highness as such as would pursue such
offenders. For refourmation whereof, be it enacted by the authority of this
present parliament, that all treasons, felonies, robberies, murders, and
confederacies hereafter to be committed in or upon the sea, or in any other
haven river, creke, or place, where the admyral or admiralles have or pretend
to have power authority or jurisdiction, shall be inquired tried hard
determined and judged in such shyres and places in the realm, as shall be
limited by the kings commission or comissions to be directed for the same, in
like form and condition, as if any such offense or offenses had been committed
or done in or upon the land, and such commissions shall be had under the kings
great seal, directed to the Admiral or admiralles, or to his or to their
lieutenaunt deputy and deputies, Chancelloure of England,
and to iii. or.iiii. such other substantial persons, as shall be named or
appointed by the lord Chancellor of England, for the time being, from time
to time, and as often as need shall require, to here and determine such
offenses, after the common course of the laws of this land, used for
treasones, felonies, robberies, murders, and confederacies of the same done and
committed upon the land within this realm.

And be it enacted by the authority before said, that such persons, to whom
such commission or commissions shall be directed, or.iiii. of them at the
least, shall have full power and authority to enquere of such offenses and of
every of them, by the oaths of twelve good and lauful inhabitants in the
Shire, limited in their commission: in such like manner and form, as if such
offenses had benne committed upon the land within the same Shyre. And that
every indictment found and presented before such commissioners of any
treasons, felonies, robberies, murders manslaughters, or such other offenses,
committed or done, in or upon the seas, or in or upon any other haven river or
creke, shall be good and effectual in the law. And if any person or persons
happen to be indicted for any such offense done or hereafter to be done upon the
seas, or in any other places above limited, that then such orders process
judgment and execution shall be used had done and made to and against every
such person and persons, so being indicted, as against traitors, felons, and
murderers, for treason, felony, robbery, murder, or other such offenses done
upon the land, as by the laws of the realm is accustomed. And that the
trial of such offense or offenses, if it be denied by the offendour or
offenders, shall be had by twelve lauful men, inhabited in the shire limited
within such commission, which shall be directed as is aforesaid, and no
challenge or chalenges to be had for the hundred. Challenge.
And such as shall be conuicte of any such offense or offenses, by verdicte
confession or process, by authority of any such commission, shall have and
suffer such peynes of death, losses of lands goods and cattalles, as if they
had been attaynted and convicted of any treasons, felonies, robberies, or other
the said offenses, done upon the lands.

And be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that for treasons robberies
felonies murders and confederacies, done upon the sea or seas, or in any place
above rehearsed, Clergy. Sainctuary.
the offenders shall not be admitted to have the benefit of his or their
clergy, but be utterly excluded thereof and from the same, and also of the
privilege of any sainctuary.

Provided always, that this act extend not to be prejudicial or hurtful to
any person or persons for taking any vittaile, gables, ropes, ankers, or
sails, which any such person or persons (compelled by necessity) takes of
or in any ship, which may conveniently spare the same, so the same person or
persons pay out of hand for the same vittaile, gables, ropes, ankers, or
sails money or money worth, to the value of the thing so taken, or to deliver
for the same a sufficient byll obligatorie to be paid in form following,
Straictes of Marrocke.
That is to say: if the taking of the same things be on this side the straytes
of Marroke, then to be paid within.iiii. months. And if it be beyond the
said straites of Marroke, then to be paid within.xii. months next ensuynge
the making of such bills. And that the makers of such bylles well and truly
pay the same debt at the day to be limited within the said bills.

Provided always, that when so ever any such commission for the punyshement
of the offenses aforesaid, or of any of them, shall be directed or sent to any
place within the jurisdiction of the five ports, Five ports.
that then every such commission shall be directed unto the lord wardayne of
the said ports for the time being, or to his deputy, and unto three or four
such other person or persons, as the lord chancellor for the time being
shall name and appoynte: Any thing in this present act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that when so ever any commission shall be directed unto the
five ports, for the inquisition and trialles of any the offenses expres^ in
this act, that every such inquisition and trial to be had by virtue of such
commission shall be made and had by the inhabitants in the said ^e ports or
the members of the same: any thing in this act to the contra^ thereof not
withstandinge.

An act for the release of such as have obtained pretended lycences and
dispensations from the sea of Rome. Capi. xvi.
WHere the bisshoppe of Rome and his predecessors, Bishop of Rome.
of his and their covetous and ambitious minds, to thentent to advance and
enriche them selfs and the sea of Rome, to the great empouerisshynge of this
realm of England, and other the kings domynyons, contrary to gods laws,
the laws and statutes of this realm, and in derogation of the imperial
crown of this said realm, have heretofore wrongefully pretended, extorted,
used, and exercised within the same diverse and many usurped powers,
jurisdictions, and auctorities, during and by the which time the said
bishop and his predecessors, arrogantly and iniustly have taken upon them
for great sums of money and other profittes to them given, to grant unto the
kings subjects, and other inhabitauntes within this realm, and other the
kings dominions, many diverse and sundry auctorities immunities faculties
privileges lycences indulgences and preeminences, of diverse kinds natures and
qualities: which all though they proceeded by an unjust and usurped
auctorytie, have been unto now of late by the subjects of this realm
temerously and ignorauntly accepted received used and erronyously put in
exercise and execution: the which usurped authority jurisdiction and power is
now justly truly and ought to be clearly and absolutely extynguyshed
extirped and abolysshed within this realm and other the kings domynions. And
for as much as all and every such person and persons bodies polytyke and
corporate, which vnlawefully and without any manner of authority or just
ground, heretofore have temerously and ignorantly accepted received used and
erroniously put in execution and exercise the said faculties immunities
auctorities privileges lycences indulgences and preeminences, have now sincere
pure and perfect intelligence and knowledge of the said usurped authority
jurisdiction and power. And that the said faculties, auctorities, privileges,
licenses, and indulgences, so as is aforesaid accepted received used and
erroniously exercised, were and ben to all intentes and purposes clearly void
frustrate and of none effect. All be it if they should be impeached or
interrupted of such privileges liberties preemine^ces auctorities jurisdictions
profittes and other commodities, which they now have use and exercise by color
of such vain and void licenses dispensations and faculties, it should be to
their intolerable inquietations and utter undoing. Wherefore be it enacted by
authority of this present parliament, that al bulls breues faculties and
dispensations, Bulls. Breues. Faculties. Dyspensatyons.
of what names natures or qualyties so ever they be of, heretofore had or
opteyned of the bishop of Rome, or of any his predecessors, or by the
authority of the sea of Rome, by or to any subjects resiantes or bodies
politic or corporate of or in this realm, or of or in any other the kings
dominions, shall from hensforth be clearly void and of no value force strength
nor virtue, and shall never here after be used ^dmitted allowed pleaded or
alleged in any places or courts of this realm, or of any other the kings
dominions, upon the peynes contained in the statute of provision and praemunire,
made in the.xvi. year of the reign of king Richard the second. Yet not
withstandinge at the most humble petition and intercession of the lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled,
it may please the kings majesty, of his most gracious benignity goodness
and blessed disposition, that it may be enacted by authority of this
parliament, that al marriages had and solempnised within this realm, or in any
other the kings dominions, Maryages.
before the third day of November, in the.xxvi. year of the kings most
gracious reign, whereof there is no deuorce or separation had by the
ecclesiastical laws of this realm, and which marriages be not prohibited by
gods laws, limited and declared in the act made in this present parlyament
for the establishement of the kings succession, or otherwise by holy
scripture, shall be by authority of this present parliament good laufull and
effectual, and shall be from the beginning of such marriages reputed esteemed taken
adjudged received approved and allowed by the authority of this present
parliament, to al and singular purposes effects and ententes, as good as
sufficient and as vayleable, as though no impediment of matrymony had ever ben
between them that have contracted and solemnysed such marriages: And that all
children procreated and to be procreated in and under such marriages, shall be
laufull to all intentes and purposes.

Archebishoppes, and bishops.
And that it may be also enacted by the authority of this present parlyament,
that all archebishoppes and bishops of this realm, or of any the kings
dominions consecrated, and at this present time taken and reputed for
archebisshops and bisshops, may by authority of this present parlyament, and
not by virtue of any provision or other foreyne authority license faculty or
dispensation, keep, enjoy, and reteyn their archebishoprikes and byshoprikes,
in as large and ample manner, as if they had been promoted elected confirmed and
consecrated, according to the dew course of the laws of this realm. And that
every archebyshoppe and bishop of this realm, and of other the kings
dominions, may minister use and exercise all and every thing and things,
perteyning to thoffice or order of an archebisshop and bishop, with all tokens
insignes and ceremonies thereunto laufully belonging. And that al
ecclesiastical persons of the kings realm and dominions, which at this time
be taken had and reputed for abbottes priours, abbasses, prio^esses, and other
heads of religion (which be not another shall be excluded from their dignities
by the late act of suppression) and the religious persons lyuinge under their
obedience, and all persons now taken and reputed as masters presidentes
prouostes and wardeynes of cathedral churches and colleges, with the companies
and felowshippes of the same, al prestes and clerks, which have received any
of the ecclesiastical orders, all archedeacons and deanes, and other having
offices cures and dignities spiritual, may by authority of this act, and not
by the virtue of any foreign power or authority, administer use and exercise
all things perteininge to their dignities offices ordres cures religions and
felowshippes, and may laufully hereafter use al tokens insignes, and
ceremonies, which they have been accustomed to use in times paste (so it be not
expressly against the laws of god and this realm) any thing or things
contained in any act or acts, made sithen the beginning of this present
parliament to the contrary of any the premises in any wise not withstanding.

And where diverse and many of the kings said subjects have purchased and
obtained many dispensations bulls breues and faculties of the bishop of Rome
for the time being, or by authority of the sea of Rome, as pluralities,
vnyons, trialities, appropriations, commendams, exemptions, and other bulls
breues and faculties, for diverse causes and matters, other than be before
expressed, which be of no strength or virtue: it may therefore please the kings
majesty, that it may be enacted by authority before said, that all and every
his said subjects during the time of one hole year next after the feast of
saint Michaell the archaungell next coming, may enjoy use and have by
authority of this present act, and not by the virtue of the said bulls
breues and faculties, al and every the effects contained and specified in such
bulls breues and faculties, in all such cases only as may be dispensed with
by the archebishoppe of Canturbury, by authority of the laws and statutes of
this realm.

And that it may be further enacted by authority aforesaid, that all and
every the kings said subjects, bryngyng rendrynge and delyuerynge to such
persons of his counsel, or of the masters of his chancery, as the kings
highness shall name and appoint, any bulls breues or any other faculties
concerning any the premises: that then if it shall appear to such persons as
the kings highness shall so name and appoint to receive such bulls faculties
and breues, after dew examination thereof had, that the effects contained and
specified in such bulls faculties and breues or any part thereof, may be
laufully granted by the said archebyshoppe, of Canturbury, by authority of
the laws and statutes of this realm: that then and in every such case the
kings said subjects, making humble suite to have the effects contained in
the said bulls breues and faculties to be granted unto them, Chauncellor of
England.
shall have receive and obtain of the chancellor of England or keeper of the
great seal for the time being, by sufficient writing in dew form to be
made, and to be sealed under the kings great seal, all and every such
effects contained and specified in such bulls breues and fac^ties,
Archebisshop of Cant.
as may be laufully granted by the said archebisshoppe of Cant^bury, by
authority of the laws and statutes of this realm, paying onel^ for the
sealinge of every such writing.xx. s.iiii. d. And over that for t^ reasonable
costs for peynes of the writing thereof.iii. s iiii. d. and not ^boue, and for
the pain taken for dew examynation of every such bulls breues and
faculties.iii. s.iiii. d. and not above. And that this present act^ shall be
sufficient and immediate warrant to the chancellor or keeper of the great s^,
for thensealing and delivery of such licenses faculties dispensations and
other writings, which shall be made granted and sealed under the kings
great seal by virtue and authority of this act.

And it is also enacted by authority before said, that all and every such
license dispensation faculty confirmation or other writing, to be had made or
granted under the kings great seal out of the said court of chauncery by
authority of this act, in form as is above rehearsed, shall be good and
effectual to the said parties suing for the same, according to the tenor and
effects thereof, and shall be admitted, accepted, and allowed in all courts
and places of this realm, and in all other the kings dominions: any usage,
prescription, foreyne laws, customs, or ordinance to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

An act giuinge authority to such as shall succeed to the crown of this
realm, when they come to the age of.xxiiii. years to make frustrate such acts
as shall be made before in their time. Capitulo.xvii.
FOr as much as laws and statutes may happen hereafter to be made within this
realm, at parlyamentes holden at such time as the kings of the same shall
happen to be within age, having small knowledge and experience of their
affairs, to the great hynderance and derogation of the imperial crown of
this realm, and to the universal damage of the common welthe of the subjects
of the same, Be it therefore enacted by authority of this present parlyament,
that if the imperial crown of this realm, after the deceasse of the kings
most royal majesty (whose life our lord long preserve) discende, comme,
or remain, to the heirs of our said sovereign lord, or to any person to
be limited by his highness, as of very right it must and ought to do, Acts of
parlyament.
according to the laws of this realm established for the same, the said
heirs or such person being within the age of.xxiiii. years, and that then
any act or acts of parliament shall happen to be made and establyshed in any
parliament, that then shall be holden, before such heir or heirs person or
persons then being in possession of the said crown, shall be of their full
ages of.xxiiii. years: that then every such heir or heirs of ^de sovereign
lord, or such person so possessed of the crown, and (...) within the same
age of.xxiiii. years, shall have full power and au^ at all times after they
shall come to their said full ages of.xxiiii. Letters patentes.
(...) by their letters patentes, under the greatte seal of England, to ^e,
adnulle, and repeal all and syngular such acts, made and established by
their royal assentes in any parlyament holden during the time (...) they were
within their said age of.xxiiii. years, their royal assentes ^de to the same,
during the time that they were within the said age of (...) years, Reuocation
of acts.
or any act or acts hereafter to be made to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

And be it also enacted by authority aforesaid, that every such repeal
ad^ation and reuocation of any act or acts, that shall be made and established
in any parlyament, holden before the time that such heirs or person, possessed
of the crown, shall be of the said age of.xxiiii. years, shall be as ^d and
effectual to al intentes and purposes, as though it had been done (...)
authority of parlyament.

An act concerning treason in certain cases. Cap. xviii.
BE it enacted by authority of this present parliament, that if any man, of
what estate, degree, or condition so ever he be, at any time hereafter, take
upon him to espouse, mary, or take to his wife any of the kings children,
being laufully borne or otherwise, commonly reputed or taken for his children,
or any of the kings systers or auntes of the part of ye father or any the
laufull children of ye kings brethren or sisters, or contract marriage with any
of them, without the especial license assent consent and agreement first
thereunto had and obtained of the kings highness in writing under his gracis
great seal, or defyle or deflour any of the^ not being married, shall be demed
and adiuged a traitor to the king and to his realm. And that every such
offense here after to be done made or perpetrated, contrary to this act, shall
be adjudged and demed to be high treason. Treason,
And that every man so offendinge, and their abettours, procurers, comforters,
counsaylours, and ayders, being laufully conuycte of any such offense
according to the laws of this realm, shall have and suffer such and like
peines and execution of death, losses of privileges of sainctuary and for
faytures of lands tenementes and hereditamentes to al intentes and purposes,
as in cases of high treason apperteyneth. Sainctuary.
Saving to all and every person and persons, bodies politic and corporate,
their heirs and successors, and to the heirs and successors of every of
them, other tha^ the lord Thomas Howarde, and his heirs, and all other
persons, which shall fortune hereafter to be atteinted by authority of this
act, and their heirs and every of them, all such right, title, intereste,
possession, leases, annuities, rentes, services, reuercions, remaynders,
offices, fees, commons, conditions and other commodities profits and
hereditamentes, in such manner form quality and condition, as they or any of
them have had, should or might have had, if this act had never ben had nor
made: Any thing in this present act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted, that in every such case before rehearsed,
the woman after the last day of this parlyament so offendynge, being within
the degrees before specified, shall incur like danger and penalty as is
before limited, and shall suffer such like death and punyshemente, as is
before appointed to the man offendyng in manner and form expressed in this
act.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
ARMA ^ REGIS ^ ANGLIE ^ ET ^ F^


