Anno primo and secundo Philippi and Mariae.

ACTS made at a Parliament, begone and holde^ at Westminster, the.xii. day of
November, in the first and second year of the reign of our soueraygne
Lord, and Lady Philip and Mary, by the grace of God, king and Queen of
England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, defendours of the faith,
Princes of Spain and Cycilie, Archedukes of Austria, dukes of Myllayn,
Burgondie, and Braband, counties of Haspurge, Flanders and Tyroll, and there
continued and kept to the dissolution of the same, being the.xvi. day of
January then next ensuynge, were enacted as follows.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The Table.
AN Act touching letters patentes, and other writings to be signed by the
Queen's Majesty. Cap. i. An act for ye reformation of excess in apparayll.
Cap. ii. An acce against seditious words and rumors. Cap. iii. An act for
the punishment of certain persons calling them selves Egyptians. Cap. iiii. An
act for to restrain ye carrying of corn, victualles, and wood over the sea.
Cap. v. An act for the reviving of three Estatutes made for the punishment of
heresies. Cap. vi. An act that persons dwelling in the country, shall not
sell diverse wares in cities, and Towns corporate by retayle. Cap. vii. An act
repealinge all Statutes, articles, and provisions, made against the sea
apostolic of Rome, since the.xx. year of King Henry theight, and also for the
stablyshment of all spiritual, and ecclesiastical possessions, and
hereditamentes conveyed to the laytie. Cap. viii. An act for the punishment of
Traitorous words against the Queen's Majesty. Cap. ix. An act whereby certain
offenses be made treasons, and also for the government of the kings and
Queen's majesty's issue. Cap. x. An act for the punishment of bringinge in of
counterfeyte coin of forr eyne realms, being curraunt within this realm.
Cap. xi. An act touching the impounding of distresses. An act appoynting in
order to justices of peace touching the baylement of prisoners. Cap. xiii. An
act for the making of russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fusti an of
Naples in Norwiche. Cap. xiiii. An act to confirm the liberties of the
Lord-Marchers in Wales. Cap. xv. An act for the continuance of certain
statutes. Cap. xvi. An act touching leases hereafter to be made by certain
spiritual persons. Cap. xvii
An Act touching letters patentes, and other Writings, to be signed by the
Queens majesty.
The first Chapter.
WHEREIN THE parliament begone and holden at Westminster, the second day of
April, in the first year of the reygne of our most dread and gracious
Soueraygne Lady the Queens majesty, and there continued and kept, till the
dissolution of the same, being the fyft day of May, then next following, one
Act was made touching the articles of her highness most noble marriage. In the
which act amongst other things it is enacted, ordered, and establyshed by
authority of the said parliament, that all and singular gifts, grauntes,
letters patentes, eschaunges, confymations, leases, and other writings, which
after the said marriage, and during the same, should pass, and be made of any
benefices, offices, lands, revenues, and fruits, or of any of them, should
be intiteled and made in the names of our Soueraygne Lord the king, and of her
most excellent hyghnes, whether his majesty should be present within the
Realms and dominions of her highness, or within any of them, or absent. And
that the same gifts, grauntes letters patentes, eschaunges, confirmations,
leases, and other wrytinges, so set forth and made, should be sealed, and
fyrmed with the sign manuel of her highness, and the same so signed and sealed
with the great seal of this realm or with such seal as has been accustomed,
should be by thauctoritie of the said parliament, deemed, adjudged, declared,
and pronounced to be as good perfect, and of like force, strength, and effect
in the law, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes, against oursayde
Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and the Queens majesty's, and her highness
heirs and Successors, as if her majesty had been at the time of the making
thereof, sole and unmarried, and that al gifts. grauntes, letters patentes,
esechaunges, confirmations leases, and other wrytinges, which after the said
marryage, and during the time of the same, should pass, and be made of the
said benefices, offices, lands, revenues, and fruits, or of any of them, where
unto the sign manuell, of herhighnesse, should not be set, made of put,
shall be by authority of the said parliament, from time to time, deemed,
adjudged, accepted, taken, and decreed, to be of no force, ne effect, but
utterly frustrate and void in the law, to all intentes, construccions, and
purposes, the said marryage, or any law, usage or custom to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding, as by the said Act more at large does appear.

Sythence the making of which Statute, and the solemnisation of ye said
marriage, the Queens most excellent majesty has been greatly molested,
grieved, and troubled, with often signing of letters patentes, gifts, grauntes,
eschaunges, leases, and other wrytynges concerning and touching benefices,
offices, lands, revenues, and fruits, made and granted by, and from our said
soueraygne Lord the king, and her highness, to sundry of their most loving
subjects, to whom also it has been, and is, no small charge to attend until
such time as they may procure and obtain the sign manuel of her highness,
unto their said letters patentes, gifts grauntes, eschaunges, confyrmations,
and leases, without which sign, the same are utterly void, by force of the
said Statute, to the great danger, loss, and utter undoing of diverse persons,
that have lately bought, purchased, or opteyned of our said soueraygne Lord
and Lady, the king and Queen's majesty's, diverse lands, tenementes, and other
he reditamentes, to their great costs and charges.

For remedy whereof be it enacted by the authority of this present parliament,
that the said branch and article, touching, or concerning only the signing
of letters patentes, gifts, grauntes, eschau^ges, confirmations, leases, or of
other wrytinges for any lands, benefices, offices, revenues, fruictes, or
other hereditamentes, shall be from henceforth clearly repelled, and made
frustrate, and void, to al intentes, and purposes.

And be it further enacted by authority of this present parliament, that all
and synguler letters patentes, touching, or concerning any gift grant,
eschaunge, confirmation, lease, or other writing, the which sythence the
said marriage, has passed, and be made of any benefices, offices, manours,
lands, tenementes, revenues, fruytes, liberties, or other hereditamentes, or
of any of them, in the names of our most dread Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the
king and the Queen's majesty's (the warraunt or writing, or warrauntes or
writings whereof being signed with her highness sign manuell, in such form,
order, and degree, as the same heretofore have been accustomed to be signed,
when her highness was sole, and unmarried) shall be by authority of this present
parliament, of the same like force, strength, and effect in the law, to all
intentes, constructions, and purposes, as if the same were, or had been signed
by her highness sign manuell, and as if her majesty had been at the time of the
making thereof sole and unmarried, and as they were before the making of the
said act. The said estatute, or any branch, or article therein contained to
the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

An Act for the reformation of excess in apparel,
The.ii. Chapter.
BE IT enacted by thauctoritie of this present Parliament, that no person
borne within this realm, or ye dominions of the same, other then the son and
heir apparaunt of a knight, or other then such, as may dispende.xx. li. by
the year in lands, offices fees, or other yearly revenues for term of life,
or be worth in goods. ii. C. li shall after the first day of Apryll next
coming wear any manner of sylke, in or upon, his hatte, bonet night cappe,
girdle, skaberd, hoose, shoes, or spur lethers, upon pain of three months
imprismo^ent, and forfeytures of.x. li foreuery days wearing contrary to the
tenor of this act.

AND be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that Justices of Assizes
in their circuities, Justices of peace in their sessions, Sheriffs in their
turns, Stewardes in letes and law days, Majors, Sheriffs, and Baylyffes of
cities Boroughes, and towns corporate in their courts, shall, and may
enquire, hear and determine from time to time, al and every the saydoffences,
committed, or done within the lymites of their several jurisdictions, and
auethorities, and where any such forfeytures shall happen to be found within
the precince of any city, bourough, town corporate, let or law day, then
the Mayor, Sheriff, and Baylyffes of the said cities, boroughes, and towns,
and owner of the said let or law days, to have the one moytie of the said
forfeytures, and the other moytye to be to any subject of this realm, that will
sue for ye same in any couct of record by action information, byll, or
otherwise, in which no wager of law protection, or assoigne shall be allowed.
And where such forfeyture shall be found out of any city, boroughe, town,
let, or law day that the moytie of all such forfeytures, shall be to the king
and Queens maiestses, and the heirs to the Queen, and the other moytie thereof
to any of their subjects, that will sue, for the same by byll playnt, action,
information, or otherwise in any court of record, as is aforesaid, in the which
no wager of law, or protection, essoigne shall be admitted or allowed. And that
all and every such person and perso^es, as have authority by virtue of this
Act, to hear and determine the premises may upon the conviction of every
such offender, awarde process unto the Shiriffe of any shire within this
realm, for the apprehension of the said offendour, which being apprehended,
shall be committed by the sheriff unto the goal of the said shire, there to
remain without bail or maynpryse until the said offendoure has paid the
said for feyture, wherein he is so convicted.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, of what estate, condition, or degree soever he or they be after ye said
first day of Apryl next coming, knowing and servant or servants of his or
theyrs to offend contrarieto this act, do not put the same out of his or
their service but shall keep in his or their setuice, the same offendoure or
offenders by the space of xiiii. days, next after such knowledge had, or
else being so put out of his or their service, shall retain the same offendour
or offenders to his or theyrseruice again within one year nextensuing the
time of committing of any such offense, the same person or persons, so keeping
or reteyning again, in, or to his or their service any such servant or
servants, offendyng contrary to the tenoure of this act as is aforesaid,
shall for every his or their offense forsayt C.li. of law full monye of
England, the moytie whereof to be to the king and Queens majesty's use and
the heirs and successors of the Queen, and the other moytie to him, that
will sue for the same in any court of record, by action, byll, playnt,
information, or otherwise wherein no wager of law, essoygne, or protection
shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always, and be it enacted that this act, or any thing therein
contained, shall not extend to any person being of or above the degree of a
knyghts son, or daughter, or being wife to any of them, nor to such as have
been, be, or shall be Mayor, Bayliffe Alderma^, or head officer in any city
borough, or town corporateor to the wife of any of them, nor to any of the
kings, or Queens servants in ordinary wages attendau^t, and wearynge the
kings or Queen's ordinary liueries, but that they, and every of the^, may use
and we are as they, or any of them might lawfully use and wear, before the
making of this act.

Provided also that no person shall be compelled by this act, to put away his
prentise or hired servant before the end of the term before agreed between
the^, nor that any master shall forfeyte or loose any pain or forfayture for
the keeping of his pre^tise or hired servant after his offense contrary to this
act, unto the end of the term before agreed between them Any thing above said
to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that women may wear in their cappes, hattes, gyrdles, and
hoodes, as they or any of them might use and wear lawfully before the making
of this act.

An Act against sedicious words and rumors.
The.iii. Chapter.
WHere it is contained as well in the Statute of Westminster. the first, as in the
Statute made at Glocestre the second year of the raygne of King Rychard the
second, yt no man should be so hardy to contriue, speak, or tell any false
news, lies, or other such like false things of Prelates Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and othere nobles and Pears of the realm, or of the Chancellor,
Tresuter, Clearke of the privy seal, Steward of the king household, Justices
of the one bancke or of the other or of any other great officers of this realm.
And that every such offendour should be taken, and imprisoned, until such
time, as he had brought him or them forth which did speak the same. And where
also at a Parliament holden at Cambridge, in the.xxii. year of the raygne of
the said king Richard, it was also enacted, that where any such offendour
as is aforesaid should be taken and imprisoned, and could not find him of
whom he heard those news, which he spoke, as is aforesaid, that then the
same speker should be punished by thaduice of the counsel, as by the same
Acts amongst other more plainly do and may appear.

Be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present Parliament, that all and every
the said former Acts and Statutes shall be, and remain in their full force
strength and effect, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes. And
further, that Justices of the peace in every Shire, city, and town corporate,
within ye limittes of their several commissions, shall by authority of this
present Act, have full power to examine, hear, and determine the causes
abouesayd, in the said two first Acts specified, and to put the said two
first statutes, and every branch in them contained in due execution that from
hen^eforth condign punishment be not defarred from such offendour^

And forasmuch as diverse and sondrye malicious and evil disposed persons
maliciously, sediciousiye, rebelliouslye, and unnaturally, contrary to the
duitie of their fidilities and allegiaunces have now of late not only
ymagined, invented, pratized, spoken, and spredde abroad diverse and sundry
false, seditions, and slanderous news rumors, sayings, and tales, against
our most dread Soueraygne Lord and King, and against our most natural
Soueraygne Lady and Queen, and against either of them, of whom we are
forbidden to think evil, and much more to speak evil, which offience
sounds, and is as well to the great dishonor, reproach and sclaunder of
their most exellent majesty's, as also to the great sclaunder of this their
realm, and other their dominions, but also have devised, made, written,
prynted, published, and set forth diuerie heinous, sedicious, and slanderous
writings, rymes, ballades, letters, papers, and books, intending and
practicing thereby to move and stir sedicions, discord discention, and
rebellion within this realm, to the great peril and danger of the same.

For avoiding whereof, be it enacted by thaucthoritie of this present
Parliament that if any person or persons, after the.xx. day of February next
ensuyng, and after open Proclamacion made of this Act, shall maliciously, of
his or their ymagination, speak any false sedicious, and slau^derous news,
rumors, sayings, or tales of our said Sovereign Lord and King, or of our said
most natural Sovereign Lady and Queen, that the^ al and every such person and
persons so offendyng, being thereof convicted or attaynted, in form hereafter,
in this Act exprssed, shall for every first offense, in some markette place,
within the shyre, City or Borough, where, or near unto the place where the
said words were, or shall be so spoken be set openly upon the pylory, by ye
Sheriff or his ministers, if it shall fortune to be with out any city or town
corporate. And if it happen to be within such city or town corporate, the^
by the principal officer or officers of such city or town corporate or his or
their ministers, and there to have both his ears cut of, unless he pay
one hundredth pounds to the King and Queen's highness use within one month next
after judgment given of his said offense, and also shall suffer impriso^ment
by the space, of three months, after such his or their execution.

And it is like wise enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that al, and every
person and persons which after the said day, and after Proclamacion made of
this Act, shall maliciously speak any false, sedicious, and slanderous
news, rumers, or tales, to the sclaunder and reproach of our said Soueraygne
Lord the King, or of our said most natural Soueraygne Lady the Queen, of
the speaking or reportyng of any other, that then all, and every such person
or persons so speaking and reportyng, being thereof conuicte or atteynted, in
form hereafter, in this act expressed, shall for every such offense in some
market place within the shire, city, borough, or town, where or near unto
the place, where the said words were or shall be so spoken and reported, be set
openly upon ye pillory by the shiriffe or his ministers, if it shalfortune to
be with out any city or town corporat. And if it shall happen to be within
such city or town corporate, then by ye principal officer or officers of
such city or town corporate, or his, or their ministers, and there to have one
of his ears cut of unless he pay one hundred marks to the kings and Queens
highness use, within one month next after judgment given of his said offense,
and also shall suffer impriso^ment by the space of one month after his or
their executyon.

And be it further enacted by thauthritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons shall after the said day and after Proclamation made as is
aforesaid, maliciously devise, wryt, print, or set forth any manner of book,
ryme, ballade, lettre, or wrytyug, containing any false matter, clause, or
sentence of sclaunder, reproach, and dishonor of the king and Queen's
majesty's, or of either of them, or to the encouragyng, sturryng or mouyng of
any insurrection or rebellion within this realm, or any the dominions
belonging to the same. Or whosoever shall maliciouslye procure any such
book, ryme ballade, letter, or writing, to be written, prynted, or set forth
(and the said offense not being punishable by the Statute, made in the.xxv.
year of the raygne of king Edward the third, concerning treasons, or
declaration of treason) that then, and in every such case, the offender and
offenders there in after his or their conviction or attaynder, shall for his or
their first offense, in some market place, within the shire, city, or borough,
where the said offense, is, or shall be committed or done, by the sheriff, or
his ministers, if it shall fortune to be without any city, or town
corporate, and if within such city or town corporate, then by the principal
officer, or officers of such city or town corporate, or by his or their
ministers, have his and their right hand stryken of.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, being once lawfullye convicted of any of thoffences aforesaid, now
provided to be punished by the execution of losses of ear, ears, or hand, as
is aforesaid, do afterward, eftsoon offend in any of thoffences aforesaid,
that then he or they so offendynge, shall suffer imprisonment, during his or
their lives, without bail or maynprise, and forfeyte and loose to the king and
Queens majesty's al his and their goods and cattelles.

And it is also enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that Justices of oyer and
determiner, within the limittes of their commission, Justices of assise in
their several circuites, Justices of jail delivery, and Justices of peace, as
well within the liberties as without, within the limittes of their several
commissions, in their general sessions, or other sessions, which they or two of
them whereof one of them to be of the Quorum may, and shall appoynte at their
pleasure, where, and when need shall require, and shall by virtue hereof have
full power and authority to enquire, hear, and determine, all and every
thoffences aforesaid, as in cases and trial of felonye. And that the party
indicted and arrayned, shall have advantage of all manner of chalenges to the
Iurye (peremptorye challenge only except) as in trial of felonye.

And also that every Justice of peace within the limittes of his commission
shall have full power and authority to commit any person, being vehementlye
suspected of any of the said offenses, toward, there co remain without bail
or maynprise, until he shall be delivered, according to this Act.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no manner
of person or persons shall be molested, or impeched for any of thoffences,
concerning speaking, or reportyng, as is aforesaid, unless he or they be
thereof accused and convicted within three months, next after his or their
said offense so committed or done. And in case any person shall be imprisoned
for any of the said offenses, concerning speaking or reportinge, and not
thereof convicted, within three months, next after his offense supposed to be
by him done and committed, that then the person so imprisoned shall be set at
liberty, and no longer deteyned in prison.

Provided also, and be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that every such
Maiour, Maiours, Bayliffes, and other head officer and officers of cities,
boroughes, and towns corporate which have, or hereafter shall have
iurisditcion and authority, within the several limittes of their office or
offices, to hold and keep sessions, as Justice or Justices of the peace shall,
and may by authority hereof, as well arrest and commit to ward, al, and
every person and persons, being vehemently suspected of any of thoffences
aforesaid, as also to proceed to thexecution, hearing, and determining of
every the said offenses, and to see, and make due execution thereof, according
to the purporte, meaning and effect of this present Act. Any thing in the
same act heretofore made to the contrary notwythstandyng.

Provided always, that the said Justice of peace, as well within liberties as
without, the which shall for any the offenses aforesaid, commit any person
or persons to ward, as is aforesaid, shall within ten days, next after such
committing, with one other Justice, whereof one of them to be of the Quorum
direct their precepte to the Shiriffe or Shiriffes of the county, where
thoffence shall be committed, or to other ordinary officer, if it be within any
city, or town corporate, where the Sheriff can not intromytte, commanding
him or them by the same impanell and return, as they shall assign.xxiiij.
good and lawful men of his or their baylywyke or baylywykes, to enquire of the
said offense or offenses the which any such person or persons shall be so
imprisoned for. And thereupon within one month after the date of the said
precept, to proceed and determine, as above is expressed. Every one of the
same Justices, upon the pain of.x.li. to be paid to the king and Queens
highnesses, as often as they shall be founden in defaulte of any the same.

Provided also and be it enacted, that this Act shall be proclaimed in all the
shyres within this realm, before the.xii. day of Februarye next coming, to
thintente that al persons may have notice thereof and avoid the peril and
danger that might ensue by offendynge against the same. And this Act to be
only in force, until the end of the next Parliament, and no longer.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that none of
the pears of this realm shall be arested or imprisoned for any of the said
offenses, but only by order or commandment, given from the Kings and Queen's
privy counsel, or of the heirs of the Queen, and that the said pears,
and every of them, that shall hereafter fortune to be indicted of any the
offenses aforesaid, shall be tried by their pears, as before has been accustomed
in caces of treso^ or fellonie.

An Act for the punishment of certain persons calling them selves Egyptians.
Te.iii. Chapter
WHere in a parliamente holden at Westminster in the.xxii. year of the reign
of our late Sovereign Lord King Henry theyght (for the avoiding and
bauyshinge out of this realm of certain outlandishe people, calling them
selves Egiptians, vsinge no craft nor fear of marchaundyses for to live by,
but going from place to place, in great companies, using great, suttel, and
craftye means, to disceaue the kings Subjects, bearing them in hand, that
they by palmistry could tell men's and woman's fortune, and so many times by
craft and subtlety, disceaue the people of thyre money, and committed diverse
great and heinous fellonies, and robberies, to the great hurt and disceyt of
the people). It was amongst other things then enacted that from the time of
the making of the said Act, on such persons should be suffered to come
within this the kings realm upon pain of forfay ture to the king, all their
goods and catteles, and then to be commanded to avoid the realm within.xv
days next after the commandment, upon pain of impriso^ment, and such
persons calling them selves Egiptians, as then were within this realm, should
depart within.xvi. days next after proclamation of the said Act upon pain
of imprisoment and forfeyture of all their goods and cattels with diverse other
clauses and articles contained in ye said act, as by the said Act more at
large it appears. Forasmuch as diverse of the said company, and such
otherlike persons, not fearing the penalty of the said Statute, have
enterprised to come over again into this realm, vsyng their old accustomed
deuelish, and noughty practices and devises, with such abhommable living, as
is not in any Christian realm to be permitted, named, or known, and be not
duly punyshed for the same, to the perellous and evil example of our
soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and Queens majesty's most louinge
subjects, and to the utter and extreme undoing of diverse and many of them,
as evidently does appear.

For reformation whereof, be it ordained and enacted by the king and Queen our
soueraygne Lord and Lady the Lords spiritual and temporal, and commons in
this present parliamente assembled and by thauctoritie of the same, that if any
person or persons, after ye last day of January next coming, do willingly
transport, bring, and convey into this realm of England, or Wales, any such
persons calling them selves, or commonly called Egyptians, that then he or
they, so transporting, bringinge, or conueying in, any such persons, contrary
to the true meaning of this Act, shall forfeyt and lose for every time so
offendyng, forty pounds of lawful money of England.

And be it further enacted by the authority, aforesaid that if any of the
said persons called Egyptians, which shall be transported and conveyed into this
realm of England or Wales, as is aforesaid, do continue, and remain within
the same, by the space of one month, that then he or they so offendyng, shall
by virtue of this act, be deemed and adjudged a fellon, and fellons, and shall
therefore suffer pains of death, loss of lands and goods, as in cases of
felony, by thor dre of the common law of this realm, and shall upon the
trial of them, or any of them, therein be tried in the county, and by
thinhabitauntes of the county or place, where they or he shall be apprehended or
taken, and not Per medietanem linguae, and shall lose the benefit and privilege
of sanctuary and clergy.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforsayd, that if the Egyptians, and
other persons, commonly calling them selves Eyptians, and every of them, now
being within this realm of Eugland, or Wales, do not depart out of the same
within.xx. days next after proclamation of this present act shall be made,
that then he or they which shall not depart within the said time according to
the true meaning of this Act, shall forfeyt and lose all his and their goods
and cattels, and that then it shall be lawful to all and every the king and the
Queen's subjects, to sease the same, the one moytie thereof to be to the use of
our soueraygne Lord and Lady the king and the Queen, and the other moytie thereof
to be the use of him or them that shall, so sease the same.

And be it also enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if the Egyptians, and
other persons commonly called Egyptians, and every of them, now being within
this realm of England or Wales, do not depart out, and from the same
within.xl. days next after proclamation shall be made of this act that then he
or they, which shall not depart, and avoid within the said time of.xl. days,
according to the true meaning of this act, shall be adjudged and deemed
according to the laws of this realm of England afellon, and fellons, and
shall suffer therefore pains of death. loss of lands and goods, as in other
cases of felony, and shall be tried as is before said, and without having any
benefit or priuelege of Saynttuary or clergy.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person after
the first day of Ianuarye next coming, shall sue for the obteyninge of any
lecence, lettre, or pasport, for any of the said persons called Egyptians, to
abide or continue within this reamle of England or Wales, contrary to the
tenor of this act, that then every such person so suing, shall forfeyt and
loose for the same forty pounds of lawefull money of England, and that every
such license, lettre and pasport, shall be by virtue of this act void, to all
intentes and purposes, the one moytie of all which sums of money to be
forfayted, as is before said, shall be to ye King and Queen our soueraygne Lord
and Lady, and the other moytie thereof to be him or them, that will sue for the
same, in any court of record, by accion of decte b^^ plaint, or information,
wherein any essoygne, wager of law, nor protection, shall be admitted and
allowed.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this
present act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be
hurtful to any of the said persons, commonly called Egyptians which within
the said time of twenty days next after the said proclamation to be made,
as in before said, shall leave that noughty idle, and ungodly life, and
company, and be placed in the service of some honest and able inhabitaunte or
inhabitauntes, within this realm, or that shall honestly exercise him self in
some law full word or occupation, but that he or they so continuing in service
or other lawful work or occupatio^, shall during such time as he or they shall
so continue, be discharged of all pains, and forfeytures, contained in this
act.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforsayde, that this act
shall not in any wise extend to any child or children, being not above the
age of.xiii. years, nor to any of the laid persons, being now in prison so
that he or they so being in prysone, do depart out of this realm,
within.xiiii. days next after his or their diliuerie out of prison, nor shall
extend to charge anyemaner of person or persons, as accessory to any offense
or offenses, contained or specified in this estatute.

An act to restrain carriing of corn, victuals, and woodde over the sea.
The.v. Chapter.
WHere as sundry good estatutes and laws has been made within this realm in
the time of the Queens highness most noble progenitors, that none should
tra^sporte, carye or conueye out of this realm into any place in the parties
beyond the seas any corn, butter, cheese, or other victual (except only for
the vitailyng of the town of Caleys, Hames, and Guysnes, and the marches of
the same, upon diverse great pains and forfeytures in the same contained, that
notwithstanding, many and sundry covetous and insatiable persons, sekyng their
only lucres and gains, has, and daily does carry and conueigh innumerable
quantity, as well of corn, chese butter, and other victual, as of wood out of
this realm, into the parties beyond the seas. By reason whereof the said
corn, victual, and wood, are grown unto a wonderful dearth, and extreme
prices, to the great detriment of the Common wealth of this your hyghnes
realm, and your faithful subjects of the same.

For remedy whereof, it may please your highness that it may be enacted, and
be it enacted by your highness, by thassent of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by
thauctoritie of the same, that no manner of person or persons, after the.xx.
day of January next coming shall carry and transport out of this realm by any
Ship, Craier, or other vessel, whatsoever, into any place in the parties
beyond the seas, or into the realm of Scotland, any wheat, rye, barley, or
other corn or graingrowing within this realm, or any malte made within the
same or any bear, butter, chese, herring or wood, except only to and for the
victualing and furniture of the towns of Calice, Hames, and Guisnes, and to
the town of Berwike and the marches of the same, with out sufficient and
lawful authority so to do, upon the pains and penalties hereafter ensuing,
that is to say, thowner and owners of the said ships and other vessels, to
forfeyte the said ships, crayers, and other vessels, with all their apparels,
to them and every of them belonging, wherein the said corn, butter, chese,
herring, byctuall, or wood, shall be so transported and carried and the owners and
owner of the said corn, butter, chese, hearing, and wood, to forfeyte the
double value of the same, so carried and conveyed, and the master and mareners
of every of the said ships craiers, and vessels, for every such offense, to
forfeyte all their goods, and to be imprisoned, by the space of one whole
year without bail or maynpryse.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, after the said twenty day of January, do carry and conueye away by
Bote, Crayer, or other vessel, or otherwise any wheat rye, barley, malte, or
other corn or grain, or any bear, butter chese, herring or wood to any
Ship or Vessel, being on the Seas, or within any Haven, creke, or other
place of the border of this Realm to be transported, carried, and conveyed into
any place in the parties beyond the Seas, or into the realm of Scotland,
without sufficient authority so to do, that then every owner of the said
victualles corn, and other things abouesayde so transported or carried and the
owner and owners of every such bote or vessel, and the botemen and mareners of
the same shall loose, forfeyte, and suffer all such forfeytures, pains, and
penalties, as is above rehearsed, the one moytie of all and every which forfeyture
or forfaytures, to be to the King and Queens hyghnes, their heirs and
successors, and the other moytie to him or them, that will sue for the same by
byl, information, action of debte, or otherwise in any of the King and Queens
hyghnes courts of record, in which action, byl, or suit, the defendaunt shall
not wage his law, nor have any essoygne or protection to him allowed.

And be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person or persons
shall obtain of the King and Queen's majesty's, their heirs or successors, or
of any of them, any license to carry and transport any corn, victual, or
wood, into any parts beyond the seas, that if he or they, to whom any such
license shall be granted, or any other, to whom such person or persons, having
such license shall give, grant or fell his or their said license unto, shall
carry, and convey, or cause to be carried and conveyed any more corn, victual
or wood, then shall be contained in his or their said license shall forfayt the
triple value of the said corn, victual, or wood, so carried and transported,
without sufficient authority, and shall suffer imprisonment for one whole year
in the common goal, where he shall be apprehended, there to remain without
bail or maynpryse.

And be it further enacted by thauethoritie aforesaid, that no manner of person
or persons, after the said.xx. day of January, that shall obtain, or have any
such license for transporting and carrying any corn, victual, or wood, into
any parties beyond the seas, shall ship, lade, and fraughte the same, or any
part thereof, at sondrye places within this realm, but at one place certain,
upon pain of forfeiture of the said corn, victual, and wood, and al his
goods and cattels, the one moytie thereof to the King and Queen's maieslies,
their heirs and successors, and the other moytie to him or them that will sue
for the same by action of debte, byll, playnt, information, or otherwise, where
in no wager of law, essoygne or protection shall be to him or them allowed,

And for the better execucio^ of this act, be it further enacted by ye
authority aforesaid, that all and singular Justices of peace as well within
the liberties as without, within their several aucthorities and commissions at
any time, within three years next after such offenses committed, shall have full
power and authority to enquire as well by the oaths of twelve lawful men, as
also to hear and examine the master, masters, and mareners of the said
ships, craiers, and other vessels, and all, and every other person and
persons, of all, and synguler thoffenders against this present Act, and to
hear and determyne the same offenses, as they may, and ought to hear and
deter mine any other tresspasses, or offenses.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauchoritie aforesaid, that at all
time and times hereafter, when the common price of corn within this realm is,
that wheat shall not excede the price of.vi.s. viii.d. the quarter, and tys.
iiii.s. the quarter, and barley.iii. shyllinges the quarter, it shall be lawful
to every person and persons to carry and transporte over the sea to any place
beyond the seas at their pleasure of the said kinds of corn, so that it be
not to the king and queen's enemies.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that this
Act, ne any thing therein ronteyned, shall extend to any person or persons
for the necessary victeling of any ship, ships, or other vessels, but that
they, and every of them, may victayle the said ships and vessels, as they
might have done before the making of this present act. This act or any thing
therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that this
act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be prejudicial or hurtefull unto
the Lord great Admiral of England, for the time being, or to the King and
Queen's majesty's jurisdiction of the Admiraltie, but that the said Lord
Admiral, or his deputy, or deputies may and shall exercise, use, and execute
al kind of jurisdiction, be longing to the sea, according to his or their
co^missions, as they might lawfully have done heretofore. This act or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the reuiuyng of three Estatutes made for the punishment of
heresies.
The.vi. Chapter
FOr the escheuing and avoiding of errors and herisies which of late have
risen, grown, and much increased within this realm, for that the Ordinaryes
have wanted authority to proceed against those, that were infected therewith.
Be it therefore ordained and enacted by the authority of this present
parliamente, that the Statute made in the fifth year of the reign of king
Rychard the second, concerning the arresting and apprehension of erroneous and
heretical preachers, and one other Statute, made in the second year of the
reygne of king Henry the fourth, concerning repressing of heresies, and
punishment of heretics, and also one other Estatute made in the second year
of the raygne of king Henrye the fyfte concerning the supression of heresies
and lollardrye, and every Article, Branch, and sentence conteygned in the
same three several Acts, and every of them, shall from the twenty day of
January next coming, be revived, and be in full force, strength, and effect,
to all intentes, constructions and purposes for ever.

The tenor of the first act, made in the fyfth year of king Richard, is as
follows. Chap. v.
ITem, forasmuch as it is openly known, that there be diueres evil persons
within ye realm, going from county to county, and from town to town, in
certain habites, vnderdissimulacion of great holiness, and with out the license
of the Ordinaries of the places, or other sufficient aucthoritye, preaching
daily, not only in Churches and Churcheyardes, but also in markettes, Fayres,
and other open places, where a great congregation of people is, diverse Sermons
co^teyninge heresies, and not or yous errors, to the great embleamishyng of
the christen faith, and destruction of the Laws, and of the estate of holy
Church, to the great pericle of the souls of the people, and of all the
realm of England, as more plainly is found, and sufficiently proved, before
the reverend father in God the Archebyshop of Canterbury, and the Byshopes,
andother prelates, masters of divinity, and doctors of Canon and of Cyuil,
and a great part of the clergy of the said realm: especially assembled for
this cause: which persons do also preach diverse, matters of siaunder, to
engender discord and discention betwixt diverse estates of ye said realm:
as well spiritual, as temporal, in exciting of the people, to the great peril
of all the Realm, which preachers cited or summoned before the Ordinaries of
the places, there to answer of that whereof they be impeched, will not obey to
their summons and commandments, nor care not for their monicions nor
sensures of the hole church, but expressly despice them: And more over, by
their subtyl and ingeneous words, do draw the people to here their Sermones,
and do maintayn them in their errors by strong, hand by great coutes: It is
ordained and assented in this present Parliament that the kings commissions be
made and directed to the Sheriffs and other ministers of our soueraygne Lord
the king, or other sufficient persons learned, and according to the
certificatio^s of the prelates thereof to be made in the Chauncerie, from time
to time, to arrest al such preachers, and also their fautours, mainteiners, and
abbettours, and to hold them in arrest and strong prison, till they
wiliustifie them according to the law and reason of holy Church. And the king
will and commands, that the Chauncelloure make such comissions at all times,
that he by the prelates, or any of them shall be certefied, and thereof required,
as is aforesaid.

The tenor of the second act, made in the second year of king Henry
the.iiii. is as follows. Cap. xv.
ITem where as it is showed to our sovereign Lord the King, on the behalf of
the prelates and Cleargye of his realm of England in this present
Parliamente, that although the catholic faith builded upon Christ and by his
Apostles, and the holy church sufficientlye determined, declared and approved,
has been hither to by good and holy, and most noble progenitors of our
sovereign Lord the king in the said Realm, amongst all the realms of the
world, most devoutly observed, and the Church of England, by his said most
noble progenitors and ancestors, to the honor of God, and the whole realm
aforesaid, laudably endowed, and in her rightes and liberties sustained,
without that that the same faith, or ye said Church was hrute or grievously
oppressed, or else perturbed by any peruers doctrine, or wicked heretical or
erroneous opinions: yet nevertheless, diverse false and perverse people, of a
certain new sect of the faith of the Sacraments of the Church, and the
authority of the same, damnably thinkyng, and against the law of God and of
the church, vsurpyng the office of preaching, do peruersly and maliciously, in
diverse places within the said realm, under the color of dissimuled
holiness, preach and teach these days openly and preuely diverse new
doctrines, and wicked heretical and erroneous opimo^s contrary to the same
faith, and blessed determinations of the holy Church. And of such sect and
wicked doctrine and opinions they make unlawful conuenticles, and
confederaties, they hold and exercise schools, they make and write books, they
do wickedly instruct and infourme people, and as much as they may, excite and
stir them to sedition and insurrection, and makes great strife and division
emo^ge the people, and other enormities horrible to be hard daily do
perpetrate and commit, in subuercion of the said catholic faith, and do etryne
of the holy church, in diminution of Gods honor and also in destruction of
the estate, rightes, and liberties of the said church of England, by which
sect and wicked and false preachynges, doctrines, and opinions of the said
false and perverse people, not only most greatest peril of the souls, but
also many more other hurtes slanders, and perilles (which God prohibit) might
come to this realm unless it be the more ple^tifully and spedely holden by
the kings majesty in this behalf, namely where as the diocesans of the said
realm cannot by their jurisdiction spiritual, without aid of the said royal
Majesty, sufficiently correct the said false and perverse people, nor refrayn
their malice, because the said false and perverse people do go from Dioces to
Dioces, and will not appear before the said Diocesans, but the same Diocesans,
and their jurisdiction spiritual, and the kayes of the church, with the
censures of the same, do utterly contempne and despise, and so their wicked
preachinges and doctrines, does from day to day continue and execise, to the
hatred of right and reason, and utter destruction order and good rule. Upon
which nowelties and excesses above rehearsed. The Prelates and clergy
aforsayde, and also the commons of thesayde realm, being in the same
parliament, praing our sovereign Lord the king, ye his roial highness would
vouchsafe in the said parliamente, to provide a conneunient remedy, the same
our sovereign Lordethe king, graciously conside ryng the premises, and also
the laudable steps of his said most noble progenitors and auncesters, for
the conservation of the said catholyke faith, and sustentation of Gods
honor, and also the safegarde of the estate, rightes, and liberties of the
said Church of England, to the laud of God, and merit of our said
soueraygne lord the king, and prosperity and honor of all his said realm,
and for the eschewing of such dissentions, divisions, hurtes, slanders, and
periles, in time to come, and that this wicked sect, preachinges, doctrines
and opinions, should from henceforth cease, and be utterly destroyed, by
thassent of the states, and other discrete men of the realm being in the said
parliament, has granted, stablished, and ordained from hence forth, fermly to
be observed, that none within ye said realm or any other dominions, subjects
to his roial majesty, presu^e to preach openly or privily, without the
license of the Diocesan of the same place, first required and obtained, curates
in their own churches, and persons he thereto priuileged, and other of the
canon law granted, only except. Nor that none from henceforth any thing
preach, hold teach, or instruct, openly or privily, or make or write any
book, contrary to the catholyke faith or determination of the holy church nor
of such sect and wicked doctrines and opinions, shall make any conuenticles,
or in any wise hold or exercise Schools. And also that none from henceforth in
any wise favor such preacher, or maker of any such, and like
conuenticles, or holdyng or exercsynge schools, or making, or writing such
books, or so teaching, infourminge, or exciting the people nor any of the in
maintain, or in any wise sustain. And that all, and singular having such
books or any wrytinges of such wicked doctrine and opinions, shall really with
effect deliver, or cause to be delivered all such books and writings to the
Diocesan of the same place, within.xl. days from the time of the proclamation
of this ordinance and statute. And if any person or persons, of whatsoever
kind, estate, or condition that he or they be, from henceforth do, or acce^pt
against the royal ordinance and statute aforesaid in the premises or in any
of the^ or such books in the form aforesaid, do not deliver, then the
diocesan of the same place in his dioces such person or perso^es in this be
balfe defamed, or evidently suspected, and eueri of the^ may by the authority
of the said ordinary and Statute, cause to be arrested, and under saufe
custody in his prisones to be detained, til he or they of the articles laid to
him or them in this behalf, do canonically purge him or them self, or else
such wicked sect, preachynges, doctrynes, and heretical and, erroneous
opinions, do abjure, according as the laws of the church does require, so
that the said diocesan by him self, or his commissaries, do openly and
iudicially proceed against such persons so arrested, and remaining under his
sause custody to all effect of the law, and determine that same business,
according to the Canonical decrees, within three months after the said
arrest any laweful impediment ceassing. And if any person in any case above
expressed, be before the diocesan of that place, or his commissaries
canonically conuicte, then the same diocesan may do to be kept in his prison
the said person so conuicte, for the manner of his defaut, and after the
quality of the offense, according and as long as to his discretion shall seem
expediente, and moreover to put the same person to the secular court, except in
cases where he according to the canonical decret ought to be left, to pay to
our soueraygne lord the king, his pecunier fine, according as the same fine
shall seem competent to the diocesan, for the manner and quality of the
offense, in which case the same diocesan, shall be bound to certifye the king
of the same fine in his eschecker, by his Lettre Patentes, sealed with his
seal, to the effect that such fine by the kings authority, may be
required and levied to his use of the goods of the same person so convict. And
if any person within the said realm and dominions, upon the said wicked
preachynges, doctrynes, opinions, schools, and heretical and erroneous
informations, or any of them be before the diocesan of the same place, or his
commissaries sencencially conuicte and the same wicked sect, preachinges,
doctrines and opinions, schools, and informations, do refuse duly to abjure,
or by the diocesan of the same place or his commissaries after the abiuration
made by the same person pronounced, fall in to relapse, so that according to the
holy canons, he ought to be left to the seculer court, whereupon credence shall be
given to the diocesan of the same place, or to his comissaries in this behalf,
then the sheriff of the county of the same place, and Mayor and sheriffs or
sheriff, or Mayor and Bayliffes of the city, town, and borough of the same
county next to the same diocesan, or the said Commyssaryes, shall be personally
present in preferring of such sentences, when they by the same diocesan or his
commissaries shall be required: and they the same persons and every of them,
after such sentence promulgate, shall receive: and them before the people in
an high place do to be brent, that such punishment may strike in fear to
the minds of other, whereby no such wicked doctrine and hereticail, and
erroneous opinions, nor their abbettours and fautours in the said realm and do
minions against the catholic faith, christen law and determination of the
holy church (which God prohibit) be sustained, or in any wise suffered, in
which al, and singular the premises, concerning the said ordinance and
statute, the sheriffs, majors, and baylyffes, of the said counties, cities,
boroughes, and towns, shall be attending, ayding, and supporting, to the said
diocesans and their commissaries.

The tenor of the third Act, made in the second year of king Henry the fyft,
is as follows. Cap. vii.
ITem forasmuch as great rumors, congregations, and in surrections, here in
the realm of England by diverse of the kings liege people, as well by them
which were of ye sect of heresies commonly called lollardrie, as by other of
their confederacy, excitation, and abbetment, now of late were made, to the
intent to adnull, destroy, and subuerte the christen faith, and the law of
God and holy church within this same realm of England, and also to destroy,
the same our soueraygne lord the king, and all other manner of estates of the
same realm of England as well spiritual as temporal, and also all manner of
policy and finally the laws of the land: The same our soueraygne lord the
king, to the honor of god, and in co^seruation and fortification of the
christen faith, and also in salvation of his royal estate, and of the estate
of al his realm, willing against the malice of such heretics and lollardes to
provide a more open remedy and punishment then has been had and used in ye
case heretofore, so that for fear of the same laws and punyshmente, such
heristes and lollardries may the rather cease in time to come, by the advice
and assent aforesaid, and at the prayer of the said commons, has ordained and
stablished: that first the chaunceler, treasurer, Justices of the one bench and
of the other, Justices of peace, sheriffs, majors, and baylyffes of cities and
towns, and al other officers, having governance of people, which now be, or
hereafter for the time shall be, shall make an oath in taking of their charges and
occupations, to put their whole power and diligence, to put out and do to be
put out, cease, and destroy al manner of heresies and errors, commonly called
lollardries within the places where they exercise their offices and occupatio^s
from time to time with all their power, and that they assiste the ordinaries,
and their co^missaries and them favor and maintain as often as they or any of
them to that shall be required by the same ordinaries or their co^missaries, so
yt when the said officers and ministers travail or ride to arrest any lollard,
or to make assistence at the instaunce and request of ye ordinaries or their
co^missaries by vertne of this statute, that the same ordinaries and
co^missaries shall pay for their costs reasonablye. And yt the kings
services, to the which the same officers be first sworn, be preferred before
all other statutes for the liberty of holy church and the ministers of the
same, and in especial for the correction and punishment of the heretics and
lollardes before this time made and not repelled being in their force. And also
that al persons co^uict of heresy, of what estate, condition, or degree that
they be, by the said ordinaries or other co^missaries left to the seculer
power, according to the laws of holy church, shall loose and forfayt al their
lands and tenementes, which they have in fee simple in the manner as follows,
that is to say, that the king have all the lands and tenementes, which the
said conuictes have in fee simple and holden of him immediately as forfayte, and
that the other lords, of whom the lands and tenementes of such conuictes be
bolden immediately, after that the king is so seaced and answered of ye year
the day, and the wast, have livery out of the kings hands of the lands and
teneme^tes aforesaid of the^ so holden, as it has been used in the case of
attainder of felony, except ye lands and tenementes, which be holden of the
ordinaries or their commissaries, before whom any such persons impeched of
heresy be convict, which lands and teneme^tes, intierly shall remain to the
king as forfayte. And moreover yt al ye goods and cattels of these persons so
co^uicted, be forfaytto our soueraygne lord the king, so that no person convict
of heresy, and left to ye seculer power after the laws of holy church, shall
forfait his lands before yt he be dead. And if any such person so co^uict, be
enfeffed be it by fine by deed, or without deed, in lands or teneme^tes,
rentes, or services, in fee or otherwise, or has any other possessions or
cattels by gift or grant of any person or persons to another use the^ to ye
use of such conuictes, yt the same lands nor tenementes, rentes nor services,
nor such other possessions, nor cattels shall be forfeyt to our sovereign lord
the king in no wise. And moreover yt the justices of ye kings benche, and
justices of peace, and justices of assise, have full power to enquire of al
the^, which hold any errors or heresies, as lollardes, and which be their main
temers, receyuers, favorers and sustemers, common writers of such books as well
of ye sermons, as of their schools, co^uenticles, congregatio^s and
confederacies. And that this clause be put in co^missions of ye Justices of ye
peace. And if any persons be endicted of any points aforesaid the said
Justices shall have power to award against the^ a Capias, and the sheriff
shall be bound to arrest the person or persons so endicted as soon as he may them
find by him or by his officers. And forasmuch as the congnisaunce of heresy,
errors and lollardries, belongs to ye judges of holy church, and not to the
seculer judges such persons endicted shall be delivered to the ordinaries of the
places or to their co^missaries, by indentures bytwyxt them to be made,
within.x. days after their arrest, or sooner if it may be, thereof to be
acquyte or co^uict by ye laws of holy church, in case that these persons be
not endicted of an other thing, whereof the cognisaunce belongs to the seculer
judges and officers, in which case, after that, that they be acquyte or
delivered before the seculer Judges of such things to the seculer Judges
belongyng, they shall be sent in safeguard to the said ordynaryes, or to their
commissaries, and to them delivered by indentures, as before to be acquyte or
conuicte of such lollardryes, errors, or heresies, as is aforesaid, after the
laws of holy church, and that within the term aforesaid.

Provided always that the said endictementes be not taken in euydence but for
information before the spiritual judges against such persons so endicted,
but that the ordinaries commence their process against such persons endicted
in the same manner as though no endictement were, having no regard to such
endictmentes. And if any be endicted of heresy, error, or lollardrye, and
taken by the Sheriff or other officer, he shall be let to main pryse within
the said ten days by good suertie for whom the said Sheriffs or other
officers will answer, so that the said person or persons, which were so
endicted, be ready to be delivered to the said ordinaries, or to their
commissaries, before the end of the said ten days, if he may by any means
for syckenes. And every ordinarye shall have sufficient commissaries, or
commissarye dwelling in every county in a place notable, so that if any such
person so endicted be taken, that the said commissaries, or commissarye may
be warned in the notable place where he dwells, by the Sheriff, or some of
his officers, to come to the kings iayle in the same county, there to receive
the same person so endicted by indentures as before. And that in the enquest in
this case to be taken, the Sheriffs and other officers, to whom it belongs
shall do to be empanelled good and sufficient persons, not suspected nor
procured, that is to say, that every of them which shall be so empanelled in
such enqueste, have within the realm of England. C. s. of lands, tenementes,
or of rent by year, upon pain to lose to the bynges use.x.li. and they which
shall be empanelled in such enquestes in Wales, every of them shall have to ye
value of.xl. s. by year. And if any such person be arested, be it by the
ordinary, or by the kings officers or ministers, and escape or break ye
prison, before that he be acquit before the ordinary, the goods and cattels,
which he had the day of such arreste, shall be forfeyre to the king and his
lands and tenementes, which he had the same day, seized also into the
kings hands, the king shall have the profytes thereof from the said day,
until he be yielded to the prison from which he escaped. And that the foresaid
Justices have full power to inquire of al such escapes, breakyng of prison, and
also of lands and tenementes, goods and catteles of such persons so endicted.

Provided also that if any such person endicted do not return to the said
prison and dies not conuicte it shall be lawful to his heirs to enter into the
lands and tenementes of their auncestre, without any other pursuyte making to
the king for this cause, and then al they which have liberties and fraunchises
royal in England, as in the county of Chester, the county and liberty of
Durham, and other like, and also all the Lords, which have jurisdiction and
fraunchises royal in Wales, where the kings writtes do not run, have power
to execute and put in due execution these articles, in all points by the^ or by
their officers, in like manner as the Justices and other the kings officers
before declared should do.

An act that persons dwelling in the country, shall not sell diverse wares in
cities, or towns corporate by retayle.
The.vii. Chapter.
WHere before this time the ancient cities, boroughes, Towns corporate, and
markette towns within this realm of England, have been very populous, and
chiefly inhabited with merchants, artificers, and handye crafts men during
which time the children in ye said cities, boroughes, towe^s corporate, and
market towns were ciuilye brought up, and instructed, and also the said
cities, boroughes, and towns corporate kept in good order and obeysaunce, and
the inhabiters of the same well set on work, and kept from ydlenes. By reason
whereof, the said cities, boroughes, and towns corporate, did then prosper in
riches, and great wealth, and were as then not only able to serve and furnysh
the king and Queens majesty's, and other their noble progenitors, kings of
this realm, as well with great numbers of good able persons, and well furny
shed mete for the wars, as also then charged 'and yet chargeable, with great
fee farms, quyndemes, taxes, and diverse other paymentes to the king and
Queens majesty's, which at this present they be not able to pay and bear,
but to their utter undoing, being few in number to pay and bear the same, but
also the same cities, bouroughes, and towns corporate, are like to come very
shortly to utter destruction, ruin, and decay, by reason whereof the occupiers,
lynnen, draperes, woollen drapers, haberdashars, and Grocers, dwellinge in the
countries out of the said cities, boroughes, towns corporate, and market
towns, do not only occupye the art and mystery of the said sciences, in the
places where they dwell and inhabit, but also come unto the said cities,
boroughes towns corporate and market towns and there sell their wares, and
take away the relief of the inhabitau^tes of the said cities, boroughes,
towns corporate, and market towns to the great decay, and utter undoing of
the inhabitauntes of the same, if spedy reformation therein, be not had in time
convenient For remedy whereof, and for the better amendment of the said
cities boroughes, towns corporate, and market towns, and to the^d the same
cities, boroughes, and towns corporate, may be the better able to pay the said
fee fermes, and also to bear the other ordynary charges within the same
cities, boroughes, and towns corporate, and to furnyshe the king and Queen's
majesty's, which numbers of able persons, like as they heretofore have done in
times past, in times of war.

Be it therefore enacted by our soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and
Queen, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that any person or
persons, which do now inhabit and dwell, or hereafter shall inhabit or
dwell in the country any where or county within this realm of England, out of
any of the said cities, boroughes, towns corporate, or market towns, from,
and after ye feast of S. Michael tharchaungel next coming, shall not sell or
cause to be sold by retayle, any woollen cloth, linen cloth, haberdashe wares
Grocery wares, mercery wares, at, or within any of the said cities, boroughes,
towns corporate, or market towns, or wtin the suburbs or liberties of the
said cities boroughes, towns corporate, and market towns, within this said
realm of England (except it be in open fayres) upon pain to forfeyt and loose
for every time so offending ye sum of vi. s. viii. d. and the hole wares so
sold, proferred, and offered to be sold, contrary to the form, intent, and
effect of this present act, as above is said, the one moytie of all which
forfaytures, to be to the use of our said soueraygne Lord and Lady the king
and Queens majesty's, and the other half to him or them that shall sease and
sewe for the same in any of the king and queens courts of record, by byll,
playnt, action of debte, informacion or otherwise, where in no essoigne,
protection or, wager of law, shall be allowed.

Provided always, that this act shall not in any wise extend, nor be hurtefull
to any person or persons, that bring any of the said woollen cloth, lynnen
cloth, haberdash, Grocery, mercery ware or wars, to any of the said cities,
boroughes, towns corporate, or markette towns to be sold, or cause to be
sold by whole sale, in gross, and not byretayle, but they and every of them
may laufully sell the same, in as large and ample manner, form and, condition
by whole sale in gross, and not by retayle, as they and every of them, might
have done at any time or times before the making of this act. Any thing here in
to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this present act shall not extend to any person or
persons, yt now dwell or inhabit in the country, or hereafter shall dwell or
inhabit out of any of the said cities, boroughes, towns corporate, or market
towns, but that they, and every of them at any time hereafter, when they, or
any of them shall be free of any the guyldes, and liberties of any the said
cities, boroughes, towns corporate, or market towns, and dwell or inhabit
within any of the same cities, boroughes, towns corporate, or markette towns,
that they and every of them so being free, shall and may sell or cause to be
sold, any of the wares aforesaid, by retayle, in as ample and large manner as
they, and every of them, might have done, being free of the said cities,
boroughes, and towns aforesaid, before the making of this Act. Any clause or
article in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that it shall be
lawefull to all persons, to sell or cause to be sold by retayle or otherwise,
al manner of cloth, lynnen, or woollen, of their own making, in every city,
borough, town corporate, and market town within this realm, as freely and
franckly as they might have done before the making of this Act Any thing in
the same contained to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
prejudicial or hurtefull to the liberties, and privileges of the universities
of Cambrydge and Oxforde, or either of them, Any thing in this Act heretofore
mentioned to the contrary notwythstandyng.

An Act repealyng all Statutes, articles, and provisions, made Against the Sea
Apostolyke of Rome, since the.xx. year of King Henry the eight, and also for
thestablyshment of all spirytuall and ecclesiastical possessions, and
hereditamentes conveyed to the laytie.
The.viii. Chapter.
WHere as since the.xx. year of King Henry theight of famous memory, father
unto your majesty, our most natural soueraygne, and gracious Lady and
Queen, much faise and erroneous doctrine, has been taught, preached, and
written partly by diverse, the natural borne Subjects of this realm and
partelye being brought in hither from sundry other forreyne countries, has
been sown and spread abroad within the same. By reason whereof as well the
spirituality as the temporaltie of your highness realms and dominions, have
swerued from the obedience of the Sea Apostolyke, and declined from the unity
of Christ's church, and so have continued, until such time as your majesty
being first raised up by God, and set in the seat Royal over us, and then by
his divine and gracious providence knyt in marriage with the most noble and
virtuous Prince, the king our soueraygne Lord your husband, the Popes
holiness, and the Sea Apostolic, sent hither unto your majesty's (as unto
persons undefiled, and by Gods goodness preserved from the common infection
aforesaid) and to the whole realm, the most reverend father in God the Lord
Cardinal Poole Legate, de latere to call us home again into the right way,
from whence we have all this long while wandered, and strayed abroad. And we
after sondrye long, and, grievous plagues, and calamities, saying by the
goodness of god our own errors, have acknowledged the same unto the said
most reverend father, and by him have been, and are the rather at the
contemplation of your majesty's, received and embraced into the unity and
bosom of Christ's church, and upon our humble submission and promise made
for a declaration of our repentance to repeal and aborgate such acts and
Statutes as had been made in parliament, since the said.xx. year of the said
king Henry theyght, against the supremacy of the Sea Apostolic, as in our
submission exhibited to the said most reverend father in God, by your
majesty's appears. The tenor whereof ensues

We the Lords spiritual, and temporal, and the commons assembled in this
present parliament, representynge the whole body of the realm of England, and
the dominions of the same, in the name of our selves perticulerlye and also of
the said body universally in this our supplication, directed to your majesty's
with most humbly suit that it may by your graces intercession and mean be
exhibited to the most reverend father in God, the Lord Cardinal Poole
legate, sent specially hither from our most holy father Pope Iulye the
third, and the Sea Apostolic of Rome, do declare our selves very sorye and
repentaunte, of the scisme and disobedience, committed in this realm and
dominions aforesaid against ye said Sea Apostolic, either by making, agreing,
or execting any laws, ordinances, or commandments, against the supremacy
of the said Sea, or other wise doing or speaking, that might impugn the same:
offering our selves, and promisyng by this our supplication, that for a token
and knoweledge of our said repentance, we be and shall be always ready under,
and with thauctorities of our miaesties, to ye vttermooste of our powers, to do
that shall lie in us, for the abrogation and repealynge of the said laws and
ordinances in this present parliament, as well for our selves as for the whole
body, whom we represente, where upon we most humbly desire your majesty's,
as personages undefiled in thoffence of his body toward the said Sea, which
nevertheless God by his prouydence, has made subject to you, so to set forth
this our most humble suite, that we may obtain from the Sea Apostolyke, by
the said most reverend father, as well perticulerlye, as generally,
absolution, release, and discharge, from all danger of such censures, and
sentences, as by the laws of the church we be fallen into. And that we may
as children repentaunt, be received in the bosom and unity of Christ's
church, so as this noble realm, with all the members thereof, may in this
unity, and perfect obedience to the Sea Apostolic, and Popes, for the time
being, serve God and your majesty's, to the furtheraunce and aduaunceme^t of
his honor and glory. We are at the intercession of your majesty's, by
thaucthoritie of our holy father, Pope July the third, and of the Sea
Apostolic, assoyled, discharged, and delivered from excommunication,
interdictions and other censures Ecclesiastical which has hanged over our
heads for our said defaultes, since the time of the said scisme, mentioned in
our supplication. The which time the said Lord Legate, and we, do al declare,
recognize, and mean by this act, to be only since the.xx. year of the
raygne of our most noble father, King Henry theyght. It may now like your
majesty's, that for the accomplyshment of our promise made in the said
supplication, that is, to repeal al laws and Statutes, made contrary to the
said supre macye, and Sea Apostolyke, during the said scisme, the which is
to be understand, since the.xx. year of ye reign of the said late king Henry
theyght, and so the said lord Legate does accept and recognize the same.

Wherein the pacliament begone and holden at Westminster, in the.xxi. year of
the raygne of the late King of most famous memory, king Henry theight one
act was then and there made against pluralities of benefices, for taking of
farms by spiritual men and for none residence, in the which act amongst
other things it was ordained and enacted, that if any person or persons, at
any time after the first day of Apryll, in the year of our Lord God a thousand
five hundred and thyrtie contrary to the same act, should procure and obtain
at the court of Rome, or else where any license, or lycences, union,
tolleration, or dispensation, to receive and take any more benefices, with
cure, then was limited and appointed by the same act, or else at any time
after the said day should put in execution any such license, tolleration, or
dispensation, before that time obtained, contrary to the said Act, that then
every such person or persons, so after the said day, suinge for him self,
or receauyng, and taking such benefice by force of such license or lycences,
union, tolleration, or dispensation, that is to say: the same prrson or
persons only, and no another, should for every such default, incur the
danger pain, and penaltite of.xx. li. sterling. and should also loose the hole
profytes of every such benefice, or benefices, as he receaueth, or takes by
force of any such license, or licenses, union, tolleration or dispensation. And
where also in the said Act it was ordained and enacted, that if any person or
persons did procure, or obtain at the Court of Rome, or else where any manner
of license, or dispensatio^ to be none residence at their dignities, prebende,
or benefices, co^trari to the said Act, that then every such person or
persons, putting in execution any such dispensation, or license for him self
from the said first day of Apryll, in the said year of our Lord God, a M.
five hundred, and thyrtie should run and encurre, in the penaltye, damage,
and pain of.xx. li. ster. for every time so doing, to the for fayted and
recovered, as by the said Act is declared. And yet such license, or
dispensation so procured, or to be put in execution, to be void, and of none
effect, as by the same act more plainly it does, and may appear.

Be it enacted by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that as much only
of the said Act as concerns the articles, and clauses aforesaid, and al and
every the words and sentences, contained in the said Act, concerning the said
articles, and clauses, and every of them, shall from henceforth be repealed,
adnulled, revoked, adnichilated, and utterly made void for ever. Any thing in
the said act to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

And where also at the session of the same parliament, holden upon prorogation,
in the.xxiii. year of the reign of the said late king Henry theyght, one
act, entitled: the act that no person shall be cited out of the diocese, where
he or she dwells, except in certain caces, And where also at the said
parliament, in the session holden at Westminster upon prorogation, in
the.xxiiii. year of the reign of ye said late king Henry theyght, one act was
made, that appeals in such cases as has been used to be pursued to the sea
of Rome, should not from henceforth be had nor used, but within this realm.
And where also at the said parliament holden at Westminster, in the.xxi. year
of the raygne of the said late king Henry the eight, and there continued by
diverse prorogations, until the.xiiii. day of April, in the xxvii. year of
his reygne, one act was made concerning restraintes of paymentes of annaties,
and first fruits, of Archebyshopryckes and Byshoprickes of the Sea of Rome.
And where at a Session of the said parliament, holden in the.xxv. year of the
reygne of the said late king, there was also made one act, entitled: the
submission of the clergy to the kings majesty's, and one other act
entitled, one Act restraynyng the said paymentes of annates, or first
fruits to the bishop of Rome, and of the electing and consecratinge of the
Archbyshoppes and Byshopes within this realm. And one other act was then and
there made, entitled: an act concerning the exoneration of the kings
subjects, from exactions, and impositio^s before that time paid to the Sea of
Rome, and for having licenses and dispensacions within this realm, without
suyng further for the same.

Be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present perliament, that the said
several acts made for the restraynt of the payment of the said annates, and
first fruytes, and all other the said Acts, made in the said.xxiiii.
and.xxv. years of the raygne of the said late king, and every of them, and al,
and every branch, article, matter, and sentence in them, and every of them
contained, shall be by thaucthoritie of this present parliament from henceforth
utterly void, made frustrate and repelled, to all intentes, constructions,
and purposes.

And be it further enacted by the authority of this present parliament. that
all and every these acts folowinge. That is to say: one act made at the
session of the said parliament holden upon prorogation at Westin. in the.xxvi.
year of the reign of the said late king Henry theyght, entitled: an act
concerning ye kings hyghnes to be supreme head of the church of England,
and to have authority to reform and redress all errors, heresies, and
abuses, in the same. And one other act made in the same session of the same
parliamente entitled: an act for nomination, and consecration of Suffragans
within this realm. And one other act made in the.xxvii. year of the reygne
of thesayde late king Henry the eight, entitled: an act whereby the king
should have power to nominate.xxxii. persons of his Clergy and Lay fee, for
making of Ecclesiastical laws. And also one other act, made at the
parliamente holden at Westminster in the.xxviii. year of the reygne of the
said late king Henry the eight entitled: an act extinquysshynge thaucthoritie
of the Bishop of Rome And one other act made in the same parliamente,
entytuled: an act for the release of such, as then had, obtained, pretended
lycences, and dyspensations from the Sea of Rome. And also all that part of
theacte, made in the said.xxviii. year of the said king, entitled: an act
for the establyshemente of the Succession of the imperial crown of the
realm, that concerns a prohibition to marrye within the degrees expressed in
the said Act. And also one other Act, made at the parliamente holden at
Westminster, in the.xxxi. year of the reygne of the said late king Henrye
the eyghte, eutituled: an act aucthorisynge the kings highness to make
Bysshoppes by his letters patentes. And one other act made in the session of
the same parliament, begone in the said.xxx. year, holden upon prorogation.
the.xxxii. year of the reygne of the said King Henry the eyghte, entitled:
an act concerning precontractes of marryages, and touching degrees of
consanguinitie. And one other act made in the parliament holden at
Westminster, in the.xxxv. year of the reygne of the said late king Henry
theyght, entitled: an act for the ratification of the kings majesty's style,
shall henceforth be repealed, made frustrate, void, and of none effect. And
where also at the said parliament holden at Westminster, in the.xxxv. year of
ye reign of the said late king Henry theyght, one other act was made, entite
led: an Act concerning the establyshment of the succession of the said king in
the Imperial Crown of this realm: In the which act there is a form of a
corporal oath devised and set forth, that every subject of this realm,
should be bound to take against the power, authority, and jurisdiction of the
Sea of Rome. Be it enacted by ye authority of this present Parliament, that
so much of the said Act, as touches the said oath against the supremacy,
and all oaths there up on had, made, and given, shall be from henceforth utterly
void, repealed and of none effect. And where also one other act was made in
the xxxvii. year of the raygne of the said late king Henry theight entitled,
an act that doctors of civil law, being married, might exercise
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Be it enacted by thaucthoritie of this present
Parliament, that the said act last before mentioned, and all, and every
branch, article, sentence, and matter, contained in the same, shall from
henceforth be repealed, and utterly made void, and of none effect.

And where one other act was made at the first session of the Parliament,
holden at Westminster, in the first year of the reign of king Edward the six
te, entitled: an act for the repeal of certain Statures, concerning
treasons, felonies, etc. In the which act amongst other things, there is
contained certain provisions, pains, penalties, and forfaytures for and
against such, as should by open preachinges, express words, sayings,
writing, printing ouert deed, or act affirm, or set forth, that the king of
this realm for the time being, is not or ought not to be supreme head in
earth, of the churches of England and Irelande, ne of any of them, or that the
Bishop of Rome, or any other person, or persons, other then the king of
England for the time being, is or ought to be supreme head of ye same
churches, or any of them, as in the same act last before rehearsed, more at
large is contained, and may appear. Be it enacted by thauctoritie of this
present Parliament, that these clauses before rehearsed, and other of the said
act, concerning the supremacye, and all, and every branch, article, words,
and sentence, in the same sounding, or tendyng to the derogation of the
supremacy, of the popes holiness, or the Sea of Rome, and al pains, penalties,
and forfaytures. made against them, that should by any means set forth, or
extole the said supremacy, shall be from henceforth utterly void and of none
effect.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that al clauses,
sentences, and articles of every other Statute, or act of Parliament, made
sithenes the said.xx. year of the raygne of king Henry theyght, against the
supreme authority of the Popes holiness, or Sea Apostolic of Rome, or
containing any other matter of the same effect only, that is repealed in any
of the Statutes aforesaid, shall be also by authority hereof from henceforth
utterly void, frustrate and of none effect.

And where we your most humble subjects, the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and commons in this present Parliament assembled, have exhibited to your
Majesty's one other supplication in form folowinge.

We the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
Parliament assembled representing the whole body of this realm, reduced and
received by your majesty's intercession to ye unity of Christ's Church, and
the obedience of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, and the Popes holiness governing
the same, make most humble suite unto your majesty's, to be likewise means and
intercessours, that al occasions of contention, hatred, grudge, suspicion, and
trouble both outwardly and inwardly in men's consciences, which might arise
amongst us, by reason of disobedience, may by authority of the Popes holiness,
and by ministration of the same unto us, by the most reverend father in God, ye
Lord Cardinal Poole, by dispensation toleration, or permission respectively, as
the case shall require, be abolished, and taken away, and by authority
sufficient these articles following, and generally all others, when any occasion
shall so require, may be provided for, and confyrmed.

First that all Bysshopryckes, cathedral churches, hospitales, colleges,
lcholes, and other such foundations now continuing, made by authority of
Parlyament, or otherwise establyshed, according to ye order of the laws of
this realm, sythens this scysme, may be confyrmed and continued for ever.

Item that marriages made infragradus prohibitos consanguinitatis, affinitatis,
cognationis spiritualis, or which might be made void propter impedimentum
publicae honestatis, iustitiae, or for any other cause, prohibited by the
canons only may be confirmed, and children borne of those marriages declared
legittimate, so as those marriages were made, according to ye laws of the
realm for the time being, and be not directly against the laws of God, nor in
such case, as the Sea Apostolic has not used to dyspence wythall.

That institutions of benefices, and other promotions ecclesiastical and
dispensations, made according to the form of the act of Parliament, may be
likewise confirmed.

That all judicial processes, made before any ordinaries of this realm, or
before any delegates upon any appeals, according to thordre. of the laws of
the realine, may be likewise ratified and confirmed.

And finally where certain acts and statutes have been made in the time of
the late scism, concerning the lands, and hereditamentes of Archebisshoprykes
and Bishoprics, the suppression, and dissolution of monasteries. Abbayes,
prioryes, chauntries, colleges, and al other the goods and cartels of
religious houses. Since the which time, the right, and dominion of certain
lands, and hereditamentes, goods and cattels, belonging to the same, be
dispersed abroad, and come to the hands, and possessions of diverse and
sondri persons, wholby gift, purchase, exchange, and other means, according
to the order of the laws and statutes of this realm, for the time veynge,
have the same. For the auoydinge of all scruples that might grow by any
thoccasions aforesaid, or by any other ways, or means, whatsoever: It may
please your majesty's, to be intercessours, and medtatours, to the said
most reverend father, Cardinal Pole, that all such causes, and quarrels as
by pretense of the said scisme, or by any other occasion, or mean whatsoever,
might be moved by the Popes holiness, or Sea Apostolic, or by any other
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, may be utterly removed, and taken away, so as al
persons having sufficient conueyaunce of the said lands and hereditamentes,
goods and cattels, as is aforesaid, by the common laws, acts or Statutes of
this realm, may without scruple of conscience, enjoy them without
impechement or trouble by pretense of any general counsel, Cannons, or
Ecclesiastical laws, and clear from all dangers of the censures of the
church.

And conformablie hereunto, the Bysshoppes and Cleagry of the prouynce of
Cantorburie have presented to your majesty's a supplication, in this tenor
that follows.

Nos Episcopi and Clerus Cantuariensis prouinciae in hoc Synodo more nostro
solito, dum Regni parliame^ta^celebratur, congregati, cum omni debita
humilitate and reuere^tia ex ponimus Maiestatibus uestris, quod lic^t
Ecclesiarum, quibus in Episcopos Decanos, Archidiaconos, rectores, and uicarios
praefecti sumus, and animaru^, quae nobis and curae nostrae subiectae su^t and
earundem bonorum iurisdictionum, and iurium, ex sacrorum Canonum dispositione,
defensores and curatores constituti sumus, and proptereaipsa rum bona,
iurisdictiones, and iura in pernicioso huius Regni praeterito scis mate de
perdita and amissa, omnistudio, and totis nostris uiribus, recuperare and ad
pristinum Ecclesiarum ius reuocare, iuris remedijs niti deberemus: Nichilominus
camen habito prius per nos super hac re maturo Consilio, et deliberatione
ingenue fatemur, nos optime cognoscere, quam haec bonoru^ Ecclesiasticoru^
difficilis, and quasi impnssibilis esset recuperatio propter multiplices, ac
pene inextricabiles super hiis habitos contractus, and dispositiones, and quod
si ea tentaretur, quies and tranquilitas Regni facile perturbaretur, and unitas
Ecclesiae Catholicae, quae iam pietatis, and aucthoritate Maiestatum uestrarum
hoc in Regno introducta est, cum maxima difficultate suum debitum progressum,
and finem sortirl posset. Ideo nos bonu^ and quietem publicam priuatis
commoditatibus, and salutem tot animarum praetioso Christi sanguine et
redemptarum terrenis bonis antepone^tes, and non quae noctra, sed quae lesu
Christisunt quaerentes, Maiectatis uestras enixe rogamus, eisque humiliter
supplicamus, ut reueren dissimo in Chricto patri, domino Reginaldo Cardinali
Polo, ad ipsas, and uniuersum hoc Angliae regnum sanctissimi domini nostri,
Domini Iulij, Papae tertij, and Apostolicae seeds de latere legato, haec nomine
nostro in sinuare, and apud eu^ intercedere digne^tur, ut in hiis bonis
Ecclesiastices in part, uel in toto arbi trio suo iuxta facultates sibi ab
eodem sanctissimo domino nostro Papa concessas, eorundem bonorum detentoribus
elargiendis et relaxandis publicum bonum priuato pacem and tranquillitatem
dissidijs, and perturbationibus, atque animarum falutem bono terrenis
praeferre, and anteponere uelit Nos enim in omnibus quae ab ipso legato
statuta, and ordinata circa haec bona fuerint, ex nunc, prout ex tunc, and
econtra co^sensum nostru^ praecta mus, imo etiam ut in praemissis se difficilem
aut restrictum reddere non uelit, malestatis uestrae nostro nomine eum hortari,
and rogare dignabuntur. In super maiestatibus uestris supplicamus, ut pro sua
pietate effice re dignentur, ut ea quae ad iurisdistionem noctra^, and
libertate^ Ecclesiasti came pertinent, sine quibus debitum nostri pastorales
officij et curae anima rum nobis commissae exercere non possumus, nobis
superiorum temporu^ in iuria ablata restituantur, and ea nobis, and Ecclesijs
perpetuo illesa and salua permaneant, and ut omnes leges, quae hanc nostram,
iurisdictionem, and libertatem Ecclesiasticam tollunt, seu quouis modo
impediunt, abrogentur ad honorem dei, and maiestatum uestrarum, and
uniuersihuius Regni Spirituale, et temporale commodum, et salutem, certam, spem
etiam habe^tes, Maiestates uestras, pro sua singulari in ipsum deum pietate,
proque multis et insignibus ab ipsius dei bonitate acceptis beneficijs
necessitatibus, et incommodis huius sui Regni Ecclesiarum maxim curam animarum
habentium nunque defuturas esse, sedprout opus fuerit, consulturas atque
prouisuras.

Forasmuch as the said most reverend father, the Lord Legate, at the
intercession of your majesty's, has by thauctoritie of the Sea Apostolyke,
sufficiently dispensed in the matters specified in the said several
supplications, as in his said letters of dispensation is contained more at
large. The tenor whereof ensues.

Reginaldus miseratione diuina Sanstae Mariae in Cosmedin Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae, Diaconus, Cardinalis Polus nuncupatus, ad Serenissimos Philippum and
Mariam, Angliae Reges, fidei defensores: et uniuersum Angliae regnum,
Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, et sedis Apostolicae de latere legatus eis them
Serenissimis Philippo et Mariae Regibus salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum
supremum consilium istius regni parlamentu^ nuncupatum Maiestatibus uestris,
per suos supplices libellos exposuisset, quod perniciocissimo scismate, in hoc
regno alias uigente, quod nunc dei misericordia, and maiestatum uestrarum
pietate extinctum est, authoritatem ipsius parlamenti, nonnulli Episcopatus
diuisi, and ex his aliquae inferiores Ecclesiae, in cathedrales erestae, et
scholae, at que hospitalia fundata, necnon plurimae dispensationes et
beneficiorum prouisiones factae fueru^t ac multae personae quibus persuasum
fuerat: Iuris Canonici dispositiones, hoc in Regno amplius locum non habere:
inter se in gradibus consanguinitatis uel affinitatis de iure prohibitis, and
alijs impedimentis Canonicis sibi obstantibus matrimonia, per uerba de
praesenti co^traxerunt, et multis actus iudiciarij, and processus, tam in
primis, quam ulterioribus instantiis super rebus spiritualibus, and
Ecclesiasticis coram iudicibus tam Ordinarijs quam delegatis, qui authoritate
laicali procedebant, habiti and seruati, adsuper eis etia^ se^te^tiae latae, et
promulgatae fueru^t, et bona ecclesiastica per diuersas eiusdem regni personas
occupata, et apprehe^sa fuerunt: Quae quidem licet ex sacrorum Canonum
institutis irrita declarari possent, tamensi ad alium statum, quam in quo
nuncsunt, reuocarentur, publica pax and quies uniuersi regni turbaretur, et
maxima confusio oriretur, presertim si dictorum bonorum possessores
molestarentur, et propterea maiestati bus uestris humiliter supplicauerint, ut
apud nos intercedere dignentur, ut premissarum rerum firmitari, et stabilitati,
et simul huius Regni quieti, et tranquillitati de benignitate Apostolica
prouidere uelimus. Cumque Episcopi quoque deinde, ac reliquus prouinciae
Cantuariensis Clerus totu^fere corpus Ecclesiasticum regni representans, ad
quos haec bonorum Ecclesiasticorum causa maxim pertinet, exposuerint, quod
haec bona ad ius ecclesiarum reuocare non possunt, quin pax uniuersalis, and
quies huius regni turbetur, et causa fidei atque unitatis Ecclesiae, iam toto
omnium consensu hoc in regno introducta, in maximum periculum adducatur, et
propterea ipsi quoque supplicauerint, ut apud nos intercedere uelint, ut in his
bonis Ecclesiasticis possessoribus relaxandus restricti et difficiles esse
nollemus, maiestates autem uestrae, ad quas maxim spectat prouldere, ut regnu^
ipsaru^ potestari, regimini et curae commissum in pace et
tranquillitateconseruetur. His supplicationibus et postulatis cognitis et
mature co^sideratis iudicauerint ea omnia, et maxim illa, quae in bonoru^
ecclesiasticoru^ causa petuntur, pro causa fidei et pro pace publica, per nos
debere sine ulla dilatione co^cedi, et que^admodu^ rogatae fueru^t, apud nos
intercedere dignatae fuerint, prout in supplicationibus per idem supremum
consilium, et episcopos ac clerum praefatum maiestatibus uestris porrectis,
atque in libello intercessionis per easdem maiestates uestras nobis simul cum
alijs supplicationibus exhibito, latius apparet. Idcirco nos qui ad maiestates
uestras, et hoc nobilissimum uestrum regnum a Sanctissimo Domino nostro Iulio
Papa tertio ipsius et sedis Apostolicae de latere legati missi sumus, ut regnum
istud, quod iamdiu ab Ecclesiae Catholicae unitate separatum fuerat, Deo et
Ecclesiae Christi, eiusque in terris uicario reconciliaremus: et ut ea omnia
quae ad pace^ et tranquillitatem huius regni pertinerent, omni studio
procuraremus, postqua^ dei benignitate, et maiestatem uestrarum pietate, per
authoritatem eiusdem Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, cuius uices hic
sustinemus, reconciliatio iam facta est, ut paci et tranquillitati regni prae
fati consulamus, atque ut unitas ecclesiae, ex qua salus tot animarum prae
cioso Christi sanguine redemptarum dependet, hoc in regno iam introducta
corrobaretur, and salua permaneat, cum utriusque rei stabilitatem in eo maxim
consistere, si horum Ecclesiasticorum bonorum possessoribus molestia nulla
inferatur quo nimus ea teneant, tot et tam grauia testimonia nobis fidem
faciant, et maiestatum uestrarum intercessio, quae pro unitate Ecclesiae, et
sedis Apostolicae auctoritate hoc in regno instauranda tam studiose, et tam pie
elaborarunt, eam quam par est auctoritatem apud nos habeat, et ut uniuersum hoc
regnum sedis Apostolicae maternam uere indulgentia^, et charitatem erga se
agnoscat, et re ipsa experiatur: quoscunque ad quos infra scripta pertine^t, a
quibusuis excommunicationis, suspensionis, et interdicti, alijsque
ecclesiasticis sente^tijs, ce^suris, et poenis a iure, uel ab homine quauis
occasion uel causa latis, si quibus quomodolibet innodati existunt, ad
effectum praesentium dumtaxat consequendum harum serie absoluentes, et
absolutos fore censentes, aucthoritate Apostolica, per litteras Sanctissimi
domini nostri, domini Iulij Papae tertij nobis concessa, and qua fungimur in
hac part, tenore praesentium dispensamus: quod omnes et singulae Cathedralium
Ecclesiarum erectiones, hospitalium, et scholaru^ fundationes tempore
praeteriti scismatis, licet de facto et nulliter atte^tatae in eo statu, in quo
nunc sunt, perpetuo firmae et stabiles parmaneant, illisque Apostolicae
firmitatis robur adijcimus, ita ut non ea aucthoritate, qua prius, sed ea, quam
nunc eis tribuimus, factae ab omnibus censeantur, and cu^ omnibus et singulis
personis regni praedicti, quae in aliquo consanguinita it is uel affinitatis
gradu etiam multiplici, uel cognationis spiritualie, seu publicae honestatis
iusticiae impedimento de iure positiuo introductis, and in quibus sanstissimus
dominus noster Papa dispensare consueuit, matri monia scienter uelignorantur de
facto contraxerint, ut alique impedime^ torum premissorum, non obstante in
eorum matrimonijs, sic contractis libere, and licite remanere, seu illa de nouo
contrahere possint, misericorditer in domino dispensamus, prolem susceptam,
suscipiendam legitimam, de cernentes, ita tamen ut qui scienter et malitiose
contraxerint, a sententia exco^municationis, et ab incestus seu sacrilegij
reatu, absolutione^a suo ordi nario, uel curato, quibus id faciendi facultatem
concedimus, obtineant, ac omnes Ecclesiasticas seculares, seu quorumuis ordinum
regulares personas quae aliquas impetrationes, dispensationes, co^cessiones,
gratias, et indulta tam Ordines quam beneficia Ecclesiastica, seu alias
spirituales materias praetensa aucthoritate supremitatis Ecclesiae Anglicanae
licet nulliter, et de facto obtinuerint, et ad correuersae Ecclesiae unitati
restitutae fuerint, in suis Ordinibus, and beneficijs per nos ipsos, seu a
nobis ad id deputatos, misericorditer recipiemus, prout iam multae receptae
fueru^t, secumque super his opportune in Domino dispensauimus: Ac omnes
processus in quibusuis instantijs coram quibusuis iudicibus, tam ordinariis
quam delegatis, etia^ laicis super materijs spiritualibus habitos and formatos,
and sente^tias super eis latas, licet nulliter et de facto, quoad nullitatem ex
defectu iurisdictio nis praefato tantum insurgentem sanamus, illosque, et illas
aucthoritate Apostolica confirmamus: Ac quibusuis huius regni personis, ad
quarum manus bona Ecclesiastica ex quocunque contractu seu titulo oneroso uel
lucratiuo iam deuenerint, illaque tenuerint, seu etiam teneant, omnes and
quoscunque fructus ex eisde^ bonis, licet indebite perceptos, in totum remitt
imus and relaxamus. Volentes ac decernentes, quod dictorum bonorum
Ecclesiasticorum tam mobilium quam immobilium possessores praefati non
possintin praesenti, nec in posterum, seu per consiliorum generalium, uel
prouincialium dispositiones, seu decretales Romanoru^ pontificum Epistolas, seu
aliam quamcunque censura^ ecclesiastica^ in dictis bonis, seu eorunde^
possessione molestari, inquietari, uel perturbari, nec eis aliquae ce^surae uel
poenae ecclesiasticae propter huiusmodi detentionem, seu non restitutione^
irrogari uel infligi, et sic per quoscunque iudices, and auditores sublata eis,
qua suis aliter iudicandi et interpretandi facultate, et aucthoritate iudicari
et diffiniri debere, and quicquid secus attemptari contigerit, irritum et inane
fore decernimus, non obstantibus praemissis defectibus, and quibusuis
Apostolicis, ac in prouincialibus, et sinodalibus concilijs editis, specialibus
uel generalibus constitutionibus, and ordinationibus, caeterisqueue contrarijs
quibuscunque. Admonemus tamen cum diuisio Episcopatuum, and erectio
Cathedralium Ecclesiarum sint de maioribus causis, quae summo pontifici sunt
reseruatae, recurrendum esse ad suam Sanctitate^, and ab ea suppliciter
postulandum, ut haec confirmare, seu de nouo facere dignetur. Et licet omnes
res mobiles Ecclesiarum indistincteijs, qui eos tenent relaxauerimus, eos tamen
admonitos esse uolumus, ut ante oculos habentes diuini iudicij seueritatem
contra Balthasarem Regem Babilonis, qui uasa sacra non a se, sed a patre e
templo ablata in prophanos usus conuertit ea proprijs Ecclesijs si extant, uel
alijs restituant. Hortantes etiam, and per uiscera misericordiae lesu Christi
obtestantes eos omnes, quos haec res tangit, ut salutis suae non omnino
immemores, hoc saltem efficiant, ut ex bonis Ecclesiasticis, maxim ijs, quae
ratione personatuum and uicariatuu^ populi ministrorum sustentationi fuerint
specialiter destinata, seu alijs Cathedralibus, and alijs quae nunc extant,
inferioribus Ecclesijs curam animarum exercentibus ita prouideatur, ut earum
pastores, personae and uicarij commode, and hones^e iuxta eorum qualitatem, and
statum sustentari possint, and curam animarum laudabiliter exercere, and onera
incumbentia congrue supportare.

Datum Lambeth prope Londinum VVintonien^. Diocese. Anno Natiuitatis domini
Millesimo, quingentesimo, quinquagesimo quarto. Nono Call. Ianuarij Pontif.
Sanctissimi in Christo patris, and Domini nostri, Domini Iulij, diuina
prouidentia Papae tertij. Anno quinto. Reginaldus Cardinalis Polus Legatus.


We the said lords spiritual and temporal, and commons in this present
parliament assembled, rendryng most humble thanks to your majesty's, by whose
intercession and means we have obtained the said dispensations of the popes
holiness by the said most reverend father in God, hyslegate, most humbly
besecheth the same, that it may be ordained as follows.

And therefore be it enacted by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that
al, and singular articles and clauses. contained in the said dispensation, as
well touching the establyshment of Bysshoprykes, and cathedral churches, as
also the confirmation of marriages in degrees prohibited by the canons of the
church, the legittimation of children, and the ratification of process, and
of sentences in matters ecclesiastical, touching the inualiditie of them for
want of iuridiction, and the insititutions and destitutions, of, and in
benefices and promotio^s ecclesiastical, dispensations, and graces, given by
such order, as the publyke laws of the realm then approved, and all other
things before contained in the said letters of dispensation, shall remain and
be reputed and taken, to al intentes and co^structions in the laws of this
realm, lawful, good, and effectual to be alleged and pleaded in all courts
ecclesiastical and temporal, for good and sufficient matter, either for the
playntyfe or defendaunt, without any all gation, or objection, to be made
against the validity of them, by pretense of any general counsel, canon, or
decree, to the contrary made, or to be made in that behalf.

And where as diverse and sondrye late Monasteries, Priories, Commaundries,
Nonneries, Deaneries, Prebendes, Colleges, Hospitalles, Howses of friars,
Chauntries, and other religious and ecclesiastical houses and places, and the
mannours, graunges, mesuages, lands, tenementes, rectories, tithes, pentions,
portions, vicareges, churches, chapels, aduousons, nominations, patronages,
annuities rentes, reuertions, services, and other possessions, and
hereditamentes to the said late monasteries. priories, nonneries, commaundries,
deanryes, chauntries, prebendes, houses of Friars, colleges, hospitalles, and
other religious and ecclesiastical houses and places and to sondrye
Archebysshoprykes, and Bysshoprykes within this realm, late appartaynyng and
belongyng, came as well to the hands and possession of the said king of famous
memory Henrye theyghte, father unto your majesty, our said soueraygne Lady by
dissolution, gift, grant, surrendre, attayndre, or otherwise, as also to the
hands and possession of diverse and sundry other persons, and bodies polytyke
and corporate, by sundry means, conueyaunces, and assuraunces, according to
the order of the laws and statutes of this realm.

And where also diverse manours, lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes percell
of the possessions of Archebysshoprykes and Bishoprykes, and many and sondrye
late deaneryes, colleges, chauntryes, rectories, Prebendes, Free chapels,
Guyldes, and Fraternities, manours, houses, Graunges, lands, tenementes,
rentes, seruyces, and other Ecclesiastical possessions, and hereditamentes,
goods, and cattels to the said Archebysshoprykes, Bysshoprykes, deanries,
colleges, chauntries, free chapels, rectories, guyldes, and fratermties, late
appertayning, and belongyng, or appoynting, to and for the fynding of priests
obyttes, lyghtes, or other like purpose, came as well to the hands and
possession of the lare noble king Edward the sixth brother unto your majesty
soueraygne Lady, by virtue of an act of parliament thereof made, or otherwise,
as also to the hands and possession of diverse and sundry other persons, and
bodies polytyke and corporate by sundry means, conueyaunces, and assuraunces,
according to the order of ye laws of this realm: a great nombre, of which
said late monasteries, priories, nonneries, commaundries, deaneries colleges,
hospitalles, prebendes, chauntries, free chappelles, guildes, and,
fraternities, and the mannours, granges, mesuages, lands, tenementes, rentes,
reuercions, seruyces, tithes, pentions, portions vicareges, churches,
chappeles, aduousons, nominations, patronages, an nuities, and hereditamentes,
goods, and cattels, to the said monasteries, pryoryes, nonneryes,
commaundries, deaneries, colleges, hospitalles, chauntries, free chappelles,
guyldes fraternities, and other ecclestasticall houses, Archebysshoprykes, and
Bysshoprykes, belonging as well for great sommes of money, as for other good,
and reasonable causes and considerations, have been conveyed and assured to
diverse the subjects, and bodies polytyke of this realm, as well by the said
king Henrye theyght, the said king Edward the syxte, and by your hyghnes our
soueraygne Lady, and ioyntely by both your majesty's, as also by diverse the
owners of the said ecclesiastical possessions, which said conueyaunces and
assuraunces by their sondrye letters patentes, and other wrytynges more
playnelye do and mayappeare. Forasmuch as the said most reverend father has
also bythe said dispensations, removed and taken away al matter of
empeachement, trouble, and danger, which by occasion of any general
counsel, canon, or decree ecclesiastical might touch and disquiete the
possessions of such goods moveable, lands, tenementes, possessions and
hereditamentes, as were of late belongyng to any of the said
Archebysshoprykes, Bysshoprykes, monasteries, prioryes, nonneries commaundries,
deaneryes, colleges, chauntries, prebendes, rectories, hospitalles, houses of
friars, or other religious and ecclesiastical houses, and places, of what
nature, name, kind, or quality soever they be of. Yet for that the title of
allandes, possessions, and hereditamentes in this your majesty's realm and
dominions is grounded in the laws, statutes, and customs of the same, and by
your high jurisdiction, authority royal, and crown imperial, and in your
courts only to be impleaded, ordered, tried, and judged, and none otherwise,
and understanding, that the whole, full, and most gracious intentes mind and
determination of your most excellent majesty's be, that all, and every person
and persons, bodies polytyke and corporate, their heirs, successors, and
assigns, and every of them, shall have, keep, retain, and enjoy all, and
every their estates, ryghtes, possessions, and interestes, that they and every
of them now has, or hereafter shall have, of, and in all and every the
mannours, graunges, mesuages lands, tenementes, tithes, pentions, portions,
aduousons, nominations, patronages, anuities, rentes, reuercions, services,
hundredes, wapentakes, liberties, fraunchesis, and other the possessions and
hereditamentes of the said monesteries, abbeyes, pryoryes, nonneryes
commaundries, deaneries colleges, prebendes, hospitales, houses of friars,
chauntries, rectories, vicareges, churches, chappelles, Archebysshoprykes, and
Bysshoprykes, and other religious or ecclesiastical (...) standing.

And where as by dissolution of monasteries, and other religious houses,
certain paryshe churches and chapels which were before exempte, from the
jurisdiction of the Archbishop, and Bishop of the diocese, and by special
exemption and privilege from Rome, were under the government and order of the
Abbottes, and Pryours of those religions houses, which said churches, by
color of the said exemptious, be now of special grant from King Henry, and
King Edward, under the rule and government, and jurisdiction of temporal and
lay men, who can no more enjoy, that supremacye, over those particular
churches, then the king might over the hole realm.

Be it therefore enacted, that all Archbyshoppes, and Bishops in their
diocesses, and al other spiritual person and persons, having jurisdiction,
and their ministers and officers, and no lay person, or persons in every
Church and place, within the precinct of ye same, being exempt, or not exempte
may freely, and without impediment, execute their spiritual jurisdiction in all
points and articles, as though no such exemption or grant had never been
made.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that this act extend not to take away,
or diminishe the privileges of the universities of Cambrydge and Oxforde, ne
the privileges, or prerogatives granted heretofore to the churches of
Westminster, and Wyndesoure, ne the Cower of London, ne prejudicial to such
temporal Lords and possessioners in this realm, as by ancient custom have
enioied probate of Testamentes, of their tenauntes or other.

And forasmuch, as after this reconsiliation, and unity of this noble realm,
to the body of Christ's church, it is to be trusted, that by the abundance
of Gods mercy, and grace, devotion shall encrese and grow in the hearts of
many Subjects of this realm, with desire to give and bestow their worldly
possessions, for the resuscitating of almose, prayer, and example of good life
in this realm, to thinte^t such godly motions and purposes should be
advanced.

Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present parliament that it
shall be lawful to such as shall be seized of any manours, lands, tenementes,
personages tithes, pencions, portions, or other hereditamentes, whatsoever in
fee simple, in possession, reuertio^, or remainder, in their own rightes, not
being copy hold, may thereof make feoffamentes, grauntes, or any other
assuraunces, or by his last will and Testament, in writing, may be queath and
give in fee simple, all and every the said manours, lands, tenementes,
personages, tithes pencions, porcions, or other hereditamentes, to any
spiritual body politic, or corporate in this realm or dominions of the
same, now erected or founded, or hereafter to be erected or founded, without
any license of mortmayne therein to be opteyned, or any writ of ad quod
dampnum to be sued out for the same, the acts de terri ad manuni mortuam non
ponendis, or any other act or statute, heretofore had or made in any wise
notwithstanding.

Saving to the Lords of the sea, all rentes, services, dew, or going out of
any of the said land or tenementes, or hereditame^tes, so to be amortized, as
is aforesaid.

Provided always, that this clause of this act, for geuyng the liberty of, or
for the amortezing of lands or tenementes, shall continue for, and during the
space of.xx. years next, and immediatelye folowinge, and no longer.

And forasmuch, as we your majesty's humble and obedient subjects, the lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons in this present Parliament assembled,
neither by the making, or deliueryng of either the supplications aforesaid,
nor by any clause, article, or sentence thereof, or of any other clause
article, or sentence of this, or any other Statute, or any of the preambles of
the same, made, or agreed upon in this session of this present parliament, by
any manner of interpretation, construction, implication, or otherwise intend to
derogate empaire, or diminishe any of the prerogatives, liberties, fraunchisies
preheminences, or jurisdictions of your Croune Imperial of this realm, and
other the dominions to the same belongyng: we do most humbly beseech your
majesty's, that it may be declared, and ordained, and be it enacted and
declared by authority of this present parliament, that neither the making,
exhibityng, or insertinge, in this present statute, or in the preambles of the
same, of the supplications, or promis aforesaid, or either of them, nor any
other thing or things, words, sentences, clauses or articles in the
preambles, or body of the acts aforesaid, shall be construed, understood, or
expounded, to derogate, diminishe or take away any the liberties, privileges,
prerogatives, preheminences, aucthorities, or jurisdictions, or any part or
parcel thereof, which were in your Imperial croune of this realm, or did
belong to your said Imperial croune the twenti year of the reign of yours
the Queens majesty's most noble father, or any other your most noble
progenitors, before the said twenty year. And the Popes holiness, and Sea
Apostolic, to be restored, and to have and enjoy such authority,
pre-eminence, and jurisdiction, as his holiness, used, and exercised, or might
lawfully have used and exercised by authority of his supremacy, the said
twenty year of the reign of the King your father, within this your realm of
England, and other your Dominions, without diminution, or enlargement of the
same, and none other. And the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the
Archebishoppes, Bishops, and Ordinaries, to be in the same state, for
process of suites, punishmente of crimes, and execution of censures of the
church, with knowledge of causes belonging to the same, and as large in these
points, as the said jurisdiction was the said.xx. year.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that in and
upon every such gifts and deuyses, to be made to such spiritual
corporacions, or persons, as is aforesaid, the donour, feoffer, or deuisor
thereof may reserve to him, and to his heirs for ever, a tenure in frank
almayne, or a tenure by divine service: And to have all remedies and actions,
for and upon the said gifts, or deuyses, and tenures, in like manner and
form, as was used before the estatute of Westminster third (commonly called)
Quia emptores terrarum. The said estatute, or any other law or custom now
being, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted, that all, and every person and persons,
and bodies polytyke and corporate, which now have or hereafter shall have any
estate of inheritance, freholde, term, or intrest, of, in, or to any portion,
pention, tithes, gleblandes, or other ecclesiastical or spiritual profytte,
which by this act, and lettres of dipensation rehearsed in the same, be
permytted and suffered to remain and continue in lay men's possessions, shall
and may have like remedy for the recovery of the same, and every part
thereof, as they, and every of them might have had before the first day of this
present Parliament, Any thing in this act contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

An Act for the punishment of traitorous words against the Queens majesty.
The.ix. Chapter.
EOrasmuch as now of late diverse noughty sedicious malicious, and heretical
persons, not having the fear of god before their eyes but in a deuillyshe
sort, contrary to the duty of their allegiaunce, have co^gregated the^ selves
together in co^uenticles, in diverse and sundry prophaue places within this
city of London, esteming the^ selfs to be in the true faith, where in deed
they are in errors and heresies, and out of the true trade of Christ's
catholic religion, and in the same places at several times, vsyng their
fantastical and scismaticall services, lately taken away, and abolyshed by
authority of Parliament, have of their most malycious and cankerde stomakes,
prayed against the Queens majesty, that God would turn her heart from
Idolatry to the true faith, or else to shortene her days, or take her quickly
out of the way: which prayer was never heard nor read to have been used by
any good Christian manne, against any Prince though he were a pagan, and
infidele, and much less against any christian Prince, and especially so
virtuous a Princes as our soueraygne Lady that now is known to be, whose
faith is, and always has been most true and catholic, and consonaunt and
agreing with Christ's catholic church, throughout the world dispersed.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present
parliament, that every such person and persons, which sense the beginning of
this present parliament, have by express words and sayings, prayed,
required, or desired, as is aforesaid, or hereafter shall pray, by express
words or sayings, that God should shorten her days, or take her out of the
way (whose life almighty God long preserve) or any such like malicious prayer
amounting to the same effect, their procurers and abbettours therein, shall be
taken, reputed, and judged traitors, and every such praying, requiringe, or
desirynge shall be judged, taken, and reputed high treason, and the offenders
therein, their procurers and abbettours, being thereof laufully conuicte,
according to the laws of this realm, shall have, suffer, and forteyte, as in
cases of high treason.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that if any person or persons shall be
indicted for any the offenses aforesaid, done and perpetrated during this
session of this present parliament, and upon his or their arreignement, shall
show him or them selves penitent for their offense, and submite him or them
selves, to the king and Queens mercy, and humbly desire the same, before
such Justices or commissioners, before whom he or they shall be arraigned, that
then no judgment of conviction or attayndour of treason, shall be given against
any such person or persons, so being penitent, and submitting them selves, as
is aforesaid. And in every such case, the justices or commissioners, before
whom such person or persons shall be arrayned, shall have authority by virtue
of this act, to prescribe, adiudge, and appoynte, such corporal punishment,
other then death, to such offender and offenders, as to them by their
discretion shall seem convenient, and upon that penance prescribed and done,
to be discharged of the said treason, comprised in that indictment.

An act whereby certain offenses be made treasons, and also for the
government of the kings and queens Majesty's issue.
The.x. Chapter.
Forasmuch as the great mercy and clemency heretofore declared by the
Queens highness in releasynge the penal laws, made by her progenitors,
has given occasion to many cankard and traitorous hearts, to ymagine,
practice, and attempt things, stirring the people to disobedience and
rebellion against her highness common policy, and duty of subjects, require
that some law be estsones establyshed to restrain the malice of such wicked
and evil doers, where by they may be prehibited to blow abroad such shameful
slau^ders and lies, as they daily inuente and imagine of her highness, and
the kings majesty her most lawefull husband, which when they be hard,
can not be but odible, and detested of al good men, consyderinge they touch
their majesty's, upon whom depends the whole unity, and universal welthe
of this realm.

In consideration whereof be it ordained and enacted by the king and the
queens majesty's, with thassente of the lords spiritual and temporal, and of
the commons in this present parliament assembled and by thauctoritie of the
same, that if any person or persons after the first day of February next to
come during the marryage between the king and the queens majesty's, do compase
or ymagine to deprive the kings majesty, that now is, from the having and
inioyinge jointly together with the Queens hyghnes the style, honor, and
kingly name of the realms and dominions unto our said soueraygne Lady the
queens highness appertaynyng, or to destroy the king that now is, during the
said matrimonye, or to destroy the queens majesty, that now is, or the
heirs of her body begotten, being kings or Queens of this Realm, or to
leauye war within this Realm of England, or within any of the marches of the
same, against the kings majesty, that now is, during the said marriage, or
ageynste the queens majesty, that now is, or any of her said heirs, being
kings or queens of this Realm, or to depose the queens majesty that now
is, or the heirs of her body begotten, being kings or queens of this
realm, from the Imperial crown of the Realms and dominions abouesaid. And
the same compasses, or imaginations, or any of the^ maliciously, advisedly, and
directly, shall or do utter by open preaching, express words, or sayings or
if any person or persons after the said first day of Februarye by preaching
express words or sayings, shall maliciously, advisedly, and directly say,
publyshe, declare, maintain, or hold opinion, that the kings majesty, that
now is, during the said matrimony ought not to have or inioye, ioyntely
together with the queens majesty, the style, honor, and kyngly name of this
realm, or that any person or persons, being neither the king or the queens
majesty's that now are, during the said matrimony between them, ought to
have or enjoy the style, honor, and kyngely name of this realm, or that the
Queens majesty, that now is, during her life, is not, or of right ought not
to be queen of this realm, or after her death, that the heirs of her hyghnes
body being kings or queens of this realm, of right ought not to be kings or
queens of this realm, or to have and enjoy ye same, or that any person or
persons, other then the queens majesty, that now is, during her life, ought
to be queen of this realm, or after her death other then the heirs of her
body being kings or queens of this realm, as long as any of her said heirs
of her body begotten, shall be in life, of right ought to have and enjoy the
imperial crown of this realm. That then every such offendour, being thereof
duly convicted, or attaynted by the laws of this realm, their abbettours,
procurers, and counselors, and all, and every their comforters, knowing the
said offenses, or any of them to be done, and being thereof conuycted or
attaynted, as is abouesayd, for his or their such offense, shall forfayte and
lose to the queens highness, her heirs and successors, all his and their
goods, and cattels, and the whole yssues and profyttes of his and their
lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, for term of the life of every
such offendoure or offenders, and also shall have, and suffer, during his and
their lives perpetual imprisonment.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all, and
every ecclesiastical person, being convicted or attainted in form
aforesaid, for every such his offense, shall be deprived by the ordinary from his
promotion spiritual or ecclesiastical, in such like manner and form; that it
shall be lawful for every patron, founder, or giver thereof, to present, after
such deprivation had, some one other to the same, as though the said offendour
or offenders were deceassed. And if any person or persons being hereafter
connycted, or attaynted of any the said offenses, in form aforesaid
committed, shall after his or their conniction, or attainder, eftsoon commit
or perpetrate any of the said offenses in form aforesaid: That then every
such second offense or offenses shall be demed, and adjudged high treason, and
the offendour or offenders therein, their abbettoures, proturers and
councillors, and al, and every their aydours, and comforters, knowing the said
offenses, or any of them to be done, being thereof convicted or attaynted,
according to the laws and statutes of this realm, shall be judged, and demed
high traitors, and shall suffer peynes of death, and loose and forfayte al
their goods, and cattels lands, and tenementes, to the queens majesty, her
heirs, and successors, as in cases of high treason, by the laws of this
realm at this day of right ought to be lost and forfeyted.

And be it further enacted by the said authority, yt if any person or persons
at any time after the said first day of February next to come, during the said
marryage, compass, or ymagine the death of the kings majesty, that now is,
and the same maliciously, aduysedly and directly shall utter and attempt by
any writing printynge, ouert deed or act, or if any person or persons at any
time after the said first day of February next coming, shall maliciously,
aduysedly, and directly, by writing, pryntyng, ouert deed, or act, affirm that
the kings majesty, that now is, during the said matrimony, ought not to
have, or enjoy jointly togethers with the queens hyghnes, the style, honor
and kyngly name of this realm, or that any person or persons, being neither
the king, or the Queens majesty, that now is, during the said matrimony
between them ought to have or enjoy the style, honor, and kyngly name of this
realm. Or if any person or persons, after the said day, by any writing,
pryntyng, ouert deed, or act, maliciously, advisedly, and directly, do
affirm, that the queens majesty that now is, during her life, is not, or
ought not to be queen of this realm, or after her death, that the heirs of
her hyghnes body being kings or queens of this realm, of right ought not to
have and enjoy the Imperial crown of this realm, or that any person or
persons other then the queens majesty, that now is, during her life, or
after her death, other then the heirs of her body begotten, being kings or
queens of this realm, as long as any of her said heirs of her body shall be
in life, of right ought to have and enjoy the Imperial crown of this realm.
That then every such offense and offenses shall be adjudged high treason, and
the offe^der and offenders therein, their abbettours, procurers, and
councellers, and al, and every their aydours, and comforters, knowing the said
offenses, or any of them to be done, being thereof convicted, or attaynted by
the laws and statutes of this realm, shall be demed and adjudged high
traitors, and shall suffer pains of death, and loose and forfayt all their
goods, and cattels, lands, and tenementes to the Queens majesty, her heirs
and successors as in cases of high treason, as is above said.

And albeit we the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this
present parliament assembled, have firm hope and confidence in the goodness of
Almighty God, that like as he has hitherto myraculously preserved the queens
majesty from many great and imminent perils and dangers, even so he will of
his infinite goodness give her hyghnes strength, the rather by our continual
prayers, to pass well the danger of deliverance of child, wherewith it
has pleased him, (to all our great comfortes, to bless her. Yet forasmuch
as all things of this world be uncertain, and having before our eyes the
dolorous experience of the inconstant gouernemente during the time of the
reign of the late king, Edward the syxte, do plainly see the manyfolde
inconveniences, great dangers, and peryls, that may ensue to this hole
realm, if foresyght be not used to prevent evil chances, if they should
happen. For the eschewynge whereof, we the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons in this present parliament assembled, for, and in consideration of
a most special trust and confidence, that we have, and repose in the kings
majesty, for, and concerning the good and polityke government, order, and
administration of this realm in the time of the young years of the issue or
issues of her majesty's body to be borne, if it should please God to call the
Queen's highness out of this present life, duringe the tender years of such
issue or issues (which God for bid) according to such order and manner, as
hereafter in this present act, his hyghnes most gracious pleasure is should be
declared and set forth, have made our most humble suite by thassent of the
Queen's highness, that his majesty would vouchesafe to accept and take upon him
the rule, order, education, and government of the said issue orissues to be
borne, as is aforesaid, upon which our suite being of his said majesty most
graciously accepted. It has pleased his highness not only to declare, that
like as for the first part his majesty verily trusts, that almyghtie God
(who has hitherto preserved the queens majesty) to give this realm so good
an hope of certain succession in the bluo roial of the same realm, will assist
her highness with his graces and benedictions, to see the fruit of her body well
brought forth, live, and able to govern, whereof neither all this realm ne all the world besides should, or could receive more comfort, then his majesty
should and would. Yet if such chance should happen, his majesty at our
humble desires is pleased and contented, not alonely to accept and take upon
him the cure and charge of the education, rule, order, and government of such
issues, as of this most happy marriage shall be borne between the queens highness
and him, but also during the time of such government, would by all ways and
means study, travail, and imploye him self to advance the weal, both
public and private of this realm, and dominions there unto belongyng,
according to the said trust in his majesty reposed, with no less good will
and affection, then if his hyghnes had been naturally borne amongst us.

In consideration whereof beit enacted by the king and the queens most
excellent majesty's, by thassent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the
commons of this present Parlyament assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same
that if it shall so please God, to call the queens majesty out of this present
life, which god forbid, before the issue of her body, inheritable to the
crown of this realm, if it be male, shall accomplish the age of.xviii
years, or if it be female, before it shall be of the age of.xv. years, and not
married, after the age of consent, and before the said age of.xv. years: That
then and immediately after, and from the deceasse of our said Sovereign Lady
the queen, the kings majesty, that now is, shall have the rule, order,
education, and gouernemente of the person of such issue, or issues, and the
rule, order, and government (under such issue, or issues) of this realm, and
the dominions to the same belongyng, until the same issue, or issues,
inheritable to the Imperial croune of this realm, if it be male, shall
accomplish the full age of eightene years and if it be female, until such
issue female, shall accomplish the age of fiuetene years, and be married after
the age of consent, and before thesaied age of fiuetene years, if the said
issue or issues, and our said sovereign Lord the King, shall so long live
together: and that during, and by all the time of such gouernemente, all, and
every the pactes, couenauntes, articles, and agrementes, mentioned and
compresed in the treatises, and act of Parliament, and every of them made, and
concluded, for, and concerning the honorable marriage, hade and co^summate,
between the King and Queen's Majesty's, which on the behalf of his Majesty,
been to be observed, performed and kept, shall after the deceasse of the
Queen's Majesty, during the time of the said government, remain, continue,
and be in as good, and full force strength, and effect, to all intentes, and
purposes, as they were at any time, during the said Marriage, or now been, and
as if they were newly by apt words, terms, and sentences, inserted and
rehearsed in this present Act, and newly made and enacted, to stand, remain,
continue, and to be observed, and kept, during the time of the said
gouernemente, and shall be by his Majesty, during the said time inuiolably
observed performed, maintained, and vpholden, in such sort, and in as full
large, and ample manner, to all respects, as they should, and ought to be,
during the time of the said marriage, or after: and his highness, and the
Queens most excellent Majesty, are pleased and contented, that it be
enacted by this present Parliament that nothing shall be done, permitted, or
assented unto by his Majesty to the contrary.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that if any person
or persons, during the time that our said sovereign lord the King that now
is, shall, and ought to have the order, rule, educacion, and government of
such issue, or issues, being, King or Queen of this realm, according to
the order and provision aforesaied, maliciously, advisedly, and derectly, by
writing, printing, ouerte deed, or act, do compass, attempt, and go about
to destroy the person of our said sovereign lord, or to deprive, or remove
his said highness, from the order rule, educacion, and gouernemente of the
same issue, or issues, being King or Queen of this realm, contrary to the
tenor, entente, and true meaning of this present act: that then every such
person or persons so offendynge, their procurers and abettours, being thereof
lawfully conuicte or attainted by the laws of this realm, shall be demed and
adiuged high Traitors: And that all and every such offense and offenses,
shall be demed and adiuged high treason: And the offendour and offenders
therein, their procurers, counsaylours, and abettours, shall incur the
dangers, forfaytures, and penalties of high treason.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie before said, that al trials hereafter
to be had, awarded, or made, for any treason, shall be had, and used only,
according to the due order and course of the common laws of this realm, and
not otherwise: Saving to every perso^e and persons, bodies polytyke and
corporate, theirheyres, and successoures other then the offenders, and their
heirs, and such person and persons, as claim to any of their uses, al
such rightes, titles, interesses, possessions, leasses, rentes, reuertions,
offices, and other profits which they, or any of them shall have at the day
of the commiting such treasons, or at any time before, in as large and ample
manner, as if this act had never been had nor made.

Provided always, and be it declared and enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid,
that conceylement, or keeping secret of any high treason, be demed and taken
only, misprision of treason, and the offenders therein to forfayte and suffer,
as in cases of misprision of treason has heretofore been used. Any thing above
mentioned to ye contrarynotwithstanding.

Provided also, that if it shall fortune hereafter any of the pears of this
realm, to be indicted of any of the offenses made treason, or misprision of
treason by this act, that then the same pears, or pear, so being indected,
shall be put to answer unto every such endictement, before the high
steward of England for the time being, and to have his and their trial by
his and their pears, and to receive and have such like judgment upon the same
trial of his or their pears, or making open confession of the same offense, or
offenses, as is used in other cases of high treason.

And it is further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons shall in any wise be impeched for any of the offenses above said,
committed only by open preaching, or words, unless the offe^der or offe^ders
be thereof indectedwithin six months next after the same open preaching or
words. Any thing contained in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that upon
thearraygnement of any person, which hereafter shall for tune to be arraygned
for any treason, mentioned in this act, all, and every such person and
persons, or two of the^ at the least, as shall hereafter write, declare,
confess, or depose any thing or thnges against the person to be arrayned,
shall, if they be then living, and within the, realm be brought forth in
person before the party arraygned, if he require the same, and obiecte, and
say openly in his hearing, what they or any of them can against him, for, or
concerning any the treasons, contained in the indictement, where upon the
party shall be so arraigned, unless the party arraygned for any such treason,
shall willyngly confess the same at the time of his or their arraygnement.

Provided nevertheless, and be it enacted by thauctoritie before said that in
all cases of high treason, concerning coin curraunt within this realm, or for
counterfeyting the King or Queens signet, prynie seal, great seal, or sign
manuell, such manner of trial, and none other be observed and kept, as
heretofore has been used by the common laws of this realm. Any law,
statute, or any other thing or things to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that the councillors, procurers, comforters, and abbettours
for his or their first offense shall suffer like punishment, penalty, and
forfayture, as is contained in this act against the principal offenders for
their first offense, and none other. And that the counselors, procurers,
comforters, and abbettours, for his or their second offense shall sustain
like punishment, penalty, and forfaiture as is contained in this act against
the principal offendour or offenders for their second offense, and none other.

An Act for the punishment of bringing in of counterfeyte coin of forrayne
realms, being curraunt within this realm.
The.xi. Chapter.
WHere diverse and sondrye coins of gold and silver of other realms, not
being of the propre coin of this realm of England, and yet by the
sufferaunce and consent of the king and queen our Sovereign Lord and Lady, be
curraunt in payment within this realine many, ill disposed persons for their
own corrupt lucre and aduau^tage, have now of late brought into this realm,
from the parties of beyond the sea, great quantity of forged and cou^terfeyte
money, like to the said coin of other forreyne realms, and have uttered the
same here by marchaundysing, and otherwise to diverse of the subjects of this
realm, to their great deceyte, hurt, and damage, because the said ill
disposed persons have perceived and understood, that there was not, nor yet
is any sufficient law or statute made or provided for the condign
punishment of the offenders in that behalf.

Wherefore be it enacted and established by the authority of this present
Parliamente, that if any person or persons, after the xx. day of January
next coming, shallbryng from the parties of beyond the sea into this realm,
or into any the dominions of the same any such false and counterfeyt coin or
money, being curraunt within this realm as is aforesaid, knowing the same
coin or money to be false and counterfeyte, to the intent to utter, or make
payment with the same within this realm, or any the dominions of the same, by
marchaundysing, or otherwise, that all, and every such person or persons so
offendyng, as is aforesaid, their counsaylours, procurours, aydours, and
abbettors in that behalf, shall be demed and judged to be offenders in high
treason, and shall suffer after lawefull conviction or atteynder thereof, such
pains of death, loss and forfaiture of lands, goods, and cattelles, as
other offenders shall do, in cases of high treason.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that al, and every
person and persons, that shall at any time after the said.xx. day of January,
be accused or impeched of any of the offenses, contained and provided for in
this estatute, or of any other offense or offenses, concerning the impayryng,
counterfeytyng, or forgyng of any coin curraunte within this realm, shall,
and may be endicted, arreyned, tried, convicted, or atteynted by such like
evidence, and in such manner and form, as has been used and accustomed within
this realm, at any time before the first year of the reign of our late
sovereign lord king Edward the sixth. Any statute, custom, law, or usage to
the contrary thereof in any wise, notwithstanding.

An Act for the impounding of distresses.
The.xii. Chapter.
FOr the auoydinge of grievous vexations, exactions, troubles, and disorder in
taking of distresses, and impounding of cattle, be it enacted by authority of
this present Parliament, that from, and after ye first dai of Apryl next
coming, no distress of cattle shall be driven out of the hundred, rape,
wapentake, or lath, where such distress is, or shall be taken, except it be to a
pound, ouerte within the said shire, not above three miles distau^t, from the
place where the said distress is, taken, and that no cattle, or other goods
distreined, or taken by way of distress, for any manner of cause, at one time
shall be impounded in several places, whereby the owner or owners of such
distress shall be constrained to sue several repleuis for the delivery of the
said distress, so taken at one time, upon pain every person, offending
contrary to this act, shall forfeyte to the party grieved for every such
offense a hundred shillinges, and treble damages.

And further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that after the said
first day of Apryl, no person or persons shall take for keeping in pound,
impoundyng, or poundage of any manner of distress, above the sum of.iiii.
pence for any one whole distress, yt shall be so impounded, and where less has been used there to take less, upon the pain of five pound to be paid to the
party grieved, over and besides such money as he shall take, above the sum of
four pence. Any usage or prescription to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And for the more spedier deliuerye of cattle, taken by way of distress, it
is further enacted by the said authority, that every Shiriffe of shires,
being no cities, nor towns made shyres, shall at his first county day, or
within two months next after he has received his patent of his office of
shirifwike, shall depute, appoynte, and proclayme in the shyre town within his
baylywike, four deputies at the least, dwelling not above twelve miles, one
dystaunt from another, which said deputies so appointed and proclaimed, shall
have authority in the sheriffs name to make repleuies, and deliverance of
such distresses, in such manner and form, as the sheriff may, or ought to do
upon pain that every Sheriff, for every month that he shall lack such
deputy or deputies, shall forfeyte for every such offense five pounds, the
one half of which forfaytures shall be to the king and Queen's highness, her
heirs and successors, the other half to him that will sue for the same by
bil, playnt, information, or action of debt, in any the king and queen's courts
of record, in which no essoygne protection, nor wager of law shall be admitted.

An Act appoynting in order to justices of peace, touching the baylement of
prisoners.
The.xiii. Chapter.
WHere in the parliament holden at Westminster, in the.iii. year of the reign
of the noble prince, king Henrye the seventh, it was among other things
ordained and enacted, that no prisoner arrested for felony, should be letten
to bail or maynepryce, by any one Justice of peace, but by the hole Justices,
or at least by two of the^, whereof one to be of the Quorum, Since the making of
which estatute, one Justice of peace, in the name of him self and one other of
the Justices his compagnion not making the said Justice party nor privy unto
the case, wherefore the prisoner should be bayled, has often times by sinister
labor, and means, set at large the greatest, and notablest offenders, such as
be not repleuisably by the laws of this realm, and yet the rather to hyde
their affections in that behalf, have signified the cause of their
apprehension to be put only for suspicion of felony, whereby the said
offenders has escaped unpunished, and do daily, to the high displeasure of
almighty God, the great peril of the king and Queen's true subjects, and
encoragement of all thieves and evil doers.

For reformation whereof, be it ordained and enacted by the king and Queens
majesty's, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that from, and after the
first day of Apryll nexe coming, no Justice or Justices of peace, shall let
to bail or mainepryce, any such person or persons, which for any offense or
offenses, by them, or any of them committed, be declared not to be replenised
or bayled, or be forbidden to be repleued, or bayled, by the estatute of
Westmin. prymer, made in the parliamente, holden in the third year of the
reygne of king Edward the first. And furthermore, that any person or persons
arrested for manstaughter or felony, or suspection of manslaughter or selonie,
being bayleable by the law, shall not after the said first day of Apryli, be
let to bail or maynpryse, by any Justices of peace, if it be not in open
Sessions, except it be by two Justices of peace, at ye least, whereof one to be
of the Quorum, and the same Justices to be present together, at the time of the
said baylment or main price, which baylement or mainpryce they shall certefye
in wrytinge, subscribed, or sygned with their own hands, at the next
general goal delivery, to be holden within the county, where the said
person or persons shall be arrested or suspected. And that the said Justices, or
one of them being of the Quorum when any such prisoner is brought before them,
for any manslaughter or felonye, before any baylement or maynepryse, shall
take the examination of the said prisoner, and information of them that brynges
him, of the fact, and circumstaunces thereof, and the same, or asmuth thereof,
as shall be material to prove the felonye, shall put in wrytinge before they
make the same baylement, which said examination together, with the said
baylement, the said Justices shall certifye at the next general goal
delyuerye, to be holden within the limittes of their commission, and that every
Coroner, upon any inquisition before him found, whereby any person or persons
shall be indicted for murder, or ma^ssaughter, or as accessory, or accessaries to
the same, before the muther or manslaughter committed, shall put in writing
the effect of the evidence, given to the Iurye before him, being material,
and afwell the said Justices, as the said Coroner, shall have authority by
this act, to bind al such by recongnisaunce, or obligation, as do beclare any
thing material, to prove the said murder or manfiaughter, offenses, or
fellonies, or to be accessory, or accessaries to the same, as is aforesaid to
appear at the next genarall goal deliuerye, to be holden within the County,
city, or town corporate, where the trial thereof shall be, then and there to
give evidence against the party so indicted, at the time of his trial, and
shall certifye as well the same euydence, as such bond and bonds in writing, as
he shall take together, with the inquisition or indictment before him taken and
found, at, or before the time, of his said trial thereof, to be had or made.
And likewise, the said Justices shall certifye all and every such bond, taken
before them, in like manner as before is said of baylementes and examination.
And in case any Justice of peace, or Quorum, or Coroner, shall after the said
first day of Apryll, offend in any thing contrary to the true intent, and
meaning of this present act: That then the Justices of jail delyuery, of the
Shire, city, town, or place, where such offense shall happen to be
committed, upon due proof thereof, by examination before them shall for every
such offense, set such fine on every of the same Justices of peace, and
Coroner, as the same Justices of jail delivery shall think mete, and shall
estrte the same as other fynes and amerciamentes assessed before Justices of
jail delivery ought to be.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by thauctoritie before said, that
Justices of peace, and Coroners within the city of London and the county of
Middelsex, and in other cities, boroughes, and towns corporate within this
realm, and Wales, shall within their several jurisdictions, have authority
to let to Bail, fellous and prisoners, in such manner and form as they have
been heretofore accusiomed, this act or any thing therein contained, to the
contrary notwithstanding. And also shall take examinations, and bonds, as is
aforesaid, upon every baylement by them or any of them to be made, and shall
certifye every such baylementes bonds, and examinations by them or any of
them, taken or made at the next jail delyuerye to be holden within the shyre,
city, borough, or town, where their several jurisdictions extends, upon
like pain and forfayture, as is before lymitted in this present act.

And be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no writtes of Habeas
corpus, or Certiorary, shall be hereafter granted, to remove any prisoner out
of any jail, or to remove any recognisaunce, except the same writtes be
signed with the propre hands of the chief Justice, or in his absence, one of
the Justices of the court, out of which the same writtes shall be awarded, or
made, upon pain that he that writes any such wryttes, not being sygned as is
aforesaid, to forfayte to our said soueraygne lord the king and the queen, for
every such writ and wryttes, five pounds.

An act for the making of russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of
Naples in Norwiche.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
WHere of late years passed, Russels called Russels Sattens, and Sattens
reuerses, have been practiced to be made beyond the seas of the wolles, bredde
in the county of Norfolk, and by reason thereof, so great quantite of the
said Russels Sattens, and Sattens Reuerses have been brought into this realm,
sold, and worn as well in every part of this realm, as in the parts beyond
the seas, that thereby the mysteries of Worstedes making, and weuyng, whereby
merchants, and inhabitauntes of the city of Norwiche, have heretofore ben
well maynteyned and relieved, is now at this present almoost wholly decayed and
brought out of estimation, and very little worn, either within this realm, or
in any other foreign realms, to the great hynderaunce, and decay of the said
city, and Citezins of the same city. For remedy whereof Thomas Marsham Maiour
of the city of Norwyche, John Corbet Esquier, Austen Steward, Robert Leche,
Robert Rugge, John Ball, and Alexander Mather Aldermen of the said city.
Thomas Whall, Thomas Pecke, Raphe Marsham, Robert Henry, John Sutton, Richard
Tomson, Citezins, and merchants of the said City, at their great costs and
charges, as well in brynging of certain strangers from the parts beyond the
seas into the said city, as also in making of Lombes, and all other provision
for the same, and also have called unto them eight persons of the most discrete
and worthy men of the misterye of Worstede weuyng, within the said city, that
is to say, John Cook, James Lyn, John Cross, Simon Petit, John Marshal,
Roger Lecke Edmond Barker, and Edmonde Selers, being the number of.xxi
persons, which have not only made Russels Sattens, and Sattens Reuerses, and
fustian of Naples within the said city of Norwich of Norfolk wolles, but also
have learned and taught other citezins and inhabitauntes of the said city to
make the same, in such good and perfect manner, that much better Russels
Sattens, Sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples, and such like, and for easyer
prices, be now at this present wrought and made within the said city, then
heretofore has been, or now be made in any of the parties beyond the seas,
whereby the said city and inhabitauntes thereof, may, and be like again to be
relieved and brought to their old estate, to the great advancement of the
commodities of this realm, and enrychynge the same, if some good and polytyke
laws and ordinances were made for the good continuance of the true making of
the said Russelles Sattens, Sattens Reuerses, and fustian of Naples, and such
like.

In consideration whereof be it enacted by the assente of the king and queens
hyghnes, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of this present
Parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, that the said russels,
sattens and sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples hereafter to be made only
within the said city, may from hence forth bear the name, and he called by the
name of Norwiche sattens and Norwich fussians, and that the Mayor and the before
mentioned citezens of the same city, which before this time has been at the
costs and charges of the bringing of the said strangers into the same city,
for the making of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustians of
Naples, and such the before mentioned eight persons, that they have called unto
them, shall be a fellowship of the^ selfs, and shall yearly the third day of
February choose of their fellows, four wardeynes within the Guylde hall of the
said city, or any other common and convenient place in the same city, and
the same wardeynes so being choosen, shall stand, and be wardens of the same
fellowship, during one whole year, next ensuing the said election and yt the
same wardeynes after the said election, shall come before the Mayor of the said
city for the time being, yearly the monday next after the said third day of
Februarye, and before the said. Mayor shall be sworn diligently to view
search, and see all the russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustians of
Naples, then made or that shall be made within the said city, during the said
year. And such of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of
Napels, as shall appear and be demed by them to be lawfully truly and
workemanly wrought shall seal with a seal of lead, bearyng the arms of the
city of Norwhich, whereby it may be known to the merchant, or buyer of them
that the same be allowed and truly made.

And that also it may be enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
wardeynes and fellowship shall be a body corporate, and to be named and be enabled
by this act to sue, and be sued and to give, and to take by the name of
wardeynes, and felowshyppe of the mysterye of russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche making within the said city of Norwich. And
if any defaulte at any time shall be found in any of the said russels sattens,
sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, or in any of them by the said
wardeynes, that the same defauite shall be reformed and the offendour or
offenders therein to be punyshed, according to such rules and ordinances, as
hereafter from time to time shall be made within ye said city by the Mayor of
the said city for the time being, and by the said four wardeynes, and the
felowshyppe of the said occcpation or mystery, or the greatest number of the
said felowshyppe, for, and concerning the same, and that the same defaultes
from time to time, as occasion shall serve shall be enquired of, and tried before
the Mayor of the said city of Norwich for the ryme being, by the oaths of
twelve honest men of the foresaid felowshyppe. And that the said four
wardeynes so choosen and sworn, shall have full power and authority, to do
execute, present, and reform all, and singular thing and things, of, for, and
concerning the said mystery, making, workynge, and occupieng of the said
russels sattens, satins reuerses, and fustian of Norwich within the said city,
in such manner and form, as in, or by the said ordynances shall be expressed
and declared, and that at al times hereafter, and from time to time, it shall be
lawful to the Mayor of the said cite for the time being, and to the before
named fellowship and wardeyns of the same mystery, and the more part of them,
and to their successors, to make and ordain from time to time, rules, laws,
and ordinances mete and necessary for the good order and governance of the
said mystery, and for the true and well making of the said russels sattens,
sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, and the same ordinances so made, to
be at al times obeyed by all thinhabitaunce of the said city, or suburbs of
the same, and to be put in due execution by ye said mayor and wardeyns, and
their successers for the time being, in such manner and form, as by ye same
ordinance shall be ordained and declared. And yt such as now be, and yt
hereafter shall be makers of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and
fustia^ of Norwich, and every of the^ within the said city, shall not from
henceforth occupye ye said misterye, and making of ye said russels satte^s,
sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, nor of any of them within the said
city, by the^ selves, or by any other, before he or they so occupying the said
misterye within the said city, be made free of the said city, and admitted to
be of the said fellow ship by ye Mayor of the said city, and wardeines and
fellowship of the said mystery for the time being. And that no person do occupy
by him self, or any other for him out of the said city, the said mystery of
making of russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustians of Naples, or of any
of them, before he or they so occupieng the same, have been pre^tice to the said
misterye by the term of seven years, or else admytted by the said Mayor and
fellowship, or ye more part of them, upon pain of forfaiture of ye same
russels satte^s, sattens reuerses, and fustia^ of Nor wiche by the^, or any of
the^ to be made contrary to ye form of this act.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that the said
Mayor and wardeynes for the time being, shall not take any sum of monye, or
reward to their own proper uses, for the admitting of any person or persons to
occupy the said mystery, upon pain of forfayture of treble the value of the
reward, or sum of money, so by them or any of them to be taken.

Provided also, that it shall be lauful to the said wardeynes, and to every of
them for ye time being, by all ways and means, and at all lawful times,
diligently from time to time, to make search by dew and ordinary ways, for all
manner of the said russels sattens, sattens renerses and fustian of Norwiche,
that shall happen to be found by them defectyue, for lack of good and true
workmanship. And that it shall be lavofull to the said wardeynes and every of
them for the time being by virtue of this act, to sease and take the said
russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian, and bring and present the same
clothes so seized and taken, to the Mayor of ye said city for the time being,
and unto his successors, to the intent that twelve honest, lawful, and expert
men of ye said mystery, and fellowship being sworn before the said Mayor, may
by virtue of their oaths, make inquiry, and present the manner of the said
defaultes before the said Mayor, for the time being according to such good and
wholesome ordinances and rules, as shall be ordained and made for the conservation
and good continuance of the said occupation and mystery, and the true making
and working of the said russels sattens, sattens, reuerses, and fustians of
Norwiche. And that al and every person and persons, that shall occupy, use, and
exercise the said mystery, or making of the said russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, and fustians of Norwiche, or any of them, contrary to the form,
tenor, plain meaning, and intent of this act, and of the rules and
ordinances, that at any time hereafter by authority of this act shall be
ordained and made for ye continuance of the true and perfect making of the
said russels sattens, sattens reuerses and fustian of Norwiche, shall for feyte
and loose for every time so offending, or making any russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, contrary to the meaning, tenor and effect
of the said act, rules, and ordinances, concerning the same, such fines,
amerciamentes, and pains as shall be adjudged, assessed, and affered by twelve
expert men of the said felowshype upon their oaths, the same twelve persons to
be sworn before the said Mayor and wardeynes to enquire and make true
verdicte, and presentment of such defaultes, the one half of al which
forfeyture to be to ye Mayor of the said city for ye time being, and his
suceessors, and the other moitie to the said wardeins for the time being, and
their successors, by action of debt, bil, playnt, or information in any
court of record, in which action, bil, plaint, or information no wager of
law, protection, inuencion, or foreign Ple, shall be allowed. And in case it
shall fortune hereafter, yt any of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses,
and fustian of Norwich shall lack of such le^g these and bredes, or of the true
and ensuing making or sorting of ye yarne as shall be appointed, and set forth by
the said rules and ordinances, and the same so to be found defective by
verdicte of twelve men of ye said feloshyp before the said Mayor and wardeins
and their successors: That then the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and
fustians of Naples, and every of them so found defective, to be cut in two
pieces, and to pay such fine or fines as shall be offered and affered by the
said twelve expert men by virtue of their oaths, ye one moitie of which fine or
fines to be to the Mayor of the said cicie for the time being, and to his
sucressours, and the other moytie to the wardeynes of the said felowshype for the
time being, and to their successors.

Provided always and be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if
any wardeyne or wardeynes for the time being, of ye said mystery or occupation
of making of russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples, shall at
any time hereafter seal, or cause to be sealed any russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, or fustians of Naples, yt shall not be well sufficient, and truly
wrought, and made, according to the true intent, and meaning of this present
act, shall forfeyte and loose for every piece so sealed, being not well,
sufficient, and truly wrought and made, the whole value of every such piece so
sealed, the one half of which forfaytures to be to the king and Queens
majesty's, her heirs and successors, and the other moytie thereof to be to such
person and persons, as shall sue for the same by bill, action, or information,
in any of the kings courts of record, in which bil, action, or information
no essoygne, prorection, or wager of law shall be allowed.

An act to confirm the liberties of the Lord Marchers in Wales.
The.xv. Chapter.
HVmbly besechen your excellent majesty's, your true and faithful Subjects,
the Lords marchers both spiritual and temporal, within your highness
dominion of wales, that where as in a parliament holden at West. the.xxvii.
year of the reygne of king Henry theight, father unto you our natural
Sovereign Lady, among other things, one act was made and established for
laws and justice to be ministered in the said dominion of wales, in like form
as it is in this realm of England, in the which act, one article is, yt for
that the lords Marchers before yt perliament, had used to put their tenauntes
within their lordshippes Marchers, under common main price and suertie of
apparaunce, and have had the forfeytures thereof, which for ever, from, and
after the feast of all saints, then next ensuing the said parliament, should
utterly cease, and be determined. It was enacted, that after the said feast of
all saints, every lay, and temporal person, then being a lord marcher,
should have the moytie or half of every forfeyture of al and every common
mainprice, recognisauce for the peace or appearance, sorfeited by any of their
tenauntes, inhabiti^g within any of their lordships Marchers, and they to be
paid ye same moytie or half, by the hands of the shryffe of every of the
counties where such forfeyture shall be, if the shiriffe can levy the same, and
the same shyryffe to account to our said late Soueraygne lord ye king for the
other half or moitie, in such excheaker, as they be accomtant. And further it
was enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all, and every lay, and temporal
person or persons, then being lords marchers, and having any lordshipes
marchers, or lordshipes royals, should from, and after the said feast of al
saints, have al such myses and profytes of their tenantes, as they have had or
used to have, at the first entry into their lands in times past. And also
should have, hold, and keep, with in the precinct of their lordshyppes, courres
baron, courts let, and lawdayes, and al and every thing to the said courts
belonging, and also should have within the precinct of their said lordships, or
lawdaye wayf, strayf, infangechefe, outfangethefe, treasure trouie, deodandes
goods, and cattels of fellons, and of persons condemned, or outlawed
offellony or murder, put in exigent for felony or murder, and also wrecke
demer, wharfage, and customs of strangers, as they have had in time past, as
though such privileges were granted unto the^ by point of charter, any thing
in that act to the contrary notwithstanding, as in ye said act of parliament
more at large it may appear.

And forasmuch as Bishops, and other ecclesiastical persons, being lords
marchers, having the like liberties, casualties, profittes, and commodities
within their lordships marchers, and lordships royal, with in the said
dominion, or principality of Wales, were not provided for by the express
letter of the said Statute, in like sort, as the lay and temporal lords
marchers were: but rather of purpose, as it should seem forgotten, and left out
of the said Act, against all reason, and good equity: And forasmuch also, as
the heirs andsuccessours of the lay and temporal lords marchers, then being,
were not provided for, by the limitation, and express words of the said act,
as well as their auncesters, and predecessers were, as reason would they should
have been.

It may please your majesty's of your most gracious fauoureand benignity, at
the humble suit, and supplication of your said faithful subjects, the lords
marchers that now are, in the said dommion of Wales, both spiritual and
temporal, to grant that it may by thasse^t of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, be ordained,
established, and enacted, by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that
as well your said spiritual, and ecclesiastical subjects, lords marchers, now
having lordshippes marchers, or lorshyps royal in Wales aforesaid, and their
successors, and the successors of every of them, as also the heirs and
successoures of the lords temporal marchers, that then were, or now be, and
the heirs and successors of every of them, being or which herafter shall be,
lords marchers, within their lordships marchers, and lordships royals, in the
dominion, or principality of Wales, shall have, and enjoy to them, and to their
heirs, and successers, respectively, and severally for ever, the moyty and
half of every forfayture, of al and every common mainprice, recognifa^ce for
the peace, or appearance forfeyted by any of their tena^tes, inhabiting within
any of their lorships marchers, or lorships royal, and they to be paid the
same moyty or half, by the hands of the shyryffe of the county, for the time
being, after such form and forte, as the said lay or temporal lords marchers
have been, or ought to have been paid the same, by force of the said Statute.

And further, shall have al such mises, and profits of their tenauntes, as the
lords marchers, spiritual or temporal, respectively, or severally had or
used to have at their first entry into their lands in times past before the
making of the said act or statute. And also shall have, hold, and keep within
the precinct of their said lordships, al such courts baron courts let, and
lawdayes, and al and every thing and things, to ye same courts belonging, and
also shall have within the precinct of their said several lordeshyps, or
lawdayes, al such wayf strayf, infangthefe, out fangthefe, treasure trouis,
deodandes, goods, and cattels of fellons, and of persons condemned or
outlawed of felony or murder, put in exigent for felony or murder, and also
al such wrecke demer, wharfage and customs of strangers, as the lords
Marchers, spiritualll and temporal, respectively, and severally had and used in
times past, before the making of the said Statute.

An act for the continuance of certain statutes. Cap. xvi.
WHere in the parliament begone and holden at London the.iii day of November, in
the.xxi. year of the reygne of our most dread sovereign lord of most famous
memory, king Henry theyght, and from thens adiourned to Westminster. and there
holden, and co^tinue^d by diverse prorogations, unto ye dissolution thereof, one
act was made and established, for the restraint of carriage and conueying of
horses, and mares out of this realm and also one other act was there made,
for the true wyndyng of wolles, and one other act was there made, to restrain
killing of wainlinges, bullockes, stieres, and heyfers, being under thage
of.ii. years which said several acts were then made to endure and continue to
the next parliament, as by the said several acts shore plainly appears. And
where also in the same parliament, one other act was made and established, for
attaintes to be sued, for the punishment of perjury, upon untrue verdites,
which acts last before rehearsed, were then made and ordained, to continue and
endure to the last day of the next parliament, as by ye same act more plainly
at large is showed and may appear. And where also in the parliament begone and
holden at Westminster. theight day of June, in the xxviii. year of the reygne of our
said most drad sovereign lord king Henry theight, and there continued and
kept, until the dissolutio^ thereof it was ordained and enacted, that all and
singular the said acts above remembered, and every of them, should continue and
endure in their sorce and strength, and also be observed and kept until the
last day of the next parliament, as by the same act among other things,
therein contained more plainly appears. And where also in the parliament
begone and holden at West. the.xxviii. day of April in the.xxxi. year of ye
reign of our said late most dread sovereign Lord, king Henry theight, and
there continued until the.xxviiii. day of June then next following, it was
ordained and enacted by thauctoritie of the same parliament yt al and singular
the said several acts above remembered and every of the^, and al clauses,
articles, and provisions in them, and every of them contained, should continue
and endure in their force and strength, and also be observed and kept until the
last day of the next parliament, as by the same act among other things
therein contained, more plainly appears. And where in the parliament holden
at Westminster. in the.xxxv. year of the reign of our said late soueraygne lord
king Henry theight, one act was made for the preservation of woods, to endure
for.vii. years then next following, and from thence to thend of the next
parliament, as by the same act more plainly does and may appear. And where
also at the parliament holden at West. in the xxxvii. year of the reign of ye
said, king Henry theight, and there continued and kept until ye dissolutio^
thereof it was ordained and enacted, yt al and singular the said acts above
mentioned, and every of them except the said act made for ye preservation of
woods, as is aforesaid, should continue and endure in their force and strength,
and also to be observed and kept, until the last day of the next parliament
then following, as vi the same act among other things there in contained more
plainly appears. And where also at the session of the parliament, ended at
West. in the.xiiii. day of March, in the third year of the reygne of our
sovereign Lord king Edward the.vi. one act was made for the true currying of
leather, which act was made to endure to thend of the next parliament, as by
the same act more plainly appears. And where also at the session of a
parliament ended at Westminster. the first day of February, in the fourth year of
the reygne of our said late soueraygne Lord king Edward the.vi one act was then
and there made, concerning the buying of rother beasts. And also one other act
was then and there made touching the buying and selling of butter and chese,
which said several acts were then and there made, to endure and continue, to
thend of the next parliament, as by the same several acts more at large it
does and may appear. And where also at the session of a parliament by
prorogation holde^ at West, the.xxiii. day of January in the.v. year of the
reign of our said sovereign lord, one other act was then and there made,
against regratours and forstallers, to endure to thend of the next parliament,
which al and singular the said acts above mentioned together, with ye said act
concerning the preservation of woods, at a parliament holde^ at Westminster. the
first day of March, in the.vii. year of the raygne of our said soueraygne Lord
king Edward the.vi. and there continued and dissolved the last day of the same
month of Marh, and al clauses articles and provisions in the^, and every of
them contained were there revived and continued, to stand in their force and
strength, until the last dai of the next parliament. And where also at the
session of a parliament holden by prorogatio^ at West. ye.xxiiii. day of
October, in the.i. year of the raygne of our most gracious soueraygne lady ye
queen, and there continued and kept until ye dissolution thereof, one act was
there made and established against unlawful and rebellious asse^bles, to endure
to thend of ye next parliament as by ye same act more plainli does, and may
appear. And where also at ye same session of parliament, last before
mentioned, al and singular ye acts above mentioned, and before that time
continued at sundry parliaments, as is aforesaid, and clauses, articles, and
provisions in them, and every of them contained, were there revived, and
continued to stand in their force and strength, unto the last day of the next
parliament.

Forasmuch as al and singular the said several acts above mentioned, be good
and beneficial for the commonwealth of this realm. Be it therefore enacted,
ordained, and established by ye king and queen our soueraygn lord and lady,
with thassent of the lords spiritual and te^porall, and the commo^s in this
present parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, that al and
singular the said several acts and estatutes above mentioned, and rehearsed,
and every of the^, and al clauses articles, and provisions in them and every of
the^ contained, shall be revived, continued, stand, and endure in their force and
strength, to al intentes, constructions, and purposes and shall be observed and
kept in all things, until ye last day of ye next parliament.

An act touching leases hereafter to be made by certain spiritual persons.
Cap. xvii.
WHere in the parliament begone and holden at West. the eight day of June, in
ye.xxviii. year of the reign of our late king of famous memory Henry theight,
and there continued and kept until ye dissolution of ye same parliamet,
the.xviii. day of June next following, one act entitled, an act for
restitution of the first fruits in the time of vacation, to the next
incu^bent, was had and made, wherein are certain clauses for leases then made,
and to be made by spiritual and ecclesiastical persons, to endure, and be in
force for term of.vi. ye ares if ye incu^bentes did resign their said
spiritual promotio^s, or if ye same should otherwise become void by thouli act
of the same thincu^bentes, as by ye same act more at large may appear. To
the intent the persons and vicars and others, having cure of souls, may the
better attend, and be the more vigilaunt in their ministry and function.

Be it enacted by the king our sovereign lord, and the queen our soueraygne
lady with thassentes of ye lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in
this present parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of ye same yt as much of
the same act, as does concern the making good of ye said leases, ne any
clause, sentence, provision, or article therein contained shall extend, or be
construed, or adjudged to extend to any lease, that shall be made by any person,
vicar or any other having any spiritual promotion, after the feast of the
purification of our Lady next coming.

Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Tipographi Regiae Maiestatis.

Anno. M.D.LV.

