THE Character of a Phanatique.
TO the performing of this task it will be necessary first to give ^ou the
E^ymology and genuine signification of the word [Phanatique] Secondly the
occasion, and most common acceptance. Thirdly, who m^^^ be justly termed
Phanatiques, before we come to the Character.

1. The Etymology of the Word.
PHanatique] is derived from the Greek Verb (...) and signifi^^ vain Dreamer,
Enthusiast, or Brainsick Visionist, one who by natural distemper, or spiritual
infatuation, or both, i^ ^elud^^ and would delude others by the pretense of
Revelations, and New Lights, never content with common Experience, universal
Consent, or plain Demonstration.

2. The Occasion and comm^n Acceptance of the Word.
NOw the occasion of this word seems to be this. At a general Counci^ for the
regulating of affairs in Church and State, all Complaints tending to the
matters in hand were to be received and debated: but ^^ere, being always in
the World of Men more or less of that spirit of Pride, Self-conceit and
Discontent, the unreasonable clamours of giddy persons would have so filled the
Assembly, that nothing of concernment could have been taken into consideration,
had they not still kept such a Decorum, as that nothing might be admitted but
what upon Examination of a select company was found to be of weighty
consequence: whereupon those impertinent troublers, and busy malcontents who
were rejected, received the most pertinent denomination of Phanatiques; and so
it has been in all ages a distinctive term, whereby those who kick against the
present constitution of a regulated Church and State have been distinguished
from the sober part of a Nation, who submit to all ancient and fundamental Laws
and Constitutions: but especially those religious irreligious
mad-men-Hereticks, being parallel to the Seditions of the City of Jerusalem
in its Destruction.

3. Who may rightly be called Phanatiques.
TO particularize the several sorts of Phanatiques would be the work rather of
a Volume than a Sheet; but in short, First, Those may be truly called
Phanatiques, who depend more upon the dictates of their own corrupt
imaginations, and fantasies of their distempered brain than reason, custom,
experience, or the general consent of all ages and nations; but especially
those who prefer their pretended inspirations and new lights before the
revealed Will of God in the Scriptures. Secondly, Those who like the Jews will
not be content unless Christ will submit to their dirty humors, and come live
upon earth with them, and so order the matter for them, that they, and they
only, may possess the earth, and will by no means be persuaded to submit to
any authority but His, whose Kingdom is not of this world. Thirdly, All those,
who out of an ambitious itch to appear somebody, under what pretenses soever,
endeavor to subvert all order and discipline both in Church and State, by
opposing every power, not respecting Right, Law, Reason, true Religion, or the
public good, wherein their own is included, were they but so sober as to be
sensible of it.

THE CHARACTER.
A Phanatique is the Mushrom of distemper, a false Conception gotten by the Air
upon the sick womb of a confused fancy, a mere changeling, who devours
greedily all doctrines, but receives nourishment from none; the dishonor of
his reputed father, the plague and ruin of his miserable mother; he is a
reasonable creature incapable of right use of reason. He is a certain thing
that would puzzle Plato or Ari^totle to define, and indeed no man knows well
what he is, but himself least of all. You may better express him in the
Negative than the Affirmative; for he is neither Pagan, Turk, Jew, nor true
Christian. But to come as close to him as we can, he is a confused lump of
earth not refined, still retaining the habit of that Chaos from whence he first
proceeded, and is like a beggars bag filled with scraps of all sorts of food,
or like a Botchers cushion made up of the various kinds of Shreds and patches,
which he has filched from several garments. He is of a skeptical humor, and
you may sooner pick all Religions out of him than one: and is somewhat a kin to
all professions different from his own, but varies most from the Orthodox
Protestant. So that a right phanatique is a fantastic fellow, pleasing
himself with new fangles, and continually gaping after Novelties, and the
discovery of New lights. He forsakes the true fire, and runs over bogs and
moorish places to light his torch at an ignis fatuus, and (ten to one but) he
sinks in the pursuit of it, and is never able to return again. He is fit for
neither Heaven, Earth, nor yet Hell, because he is against all order and
government, which is not only exercised in Heaven and Earth, but practiced by
the Devils themselves. He pretends much to a good conscience, yet thinks it
lawful to murder all that dissent from him in opinion, although he changes from
himself more often than the Moon. If you talk with him to day you are never the
nearer to know him to morrow, for you shall find him perfectly metamorphosed.
He rayls much against the Pope of Rome, and the Whore of Babylon, when none so
much resemble the beast as himself, whose mark he bears in his forehead, but
wants the Looking-glass of reason to descern it. He writes all men in the black
book of Reprobation, but his own fraternity, and concludes all his Forefathers
damned. He thinks himself wiser than all others, although he be a verier fool
than a mere Naturalist. He will prate two hours together, and after all you may
sooner resolve a Delphian Oracle, than unfold his meaning, only he is dexterous
in blaspheming those two great Ordinances of God, Magistracy and Ministry. He
is naturally an arrand Coward, yet his Chymerical opinions infuse into him a
kind of frenetique valor. He is a perfect Saint in his own conceit, and would
not change places in Heaven with any of the Apostles, whom he calls nothing but
bare Paul, Peter, John, etc. and dare not add the title of Saint for fear of
sinning. He has but a mean respect to the Scripture, and could wish some
things expunged out of the Bible, having blotted them out of his mind and
opinion, which is all one as to curtel the Scripture. And for Tradition he
cannot abide it, esteeming of the writings of ancient Fathers as Winter tales,
or old Women's fables. If he be not an enemy to Government in the abstract, he
is rarely reconcilable to present powers, (in case they do not shower
preferments upon him) for that he thirsts after innovation as well in things
Civil as Ecclesiastical. And loathes Antiquity as a Frenchman does his
fashions of the last year. He is by nature covetous, yet will not grudge to
squander away his whole estate to maintain Conventicles, and is charitable to
none but his own tribe. The Proverbs of Solomon are a great eyesore to him,
but especially that Text, My son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change. To couclude, He is a bubble or bladder tossed to
and fro with every wind, which at length breaks, and vanishes to nothing.

London, Printed for Henry Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1660.


