A MEMENTO For the PEOPLE, about their Elections of MEMBERS for the approaching
PARLIAMENT.
I.

REmember that the choice of your Lawmakers is your first common right, by
which you distinguish your selves from slaves; for in the use thereof, you show
the original of your own Authority and Government, and how that every one of
you has such an inherent and natural Right in his own person, as not to be
disposed of, ordered, bounded or limited, but by his own Consent in Parliament;
the Members thereof being the peoples Representatives. And therefore if you be
tender of any thing, that you call or think your Right, Privilege or Liberty,
be tender of this, as the foundation and root of all your Liberties.

II.

Remember that the choice of your Lawmakers, is the greatest trust in civil
matters, and of the nearest concernment to you all, that you ever did, or can,
or shall repose in any body: you may trust some with your estates, and it may
be with your persons too; but you trust your chosen deputies in Parliament with
your persons, your lives, your posterities, and your whole Country; and they
may under God involve you in blood and confusion, or settle you in peace.

O then be cautious and circumspect in your choice now to be made, and consider
whom you may safely trust.

And first, consider whether it be consonant to your safety, and the end for
which you elect, to trust any that have ever broken their faith, or falsified
their trust formerly put in them. Remember the Declarations, Vows and Promises
of the Army, how and by whom violated and broke. The I^alian says, If a man
deceives me once, it is his fault; but if he deceive me twice, it is my own
fault.

Secondly, Consider, whether it be fit to confer your own Legislative Authority
upon any persons, who have another Legislative Authority stamped upon them
already. For how can it be looked upon but as prodigious, for two Suns to be
seen in one firmament?

Thirdly, Consider, whether you may trust those that shall not be equally
concerned with you in all the Laws to be made, or are not equally subject to
them with your selves?

Those that live, and intend to live upon the public purse, are not equally
concerned in levying of monyes upon you, with those that live only upon their
own estates and trades. Public Officers, that have great Places and Salaries
from the common purse, put in a penny, and take out a pound.

Those that have been made fat by the blood and ruins of the people, you can
have little hopes of: for, can a Blackmoore change his skin, or a Leopard his
spots?

And those that are to execute the Laws, may avoid the stroke which others must
abide: for how is it consonant to freedom and safety, for the Legislative
power, and the Executive power, to be in the same hands?

Therefore you may safely trust those to make your Laws, that must do the same
good or harm to themselves, which they do to you. And such as have not been
stained with the corruptions of the times, as have been ever constant to the
interest of the people, and as have not been enriched by the oppressions and
ruins of the Land, you may safeliest trust; of such there being most hope.

Fourthly, Excise men, Corrupt Lawyers, Impropriators, Farmors of Tithes,
Sword, -- etc.
Consider, whether you may trust any that are engaged either by their profit or
honor, or any kind of interest, to continue any of the burdens or grievances
that are upon you: as the Silver-Smiths were engaged to maintain the Image of
Diana and her Temple.

Fifthly, Consider, whether you may trust any man, that wants either depth of
judgment, or courage: he that wants the first, may suffer you to be cozened of
your Liberties; and he that wants the other, will certainly betray your
liberties unto any body that boldly attempts to take them from you.

And further consider, That those whom you choose for your Members in
Parliament, you choose to sit in your own stead, to represent the whole Nation;
their vote to be the voice of the people, and you to be bound thereby, only
saving to your selves your fundamental Laws and Liberties, as unalterable, and
not within their trust to violate or destroy. All that are worth 200 l in
Counties, are to be really in Parliament, voting there, and consenting to what
is done by their Knights or Trustees, whom they have chosen for their Counties;
and all the Burgesses and Inhabitants of Cities and Buroughs, are also there
in Parliament, by choosing them that shall speak for them and vote for them.

And that this Liberty, this Principle of common Right, might not be infringed
or restrained, care was taken in The Instrument of Government set forth by the
Lord Protector, That Tradesment that live in Cities and Buroughs, should be
all free to choose, although not worth 200 l for that restriction of 200 l
limited in the said Instrument of Government, is for such as are thereby
enabled to choose Members for Counties: which are the Knights girt with Swords,
mentioned in the Indentures; but as for Burgesses, there is no distinction
betwixt rich and poor; as all must be subject to the Law, so all must be free
to choose: which is very much to his Highness honor.

And indeed, Tradesmen that live in Cities, are as useful to the Nation, and
bear as much share in the burdens thereof, when they are not worth 200 l as
those that live in Counties, and are worth 200 l And the encouragement and
respect to Traders, being of great consequence to the Commonwealth, It was not
thought fit to restrain the the choice in Cities and Buroughs to those only
who were worth 200 l.

Neither is that restriction of the Electors for Counties, any straitning of
the election, but an enlargement thereof, full of reason; for the restraint
formerly was strictly to Freeholders, having -- xl.s. by the year; and now by
the Lord Protector, every man, though a Copyholder, or a man of a personal
estate, if he be worth 200 l is made a chuser, as well as Freeholders. So that
all that are worth 200 l may choose for Counties, as well as Freeholders; and
for Cities and Buroughs, all universally are to choose, who have not disabled
themselves by something done in the late wars.

Now Sirs, be advised to set aside all faction, self-interest, favor and fear,
that may bias your judgments in your choice; and agree together, to have
regard to the worth and merit of those you choose; let their wisdom,
faithfulness and courage, their public zeal and affection to the cause of the
people, their moderation, charity and compassion, their freedom from the
cruelty and oppression of the times, persuade you to choose them. And in so
doing, you will honor your Country, and settle it in righteousness, peace and
plenty. And the generations that are yet unborn, will have cause to bless you.

London, Printed for Rich. Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door. 1654.


