THE SUBJECTS DESIRE To see our Gracious King Charles THE SECOND, HIS SAFE
ARRIVAL.
REturn Great King. For Loyalty implores
Our Sovereign, to leave the Belgic shores.
And bless the British soil, which longs to greet
Her Second Charles, and kiss his Princely Feet.
Let not the Ocean, or the more profound
Abisse of guilt, wherein our Island's drowned,
Deprive us longer of that Influence,
Thy radiant Sun beams of benevolence,
But cross that envious Sea, that separates,
And show those smiles, all anger dissipates.
Let Neptune solemnize his conquest now;
Erect his head, and smooth his wrinckled brow.
As proud of such a trust, whose precious Lading
Not countervail'd, by all the Indian Trading.
Let curled wares in pleasant triumph dance,
To give us notice of that Ships advance.
Whose happy fate, shall by supreme decree
Engrosse three Kingdoms wealth containing Thee,
May Heaven her Pilot be, so to conduct,
That no aspiring rock, dare once obstruct.
May Holy Angels guard her day and night
May Winds, and Waters, join to speed her flight.
Who in their whispering murmurs, seem to say,
We are the best of Subject, We obey
Our Sovereign's Laws. And tacitly imply
A check to us, for past disloyalty.
Such may thy passage be, as shall presage
Those Halcton days, Thou promisest this Age.
May no tempestuous storm disturb thy rest,
Be Seas serene as is thy Royal Breast.
May Heavens propitious seem to favor Us,
Who toward thy safe return contribute thus
Our contrite tears, as Seas, to waft thee over
And bring Thee reconciled to our shore.
Faith climbs the mast's; Our hopes do swell the Sails,
And loyal wishes, breath ( Thee, prosperous gales.
Till day shall come, (our kalendars shall boast)
KING CHARLES again, arrived on our coast.
More welcome then the Rain to parched Land,
Then shall the Scepter court the Regal Hand.
Mean time, It is our hopes, and humble suit,
Of Royal Bounty, still totast more fruit.
That as thy Kingly word has all forgiven,
Thy Prayers would get, this pardon sealed in Heaven.
That whereas We, Thy Happy Reign, might miss,
As jug'd unworthy of so great ablisse;
May for thy sake obtain it. And be spared,
As those, on whom, thy Clemeney declared.
Whilst owned a People, Not reduced by Sword,
But won by Favor, and thy Princely Word.
Such conquest shall atchieve the greatest Glory,
And shall suffize t'immortallize thy Story.
Since such a work, no spirit could complete
But such as Thine. all Royal, Christian, Great.
Who, but the Son of Charles, thy Glorions Father,
Could cherish us, deserve destruction rather?
Who, but the Deputy of Bod Above
Could woo Rebellious Subjects, with such Love,
Who but Thy Self, could do as thou have done?
So never Conqerour, such triumphs won.
To God be Glory. Did thy Heart incline,
And for these gracious Acts, the honor Thine.
Long happy be Thy Reign, so as to tell,
Succeeding Ages, None could parallel.
These are our prayers, This our sole Ambition.
To see Thee here enthroned in Rights fruition.
Whilst We thy Subjects labor to redeem
By future loyalties Thy good Esteem
And make conspicuous to thy Royal Eye
The major part retained integrity.
M. D.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for H. B. at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1660.


