C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
The KINGS Declaration to all his loving Subjects.
WE are not ignorant that the incessant Malice of some indisposed, or rather
desperate men (like Cockle amongst Corn) continue endeavoring by all the means
they can to hinder the growth and pervert the Judgments of such Our good
People, as are willing to recover their lost Duty and Obedience to Us,
notwithstanding the prudent care of Iudirious, Unpassionate, and Vninteressed
Persons, to Compose the differences and heal the Wounds which have so long been
kept open and raw by the Blood-Thirsty, who beleiving their Crimes to be beyond
pardon, endeavor, like Pilate, to mingle Innocent Blood with their former
impious Sacrifices, toward whom all Gracious mercies and Concessions are cast
away.

We have therefore thought fit, once more, out of Our Princely Compassion
toward those, whose Sins are in their sight, and evidently repented, as by
their daily Expressions, are brought to Us at this distance, which has not
ever heretofore been known to be between the Kings of England and Subjects; We
say, We have thought fit again to Declare Our propense readiness to embrace all
Our Loving Subjects with the Arms of Pardon and Forgiveness, who shall no
longer value themselves above Our Mercy, or their Crimes above Forgiveness,
which cannot be of that deep remembrance with Us.

Nor are We without a deep sense of their wilful Sufferings, who like weak
Spirited Women and Children, are willing to fall under their Infirmities,
rather then admit the distaste and operation of a healing Remedy: What
invitation can We indeed offer unto them after they have slighted the
preservation of their own Inheritance and their Laws, and that nearer
Obligation, their Religion; For having wilfully resigned the properties of
their Possessions, and more unhappily resisted the means of their Salvation;
Our hopes also may seem desperate, though we set before them all the Fruitions
which this and the next World can enable Us to perform.

Nevertheless, in imitation of Our Heavenly Father (by whom, and in whose
Lively Image Kings Reign) We do again hereby offer a Free Pardon and Indemnity
to all such of Our Loving Subjects as shall embrace the same, and in Testimony
thereof prepare themselves Peaceably to receive, and Dutiful to Defend Us at
Vur coming, against the Unchristian Attempts of such, as shall (if any such
there be) continue or combine further to resist Our Lawful Claim and Peaceable
Possession of those Our undoubted Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland: We
say We do hereby tender unto them a Free and General pardon: Will you therefore
that We come unto you in the Spirit of Meekness, or in Revenge? It is in your
own Power to put a Scepter or a Rod into Our hands?

It is well known unto Us that you feel and confess your ruins to be grounded
upon your Disobedience, and will you yet against that Mercy of God which has
opened your Eyes, continue your Obstinacy and undo your Confession by denying
your Conversion? Look upon your Little Ones, and read in them the
Multiplication of your Sufferings whose future reflections upon your Rebellions
and forfeitures, must leave them miseraole, and the remembrance of their
Ancestors odious: know, That if you further provoke Us to use those helps which
Our Royal Consanguinities do daily offer unto Our Assistance, and which We must
be most unwillingly enforced to embrace, that the Charge thereof your Estates
must compensate, if by no other president or relation, then that of your own
injustice in takin^, possessing, or selling the Inheritance of such Our Loyal
Subjects, whom you have either stain with the Sword of your Success, or hold in
Banishment through your Fear and Malice, that they may again enjoy their own,
and return some of you to the Hunger and Nakedness which was your Portion
before Our Calm and Healing Waters were troubled.

If those who Travel the Seas with Merchandies will truly relate unto you their
Returns, you will apparently see the decay of your Tradings in general; For We
well know that if your Merchants miscarry, your Husbandry and Manufactures will
lie heavy upon you; of which We hear daily Complaints, and are willing to ease
the same, if by Your Obedience You would bring them within Our Power.

If any amongst You cry out of Tender Consciences? Who could offer more toward
their Consolation then We have formerly in all Our Declarations Erpressed? and
in case that do yet continue to be an Obstacle, We assure You in the word of a
King, and your King, that You shall fully enjoy such Liberty to Your Souls as
Your own Representatives in PARLIAMENT, together with Your most Learned Divines
shall advise.

Paradventure the Soldiers amongst You (as well knowing their want of legal
Title to the Estates they possess, as the unwillingness of the People to
satisfy their Demands in Arrears, may withstand other men's more moderate
desires;) As to them who are in possession of Our own and other Men's
Inheritances, We shall for avoidance of Partiality leave them also to the
Judicature of their Representatives, either to continue their Possessions, or
to redeem them on such Terms as their own Wisdom shall most approve; and for
the Arrears unpaid to the Common Soldiers, it will be, We assure You, Our
first care to discharge them so soon as We shall be in Peaceable Possession of
Our Kingdoms.

There remains no more, but that upon Our Princely Word. We will be ready to
join with all Our Loving Subjects for the settling of an Everlasting Peace, the
first step whereto is an Amenstitia and absolute Oblivion to all which is past,
which on Our part shall be so inviolably kept, as those who have been Our most
Protest Enemies, shall not receive the least Endamaging Affront from Our most
Deserving Friends; And as We are the Undeniable Lawful Deputy of GOD shall as
near as We can, study and endeavor to imitate Him in Mercy and Justice, to
as many of You as acknowledge and obey Us Your true and undoubted Sovereign

C. R.
Given at Our Court at BRUSSELS the 30 of March, S. N. 1660.
LONDON. Printed for Richard Parker in Little Britain, 1660.


