To the present visible Supreme Power, Assembled at WEST MINSTER.
The Humble Petition, and desires of many thousand well-affected persons, in,
and about the City of London, in behalf of themselves and the whole Kingdom.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners being sensible what it is to offend the Almighty, and
procure his wrath upon our selves and our posterity, (as also of the misery of
a late and lasting War) and how dangerous a thing it is to offend against the
very light of Conscience, and to dally with Oaths and Covenants, etc. And
having taken into our Consideration the present straits we are in, if under one
hand we shall oppose or speak against those present visible powers in being: Or
on the other hand, shall violate the Oath of Allegiance, (which we were forced
to take when we became Freemen, and Subjects to the King) the Protestation,
and the late Solemn League and Covenant, all which we have, by many learned
Divines, been from time to time taught that they ought not to be violated, and
that from the same we could not be absolved.

But so it is, as we humbly conceive, if we shall comply with our Brethren in
laying aside of the King, the Parliament, the present Settled Laws, and
Constitutions of this Kingdom; and shall side with, and abbet in deposing of
the King, and His Posterity, the dismembring of Parliament, the defrauding of
Fellow Members of their Freedom, for to Choose, or to be Chosen, in places of
Office and Trust in the Kingdom; we shall thereby violate our Oaths, give up
our undoubted Rights to others, offend God, and sin against the light of our
own Consciences: Or if not, we shall expose our selves, and Estates, into the
power of those, who (by the known Laws, and undoubted Rights, belonging and
appertaining unto the Subjects of England) have no power over us, and to be
tried, and disposed by unwritten, and uncertain Dictates, Laws and Rules, to
which we never gave the least consent, nor had the least knowledge of.

Neither are we ignorant of what evil Consequences to this Kingdom, the
deposing of former Kings has been, witness the Story of Henry the Fourth, and
others: And how God from time to time, has taken vengeance on
Covenant-breakers, (though it was amongst Heathens themselves) who have made
specious pretenses of good, until they have gotten power into their own
hands, etc. and of the sad consequences that have risen from the change of
Government in a State, witness that of Athens, etc. All which, we beseech you
to take into your serious consideration, (know you not yet that ENGLAND is
destroyed) before our miseries come inevitably upon us, and there be no remedy,
nor hopes of Restoration to our hoped-for Peace and Tranquillity; and that for
the prevention of the forementioned evils felt or feared,

1. You will please to propound to the whole Kingdom, (and not a part only)
that they, within a certain time to be limited, convene together, to declare
their approbation of the present Members, or to choose others instead of them:
which Parliament so freely and satisfactorily chosen by the whole Kingdom, may
(with the advice of our Brethren of Scotland) consult, and advise for the
speedy Settling the Peace of both Kingdoms upon sure and lasting Bases.

2. That for matter of Religion and Church Government, you will please to take
advice of an Assembly of Ministers, Convened out of England, Scotland, and
Holland, that so the better satisfaction may be given, as to your selves, so to
the whole Kingdom.

3. That you will declare unto us, what immunities you will please to grant, to
those that descent from, and cannot in Conscience join with the now propounded
Agreement, or Propositions drawn up and propounded by a few unto the whole
Kingdom, etc. and that, though in some mean condition, we may live in peace
amongst our Brethren, who once declared it as most unreasonable, for all
Government to be in the hands of a Party, etc.

Therefore our humble desire is, that your Honor; would be pleased to take the
premises into your serious Consideration: which granted,

Your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.


