A Letter written to an Honorable MEMBER of the House of COMMONS.
SIR,
THe jealousies that are against certain Members of the Parliament concerning
their failing in their places and Trust, give us sensible occasion (as to call
to mind the several happinesses which we of this Corporation have received in
your part of representation of us so for your further encouragement in well
doing) to express your thankfulness for the same as to God, so to your self.
Sir, We do thankfully acknowledge, that for more then eight years past as you
were freely chosen by us, so you have freely and cheerfully all this time taken
this charge upon you of serving your Country as one of the Burgesses of this
Borough. To which place, we had the more reason to make choice of you, most of
us having plentiful experience of your fitness in sund^ie respects, and of
your fidelity manifested in former Parliaments, in which we found your ready
willingness not only to be active for pub^ick good, but to suffer also with
cheerfulness in the public cause of the Commonwealth. Sundry of us well
know, and thankfully remember your carriage against the Loan money, and other
projects tending to public detriment, though much to your particular hazard in
bearing witness against them. And as for this present Parliament, which has
past the greatest hazards, trials and oppositions of any (for maintenance
whereof (as we of this Town have from the first all along to this day been
engaged with them against the common Enemy) so you in particular have always
countenanced and encouraged us therein, as well in your personal as other
affitance in the same common cause. As for your carriage in this Parliament,
though we could not be spectators, eye and ear witnesses thereof, yet we have
not been wanting to be inquisitive after the same. The result of which
Inquisition ever rendered you to us a diligent attendent as of the House, so of
the particular Committees, and one that ever closed with that party of the
House that most endeavored Reformation of things am sse both in Church and
Commonwealth.

And as to such particular occasions as thy Corporation has had in this
Parliament, both for our Church and our Garrison, we thank you for it; your
endeavors have been most readily extended to the utmost on our behalfs. And
for your carriage in the Country at such times as you have had liberty to come
amongst us, we thankfully acknowledge that in order to the weal public, both
as a Justice of the Peace, and as a Commissioner of the Parliament, you have
been very active in discountenancing persons i^l-aff^cted, or any ways
obstructing or impeding the public Service of the Parliament; and encouraging
and advancing the payment of taxes, and execution of the Ordinances of the
Parliament. We well remember your seiz^ng, and sending to the Parliament the
high Sheriff that was of this County, and your proceedings against other
potent Enemies of this County. And to this day we have observed your adhering
to the first principals, as well by expressing the like activity for the
Parliaments occasions here in the Country, as by your Letters which some of us
have seen, as also by your rejoicing at the successes of the Parliaments Army
under his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and your bewailings of the sad condition
of the Kingdom upon the Scots Invasion this Summer; of which also some of us
are witnesses. And surely your own advantage to your particular estate h^th not
been an Ince^tive to all this; for as for recompense from us You were nobly
pleased to way ve it and serve us freely: so we believe that you have as freely
at your own charge served the Commonwealth: For we well observe and understand
that in this time of your ^ong absence, your Estate here i^ considerably
impaired, which though you lightly esteem, being it is for the servic^ of the
public, yet we have reason to acknowledge it with thankfulness. Sir, We write
not thus to flatter you, or to make way for any design of putting you to any
increase of service in our own particulars, but in way of testifying our hearty
thankfulness unto you, and to encourage in that furthee public Service which
your place and trust calls for from you. And so with our very loving
remembrance to your Self, and your Honorable Lady, we rest: Boston, Linc.

Sir, Your very loving friends to serve you, Reginald Hall, Mayor. Aldermen.
John Hobson. Sam: Cust. Andrew Baron. Thomas Ceny. Francis Vaughan. John
Ellis. John Atkin. Henry Mawbray. Disertion Cosen. John Tooly. Robert Atkin.
Sam: Beetson. W^lli:Leverington. George Metcalfe. John Adams. John Letsham.
Henry Rosse. Matthew Harris^n. Edward Mould. Thomas Cave. Henry Calverley.
Edward Tilsen John Whiteing Reginald Hall, Thomas Asham Thomas Law Charles
Empsen Thomas Tooly Thomas Welbye William Wight John Tilson Edward Adlard


For our much honored Friend, Sir Anthony Irby Knight, these present. December.
20 1648 Vera Copia.




