TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THE Glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth has done so great things for us in
restoring your Majesty to your Throne, and these Nations to your Majesty's
Rightful and Undoubted Government in Peace, without either the dangers or
destructions of War, that we are like them that dream. For though the
Settlement of your Majesty's Kingdoms under your Royal Scepter, has been all
these late times of trouble the matter of our Longings, Prayers, Endeavors,
and consequently of our Expectations, yet to have it accomplished so much with
both your Majesty's Honor, and your Peoples Quiet and Security, was far above
our Hope before, and now exceeds the Expressions of our Joy. Your Majesty is so
signally and highly favored in the Court of Heaven, that God has for you
inverted the ordinary methods of his Providence, he has took the Race from the
Swift, and Victory from the Strong: In your Case, Inveterate Factions submit to
Union, and high Passions and Violence to Reason. For this Blessing, we have
joined with all your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, in rendering unto God the
greatest Praises our Hearts could frame for the greatest Temporal Mercies, in
using the loudest Acclamations, and heartiest Expressions of Joy ever used by
this Nation, and in evidencing our Submission and Obedience by all the ways
our greatest Affections and Dutifullness could find out.

And we most humbly beseech your Majesty to accept graciously this our most
humble Address as a further overflowing of our hearts, though we have nothing
in it to offer your Majesty, but that which is your own by the Law of God and
of this Land, our most affectionately Loyal and Obedient hearts, with an
entire resignation of our Lives and Fortunes, whenever they may be for your
Majesty's service: And humbly pray Almighty God in your Majesty's behalf, that
you may long Reign happily, as you do now, that is, as well in the Hearts, as
over the Outward Condition of your Subjects, that from your Majesty's so much
desired Government may flow all Blessings upon your Loyal Subjects, that we
may by your Majesty's great Moderation, Prudence and Felicity, see once again
the Church and State flourish, as in the days of your Royal Father and
Grandfather of ever Glorious Memory, to whom, as your Majesty is a living
Monument of Honor upon Earth, so that you may be, after a very long Life, the
same in Heaven, shall be the Constant and most Zealous Prayer of

Your MAJESTY'S Most humble and most dutiful Subjects of the County of
SOMERSET, John Lord Paulet. Francis Lord Hawley. Esquires.
John Paulet. Francis Paulet. Amos Paulet.
Sir William Portman Baronet. Sir John Sydenham Baronet. Sir John Stowell
Knight of the Bath. Sir Henry Berkely. Sir Charles Berkely. Sir Hugh Wyndham.
Sir George Norton. Sir William Wyndham. Sir John War. George Horner Knights
of the Shire. Hugh Smith Knights of the Shire. Esquires.
Alexander Popham. Edward Phelips. George Stowell. Samuel Gorges. Hugh
Halswell. Peregrine Palmer. Edward Hungerford Maurice Berkley. John Malet.
Ralph Stowell. George Speak. Edward Berkely. William Basset.
John Brice Gent. Timothy Rivot Gent. Esquires.
John Newton. Thomas War. John Tynte. Edmund Wyndham. Francis Wyndham.
William Bull. Samuel Horner. Charles Pym. John Bamfield. Robert Phelips. Thomas
Pigot. George Bampfield. Warrick Bampfield. George Sydenham. William Every.
Edward Bampfield. Nicholas Codrington. Humfry Hook. William Doble. William
Dyke. Edward Gorges. Edward Nevill. William Helliard. Henry Bull. John
Churchill. Henry Winter. Hugh Tynte. Robert Hawley. Anthony Paulet. Malet
Paulet.
Francis Harvey Gent. John Harvey Gent. Esquires.
Thomas Percivall. William Walrond. Angel Gray. John Buckland. John Coventry.
Henry Gray. Francis Luttrell. Robert Hunt. Thomas Neuton. Henry Walrond. George
Walrond. John Hall. Henry Sydenham. Humphry Sydenham. Roger Bourn. Tristrum
Wood. Thomas Francis. John Bonvile. Robert Mohun. William Paulet. Michael
Malet. Thomas White. William Milbourne. Henry Dunster. John Morgan. Richard
Morgan. Francis Keen. Thomas Dyer. Martin Sanford. John Harrington.
Thomas Gorges Esquire Henry Rogers Gent.

This Address was presented to his Majesty by George Horner and Hugh Smith,
Esquires, Knights for the County of Somerset, on the Ninth of June, to which
his Majesty gave a very gracious Acceptance.



LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane, MDCLX.


