THE BLACK BOOK OPENED,
OR Traitors Arraigned and Condemned by their own CONFESSION, Being a Tragical
Discourse between a Noble Cavalier and a Select number of those Pure refined,
Diabolical Saints, called (by the most Loyal Subjects) KING-KILLERS.
As it is to be acted at the Red-Bull in St. John's street by a Company of Blind
Bloomsbury Fiddlers, the ablest now extant.
Enter Cavalier and Hewson the Cobbler. WEll meet blind Harper, whether away so
fast?


Hews. Sir, to tell you true I scarce know my self.


Caval. Do thou hear the News?


Hews. What News?


Caval. That the Old Kings Son shall Reign and Rule the Dominions of his Father.


Hew. Heaven forbid! I Would rather all the Apprentices in London should rise, had
I but my Regiment again.


Caval. Why so? Art thou (who never had the least spark or thought of
Conscience or honesty) frighted at the noise of a King coming: Does that sound
terror in the hearts of King-killers, Is a bloody Aspect attending that cursed
hand that signd thy Sovereigns Death? Or do thou repent of that heinous
murder committed in cool blood?


Hews. No, I could act a second Tragedy with as good a Conscience as ever I was
Mr. of, might I but get my Colonels place again, yet there is little hope since
the wheel of time has turned me not only out of my place but into such a
shaking Ague through fear of a King, that I fear my soul (by the Devils
assistance) will hardly keep close to the upper leather of my body; especially
when I think upon my Oath when I first became a Free Cobbler of London; But hang
thoughts, I am not alone, who comes there, Tom Scot? exit.


Enter Scot. As sure as Lowse in bosom, whose confidence had you, the face of
Majesty could never beat a retreat in your ears. Come what change will, I Will
make one: Have not I been for a Parliament, an Army a Rump, and cannot I be for
a King forsooth? an Act of Indemnity cures all. Nay come what will, there is
more security in a Lambeth Begger-wench then in any Cobblers shop in London. Who
comes there an Actor in the same blooy Scene as my self?


Enter Harrison. I, and deeper then you ever durst, for I not only signed the
Murder, but appointed the time and place for erecting the Stage on which the
Tragedy was to be acted; And I resolve to stand out to the lest. We Will have no
King but him whom our brother Overton declared for, If we secure Hull all is
ours, then what will become of your Lambeth Quarters, when he appears such as
you shall be hewers of wood, and drawers of water to our holy Camp, No bastard
shall shake his -- in our Dominions. But is no more of our Gang here?


Enter Mounson. Yes faith, and as true a trout as the best, I sed little, but
signed as much as any, yet I expect the favor of a King if he do come; who
knows but that Indemnity may stand me in as much stead as a 5 l. Act. exit


Caval. What Is this comes here Famine the God of hunger, one of Pharaohs Lean
Kine, or the Ghost of some Bacon dried Boar-Pig enough to fright the Devil, In
good sooth it is Corbet the Welsh Philosopher; Sure he is for a King now.


Corbet. Sfoot I for a King, Id'e rather dye in a ditch, then live to see a
King, and be advanced in Acteon road a story above my neighbors, which I must
needs expect; Had I a hand to sign my Sovereigns death, and shall I desire a
branch of the same Tree. No, yet I should count it a good step in my way to
Heaven, could I as Pilate wash my hands clear from the guilt of that bloody and
unparalleled murder.


Cav. Sfoot, who comes there, Old Smell-Smock,


Enter Martin, The very same, I came just now from Baldwins Gardens where I
thought to have found a Nurse fit for my purpose, but a P -- take the Whore,
her milk fell short, she would not take the piece of my ingenuity though I
profferd a fair price, nor I ^ear keep my Council though I gave her a Fee, Were
I as clear of this as from fear of any prejudice by a King coming, I should
hardly vnnter upon a single woman again;


Caval. Whoop, what is here a Goldsmith?


Enter Bark. Alas you all know I was a Lord of the new stamp, I mind no King
but could ene grieve to think that my impregnable strength, where I enjoyed the
very quintissence of pleasure for signing that heinous murder. I was always
moderate, the chief and most resolute to damn Ringship was my Brother Tichbuan.


Enter Tich. Who I; that have been the God of the City pinching the poor, of
bread, Butter, and meat but especially the Ale-wives, whom I keep in more Awe
than ever Wolf kept sheep, but rather then a King shall come to take of my
Ill-gotten Estate I shall fight up to the ears in Milk-sops; Nay raise such a
fortification of Cow dung to my very throat that shall make such a plentiful
increase on my Chin; that against the next King comes to the Scaffold I hope to
look like a grave President.


Enter Ludlow. Heavens what a Bablings here, why is this confession to a Damnd
Cavalier, are ye minded to be rediculous the uinverse; Had not we good witness
against him men of Noble fortunes, viz.

Seely, Of London Cobbler, why not a Cobbler a witness as well as a Col. Lacy of
Nottingham why not a Painter who would draw out the Scarlet Hue of our famous
Murder; and Leads the Tylor; Morgan the Feltmaker, Roberts the Iremonger; James
Crosby Dublin Barber, Whittingon the Shomaker of Nottingham, Bennet the Clover
and Evans the Welsh Smith besides Price the Scrivener of London and diverse more
such like Noble Gentlemen? many of which have been well requited since.


Enter Caval, With a naked sword. Caval. Whose that dare say no King.


All. Not I, not I, nor I Sir,


Caval, Villains have you swallowed up the precious blood of a Martyred Father,
and subverted the Laws of his Kingdoms, and now do you aim at a Sons blood too,
will your Hell Governed hearts delight in nothing but sentencing Kings, and
Butchering Loyal Subjects? Is no pity in you?


A?. No.


Caval. Oh wonderful, when Devils tells the truth? Nay such Devils who hope to
gain salvation by bloody Butcheries, would you Murder the Son, If you were
Judges of the Court as you did the Father.


All. We would.


Caval. A Pox upon you all, His Royal Person who has been by Providence
preserved and escaped many dangers (especially at Worcester fight) and an
pursuit preserved (by God himself to be King) such Upstart Gentlemen have
preyed too long on the blood of Majesty; Whom God defend now from such slaves
as you, God save the King; Base Villains all Ad^^e.


All. Our grief is great we shall for sorrow die,
Since all the Nations for a King do cry.

LONDON, Printed for Theodorus Microcosmus, 1660. March.25. 1659


