THE ground of desperation is our of the light, for Cain when he despaired,
Genesis 4.8.
went from the light, that killed the just; he that killed the just within,
killed the just without: And Esan who despised his birthright, who was a
profane person, did seek to kill the just; Gen, 27.4^.
and he that rose up against the beloved of God, David, who despaired, 2 Sim.
28.15. and 31.4.
there he rose up against the just: And the Jews did despair, and doubted,
they did not believe in the light, and were against the just, though they
professed all the Scriptures; Mat 27.5.
and Judds which despaired, turned from Christ the light, to the changeable
Priests; so the cause of desperation is going from the light, for that which
will presume will despair, which rises up in that nature which acts contrary
to the light, and that is it which wanders too and fro, up and down, and hunts
abroad, Gen 25 (...).
and builds that which God confounds. I am the light of the world, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, says Christ, he by whom the
world was made: Now every one being enlightened with the light that comes from
him who is not of the world, who was tempted in the world to make himself away,
who was tempted to lust after the Creatures, Luke 4.9. and ^, ^, 8.
who was tempted to worship the Devil who is out of the truth, but overcame
all: Now every one of you that come into the world, having a light from him
that is not of this world, that was thus tempted, who entered not into the
temptation; it is not a sin to be tempted, for he was tempted, but to enter
into the temptation: So if you see temptations with the light that comes from
Christ, the light, the truth, and the life; look at him who was tempred, Heb,
4.15.
who overcame the temptations, who was not of the world; having a light from
him whose name is called The Word of God, who says, If thou keep my word,
Revel. 3.10.
I will keep thee in the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the
world, and it shall not come near thee, which shall come to try all that dwell
upon the earth: For having a light from the Word by which all things was made,
and keeping the Word, Revel. 3.8.
the power is received against all temptations, and they shall not come nigh.
Art thou tempted to make away thy self? Luke 4.3.
so was Christ. Look not at the temptations, but look at Christ, and there thou will receive power. Art thou tempted to the Creatures; does the Devil, he that
is out of the truth, who is a destroyer, Luke 4.7.
tempt thee to the Creatures? so was Christ, he by whom all things was made.
Heb. 2.10.
Art thou tempted to worship the Devil? Does the Devil who is out of the truth
tempt thee to worship him? Look to Christ, John 14.6.
he was tempted, who overcame: Look to him who overcame, he is the Captain of
our salvation: So every one having a light from Christ Jesus, which is given to
him to watch, and to pray, and to seek, and to knock after Christ, who is the
door, the way, the life, the Covenant of peace: So look not at the temptation,
but at Christ, neither be troubled at them; but look to him from whom your
strength come, that lets you see them, and there stand still, for there
salvation is received, and your strength. Isa. 45.2^.
Have you made a Covenant with death, who contrary to the light in your
consciences, have acted? Isa. 28.10, 17, 18.
Have you made Covenants with Hell, and the Grave, and Satan, which is our of
the light, our of the truth; Isa. 42.6.
and that is the Devil that is out of the truth, the destroyer, the devourer.
Isa 49.9.
Therefore being turned to the light which comes from Christ, the Covenant of
God, Gods Covenant of light, there waiting, the Covenant of death is broken,
and in it believe, for there Gods mercy is received, against which Covenant
Hells gates cannot prevail, let her open her mouth never so wide; and all the
bonds of iniquity, promises which you have made with the fleshly mind, and the
lusts being turned to the light, the Covenant of life breaks all the bonds and
the promises of the fleshly mind: Therefore in patience wait in the light which
comes from Christ, the Covenant of peace which ye may receive, to have peace
with God; Lam. 3.26.
and never look at the temptations, but at the light which shows them, and
there stand still to receive power from him from whom all power is received;
for that which is out of the truth, that tempts to draw from the light, and
from the truth, and out of it; therefore every one having the light from
Christ, who is not of the world, which is come into the world, that will let
you see the temptations. John 17.18.
Thou that keeps my word, they shall not come nigh thee, but power shall be
received to trample upon all. Revel 5.10.
And the worship in the Spirit and truth will be known, John 8.14.
and the wisdom by which all the Creatures were created, will be received,
with it to use them to the glory of God, to which end they were created; Mat.
14. 29.
and that which is out of the truth, which tempts to murder, for that is the
murderer which is out of the truth, and out of the light will with the light
be seen, judged, and condemned; but before he will lift up, and exalt, and the
same will bring to despair: But learn of Christ the light, who is meek and
lowly, and he is kept out and down who is out of the light: But before this he
will tempt into the creatures, to get into the creatures, he who is from the
light, and from the life, and so a devourer of them, and so out of the wisdom
by which they were created; therefore as I said before, wait in the light which
comes from Christ the life, that with it ye may come to receive refreshing from
the Lord, and to know the wisdom of the Creation, with which it must be used
to the glory of the Creator. So having a light from him by whom the world was
made, to whom all power in heaven and earth is given; wait in the light, from
him to receive power, which brings out of the worlds lusts and defilements,
which the light which comes from him will show you all the temptations to the
creatures, John 9. 51.
or obeying the will of him that is out of the truth, but you will come to know
the right use of the creatures, waiting in the light; so wait for power from
the Lord in the light (which shows you all temptations) which comes from the
Lord, for power to stand against all temptations; and so that all may be
condemned with the light, that is contrary to it; Mat. 13.33.
and so you may come to witness the leaven that leavens into the new lump, and
see him that makes intercession, who is able to save to the utmost; Heb, 7.25.
and so with the light you will see there is no temptation you are taken with,
but which is common to man. 1 Cor. 10.13.
So if you mind the light, and in it stand, you will see the Lord giving issue,
whereby you will find deliverance standing in the light, which comes from the
word, which is as a fire, and a hammer, and a sword, Jer. 23.29.
which beats down that which is contrary to the truth, divides and burns up,
which keeping the word the temptations will not come nigh, but the word of
reconciliation be witnessed, and the word of faith which m^kes clean and
purifies, ^ Cor. 5.19.
and sanctifies: Where the old Garment is put off, and the knowledge in the
flesh denied, and the knowing in the life in the Spirit where nothing comes to
reign but life and power, where all is overturned, and with the power of the
(...) ^^^^^^hended the dread and life of the living God, to whom be all honor
and glory for ever.


