Mr. PRYNNES LETTER TO THE GENERAL The third of January 1648.
Demanding what kind of Prisoner He is? And whose Prisoner? with an appearance
to his Action of false imprisonment, which he Resolves to prosecute against
those who have imprisoned him, for the public interest and freedom. of the
Members and Subjects.

My Lord,
IT is now a full Months space since I [with other Members of the Commons
house] have been forcibly apprehended and kept prisoners by some of your
Officers and Marshall, against the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of
the Subject, the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and all rules of Justice,
Conscience and Right reason; without the least shadow of Authority, or any
cause at all yet made known to me, of which [were there any] neither God nor
man, ever yet made your Lordship or your Officers Judges. I therefore desire to
know from your Lordship, what kind of prisoner I am? and whose? If a prisoner
of peace: neither your lordship nor your Officers are any Justices of peace, or
Civil Magistrates in this place, to restrain me for any civil crime, were I
guilty of it, much less without proof or hearing, in case I were no Member:
but being neither guilty nor accused of any such crime, and a Member too, no
Magistrate can, nor ought to imprison me upon any pretext, at least without the
Houses license first obtained. Ifa prisoner of War, which I cannot probably be,
being never in Arms, and apprehended near the Commons house door, going
peaceably and unarmed thither to discharge my duty; then you, and your Officers
thereby acknowledge, that you have LEVIED WAR AGAINST THE PARLIAMENT, and
it is MEMBERS; and what a Capital offense this is, and what a punishment it
deserves, I need not inform your Lordship, or your Council, who have for this
very crime condemned and shot some to Death, As TRAITORS: and demanded speedy
Justice and Execution for it upon THE KING HIMSELF. I have but one thing more
to trouble your Lordship with, and that is, to demand whose Prisoner I am?
having yet seen no Warrant nor Order, from your self, or your Officers for my
restraint, though I have often demanded it of your Marshall: If your Lordships
Prisoner, there appearing yet no Legal Authority, cause or warrant for my
restraint, I must then crave so much Justice from your Lordship (being but a
Subject, and not yet paramount all Laws) to order your Attorney to give an
Appearance for you in the KINGS BENCH, the first return of the next Term, to
an action of false imprisonment, for this my unjust restraint; which I
intend(by Gods assistance) effectually to prosecute. If your Officers Prisoner
only and not yours, which I conceive, who yet abuse your name and authority
herein, though it be a rule in Law and Divinity too, Qui non prohibet malum
quod pocest, Inbet; yet I shall be so just as to set the saddle upon the right
horse, and commence my action only against such of your Officers, who have been
most active in my imprisonment, for damage and reparations, which if there be
any justice remaining under Heaven, I doubt not but I shall recover in Gods due
time, in this public cause which so highly concerns the Honor, Freedom, and
Priviledgesof Parliament and Subjects Liberties; for defense and maintenance
whereof, as I have hitherto spent my strength, adventured my life, Body,
liberty and Estate, so I shall now again engage themall, and all the friends
and interests I have in Heaven and Earth, rather then they shall suffer the
least diminution, prejudice or Eclipse by my stupid patience under this unjust
captivity; though I can as willingly forgive and put up private Iniuryes, when
the public is not concerned, as any man. All which I thought meet to inform
your Lordship off, whom I am heartily sorry to see so much dishonored, abused,
and misled by rash ill-advised Officers, and dangerous, destructive (and I dare
say Jesuitical) counsels, to the Parliaments dissipation, the Kingdoms
prejudice, Irelands loss; most good men's and ministers grief, your best
friends astonishment, your Enemies and the Papists triumph, our Religions
scandal, and your own dishonor; which I beseech you as an Englishman, a
Christian, a professor of piety and Religion, a Soldier, a General, to lay
sadly to your heart, as the earnest request of

From my Prison at the Sign of the King's Head in the Strand: 3. Iauuary 1648.
Your Lordships faithful Friend and Monitor WILLIAM PRYNNE.
To the Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, GENERAL of the Present Army, these
present.



An Additionall POSTSCRIPT.
WE read Luke 3.14. That when the Soldiers demanded of John Baptist saying; And
what shall we do the said unto them; DO VIOLENCE TO NO MAN [or put no man in
feares] NEITHER ACCVSE ANY FALSELY; and be content with your allowance; not
imprison depose, or murder Kings, pull down Parliaments imprison, violently
shut out and drive away Parliament men, and then lay all false accusations and
scasdalls upon them, to color your violence, subvert kingdoms, alter States;
break all bonds of Laws, Oaths, covenants, obligations, engagements to God
and men; usurp all civil, military and Ecclesiastical power, and the Kings
Royal Palaces into your own hands, as supreme Lords and Kings; raise what new
forces, and leavie what new Taxes you please, take up what Freequarters and
houses, seiz and plunder what publik Treasuries and moneys you please, without
Commission or Authority, obey neither God nor Man, neither Parl. nor
Magistrate; and be content with nothing, but alter and subvert al things. These
are St. Peter's new Doctrines and Revelations, to our Officers and Soldiers now,
andthose Jesuits who lurk amongst them not John the Bapt. whose Canonical
advise is now rejected as Apochryphall even among the army Sts. who prefer
every ignis fatuns, though from Doway or Rome it self, before this burning and
shining old light, and are guided only by a new minted law, of pretended
providence, or necessity, of their own forging, and not by the Revealed will
and law of God, the sacred light whereof their present works of Darkness dare
not approach, least they should be reproved and condemned by them. But some 43
actions of false imprisonment by the imprisoned, and 150. actions of the Case
by the secluded Members, brought against these dominering lawless Officers and
Grandees of the Army, where in good Damages will be recovered, and some 12.
Indictments of High Treason against them, for laying violent hands upon the
Kings Person, and the Members, and levying War against the Parliament, will
teach them more Obedience, Humility, and Modesty, then either John Baptist,
Saint Paul, Saint Peter, or Saint Peter's will do; and be like Giddeon thorns
and briars of discipline to these men of Succoth, with whom no fair means will
prevail: who might have learned so much law and justice from an Heathen
Soldier and Governor Festus Acts 25.27. it seems unto me UNREASONABLE to
send, (much more to commit) a pri^ner, and not withal to signify THE CRIMES
LAID AGAINST HIM; And come short of that ingenuity of the Heathenish CHIEF
Captain, who seized upon Paul, thereby to appease the tumult at Jerusalem,
Acts 22, 27.29. who as soon as ever Paul told him, he was a Roman, and FREE
BORN, then straightway they departed from him who should have examined him; and
THE CHIEF CAPTAIN ALSO WAS AFRAID, after he knew that he was a ROMAN, AND
BECAUSE HE HAD BOUND HIM. And should not the false imprisoning of a Parliament
man, and Freeborne English Man, be as formidable to our chief Captain^ (being a
christian, I say sworn and vowed to defend the Houses Privileges and Members
persons as the imprisonment of a Roman was to this Chief Captain, and they as
ingenious and just as he, who shall rise up to Judgment against them and
condemn them at the last.

FINIS.

