Mris. RVMP brought to Bed of a MONSTER, with her terrible pangs, bitter
Teming, hard Labor, and lamentable Travel from Portsmouth to Westminster, and
the great misery she has endured by this ugly, deformed, ill-shapen, base
begotten Babe, or Monster of Reformation, with the great care of Nurse
Haslerigg, and Mris London the Midwife.
The Prologue.
Let merry Bells with Musiick backwards Ring,
Whilst we the praise of Mistress Rump do sing,
Let all her friends at Portsmouth Bonfires make
Of purest Straw they from Pis'd Beds can take;
With Eccoes loud like screeking of a Cart,
And with shrill noise more sweeter then a F --
For now she is safe from danger brought a bed,
Behold the Monster of her Maidenhead;
The Nurse is paid, not by imagination,
But by the new found Coin called Sequestration.
It Is strange a Rump that is roasted, boiled, and broy'd,
Should dye, and yet produce a Monstrous Child;
But yet Spectators now with patience view
This Scene, it is called, a false Rump never true.
Enter Mris Haslerig an old dry Nurse, and chief Matron to the Rump.

GAllop, Ride, Trot, Amble, Go, Run amain, with all agility, dexterity,
alacrity and celertty, call Mris. London the Midwife, and tell her the Mris
Rump desires her to come away presently, for shees's in strong labor and
endures miserable pangs and throws that comes upon her by playing the Whore at
Portsmouth; pray Heavens she has not tajen some fright at the exclamations of
the people against the Fag-end of a Parliament! I Will be sworn it is enough to
gally a Gentlewoman of her quallity and breeding to be despised by every idle
boy that makes verses, rimes and Songs of her, making no better of her then a
common Camp or Ammunition M -- turning up her Tail to every lowsy
ill-dependant, besides Martin the Town Bull. Well she is not the first that
has done amiss, these are but slips occasioned by the weakness of her Sex.
I Will in and make her a spiritual Cawdle, I doubt she will have an ill bargain
on it. Mris Rump, how do you? I say Mris Rump Will you have a little Strong
Water of Mris Scots distellation, or a Cawdle of Sequestration to comfort your
putrifyd Bum?

Mris Rump. Oh sick, sick, I must Spew Nurse pray reach the Boul, Haw -- aw --
aw --.


Nurse. Well sed Mris, fetch it up: up with it: Heaven bless us! What Is this
looks so red Mris?


Mris. Rump. Oh it is blood, innocent blood, that has lay in congealed clods in
my Stomach a 11 years; Hark how loud it cries for vengeance! I never felt it
before I was overpowred by my Secluded Gossips, only once at Portsmouth, when I
was frighted by my Gossip Fleetwoods party and the London Apprentices Oh the
death of my King, his blood and the fear of his Sons coming, causes me pain to
increase, I understand too late he suffered by my Tyranny, an innocent and
untimely end.


Nurse. It Is well it is up, Mris cast again.


Mris Sump. Aw --, aw --, aw -- Oh my heart is almost burst!


Nurse, Lord, Mris, what is that looks so yellow, Is it Cholier?


Mris Rump. No Nurse it is Gold, accursed Gold, for love of which I sold my God,
murdered my King, gave away my Soul, and pulld down the gates, Posts,
Percullisses, nay Nurse through thy instigation had like to have fired the
habitation of Mris London my Midwife, and that for a small sum of one hundred
thousand pounds Aw --, aw --, aw --.


Nurse. What Is this looks like Paper?


Mris Rump, These are Votes, and Ordinances of my own creating, contrary to Law
or Reason, made only to Keep out my King contrary to my Oath of Allegiance, and
for sequestring my friends to enlarge my own Coffers. Pray hold my back hard
Nurse, else my heart will shiver in pieces.


Nurse. What Is this that comes so strongly up? Foh foh, now it stinks all the
Kingdom over, but I cannot help it.


Mris Rump. Oh Nurse its too late now. This is that damnable Declaration you
caused to be lapt up in an Oath of Abjuration against my Sovereign the King,
aspersing him and his whole Line with scandalous lys: calling him tyrant who
was the most Virtuous mild and loving Prince to his Subjects in the World; Pray
flng some hot embers on it, and make have for Mris Murder, Mris Rapine, and my
good neighbor Mris. Perjury.


Nurse. I Am gone, here is the Midwife, Mris London is come forsooth.


Mris London. Mris Rump how do yo I pray?


Mris Rump. Oh Mris London, help me now or I dye, never did Rump endure so much
sorrow, with bitter pangs, sobs and sighs. Oh, oh I am ready to dye, you need
not have staid so long; there was no Gates, Portcullises or Posts to hinder
you, Oh I Am ready to depart!


Mrs London. Go, and the Devil go with you, I came but to laugh at thy misery,
thou have had too much of my help already, which has emboldned thee to play
the Strumpet.


As soon as she had made an end of speaking, in came rushing Mrs. Privilege,
Mrs. Ordinance, Mrs. Schism, Mrs. Sedition, and Mrs. Tolleration, who
presently fell about their business: one held her hands, another her back, and
a third her members, she being in this grievous agony (having no hopes to escape
with life, desired Mrs. Haslerig to indite a bill to have her prayed for) and
that it be speedily sent by the Lord Mayor to the several Congregations within
every their respective Parishes for her safe Deliverance; which most accurately
she penned in form of a Declaration, in these words following.

The Declaration of Mrs. Rump, lying very weak, aad in most grievous Pangs of
Childbearing; and cannot be DELIVERED.
WHatsoever dangers are threatened or feared, either by the great perplexity I
am at this present in (or by reason of my manifold sins that now in my weakness
lie heavy upon my Conscience,) yet I have assurance, that if I confess and
forsake them (as I have no such intention) I shall find mercy.

Therefore I confess and acknowledge (but not from the bottom of my heart) that
for the space of these eveven years I have been a most cruel Murderer, not
only of Bodies, but of Souls; that I have perjured my self, First by my Oath
of Alegiance, and secondly by my Solemn Covenant, wherein (as in Hos. 1. 9.) I
have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant; springs up against
me) like Hemlock in the furrows of the field: That I have most Traitorously
betrayed, and murdered my lawful King, the Anointed of the Lord, that I have
made Gods House and the Kings House a Den of Thieves: that I have loved
wickedness, and practiced it; that no fear has dehorted me from doing any
thing, (but Justice) that I have Robbed both God and the King, and have not
feared the one, nor honored the other: that I have used all manner of
jugglings, Cousenage, contradictions and Equivocations, that my Religion has
been Railing, Blasphemy; Treason and Tautalogies.

And that I have not only Coveted but by the instigation of the Devil, and
against the Laws of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, forceably taken, stole
and carried away the Goods and Chattells of many thousands of His Majesty's
Loyal and obedient Subjects; that I have made this Canaan of all happiness, a
Golgatha, and Field of Blood; and have yoaked my fellow Subjects to the Pride,
Tyranny and Oppression of my own Lust and Ambition; instead of Reforming I have
Deformed, and instead of repairing I have pulled down; Which has occasioned
all these miseries to fall upon me; My greatest grief of all being, that I know
I have Committed all this, and much more, but cannot Repent for the same;
therefore the several Ministers within the Cities of London and Westminster,
and the late Lines of Communications, are desired upon next Good Friday if I
shall not be Delivered before, to keep a day of feined Humiliation, and
Prating; that the heavy judgments that so inevitably threaten me, may be
diverted: That so I may come in again to Rule, Reign, and Tyrannize over you,
Rump everlasting, Impositions, Assessments and Taxations without end, Amen.

Your despised Friend, Rump.

While this was writing Mrs. Rump grew worse and worse, and the good Wives made
account she had been drawing on: therefore Mrs. Privilege stepped to her and
spoke as follows, viz.

Mrs. Privilege. Dear Daughter I perceive by thy Pulses beating, and so much
blood springing out of thy Conscience into thy Face, that thou art almost
already as it were dead, and its a question whether the Child thou now art in
labor with may come to perfection or no? or live to receive its Christendom,
and though I have upheld thee in all thy Actions, and safely brought thee from
Portsmouth to London; yet thy sins and abominations have been so great I cannot
deliver thee so as to restore thee to thy former power, I advise thee therefore
restore what is taken by thy cruel Ptws from thy God, thy King, thy Neighbor,
and repent of thy perjuryy.

Whilst thus she speak the Room was filled with smoke, over spread clear with
darkness, the Candles went out, and terrible thundaing were heard, intermixed
with wawling of Catts, howling of Dogs, and barking of Wolves, which struck a
great terror in all her Gossips; In the mean time Mrs. Rump brought forth an
ugly deformed Monster without a Head, goggleey'd, bloody hands, growing out on
both sides of its devouring panch, under the Belly hung a great Bag, and the
Feet were like the Feet of a Bear; those that will see it may repair to the
Plantation of Fumigosus called Slavonia, where this Brat is gone to be nursed
with her Cosen Jermine, Nrs. Sequestration, who no sooner departed, but in
comes the secluded Nurses.

Enter Secluded Nurses; What Is here to do? Is no Room left for us, if not,
we will make Room by force.

Nurse Lenthall. Pray sit down, you are all Welcome.

Secluded Nurses? Nurse Lenthall pray read over the Manuscript of Mrs. Rump.

Nurse Lenthall. Here Is an Act again the line of King James; an Act for
sequestring Booth and Lamberts parties.

Secluded Nurses. Those Acts we Vote as Null and Void, we clear the Road; let
the next go on where we have left; and right will take place, the putrified
Rump be in a weak Condition, though its supposed we fatt'ed them.

We Will make them Lean, and all for sorrow sing
Themselves to Hell; England shall have a King.
Epilogue.
Rejoice Great Britain now, for King there is none
Shall Govern thee, but Charles, and he alone
Will piece and plenty to this Nation bring,
Who is the Son of Charles thy Martyrd King.
The Rump of Traitors, that did sore so high
To spill the blood of sacred Majesty,
Are now defunct, Poor Whore, she is brought a Bed
Of a long tail, but neither Brains or Head.
Printed by Portcullis Damgate for Theod. Microcos^^^, 1660.


