By the Major.
To the Aldermen of the Ward.

We charge and command you, that upon S. Thomas day the Apostle next coming,
you do hold your Wardmote, Wardmote.
and that you have before us at our general Court of Aldermen to be holden in
the Guildhall, the Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany next coming,
all the defaults that shall be presented before you by Inquest in the said
Wardmote, and the said Inquest shall have full power and authority by one whole
year to inquire and present all such defaults as shall be found within your
said Ward, Inquest for a year.
as oftentimes as shall be thought to you expedient and needful, which we will
shall be once every month at the least.

2 And if it happen any of your said Inquest to dye, Inquest dying.
or depart out of your said Ward within the said year, that then in place of
him or them so dying or departing out of your said ward, you cause to be chosen
one able person to inquire and present with the other in manner and form above
said.

3 And that at the said general Court, you give before us the names and
surnames of all them of your said Ward, that come not to your said Wardmote if
they be duly warned, Nonappearance.
so that due redress and punishment of them may be had as the case shall
require, according to the Law.

4 And that you do provide, that at all times convenient, covenable watch be
kept: And that Lanthornes with light by nightertaile in old manner accustomed,
be hanged forth: and that no man go by nightertaile without light, nor with
visard, Watch, light, Visard.
on the peril that belongs thereto.

5 And also that you do cause to be chosen (...) men of the most sufficient,
honest, and discreet men of your said ward, Common Coun^ell.
to be for your said ward of the common Council of this City for the year
ensuing, according to the custom in that behalf yearly used. And also that
you do cause the said men, so to be chosen to be of the common Council, to be
sworn before you, and in your presence, according to the Oath for them used,
and of old time accustomed: the tenor of which Oath hereafter ensues.

Ye shall swear, that ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King that
now is, and to his heirs and successors, Kings of England, and readily ye
shall come when ye be summoned to the common Council of this City, but if ye
be reasonably excused: and good and true counsel ye shall give in all things
touching the Commonwealth of this City, after your wit and cunning: and that
for favor of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the
common profit of this City, and after that you be come to the common Council
you shall not from thence depart till the common Council be ended without
reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Majors license: And also any secret
things that be spoken or said in the common Council which ought to be kept
secret, in no wise you shall disclose, as God help you.

6 And that also in the said wardmote, you cause to be chosen certain other
honest persons to be Constables, and Scavengers, Constables, Scavenger, Beadle,
Raker.
and a common Beadle, and a Raker to make clean the streets and lanes of all
your said Ward, according to the custom yearly used in that behalf: which
Constables have and shall have full power and authority to distraine for the
salary and quarterage of the said Beadle and Raker, as oftentimes as it shall
be behind unpaid.

7 Also that you keep a Roll of the names, Roll of names.
surnames, dwelling places, professions and trades of all persons dwelling
within your ward, and within what Constables precinct they dwell, wherein the
place is to be specially noted by street, lane, alley or sign.

8 Also that you cause every Constable from time to time, Constable.
to certify unto you the name, surname, dwelling place, profession and trade
of every person, who shall newly come to dwell within this precinct, whereby
you may make and keep your roll perfect. And that you cause every Constable
for his precinct to that purpose, to make and keep a perfect roll in like
manner.

9 Also that you give special charge that every Inholder and other person
within your ward who shall receive any person to lodge or sotourne in his house
above two days, shall before the third day after his coming thither, Roll.
Inholder. Lodger. Sojourner.
give knowledge to the Constable of the precinct where he shall be so received
of the name, surname dwelling place, profession and trade of life, or place of
service of such person, and for what cause he shall come to reside there. And
that the said Constable give present notice thereof to you: and that the said
Inholder lodge no suspected person, or men or women of evil name. Suspect
persons.


10 Also that you cause every Constable within his precinct, once every month
at the farthest, and oftener if need require, Search.
to make diligent search and inquiry, what persons be newly come into his
precinct to dwell, soiourn, or lodge. And that you give special charge, that
no Inholder or person shall resist or deny any Constable in making such search
or inquiry, but shall do his best endeavor to aid and assist him therein.

11 And for that of late there is more resort to the City of persons evil
affected in religion, and otherwise than in former times has been: New comers.
you shall diligently inquire if any man be received to dwell or abide within
your ward, that is not put under frank pledge as he ought to be by the custom
of the City, and whether any person has continued in the said ward by the
space of one year, being above the age of xii. years, and not sworn to be
faithful and loyal to the Kings Majesty, Frank pledge
in such sort as by the law and custom of this City he ought to be.

12 To all these purposes the Bedle of every ward shall employ his diligence,
Bedle.
and give his furtherance.

13 Also that you have special regard that from time to time, Fire.
there be convenient provision for Hooks, Ladders and Buckets, in meet places
within the several Parishes of your ward, for avoiding the peril of fire.

14 Also that the streets and lanes of this City, Sueets.
be from time to time kept clean before every Church, house, shop, warehouse,
door, dead wall, and in all other common passages and streets of the said ward.

15 And whereby diverse Acts of common Council, Hucksters of Ale and Beer.
before time made and established for the common weal of this City. among
other things it is ordained and enacted, as hereafter ensues.

Also it is ordained and enacted, That from henceforth, no huckster of Ale of
^eere be within any ward of the City of London but honest persons, and of good
name and fame, and so taken and admitted by the Aldermen of the ward for the
time being, and that the same hucksters do find sufficient surety before the
Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, to be of good guiding and rule. And that
the same hucksters shall keep no bawdry, nor suffer no letchery, dice playing,
carding, or any other unlawful games to be done, exercised or used within
their houses, and to shut in their doors at nine of the clock in the night,
from Michaelmas to Easter, and from Easter to Michaelmas at ten of the clock
in the night, and after that hour sell none Ale or Beer. And if any huckster
of Beer or Ale, after this Act published and proclaimed, sellany Ale or Beer
within any ward of the City of London, and be not admitted by the Aldermen of
the same ward so to do, or find not sufficient surety, as it is above
rehearsed, the same huckster to have imprisonment, and make fine and ransom
for his contempt, after the discretion of the Mayor and Aldermen. And also that
the said hucksters suffer no manner of common eating and drinking within their
cellars or vaults, contrary to the ordinance thereof ordained and provided, as
in the said Act more plainly appears at large. We charge you that you put the
same in due execution accordingly.

16 And also that ye see all Liplers and other sellers of Ale or Beer,
Measures ^aled.
as well of privy Osteries, as Brewers and Inholders within your ward, not
selling by lawful measures sealed and marked with the letter C. crowned,
according as in that behalf it is ordained and purveyed, be presented, and
their names in your said Indentures be expressed, with their defaults, so that
the Chamberlain may be lawfully answered of their amercements.

17 And also that you suffer no stranger borne out of the Realm to be of the
common Council, Stranger born.
nor to exercise or use any other office within this City, nor receive or
accept any person into your watch, privy, or open, but Englishmen borne. And if
any stranger borne out of this Realm, made denizen by the Kings Letters
Patents, or any other after his course and lot be appointed to any watch, that
then ye command and compel him or them to find in his stead and place, one
Englishman to supply the same.

18 And also that you cause an abstract of the Assize appointed by Act of
Parliament for billets and other firewood to be fair written in Parchment, and
to be fixed or hanged up in a Table in some fit and convenient place in every
parish within your ward, where the common people may best see the same.

19 And furthermore, S^reets.
we charge and command you, That you cause such provision to be had in your
said ward, that all the streets and lanes within the same ward, be from time to
time cleansed and clearly voyded of ordure, dung, mire, Pain. 40 2.
rubbish, and other filthy things whatsoever be to the annoyance of the Kings
Majesty's subjects.

20 And also that at all times as you shall think necessary you do cause
search to be made within your said ward for all vagrant beggars, Vagrants.
suspicious and idle people, and such as cannot show how to live, and such as
shall be found within your said ward, that you caust to be punished and dealt
with according to the law and the statute in such case ordained and provided.

21 And also we will and charge you the said Alderman, Jury men.
that your self certify and present before us at the said general Court to be
holden the foresaid Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany, all the names
and surnames truly written of such persons within your said ward, as be ably to
pass in a Grand-Iury by themselves: And also all the names and surnames truly
written of such persons being and dwelling within your said ward, as be able to
pass in a Petty-Iury, and not able to pass in a Grand-Iury, by themselves:
that is to say, every Grand-Iury man to be worth in Goods an hundred Marks,
and every petty Jury man forty Marks, according to an Act in that case
ordained and provided, and the same you shall indorse on the backside of your
Indenture.

22 Item, Harlots.
for diverse reasonable and urgent considerations us especially moving, we
straightly charge and command you on the King our Sovereign Lords behalf, that
you diligently provide and foresee, that no manner of person or persons within
your said ward, of what condition or degreee soever he or they be of keeping
any Tavern or Alehouse, Ale-seller, or any other victualling house or place,
of common resort to eat and drink in, within the same ward, permit or suffer
at any time hereafter any common woman of their bodies, or harlots to resort
and come into their said house or other the places aforesaid, to eat or drink,
or otherwise to be conversant or abide, or thither to haunt or frequent upon
pain of imprisonment, as well of the occupier and keeper of every such house,
or houses, and all other the places before remembered, as of the common woman or
harlots.

23 Also that you do give in charge to the wardmote enquest of your ward,
Articles.
all the articles delivered to you herewith.

An Act for the Reformation of diverse abuses, used in the Wardmote Enquests.
ITem, Commons, Dinners, Banqueting.
where the Wardmote Enquests within the several Wards of this City, for the
maintenance of honesty, virtue, and good living, and for the abolishment,
exiling and suppressing of all kind of vice, evil rule, and iniquity,
according to the ancient laudable Laws and Customs of the said Cite, are
yearly severally charged and sworn, upon the day of Saint Thomas the Apostle,
before the Aldermen of the said wards, chiefly and principally to the end and
intent, that they with all diligence should truly and duly inquire and present
all such enormities, nusances, misorder, and offenses, as are, or at any time
within the space of one whole year then next ensuing, shall be severally used,
committed, or done within the said Wards, and have day yearly to make their
said presentiments, until the Monday next after the Feast of the Epiphany. The
said Enquests heretofore, little or nothing at all regarding (as it is very
manifest, and not unknown, the more is the pity) their said Oaths, or yet
the great commodities, utility, quietness, honor and worship that might or
should grow and ensue to the said City and inhabitants of the same, through
their good, industrious, and indifferent proceedings, for the advancement of
virtue and repressing of vices, have drawn it in a manner into a very ordinary
course and common custom, to consume and spend a great part of their said
time, that they have yearly given unto them when they receive their said
charge: partly in setting up among themselves a certain commons, and making
and keeping many costly and sumptuous dinners, suppers and banquets, inviting
and calling to the same at sundry times in a manner, all the inhabitants of the
said several wards, to the no little charges of the same inhabitants: and
partly in passing and occupying much part of the same time, in playing at dice,
tables, cards, and such other unlawful games, both to the great costs charges,
and expenses of the said Enquests (whereof the greater part are most commonly
but poor men) and also to the very lewd, pernicious, and evil example of all
such as have any access or recourse unto the same Enquests. And where also the
said enquests have of late usurped to dispense with such persons, as they by
their search and otherwise have founden to offend and transgress the Laws, in
using and occupying of unlawful Weights and Measures, taking of the said
Offenders certain Fines, which Fines as it is said) the said Enquests have
commonly used to employ toward the maintenance of their said Feasting and
Banqueting, directly against the due order of our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Laws, and the public wealth of all his Highness Subjects within the said
City, and much to the reproach and dishonor of the same City.

For remedy and reformation thereof, be it ordained, enacted, and established
by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in this present common Council
assembled, and by authority of the same: That all and every the wardmote
Enquests of the said City, from henceforth to be yearly charged and sworn
within the said several Wards, at the time before rehearsed, shall at all times
and places meet and convenient for the due execution of their said charge, meet
and assemble themselves together, and that they and every of them after their
said meetings, inquisition, and treating of their said necessary matters, shall
go home to their own several houses to Breakfast, Dinner, and Supper, during
all the said accustomed time of their Charge and Session above said: And that
none of the said Enquests shall from henceforth forward, set up any manner of
Commons, or keep or maintain any manner of dinners, suppers, or banquets among
themselves, or use at their said Assemblies and Sessions, any of the games
above mentioned, or any other whatsoever unlawful games or plays at any time,
before the giving up of the said presentiments, at the time above remembered:
Fines.
or shall take or receive any manner of Fine or Fines, for the concealment and
discharging of any of the offenses before recited, but truly present the same
offenses, and every of them according to their Oaths, upon pain of
imprisonment by the discretion of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City
for the time being.

Provided always, Fire and Candle, etc.
and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it shall be lawful for all
and every of the said Enquests, to take and receive toward the charges of
their fire and candles, and other necessaries during the time of their said
Session, all and every such sums of money, as any honest person or persons of
their free will and benevolent mind, will give or offer unto them. And when
they have made their said presentiments, to go and assemble themselves together
for their recreation and solace, Recreation.
where they shall think it good, and there not only to bestow and spend the
twenty shillings, which every Alderman within his Ward, according to a certain
order lately taken shall yearly give unto them at the time of the delivery of
the said presentiments, toward their said charges in this behalf: but also the
residue of the said money received and gathered, as it is aforesaid, of the
benevolence of their said loving friends, if any such residue shall fortune to
remain: Any clause or Article in this present Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Not failing hereof, as ye tender the commonweal of this City, and
advancement of good justice, and as ye will answer for the contrary at your
uttermost peril. Dated at the Guildhall under the Seal Office of Maioralty of
the said City, the twelfth day of December, the (...) year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

God save the King.
Printed at London by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


