THE DECLARATION and ADDRESS of the GENTRY of the County of ESSEX, who have
adhered to the KING, and suffered Imprisonment, or Sequestration, during the
late Troubles.
May it please Your Excellency,
WE the Gentlemen of the County of ESSEX, taking notice how industrious some
pernicious and desperate persons have been to raise a jealousy, that all who
adhered to the KING have such a Settlement of rancour and revenge in their
hearts, against those who were of a different party, that the blessing of a
firm and lasting PEACE, so long wished for and now hoped to be in a near
propinquity, is not likely to take its due and desired effect, Have thought fit
to express the true sense of our hearts, in a Declaration which we have
enclosed herein, Conceiving it very fitting, not to make the same more
public, till it has first arrived at the view of your Excellency, whom God
has been pleased to make so signally eminent in the delivering of this Nation
from those pressing miseries it has so long lain panting and groaning under;
and for which, as we can never enough magnify his mercy, so can we not
sufficiently express that high Honor and respect which we retein in our hearts
to wards Your Excellency, the great and worthy instrument he has been pleased
to make use of therein.

Chelmesford, April 17. 1660. MY LORD, We subscribe our selves, Your
Excellencies most Humble and Devoted Servants.

This was subscribed by the Gentry, whose names are expressed under the
subsequent Declaration, and superscribed To His Excellency the Lord General
MONCK.

The DECLARATION.
WHereas Almighty God has raised this distracted Nation to some hopes of
Re-settlement on Just, Known, and Lasting Foundations: We magnify his Mercy
from the bottom of our hearts, and shall ever pay a most grateful
Acknowledgment to his EXCELLENCY the Lord Genesis MONCK as the signal Instrument
of so great a Deliverance.

And whereas some pernicious and desperate Persons have labored to raise a
Jealousy, that those who adhered to the KING do still in their hearts retein
Revenge against such as were of a different Party: We think our selves bound to
declare to all the World (in the presence of God) that we detest and abhor
all thoughts of Animosity or Revenge against any Party or Persons whatsoever.
For as we could wish the late Divisions had never been begotten, so we desire
they may for ever be buried, and shall think those Persons the greatest and
common Enemies of our Country who shall offer to revive them. And we also
declare, That we will thankfully submit and attend the Resolutions of the next
ensuing Parliament, for a just and happy Settlement of Church and State, that
so at last (by Gods blessing) those odious marks of Sides and Parties may for
ever be blotted out, and a perfect Union may again be restored to this
distressed Nation.

Edward Russel, Esquire Sir Henry Appleton, Baronet. Sir Benjamin Ayloff, Baronet.
Sir Denner Strutt, Baronet. Sir Humfrey Mildemay, Knight. Sir John Tirell,
Knight. Sir Cranmer Herris, Knight. Sir Edmund Pierce, Knight. Sir Henry Wroth,
Knight. William Ayloffe, Esquire James Altham, Esquire Gamaliel Capel, Esquire Anthony
Brown, Esquire Charles Fytche, Esquire Thomas Argall, Esquire Stephan Smyth, Esquire Salter
Herris, Esquire Henry Pert, Esquire John Fanshaw, Esquire Thomas Roberts, Esquire Richard
Humphrey, Esquire John Lynn, Esquire Dr. John Michaelson, Richard Symonds, Esquire Anthony
Kempson, Esquire William Herris, Esquire William Bramston, Esquire John Brown, Gent.
Nicholas Serle. John Vavasour, Gent. John Green, Gent. James Cookson, Gent.
Edmund Cool, Gent.


This Declaration and Address was agreed-upon by the Subscribers at a General
Meeting, at Chelmesford in Essex, April 17. 1660. Sir Benjamin Ayloffe, and Sir
Edmond Pierce being then appointed and desired to present them to his
Excellency, which was done accordingly at St. James's the 19th of the same
Month.

LONDON, Printed for Gabriel Bedell, and Thomas Collins, at the middle
Temple-gate in Fleet street.


