AN HEROICAL SONG On the Achievements of his most Excellent Highness JAMES
DUKE OF YORK, ADMIRAL of CASTILE.
COme rare invention some sprightly strain,
The mighty Cleavelands pregnant brain,
To speak great York, St. James for Spain,
Whom we will have again.
The Glorious Luster of whose whitest Rose,
Stalkt upon prickles to our late Red Nose,
Too fragrant for the Breech without a Hose,
Returned in spite of Foes.
Forced by his barbarous Country to Exile,
And leave a wretched, self confounding Isle,
Now the high Admiral of great Castile,
Fortunes first pleasing Smile.
A Prince, whose Infant eryes were sounds of War,
His Swaddling Clothes were Harness, a la guarre
Wer's first plain words, the Martial Star
At's getting helped C. R.
Sprung from the Loins of Henery le grand,
That Val'rous Captain, to whose Sovereign hand,
France owes its present Greatness and Command,
And we the hope of our Land.
His other Grandsire, that peacemaking King,
That did the two discordant Nations bring
To unity, from whose most royal spring
Such streams derive to him.
But the immediate Parents of this Prince
Were the great matchless couple, Innocence
And Wisdoms Patterns, in whose just defense,
Honey soit qui maly'a pense.
He Charles the good, She Mary good and great,
Once the sole Orn'ments of this wanton State,
She still survives his most unworthy fate,
For him we mourn too late.
Their sublimate perfections thus combined
And all their several virtues here we find
Centred in him, whom Nature had designed
But one degree behind.
His Childish plays were Stratagems and Arts,
Where he was always taking Forts, our Hearts
His Tennis Balls resembled Warlike Darts,
Disguised, and so departs.
Dressed like a little Lady in a Gown,
('It Was Pallas sure) he left this thankless Town
To keep a head as a reserve to the Crown,
If it descended down.
Then traced the world, and foreign places see,
Examined Courts, and their State mystery
A privy Counselor in's minority.
Now just past twenty three.
Since which, the French and bloody Flandrian Field,
Have seen him a Victorious Sword to wield,
Death like the Gorgons Head placed in his Shield,
Compelled the Foe to yield.
With what undaunted valor did he set
Upon the Dunkirke Camp what ere he met
He overthrew, nor did their force him let.
But Fortune did forget.
Forced to give ore the attempt, and to retreat,
How did he change not leave the battles seat,
And the advancing Enemy still rebeat,
And saved the defeat.
The amazed Belgicks wondered to behold
His glorious valor, and their hands uphold
T'Heaven for safety, fearing him too bold,
And wished our Pistols into Gold.
But as if the Earth Elements could not suffice
His Macedon Spirit, the great Ocean cries
Let me pay tribute to his fame, and rise,
High with my richest prize.
Now the great James is lanch't into the Main
St. James, Patron and Admiral of Spain
St. George for England we still will maintain.
Till we see great Charles again.
LONDON. Printed by Henry Blunt, 1660.


