A DIARY of the Siege of Colchester by the Forces under the Command of his
Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX.
Tuesday June 13.
HIS Excellency the Lord Fairfax engaged in the fields before Colchester, near
St. Mary's, the Lord Gorings Forces, together with the Forces under Command of
the Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas, and beat them into the Town; Colonel
Sir William Leyton, and between 4 and 500 of the Enemy were taken prisoners,
(200 of them being of Colonel Far (the Apostate) his Regiment,) and in
pursuit of the rest, Col. Barkestead, with his Regiment, entered the Suburbs as
far as head-Gate, and entered the Gate, but being overpowered there, and out of
the Church yard, the Enemy Barracadoed the Gate, (leaving near 500 men to our
mercy;) yet notwithstanding those foot, and Col. Needhams fought many hours
after, in hopes to gain the Town at that place, but could not, the enemy making
good resistance; there were slain of the Enemies part, Colonel Sir William
Campion, Colonel Cook, and diverse Officers of quality, and about 80 private
soldiers; Colonel Panton, Capt. Brunkerd, Clifford, Worsop, and diverse other
Officers wounded. On the Lord Fairfax side, Col. Needham, Capt. Lawrence of
Horse, Capt. Cox of foot, and near 100 private soldiers and inferrior Officers
were slain: when we entered the Suburbs, the Lord Goring was Summoned, but
returned an Answer not becoming a Gentleman: The Enemies word at the Fight was
Charles, the ground they fought upon, Mary's: Ours, God's our help.

The Forces under the Command of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax engaged in
the Fight before Colchester, June 13.1648.
As also the names of the chief Commanders and persons of Quality of the Lord
Gorings Forces engaged at that Fight.
His Excellencies forces engaged in that Fight.
Part of His Excellencies Regiment of Horse, being four Troops, Commanded by
Major Desbrough. Of Colonel whaleys Regiment, six Troops, Commanded by himself.
Of Colonel Fleetwoods, five Troops, Commanded by Major Coleman. Three troops of
Commissary General Iretons, Commanded by Captain Cecill. Two Troops of
Dragoons, Commanded by Captain Freeman and Captain Barrington.
Of Foot.
Col. Barksteeds Regiment Commanded by himself, consisting of ten companies,
about 800 men. Col. Needhams Regiment, lately the Tower Regiment, Commanded by
Col. Needham, being seven Companies, and about 400 men. Part of Colonel
Inglesbies Regiment, of four Companies, Commanded by Capt. Grimes, 320 men.
Of the Essex Forces.
Col. Harlackendens Regiment, of four Troops of horse, Commanded by major
Robert Sparrow; and Capt. Turners Troop of Dragoons. Sir Thomas Hunniwoods
Regiment of Foot Colonel Cooks Regiment of Foot,both which said Regiments
consisted of Auxiliaries, and Trained bands. The County Forces of Essex left to
secure Chelmsford and Maulden, two considerable Passes, lest more Forces should
resort from London to the Lord Goring. Colonel Henry Mildmaies Regiment of
Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons. Part of Colonel Carew Mildmaies Regiment of
Foot, Commanded by Major Bard. The Suffolk Forces, who made good the Passes
over the River at Nailand, Stratford, and Cadaway, lest the Enemy should escape
toward Suffolk and Norfolk, were under the Command of Captain Fisher, Captain
Brandling, and Captain Sparrow, besides the assistance which Captain Ball,
Captain Cox, and the rest of the Sea Commanders gave to secure the River. The
Suffolk Forces that. came afterward to help besiege this Town. Colonel
Gourdons Regiment of horse.
Of Foot Regiments.
Colonel Sir Thomas Barnardistons, Colonel Fethergils, Colonel Harveys,
Colonel Bloises.
Of the Army that came up after the fight.
Colonel Scroop, with three Troops of horse of his Regiment. The Lord Gorings
Forces engaged in that Fight.
Of Horse.
Lord Gorings Regiment. Lord Capels Regiment. Sir William Comptons. Colonel
Slingsbies. Colonel Sir Bernard Gascoignes. Colonel Hamonds. Colonel
Culpeppers.
Of Foot.
Sir Charles Lucas his Regiment. Sir George Lisl^s Regiment. Colonel Tilleys
Regiment. Colonel Tewk his Regiment. Colonel Farrs Regiment. Colonel Gilburds
Regiment. Colonel Sir William Campions Regiment, himself slain. Colonel Burds
Regiment. Colonel Bowmans Regiment. Colonel Chesters Regiment.
Colonels who had no Command of Regiments, yet assisting at that Fight.
Earl Louborough, Lord Hastings, Sir William Leyton, Colonel, taken Prisoner,
and wounded, Colonel Sir Richard Hastings, Colonel John Heath, Colonel Lee of
Kent, Colonel Panton wounded, Colonel Cook slain, Colonel Sir Hugh Orelie,
Quartermaster Genesis Col. William Maxey, Col. Pilman, Col. Beal, Lieu. Col Hatch
slain, Major Jammot, Adjutant Gen, besides diverse Lieutenant Colonels and
Majors who were assistants, but had no Commands.

Wednesday 14.
His Excellency perceiving the Enemy would not stand the field, resolved to sit
down before the Town in order to asiege (being too few to storm it) having not
then, nor when be first engaged, 1500 old foot, and but about 1500 horse, and
two Troops of Dragoons, (besides the two Regiments of the Trained Bands, under
Col. Sir Thomas HunniWood, and Col. Cook,) the Enemy at that time being about
6000 Horse and Foot in Town, and the Town and Suburbs larger in compass then
Oxford, and would require 5000 men to besiege it; appointed Lexden in the road
to London for the Head-Quarter, where the greatest body was to lie, to prevent
more aid for coming from London to the Lord Goring, and kept strong Guards of
Horse on Cambridge road, on the other side the River, that they might not
escape Northward, to join with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, leaving no place open to
them, but toward the Sea, where they could not go far; and the same day his
Excellency sent a party of Horse to secure Mersey Island, to prevent the
Revolted ships from coming Into the River to relieve the Town; the Enemy sent
Colonel Tuke with a strong party an hour after, but came too late.

Thursday 15.
The Enemies Canon from the Royal Fort at St. Mary's, played very hard, killed
several of our men, as they did the day before; some, as they were raising the
first Work; called Fort Essex, others as they were straggling in the field.

Friday 16.
Nothing of importance happened, but three of Captain Canons men killed with a
Canon Bullet.

Saturday 17.
A Trumpet sent in about the Exchange of prisoners, and this day the Enemy got
provisions out of Tendering Hundred, which we could not prevent till the
Suffolk Forces marched to our assistance.

Sunday 18.
We took two of their Frigots, the one with ten, the other with eleven Guns.
And this day Colonel Ewers came up with six Companies from Chepstow Castle:
The Essex foot under Sir Thomas Hunniwood and Colonel Cook endured many Canon
shot this day, and were very ready upon an Alarm.

Monday 19.
The party of Horse sent from the Leaguer under Major Sparrow and Capt.
Wallington, engaged the Enemy at Linton, (coming to assist Goring,) where Major
Muschampe and others of the Enemies side were slain, and Master Reynolds, and
others taken prisoners, the rest (about 500.) dispersed. This day a Trumpet came
from the Lord Goring, pretending to disre a Treaty of Peace.

Tuesday 20.
Answer returned, if a general Peace was intended, that then it was proper for
the Parliament to determine of that, and offered them in that answer
Conditions, viz. The Gentlemen and Officers to go beyond sea, and the soldiers
to go home, without prejudice.

Wednesday 21.
The Enemy returned a scornful answer, moving for a free-trade for the
Townsmen.

Thursday 22.
A small party of the enemy sallied out to view a new Work (afterward called
Col. Ewers Fort) but were instantly beaten in by Musketeers. Their Canon
killed two men of ours. That day the Lord Goring sent a summons to the Suffolk
Forces at Cattaway-Bridge, Commanded by Capt. Fisher, and Capt. Brandling, to
join with him, which they refused, expressing their Resolution still to adhere
to the Parliament and Army.

Friday 23.
The Guns began this day to play from our new Battery, which much annoyed the
Enemy at north bridge. His Excellency sent a Reply concerning his former offer,
offering the same Condtions again to all in the Town, Except the Lord Goring,
Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas.

Saturday 24.
One of the Enemies Canoneers was killed. This day the Suffolk Forces advanced
out of their own County, and took up their quarters upon Mile-end, over
against the North-gate, being about 2500. horse and foot, leaving a guard at
Cattaway, and Nayland, to secure those passes.

Sunday 25.
Nothing of importance.

Monday 26.
A party of Col. Barkesteads Foot (the Enemy being drawn out near the
Almes-house) beat them from the Hedges, and from their Court of guard, fired
the guard house, and brought away the hour glass by which they stood Centry.


