A DECLARATION OF THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY That adhered to the late KING, now
residing in and about the City of London.
AFter the miseries of a Civil War, and the many vain and fruitless Attempts
toward Settlement upon several interests and Imaginary forms of Government, It
having pleased Almighty God by unexpected and wonderful means to give these
Nations a Probable hope of being restored to those Laws and Privileges which
have been transmitted to them from their Ancesters,

We do declare, That we think our selves obliged, next to divine Providence to
attribute this Glorious work to his Excellency the Lord General MONCK, who as
he had the Courage to assert the Public liberty, And the Prudence to carry it
on against so many difficulties, has also had the happiness to lead us thus far
through the Wilderness of Confusion, without Passing the Red Sea of Blood.

And because the Enemies of the Public Peace have endeavored to represent
those of the late KING'S Party as men implacable, and such as would sacrifice
the common Good to their private Passions. We do sincerely profess that we do
reflect upon our past Sufferings as Proceeding from the hand of God, and
therefore do not cherish any violent Thoughts, or Inclinations to revenge
against those who have been any way Instrumental in them; And if the
indiscretion of any bitter Spirited Persons transports them to Expressions
contrary to this our Sense, we utterly disclaim them, And desire that the
imputation may Extend no farther then the folly of the offenders.

And we farther declare, that we intend by our Quiet and Peaceable behavior to
testify our Submission to the present Power, as it now resides in the Council
of State, in Expectation of the Future Parliament, upon whose Wisdom and
Determinations we trust God will give such a Blessing as may produce a perfect
Settlement both in Church and State.

And as his Excellency has not chosen the Sandy foundation of
Self-concernment, but the firm Rock of National Interest, whereon to frame our
Settlement: It is our hope and Prayer that when the Building comes to be
raised, it may not like Rome have its beginning in the Blood of Brethren, nor
like Babel be interrupted by the Confusion of Tongues, but that we may all
speak one Language, and be of one name, That all mention of Parties and
Factions, and all Rancor and Animosities may be thrown in and buried like
rubbish under the Foundation.

Subscribed by The Marquess of Dorchester The Earl of Northampton The Earl of
Devonshire The Earl of Barkshire The Earl of Newport The Earl of Dover The E.
of Peterborough The Earl of Norwich The Earl of Cork The Earl of Carbery The
Earl of Desmond The Viscount Ogle The Viscount Grandison The Viscount Lumley
The Viscount Brounker The Lord Lucas The Lord Bellassis The Lord Lougborrow The
Lord Lexinton The Lord Brereton Tho. Fuller Bp. of Kerry Sr. Will. Compton Sr.
Francis Vane John Russell Will. Ashburnham Ed. Villers Tho. Howard Will. Howard
Sr. Jarvis Clifton Knight and Baronet Sr. Tho Corbet Baronet Sr. Tho. Littleton
Bar. Sr. John Grenvil Knight and Baronet Sr. Tho. Harris Knight and Baronet Sr.
Will. Thorold Bar. Sr. Tho. Prestwich Bar. Sr. Orlando Bridgman Sr. Ed. Pie Sr.
Lewis Kirk S. Tho. Smith Sr. Rob. Stapleton Sr. Will. Coney Sr. Nich. Crisp
Sr. Hugh Cartwright Sr. Sutton Cony Sr. Hen. Chichley Sr. Will. Morton Sr. Ed.
Savage Sr. Tho. Armestrong Sr. John Stephens Sr. Humph. Bennet Sr. Will. Howard
Sr. Hen. Wroth Sr. Will. Dacres Sr. Rich Malevory Sr. Arthur Gorge Sr. Anthony
Jackson Sr. Rob. Bolles George Morley D. D. Tho. Warmstry D. D. Jer. Tailor D.
D. Phil. King D. D. E. Penrodock Will. Leg George Penrodock Tho. Lower Herbert
Price Tho. Panton Robert Ruthen Coll. Fretswell John Jeffryes Adrian Scrope
Will. Burgh John Mayard Ed. Rosecarack Ed. Vernon Dan. Treswell Phill. Froude
David Walter Philip Wenman Fitzwilliam Conisby Walter Slingsby Ed. Gray Rob.
Phelips Rich. Hopton Paul Smith To. Hope Ralph Eure Fra. Finch Tho. Hales John
Leigh I. Smith James Progers Humph. Noye John Heath Hump. Sydenham Hen. Osborn
Tho. Prestwich Tho. Mompesson Tho. Blague Henry Seimer Ant. Gilby Sam. Byspham
M. D. Martin LLuellin M. D. Patrick Carey Nic. Bacon Ja. Halsall Ellis Crisp
Tho. Fownes Tho. Offley John Covet Jeffery Palmer Phill. Warwick Tho. Sanderson
Edw. Stanford Roger Le Strange Will. Franklyn Francis Swift Tho. Temple Fran.
Withins Dudley Sands Tho. Holmes Tho. Thory Edward Arden Rich. Day Rich.
Farriar Thomas Nevill Humphrey Painter Rich. Wiseman Hen. Wyvell Chrystopher
Sympson John Cole Lewis Buts Matthew Bailey Geo. Beridg John Burage. Geo.
Gammel Rich. Bins Andrew King Humphrey Baggaley Henry Brockden Tho. Watson Paul
Knell John Montfort John Brayden John Butler Tho. Ross Ed. Molins Will. Knight
And many others.

London, Printed by Roger Norton, 1660.


