Mercurius Bellicus. The fourth INTELLIGENCE FROM READING.

Dated from His Excellency His Quarters in Reading, April the last, at 5 a
clock at night.

Wherein is the certain Relation of the taking of HEREFORD by Sir William
Waller.

London, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, May 1. 1643.

Mercurius Bellicus. April 30.
Sir,
I Think you have now been sufficiently abused by variety of reports, I shall
spend some time in your relief: Our friends, doubtless, some through kindness,
some through curiosity, desire to know how we do. Its true our present Vacation
affords not much, but something you will find observable since my last of
April 26. On Thursday toward noon we entered the Town of Reading, out of which
we saw, and some upon account justify, above 4000 men march, well armed, and
for ought we know, resolved, if men can be well resolved in such a cause: I
occasioned some wonder, that being so strong, they sallied not, and that they
yielded the Town, when doubtless they might have kept it: the best reason of
the surrender I can find upon inquiry, is this; That the Governor, who was
equally covetous and cruel, together with some of the chief Commanders, who
had made very great gain of Plunders and Taxes, were afraid to put it to the
hazard: Which opinion I am confirmed in by the certain relation we had of an
endeavor to convey it away two days before the Parley. I believe your Oxford
Mercury will tell you a sad story of our breach of the agreement, and the
incivility of our Soldiers: Its confessed some things were not well, but worse
was feared; and upon a just enquiry themselves will be found the first breakers
of the Articles, in carrying away unlawful Baggage, besides women, of which
that great, though not good store, as Arms and Ammunition to spare: some of the
Pike-men carried Powder and Match, and their Wagons unlawfullie laden. The
worst was done was the changing hats, taking away some Arms; and some unruly
fellows took clothes which I know no man will excuse. I am sure the Officers,
and all those from whom reason might be expected, did their utmost to prevent
it. Upon the entrance of the Town, we find the people had been used with more
then Turkish severity, being frequently bastinadoed, imprisoned, assessed 2000
pounds a Month, according to the known Laws of the Land, which the Governor
was well skilled in, in regard o^ his familiarity with a Lawyers wife where he
quart^red. They seem very glad of our coming, but not willing to entertain any
Propositions of Money according to the Ordinances of Parliament; which yet must
not be neglected in some proportion, though we came but to the latter fair. On
Friday we had experience of a mutinous disposition in our Soldiers, who began
to plunder some notorious malignants; but His Excellency; who rode out three
times that day, once from dinner, to appease and prevent them, and the Major
General, and other Officers, did their best to hinder it; and there was little
hurt done, only in the Shop of one Duel, a man of ill fame as to this
business. The wind is now down, and the waves still, the 12s. reward
promised, being performed, on Saturday the new paymasters entered their Office
by Commission, which I hope will be digested, though it lie upon the stomach a
while. Your next expectation is when we advance, that is mine too: some of our
Commanders are at London, I need not tell you their Errand; only suggest better
any thing on this side ruin done or suffered, then we lie still at this
present: This day was appointed for a thanksgiving for the preservation and
prosperous state of the Army, which was much quickened by intelligence received
from Devon, and Hereford. From Devonshire we had news of my Lord Stamfords
forces routing Hoptons, but there was such a rout and confusion in the letter,
so that I can make no perfect relation, only give grounds of good hopes of our
affairs in those parts. But from Hereford where Sir William Waller is we had a
happy and exact Relation, which to my best remembrance is this; That upon
Sunday last he marched from Gloucester toward Hereford with his forces to quiet
that Country before he came this way, He shot three Pieces at the City on
Monday morning, and then summoned it by a Trumpet, to which Cunningsby their
Governor returned this answer; That if he could show a Commission from the
King, they would surrender it to him, otherwise they would keep it for him.
Thereupon he assaulted the Town in three several places, and some sallies and
contestations there were; but before three of the clock, their Sallie was
turned to a Parley, and two were sent out of the Town to Sir William Waller,
who sent likewise two to them, offering them Quarter and no more. Herbert Price
a Commander there came out and brought other Articles with some high language,
but Sir William stuck strictly to his first Proposition, which after some
injurious detention of his Hostages, they yielded to, only their Courtship
would have some complementall forms added to his rough demand; That Gentlemen
should have Quarter and civil usage, Ladies be treated honorably, the
Citizens, Bishop, Dean and Chapter preserved from Plunder, and not imprisoned
for any thing past; That Arms, Ensigns, Ammunition and the Government of the
Town should be surrendered to him, which was done on Tuseday morning: He took
some persons of quality, as Conningsby, Price, Sir William Crofts, Sir Richard
Cave, and others, the Lord Scudamore: who was not sent to Gloucester with the
rest, but his honorable word taken to appear at the Close Committee upon
summons, and all this (through mercy) with the loss of one man, and hurt of 3
or 4 soldiers; so wonderfully does God go along with the endeavors of this
valiant and vigilant Co^mander. But let us now take heed of giving way to the
fraud of our enemies, who strive to draw out of every advantage, a disadvantage
to us, and to set up a part of an Army in opposition to that Army whereof it is
a part: As I hope we shall be free from envy, so be you from jealousy. That
the terms of Reading were not the like with Hereford; Reading was better
Fortified and manned, had an Army of the enemy near for relief; and which is
very considerable, We upon whose welfare the being of this Cause does much
depend (to speak of humane means) must not be so adventurous as others may, who
upon a misfortune may address to us for supplies, we to none else. Let us
bless God for each other, and you for us both; if you help on our march, I
hope we shall meet ere long upon good terms. I can add little concerning the
enemy; The King is gone from Wallingford to Oxford, He calls in the people from
sixteen to sixty, and all kind of Arms; They have at this present more than a
pannicke fear upon them, one man gave them an Alarm at Wallingford on
Satturday, that confounded the consultations of the Council of War then
sitting, and dispersed them. We have some intimations of the KINGS advancing
for Wiltshire. The Earl of Stamford sent us a letter intercepted to Hopton,
commanding to March, to horse his Muskets and Pikes too according to the
example of the Rebels, who swept the Commo^^ where they came (an unjust
slander) the letter was writ in Tiffany, with another letter signed Charles R.
Wherein it is likewise promised, That upon his approach, a considerable party
of horse shall be sent to strengthen his passage through Somersetshire, but I
hope this is prevented: We intercepted some Letters which extremely mis-report
our affairs, but that is no more than we expected, though I hope more than will
be believed; They were going into Wiltshire with a protection for some persons
there, against the time that the Kings Forces should march that way. I know no
more of consequence for the present, with things impertinent, trivial, or of
suspected truth I will not trouble you, but rest till the next opportunity.

FINIS.

