AN Exact and true Relation, Of the wonderful VVHIRLE-VVIND, on Saturday, June
the 2. about 4. of the Clock in the Afternoon at Worthington, and
Worthington-Hall, and at Tongue, and some other Places in the County of
Leicester.

AS ALSO, The terrible Devastation that it made in beating down many Trees and
Houses, and with a sudden violence stripping naked many great Oaks, and
plucking their barks from their Bodies; As also taking away a Hive of Bees,
and great store of Linen, which could never since be heard of.

Together with the miraculous mercy of GOD preserving many Men, Women, and
Children, who were desperately involved in that dreadful Danger.

Very necessary to be Read.

Attested by Colonel Tho: Ragge, and Major Fran. Beniskin of Tongue, to whom
the said Hive of Bees belonged; and by many thousands of others, whose Names
are too many to be here incerted.

June 25 LONDON, Printed by T.F. for Fr. Coals, in the old Baily at the Lamb.
1660.

An Exact and true Relation, OF The wonderful Whirlewind at Northington,
Springwood, and other places in Leicester shire, on Saturday, June the 2. about
4. of the Clock in the Afternoon, etc.
THe Tuesday before was a whirlwind of Joy, the Acclamations of the Nobility,
Gentry, and people of the Nation for the Restoration of his Majesty to the
Government of his People, being such that it is not to be paralleld in any
History of the world.

God save the King, was never breathed forth in England with such universal
Shouting; The air it self did seem to suffer in the Excellence of our Joys;
It is remarkable, that when God brought his M^j^sty unto us, the weather all
the time, was f^ire and seasonable, but it pleased God when the ^ravell was
over and the King in his Palace at White Hall, that on the next day we had
Rain, a great b^essing of Almighty GOD o^ the Countries, that did so much
desire and pray for it.

You may remember that not long before, Colonel John Lambert, Col. John Okey,
and some other discontented persons of the late Army, did intend to randevouz
their mutinous numbers in Leiceste^ shire, and to make those parts the seat of
the War, from whence they threatened like a Whirle wind to m^r^h toward the
City, and to bear down all before them, but it pleased God their violent
motion was easily suppressed, and the Enemy almost as soon put to flight as
discovered, but it seems that there remained still in those parts some
turbulent Air, which had not the leisure to vent it self until the Second of
this present Month, which it did then in the most prodigious manner as almost
was ever heard of.

It is true, that we have had some strange and high winds and Tempests
heretofore, as about four years since (much about the same time of the Day) in
the City of Norwich and the adjacent Counties, where the Wind was so unruly
that it laid all things desolate, the Birds were st^fled as they did fly in the
Air, and did fall down dead on the ground, And many Beasts not able to endure
the violence of the Tempest were found dead next morning. Even the Conies
themselves that were grazing in the fields were overtaken by the fury of the
Wind and deprived of life before they could recover their own holes. There are
many thousands yet living that can witness this truth.

We are sensible also of a very violent wind and Tempest some few days before
the Death of the late great Usurper, if he did not indeed dye at the same time
in the height of it as some have affirmed. The Prince of the air was then so
busy, that there is hardly any place in the whole Nation, where some marks
were not to be seen of the ruinous effects thereof.

But that you will say, was at the Death of an Usurper and a man of Blood.

This of which we come now to speak of, is at the Restoration of a Mild,
Gentle, and a merciful Prince unto his Nations, whose very Enemies are
overcome by his Goodness, as he has overcome his own suff rings by his
Innocence and his Patience; and even those now do extol his candor and his
Piety, who before stood in fear of his Power; We are truly to believe that all
Airs of Division, and Contention which before for a long time did overcloud
the face of the whole Nation, are now blown away with this Tempest, which will
put a period to the Disturbance and Confusion which raged like a Contagious
Fever amongst us; and that for the time to come we shall enjoy all
Tranquillity, Peace, Health and happiness under the Reign and Government of
our most gracious Sovereign, whom GOD long preserve amongst us.

On Saturday June the second, about four of the clock in the afternoon, the
Sun beginning by degrees to be overcast with many clouds, there was a great
da^kness at a Town called Worthington in the County of Leicester; which struck
a ^errour into many of the Inhabi^ants, who were then in the Fields, and made
have some thinking to avoid the violence of some sudden shore, which threatened
to power down upon them; not long afterward there arose agreat and violent
Whirlwind, which wrestling with the clouds, and the air made a dreadful
noise, and sweeping through the town untiled many of the houses, and ruined a
great part of the Chapel, The inhabitants hearing the tiles so r^ttle did fly
into their houses, giving strict Command unto their Children not to stir out
of doors, but some of the broken stones falling within doors, as well as
without, they knew not to what place to betake themselves for protection, and
had the only refuge to seek to Alm^ghty God upon their knees, to preserve them
from so great a danger.

It pleased God, to hear their prayers, and the tempest suddenly passed from
thence, to another place distant not far from it called VVorthington-H ll,
where it exercised its former fury, and indeed was far more violent then it
was at the first, insomuch that it not only unt led the House, and unglazed and
broke the windows, but it forced open some doors that were locked, and d
stroyed seven B^yes of Building, and fell blustering in upon the house with so
much violence, that a great part of it fell down to the ground, as to this day
it is still to be seen, the house being torn from the top unto the very
foundation of it.

Yet behold mercy in this great judgment, there was a Barn not far off,
which had also been ruined and levelled to the ground by this whirlwind, whiles
the stones were clattering, and the great beams and supporters cracking, there
were three people in it of whose lives and safety, God so wonderfully, and so
miraculously did dispose that not one of them was hurt.

It was a singular providence of God, that when all was fallen, or falling
down, these three men should stand upright in the midst of the Ruin, and not
so much as one of them be hurt.

The s^m^ g^acious God who preserved the three Children in the midst of the
fire, that not so much as a Hair of their Heads were singed, preserved these
three old Men, when the S ones, the joyce, and rubbish of the falling Barn came
all like so many Summons to death about their ears.

These three Men being delivered from so great a danger did tremble down upon
their knees, and the violent wind by the mercy of God having whirled it self
into another corner, the People who began to come out of their Houses did find
them in that devout Posture, praising of God, and joined with them in their
thankfulness for their deliverance.

There were many houses that were torn up from the very foundation, yet the
goodness of God was so remarkable, and had such a Command over the Storm,
that no Man, Woman, or Child were killed, only one or two were a little
bruised, or received some little scratch by the fall of the Timber, who would
imagine that so many great Beams and R^f^ers should fall to the ground, and
bring a great Ruin along with them, yet that not so much as one Christian
amongst so many hundreds that were engaged in that great Desolation should be
mortally wounded. The Brains of Dogs were scattered up and down, and
besprinkled many a Post: the Horses were struck down dead in the Stables. It
was God alone (to whom be the Honor of it) yet did divert the danger from
those who prayed unto him for his Protection.

In the mean time the whirlwind roaring and flying from place to place, and
showing every where some testimony, or other of his devilish rage, was
permitted to come to a place called Springwood, which is a Wood belonging to
the Right honorable, the Earl of Stamford. Here as if it had b en let loose,
it showed all the effects and practices of its ou ragious violence and Fury. It
is a common saying, that things that are lightest are always in greatest
dang^r; and so it appeared in this wood, for the whirlwind wr^stling with the
fairest, and the tallest of the Timbers, did lay many of them upon their backs
with their heels higher then their Heads, many it tore up by the roots, and did
cleave and split their vast bodies, as if they had been labored by so many
Wedges, it took off several other trees by the middle, and snapped them a
sunder. A strange sight it was on the day following to see such a Havoc made
in a wood without Axe or Hatchet; you would have thought the courteous
Whirlwind to repair the Breaches it had made in the Houses, and levelled so
many Timber trees, for the building of them up again. But one thing is indeed
yet more wonderful, and shows that the Whirlwind pertakes with the lightning
both in the suddenness, and the subtlenesse of his effects; for ranting thus
(as J have said) in the wood, it took off the barks and stripped naked many
of the trees, which it performed in a moments space, and with such dexterity,
and handsomeness that a deliberate labourer could not have taken off the
barks so artificially in a whole day. The trees thus stripped and plundered by
the Whirlwind are still to be seen, and having nothing of the Bark left to
cover the bodies of them, are many of them in a perishing condition.

Having thus ransact and destroyed a great part of the Wood, it whirled to a
Village not far from it called Tongue, where it did very much hurt to the
ruin of many of the Inhabitants blowing down trees, and not only untiling,
but beating down many of the House. The Orchards here sufferd extremly, for
many trees which hereofore did bear gallant fruit, and this year were full of
hopes, were torn up by the Roots, many of them had their heavy and laden arms
plucked a sunder from their bodies, and being thus maimed and defective, they
are become the pity who were before the Pride of their Owners.

One thing is truly admirable, At this Town of Tongue there was a Hedge full of
linen clothes, and not far from it, a Hive of Bees in a garden, the whirlwind
sweeping by with an extraordinary noise and violence did take all the linen,
and the Hive of Bees quite away, and being very often and hourly enquired they
can never be heard of since.

A bay of a Barn was there taken away from between two several Houses; There
was a man that lay asleep in the barn, and yet received not the least
prejudice.

Another house was torn almost quite to pieces, there being a woman and three
small Children in it, who (God so directing them) ran under the Mantle-tree,
and received no hurt at all. It ran afterward two Miles and a half doing much
hurt all along to the Trees of Fruit, and dwelling Houses as it passed by them.
Thus has God graciously been pleased to visit those parts in Leicestershire,
who as they have great Reason to acknowledge hi^ Judgment, so they have a
greater Obligation laid upon them to applaud, and to be be thankful for his
m^rcies.

The End.

