The VVelch-mans Life, Teath and Periall. TOGETHER WITH A LONG Narrow prod
List, of the care her took in hers life time, to make awle hims friend and
acquaintance merry at her teath; abscribing the manner of hers finerall, with
fair cost bestowed upon them that comes to hims Periall.


Hims Narration.

TO make awle hims neibors and stranshers the petter acquaintance of her
overgrown cherity upon the next tay after dome tay, if him can live non longer,
was command awle her sheneration as well short cote as tele, to eat him
vitills up.

Where pershance them shall have petter sheare,
Then them had at her wedding an a were.
Imprim. Shaul be first serve in without toore in fair woden plate and earthen
trensher one creat sheep-arme with too leg, with eleven slice of Cows-pody cut
smaul and fine anwer, eight ladill full of Welsh formoty made with leeke, six
sucking shickins with shell on them pack, four oten Pancake baked upon a woden
stone, too Caulfs-pate, one Sow-babby: Eat cuntry-men and pee merry.

Item, when you have eat up all the good sheare, and that you see was dead
indeed, was desire him friends to take a little pain with her, to pull out her
Gut, poding, and Intrils^, and to perry them under a Tombstone, him knewed her
sweet wife Shone will ched on creat tear as pig as too milston, pecause was
tinke shall have no more husband.

Item, her further request is, that when was dye, would have you to pool the
skin of her pack, and to make her own son new pair of poots with him, a peec
of tough lether was warrant you.

Was awlso bestow the scull of her head (when the brains be taken out) amongst
hims friends to make a trinking poale, that as often as was trink helths, was
say, gat-a-mercy on her soul, was hold a gallon of covd Sider was warrant you.

Was pestow hims Tongne upon her cosen Maudy, was make her speak proper Welsh
me warrant you.

Was give him Eyes to plind Robin the sing-pallat, to make him see hims own
wife from another man's.

Was give him nose to Mistress Moll Hoper auc of Linden, pecause she have had
non this ten and twenty year.

Was give hims Teeth to her cosen Tavid ap Shinkin ap Wakkin, to make pins for
her Harp string, O was play notable fine dance me warrant you.

Was pray to perry the rest of hims pody under the forenamed Tombestone with
the rest of her powels, and to sing one merry pallat for her sake.

But stay, stay, was awlmost forgot her self, me would farther entreat you
that you will for me sake do this much more venid baugh.

Jmprim is, to set over hims Tombestone, her Grandmother Arms, which is too
creat Leeke and the Tagger mawer anwer.

These things friends me sharge you do, or elt my Cost shall haunt you; So till
the morrow after Domes tay friends ferewell. Dew catee whee.

An Epetaph wreten py hims youngest Daughter Gueatlen and engraven on the
Tombestone.

Under this Tombestone lies the very same,
Which had seven style be longing to him name.
Who killed him? Teath, did Teath her father kill?
Cats plit had him his Tagger and her Bill.
Not twenty Teath could kill her valiant father
Teath not kill him, put him kill Teath rather.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Lambert dwelling in Smithfield 1641.


