To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Governor, Assistants, and Fellowship of the
Merchants-Adventurers of England.
MOst humbly shows, That the Petitioners being, during these miserable
distractions of the Kingdom, encompassed on all sides with many difficulties;
and well weighing the dangers they may fall into in Foreign parts, if your
Majesty should withdraw Your Royal Protection from them, upon any displeasure
to the Company.

Do humbly Prostrate themselves before Your Royal Majesty, and for their
Assurance, in so many fears, humbly beseech Your Majesty to grant them some
particular Declaration, at present, of your Royal Grace and Goodness toward
the Fellowship, whereby they may be enabled to uphold the little remainder of
the Staple Trade of this Kingdom, and proceed in the same with encouragement,
as Your Majesty's true and Loyal Subjests.

And as in duty bound, they shall daily Pray, etc. Signed by Sir HENRY ROW,
Governor.

At the Court at Oxford, 26. Martii. 1643.
HIs Majesty has commanded me to give this His answer. That if the Petitioners
are not conscious to themselves of any disloyalty to His Majesty, they have no
reason to fear the withdrawing His Royal Protection from them, His Majesty
being so desirous to preserve and advance the public Trade (a thing of so
high concernment to the whole Kingdom) that He has left no means unattempted
to that end. But if the Petitioners, or any of them, are fallen from their Duty,
Obedience, and Allegiance to Him, upon an opinion, That His Majesty could not
have the benefit of the Laws here against them, He will never consent that
they shall have the benefit and Protection, due only to His good Subjects,
abroad, and so evade His Justice every where; but will precisely observe His
resolution declared so long since, and so graciously, in answer to the Petition
presented in the beginning of January last from the City of London, in and by
which the Petitioners, and all other Persons concerned, had sufficient Warning
and instance of His Majesty's Grace and Favor to them.

EDW. NICHOLAS.

Printed at Oxford by LEONARD LICHFIELD, 1643.


