We have brought our Hoggs to a fair Market. OR, The IRON Age Turned into GOLD.

See they obey our Gracious Sovereigns words,
Presto they are gone; and now these wicked Rogues
Look like the withered face of an Old Hagg,
But with three teeth, like to a triple Gagg.
Never published by any Pen before.

By J. A. A lover of his Countries welfare.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Mills, 1660.

We have brought our Hoggs to a fair Market: OR, The Iron Age Turned into Gold.
THeir Militia (like its Patron Mars) was the issue of the Mother, without the
concourse of Royal Jupiter, yet their Law it was, if they would Vote it; though in
defiance of their Fundamentals; much like the Old Sexton, who swore his Clock
went true, though the Sun said to the contrary: But Actors must have their
properties, and since the Stages were Voted down, the only Playhouse was at
Westminster, suitable to their Plots wear their Informers, Skippers, and
Tailors; Spaniels both fit for Land and Water; Good Conscionable Intelligence;
for however Scots bill might inflame the reckoning, the bonest Vermin had not
so much for Liing as the Public Faith.

Thus the Quixots of our late times fought with the Windmills of their own
Heads, quail Monsters of their own ereation, makes Plots and then discovers
them; as who fitter to Un-kennel the Fox then the Terrier that is part of him.
In the next place march to their Adventurers, the Roundheads Legrand, the
Rebels Romance, stories of a larger size then the ears of their Sects, able to
strangle the belief of a Soli fidian.

I Will present them in their order, and first as a Whifler before the Show, enter
one that trod the Stage with the first, traverse his ground, made a Leg, and
exit: The Country People took him for one that by Order of the House was to
dance a morris through the west of England. Well, he is a nimble Gentleman, set
him but upon Banks his Horse in a Saddle rampant, and it is a great question
which part of the Centaur shows the best tricks.

There was a Vote passing to translate him with all his Equipage into
Monumental Gingerbread, but it was crossed by the Female Committee, alleging
that the valor of his Image would bite their Children by the tongues.

This Cubit and half of Commander by the help of an Intelligencer routed his
Enemies fifty miles off: It is strange you will say, and yet it is generally
believed, he would as soon do it at that distance, as near hand. Sure it was
his Sword, for which weapon salve was invented, that so wounding and healing
like loving Correlates, might both work at the same removes: But the Squib is
run to the end of the Rope; Room for the prodigy of valor, Madam Atrops in
Breeches, a valiant Knight erantry, and because every Mountebank must have his
Zany, throw him in Hasilrig to set off the story: These two, like Bell and the
Dragon were always worshipped in the same Chapter; they hunt in their couples,
what one does at the Head the other scores up at the Heels. Thus they kill a
man over and over, the one Chiming all in and the other strikes up the Saints
bell.

I wonder for how many lives the Lord Hopton took the Lease of his body: First
an Earl slew him, then W -- out-killed that half a bar, and yet it was thought
the sullen Corpse would scarce bleed, were both these Man slayers never so near
it: The fame goes of a Dutch Headsman, that he would do his office with so much
ease and dexterity, that the Head after Execution should stand still upon the
shoulders: it was well Sir W -- Knight was not Probationer for the place; thus
the Artificers of Death could kill the Man without wounding the Body, like
Lightning that melts the Sword and never singes the Scabord.

This is the Valiant Hero whose Mistress was the Conqueror, this is the Cities
Champion, and the Conquerours delight: Translate but the Scene to Round
way-down; there Hasilrigs Lobsters were turned into Crabs and crawled
backwards; then poor Sir John ran to his Lady for a use of consolation.

But the Conquerors were weary of the Arm of Flesh, and now begins an Hosana to
Cromwell, one that beat up his Drums clean through the Old Testament; you might
learn the Genealogy of our Savior, by the names in his Regiment. The
Muster-master used no other ^^st then the first Chapter in Matthew.

Come keen Traitors with your Badgers feet,
And Badger-like, bite till your feet do meet:
Help ye tart Satirists to imp my rage,
With all the Scorpions that should have whipped that Age.
Traitors are like Witches; do but whet you Pen.
Scratch till the blood come; they will not hurt you then,
Now as the Martyrs were enforced to take
The shapes of Beasts, like Hypocrites, at stake,
I Will bait my Traitor so, yet not cheat your Eyes,
A Traitor within a Beast is no Disguise.
With what face could they object to the King, the bringing in of Farriners,
ween themselves entertained such an Army of Hebrews? The Traitor Cromwell was
never so valourous as when he was making Speeches for Association, which
nevertheless he did somewhat ominously with his Neck awry, holding up his Ear
as if he had expected Mahomets Pidgeon to have come and promp him. He should be
a Bird of prey too by his bloody-beak; his Nose was able to try a young Eagle,
whether she was lawfully begotten: but all is not Gold that glisters; what we
wonder at in the rest of them was naturally in him, to kill without blood shed.
For most of his Trophies were in a Church window, when a Looking-glass would
have showed him more superstition; He was so perfect a hater of Images, that he
had defaced Gods in his own countenance: If he deal with men, it is when he takes
them napping in an Old Monument; then down goes dust and ashes; and the
stoutest Cavaliers is no better. O brave Oliver! Times voider. Subsizer to
Worms, in whom death, that formerly devoured our Ancestors now show the Cud. He
said Grace once, as if he would have fallen aboard with the Marquess of
Newcastle, and the In^elligence gave you his bill of fare, but it proved a
running banquet, as appeared by the story: Believe him as he whi^tles to his
Cambridge teem of Committee Men, and he does wonders; but Holy men (like the
Holy Language) must be read backwards. They did rifle Colleges to promote
Learning, and pulled down Churches for dification. But Sacrilege is intailed
upon him: There must be a Cromwell for Cathedrals, as well as Abbeys; A secure
Sinner, whose offense carries its pardon in its mouth; for how could he be
hanged for Church robbery, which gives it self the benefit for the Clergy.

But for all Cromwels Nose did wear the Dominical Letter, compared to M --
otherwise called the Brewers Copper, he was but like the Virgils to an
Holy Day. This was the Man of God; so Sanctified a Thunderbolt, that a Divine
in a proportionably blaspheming to his Lord of Hosts, would style him the
Archangel, giving Battle to the Devil.

They ageeed in nothing, but they were all Adamits in understanding: It is the
sign of a Coward to wink and fight; but I wonder from whence Lambert and
Harrisons purity first proceeded; it was not by tradition: If they were
begotten Saints, it was by equivocal Generation; for the Devil in the Father
turned Jesuits in the Sons so that their Godliness was of the same Parentage
with good Laws, both extracted out of bad Manners, and would they alter the
Scripture, as they attempted the Creed, they might vary the Text, and say to
Corruption, Thou art our Father. Barbarous Rebels, who will be revenged upon
all Learning, because their Treason is beyond the mercy of the Book.

There were more Puppets that moved by the name of Champions as, Scot and
Thurloe, two of Nols Petty-toes such sniveling Cowards, that it is a favor to
call them so: had Thurloe been to fight with his Teeth, as in other things he
resembles the Beast, he would have ods of any man at the weapon: O he is a
terrible slaughter-man at a Thanksgiving dinner had he been Cannibal, to have
eaten those that he vanquished, his Gut would have made him valient.

And now I speak of reformation, vous evez Fox, the Tinker, the liveliest
Emblem of it that may be; for what did that Rump Parliament ever go about to
reform, but Tinker-wife, in mending one hole they made three.

I will close up all thus, the Victoryes of the Rebels, were like the Magical
Combat of Apuleius, who thinking he had slain all three of his enemies, found
them at last but a triumphirate of Bladers. Such and so empty are the
imposthumated fancies, so many Bladers of their own blowing.

Like to Don Quixots Rosary of slaves
Strung on a Chain; a murnivall of knaves
Packt in a trick like Gypsies when they ride
Or, like Colleagues, which sit all of a side,
So the vain Satyrist stand all a row.
As hollow Teeth on a Lute string show.
FINIS.

