TO THE HONORABLE, THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS AND BURGESSES OF THE COMMONS HOUSE IN
PARLIAMENT NOW ASSEMBLED. January, 24. 1642.
The humble Petition of the Lay-Catholiques Recusants of England.
Shows,
THat the chiefest and most glorious Attribute of power, being Mercy, the
safest address thereto must be Submission, which makes us in all humility
offer unto the consideration of this Honorable Assembly, the great and heavy
burden under which we groan, and though to Law; we humbly shall submit, yet
such is the weight of some that lie upon us, that nothing less then linity can
let us live, nor can we any way find our relief, but by applying our selves
unto this High Court, whereas Fathers and supreme Judges, you reside,
retaining still full Power to frame, or change, according to the exigency of
times, and occasions, and being prudent and merciful, can afford us patience,
and favor in this short Petition, wherein we shall yield our selves fit
Subjects for your mercy, or obedient Submittees to your wills and resolutions.

The many penal Laws in force-against your humblest Petitioners are to this
Honorable Assembly known, as is the ground on which they first were made not
out of memory, having had their Birth but under Queen Elizabeth, when partly
extraordinary proceedings from the Sea of Rome against her Person, and partly
the claim our dread Sovereigns Grandmother, wholly devoted to that Religion,
laid to the Immediate succession of the Crown. Occasioned several
destractions, and even cast jealousies and suspicions upon all, that in
Religion had relation to that See. Whereupon from emergent reason of State. And
by way of prudent cautions, and preventing future disobedience (and not to put
restraint upon the conscience of the Subject or to punish contrariety of
opinion or belief) these Laws as we conceive were made, and afterward much
aggravated and made more heavy to us all, by occasion of that ever most
detestable plot of those few decayed, turbulent, and desperately discontented
persons, indeed Professors of the same Religion, but quite neglecting and
transgressing, and most inhumanely therein forgetting all duty and obligation.

If thus (Right Noble Gentlemen) these Laws originally were oppropriated to
these times, and no such reason now (we hope) appears, and still these Laws
overwhelmes us, It is either for the personal offenses of other men, whose
wicked facts we (are no way guilty of) with all good Christians utterly
abhor, or for supposed errors of our understanding and belief, which as in
it self (according to all Divines) is an effect immediate of Grace, and
therefore not to be enforced: So in its tenants, there is not any thing
forbids, invites, or hinders the professors of it, from their due obedience to
their Prince, and faithful preservation of their Countries liberties. In
prosecution of which truth, we here objure as false and most erroneous, both
assasination of Princes, and Faith is not to be kept with all sorts of people,
and do detest them both, as most oppugnant to humanity, and not to be allowed
by any Religion whatsoever. We also shall and will be ever ready to maintain
and defend with all our power, lives, and fortunes, all our Countries
liberties, the Right and Privileges of the Parliaments, the Subjects lawful
Rights, liberty and propriety, the peace and unity of his Majesty's three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and in all just and honorable
ways, endeavor the punishment of all that seek to work the contrary: as
dutiful, obedient, and Loyal Subjects are obliged, and as true borne lovers
of their Countries good are bound; All which (under favor) as the Laws now
stand we no ways are permitted, as having neither freedom, or fortunes of our
own, for strictly are our actions, Judgments, and our Tongues tied up.

But the approaching storm that seems to threaten her, moves us to take
shelter under your mercies wings, most freely spread to comfort all agrieved,
where we do hope for shadow and protection. And humbly are Petitioners, that
you will be pleased to ease our sufferings, by mitigating the rigor of those
penal Laws, that either ruin us and our posterity, or cast a thraledome on
our Consciences, so as we meekly walking in our forefathers steps, aspiring
unto nothing but possessing our selve in peace, as people that seek ease, not
honors, and that the crime of Catholics before this Horourable Assembly now
appears, but only different ways in serving the same God you serve, the same
Christ which you believe (for whosoever in any other sort offends, qui
peccaverit ipse moriatur) we most humbly in your prudence and your goodness
trust, in this public Jubilee (when all is intended to be joy and consolation)
we shall not be the only Subject of sorrow and desolation, nor that the Laws
made for offenders in one time, should lay upon the innocent in another. And
therefore humbly beg, you will cast your eye upon the Schedule of these Laws
annexed and then your merciful repeal of what your wisdoms and mercy find,
shall give the Conscience relief that is afflicted, and not the mind content
that is ambitious, and a thing we thirst not after.

And for so great a charity your humble Petitioners shall ever (as in duty
bound) pray for Your continual prosperity and eternal happiness.
London, Printed for Geo. Baily, 1642.


