THE VOTES OF THE HOUSE, Or the daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT Since the
coming in of the secluded Members the 21 of February 1659, until the
dissolution of the Parliament March 16 1659.

Published according to Order.



LONDON Printed by JOHN REDMAYNE in Lovels Court in Paternoster Row 1659.

Numb. 1. A PERFECT DIURNAL Of every days Proceedings in PARLIAMENT
Tuesday 21. Feb.
Resolved,
THat the Resolutions of this House of the 18. December. 1648. that Liberty be
given to the members of this House to declare their dissent to the Vote of the
5 December. 1648. that the King's Answer to the Propositions of both Houses was a
ground for this House to proceed upon for the settlement of the peace of the
Kingdom be vacuated and made null and void.

Resolved, that the resolutions of this House of of the 20. December. 1648.
touching members declaring their dissent or disapproval of the said Vote of the
5. of December. 1648. to a Committee therein named, and every clause of the said
Order be vacuated and made null and void.

Resolved that the Order of the 23. Feb. 1648. that no Member that has not
sitten in this House since the 31. of Ian. then last, should sit in any
Committee until this House take further order, be vacuated and made null and
void.

Resolved that the Votes of the 9. of June 1649. touching suspending the
sitting of such members as shall enter their dissent or disapproval of the said
Vote of the 5. of December. 1648. and should not before the 30, of the said
Month of June give satisfaction to the said Committee; and that the House
would proceed to the Election of new Members in their room, be vacuated and
made null and void.

Resolved that all Orders of this House made upon a Paper entitled A solemn
Protestation of the Imprisoned and secluded Members of the Commons House,
against the horrid force and violence of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army
on Wednesday and Thursday last being the sixth and seventh of December 1648. be
and are hereby vacated and made null and void, and the said Paper be taken off
the File.

Resolved that the Resolutions of Parliament of the 5. of Ian. 1639. for
confirming the former Votes be likewise Vacated and made null and void.

Resolved that all Votes of this House touching New Elections of Members to sit
and serve in this Parliament, be and are hereby Vacated, and that Mr. Speaker
be and is required not to sign any such Orders.

Ordered that it be referred to a Committee to expunge and obliterate the Votes
and Resolutions of this House this day Vacated; and also to consider what other
Votes there are of this nature. and report their opinion to the Parliament,
which of them they conceive fit to be Vacated, who are to meet in the Speaker's
Chamber at two of the clock this afternoon.

Resolved that General GEORGE MONCK be constituted and appointed Capt. Genesis and
Commander in Chief under the Parliament of all the Forces of England, Scotland
and Ireland.

Resolved that Vice Admiral Lawson be and is hereby continued Vice Admiral of
the Navall Forces.

An Act constituting Commissioners for the government of the Army was read.

Resolved that all the powers granted unto General George Monck, Sir Arthur
Hasilrig, Col. Walton, Col. Morlcy and Col. Matthew Allured by the said Act
appointing Commissioners for government of the Army, do cease; and that the
said Commissioners be required to forbear nor Proceed to Act any further
thereupon; and that Col. Norley do give them notice of the said Votes to the
rest of the said Commissioners.

Resolved that an Act of Repeal of the said Act appointing Commissioners for
the government of the Army be brought in by a Committee.

Resolved that Sir Robert Pie, Major Fincher, Mr. Vincent, Mr. Bludworth, Major
Chamberlain, Col. Bromfield, Mr. Iackson, and Mr. Thomas Brown and Major Cox be
discharged of their Imprisonment in the Tower of London.

Resolved that Mr. Rolls be discharged of his imprisonment upon giving
security to the Lieutenant of the Tower not to disturb the peace of the
Commonwealth.

Ordered, that the Lieutenant of the Tower do give an account to the
Parliament to morrow morning of the cause of the imprisonment of Sir George
Booth and Major Peter Brook.

Ordered, that all such Orders as have been made since Saturday last by the
Council of State, or Commissioners of the Army concerning the Forces and
Garrisons, be communicated to General George Monck, and that there be no
proceedings upon any of the said Orders without the approbation of the said
General George Monck.

Resolved, that all powers given to the Council of State, be and are hereby
suspended until the Parliament take further order; and that an Act be brought
in for constituting a new Council of State this afternoon, and that Mr Weaver
do give notice of this order to the Council of State, and leave the order with
the Clerk of the Council.

Afternoon.
Resolved, that the Order of Parliament of the 9 of this instant February, that
the present Common Council for the City of London, Elected for this year be
discontinued, and declared null and void, shall be and is hereby vacated and
made null and void.

Resolved, that the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of
London, have liberty to make up their Gates, Posts, Percullices and Chains, as
they shall see cause.

Ordered, that St Gilbert Gerrard, Mr Vassells and Alderman Atkins do deliver
these Votes to the Lord Mayor and Common Council of the City of London.

Ordered, that a Committee do withdraw and bring in an Act for repealing the
Act constituting Commissioners for the Government of the Army.

Mr Weaver acquaints the House that he had given notice to the Council of State
of the Order of this House for suspending the Council of State according to the
command of the Parliament, and that ready obedience will be yielded thereunto.

The Bill appointing and constituting a Council of State was this day read the
first and second time, and Committed.

Resolved, that the number of the Council of State be one and thirty, and that
General George Monck be one of the Council of State, and that the respective
Members of Parliament do to morrow morning give in names to make up the thirty
persons more to be of the Council of State, and that they be chosen by the
Glasses as formerly was accustomed to morrow morning, and that a Committee be
appointed to meet this afternoon to consider of instructions for the Council of
State.

Ordered, that Mr Peter Brook do attend the Parliament to morrow morning.

Ordered, that Mr Speaker do write Let ters to he Sheriffs of the respective
Counties to summon the respective Members of Parliament to attend the service
of the Parliament, and sign the same.

Ordered, that the Order concerning the imprisonment of any of the Members of
the Common Council be discharged.

Ordered that Mr Chester High Sheriff of Buckinghamshire be discharged of his
imprisonment, also that Henry Brook be likewise discharged of his imprisonment.

Ordered, that General George Monck be desired to take care that the Post have
free passage for this night, and that Sr John Temple do acquaint him with this
Order.

Ordered, that Sr John Norcott, Sr Richard Temple, Mr Courtney, Sr Copleston
Bampfield be discharged of their imprisonment.

Ordered, that the keeper of the Castle of Windsor do forthwith certify to
the Parliament the causes of the imprisonment of the Earls of Crawsord and
Lawtherdale, and the Lord St Clare now in prison there.

Resolved, that the Apprentices of London now in prisonin Lambeth-House be
discharged of their imprisonment.

This Evening was ended with abundance of Bonefires, Ringing of Bells,
acclamations of joy throughout the whole City of London.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

Numb. 2 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings IN PARLIAMENT.
Wednesday 22. Feb.
Mr. Prin Reports what Votes are fitting to be expunged out of the Iournall
Book.

Ordered that the entry of dissents by Members of Parliament to the Vote of the
5. of December 1648. be discharged, and made null and void, and to be expunged
out of the Journalls of Parliament.

A Proclamation dated 3. June 1659. against Major General Brown, and others, to
render themselves to the Council of State was read.

Resolved that Major General Brown be admitted to come and take his place in
Parliament.

Ordered that the order for the said Proclamation against Major General Brown
and some others: and the said Proclamation, as to Maj. Genesis Brown, be, and is
hereby vacuated and made null and void, the Members of the Council of State
having declared that nothing appears charged against the said Major General
Brown.

Coll. Morley Reports the Warrant by which Sir George Booth was committed to
the Tower, which was read.

Resolved that Sir George Booth be discharged of his imprisonment in the Tower,
upon giving 5000 l. Bayl to answer any thing that shall be objected against
him, and that the Lieutenant of the Tower do take Bayl of him accordingly.

Resolved that the Sequestration of the Estate of Sir George Booth be
suspended, until the Parliament take further order, and that the Commissioners
for Sequestrations, and all other persons whom it does or may concern, are
required to forbear, further to proceed upon the said sequestration.

A bill for the continuance of the Customs and Excise, from the last day of
Feb. 1659. until the (...) day of (...) was this day read the second time, and
committed to a Committee, who are to meet this afternoon at two of the clock in
the Court of Wards, and ordered that it be brought in to morrow morning.

Resolved that a new Parliament be summoned to appear the 25 day of April
1660. and that the Lords Commissioners for the great Seal do issue forth Writs
for Elections of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and Barons of the
Cinqueports, with the Members thereof, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, to
sit and serve in Parliament returnable the said 25 day of April 1660.

Ordered that it be referred to a Committee to prepare qualifications. for
Members to sit and serve in Parliament, who are to meet this afternoon in the
Inner Court of Wards, and bring in the qualifications on Friday next, the first
business, nothing to intervene.

Resolved that the names of the Sheriffs be presented to the Parliament for
their Consideration, the first business to morrow morning nothing to intervene.

Resolved that Mr. Faunt Sheriff of the County of Leicester, be and is hereby
discharged from his Imprisonment.

Sr. Gilbert Gerard reports, that he acquainted the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London with the Resolves of the Parliament made yesterday according to the
command of the Parliament, and that they returned their humble thanks to the
Parliament for their respects to the City.

Resolved that the Knights and Burgesses of every County be added to the
Committee for nominating Justices of Peace.

Ordered that Mr. Swen and Coll. John Birch be added to the Committee of the
Army.

Ordered that a Committee be appointed to go to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council of the City of London to confer with them about the advance of
such sums of moneys, as they conceive necessary upon security of the
Assessements for the Army: for the present supply of the Army and Navy.

Resolved, that the City be desired to advance money, and that the Assessement
be security for repayment of the said money.

Ordered, that Letters be written and signed by Mr. Speaker to the
Commissioners of the Assessement for the Army in the City of London, and to the
Commissioners for the respective Counties to quicken the paying in of the
Assessement.

Ordered, that a Committee be appointed to bring in an Act for repealing the
Act appointing the form of a writ for Members to sit and serve in Parliament.

Resolved, that the Gates, Percullyces and Posts of the City of London be made
up at the public charge of the State.

Ordered, that the House do proceed to morrow morning at ten of the clock to
the Election of the Council of State, and that the Members of this House do
prepare their names accordingly.

Ordered, that Mr. Sergeant Maynard do bring in an Act for repeal of the Act,
constituting Commissioners for management of the Army.

Ordered, that Mr. Wheeler do bring in a Commission to constitute General
George Monck Capt. General under the Parliament of all the Land Forces in
England, Scotland and Ireland

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 3. A PERFECT DIURNAL Of every days Proceedings in PARLIAMET.
Thursday, 23 Febr. 1659.
Ordered,

THat Sir William Man, Sir John Boys, Mr, Sumner, now Prisoners in Dover
Castle; and all other persons who stand committed only for tendering an
Address or Declaration for a Free Parliament, be discharged of their
Imprisonment: And that all Warrants for apprehending persons for making any
such Declarations or Addresses, be null and vacated.

Resolved, That no private business be admitted during the sitting of this
Parliament.

That an Act be brought in, for repealing of the Acts for settling the Militiaes
in the several Counties, Cities and Boroughes of this Commonwealth.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament, That all the Militiaes in the
respective Counties, and the Powers given to them, be and are hereby revoked,
and that the Levying of any Men, Moneys, Horses or Arms be forborne: And this
Vote be forthwith Printed and Published, and sent down into the respective
Counties, Cities and Boroughs: And that the respective Members of the several
Counties do send them into the several Counties by the Post this night.

That a Committee be appointed to bring in an Act for settling the Militiaes in
the several Counties.

Ordered, That the Vote constituting. Mr. Scot Secretary of State, be repealed,
and is hereby vacated and made void.

A Draught of a Letter to be signed by Mr. Speaker, and sent to the
Commissioners for the Assessments to expedite the bringing in of the
Assessments, was read and approved, and it is Ordered, that Mr. Speaker sign
the same.

Several Aldermen and Common Council-men of the City of London attended the
Parliament; and being called in Alderman Fowke delivered himself in a Speech to
them; wherein he congratulated them in reference to their happy U nion, and the
return of the Members to the discharge of their Trust; And having insisted upon
some other things, he came to desire them that the Militia of the City might be
settled, and presented them with the Names of the Commissioners of the Militia,
the List whereof follows:

The Names of the Commissioners for the Militia of the City of London.
The Lord Major, Thomas Alleyn. The Sheriffs for the Time being. Alderman
Atkins Alderman Foot Alderman Fowke Alderman Viner Alderman Thompson Alderman
Robinson Alderman Bateman Alderman Lawrence Alderman King Alderman Bolton
Alderman Wale Col Bromfeild Common-Council-men. Richard Ford
Common-Council-men. Major Chamberlain Common-Council-men. William Bateman,
Esquire; Common-Council-men. John Jolley, Esquire; Common-Council-men. Major Jo. Tailor
Common-Council-men. Deputy Antrobus Common-Council-men. Deputy Stains
Common-Council-men. Mr. John Win Common-Council-men. Theoph. Biddulph
Common-Council-men. Capt. Story Common-Council-men. Capt. Johnson
Common-Council-men. Mr Sanders Common-Council-men. Tho. Bludworth
Common-Council-men. Maximill. Beard Common-Council-men. Major Cox
Common-Council-men. Major Eardly Common-Council-men. Deputy Lenthall, Gower,
Esquire; Common-Council-men. Peter Mills Common-Council-men. Nicholas Penning
Common-Council-men. Capt. Cleggat Common-Council-men. William Vincent, Esquire;
Common-Council-men.
The Aldermen and Common Councilmen being again called in, The Speaker returned
them the hearty thanks of the House, and told them that they had approved of
their Commissioners for the Militia.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament, That Tuesday next be set apart
for a Day of Thanksgiving to the Lord, to be observed by the Parliament in
Margrets Church Westminster, for the happy Union of the Parliament, and the
Return of the Members of Parliament to the Discharge of their Trust.

Ordered by the Parliament, That Mr. Calamy be desired to assist in carrying on
the Work of Thanksgiving at Margarets Church Westminster, before the Parliament
on Tuesday next. And Mr. Annesly is desired to give Mr. Calamy notice hereof.

The House proceeded to the Nomination of a Council of State, which are as
follows.

The Names of the Council of State.
Genesis George Monck. Lord St. John. Mr. Pierrepoint. Sir William Lewis. Mr.
Crew. Col. Rossiter. Mr. Knightley. Col. Popham. Col. Morley. Sir Gilbert
Gerard. Sir Anth. Ashley-Coop. Lord Widdrington. Mr. Evelyn of Wilts. Genesis
Montague. Sir John Temple. Col. Waeley. Lord Fairfax. Col. Norton. Sir John
Holland. Mr. Annesley. Col. Thompson. Mr. Hollis. Mr. Trever. Sir Harebotle
Grimston. Sir John Potts. Sir William Waller. Col. Birch. Mr. Weaver. Mr.
Swinfen. Mr. Sergeant Maynard. Sir Richard Anslow.
LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwel, in Thames Street, over against Baynards Castle.

Numb. 4 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings IN PARLIAMENT
Friday 24. Feb.
Courteous Reader,
YOu are desired to take notice, that yesterday being the 24. Feb. there was a
Printed Pamphlet in imitation of this Book, as if done by the same hand: and
that it is both false in it self, and the Title forged to deceive: Therefore
the continuation of this which is the Extracts from the Original, you are
constantly to expect from the Printer hereof.

Ordered, that Mr. Manton be desired to be assisting, in carrying on the work
of public thanksgiving before the Parliament, on Tuesday next at Margarets
Church Westminster, for the union of the Parliament, and restoring the Members
hereof to the discharge of their trust, and that Coll. Leigh do give him notice
accordingly.

A Bill Constituting George Monck Esquire, to be Captain General and Commander
in chief of all the land Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, was this day
read the first and second time, and upon the Question committed unto a
Commit, who are to meet this afternoon at two of the clock in the Speakers
Chamber, with power to send for persons papers, and what otherwise may be of
concernment to that business.

Resolved that Coll. Hutchinson be discharged from being Sheriff of the County
of Nottingham, and that John Rayner Esquire; be Sheriff of that County according to
former order.

Resolved that Coll. Crook be discharged from being Sheriff for the County of
Oxford.

Resolved that the Sheriffs appointed for the County of York do stand.

Resolved that Edward Williams Esquire; be and is nominated and apppointed Sheriff
for the County of Breeknock.

Resolved that the Sheriffs for the last year, not otherwise altered by the
Parliament this day, do continue Sheriffs, until the Parliament take further
order.

The Amendments to the Bill for continuing the Customs and Excise, was twice
read and agreed unto.

Resolved, that Nathaniel Manton be and is hereby constituted and appointed one
of the Commissioners for Excise in the place of Mr. Bulstrod, and that Mr.
Bulstrod be and is hereby discharged from being a Commissioner for the Excise.

Resolved that Capt. Stone, be and is hereby constituted and appointed one of
the Commissioners for appeals in the place of Capt. Adam Baynes, and that Capt.
Adam Baynes be and is hereby discharged from being a Commissioner for appeals.

Resolved, that Mr. Scowen be and is hereby constituted one of the
Commissioners for appeals, in the place of Luke Robinson Esquire; and that the same
Mr. Luke Robinson be and is hereby discharged from being a Commissioner of
appeals.

Resolved, that Iervace Bennet Esquire; be and is hereby constituted one of the
Commissioners for Appeals in the place of Dr. William Barker, and that Dr.
William Barker be and is hereby discharged from being a Commissioner of
Appeals.

Resolved, that the Commissioners, Collectors and Governors of the Excise and
Customs in Ireland shall continue until the 24. of June 1660.

Resolved, that the Bill for the continuing of the Customs and Excise be
engrossed and brought in the first business, nothing to intervene.

Resolved, that the Assessement for the Army shall be the security to be given
to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, for the
moneys which shall be advanced by them for the use of the Army and Navy.

Resolved, that an Act be brought in for settlement of the Assessements for the
Army, as their security accordingly.

Resolved, that the Quorum of the Commissioners for the Militia of the City of
London be nine.

Resolved, that Alderman Viner, and Alderman Robinson be nominated Treasurers
in the said Act, for receipt of the said moneys, to repay the said moneys to be
advanced as aforesaid.

The Committee for Qualifications of Members to be Elected to sit and serve in
Parliament made their Report.

Resolved, that the Debate upon the said Qualifications be taken into
consideration, on Monday morning next.

The House adjourned until three of the clock.

Friday 24. Feb. Afternoon.
A Bill for holding an Assize for the County of Lancaster, was this day read
the first and second time, and committed.

Resolved that Mr. Molineux be Sheriff for the County of Lancaster.

Ordered that it be referred to a Committee to consider of the Chamberlain of
Northwales, and of the Seal there, and report their opinion herein to the
Parliament.

The Bill for repealing an Act constituting Commissioners for government of the
Army, was this day read the first, second, and third time, and upon the
Question passed.

Resolved that this be the Title to this Act, viz. An Act making void the Acts
appointing Commissioners for government of the Army, and for making Charles
Flectwood Esquire Commander in chief of the Land Forces.

Ordered that this Act be forthwith printed and published.

The House likewise read the Bill for constituting a Council of State, and
ordered the said Bill to be engrossed.

Resolved that a Bill be brought in on Monday next for the dissolving of the
Parliament, and that a Committee do prepare and bring in the said Bill
accordingly.

Resolved that the Bill constituting George Monck Esquire Capt General, and
Commander in chief of all the I and Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland be
engrossed.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1650.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 5 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Saturday 25. Feb.
A Bill engrossed for constituting George Monck Esquire; Capt. General and
Commander in Chief under the Parliament, of all the Land Forces in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, was this day read the third time.

Resolved, That this be the Title of this Act, Viz. An Act constituting George
Monck Esquire; Capt. General and Commander in Chief under the Parliament of all the
Land Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the said Act being put to
the question, passed.

Ordered, that Sr William Wheeler, Sr John Temple and Mr. Raleigh do carry this
Commission to his Excellency General George Monck.

A Bill for settling the Honnors and Manors of Hampton Court, and other Lands
upon General George Monck and his heirs, which was this day read the first
time.

Ordered, that this Bill be read the second time on Monday morning the first
business.

A Bill engrossed constituting a Council of State, and Instructions given to
the said Council was this day read the third time.

Resolved, that this be the Title of this Act, viz. An Act for constituting a
Council of State, and the said Act being put to the question passed.

Resolved, that William Love Alderman and Sheriff of London, upon his own
desire and request, be and is hereby discharged from being one of the
Commissioners of the Customs, and that Edward Wigate Esquire, be and is hereby
constituted one of the Commissioners for the Customs in the place of the said
William Love.

A Bill engrossed for continuance of the Customs was this day read the third
time.

Resolved that Col. John White be discharged from being a Commissioner for the
Customs, and that Mr. Swinfin be and is hereby constituted a Commissioner in
the place of the said John White.

Resolved that Mr. Harrington be and is hereby discharged from being one of the
Commissioners for the Customs, and that Mr. Samuel Vassalls be and is hereby
constituted one of the Commissioners for the Customs in the place of the said
Mr. Harrington.

And the said Bill so amended being put to the question passed.

Ordered, that this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Resolved that all the Circuits for the Lent Assizes, for the several Counties
of this Commonwealth, be and are hereby put off.

Ordered that Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and Goal delivery, do issue
under the great Seal to the Justices of peace in the respective Counties of
this Commonwealth, and that the Lords Commissioners for the great Seal do issue
forth Commissions accordingly.

The House read the Humble Petition of the poor maimed Soldiers, Widows and
Orphans at Ely House and the Savoy.

Ordered, that this Petition be referred to a Committee to examine the
business, and to consider how the case stands, with the Petitioners, and how
the two thousand pound formerly granted unto them, and their Pentions for the
future may be paid and satisfied, and report their opinion to the Parliament on
Monday morning.

Ordered, that a Committee do prepare a Proclamation declaring the grounds and
reasons for putting off the Circuits for this time.

Ordered, that it be referred to the Council of State to give directions that
the streets before Whitehall be repaired, and that they see that the Surveyors
be paid, and satisfy the disbursment for repair thereof.

Ordered, that Peter Brook, Col. Holland, Henry Brooker and Col. Charles White,
be discharged of their imprisonment, and that the sequestrations of their
Estates be suspended, and that the Commissioners for sequestration be and are
hereby required to forbear any further proceedings touching the sequestration
of the Estates of them, or any of them.

A Pardon for James Pyper, Samuel Eden, Richard Iackman, Winifrid Jones Wife of
Edward Jones, William Love, Henry Warner, Jane Odford, Will. Auckland, William
Hele, John Christopher, Agnes Hakewood, John Norris, Samuel Warren, otherwise
Pulling, Ioane Skinner Wife of William Skinner, John Brodrip, Henry Sanson,
otherwise Chippet, Gregory Sanson, John Hunt, Richard Green, Nicholas Watts and
John Watts; and the Judges Certificate of the Crimes of which they were
convicted were read, and the said Pardon upon the Question agreed unto.

And it is Ordered, That the Lords Commissioners for custody of the Great Seal,
do pass the said Pardon for them, and every of them, under the Great Seal of
England.

Ordered, That the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace for the respective Counties,
wherein the said Winifrid Jones, William Love, John Christopher, John Brodrip,
Henry Sanson, otherwise Chippet, Gregory Sanson, otherwise Chippet, John Hunt,
Rich. Green, Nicholas Watts and John VVatts, do send the forepersons into
Foreign Parts or Plantations, according to the Judges Certificate.

Ordered, That Justice Newdigate do give order for the execution of Edward
Weeks convict for Robery according to Law.

The Committee unto whom it was referred to draw up a Proclamation, declaring
the grounds and reasons for putting off Circuits for this time, reports the
draught thereof, which being read, was a greed unto, and Ordered to be
forthwith Printed and Published: which follows.

The PROCLAMATION.
THe Parliament, for diverse weighty reasons to them appearing, do Declare and
Order, That the Circuits for the holding of Assizes and Trialls of Nisi Prius
for the several Counties of England and Wales be not held this present Vacation
of Lent, 1659. And that all persons be discharged of their attendance thereon:
and that this Order be forthwith Printed, and sent down to the respective
Sheriffs, that notice may be taken thereof.



Ordered, That the Bill for the Militia be reported on Monday morning the first
business.

Ordered, That the Committee touching Qualifications be revived, and sit this
afternoon, and that they consider of Qualifications, as well as of persons that
are to give Votes in Election, as of the persons to be Elected,

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 6 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Monday 27. Feb.
ORdered that the Sequestrations of the estates of Robert Pierpoint be
suspended, and that the Commissioners for sequestrations do forbear to proceed
therein until further order, and that the said Robert Pierpoint be and is
hereby also discharged from any imprisonment or restraint.

Ordered, that Earnestus Biron and Mr. Malcome Smith prisoners in the gatehouse
be discharged of their imprisonment, and that the Sequestration of their
estates be suspended, until the Parliament take further order.

Ordered that Will. Cork, Timothy Cork, and Michael Bret Junior, Sir Thomas
Middleton, and Thomas Middleton his son, and the other persons who were taken
upon surrender of Chirk Castle, have their liberty, and that the sequestrations
of their estates be suspended, and that the Commissioners for sequestration do
forbear any further to proceed in the sequestrations of their said estates,
until the Parliament take further order.

Resolved, that the Votes of the 17. of September. 1659. touching the dissolving
and disincorporating of the City of Chester, and for making void their Charter,
and that the County Palatine of Chester be no distinct Jurisdiction, be
vacuated and made null and void.

Ordered that the sequestrations of the estates of Mr. Thomas Fanshaw and Sir
Thomas Leventhorp be suspended until the Parliament take further order.

Resolved that William Lenthal Speaker of the Parliament, be and is hereby
constituted Chamberlain of Chester, and Chanceller of the County Palatine of
Lancaster.

Resolved, that an Act be brought in for reviving the jurisdiction of Chester
and Lancaster, and that a Committee do bring in the said Act accordingly.

Ordered that the Lord Kilmurry and his brother Mr. Thomas Needham Mr. Sperten
and Mr. Reinald Lacy be discharged of their imprisonment, and that the
sequestration of their estates be suspended until further order, and that it
be referred to a Committee to consider who are in prison and upon what account,
and who are fit to be discharged of their imprisonment, and the sequestration
of their estates to be suspended, who are to meet this afternoon in the inner
Court of Wards, and to report their opinion forthwith to the Parliament.

A Report of an Oath to be taken by the Officers attending the Council of
State, which was read.

Resolved, that the Parliament does approve of the said Oath, and that the
Council of State, or any three of them, be and are hereby empowered and
authorized to administer the said Oath to the respective officers and ministers
appointed to attend the Council of State accordingly.

A Report was also made from the Council of State of a Proclamation, which was
this day read the first and second time and agreed unto, which follows.

By the Parliament.
The Parliament being desirous that good order and discipline may be still
continued in the Army, to the end that the soldiers thereof may not any wise be
an oppression to the Country, and where as diverse Officers of the Army whose
Regiments Troops and Companies are quartered in several Counties of this
Nation, do still continue hereabout the Town, and absent from their respective
charges; does therefore hereby require all such Officers of the Army forthwith
to repair to their respective charges, and not to depart from them without
special order from the Lord General, and in case that any of the Regiments,
Troops, or Companies of the Army are removed from their quarters last assigned
them without order from the Lord General, the Parliament does require such
Regiments Troops and Companies to return forthwith to their said last quarters
formerly assigned them, or to such other quarters as shall be assigned them by
directions from the Lord General: and the Parliament does further require that
such Regiments Troops or Companies, as are not removed do continue in the
quarters last assigned unto them, and none of them to remove from thence
without the special Order of the Lord General in that behalf.

Ordered by the Parliament that this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and
Published, Tho. St. Nicolas Clerk of the Parliament.



Ordered, that all Sheriffs of the respective Counties within this
Commonwealth, and all Mayors and other head Officers of the respective
Corporations and Buroughs within the same, be and are hereby required to
proclaim the said Proclamation in their respective Counties and Buroughs,

Ordered that the Council of State do take care, to see that this Proclamation
be proclaimed, and the said Order put in Execution accordingly:

Upon a Report from the Council the House

RESOLVED,

That this House does agree with the Council of State, that liberty be given
to the Council of State, in case of special exigencies for the public safety
to seize and secure any person or persons, that they shall have just grounds to
suspect, to carry on any designs of public danger, though such Person or
Persons be for the present Members of Parliament.

A clause engrossed in Parliament was tendered to this Bill in these words,
whether it be by pretense or color of Authority from Charles Stewart, Son of
the late King, or from any single Person whatsoever or otherwise: and the
question being put that this clause be read, it passed with the Negative. And
the said Act being put to the question passed.

Ordered, That Sir John Temple do make Report of the state of the Navy, and
that the same be taken into consideration on Wednesdry next, upon a Report of
an Information given to the Council of State which was read.

The House Resolved, That Sir John Seymer a Member be discharged of his
imprisonment, and every other Member of Parliament, restrained by Collonell
Okey be discharged of their imprisonment and restraint, and that the matters in
this Report concerning the City of Bristol, and the safety and peace of the
Nation be referred to the Council of State to do herein as they shall think fit.

Ordered, That the Information given concerning Coll Okey be reserred to the
Council of State to examine the same, and Report their Opinion therein to the
Parliament.

Resolved, That it be referred to the Council of State to dispose of the
Post Office for the best advantage of the Commonwealth.

The humble Petition of William VVithering Esquire was read.

Ordered, That the Petition of Mr. VVithering be referred to the Council of
State to examine the matters of fact, and also to hear all parties claiming
interest in the said Post Office, and to examine their respective interest to
the said Post Office, and to State matters of Fact, and report their opinion
therein to the Parliament.

Upon a Report from the Council of of State, the House Resolved that John
Thompson Esquire, be one of the Secretaries of State.

Resolved, That John Thurloe Esquire be appointed another Secretary of State.

A Bill for settling the Honors and Manors of Hampton Court, and other Lands
upon his Excelcy George Monck and his Heirs, was this day read the second time.

Resolved, That there be a full addition of Lands to the Lands mentioned in
this Bill.

Resolved, That this Bill be committed upon the whole Debate with the former
Vote to the former Committee.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee, to whom the Bill for settling
Lands on General George Monck is referred, to consider how the Title of the
Hamper Office stands, and if they find the Title to be clear in the state, that
the same be conferred on Dr. Clergius: But if it appears that the Title is not
clear in the state, that then the said Committee consider of some other Office
to be confered on the said Dr. Clergius, and report their opinion therein to
the Parliament.

A Bill for dissolving this present Parliament was this day read the first time.

Resolved, That this Bill be red the second time on Wednesday morning next.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Commit that brought in the Bill for
dissolving the Parliament, to bring in a form of a Writ for Elections of
Members to sit and serve in Parliament, and how and in what manner the new
Parliament shall be summoned, and that they Report their opinion herein to the
Parliament with all speed.

Resolved, That the House at the arising be adjourned until Wednesday morning
next, saving power to all the Committees to sit notwithstanding the said
Adjournment.

An Act for the settling the Militia's in the respective Counties of this
Common wealth was this day read the first time.

Ordered, That this Bill be read the second time on Wednesday morning next, the
first business nothing to interveen.

Ordered, That John Vaughan Esquire; be and is hereby discharged from being
Sheriff of the County of Caernavan so this next year, and that Rowland Gwinn
Esquire; be Sheriff for the said County of Caernavan for this next year, and that
the Lords Commissioners for the great Seal of England, do pass a Pattent or
Commission for him to be Sheriff of the said County accordingly.

London, Printed by John Redmayne in Lovets. Court in Pator-Noster-Row. 1660.

Numb. 7. A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Wednesday, 29. Febr. 1659.
Ordered,

THat the Thanks of this House be given unto Mr. Calamy for his great pains
taken yesterday in Margarets Church Westminster, in carrying on the work of
Thanksgiving for the Union of the Parliament, and restoring the Members of
Parliament to the discharge of their trust; and that he be desired to print his
Sermon.

Ordered,

That the thanks of this House be given unto Mr. Manton for his great pains
taken yesterday in carrying on the work of thanksgiving at Margarets Church
Westminster, for the union of the Parliament, and restoring the Members to the
discharge of their trust, and that he be desired to print his Sermon.

Ordered,

That Sir Gilbert Gerard, and Colonel Lee, do give them the thanks of the House
accordingly.

Ordered,

That it be referred to a Committee, to consider of settling of Ministers, and
of all matters concerning Religion and the Confession of Faith, and present
their opinions herein to the Parliament what they think fit to be done, by
Friday next, who are to meet this afternoon at two of the clock, in the
Speakers chamber.

An Act for security and repayment of such sums of money as shall be advanced
by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, was this day
read the first and second time, and committed unto a Committee, who are to meet
in the Inner Court of Wards this afternoon at two of the clock.

A Bill for settling the Militia of the City of London and the Liberties
thereof, was this day read the first and second time.

Resolved,

That Major General Brown be inserted into the Bill one of the Commissioners
for the Militia of the City of London.

Resolved,

That this Bill be committed unto a Committee, who are to meet this afternoon
at two of the clock in the Exchequer-chamber, and all that come to have Voices.

A Bill for settling the Militia of the several Counties of England, Wales, and
of Berwick upon Twede, was this day read the second time, and committed to the
same Committee, that the Bill for the Militia of the City of London is
committed.

Ordered,

That the Report of the Qualifications of Members to sit and serve in
Parliament, be made to morrow morning at Ten of the Clock.

The Bill declaring this present Parliament to be dissolved, was this day read
the second time.

Ordered,

That the Committee to whom it is referred to consider of the Form of Writs, do
bring in an Act for settling the Form of Writs, and do also bring in a Clause in
that Act to dissolve this present Parliament, and that they bring it in on
Friday next.

Ordered,

That further power be given to the Committee to whom it is referred to
consider of Matters of Religion, and the Confession of Faith, to consider of
such Ministers as are in Livings upon Sequestrations, and of Ministers
sequestered, and to examine the business touching such Ministers in Wales, as
have been put out of their Livings, and state matters of Fact, and Report it to
the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb living in Thames Street, over against Baynards
Castle, 1660.

Numb. 8 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Thursday 1. March.
Ordered,

THat this morning the House do receive Reports from the Committee for
Religion, and spend one hour therein every morning, and that Mr. Speaker do put
the House in mind thereof.

Ordered, that Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight be and is hereby constituted and
appointed Custos Rotulorum for the County of Middlesex, to hold, exercise, and
enjoy the said office as fully and amply, a any person formerly might and ought
to hold and execute the same.

Ordered, That Coll. Norton, Sir William Lewis, Mr. Bulkley, Mr. Grove, Mr.
Button, and Mr. Whitehead, be added Commissioners for custody of the new
Forest, for the preservation of the timber, Wood and Vert in the said Forest,
and that any four of the said Committee be a Quorum.

Ordered, That John Alderton Mayor of Guilford, Henry Baldwyn, and John How, be
added Commissioners for the Assessement for the County of Surrey, and the said
Commissioners be, and are hereby Authorized and required to sit and act as
Commissioners for the Affessements, as fully to all intents and purposes, as if
they had been named in the Act entitled An Act for raising a 100000 l. a
month upon England, Scotland, and Ireland, for six months.

A Bill for repeal of two Acts for Sequestrations, was this day read the first
time.

Resolved, That this Bill be now read the second time, and upon the question it
was committed unto the Committee that brought in the said Bill, who are to meet
at two of the clock this afternoon in the Inner Court of Wards.

Upon a Report from the Committee, concerning distressed Widows, Orphans,
Maimed Soldiers, etc.

Ordered, That the sum of 2000 l. formerly ordered for relief of the poor
Widows, Orphans, and Maimed Soldiers, be charged to be paid out of the first
moneys that shall come into the Exchequer, other then the Customs and Excise.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee, to consider how and in what
manner the said VViddows, Orphans, and Maimed Soldiers at Ely-house may be
provided for and paid for the future, with the least prejudice, and most case
to the Nation; and how a weekly revenue may be settled for their maintenance,
and how the Maimed Soldiers may be disposed of, so as the Nation may be eased
of the charge, and how they may be provided of a preaching Minister. Which
Committee are to meet this afternoon at two of the clock in the Exchequer
Chamber.

Ordered, That the Committee of the poor Knights at Windsor be revived and
joined to the Committee touching the Widows and maimed Soldiers at Ely House
and the Savoy.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee to take into consideration the
state of the Revenues of the Commonwealth, and to present to the Parliament
what the charge of the Commonwealth is, what Obstructions hinder the bringing
in the Revenue, and how the Revenue may be managed for the best advantage of
the Commonwealth, who are to meet in the Treasurie-Chamber with power to send
for persons, papers, and what else may conduce to the business.

Ordered, That the several Commissioners for the Assessments in the several
Counties, Cities and Borroughs of this Commonwealth do take special care to put
the Act entitled An Act for an Assessment of 100000. l. by the month, upon
England, Scotland and Ireland for six months, in speedy and effectual
execution; and that the Members of Parliament who serve for the respective
Counties, Cities and Buroughs, do send down this Order into the respective
Counties, Cities and Buroughs, And that this Order be Printed and Published.

The humble Petition of the surviving Warden and Assistants, with the Brethren
of the Trinity House of Deptford Strand, for relief of distressed Mariners,
their Orphans and Widows which are fallen into necessity, poverty and need,
was read.

Ordered, That this Petition be referred to a Committee to consider of this
petition, examine the business, state matters of fact, and Report their
Opinion therein to the Parliament, who are to meet this afternoon at three of
the clock in the Duchy Court.

Resolved, That the time of the dissolution of this Parliament be at or before
the fifteenth day of this instant March.

Resolved, That after the business concerning Religion be over, every morning
the House do proceed upon the Bill for settling the Militia until it be
finished.

Ordered, That the Members that do serve for the several Counties, Cities and
Buroughs do bring in the names of Commissioners for the Militia.

Resolved, That the Council of State have the trust of ordering the Houses,
Forests, Chases and Parks belonging to the Commonwealth, and of disposing the
Care and Custody thereof and of the places and services relating thereunto, and
of the Timber and Wood growing and being in any of the Forests, Chases and
Parks as shall be from time to time necessary for the best advantage of the
Commonwealth.

Ordered, That Sr. Anthony Ashley Cooper be added a Commissioner for Custody of
New Forest.

Ordered, That a Committee do repair to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of
the City of London and propound unto them the desire of the Parliament that
they will forth with advance so much moneys as the Assessments for the City
will amount unto for the present service of the Army and Navy instead of the
money by them offered to be advanced upon security of the Assessments.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 9. A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Friday, March 2. 1659.
A Bill for approbation of Ministers, before they be admitted to any public
Benefice, was this day reported from the Commit for Religion, read the first
and second time, and committed to the same Committee that brought in the Bill,
with an addition of several Members thereunto, and with power to consider of
the Fees of the Register, and to consider of the Ministers doing their duty,
and the Committee is ordered to bring in the Bill with all convenient speed.

The Confession of Faith, presented from the Assembly of Divines by Doctor
Burgess, and others of the Assembly, Friday the Five and twentieth day of
September 1646. was reported and read.

Resolved, That the House does agree to this public Confession of Faith
contained in all the Chapters, except the Thirty and thirty one Chapters.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee that brought in this Confession,
to bring in an Act declaring and owning this to be the public Confession of
Faith, of the Church of England.

Ordered, That the Thirtieth Chapter of Church Censures, and the One and
thirtieth Chapter of Synods and Counsels be referred back to the same Committee
that brought in the Confession of Faith to consider thereof, and to confer with
such persons thereupon as they shall think fit, and present their opinion
therein to the Parliament.

Upon Report from the Council of State, that the Lord General Monck be
Commissionated one of the Generals of the Fleet for the next Summers
expedition; And that Colonel Edward Mountague be one other of the Generals of
the Fleet for the next Summers Expedition.

Resolved, That the House does agree with the Council of State, that the Lord
General Monck be Commmissionated one of the Generals of the Fleet for the next
Summers expedition.

Resolved, That the House does agree with the Council of State, that Colonel
Edward Mountague, be one other of the Generals of the Fleet, for the next
Summers expedition, and that a Commission be prepared and granted to him
accordingly.

Resolved, That William Androse of Bridgwater be a Commissioner for the
Assessments in the County of Somerset, in stead of Tho. Andrews mentioned by
mistake as a Commissioner for the said County, in the Act of Assessments
entitled, An Act for an Assessment of 100000 l. by the month upon England,
Scotland and Ireland, for six months; And that the said Tho. Andrews do
forbear to act by virtue of the said Act, and the said William Androse is
hereby empowered and authorized to fit and act as a Commissioner for the
Assessments as sully to all intents and purposes as if he had been rightly
named in the said Act.

Ordered, That Hugh Powell, Morgan Jones, James Penry, Rowland Lloyd, William
Bowen and Thomas Powell be and are hereby nominated and appointed Commissioners
for the Assessment in the County of Brecknock; And that they and every of them
be and are hereby empowered and authorized to sir and act as Commissioners for
the Assessments as fully to all intents and purposes, as if they had been named
in the Act entitled, An Act for the Assessment of 100000 l. by the month upon
England, Scotland and Ireland, for six months.

The like Orders passed for Sir Francis Hollis Baronet to be one of the
Commissioners for the Assessment in the County of Wilts and the County of
Dorset. For Robert Pemberton, Robert Ivory, and Robert How, for the Borough of
S. Albans. For Cant. William Meredith, Richard Evans of Collenny, William Dear
of Lluntrit Major, Nicholas Robin, Miles Matthew of Blaengwawre, Edward Jones
of S. Michaelston, and William Watkins for the County of Glamorgan. For Edward
Exton, Nicholas Clements, William Stanley, Peter Clungion, and Henry Pit
Aldermen, for the County of Southampton. For Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman, Sir
Thomas Spencer Baroner, Sir Thomas Penniston Baronet, Thomas Cobb, Miles
Fleetwood, Edward Clerk, George Crook, Crompion Read, Robert Dormer, Vincent
Barry, George Greenwood, and Arthur Jones Esquires, for the County of Oxford.
For the Borough of Albrough in the County of Suffolk, the Bailiffs for the time
being, Francis Bacon Recorder, Richard Brown and William Skippon Gent. For the
Corporation of Bury S. Edmonds in the County of Suffolk, John Southerby Esquire;
Recorder, John Clark Esquire; John Moody Alderman, Thomas Chaplin, and Jasper
Shepherd, Gent. For the County of Caermarthen, Sir Erasmus Philips and Sir
Edward Mansell Baronets, Edward Rice, Nicholas Williams, James Jones, Thomas
Gwyn, John Powell the elder, Owen Price, Morgan Jones, Walter Jones, Thomas
Evans, Humphrey Brown, Rawley Mansell, Owen Brickstock, William Lloyd, Lewis
Lloyd, Henry Mansell, Philip Vaughan, Captain William Slowman, Richard Lewis,
Robert Birt Esqs the Mayor of Caermarthen pro tempore, Anthony Jones Alderman,
Rowland Philips, Edward Doonligh, John Price, John Philips; Morgan Lloyd,
Maurice Thomas, Mugulstone Allen, John Evans, Richard Williams, James Lewis,
and Howell Philips.

For the City of Sarum and Close of the same, Robert Good, John Holt Esqs For
the County of Cardigan, James Lewis Junior; John Vaughan Junior, Thomas Evans,
William Lloyd of Bronwith, Will. Lloyd, Richard Jones, Reinold Jenkins Esqs
David Lloyd of Alt-yr-Odin, Thomas Powel, Howell Philips, and Thomas-Jenkins
Gent.

For the City of Westminster, Sir Gilbert Gerard Baronet, Sir William Waller,
Sir Anthony Erby, Sir William Plater, Sir William Wheeler, Knights, William
Bell, Henry Peck, and Gabriel Beck Esqs

The House adjourned till two of the Clock in the afternoon.

Afternoon.
The House had under consideration consideration, the Bill for settling the
Militia, and made some further progress therein. They also passed an Act for
securing the 27000 l. advanced by the Lord Mayor, and Commons of the City of
London.

Resolved, That the Members of this House be enjoined to take special care,
that to the best of their Judgments, the Commissioners of the Militia which
they present, be persons well affected to the Cause of the Parliament.

Ordered, That the Letters, and public dispatches out of Ireland, which were
brought by Colonel Iemple and others, and are directed to Mr. Speaker, be sent
to the Council of State, to consider, and take order therein, and present their
opinion therein to the Parkament, if they see cause.

Ordered, That the Council of State, do give order for payment of the 2000 l.
to the poor Widows, Orphans, and maimed Soldiers of Ely-House, and the Savoy
Hospital.

The Committee to whom it was referred to consider what Votes were fitting to
be expunged, made Report of several Votes to be expunged.

Resolved, That the Parliament does agree with the Committee, that the several
Orders made against Denzil Holles Esquire; touching his impeachment, and the
exclusion of him out of the Parliament, be discha ged and obliterated.

The like Order passed for expungiug the Votes against Sir Robert Pie, and
Major Harley.

The House this day passed the Act for repealing of two Acts of Sequestration,
and ordered it to be forthwith printed and published.

Resolved, That Commissions be granted under the Great Seal, unto General
George Monek, and General Edward Mountague, to be Generals of the Fleet for the
next Semmers Expedition, and that the Commissioners for the Great Seal do pass
Commissions to them under the Great Seal of England accordingly.

Resolved, That General Edward Mountague do forthwith go to the Fleet.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb living in Thames Street, over against Baynards
Castle, 1660.

Numb. 10 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT
Published according to Order.
Saturday 3. March.
Ordered,
THat Charles, now Earl of Warwick, be and is hereby constituted Custos
Rotulorum for the County of Essex, to hold, exercise and enjoy, the said Office
in as full and ample manner to all intents and purposes as any person or
persons formerly held and enjoyed the same.

The Bill for reviving the jurisdictions of the Counties Palatine of Lancaster
and Chester, was this day read the first and second time, and upon the
question, committed with power to revive the Duchy of Lancaster: who are to
meet on Monday at two of the Clock in the aftenoon in the Duchy Court.

A Letter from Colonel Whichcot from Windsor Castle, the 22 Feb. 1659. and a
Warrant of the 27 of November. 1656. signed He. Lawrence President, directed to
the Governor of Windsor Castle, to receive into his charge John Earl of
Crawford Lindsey, and another Warrant, signed He. Lawrence President, dated 17
Ian. 1656. directed to the Governor of Windsor Castle, to take into his charge
the body of the Lord Sinclare: and another Warrant dated 14 January, 1656.
signed Oliver P. to detain and keep under impisonment the body of the Earl of
Liwtherdale, which were read.

Ordered, That the Earl of Crawford Lindsey the Earl of Lawderdale, and the
Lord Sinclare, now prisoners in Windsor Castle, shall be discharged of their
imprisonment, upon giving security to the Council of State, unto whom it is
referred to take the same, not to act any thing prejudicial to this
Commonwealth.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Council of State, upon conference with the
Generals at Sea, or either of them, to nominate and approve of all the Captains
and Lieutenants to be employed in the Navy, and that the Generals at sea, or
either of them, under the Seal of the Admiralty, do grant Commissions, unto
such Captains and Lieutenants as they shall approve of accordingly, or in their
absence, to the Commissioners of the Admiralty.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee to send for Dr. Reynolds and Dr.
Owen, and to examine the business concerning Dr. Reynolds and Dr. Owen,
touching the Deanary of Christ Church, and that the Committee to state matters
of fact, and report it to the Parliament on Thursday next, and that Dr. Owen be
summoned forthwith to attend the said Committee.

Ordered by the Parliament. THat Sir William Roberts Knight, William Warren of
Wapping Esquire; John Limbery and William Northey Esqrs be and are hereby
nominated and appointed Commissioners for the Assessement in the County of
Middlesex, and that they and every of them be and are hereby empowered and
authorized to sit and Act as Commissioners for the Assessements as fully to all
intents and purposes, as if they had been named in the Act Entitled, An Act for
an Assessement of 100000 l. by the Month upon England, Scotland and Ireland,
for six Months.

Resolved, That General Mountague be and is hereby constituted and appointed
one of the Commissioners for the Admiralty, and that he be and is hereby
empowered and authorized to act as one of the Commissioners for the Admiralty,
as fully to all intents and purposes as any other the Commissioners may or
ought to do.

Ordered, That no persons go as Chaplains in any of the Ships, but Ministers,
or such as shall be approved of by the Generals at Sea.

A Report was made of Moneys charged on the Assessement, for the use of the
Navy, and what have been received thereupon, and also an Estimate of the Debts
of the Navy due unto the first of this instant March.

Ordered, That the Council of State, with the Generals at land and sea, do
advise with the Committee of the Army, Commissioners of the Admiralty and Navy,
and the Committee of the Revenue about the charge of the Debts of the
Commonwealth, with the incomes, and to consider how the Forces at land and sea
may be so retrencht, as that the charges may not exceed the incomes, and how
the Debts may be satisfied, and Moneys proportioned betwixt the Army and Navy.

Upon a Report from the Commissioners of the Admiralty and Navy, it was ordered
that the Commissioners of the Admiralty and Navy, be and are hereby empowered
to place Pursers in stead of Cheques and Stewards, if they see cause.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Commissioners of the Admiralty, to take
care, and they are hereby empowered to bring the late Commissioners for Prize
Goods to an account, for the Arrears remaining in their hands, and also to get
in such moneys as have been impressed by the late Committee for the Navy, or
others, to any person or persons not yet accounted for, and that the Prize
Goods be disposed of, and employed to the use of the Navy, and that the said
Commissioners for the Admiralty do also take care of such Prizes as are or
shall be brought in by the ships of this Commonwealth, and the Commissioners of
the Admiraltie are hereby empowered to proceed in a summary way touching
Merchants Ships of this Commonwealth, surprised by the Enemy, and retaken by
the States Frigates.

Resolved, That Dr. Walker and Dr. Turner only, be Judges of the Court of
Admiralty and Probate of Wills.

Resolved, That Dr. Wiseman be Advocate of the Commonwealth, instead of Dr.
Walker.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 11. A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Monday, March 5. 1659.
AN Act declaring the Public Confession of Faith of the Church of England,
was this day read the first, second and third time, and passed: Ordered that it
be forthwith printed and published.

Ordered, That it be referred to Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Calamy, and Mr. Manton, to
examine the same at the Press, and also to examine the Scriptures for proof of
every Article, and insert the same in the Margin of the Book.

Orderd, That Major John Blackmore be and is hereby discharged from being
Sheriff of the County of Devon, and that the Gentlemen who serve for the said
County do presently bring in Three Names, that out of the same the Parliament
may approve of one to be Sheriff of the said County.

Resolved, That the Sheriff for the County of Sussex be discharged, and the New
Sheriff be and is hereby approved of, and that he do forthwith sue out his
Patent.

Resolved, That Edmund Waring Sheriff of Shropshire, be discharged of being
Sheriff, and that the Gentlemen who serve for the said County do present Three
Names to morrow morning, out of which the Parliament may nominate one to be
Sheriff of the said County.

Resolved, That Mr. Crowcher be discharged from being Sheriff of Hampshire, and
that the Members of Parliament who serve for the said County do present the
Names of Three Persons to morrow morning, out of which the Parliament may
nominate and approve one to be Sheriff.

Ordered, That the Members of Parliament do bring in the Names of Sheriffs to
morrow morning, for the approbation of the Parliament, in such places where
they desire the old Sheriff^ should de discharged.

Ordered, That a Proclamation do issue forth for putting all the Laws and
Statutes against Popish Recusants, Priests and Jesuits, in speedy and
effectual execution; and that a Committee do bring in the Proclamation
accordingly.

Ordered, That the sum of Twenty pounds shall be given by every Sheriff to
such person or persons as shall discover any Popish Priest or Jesuit, upon the
Conviction of every such Priest or Jesuit; and that the same shall be allowed
to the respective Sheriffs upon their respective Accounts; and that the said
Reward be inserted in the Proclamation.

The humble Address of the Mayor, Burgesses, and other Inhabitants of the Town
of Lyme in the County of Dorset, was read, which follows.

To the Right Honorable, the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament:
The humble Address of the Mayor, Burgesses, and other Inhabitants of the Town
of Lyme in the County of Dorset.
Humbly shows,
THat though we are a small, and in our selves an inconsiderable People, yet it
pleased the most wise and powerful God to make us among others instrumental for
your preservation from the violence of the late King, his evil Counselors and
their Adherents, before that illegal force of your own Armed Guards upon you in
the year 1648. And we hope, in some degree and measure (according to our
capacity) successfully helpful for your late Restitution, which we have not
only endeavored by our Prayers, but also by taking Arms for you, when yet we
had but little, or no hope of effecting your Readmission. And therefore we have
taken this boldness upon us of Addressing our selves to this Honorable House;
that by so doing, we may manifest our dislike of that long continued Force upon
you, (the source and spring of all those evils that have befallen these almost
ruined Nations) Our adhering to you in our affections whilst under that force;
Our cordial rejoicing in the wonderful providence of God showed in your
Restitution to sit, and exercise the Trust reposed in you, (which we judge the
only probable means under God of healing our breaches, and restoring our paths
to dwell in) Our revived hopes of much approaching good to these Nations by
your wise and moderate Counsels; Our unchangeable resolution of adhering to you
in the defense of your just Privileges and Authority, with the uttermost
hazard of our lives and fortunes; and to acquiesce in such a settlement as your
grave wisdom shall judge best for us and these distressed Nations: For the
effecting whereof, you shall not fail of the most importunate prayers of

Your faithful Servants to command.


Resolved, That the Thanks of the Parliament be given unto the Mayor,
Burgesses, and other Inhabitants of the Town of Lyme; and that Mr Moore do give
them the thanks of the Parliament accordingly.

The House likewise agreed upon the Militia's of the Counties of Salop,
Warwick, Norfolk, Devon, the City of Westminster, the City of Exeter, the
Borough of Southwark, and the places adjacent, Radnor, Somerset, the County of
York, City of Worcester, the County of Gloucester, City and County of
Gloucester, Essex, City of Norwich, County of Lincoln and City and County of
the same, County of Cambridge, Middlesex, County of Dorset, the Town and County
of Poole, the Hamlets of the Tower of London, County of Oxford and City of the
same, County of Sussex, County of Wilts, and the County of Cornwall.

Ordered, That such Justices of the Peace who were formerly of the Quorum, And
such other Justices as the Commissioners for the Great Seal shall think fit to
nominate, any five, four, or three of them be of the Quorum, And the Lords
Commissioners for the Great Seal are to issue forth Commissions accordingly.

Ordered,

That the SOLEMN LEAGVE AND COVENANT be Printed and Published, and set up and
forthwith Read in every Church, and also once every year according to former
Order of Parliament, and that the said Solemn League and Covenant be also set
up in this House.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb living in Thames Street, over against Baynards
Castle, 1660.

Numb. 12 A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Tuesday 6. March.
Resolved,

THat Matthew Heal Esquire; be and is hereby nominated and approved of, to be
Sheriff for the County of Devon: for the year ensuing, and that the Lords
Commissioners for Custody of the great Seal do pass a Patent to him under
the great Seal to be Sheriff of the said County of Devon: accordingly.

Resolved,

That William Okeley Esquire; be and is hereby nominated and approved of, to be
Sheriff for the County of Salop, for the year ensuing, and that the Lords
Commissioners for Custody of the great Seal do pass a Patent to him under
the great Seal, to be Sheriff of the said County of Salop. accordingly.

The Petition of John Lambert major General was Read.
Resolved,

That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State have done in
committing of Colonel John Lambert to the Tower.

Resolved,

That Sir Arthur Hesilrig do attend the Parliament to morrow morning.

Resolved,

That the Council of State be enjoined to take special care of the Safety and
Peace of the Nation, and to proceed vigorously in securing such persons as they
shall think dangerous to the Peace and safety of the Nation.

Resolved,

That Colonel Overton be and is hereby discharged, from being Governor of Hull,
and that his Commission to be Governor there, and to be Colonel of a Regiment
of Foot be and are hereby revoked and made void.

The House adjourned until three of the clock.

Afternoon.
Ordered,

That the Report touching the commissioners of the Customs be made to morrow
morning the first business.

The House made a further progress in the Militia's of the several Counties,
and passed the Militia's of Surrey, Northwales, Southwales, Bedford, Carmarthen
and Hertford.

Mr. Speaker acquaints the Parliament, that diverse persons with store of Arms
are apprehended, and at the door.

Resolved,

That the Sergeant do detain the persons taken with Arms until the Council
of State do sit, and that no body be permitted to speak with them.

The House likewise passed the Militia's of Berks, Kent, Suffolk, Southampton,
Nottingham, Derby, Monmouth, the City of Bristoll, the Town of Barwick,
Stafford, Hereford, the Town of Southampton.

Resolves

That the Earl of Bedford be and is hereby Constituted Custos Rotulorum for
Bedfordshire, to hold and enjoy the same in as full, and as ample a manner as
any other person, or persons formerly held or enjoyed the same, and that Coll.
John Okey be and is hereby discharged from being Custos Rotalorum of the said
County.

Ordered,

That the fortnights pay formerly ordered to the Gent of Oxfordshire,
beforthwith paid unto them, and that the Committee for the Army do take care
to pay it.

Ordered,

That the Pistols, Sadles, and other goods that were taken from the Lord
Falkland in or since August last be restored to him and that he takes them
where he finds them.

Resolved,

That Mr. Henry Ashurst be added a Commissioner for the Militia of the City of
London.

Ordered,

That William Beecher Esquire; John Thompson Esquire; John Charnocke Esquire; Henry Chester
Esquire; Oliver Luke Esquire; Sir William Palmer, Sir Thomas Alston Baronnet, John
Alston, John Neale, John Harvey, William Butler, Walter Rolt, Edward Cator
Esquiers, be and are hereby nominated and appointed Commissioners for the
Assessement in the County of Bedford, and that they and every of them be and
are hereby empowered and Authorized, to sit and Act as Commissioners for the
Assessements, as fully to all intents and purposes, as if they had been named
in the Act Entitled an Act for an Assessement of 100000 l by the Month, upon
England, Scotland and Ireland for six Months.

Ordered,

That if the Members, whosoever for any County do not present Commissioners
for the Militia, that then the Gent. who serve for any other County, do bring
in Names to be incerted into the Bill.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 13. A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Wednesday, March 7. 1659.
THe House had under consideration the Bill for approbation of Ministers, and
agreed upon several Amendments to be made thereunto, and likewise referred it
to a Committee to bring in a Clause to be inserted in the said Bill, to
authorize and empower the Approvers to delegate other persons to approve
Ministers in several places of these Nations remote from London, for ease of
the charge and trouble of Ministers in making long Journeys, and intedious
attendance to be approved, and other Clauses upon the debate of the House.

The House this day passed an Act for explanation of certain Clauses and
Provisoes inan Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the
continuance of the Customs and Excise, from the last of Feb. 1659. until the
Twenty fourth day of June 1660. and ordered the same to be printed and
published.

Ordered. That it be referred to the committee of the Revenue, to consider of
the duty of Prisage, and to settle the difference about the same, and report to
the Parliament their Proceedings therein, and in case they cannot end the
difference, then to state the matter of Fact, and report it to the Parliament,
with their opinion therein.

Colonel Rich being brought to the House door,

The House Resolved,

That colonel Rich be called in.

A Letter from Colonel Ingoldsby from Bury, dated the fifth of March 1659. and
an Information given in by Cornet Robert Thornback against colonel Rich, were
reported from the Council of State, and read.

Colonel Rich standing up in his place, denied the charge laid against him, and
said, that he is a stranger to all represented.

Resolved,

That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State have done
concerning the commitment of Col. Rich, and bringing of him to the Parliament,
being a Member of the House.

Ordered,

That it be referred to the Council of State further to examine the whole
matter charged against Col. Rich, and what else concerns the business, and
forthwith to state matter of fact and report it to the Parliament.

Resolved,

That colonel Rich be and is hereby enjoined to attend the Council of State
from time to time, upon examination of this business.

Several Examinations are also reported from the Council of State, touching Sir
Arthur Hesilrigg, and the whole matter thereupon depending before the said
Council, touching several Informations given in to the Council against Sir
Arthur Hesilrig.

Sir Arthur Hesilrig standing up in his place, said he was not guilty of any
thing wherewith he is charged.

Ordered,

That this business concerning Sir Arthur Hesilrig be referred back to the
Council further to examine the business, and report it to the Parliament.

The House likewise proceeded in the Act for the Militia, and approved of the
Militia's for the county of Westmorland, county of Cumberland, county of
Chester, city of Chester, county of Bucks, and county of Durham.

Ordered,

That the House do proceed touching the Militia's to morrow morning, next
after the business for Religion.

Resolved,

That the Parliament do proceed only with matters of Religion, the Militia, the
Qualifications, and the Writs.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb living in Thames Street, over against Baynards
Castle, 1660.

Numb. 14 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT
Published according to Order.
Thursday 8. March.
Ordered,

THat the Bill for the Militia be forthwith engrossed and brought in to morrow
morning the first business.

Ordered,

That Colonel Birch do report the rest of the Names of the Commissioners for
the Militia's, as soon as he comes into the House.

Ordered,

That the Amendments to the Bill for the County Palatine of Lancaster, and
Duchy of Lancaster, be reported to morrow morning.

The Amendments to the Bill for Approbation of Ministers, was twice read, and
upon the Question agreed unto.

Ordered,

That the said Bill be engrossed.

A Proclamation for putting the Laws and Statutes against Jesuits, Popish
Priests and Recusants in speedy and effectual execution was read.

Ordered,

That it be referred to a Committee, to bring in an effectual short
Proclamation for putting the Laws and Statutes against Jesuits Popish Priests,
and Recusants, and that the Bill for settling the Revenue of Recusants Lands be
reported on Saturday morning next.

The House likewise agreed upon the Names of the Commissioners of the Militia's
for the County of Northampton, for the County of Northumberland, for the County
of Lancaster, for the County of Rutland, for the County of Huntington, for the
Town of Newcastle, for the County of Brocknock, for the County of Cardigan, for
the County of Pembroke, and the the Town and City of Haverford-West, for the
City of Oxford, for the City of Bristol.

The House likewise added several Commissioners for the Counties following,
viz. Kent, Devon, Bedford, Surrey, Essex, Berks, Hereford, Suffolk, Hampshire,
Yorkshire, Wiltshire, Carmarthen, Oxfordshire, Cumberland, Norwich,
Bedfordshire, York City, Middlesex.

The Commissioners Names for North Wales, were likewise read and approved.

Ordered,

That all the Names of Commissioners for the Militia, be engrossed in the Bill.

Resolved,

That the Militia of London be passed in a distinct Bill by it self, and that
the Committee unto whom the Bill for the Militia of the City of London, be
revived, and meet this Afternoon, and make their report to morrow morning.

A Bill for calling and holding a Parliament the 25. of April 1660. was this
day read the first time, and ordered to be read the second time to morrow
morning at ten of the clock.

Ordered,

That it be referred to the Gentlemen of Bucks to bring in the names of three
persons, out of whom the Parliament may Elect one to be Sheriff of the Countx
of Bucks.

The humble Petition of Captain John Stoaks late Commander in Chief of the
Commonwealths-Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas was read.

Ordered,

That the Case of Capt. John Stoaks be referred to the Court of Admiralty, and
that they determine it according to Justice and Equity, and that the
proceedings at Law in the Upper Bench by Wiliam Winter against the said John
Stoaks be stayed in the mean time.

Upon a Report concerning the Courts of Admiralty and probate of Wills,

Resolved,

That all fees and perquisits payable to the Judges of the Courts of Admiralty
and Probate of Wills be reserved and answered to the Commonwealth.

Resolved,

That the Power of granting administrations and all other judicial sentences be
by both the Judges for Probate of Wills, and not by one of the Judges only,
and that no Judicial Act or Sentence shall be granted by the said Judges but
only in the open Court.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Paternoster Row 1659.

(...) be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 15. A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Friday, March 9. 1659.
A Proclamation for putting of all Laws and Statutes made against Seminary
Priests, Jesuits, and Romish Priests in speedy and effectual execution, was
this day reported, read the first and second time, and ordered to be engrossed.

Ordered by the Parliament,

That William Beecher, St. John Tompson Esquire, St. John Charnock Esquire,
Henry Chester Esquire; Oliver Luke Esquire, Sir William Palmer, Sir Thomas Alston
Knight and Baronet, John Alston Esquire, John Neale Esquire, John Harvey
Esquire, William Butler Esquire; Walter Rolt Esquire; Edward Caloe Esquire; Samuel Bedford,
be and hereby nominated and appointed Commissioners for the Assessment in the
County of Bedford, and that they and every of them be and are hereby empowered
and authorized to sit and act as Commissioners for the Assessments, as fully to
all intents and purposes, as if they had been named in the Act entitled, An
Act for an Assessment of One hundred thousand pounds by the month, upon
England, Scotland and Ireland, for six months.

Ordered by the Parliament,

That the Bill for settling the Militia be forthwith examined and brought in,
and that it be read forthwith, after the same is examined and brought in.

An Act for the calling and holding of a Parliament at Westminster the Five and
twentieth day of April One thousand six hundred and sixty, was this day read
the second time, and upon the Question committed upon the Debate of the HOuse
to a Committee, who are appointed to meet this afternoon in the Speakers
Chamber, consisting of a considerable number of Members of the House, and all
the Gentlemen of the Long-Robe, and also all that will come to have Voices. And
the said Committee are further empowered to consider of the foresaid
Qualifications, and to make such addition thereunto as is fit, and Report to
the House.

An Act for taking the Accounts, and redressing of Grievances concerning the
Tithes and Churchlivings in Wales, and for the advancement of Religion and
Learning there, was this day reported to the House, from the Committee for
Religion, and read the first and second time, and committed to the same
Committee that brought it in, with an addition of several Members unto the said
Committee.

The Qualifications of Members to sit and serve in Parliament formerly reported
and read, were this day again read.

Master Speaker acquainted the Parliament, that he had received Letters from
the Sound.

Ordered,

That the said Letters be referred to the Council of State, to take the same
into consideration.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,

That the business of the Militia be taken into consideration to morrow morning
the first business, nothing to intervene.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb living in Thames Street, over against Baynards
Castle, 1660.

Numb. 16 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT
Published according to Order.
Saturday 10. March.
A Bill for settling the Militia for the City of London and Liberties thereof,
was this day read the first and second time, and upon the Question, committed.

Resolved,

That Alderman Major General Brown's Name be placed in this Bill, next after
Alderman Viner's.

Resolved,

That the same Qualifications be incerted in this Bill, as they are in the
general Bill for settling the Militia.

Resolved,

That this Bill shall continue for one year, or until the Parliament take
other order.

Resolved,

That the Bill for payment of certain Debts be brought in on Monday morning.

The Amendments to the Bill for settling the Militia for the City of London were
twice read, and upon the Question, agreed unto.

Ordered,

That this Bill be engrossed.

Resolved,

That Mr. Robert Diser of Brauhen Esquire; be and is hereby nominared and approved
of to be Sheriff of the County of Hertford, and that the Lords Commissioners
for the Great Seal do pass a Patent to him to be Sheriff of the County of
Hertford accordingly.

The Bill for settling the Militia for England and Wales, was this day read the
third time

Resolved,

That John Crew of Crew Hall be added a Commissioner for the Militia for the
County of Chester.

Resolved,

That Henry Ashford do stand a Commissioner for the Militia in the County of
Devon.

Afternoon.
Ordered,

That Sir Eras. Philips, and Sir Edward Mansell Bar. Edward Rice, Nicholas
Williams James Jones, Thomas Gwin, John Powell the elder, Owen Price, Morgan
Jones, Walter Jones, Thomas Evans, Humphry Brown, Rowland Mansell, Owen
Brickstock, William Lloyd, Lewis Lloyd, Henry Mansell, Philip Vaughan, Captain
William Slowman, Richard Lewis, Robert Birt Esqrs, the Mayor of Caermarthen
protempore, Anthony Jones Alderman, Rowland Philips, Edward Doonligh, John
Price, John Philips, Morgan Lloyd, Maurice Thomas, Magulstone Allen, John
Evans, Richard Williams, James Lewis, and Howell Philips Gent. be and are
hereby nominated and appointed Commissioners for the Assessement in the County
of Caermarthen, and that they and every of them be and are hereby empowered and
authorized to sit and act as Commissioners for the Assessements, as fully to
all intents and purposes, as if they had been named in the Act Entitled, An
Act for an Assessement of 100000 l. by the month, upon England, Scotland and
Ireland, for six months.

The House proceeded in the Bill for the Militia, and added many persons
Commissioners for the Militia in the several Counties of England and Wales.

Resolved That the Bill for the Militia of the City of Dondon be read on Monday
morning next.

The Names of the Commissioners in the said Bill, are as follows, viz.

Thomas Alleyn Lord Mayor of the City of London.

The Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of the said City for the time being:
Alderman Atkins. Ald. Foot. Ald. Fowke. Ald. Tho. Viner. Ald. Brown. Ald. Will.
Thompson. Ald. Robinson. Ald. Bateman. Ald. Lawrence. Ald. King. Ald. Boulton.
Ald. Wale. Col. Bromfield. Rich. Ford Esquire; Major Chamberlain. Will. Bateman Esquire.
John Jolly Esqrs Will. Vincent Esqrs Will. Antrobus Esqrs John Win Esqrs Theo.
Biddolph Esqrs Tho. Stean Esqrs Capt. Storey. Deputy Johnson. John Saunders.
John Bludworth Esquire; Maximilian Beard Esquire; Will. Eardly. Major John Alsop. Tho.
Lenthall Esquire; Col. Gower. Mr. Peter Mills. Mr. Nich. Penning. Capt. Cleggat.
Sir Tho. Soame. Samuel Vassal Esquire; Maj. Genesis Phil. Skippon. Mr. Henry Ashurst.
Ald. Pack. Ald. Dethick. Ald. Chiverton. Ald. Frederick. Ald. Milner. Ald.
Love. Ald. Blackwell. Mr. Lawrence Blomley. Mr. James Noell Deputy Cliffe. Mr.
Will. Knellin. Mr. John Maskall. Mr. Rich. Rives. Lieut. Col. Iackson. Mr.
Morris. Mr. John Bathurst. Mr. John Cook. Mr. Will. Allet. Mr. Tobias Aylmer.
Deputy Minne. Mr. James Medlicot. Mr. John Tailor Esquire; Mr. Tho. Cox.
LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence

Numb. 17. A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Monday, March. 12. 1659.
Ordered,

THat the Examination of Sir George Booth, his Lady and Servants, be taken off
the File and delivered to the said Sir George Booth.

Upon a Report touching Trinity House.

Resolved,

That Alexander Bence be and is hereby approved of to be Master of the
Trinity-House.

Resolved, That Cap. Will. Rider be one of the New Wardens of Trinity-House.

Ordered,

That this Report be Recommitted, and that the Committee be and are hereby
empowered to bring in Names of Wardens and Brethren, for the Trinity-House to
morrow morning.

A Proclamation Engrossed in Parchment, for putting the Laws against Jesuits,
Seminaries and Popish Priests, in effectual execution, was this day read the
third time.

Resolved,

That this be the Title to this Bill, An Act and Declaration for putting the
Laws against Priests and Jesuits, in speedy and effectual execution.

And the said Bill so amended was upon the question passed.

Ordered, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Ordered, That a Bill be brought in to morrow morning for impressing of
Mariners to serve in the Fleets and ships of this Commonwealth.

Ordered,

That Denzil Hollis Esquire; be and is hereby constituted Custos Rotulorum of the
County of Dorset, to hold, execute and enjoy the said Office, in as large and
beneficial manner to all intents and purposes, as any other person or persons
had, held, or enjoyed the same.

A Bill Engrossed for settling the Militia of the City of London, was this day
read the third time, and upon the question passed.

Ordered, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Ordered, That Edward Trussel Esquire; be and is hereby nominated and appointed
Sheriff for the County of Southampton, and that the Lords Commissioners of the
Great Seal do pass a Patent to him under the Great Seal, to be Sheriff of the
County of Southampton accordingly.

Ordered,

That George Chetham of Turton Esquire; be and is hereby nominated and approved of
to be Sheriff of the County of Lancaster, and that the Lords Commissioners for
the Great Seal do pass a patent to him under the Great Seal, to be Sheriff of
the County of Lancaster accordingly.

Ordered, That the Report concerning the Duchy of Lancaster be made to morrow
morning.

Ordered,

That the Vote touching Sir Thomas Soame be discharged.

Ordered,

That the Reports touching Sir Andrew Dick and Mrs. Inglish be made to morrow
morning.

Ordered,

That the Report touching Dr. Reynolds and Dr. Owen concerning the Deanery of
Christ-Church, be made to morrow morning the first business.

Resolved,

That Thomas Catesby Esquire; be and is hereby nominated and approved of to be
Sheriff for the County of Bucks, and that the Lords Commissioners for the Great
Seal do pass a Patent under the Great Seal for constituting him Sheriff of the
said County of Bucks accordingly.

The House resumed the Debate upon the Bill of the Militia, unto which a
Proviso was tendered in these words: Provided that no Commissioner nor
Commissionated Officer shall exercise any the powers or authorities herein
mentioned, or any thing do in pursuance thereof, until that he in the presence
of five or more of the said Commissioners, shall first acknowledge in these
words following, viz.

I do acknowledge and declare, That the War undertaken by both Houses of
Parliament in their defense against the Forces raised in the name of the late
King, was just and lawful; and that Magistracy and Ministry are the Ordinances
of God.

Which Clause was read the first and second time, and Ordered to be engrossed:
The said Proviso was engrossed accordingly, and read, and Ordered to be part of
the Bill; and the said Act so amended being put to the Question passed.

Ordered, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb living in Thames Street, over against Baynards
Castle, 1660.

Numb. 18 A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Tuesday 13. March.
Resolved,

THat the Engagement appointed to be taken by Members of Parliament and others,
in these words, viz.

I do declare and promise, that I will be true and faithful to the Commonwealth
of England, as the same is now established, without a King, or House of Lords,
be discharged, and taken off the File.

Resolved, That all Orders enjoining the taking of the said Engagement, be and
are hereby vacuated and expunged out of the Journal Book of Parliament, and
that Mr. Prin, Sergeant Maynard, and Col. Harley, do see the same expunged
accordingly.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee to consider what has been done in
this House concerning the Lords House, who are to state the whole matter of
fact, and report it to the Parliament to morrow morning, and to meet this
afternoon in the Speakers Chamber.

The House heard the Report touching matter of Fact concerning the Denary of
Christ-Church in Oxford, with a Letter from Dr. Owen, dated at Stadham, March
5, 1659. which was read.

Resolved, That Dr. Owen be and is hereby discharged from being Dean of
Christ-Church, Oxon.

Resolved, That Dr Reynolds be and is hereby restored to the Denary of
Christ-Church, Oxon. with all Privileges, profits, and appurtenances to the
said place belonging, and that Dr. Reynolds be put in possession of
Christ-Church accordingly, and that the Sub-Dean and Senior Cannon of
Christ-Church do see this Order put in effectual execution, and that Dr.
Reynolds be put in possession accordingly.

Resolved, That Mr. Ambrose Upton be discharged from being a Collegiate Prebend
of Christ-Church, Oxon. And that Dr. Mills be and is hereby restored to be
Collegiate Prebend of Christ-Church aforesaid in the Room of the said Mr.
Ambrose Upton with all Privileges, profits and appurtenances to the said place
belonging, and that he be put in possession of the said Prebendary accordingly:
And that the Sub-Dean and Senior Cannon of Christ-Church do see this Order put
in effectual execution, and that Dr. Mills be put in possession accordingly.

The House received the Report from the Committee touching Maimed Soldiers,
Widows, and Orphans.

Resolved, That the council of State do forthwith pay 1700 l. out of their
Contingencies for the present relief of the poor Widows, maimed Soldiers, and
Orphans at Ely-house and the Savoy, and that the said 1700 l. be repayed to
them out of the Public Revenew of the Exchequer.

Ordered, That the particular persons named of the Committee for the maimed
Soldiers, Widows and Orphans of Ely-house and the Savoy, be and are hereby
authorized to reform abuses touching the Governors and Government of the
Hospitalls of the Savoy and Ely-house, and to call the Governors to account
for moneys by them received, with power to settle the Government for the best
advantage of the Commonwealth, and maintenance of the poor Widows, maimed
Soldiers, and Orphans, and to remove such Officers as they think fit, and
place others in their room, and report it to the Council of State, who are
hereby authorized to confirm the same.

Upon a Report from the Committee unto whom the Bill for dissolution of this
present Parliament was referred, that the House do resume the business into
their own consideration.

Resolved, That the debate upon this business, be taken up at two of the clock
this afternoon nothing to intervene.

The House adjourned until two of the Clock in the afternoon.

Afternoon.
Ordered,

That the sum of Six hundred pound with the Arrears, be continued and paid
unto Sir John Stowell, and charged upon the same revenew it was formerly
charged, until the Parliament take further order: and that the Council of
State do sign from time to time to make payment thereof accordingly.

Ordered, That the Bills for approbation of Ministers, and the Act for settling
Lands on his Excellency the Lord General, be read to morrow morning the first
business.

The House likewise received the report of Amendments to the Bill for
dissolving this Parliament, which was twice read, and upon the Question, agreed
unto.

They had also under consideration the Qualifications of Members to sit and
serve in Parliament, and made some considerable progress therein.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 19. A PERFECT DIURNAL OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Wednesday, March 14. 1659.
A Bill for Approbation and admittance of Ministers to public Benefices and
Lectures, was this day read the third time, and the said Bill being put to the
question, passd.

Ordered that this Act be printed and published.

The House resumed the debate upon the Qualifications, and Resolved,

That all such Person and Persons who have Advised, Aided, or any ways Assisted
or Abetted the Rebellion of Ireland, and all those who do profess the Popish
Religion, are disabled to be elected Members to sit in Parliament.

Resolved, That all and every person who have advised or voluntarily Aided,
Abetted, or Assisted in any War against the Parliament, since the first day of
January 1641. unless he or they have since manifested their good affection to
this Parliament, shall be incapable to be elected to serve Members in the next
Parliament.

Resolved, That he which shall enter into the Parliament, who is not qualified
as aforesaid, shall be deemed no Knight, Citizen or Burgess, nor Baron for the
Parliament, nor shall have any Voice, but shall be to all intents,
constructions and purposes, as if he had never been returned nor elected
Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron for the Parliament, and shall suffer such
pains and penalties as if he had presumed to sit in the same without Election,
Return, or Authority.

Ordered, That Colonel Philip Jones, Evan Seys Sergeant at Law, Col. Rowland
Dawkins, John Price, Evan Lewis, Robert Thomas, and John Bowen Esqs be and are
hereby nominated and appointed Commissioners for the Assessments in the County
of Glamorgan, and that they and every of them be and are hereby empowered and
authorized to sit and act as Commissioners for the Assessment as fully to all
intents and purposes, as if they had been named in the Act entitled, An Act
for an Assefement of 100000 l. by the month upon England, Scotland and Ireland
for six months.

Ordered, That Evan Seys Sergeant at Law; and William Jones Esquire; be and are
constituted and appointed Judges for North Wales, and that a Patent be passed
to them to be Judges for North Wales in usual form, and that Mr. Speaker do
sign a Dockquet for passing the said patents to them under the great Seal, and
that the Commissioners for custody of the great Seal of England do pass the
said patents accordingly.

The like Order passed for Mr. Foxwist Esquire; to be second Judge in Chester. And
for John Corbet Esquire; to be Judge of the Circuit of Glamorgan, Brecknock, and
Radnor, and also for Mr. Bennet Hoskins Esquire; and Mr. Tho. Manby to be Judges of
the Circuit of Carnarvan Cardigan and Pembroke.

Afternoon.
Ordered, That the Report concerning the Customs an^^ (...) to morrow morning
the first business.

The House read Amen (...) for reviving of the Court of the Dutchy-^^a^^^er of
Lancaster at Westminster, which was twice read.

Resolved, That Sir Gilbert Gerard be Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

Resolved, That Nicholas Lechmere Esquire; be Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster.

And the Bill so amended was upon the question passed.

The House read the Bill for Restoring of William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the
Parliament to be Chamberlain of Chester, which was read the first and second
time, and upon the Question passed.

Ordered, That Thomas Waller Sergeant at Law, be and is hereby constituted and
appointed Chief Justice of Chester, in as large, ample, and beneficial manner,
as any other person or persons formerly held and enjoyed the same, and that a
Patent be passed, and that Mr. Speaker do sign a Docket for passing a Patent
to the said Sergeant Waller, and that the Lords Commissioners for Custody of
the Great Seal, do pass the said Patent under the Great Seal of England
accordingly.

Resolved, That the Council of State be and are hereby Authorized to issue
forth Proclamations at any time until the first sitting of the next
Parliament, against such persons as they shall find dangerous to the Peace and
safety of the Commonwealth, who absent themselves from their dwellings and
places of their habitation, to summon them to appear before them at a certain
day, under such penalties as the case shall require, and as the Council of
State shall think fit, to answer such matters as shall be objected against them
by the Council of State.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb living in Thames Street, over against Baynards
Castle, 1660.

Numb. 20. A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Thursday 15. March.
THe House read the Report concerning the prizage of Wines, and the opinion of
the said Committee thereupon.

Resolved, That the prisage Wines ought to pay no Tunnage or Custom.

Refolved, That all such Customs as have been taken from the Lessee of the
prizage Wines, or his Assigns, by the Customers, shall and ought to be allowed
to him upon his Account, and defalked out of his Rents.

The Bill for Confirmation of Ministers, settled in any Personage, Vicarage or
Hospital within this Commonwealth, was this day read the first and second time,
and committed unto a Committee, who were Ordered presently to withdraw, with
power to consider how to continue the powers touching granting augmentations of
Ministers, and to bring in the Names of persons to be Trustees, and to take the
Bill touching Wales formerly committed into consideration.

The House likewise Ordered the payment of 5000 l. and of 4016 l. with Interest
due unto Major General Brown, and formerly charged upon the Excise, one fourth
part whereof presently, and the residue thereof at three three months by
equal portions out of the present Receipt of the Excise, and that his
acquittance testifying the Receipt thereof shall be a sufficient discharge.

Resolved, that the sum of twenty thousand pounds be and is hereby conferred
on his Excellency General George Monck, and that the same be charged upon the
Receipts of the public Exchequer (other then the Excise, Customs and
Assessements) and paid to the said General George Monck, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, as the same shall come in,

Ordered, that a Bill be brought in for payment of the said twenty thousand
pound to General George Monck accordingly, and that Mr Pryn and Mr Scowen do
bring in the said Bill accordingly.

The House read the Bill enabling to sue Bonds and securities taken in the name
of Oliver Lord Protector, or Richard Lord Protector, which was this day read
the first and second time, and upon the Question passed.

Ordered, that this Act be Printe and published.

Resolved that this be the Title of the said Act viz An Act for the payment of
Debts due to the public.

A Bill for countenancing the Receivers, and impowring them to get in the Rents
and Revenues of Delinquents and Popish Recusants Estates, was this day read the
first and second time, and so passed.

Ordered, that the two Troops of Oxfordshire be paid their months pay, as the
rest of the Army are paid.

Resolved, that the business concerning Mr Long, be taken into consideration
next after the business of General Monck.

Ordered, that Sr Thomas Greisley Baronet, Sr John Curson Knight and Baronet,
Walter Horton Esquire, Charles Agard Esquire, George Sidwell Esquire, Gilbert
Thacker Esquire, and George Tailor Gent, be and are hereby nominated and
appointed Commissioners for the Assessements in the County of Derby, and that
they and every of them, be and are hereby empowered and authorized to sit and
Act as Commissioners for the Assessements, as fully to all intents and purposes
as if they had been named in the Act Entitled, An Act for an Assessement of
one hundred thousand pound by the month, upon England, Scotland and Ireland
for six months.

The House adjourned until three of the clock.

Afternoon.
Resolved, that the grant of the Office of chief Register in Chancery made to
Miles Corbet Esquire; and Mr. Rob. Goodwin shall from henceforth cease and be void,
and that the differences between Walter Long Esquire; a member of Parliament, and
the Lady Lermin touching the said Office, be and is hereby reserred unto
Donzill Hollis and Harbotle Grimstone, to determine the same.

The House read a Bill for giving power to the Council of State during the
Interval, in order to public safety, which after the first and second reading
passed.

Resolved, that the Letters Credentials from the King of Sweden given at
Gottenburgh 13 Feb. 1660, and former Letters from the said King of Sweden,
delivered in by Mr Speaker, be referred to the Council of State.

The House also read the Credentials of Algernon Sidney and Sr Robert Honywood
Knight, Plenipotentiaries to the King of Sweden.

Ordered, that the Council of State do write such Letters Credentiall for the
said Plenipotentiaries as they shall think fit, and that Mr Speaker do sign the
same, and seal the same with the Parliaments Seal.

The House likewise read the Bill for continuing the Terms, Processes and
Proceedings of the four Courts of Justice in Ireland, which being read the
first and second time upon the Question passed.

Likewise the Bill for reviving an Act for Impressing of Seamen was this day
read the first and second time.

Resolved, that this Act do continue until the 24 of June 1660 and no longer,
and the said Bill so amended being put to the Question passed.

Resolved that further power be granted unto the Council of State to issue
their Warrants to the Commissioners of the great Seal, for the Authorizing them
to pass under the great Seal such Commissions or Plenipotentiaries, as the
Council shall find necessary to foreign Ministers employed from this
Commonwealth, and particularly for those employed in Sweden.

The House also passed an Act for removing obstructions in bringing in the
Assessements.

Resolved, That power be and is hereby given to the Council of State to
discharge Colonel John Lambert from his Imprisonment upon his Paroll or
security, as they shall see cause.

Resolved, That Dr. Wren be discharged of his Imprisonment, and that the
Lieutenant of the Tower be and is hereby required to discharge him accordingly.

Resolved, That the like power be and is hereby given to the Council of State
to discharge any other person or persons that are imprisoned upon any crime
committed against the State.

Ordered, That the Act for the Ministers, the Act for the General, and the Act
for dissolving this present Parliament be taken into consideration to morrow
morning, nothing to intervene.

Ordered, That the Petition of the Adventurers for Lands in Ireland be referred
to the Council of Stare, to take the same into consideration, and to settle
those that are already in possession, and supplying of Deficiencies out of Land
forfeited to the Commonwealth.

Ordered, That the Trustees for sale of Lands forfeited to the Commonwealth for
Treason, be and are required to forbear to sell and of the Lands or Estates of
the Lord St. John, and of the Lord Craven, and a stop be and is nereby put to
the selling of the same, and in selling of the Timber on their or either of
their lands yet unsold.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are so be had at the Office of Intelligence.

Numb. 21. A PERFECT DIURNAL: OR The daily Proceedings in PARLIAMENT.
Published according to Order.
Friday 16. March.
THe Reader is to take notice that a Diurnal of this days Proceedings is
intended to be published by another hand, which contains only the Forenoon,
and that imperfect, as will appear by this which is taken from the Original.

Resolved,

That John Iure a Servant attending on the Parliament, having been arrested and
being imprisoned at the Suit of John Biscoe be and is hereby discharged of his
imprisonment, and that Richard George a Bayliffe of the Liberties of
Westminster who arrested the said John Iure be sent for in custody, and that
the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament, do take him into Custody
accordingly.

Information being given to the House that there was a neglect by the Printer,
in not expediting the Acts for the Militia: the Parliament nominated a
Committee to go unto the Printing house, and to examine matters of fact; Mr.
Prin reports from the said Committee, that according to order of Parliament
they went to the Printer's last night, and did find that there was no fault in
the Clerk nor in the Printer, nor no delay in the one nor in the other.

Ordered,

That the Pattent concerning Sion College, now in the hands of the Clerk of
the Parliament, be delivered unto Mr. Manton.

A Bill for conferring of 20000 l. on Captain General George Monck, for his
Eminent services, was this day read the first, second and third time, and upon
the Question passed.

Ordered,

That his Excellency the Lord General Monck be and is hereby constituted
Steward of the Honors and Manors of Hampton Court, and Keeper of the House and
Park there, and that he hold and enjoy the same, with all Rights and
Privileges to the said Stewardship, belonging in as large, ample, and
beneficial manner to all intents and purposes as any Steward of the Honors and
Manors of Hampton Court, Keeper of the House and Parks, have at any time
heretofore had and enjoyed the same.

Resolved,

That the Act for dissolution of this Parliament be read the first business
this Afternoon, nothing to intervene.

Amendments to the Bill for settling incumbents in sequestered livings, which
being twice read, upon the Question, was agreed upon, and the said Act so
amended, being put to the Question, passed.

Ordered,

That this be the Title of this Act, viz. an Act for Ministers and payment of
Tithes

Ordered, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Ordered, That Mr. Martin Blague be and is hereby restored to his living at
Barstaple in the County of Devon, and it is referred to the Lords Commissioners
for Custody of the great Seal, and the Master of the Rolls or any two of them
to see this Order executed, and that the said Martin Blague be put in
possession of the said Living accordingly.

A Letter from General George Monck from St. Iameses of the sixteenth of March.
1659. was read.

Ordered, that three Gentlemen be appointed to go unto the General to give him
satisfaction and report their proceeding herein to the Parliament.

A Bill for taking the Accounts and redressing of grievances concerning the
Tithes and Church Eivings in Wales, and for advancement of Religion and
Learning there was this day day read the third time, and upon the Question
passed.

Ordered, That this Act be forth with printed and published.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
WHere as a Resolve was published in the Thursdays Diurnal concerning
Qualifications of Members to sit and serve in Parliament. The Reader is to take
norice, that there was an amendment passed to be added unto the said Resolve,
viz. After the first day of Ian. 1641. his or their sons be added so that the
Resolve thus amended, is as follows.

Resolved, That all and every person who have advised or voluntarily aided,
abetted or assisted in any war against the Parliament (since the first day of
January 1641.) his or their sons, unless the or they have since manifested
their good affection to this Parliament, shall be incapable to be elected to
serve as Members of the next Parliament.



Afternoon.
The Committee appointed to go to the General, Reports that the General upon
Reading the Clauses in the Act for the Militia rested well satisfied.

A Bill en grossed for dissolving of the Parliament begun and holden at
Westminster the third of November 1640. and for the calling and holding of a
Parliament at Westminster on the 25. day of April 1660. was this day read the
third time. A Proviso unto the said Bill was tendered and Read the first and
second time, and upon the question agreed unto; viz. Provided always, and be
it declared that the single Actings of this House, enforced by the pressing
necessities of the present times, are not intended in the least to infringe,
much less take away, that Ancient native right which the House of Peers
(consisting of the Lords who did engage in the Cause of the Parliament against
the forces raised in the name of the late King, and so continued until 1648.)
had and have to be a part of the Parliament of England.

Resolved,

That the day for the dissolution of the Parliament be from the 16. day of
March 1659. And the said Bill so amended being put to the question passed.

Ordered that this Act be printed and published.

Resolved,

That this day three weeks being Friday the 6. of April 1660. be set apart for
a day of public fasting and Humiliation to be solemnized throughout these
Nations to seek the Lord for his blessing upon the Parliament to be called,
that the Lord will make them healers of our Breaches, and instruments to
resolve and settle peace and Government in these Nations upon foundations of
truth and righteousness:

The Writs for choosing of Members to sit and serve in Parliament are to be
issued forth in the names of the Keepers of the Liberties of England by
Authority of Parliament.

LONDON Printed by John Redmayne in Lovels Court in Pater-noster-Rowe 1659.

And are to be had at the Office of Intelligence.


