THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Mr. JOHN COOK, Solicitor to the late
High-court of Injustice. AND Mr. HUGH PETER'S, that carnal Prophet.

For their several High-treasons, etc.

At the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, on Saturday the 13. of October, 1660.

Together with, Their several Pleas, and the Answers thereunto.

PROVERBS 25. V. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and His Throne
shall be established in righteousness. LONDON, Printed for John Stafford and
Edward Thomas. 1660.

ON Saturday the 13th of October, The Kings Lords Justices for Trial of those
Traitors who took away the Life of the King called to the Bar.

Mr. John Cook Solicitor to the High Court of Injustice.

Mr. Hugh Peter's the Grand Impostor and Designer of that wicked Act.

After the Jury was Sworn and the Indictment Read, The Kings Council, spoke as
follows.

Gent. of the Jury, The Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted that he with others
did Imagine and Contrive the Death of the King our Late Sovereign of ever
blessed Memory: The circumstances of the Indictment is only to show that they
sat as Judges for the Trying, Sentencing and Condemning his said Late Majesty.

And the prisoner at the Bar as a Wicked Instrument stood by, and set his Hand
to a Wicked Libel, charging his Majesty with Murder, High Treason etc. He makes
a large discourse te prove Innocence it self guilty of high Treason; he is the
Man that would not suffer the King to speak, he interrupts him in what he had
to say, he moved the Court that if he would not plead it should be taken pro
confesso. He pressed the Court for Judgment: was angry with them because they
admitted of delays, he pressed the court for Judgment, and afterward demanded
Sentence thereupon, And he was the man that did it against his conscience, for
he said that the King was a Wise and a Gracious Prince, but that he must Dye
and Monarchy with him, And before we have done my Lord we shall prove his
Treason and the reward of his Iniquity.

The VVitnesses are called and Sworn to this effect.

That he Exhibited a Charge of High Treason against the King.

That he moved in case the King would not plead the matters in the charge
should be taken pro confesso.

That he demanded Judgment of the court and said that the blood that had been
spilt cried for it.

That he did not only demand but several times pressed that Judgment might be
given.

Lastly, And that he was angry that the Court did not proceed to give Sentence.

After several Circumstances between the Prisoner and the Court, the Prisoner
stood up and spoke as folfoweth.

My LORD,

I may say as Paul speaks in the Acts of the Apostles, Against the Law and
Against Caesar, I hope I have not Offended. The Matters which are charged
against me do consist in a Narrow compass; the substance whereof I conceive
will come within the three heads following.

1. That I with others did Imagine, Consult and Contrive the Kings Death.

2. That for the perfecting of that Conspiracy I with others did assume Power
and Authority over the King.

3. That there was a Person unknown that did Cut off the Kings Head, and that I
was Aiding, Abetting, Assisting, and Comforting the Person that did the same.

My Lord, I have very few words to offer for my self, and therefore I hope the
Court will give me Liberty. If it appear that I did never Propound, Consult,
Advise, Attempt, Imagine, or any way Council the Death of his Late Majesty,
then I hope I shall not be found Guilty.

My Lord, I was appointed together with Doctor Dorisleus and Mr. Ask to
consider and contrive a Charge against the King, and had an Order sent me to
that purpose: now my Lord I conceive that it cannot be said that I did that
Malicioufly which I was Required and had an Order to do, I Acting in my Sphere
as a Counselor and no otherwise, and not exceeding the bounds of that
aforesaid Order.

The next thing I desire to plead to, my Lord, that words will not amount to
High Treason, (and words is all that I am taxed with) words may declare a man
to be a Heretic but not a Traitor, but it is objected that I put that Treason
into writing.

To which my Lord I answer, whether there be any full proof that I set my hand
to that Charge? that which I writ was only after another as it was Dictated to
me, and although the Words were Treason in themselves, yet I only writing them
after another that speaks them, I hope it will not be accounted Treason in me,
considering that Treason comes from a traitorous Heart and a secret imagination
to do the Act.

The next thing is this my Lord, it is said that I prayed the Justice of the
Court against the King, I hope my Lord that that very thing cannot be called
Treason, for if the word be considered in the plain Legal Genuine and
conspicuous interpretation it will bear no other construction then this [that
whereas those Gentlemen brought the King to the Bar it was prayed by me that
they would do him Justice, I hope it will appear that I have good council, and
that I did not exceed the bounds of my employment. I put no other words within
that Charge, but what was within the Order which Authorized that Court. Now my
Lord if I only proceeded according to the merit of the cause, and declared
only in general that it should be according to Justice, and that must be
according to Law. I hope, my Lord, that where a double construction may be made
of the words the most favorable may be interpreted for me, especially since
where there is a desire of doing Justice there can be no intention of
injustice, for my Lord if justice be demanded, and injustice done thereupon, I
could not any way help it.

I say, my Lord, there is a double construction of the words, [demanding
Justice or Judgment; a judgment of acquittal and of condemnation.] Now my
Lord, if those that were entrusted with that business knew no Law to take away
his Majesty's Life, and I only demanding their judgment, did not give mine;
and I appeal to those Learned Gentlemen that are skilled in the Law, whether
they have not been sorry when a Cause has gone on their Clients side when they
have found the cause wrong; and so was I in this:

Again my Lord, I desire your Lordship to consider that his Majesty's condition
at that time was very sad, as being a Prisoner, under Force of an Army etc. I
hope my Lord, that my drawing up a Charge against him advisedly, was rather a
service to him then a disservice, in regard that to make his Trial the more
speedy was to desire his Releasment, as knowing no Law to detain him; and
therefore to pray proceedings according to justice, was but to desire his
Discharge, which I hope will beget in your Lordships a better reputation of me
then a Traitor.

He proceeded to this purpose much longer, urging, that words cannot be
instrumental to take away any man's Life, that he did it for his Fee being a
Counselor, that he did not do it Magisterially but Ministerially; and though
he did not act by a legal Authority, yet he hoped that he not exceeding their
Order, it might bear him out: and therefore seeing there was not such an
Evidence as might clear it as the Sun at noon day, that did see him sign that
Charge of High Treason against the King whether they did believe that he had
such a traiterous intention as in the Indictment was mentioned.

After it was answered by the King's Council, That Mr. Cook had spoken much
like a Lawyer, That it was strange that he that knew the Law so much should
transgress so much: He was no doubt long enough in contriving the Death of the
King; for that he oftentimes interrupted Him, and made long Speeches to that
purpose; which shows, That out of the multitude of the thoughts of the heart
the mouth speaks. He demands justice and pressed the Murder; and whether when
he ordered the Clerk to Record that wicked Charge he did not imagine the Death
of the King; he was one that did Assemble, meet and consult with that wicked
Council: there can be no accessaries in Treasons; for if he be guilty in any
part, he is guilty of the whole.

And whereas he says what he did was but for his Fee, is as much as to say,
That no Councellor can be guilty of High Treason; and that if a Counselor
give advice to kill a Man he shall be excused.

He exhibits this charge against the King in the Name of the people of England,
of which Gentlemen of the Jury you are part: therefore look to it, if you own
the thing, you justify what he says. But I hope you stand here to tell all
the World that the people of England had no hand in it.

It was not enough that he exhibits the Charge, but he aggravates it with all
the circumstances imaginable; he presses it, he is angry at delays, he would
have things taken pro Confesso: he pretends to be a servant for the people of
England, and when he meets his old acquaintance, he tells them that the King
must die and Monarchy with him: and I hope that both You and We are bound to
vindicate the Commons of England from that horrid Murder.

Gentlemen, every step and gradation in this sad Tragedy is Treason: the very
Act of drawing the Charge was Treason; the appearing in the Court was Treason;
the coming into Westminster Hall was Treason, and all present in the Hall
(except the sad Spectators) were guilty of Treason.

He says he did it for his Fee, and so Gentlemen did Judas; it was a Judas his
Fee of thirty Pieces of Silver which made that Wretch go forth and hang
himself. A Counselor must keep within the compass of the Law as well as
other people: There was never such a thing as a High Court of Justice known; a
High Court, it was a Shambles rather set up only for the Butchering of his
Majesty.

For Mr. Cook's knowing of such a Paper which calls the King a Murderer, and
promoting it, signing it and bringing it into that Assembly, shows clearly,
that you had a Design of taking away the Life of the King. And truly my Lord,
since he says he did the King a courtesy in demanding Justice against Him; I
hope he will think it no unkindnesse in me if I demand Justice against him.

And since he said that the KING must die and MONARCHY with Him, and
considering all the other CIRCVMSTANCES it cannot be conceived but that his
demanding Justice against the KING must intend the giving Sentence for his
Death.

He says he demanded Justice, and so did they that Spit in His Face; and he
demanded Judgment, saying, The blood that had been spilt cried for it.

After all which, having no more to say, the JURY without going forth found him
Guilty, and accordingly Sentence to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered was
pronounced against him.

After Mr. Cook was tuken from the Bar, Mr. Hugh Peter's the grand Imposter of
the Nation, the General of all fomented mischief, and the abuser of the word of
God, maker of malicious interpretations, thereupon to animate the people
against his Majesty; was brought to answer according to Law for such his
aforosaid mischeivious Traiterous, and abominable practices.

The Jury being sworn, and silence commanded, the Indictment was read, after
which the Kings Counsel stood up, and spoke to the following effect.

Gentlemen the Prisoner at the Bar, has been Indicted for aiding, assisting,
abetting, councelling and compassing the death of the King; We have evidence
against the Prisoner to be a principle Actor in that sad tragedy, next to him
that God has taken to his own judgment. I say, my Lords, he was the principle
actor for procuring the Soldiery to be assisting thereunto, he makes use of
his Profession for that purpose, for whereas he should have been the Minister
of peace, he makes himself the Trumpeter of Treason, to the destruction of the
King, he Preached many Sermans, prepareing the Soldiery for his death,
compared the King to Barrabas, he was Instrumenial for procuring a High Court
of Justice to be erected, appointed where and in what place it should be
proclaimed, way instrumental for bringing the King upon the Stage, before that
Mock Court; he encouraged the Soldiers to cry Justice, Justice; We shall show
you how at several times he promoted the Kings Death, and after when they
brought him to his Trial, this wretched man stood behind him like the Marshal
General, we shall prove too much of his activeness upon that bloody Stage,
which we shall leave to the Witnesses, more fully to declare.

Mr. Hugh Peter's, had a cloud of Witnesses to justify this against him, but
his confident Impudence denied every thing objected against him, though many
things were not only proved by the Journal books of the Rump Parliament, but
by several authentic and credible Witnesses.

The substance of all the Witnesses is contained in the following Relation.

That Hugh Peter's was several times between England and Holland to advise with
them how to bring England into a free state.

That he said that it could not be effected unless 150. were taken out of the
Nation, the same witness asked him what he meant by 150. he answered, three
LLL. The said Witness desiring to explain himself, he said that the Nation
could not be settled till the Lords, the Lawyers, and the Levites were taken out
of it.

That he did advise with Cromwell whether there were not a way for the Kingdom
to be settled without the King, and that it was said between them that there
was no other way then to cut off the Kings head; and being asked whether
Cromwell or Peter's spoke the words, he answered, That he did not know which, but
that was the effect of their consultation, as Mr. Peter's himself had confessed.

That Hugh Peter's was several times at meetings with Oliver Cromwell and Henry
Ireton at the star in Colemanstreet, that he used sometimes to come with along
sword thither, and not to depart till four a clock in the morning.

That he marched in the head of the Soldiery several times, and when the High
Court of Justice sat.

That he was very busy that day the Proclamation was made for the said High
Court in the Palace yard at Westminster, and said that that was nothing unless
it was proclaimed at Cheapside-cross and the Old Exchange too.

Twat he was in Westminster Hall when the High Court of Justice sat, and did
encourage the Soldiers of Col. Stubbers Regiment and others, cry out Justice,
Justice, and that the said Soldiers did cry out so accordingly.

That he was several times in consultation with the Officers of the Army in the
painted Chamber about the Kings Trial, and that he was several times also with
Bradshaw till two a clock in the morning in the Deanery of Westminster.

Another Wisnesssaid, That he heard Mr. Peter's say, that he was in a
consultation with the Officers about the death of the King, and that he should
see a blessed day very suddenly.

That he said he could even reverence the High Court of Justice, it did so much
resemble the trial of the world, which shall be at the last day by the Saints.

That he seldom spoke of the King but maliciously and traitorously, calling him
Tyrant, Murderer of his people, etc. And further that Hugh Peter's said he was
appointed one day to preach before the King, but the wretch would not hear him,
meaning the King.

That he was upon the Scaffold that morning that the King was beheaded, and was
ordering and preparing things for that purpose.

That he carrying on the work of prayer, as they called it, a month before the
King was murdered, and being ordered to preach in the Painted Chamber used
these words.

Lord what a do there is to bring this great man to his trial, and yet what a
mercy is that this great City falls down before us, He will bring us all into
blood again, if we do not take away his.

That in a Sermon preached at St. Margarets in Westminster his whole drift was
to prepare the people for the murder of the King, calling him Tyrant, a
Murderer of his people, a Traitor, etc. and said, Good people of the Nation
the power is in you, calling the King that Barabas.

Here Mr. Peter's, as in all the rest, out-faced and denied all.

The Council here said, That after he had thus prepared the business and
brought things to his purpose, the first Sunday after the King was brought to
the Bar, being 21 January, 1648. He preached before Cromwell and others at
Whitehal upon this Text, Psalm. 49. the latter end.

To bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron; this
honor have all the Saints, praise ye the Lord.

And that he said at that time, blessed be the Lord, the lower house is now
purged, etc. The upper house will fall down suddenly, in the same Sermon
calling his Majesty (that wretch) very often.

And at another time Preached upon a Text, Isai. 14.18, 19, 20. verses.

All the Kings of the Nations, even all of them lie in glory, every own in his
own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave, like an abominable branch, and
as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go
down to the stones of the pit, as a carcass is trodden under feet. Thou shall
not be joined with them in burial, because thou have destroyed thy land, and
slain thy people, the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned. At the top of
the Margent in the Bible, being the note to find the Chapter, is writ the
(Tyrants fall) where he endeavored to make a parallel between the King of
Babylon, and the King of England.

Another witness being sworn said, That Hugh Peter's was often among the council
of Officers at Winsor, That he used to be with them late at night when the
Kings death was contrived, That the Gentleman of the house saying grace one day
where he dined, and giving thanks, was about to pray after the usual form, God
save the King, etc. and he said, God save the King, and deliver him out of the
hands of all his Enemies; but Hugh Peter's started up of a sudden, and said,
Hold Gentlemen your Idol shall not stand long.

That at another time it was said by Hugh Peter's, That if they could but keep
the Army but one seven years longer, they need not care for the King and all
his Posterity.

That he said, That day the High Court of Justice sat was the happiest day
that ever England saw, That it was a day that many of the Saints of God had
been praying for these many years, and that he could freely say, Now Lord
let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation, This is the glorious beginning of the work, etc.

After many things passing in the Court, Mr Hugh could not say any thing for
himself, but plead several good offices he had done for the Kings Friends; to
which the Judge answered, That he was not brought thither for any of his good
deeds.

At last the Kings Council told the Jury, in short, That he had been a grand
abuser of the people by his seditious Doctrine, That he had been a grand
contriver of the Kings death, That his death would preach better then his life,
and that since he had put himself upon his Country, and the Country had put
themselves upon them, that they should free their Country from that innocent
blood: whereupon the Jury without going forth found him guilty.

Sentence passed on him accordingly to be hanged, drawn, and quartred

And according to the Sentence they were both executed at Chaiing-cross this
16. October. 1660.

FINIS.

