royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT


By the King.

A PROCLAMATION Declaring his MAJESTY'S pleasure touching His Royal Coronation,
and the Solemnity thereof.
CHARLES R.

Where Is We have resolved by the favor and blessing of God to celebrate the
Solemnity os our Royal Coronation upon the Three and twentieth day of April
next, being S. George's day, at Our Palace of Westminster; And forasmuch as by
ancient Customs and Vsages of this Realm, as also in regard of diverse Tenures
of sundry Manors, Lands, and other Hereditaments, many of Our loving Subjects
do claim and are bound to do and perform diverse several services on the said
day and at the time of the Coronation, as in times precedent their Ancestors
and those from whom they claim, have done and performed at the Coronations of
Our Famous Progenitors and Predecessors Kings and Queens of this Realm. We
therefore out of Our Princely care for the preservation of the lawful Rights
and Inheritances of Our loving Subjects whom it may concern, have tought fit to
give notice of and publish Our Resolution therein, and do hereby give notice of
and publish the same accodingly.

And We do hereby further signify, That by Our Commission under Our Great Seal
of England, We have appointed and authorized Our Right trusty ad Right
welbeloved Cosins and Counselors, Edward, Lord Hyde Our Chancellor of England,
Thomas Earl of Southampton Our high Treasurers, George Duke of Albemarle Master
of Our Horse, Henry Marquis of Dorhester, Montague Earl of Lindsey Our great
Chamberlain, James Marquis of Ormond Steward of Our Household, Edward Earl of
Manchester Chamberlain of Our Household, Aubery Earl of Oxford, John Lord
Roberts Baron of Truro, and our Trusty and welbeloved Sir Robert Foster Knight
chief Justice of Our Court of Kings Bench, and Sir Orlando Bridgman Knight and
Baronet, chief Justice of Our Court of Common Pleas, or any three, or more of
them, to receive, hear, and determine the Petitions and Claims which shall be
to them exhibited by any of Our, loving Subjects in this behalf: And We shall
appoint Our said Commissioners for that purpose to sit in the Painted Chamber
of Our Palace of Westminster upon the Six and twentieth day of this instant
month of March, in the afternoon of that day, and from time to time to adjourn
as to them shall seem meet, for the execution of Our said Commission, which We
do thus publish, to the intent that all such person whom it may any ways
concern, may know when and where to give their attendance for the exhibiting of
their Petitions and Claims concerning their Services beforementioned, to be
done or performed unto Us at Our said Coronation.

And We do hereby signify unto all and every Our Subjects whom it may concern,
That Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby straightly charge all persons
of what rank or quality soever they be, who either upon Our Letters to them
directed, or by reason of their Offices or Tenures, or otherwise, are to do any
service at the said day or time of Our Coronation, That they do duly give
their Attendance accordingly in all respects furnished and appointed, as to so
great a Solemnity appertains, and answerable to the Dignities and Places
which every one of them respectively holds and enjoys. And of this, they or
any of them are not to fail, as they will answer the contrary at their perils,
unless upon special reasons by Our Self, under Our hand to be allowed, We shall
dispense with any of their Services or Attendances.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Eighth day of March, in the Thirteenth
Year of Our Reign, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1660. At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


