TO THE MOST HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF PEERS, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE Of
COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Baronets, Justices, and Gentlemen of the County of
DEVON at their General Sessions.
Shows;
THat your Petitioners observing to our comfort your infinite labors, and to
our sorrows your abounding pressures and incombrances; and studying how we
might possibly in our degree contribute to your help; The Complaints and fears
of our Countrymen herewith commended to your view, have given us an overture,
charging us, by all the interest of our common welfare and danger, to represent
to His Majesty, and your Honors, their present distresses and expected
miseries. The Port Towns as they are for the most part the first receivers of
foreign intelligence; so are they soonest sensible of inconveniences
occurring by the proceedings of their trade, losses by Turkish Pirates, Crosses
by the Irish Rebellion, and London distractions though first felt, yet are
these their least feared calamities; Neither do the flocks of poor Protestants
coming from that Kingdom robbed of their late good Fortune, and now depending
upon their Christian charity so much affright them, with the charge of their
relief. As for the threatening messages they bring from their woolvish enemies,
That the bounds of that Kingdom shall not limit their malicious Tyranny: So
these as your Honors may perceive by the perusal (which we humbly pray you to
afford) they add the Popish Plots by your wisdom and vigilancie already
discovered, as certain arguments of war intended and ready for Execution.

And all this they do with so much probability conjecture to proceed from the
practices of the Popish Lords, and their constant adherents in most of their
Votes, the Prelates in the House of Peers, as your Petitioners concur with
these our neighbors in opinion and desires, that your Honors would once more
employ your endeavors to our most gracious King, to exclude Papists from his
great affairs, and his Prelates from Temporal Jurisdiction.

By the bearers hereof your Petitioners have presumed to make the like tender
to his Majesty's Royal hand, being from thence confident of their happy
effects; instead of distractions, unity; for remora's, celeritie; for
misunderstanding, correspondencie. And by the mercy of God upon his Church and
people, and upon the best of Kings their Supreme Governor; Prerogative and
Privilege will kiss each other, when His Majesty shall think it his greatest
Honor to grant your just Privilege, and you acknowledge it your best
Privilege, to enjoy the benefit and glory of his due and princely Prerogative.

For these and all other wished Felicities, your Petitioners shall ever pray,
etc.

Printed for H. Blunden, 1641.


