BY THE KING.
A Proclamation for the ease of the City of Oxford, and Suburbs, of the County
of Oxford, of unnecessary Persons lodging or abiding there.
HIS MAJESTY being enforced to draw into these parts and places diverse
Regiments of Soldiers, who want fit places to Billet them in, by reason (as He
is informed) there are many Women and Children as well as Men, who have no
necessary employment either about His Majesty's Person, or Court, or Army, and
yet have thrust themselves into houses and Lodgings in these places, from
whence they keep out others, which must be placed here, and are but a burden
in the consumiug those provisions which are and must be made for those, whose
attendance and service is necessary, Has therefore, by the advice of the
Lords, and others His Highness Commissioners, of His Princely care, thought
fit to publish and declare His Royal pleasure and command as follows.

1. That all such as have houses, or parts of Houses, or other Rooms, fit for
the entertaining, lodging, or disposing of any Soldiers, or others, do truly
deliver the number of rooms they have, the number of beds, the true number of
Persons there lodged, entertained or reaceaved, and their names, as near as
they can, and to whom they do belong, or under whose command they are. 2. That
all such as are so lodged or entertained do truly deliver what their qualities
are, under whose command, or upon what attendance, either to the Court or Army,
what their names are, and do truly set down what bedds they have to receave
them, and where. 3. That if any do refuse to give such true information, or
do mis-informe in any thing, or do color any others to lodge there which
ought not so to be, that He or She shall be subject to that punishment which
the offense deserves. 4. That if any person shall not immediately, orwithin
twenty four hours after the publishing of this Proclamation, depart from this
City and Suburbs thereof, and County aforesaid, who cannot justify their
abiding here as aforesaid, they shall be sent away by the Officers of the Army,
or Ministers af Justice, as the cause shall require, with such disgrace as they
diserve for such their fault herein. 5. That if in this Country there be any
Women or Children lodged or entertained under pretense of attending the Army,
or any Soldiers therein, that the Commanders in that place shall examine and
certify to the Kings Commisioners, what they conceave to be fit, According to
whose Certificate, that shall be done which shall be just in such case. 6. That
if any have houses of abiding in this Country, or near thereunto, that they
remove thereunto speedily, where they shall have the Kings Protection for their
safety. 7. That if any shall in any of these things offend, they ere hereby to
know, that they shall not only incur the danger of contempt to his Maiecty
for such their offense, but also such other punishment as the nature of their
offenses shall deserve. 8. That if any person come into the City or Suburbs
thereof he shall that night, or before, discover unto Sir lacob Ashley the
Governor of the City, his own name, and the names of his servants, or
company and the place from whence he came, and the occasion of his coming. And
that the Master of the House shall, before any new commer shall lodge in any
house, deliver the name of such Person and his company, to the Governor of the
City, upon the like pain as aforesaid.
Given at Our Court at Oxford, the twentieth day of January, in the Eighteenth
year of Our Reign.
God save the King.

