An Additional Act OF COMMISSIONERS FOR The Assessment of the Ninety thousand
pounds per Mensem.
Whereas by an Act of this present Parliament, the Sum of Ninety thousand
pounds per mensem is appointed for Maintenance of the Forces raised by
authority of Parliament, for the service of England and Ireland; In which many
of the Commissioners Names for the respective counties, cities and places
therein mentioned were misprinted, and some others omitted: To the end
therefore that the several sums of money therein mentioned, may be duly levied,
taxed and paid as is thereby directed, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted
by this present Parliament, and by the authority of the same, That the persons
hereafter named shall be added Commissioners for the several and respective
counties, cities and places in the said Act mentioned, to put the same in
execution in the said several and respective counties, cities and places for
which they are hereby respectively appointed Commissioners: And it is further
Enacted, That the said respective Commissioners for the said several and
respective counties, cities and places, shall and may use, exercise and put in
execution, all and every the powers and authorities given, limited or appointed
in and by the said Act of the 7 th of April last.

For the county of Berks. WIlliam Hide, William Trumbal, John Blagrave, Thomas
Bateman, George Wooldridge, Peter Burningham, Richard Winch, William Strowde,
Esqs Edward Jennings Gent. Arthur Evelyn, Christopher Whitchcot, Esqs John
Harrison Alderman of Reading.

Bucks. Mr. Ligoe senior, William Hill Esquire

Chester, Col: Thomas Croxton, Mr. Robert Gregg.

For the city and county of the city of Chester, Christopher Blayes, Thomas
Aldersey, William Crompton, Aldermen, Robert Gregg, Thomas Parnel, Gent.

Derby. German Pool, William Bage Esqs William Savile Gent.

York Westriding, Sir Edward Roades Knight, William Drake, George Marwood, John
Farrer, Esqs Col: William White.

North Riding, Col: Wasthal.

Town of Colchester, The Major for the time being, Henry Barrington, Thomas
Wade, John Langley, Ralph Harrison, John Farley, Thomas Laurence, William Cook,
William Vicars, Aldermen.

Hereford, Richard Nicholets, Miles Hill, Gent. Robert Kyrl Esquire Arthur Cockram,
Thomas Dannet of Bosbry, Francis Hall of Ledbey, Gent.

For the city of Hereford, Thomas Seaborn Major, Dr. Hartford, Mr. Cooper,
Miles Hill.

Kent, Will: Draper, John Seyliard, John Polehil, Rich: Porter, Mr. (...) Jole,
Peter Pet, Peter Buck, Robert Wivel, Thomas Wivel, Thomas Foche, Richard Bate,
William Lancaster, Peter Heyman, sir John Roberts, Thomas Paramer, Thomas
Monins, Francis Butcher, Stephen Monins, John Boys jun. of Betsanger, Thomas
Plumer sen. Thomas Plumer jun. Captain Richard Bowen, George Jackson, George
Kadwel, John Finch, sir Michael Livesey, Col: William Kenwrick, John Bix Esquire
the Major of Dover for the time being.

Lincoln County, John Brown, Leonard Brown.

Leicester, John Prat Esquire

Westminster, and the Liberty thereof, and Middlesex, John Hooker Esquire Mr.
George Meresfield, Mr. Henry Field, Mr. William Barns, Mr. Kellowy Guydet, Sir
William Brownlow, Sir John Thorowgood of Clerkenwel, Mr. Merryfield.

Ordered, That the Committee of Middlesex and Westminster do act together as
formerly they were wont to do.

City of Gloucester, James Stephens Alderman.

Hertford, Thomas Hobson, Gent.

Northampton, Sir Richard Samwel, Sir John Norwich, Baronets, John Parker
Sergeant at Law, William Ward Esquire John Ward Gent. Henry Benson, John Cartwright
of Ayno, Mr. Bletzo, Mr. Samwel, John Barnerd, Francis Quarles junior Gent.

Salop. Thomas Edwards of Kilhenery, Thomas Kinaston of Ryton, Gent. Richard
Crescet of Cund Esquire Edward Crescet, Charles Langford, John Aston of Ludlow,
Morris Overton, John Broom, Gent. Edward Whitchcot, John Wettenhal, William
Crown, William Jucks, Charles Bennyon, Lieu: Col: Tho: Clive, Esqs Mr. Langley
Mr. Huxley, of the Franchise of Wenloke, Mr. Thomas Hayes of Shrewsbury, Mr.
Daniel Bennyon of Ash, Mr. Whitehal of Whitchurch.

Somerset. Richard Jones, William Samborn, William Blanchard of Kattern, Esqs
John Fisher, John Merewether, Thomas Blanchard of Batheaston, Laurence Waldron,
James Cottington, John Lock, Benjamin Tibbot, Gent.

City of Bath, The Major for the time being, John Big, Matthew Clift, John
Parker, Aldermen.

Suffolk. Sir William Soam, Sir John Rous, Sir Philip Parker, Knights; Henry
Parker, John Groom, Mr. Vesey of Hinckleson.

Surrey. James Sherley, Josias Barners.

Surry,with the Borough of Southwark, Robert Dawlman Esquire Thomas Walker Gent.

Worcester county, Sir Thomas Rouse Baronet, sir William Cravon Knight. William
Jefferyes, Samuel Dingly, John Nanfan, Nicholas Acton, John Keyt, Daniel
Dobins, Jarvas Buck, John Bridges, Esqs John Fowns, William Hicks, Henry
Matthews, George Symons, Philip Parsons Gent. The Major of Evesham, and Bailiff
of Beaudley for the time being.

For the city of Worcester, Francis Francks, Theophilus Alie, Fowlk Estop,
William Scot, Gent. William Dingley, Francis Street Esqs

Wiltshire. Edward Pike junior of Martin, Francis Andrews of Collingborn, John
Fisher of Chute, Edward Mills of Froxfield, John Cheyny of Oar, Edward Tidcomb
of Eastcot, Robert Monday of Charlton, Thomas Carter of Warminster, Esqs

For the Isle of Anglesey, Major Edward Moo^, Major of Bewmorrice, Thomas
Williams, Esquire John Sidenham, Richard Boulton, Henry Marsh, Gent.

Haverford-West, John Tavernor Esquire Edmund Symeon of Pirton Gent. John Keat
Gent. (...) Brigham of Cave-End, William Barker, Thomas Parsons, Robert Warcup.

Warwickshire, Waldive Willington, Paul Wentworth, Edward Stratford, Edward
Marrow, Tho: Combs, William Combs, Esqs William Whiteal, Tho: Basnet, Gent.

For the County of Coventry, John Hales Esquire Thomas Love Gent. Richard Hopkins,
Esquire

Die Lunae, 14 Maii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Additional Act of
Commissioners in the several counties, for the Assessment of Ninety thousand
pounds per mensem, be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric' Parliamenti.


