AN ORDINANCE Touching the Assessing, Levying, and Collecting of the latter
Three Months Assesment Appointed by an Act of the late PARLIAMENT, ENTITLED, An
Act for an Assesment at the rate of 120000 l. by the Month, for six Months,
from the 25. of December 1653. to the 24. of June then next ensuing, toward
the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth.

depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp

Friday, 17. February, 1653.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

HENRY SCOBELL Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1653.

depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp
AN ORDINANCE Touching the Assessing, Levying, and Collecting of the latter
three Months Assesment, appointed by an Act of the late Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for an Assessment at the rate of 120000 l. by the Month, for six
Months, from the 25. of December 1653. to the 24. of June then next ensuing,
toward the maintenance of the Armies and Navys of this Commonwealth.
WHereas by an Act of the late Parliament, Entitled, An Act for an Assessment
at the rate of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the Month, for six
Months, from the five and twentieth day of December one thousand six hundred
fifty and three, to the four and twentieth day of June then next ensuing,
toward the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, It is
among other things provided and enacted, That if the Commissioners for any
County, City, or Town in the said Act named, should at their second general
meeting find, that, for want of sufficient time, a just and perfect survey, or
rate, of each Parish and place within such County, City, or Town, as is
directed by the said Act, could not be made, and returned, so as to proceed to
the rating and apportioning of the whole six months Assesments, in way and
manner as is in that Act prescribed, That then it shall and may be lawful for
the said Commissioners in any of the said Counties, Cities, or Towns, where the
said surveys and rates for want of such sufficient time shall not be made and
returned as aforesaid, to proceed at their second general meeting, to apportion
the first three of the said six months Assessment, according to the most just
and equal way of rates held in such Counties, Cities, and Towns; And the
Commissioners of such Counties, Cities, and Towns, in their respective
Divisions, to cause the same to be assessed, levied, collected, and paid. And
the Assessors, Collectors and Sub-Collectors in their Respective Divisions,
Parishes, and places were thereby authorized and required, in assessing,
levying, and collecting of the said first three Months Assessment, to proceed
accordingly. And in such Counties, Cities, and Towns where the first three
Months Assessment was appointed to be assessed, and levied according to the
rates held in such places as aforesaid, the several and respective
Commissioners, and other persons therein, were authorized to put in execution
all the powers given by that Act unto them, for causing the said three months
Assessment to be fully, and timely assessed, collected, levied, and paid, as
if the same had been assessed and rated by a poundrate, and as the six months
assessement appointed by that Act, were therein directed to be assessed and
rated. But for the apportioning assessing, levying and payment of the last
three of the said six months Assessment by a survey and pound rate; It was
Enacted, That the Commissioners of such Counties, Cities and Towns, where the
first three months Assessment should be appointed to be rated, assessed and
paid, according to the rates held in such places as aforesaid, or the major
part of them present at the said second general meeting, were thereby
authorized, and required to appoint a third general meeting, on the first day
of March, one thousand six hundred fifty and three, and at their said second
general meeting to give such orders, and directions, and appoint such times for
the effectual taking, examining and returning of surveys, and determining all
controversies which might happen therein, as that a true, and perfect survey of
each parish, and place within such County, City, or Town might be returned
unto them at their said third general meeting. And the said Commissioners in
their respective Divisions, and Hundreds, or any two of them were likewise to
proceed effectually therein, according to the powers given them in that Act for
that purpose. And the Commissioners for such County, City, or Town, or the
major part of so many of them as should be present at the said third general
meeting, were thereby required to sum, and cast up the total of the surveys of
each County, City, and Town, and to proceed to apportion, levy, and raise the
said latter three months Assessment upon all Estates real and personal, in
such manner, and by such ways, as the six months Aessessments were therein
first appointed to be rated, assessed, levied and paid. And whereas by the said
Act the latter three months Assessments is appointed to be collected so as the
same may be fully paid into the high Collectors, and by them to the Receiver
General to complete the whole six months Assessment at, or before the twentieth
day of April at the furthest, which shall be in the year, one thousand six
hundred fifty and four. Now to the end the whole Assessment by the said Act
appointed may be fully collected, and paid in for the preventing of
free quarter, and for the more effectual carrying on of the public service,
His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR by and with the advice and consent of his
Council does Declare and Ordain, That in case the way, or manner of assessing
the said later three months Assessment by a pound rate in such sort as is
prescribed by the said Act shall prove prejudicial, and obstructive to the
bringing in the said latter three months Assessment appointed by the said Act,
by the time in the said Act for that purpose limited, That then, and in all
such cases, the said Commissioners in any of the said Cities, Counties, Towns,
and places in the said Act mentioned where such obstructions shall be or
happen, shall appoint a general meeting together, and the major part of them
meeting may, and are hereby authorized (for the removal of such obstructions,
and the more speedy and effectual execution of the said Act) to proceed
according to the most just and equal way of rates held in such places in the
proportioning, levying and assessing the respective sums charged upon them,
any thing in the said Act to the contrary thereof contained in any wise
notwithstanding.

Friday, the 17th of February, 1653.
ORdered by His Highness, the Lord PROTECTOR, and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Scobell Clerk of the Council.

Printed by William Du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness the Lord
PROTECTOR. MDCLIII.


