A[prill.2. 1655. An Act for continuing ye jurisisdiction of ye Court of
Admiralty. vide voll. 10th. fol. 3 single sheet.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT Concerning the New INVENTION OF Melting down Iron and other Metals
with Stone-Coal and other Coals, without Charking thereof.
WHereas Jeremy Buck of Minchinhampton in the county of Gloucester Esquire by a New
Invention does undertake to melt or cause to be melted down Iron, Lead, Tin,
Copper, Brass, and other Metals, with Stone-Coal, Pit-Coal or Sea-Coal,
without Charking thereof; Be it therefore Enacted by this present Parliament,
and by the Authority thereof, That the said Jeremy Buck, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and such as he or they or any of them by Writing
under his, their, or any of their Hands and Seals shall from time to time
appoint (and none other) shall and may use, exercise and enjoy the Art, Skill
and Mystery of melting down Iron, Oar and Sinders into Raw Iron, and of other
Oar and Metal, with Stone-Coal, Pit-Coal or Sea-Coal, without Charking
thereof; and the sole and only benefit of his New Invention aforesaid, for and
during the term of Fourteen years, from the First day of March in the year of
our Lord God One thousand six hundred and fifty. And that no person or persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate whatsoever, shall make use of the said New
Invention within the Commonwealth of England, or any the Dominions thereof,
during the said time of Fourteen years. Provided always, and it is hereby
Declared and Enacted, That all and every person and persons may use such ways
and works for melting down any Iron, Oar, Sinder, or other Metals, as they
now use, or have heretofore lawfully used to do, or any other way or works
hereafter by them newly to be invented, so as they make not use of the said New
Invention of him the said Jeremy Buck. And it is further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That every person offending against this Act, for every
day wherein such Offense shall be committed, shall forfeit and lose to the said
Jeremy Buck, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, the Sum of
Ten pounds, in the name of a Pain or Penalty to be recovered by the said Jeremy
Buck, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by Action of Debt to be
grounded upon this Act, in any Court of Record within this Commonwealth, where
any Action of Debt now does, or shall hereafter be Tryable, together with
Damages for Non-payment thereof, and Costs of Suit; in which Action of Debt, or
for the staying whereof, no Essoin, Wager of Law, Protection or Injunction, or
any other means of Delay, shall or may be granted, admitted or allowed.
Provided also, That the said Jeremy Buck and his Assigns, after Seven years of
the term hereby granted, do and shall take Apprentices and teach them the
Knowledge and Mystery of the said New Invention.

Die Mercurii, 2 Aprilis, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.


