THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE PARLIAMENT UPON THE Petition and Appeal OF Josiah
Primat of London, Leatherseller.

Saturday the Seventeenth of January, 1651.

ORdered by the Parliament, That the several Proceedings and Votes be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.

Tuesday the Three and twentitth of December. 1651.
THe humble Petition and Appeal of Josiah Primat of London Leatherseller, was
this day read.

Resolved upon the Question,

That the Petitioner Josiah Primat be called in to avow his Petition.

The Petitioner was called in accordingly, and being come to the Bar, Mr.
Speaker demanded his name: He answered, Josiah Primat; and being showed the
Petition it self, and demanded whether that were his Petition, and that he did
avow it: He answered, The name subscribed thereunto was his hand, and that was
his Petition, and that he did avow it in the manner as it is therein expressed;
and then the Petitioner withdrew.

The Petitioner was again by Order of the House called in, and Mr. Speaker
demanded of him whether he did give order for this Petition to be printed: To
which he answered, Yes. And being asked who printed it: He says, It was a
Printer at Pauls-wharf, he says his name was Mr. Newcomb: And that he the said
Mr. Primat gave order for the printing of Five hundred, and that he gave such
order about three days since. And being showed a printed Paper entitled thus,
To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, The humble Petition and Appeal of Josiah Primat of London,
Leatherseller: He does acknowledge that the same is one of the Copies he caused
to be, printed, and that he did deliver diverse of them to diverse Members of
the House, and likewise to diverse other persons not Members of the House; and
that he delivered diverse printed Copies of them to other persons to be
delivered, and in particular to Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn, to deliver
them to several persons.

Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn was by Order of the House called in, and being
come to the Bar, was demanded by Mr. Speaker, whether he did deliver any of the
printed Copies of Master Primat's Petition, one whereof was showed him: He
answered, He did deliver diverse to Mr. Speaker, Sir Arthur Hesilrige, Colonel
Fenwick, and as many other Members of the House as he could. And being asked
whether he did not deliver it to diverse others that were not Members: He says,
He did deliver it to diverse who desired to read it; And being asked whether he
gave direction for the printing of it, He says, He was employed from the
beginning in managing this Business by Mr. Primat and his Uncle George Lilborn;
that he believed Mr. Primat will tell the House he gave direction for the
printing of it, and will avow it.

And being asked whether he did pen the Petition: He says, He did not, but he
was by when it was penned, and liked it well.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament, That this Petition of Josiah
Primat be committed.

A Committee was accordingly appointed, and power given them to examine upon
Oath, and to send for Persons, Parties, Witnesses, Records and Papers, and to
report forthwith.

The Committee having sat Twelve days upon this Business, and examined
Witnesses produced on both sides, and heard whatsoever could be said:

Thursday the Fifteenth of January, 1651.
A Report was made from the said Committee of their Proceedings therein, and of
the matter of Fact appearing to them, and the Evidence given them.

The Petition which was committed, was as follows; viz.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England; The humble Petition of Josiah Primat of London, Leatherseller;
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner by his Under-Tenants, George Lilborn Esquire and George Gray
the younger, Gent. both of the county of Duresm, being in the years 1647, 1648,
and 1649. in a just and quiet Possession of the Collieries or Seams of Coal in
Harraton, in the County aforesaid, called the Five-quarter and Nine-quarter
Coal (and having spent near 2000 l. to win the same) which lay drowned and lost
from 1642, to 1647. Sir Arthur Hesilrige in September 1649. procuring Colonel
Francis Wren, one of the Committee of that County, and Colonel George Fenwick,
to join with him, made an Order (against which the rest of the said Committee
present protested) to sequester the said Collieries, under color of an untrue
suggestion: That Sir William Armyn had sequestered the same in 1644. as
belonging to one Thomas Wray a Papist Delinquent; and thereupon the said Sir
Arthur violently dispossessed your Petitioners Tenants, and seized their Goods,
and let the said Collieries to Colonel Francis Hacker, and several of the
Officers of his own Regiment.

That your Petitioner has petitioned to the Commissioners for Compounding for
relief, but by the power and influence of the said Sir Arthur upon most of the
said Commissioners, your Petitioner has been delayed and denied the ordinary
course of Proceeding in all Courts of Justice; and at last coming to Hearing,
the said Sir Arthur appeared every day of the Hearing, and took upon him, not
only to plead against your Petitioner (which is humbly conceived to be
contrary to Law, he being a Member of the Supreme Authority) but also
authoritatively to prejudge your Petitioners Case, and to direct the said
Commissioners what to judge therein, and by his power and influence upon the
said Commissioners, he overawed most of them; and after full Hearing,
Judgment being respited from day to day, the said Sir Arthur kept private
Correspondence with some of the said Commissioners about finding some new
color or pretenses to detain your Petitioners Possession from him: Whereupon
he produced new pretended Evidence after full hearing; and thereupon the major
part of the said Commissioners not daring (as is humbly conceived) to oppose
the will and pleasure of the said Sir Arthur, have contrary to clear Evidence
before them for your Petitioner, refused to relieve him, and have punctually
pursued in their Judgment, the Direction publicly given by the said Sir
Arthur.

That the said Commissioners being the only persons authorized by the
Parliament, to hear and determine all Cases about Sequestered Estates, Your
Petitioner cannot be relieved from the Oppression and Tyranny of the said Sir
Arthur, save by the Parliament, or their special Order and Direction. And your
Petitioner has been kept from his Possession above Two years; and the said Sir
Arthur has declared the said Collieries to be worth at least 5000 l. per annum.

May it therefore please the Parliament, in respect to the Public Justice of
the Commonwealth, to cause the Truth of the Premises to be speedily examined,
and to provide for your Petitioners relief from the Oppression and Tyranny of
the said Sir Arthur Hesilrige; and for the Dispensation of Justice, without
Fear or Favor, as to your Wisdoms shall seem most just.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. Josiah Primat.

The Judgment and Resolution of the Commissioners for Compounding, against
which this Petition and Appeal was made, is as follows:

By the commissioners for Compounding, etc. 12. December. 1651.
IN the Case depending before us, touching the Colliery of Harraton, having
heard the Depositions and Proofs taken therein, and perused the Deeds and other
Writings offered to us, on the behalf of Josiah Primat of London,
Leather-seller, who claims an Interest in the said Colliery by Lease thereof
from Robert Coniers, who pretends a Right therein by Grant from Sir John
Hedworth; And upon hearing of Counsel, as well on the Part and behalf of the
said Josiah Primat, as on the behalf of the Commonwealth, in whose Right the
same is Sequestered, as belonging to Colonel Thomas Wray, a Papist and
Delinquent; And having had several Debates upon the said Proofs and Writings,
and what has been offered by the Counsel on either side, Do Resolve,

That it does appear that the whole Colliery of Harraton was under
Sequestration in the year 1644. without distinction of Seams.

That it does not appear that the said Colliery, or any part thereof, was
discharged from Sequestration from the year 1644. to this time.

That upon Consideration of the whole Matter, there does not appear to us
sufficient cause to take off the Sequestration of the said Colliery, or any
part thereof, upon the Petition of the said Mr. Primat.

Resolved,

That we do leave all Parties claiming any Interest in the said Colliery to
their course in Law; and do think it fit that the Possession be established
accordingly.

Resolved upon the Question,

That the House do proceed first with the Civil part.

The House after long and serious Debate of the Matter,

Resolved upon the Question,

That the Parliament does approve of and affirm the Judgment and Resolutions
of the Commissioners for Compounding, in the Case of Josiah Primat.

In the next place the House proceeded with the Matter of Crime charged by the
said Petition; and

The Question being put,

Whether this part of the Petition [ viz. That Sir Arthur Hesilrige in
September, 1649. procuring Colonel Francis Wren, one of the Committee of that
County, and Colonel George Fenwiek, to join with him, made an Order (against
which the rest of the said Committee present protested) to Sequester the said
Collieries under color of an untrue Suggestion, That Sir William Armyn had
sequestered the same in 1644. as belonging to one Thomas Wray a Papist
Delinquent] appears to the House to be proved to be true.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put,

Whether this part of the Petition [ viz. That Sir Arthur Hesilrige did
thereupon violently dispossess the Petitioners Tenants, and seized their Goods,
and let the said Collieries to Colonel Francis Hacker, and several of the
Officers of his own Regiment] appears to the House to be proved to be true.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put,

Whether this part of the Petition [ viz. That the Petitioner (having
petitioned the Commissioners for Compounding for relief) by the power and
influence of the said Sir Arthur upon most of the said Commissioners, the
Petitioner has been delayed and denied the ordinary course of proceedings in
Courts of Justice] appears to the House to be proved to be true.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put,

Whether Sir Arthur Hesilrige has committed any Crime in appearing every day
at the hearing of the said Cause, and speaking there on behalf of the
Commonwealth.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put,

Whether that part of the Petition [ viz. That Sir Arthur did Authoritatively
prejudge the Petitioners Case, and direct the Commissioners what to judge
therein; and by his power and influence upon the said Commissioners he overawed
most of them] appears to the house to be proved to be true.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put,

Whether this part of the Petition [ viz. That after full hearing, Judgment
being respited from day to day, the said Sir Arthur kept private Correspondence
with some of the said Commissioners, about finding some new color or pretenses
to detain the Petitioners Possession from him; Whereupon he produced new
pretended Evidence after full hearing] appears to be proved true.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put,

Whether this part of the Petition [ viz. That thereupon the major part of the
said Commissioners not daring to oppose the will and pleasure of the said Sir
Arthur, have contrary to clear Evidence before them for the Petitioner, refused
to relieve him, and have punctually pursued in their Judgment, the direction
publicly given by the said Sir Arthur] appears to this House to have been
proved to be true.

It passed in the Negative.

The Question being put,

Whether it does appear that Sir Arthur Hesilrige is guilty either of
Oppression or Tyranny in the Carriage and Prosecution of this Business.

It passed in the Negative.

Resolved upon the Question,

That this Petition is false, malicious and scandalous.

Resolved, etc.

That the printing, publishing and dispersing of this Petition, both before and
since it was preferred to the Parliament, is an high Breach of the Privilege
of Parliament.

Resolved, etc.

That all the printed Copies of the Petition, entitled, The humble Petition
and Appeal of Josiah Primat of London Leatherseller, be burnt by the hand of
the common Hangman, at the Old Exchange London, and in the Old Palace, on
Tuesday and Wednesday next; and that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex do
take care that the same be done accordingly.

Resolved, etc.

That the Fine of Three thousand pounds be imposed upon Josiah Primat of
London, Leatherseller, to be paid to the use of the Commonwealth.

Two thousand pounds to sir Arthur Hesilrige for his Damages.

Two thousand pounds to James Russel, Edward Winslow, William Molins and Arthur
Squib, Esqs four of the Commissioners for Compounding; that is to say, To each
of them Five hundred pounds for their Damages.

Resolved, etc.

That the said Josiah Primat be committed to the Fleet, there to remain a
Prisoner, until the several Fines aforesaid be paid.

Resolved, etc.

That the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament, do apprehend the said
Josiah Primat, and bring him to the Bar of this House upon Tuesday next, to
receive the Judgment aforesaid, and that Mr. Speaker do direct a Warrant to
the Sergeant at Arms accordingly.

The Parliament did in the next place proceed against Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilborn.
Resolved, etc.

THat the Fine of Three thousand pounds be imposed upon Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilborn, to be paid to the use of the Commonwealth.

That he be Fined Two thousand pounds more to be paid to Sir Arthur Hesilrige
for his Damages; and Two thousand pounds more to be paid to James Russel,
Edward Winslow, William Molins and Arthur Squib, Esqs four of the Commissioners
for Compounding; that is to say, To each of them Five hundred pounds for their
Damages.

Resolved, etc.

That Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn be Banished out of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and the Islands and Territories thereunto belonging, and not to return
into any of them, upon pain of being proceeded against as a Felon; and in case
of such return, shall suffer Death accordingly.

Resolved, etc.

That Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn do depart out of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and the Islands and Territories thereof, within thirty days now next
coming; and in case the said John Lilborn shall after the said Thirty days be
found within England, Scotland or Ireland, or the Islands and Territories
thereunto belonging, or ally of them; The said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn
shall be proceeded against as a Felon, and shall suffer the pains of Death
accordingly.

Resolved, etc.

That the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament, do Apprehend the said
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn and bring him to the Bar of this House upon
Tuesday morning next, to receive the Judgment of Parliament aforesaid; and
that Mr. Speaker do direct a Warrant to the Sergeant at Arms accordingly.

Friday the 16th of January, 1651.
THE House resumed the Debate upon the Report made by Mr. Hill yesterday.

Several Passages in a Printed Book [Entituled, A just Reproof to Haberdashers
hall: Or, An Epistle written by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn, July 30. 1651.
to four of the Commissioners at Haberdashers-hall; viz. Mr. James Russel, Mr.
Edward Winslow, Mr. William Molins, and Mr. Arthur Squib; wherein is set forth
their unjust and unrighteous dealings in several Cases: with the Relations of
the said John Lilborn, and their Captiving their understanding to the
Tyrannical will of Sir Arthur Hesilrige, who has most unjustly endeavored a
long time together, the extirpation of the Family of the said John Lilborn]
were now read; which Book was proved before the said Committee to have been
delivered to a Member of Parliament by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn, and was
by the said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilborn confessed before the said Committee
to be his Book, as was now Reported to the House from the Committee.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament, That this Book does contain
matter, false, scandalous and malicious.

Resolved, etc.

That this Book, and all the Printed Copies of the same, be burnt by the hand
of the common Hangman, at the same place and time when the printed Copies of
the Petition of Josiah Primat of London Leatherseller, are appointed to be
burnt.

Ordered by the Parliament,

That all Printers, Stationers, Booksellers and others, who have any of the
printed Copies of the Book, Entitled, A just Reproof to Haberdashers-hall,
etc. or any of the printed Copies of the Petition and Appeal of Josiah Primat
of London Leatherseller, be enjoined and required forthwith to deliver in to
the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, or to the next Justice of the Peace, all
the said printed Copies of the said Book and Petition; and that the said
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and the said Justices of Peace respectively,
be required to cause all the same printed Copies to be burnt by the hand of the
common Hangman.

Saturday the Seventeenth of January, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the several Proceedings and Votes upon this
Report, be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


