AN ORDINANCE FOR REVIVING the JURISDICTION OF THE County Palatine OF
LANCASTER, and for holding there an ASSIZES.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Tuesday, 28. February, 1653.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

HENRY SCOBELL Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1653.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For reviving the JURISDICTION of the County PALATINE of
Lancaster, and for holding an ASSIZES there.
BE it Declared and Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector, by the advice
and consent of His Council, That all Privileges and Jurisdictions belonging to
the County Palatine of Lancaster and the Inhabitants thereof, be, and are
hereby Revived and Continued, as fully and amply to all intents and purposes,
as the same were at any time before the tenth day of October last. And that all
Actions as well real as personal, and all other Actions mixed or otherwise,
Pleas, Precepts, Writs, Process, Demurrers, Recognizances, Fines, Recoveries,
and all other Proceedings, Matters and things, of what nature or quality
soever, now depending in any Court within the said County Palatine, or there
commenced or prosecuted since the said tenth day of October, shall be and stand
revived, continued, and of full force and effect in the Law, to all intents,
constructions and purposes. And that all Process, Pleas, Demurrers and
Proceedings in every such Action, Actions, Suits, Bills or Plaints, which were
there depending the said tenth day of October last, or commenced or prosecuted
there at any time since, shall stand good and effectual, and be proceeded in
according to the Laws of the Nation, and the proceedings used within the said
County Palatine of Lancaster.

And be it hereby further Ordained, that Matthew Hales one of the Justices of
the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, and Hugh Wyndham Sergeant at Law,
shall be Justices of Assizes and Jail-deliver within the said County Palatine;
and that the said Justices, or either of them, shall and may act, do and
perform all matters and things, as well concerning Criminal as Common pleas,
and all other Pleas and Process whatsoever, in such manner and form as any other
Justice or Justices of Assizes at Lancaster have usually acted, done and
performed at any time heretofore. And the Commissioner for keeping the Seal of
the said County Palatine of Lancaster hereafter named, is hereby Authorized and
appointed to issue forth to the said Justices, for the execution of the
premises, such Commission or Commissions as in such cases have been heretofore
in the said County Palatine used and accustomed. And that Thomas Fell Esquire be,
and is hereby made and appointed Commissioner for keeping of the Seal of the
said County Palatine of Lancaster, and shall have all such powers as any
Chancellor or Commissioner for keeping the Seal of the said County Palatine
has formerly lawfully used and exercised concerning the same, till further
Order.

Tuesday February: 8. 1653.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.


