ARTICLES OF PEACE, FRIENDSHIP and INTERCOURSE, Concluded and Agreed between
ENGLAND and SWEDEN, In a Treaty bearing date at Upsal the ninth day of May in
the year of our LORD GOD 1654.

blazon or coat of arms of the Anglo-Irish Commonwealth

Published by his Highness special commandment.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, MDCLV.

ARTICLES OF Peace, Friendship and Intercourse concluded and agreed between
England and Sweden.
In a Treaty bearing date at Upsal, the ninth day of May in the year of Our
Lord God, 1654.
I.
THat from henceforth there be and remain a good, firm, sincere and perpetual
Peace, Amity, Alliance and correspondence between the Protector and
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Queen and Kingdom of
Sweden, and all and singular their Dominions, Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces,
Islands, Plantations, Lands, Cities, Towns, People, Citizens, and generally all
their Subjects and Inhabitants, so that each part treat and use the other with
all real friendship and affection.

II.
The said Confederates, their People, Subjects and Inhabitants shall, as
opportunity is offered, take care of, and promote the welfare each of other.
And shall advertise each other, upon knowledge thereof, of all imminent dangers,
plots, and conspiracies of Enemies against the other; and, as much as in them
lies, oppose, and hinder the same. Neither shall the one Confederate, either by
himself, or any else, treat of, act, or attempt any thing to the prejudice and
disadvantage of the other; his Lands or Dominions, in whatsoever place, whether
at Sea or Laud, Nor shall any way assist the Rebels or Enemies of the other,
to the damage of the Confederate, nor receive, or entertain within his
Dominions, any Rebel or Traitor, who shall attempt any thing against the others
State, much less afford them any Council, help or favor, or permit it to be
done by any of his Subjects, People and Inhabitants.

III.
The said Protector and Commonwealth, and the said Queen and Kingdom shall
take diligent care, That, as much as in them lies, all impediments and
obstacles be removed, which have hitherto interrupted the freedom of
Navigation and Commerce, as well between both Nations, as with other People and
Countries within the Dominions, Lands, Seas and Rivers of either. And shall
sincerely endeavor to assert maintain, defend and promote the aforesaid
Liberty of Navigation and Commerce against all the Disturbers thereof, by such
ways and means, as either in this present Treaty, or hereafter shall be
agreed upon. Neither shall they suffer, that either by themselves, their
Subjects and people, or through their default, any thing be done or committed
contrary hereunto.

IV.
That either of the aforesaid Confederates their people and Subjects, may
without any safe conduct, license, general or special freely and securely go
and enter by Land, or Sea, in and to the Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces, Lands,
Islands, Cities, Villages, Towns, whether walled or unwalled, fortified, or
otherwise, Havens and whatsoever Dominions of the other, and there stay and
from thence return or pass through; and in the same places, upon just prices to
procure, and have provision of Victuals, for their use and sustenance and to be
used with all friendly Offices. And that either Confederate, their people and
subjects may trade and have commerce in all places where commerce has hitherto
been exercised, in what Goods and Merchandises they please, and may freely
import and export the same, paying the customs which are due, and conforming
themselves to the Laws and Ordinances of the said Commonwealth and Kingdom,
whether the same respect, Trade, or any other right; which presupposed, the
people, subjects and inhabitants of both Confederates, shall have and enjoy in
each others Kingdoms. Countries, Lands and Dominions, as large and ample
privileges, Relaxations, Liberties and immunities, as any other Foreiner at
present does, or hereafter shall enjoy there.

V.
No Merchants, Captains, and Masters of Ships, Mariners, nor any other persons,
Ships, Goods, or Merchandise belonging to either Confederate shall upon any
public, or private account, by virtue of any Edict General or special, within
any the Lands, Havens, Sea-roads, Coasts, or Dominions of the other, for any
public service, or expedition of War, or any other cause, much less for any
private use, be feised, embargued, arrested, forced by violence or be any way
molested or injured, provided only such arrests, as are conformable to justice
and equity be not hereby prohibited, so be it they are made according to the
ordinary course of Law, and not granted upon private affection, or partiality,
but are requisite for the administration of right and justice.

VI.
In case any of the Ships of either Confederate, whether of War, or Merchants,
belonging to the Subjects and People of either, be by occasion of Tempests,
pursuit of Pirates and Enemies, or any other urgent necessity constrained to
put into each others Havens, Roads or shores they shall be received there with
all kindeness and humanity, and enjoy all friendly protection, and be permitted
to refresh themselves and procure, at a reasonable price, all things needful
for their sustenance, reparation, or use. Neither shall they be hindered from
going out of the said Ports or Roads, at their pleasure, without paying any
customs or duties. Provided they do nothing contrary to the Laws, Ordinances
and Customs of the place, which the said Ships shall enter into or abide in.

VII.
In like manner, if any Ship or Ships, whether public or private, belonging to
either Confederate, their People and Subjects, shall within any the Coasts or
Dominions of the other, stick upon the sands, or be forced to lighten their
burden, or be wracked, or suffer any damage, all friendly help and relief,
shall be given them upon a competent reward. And what ever shall be remaining
of the goods thrown overboard or after Shipwreck, or any other damage
sustained, shall be kept in safe custody, and restored to the owner, or whom
the said Owner shall appoint.

VIII.
In case the people and subjects on either part, whether they be Merchants,
Factors, or Servants, Masters of Ships, Mariners, or such others, who travel
and inhabit within the Dominions of the other, or those who act on their behalf
before any Court of Judicature, for recovery of their Debts, or for other
lawful occasions, shall stand in need of the Magistrates help, the same shall
be readily, and according to the equity of their Cause, in friendly manner
granted them, and Justice shall be administered to them without long and
unnecessary Delays. Neither shall they be any way molested upon any pretense
in the Dispatch of their Affairs, in their Iourneying, Bargaining, and
Receiving the Price of their Commodities, but that all Love and Friendship be
extended toward them. And it shall be free for them on both sides, in their
passage to and again, in each others Coasts, Ships, Havens, and Public
Places, to wear about them Arms for their proper defense, so be it they give
no just suspicion to the Governor or Magistrate of the place, of any design
against the public or private peace. But he especially who behaves and
demeans himself soberly and inoffensively, shall be protected from all injury,
violence and molestation.

IX.
The said Confederates, and all and singular their people and Subjects, may buy
and export out of all the Countries, Dominions and Kingdoms of the other, all
kind of Armor and Provision of War, and may safely and freely put in with
their Ships, and arrive at each others Ports, Havens and Shores, and there
stay, and thence depart, they carrying themselves peaceably, and conformably to
the Laws and Customs of the respective places, and not disturbing the
freedom of commerce therein. In like manner the Ships of War shall have free
access to the Ports of either, there to stay, and come to anchor, but not in
such numbers as shall occasion manifest suspicion, without the leave and
consent of that Confederate first obtained, to whom the Port belongs, unless
compelled thereto by tempest, force, or danger of the Sea, in which case they
shall signify to the Governor, or Chief Magistrate of the Place, the cause of
their Arrival, and shall continue there no longer then the said Governor or
Chief Magistrate shall permit, Observing always and every where, the Laws
aforesaid, and such as shall hereafter be agreed upon.

X.
The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Queen and Kingdom of Sweden, may safely
and freely travel in England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereof,
and pass through the same by Sea or Land, to any other Nations freely to
traffic and have commerce with them in all sorts of merchandise, and to
import and export the same. And the people of the said Commonwealth shall enjoy
the same freedom in the Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories, of the Queen and
Kingdom of Sweden. Provided, the Laws, Ordinances, and particular rights of
each Nation, concerning Trade and Commerce be observed on both sides.

XI.
Although in the preceding Articles of this present Treaty, it be forbid to
either Confederate to yield any aid or assistance to the Enemies of the other;
yet it is not to be so understood, as if either Confederate having no War with
the Enemies of the other, might not sail to, or traffic with the said
Enemies, notwithstanding that the other Confederate be in actual war with them;
But it is only provided, That till a more particular agreement be made
concerning this matter, no goods called goods of Contrabanda, a Catalogue and
Specification of which shall be made within four months after the date
hereof, shall be carried to the Enemies of each other without peril in case
they be taken, of being adjudged lawful prize without hope of Restitution.

XII.
But lest such Navigation and Intercourse of the one Confederate, his People
and Subjects by Land or Sea, with other Nations, during the War of the other
Confederate, should redound to the prejudice of the said other Confederate. And
lest goods of enemies, should pass concealed under the name of friends; for the
removal of all suspicion and prevention of fraud herein, it is agreed, That all
Ships, Wagons, Wares and men, belonging to either Confederate, shall in their
passage, have Letters of safe conduct, commonly called Pass ports, and
Certificates signed by the Governor, or chief Magistrate of the Province or
City, from whence they come, Of which Letters and Certificates such forms shall
be observed as shall be mutually concluded upon, within the space of four
Months, next after the date hereof. And wheresoever any the Merchandise,
goods, vessels, or men belonging to either, their people and Subjects, shall be
met with either in open Sea, or in any Channel, Haven, Road, Land, or any other
place by the Ships of War, public or private, or by any the People, Subjects
and Inhabitants of the others, or shall happen to be in one place with them,
they producing their Letters of safe Conduct and Certificates aforesaid, shall
have nothing further exacted of them, no search made, either of Goods, Vessels
or Men, much less shall they receive any damage, injury or molestation; but
shall be suffered to pass on with freedom to pursue their occasions. And if
any the people and Subjects of either shall do, or commit any thing contrary to
the proper sense of this present Article, either Confederate shall take care
that severe punishment be inflicted on the Offenders, and cause full and speedy
satisfaction to be made to the parties wronged, for all Costs and Damages.

XIII.
In case it shall hereafter happen, that, during this Amity and Confederation,
any of the people or Subjects of either, shall act or attempt any thing against
the same or any part thereof, either by Land, Sea, or other Waters, this Amity,
Confederation and Alliance, shall not be thereupon interrupted or broken of,
but shall remain and continue still in full force and virtue. Only in such
case the particular persons which have offended, shall be punished, and no
others; And that Justice shall be done and satisfaction made to all persons
injured, within twelve Months after Demand thereof. And in case the persons so
offending as aforesaid shall not appear and submit themselves to Justice, and
make satisfaction within the said Term, the said persons shall be declared
enemies to both States, and their estates, goods and effects whatsoever, shall
be confiscated and employed to a due and full satisfaction for the wrong by
them done. And their persons shall be liable to further punishment when they
shall come within the power of either State, as the quality of their offense
shall deserve. And that speedy restitution and satisfaction be made for the
loss and damage which either part has sustained from the other, during the
War betwixt England, and the United Provinces.

XIV.
This present Treaty and Confederation shall in nothing derogate from any
preeminence, right or Dominion of either Confederate within any his own Seas,
Channels or Waters, but that they have and retain the same, in as full and
ample manner as they have hitherto had, or as of right belongs to them.

XV.
It being the primary intent of this League and Amity, that each Confederate
their people and Subjects might enjoy such freedom of Navigation and Commerce,
as is described in the foregoing Articles, within the Baltic, Sound, Northern,
Western, and British Seas, Mediterranean and Channel, and other the Seas in
Europe; Therefore all sincere endeavor shall be used on both sides by common
advise, aid and assistance, that the aforesaid mutual Liberty of Navigation and
commerce, be established, promoted, and as occasion is, defended against all
the Disturbers thereof, who shall go about to interrupt, prohibit, hinder or
restrain and limit the same to their own will and pleasure, in prejudice of the
said Confederates. And either part shall with all Willingness or readyness,
promote the good and prevent the hurt each of other; Saving the Treaties which
either Nation has made with other Kingdoms, Commonwealths and nations. And
neither Confederate shall hereafter make any League or Agreement in prejudice
of this present, with any other People or Nation without the privity and
consent of the other, or if any such Agreement be hereafter made, the same
shall be reputed null and void, and give place to this present Treaty. But as
for the manner of giving aid and assistance each to other for the defense of
this League and of the Liberty of Commerce and Navigation, a more particular
agreement, as need shall require, shall be made thereupon accommodated to the
circumstances of time and other affairs.

XVI.
For what concerns other Commodities, which Ships of War may enjoy, and the
Laws by which they shall regulate themselves when they arrive in each others
Ports and Harbors; and for what concerns commerce to be exercised in America,
as also the advantages of the Herring, and other Fisheries, the execting
Staples for Trade, and other Things and Conditions which shall be found
requisite for the better clearing of the foregoing Articles, Resolution shall
be had therein according to what shall be agreed upon in a distinct and
peculiar Treaty or Contract.

XVII.
Whatever is agreed on in the foregoing Articles shall be in force and virtue
from this present time, and be truly observed on both sides by all such as are
within each others Allegiance. And for the further Confirmation thereof, shall
be subscribed, signed and ratified by the Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, in the name
of his Highness and the said Commonwealth, and by her Majesty of Sweden, under
the handwriting and Seals of their said Highness and Majesty, within four
Months next ensuing the Date of these Presents.

FINIS.

