AN ORDINANCE FOR AN ASSESSMENT FOR Six Months, From June 24. 1654. for
maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, at the rate of
120000 l per mensem, for the first three months. And at the rate of 90000. l
per mensem, for the last three Months thereof.



Thursday June 8. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

AN ORDINANCE For an Assessment for six Months from June 24. 1654. for the
maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, at the rate of one
hundred and twenty thousand pounds per mensem, for the first three months. And
at the rate of ninety thousand pound per mensem, for the last three months
thereof.
BE it Ordained and Declared by his Highness the Lord Protector, with the
consent of his Council, And it is hereby Ordained, That toward the maintenance
of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, an Assessment of one hundred
and twenty thousand pounds per mensem, for three months, commencing the four
and twentieth day of June one thousand six hundred fifty four, and ending the
nine and twentieth day of September following, And of ninety thousand pounds
per mensem, for three months commencing the said nine and twentieth of
September one thousand six hundred fifty four, and ending the five and
twentieth day of December following, shall be taxed, collected, levied and paid
in England and Wales, in such sort as hereafter is expressed, That is to say,
The said first three months Assessment of one hundred and twenty thousand
pounds by the Month, from the four and twentieth of June one thousand six
hundred fifty four, to the nine and twentieth of September following, shall be
taxed, collected, levied and paid in the several Counties, Cities, Towns and
Places in England and Wales by the several Sums, and according to the several
rates and proportions, and in such manner, as in and by a late Act of
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for an Assessment at the rate of one hundred and
twenty thousand pounds by the Month for six Months from the five and
twentieth day of December one thousand six hundred fifty three to the four and
twentieth day of June then next ensuing toward the maintenance of the Armies
and Navies of this Commonwealth, and published the four and twentieth day of
November one thousand six hundred fifty three; the said six Months Assessment
of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds per mensem, was appointed to be
levied, collected and paid.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Sum of
ninety thousand pounds per mensem, for the latter three Months Assessment to
commence from the twenty nineth of September, one thousand six hundred fifty
four, to the five and twentyeth day of December then next following, toward
the maintenance of the said Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, shall for
every Month of the said three Months be assessed, taxed, levied and paid in
the several Counties and places in England and Wales according to the several
Sums and proportions hereafter expressed, viz. for every Month of the said
latter three Months.

UPon the County of Bedford, the sum of one thousand two hundred pounds. The
County of Berks, the sum of one thousand four hundred pounds. The County of
Bucks, the sum of one thousand six hundred and fifty pounds. The County of
Cambridge, the sum of one thousand four hundred and seventeen pounds and ten
shillings. The Isle of Ely, the sum of four hundred seventy two pounds and ten
shillings. The County of Chester, the sum of nine hundred and ninety pounds.
The City and County of the City of Chester, the sum of one hundred and ten
pounds. The County of Cornwall, the sum of two thousand one hundred pounds. The
County of Cumberland, the sum of one hundred thirty eight pounds seventeen
shillings. The County of Derby, the sum of one thousand two hundred pounds.
The County of Devon, the sum of three thousand eight hundred sixty two pounds.
The City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of one hundred thirty eight
pounds. The County of Dorset, the sum of one thousand six hundred eighty six
pounds and five shillings. The Town and County of Pool, the sum of thirteen
pounds and fifteen shillings. The County of Durham, the sum of one hundred
ninety seven pounds twelve shillings eight pence. The County of York, with the
City and County of the City of York, the sum of three thousand nine hundred and
thirteen pounds. The Town and County of Kingston upon Hull the sum of eighty
seven pounds. The County of Essex, the sum of four thousand five hundred
pounds. The County of Gloucester, the sum of two thousand ninety one pounds.
The City and County of the City of Gloucester, the sum of two hundred and nine
pounds. The County of Hereford, the sum of one thousand five hundred pounds.
The County of Hertford, the sum of one thousand eight hundred pounds. The
County of Huntington, the sum of eight hundred pounds. The County of Kent, with
the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the sum of four thousand seven
hundred pounds. The County of Lancaster, the sum of one thousand two hundred
pounds. The County of Liecester, the sum of one thousand four hundred pounds.
The County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the
sum of three thousand five hundred pounds. The City of London, the sum of six
thousand pounds. The County of Middlesex, with the City and Liberty of
Westminster, the sum of two thousand three hundred pounds. The County of
Monmouth, the sum of six hundred pounds. The County of Northampton, the sum of
one thousand eight hundred pounds. The County of Nottingham the sum of one
thousand one hundred sixty one pounds six shillings. The Town and County of
Nottingham, the sum of thirty eight pounds fourteen shillings. The County of
Norfolk, the Sum of four thousand six hundred and sixty pounds. The City and
County of the City of Norwich, the sum of two hundred and forty pounds. The
County of Northumberland, the sum of two hundred thirty one pounds eight
shillings and four pence. The Town of Newcastle, the sum of forty five pounds
fifteen shillings. The County of Oxon, the sum of one thousand four hundred and
fifty pounds. The County of Rutland, the sum of three hundred and fifty pounds.
The County of Salopp the sum of one thousand seven hundred pounds. The County
of Stafford, with the City of Litchfield, the sum of one thousand two hundred
pounds. The County of Somerset, the sum of three thousand five hundred pounds.
The City and County of the City of Bristoll, the Sum of two hundred and twenty
pounds. The County of Southampton with the Town and County of Southampton, the
sum of two thousand six hundred pounds. The County of Suffolk, the Sum of four
thousand seven hundred pounds. The County of Surrey, the sum of two thousand
and twelve pounds and ten shillings. The Borough of Southwark, the sum of two
hundred thirty seven pounds and ten shillings. The County of Sussex, the sum of
two thousand four hundred and fifty pounds. The County of Warwick, with the
City and County of the City of Coventry, the sum of one thousand six hundred
pounds. The County of Worcester, with the City and County of the City of
Worcester, the sum of one thousand six hundred pounds. The County of Wilts, the
sum of two thousand five hundred pounds. The County of Westmerland, the sum of
ninety five pounds and two shillings. The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of one
hundred seventy four pounds, and ten shillings. The County of Brecknock, the
sum of four hundred sixty five pounds. The County of Cardigan, the sum of five
hundred forty nine pounds. The County of Carmarthen, the sum of four hundred
fifty three pounds. The County of Carnarvan, the sum of two hundred and sixty
pounds. The County of Denbigh, the sum of three hundred and fifty pounds. The
County of Flint, the sum of one hundred seventie four pounds and ten
shillings. The County of Glamorgan, the sum of five hundred and nintie pounds.
The County of Merioneth, the sum of one hundred and sixty pounds. The County
of Montgomery, the sum of three hundred and eighty pounds. The County of
Pembroke, the sum of five hundred twenty two pounds. The County of Radnor,
the sum of three hundred twenty seven pounds. The Town of Haverford-west, the
sum of eighteen pounds fifteen shillings. The Town of Berwick, the sum of seven
pounds and ten shillings.
And be it further Ordained, That the several Commissioners, and other persons
nominated and mentioned in the said late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for an Assesment, at the rate of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the
month, for six months, from the twenty fifth day of December, One thousand six
hundred fifty three, to the twenty fourth day of June then next ensuing,
toward the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, and
such others who have by any Order of the late Parliament, or of his Highness the
Lord Protector and His Council, been thereunto since added, and authorized to
act as Commissioners, shall be, and hereby are authorized, appointed and
continued to be Commissioners, and shall have, use, exercise, and put in
execution all and every the powers and authorities, for the Assessing,
Collecting, Levying, and paying the present six months Assesment hereby
appointed to be Assessed and paid, as also the arrears of all former
Assesments which they had, and were empowered and appointed to use and exercise
by the said recited Act, for the Assessing, Collecting, Levying and payment of
the aforesaid six months Assesment of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds
by the month; And that the several rules, directions, clauses, and proviso's
mentioned and contained in the said recited Act, and the powers and authorities
thereby given to all, and every the persons therein named or mentioned, shall
endure and have continuance for six months longer, viz. from the said twenty
fourth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty four, to the twenty fifth
of December next following: For the better effecting whereof, it is hereby
further Ordained, That the several and respective Commissioners hereby
appointed and continued for the said several and respective Counties, Cities,
and Towns, shall meet together at the most common and usual place of meeting in
each of the said Counties, Cities, and Towns respectively, on or before the
twenty ninth day of June one Thousand six hundred fifty four. And the said
Commissioners or so many of them as shall then and there attend, and be
present, shall cause this present Ordinance to be put in execution (for the
ordering, directing, managing, levying, and bringing in the Monthly assessment
by this Ordinance required) and shall then (if they see cause) appoint a second
General meeting, on or before the twelfth day of July, one Thousand six hundred
fifty four, to the end the rules, and directions in this Ordinance given, and
prescribed, may be, as is before declared, timely and effectually prosecuted
and observed, so as the full sum of the first three Months Assessment charged
upon each division, hundred, parish, or place, may be at once wholly Collected
and paid in to the respective Receivers General, at or before the Twentieth day
of July next; And the later three Months Assessment, to be also fully
Collected, and paid in to the said respective Receivers General, at or before
the tenth day of October next; And it is hereby further Ordained, That in case
the way or manner of Assessing by a Survey, and pound rate, in such sort, as is
prescribed by the said recited Act, shall prove prejudicial, and obstructive to
the bringing in of the present six Months Assessment hereby appointed and
ordained, by the times limited for paying in of the same, That then, and in all
such cases the said Commissioners in any of the said Counties, Cities, Towns,
and places, in the said recited Act mentioned, where such obstructions shall
be or happen, or the major part of them present at their General meeting, may
and are hereby Authorized (for the removal of such obstructions, and the more
speedy and effectual execution of this Ordinance) to proceed according to the
most just and equal way of rates held in such places in the proportioning,
levying, and Assessing the respective Sums Charged upon them, and every of
them, any thing in the said recited Act to the contrary thereof contained in
any wise notwithstanding.

Thursday 8th June, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

Thursday the 8th June, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the COUNCIL, that the several
persons here undernamed, be, and are hereby constituted and appointed
Commissioners for the Assessments, in the several Counties and Places here
underwritten respectively; and they are hereby empowered to Act as
Commissioners, as fully, to all intents and purposes, as any the Commissioners
named in the last Act may, or have power to do, by this present Ordinance.

For the City and County of the City of Gloucester. Thomas Hodges, Esquires.
William Shepherd, Esquires. William Neast, Esquires. John Croft, Esquires.
Thomas Wall, Esquires. John Millington, Esquires. Francis Harris, Gent.
For the City of Westminster and liberties thereof. John Hooker, Esquire.
George Merifield. Henry Field. John Throckmorton. John Brown.
For the County of Cornwall. Hugh Boscawen, Esquires. Anthony Nicholl,
Esquires. John Moyle, Esquires. Thomas Gewen, Esquires. Thomas Ceeley,
Esquires. John Thomas, Esquires. Tho. Penwarne, Esquires.
For the County of Suffolk. Robert Knowlys, Esquire.
For the County of Berks. William Nelson of Chadleworth, Esquire.
For the County of Surrey. Robert Cross of Richmond, Esquires. Samuel Rous,
Esquires.
For the County of York and the City of York. Sir Robert Berwick.
For the County of Cambridg. Col. Robert Castle. Major Agricola Waylett.
For the County of Worcester. John Egioke, Esquires. John Naufan, Esquires.
John Barker, Esquires. Richard Varicon, Esquires.
For the County of Glamorgan. Sir Thomas Lewis, Knight. Herbert Evans, Esquire
Robert Williams of St Hillory. William Bassett of Bewper, Esquire William Basset of
Miskin, Esquire Richard Evans, Gent.
For the County of Somerset. Col. Nathanael Whetham.
For the County of Middlesex. Mr Thomas Airs. Mr Richard Wilcox.
For the Isle of Ely. William Fisher, Esquire
For the County of Stafford. Edward Bagot of Blithfield.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


