AN ORDINANCE For admitting PROTESTANTS IN IRELAND TO COMPOUND.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Saturday September 2. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For admitting Protestants in Ireland to Compound.
BE it Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the Advice and
Consent of His Council, That the Lord Deputy of Ireland; and the Council there
for the time being, be authorized and empowered by themselves or such person and
persons as they shall appoint, to compound with all and every person and
persons being Protestants in Ireland (other than the Protestants in Munster
mentioned in an Ordinance, entitled, An Ordinance for Indemnity to the
English Protestants of the province of Munster in Ireland) who having been
Delinquents there, have not been excepted from pardon, and to set such Fines
for the composition of all and every such person and persons for his and their
Estates both real and personal as shall be fit.

Provided, That the Fine and Fines to be set and imposed for the real Estate of
such person and persons shall not be less than two years full value of such
Estate, as the same was worth to be let in the year one thousand six hundred
forty. All and every which Fine and Fines shall be paid into the Public
Treasury there, at such time and times as the said Lord Deputy and Council
shall appoint. And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That upon
payment into the said Treasury the Fine and Fines, which shall be so set and
imposed as aforesaid by the respective person and persons so compounding, and
within the times which shall be so appointed, all and every such person and
persons so paying in the same, and his and their heirs and assigns, and all and
every the lands and estate which shall be so compounded for, shall be from
thenceforth freed and discharged of and from all and all manner of
Sequestration, Confiscation or Forfeiture, for or in respect of any Delinquency
aforesaid, and the said Lord Deputy and Council, and such person and persons as
shall be by them so appointed, are hereby authorized and enabled to give order
for such discharge accordingly.

Saturday September. 2. 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


