seal of the Commonwealth
The Form of an Indenture between the Sheriff and the Electors of Persons to
serve in Parliament for Counties.
THis Indenture made the (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred fifty and four, at (...) in the County of (...) Between
(...) Sheriff of the County aforesaid of the one part, and C.D. E.F. G.H. and
diverse other Persons qualified and capable to elect Members to serve in
Parliament for Counties, as is prescribed in the Government of the Common wealth
of England, Scotland and Ireland, Witnesses, That Proclamation having been
made in every Market Town in the County aforesaid within ten days after the
receipt of a certain Writ of the Lord Protector to the aforesaid Sheriff
directed, and to one part of these Indentures annexed for the Election of (...)
Knights, fit and discreet Persons of the County aforesaid, for the Parliament of
the said Lord Protector, in the Writ aforesaid specified to be chosen, and to
be at the Parliament of the said Lord Protector at Westminster in the County of
Middlesex, the third day of September next to be held; The aforesaid C.D. E.F.
G.H. etc. and diverse other Persons of the County aforesaid, who were present at
such Election, freely and indifferently have chosen (...) Knights girt with
Swords, that is to say, A. B. etc. to be in the Parliament aforesaid, as in the
said Writ is mentioned, who for themselves, as also for all the People of the
County aforesaid, have full and sufficient power to do and consent unto those
things, which in the aforesaid Parliament shall then and there, by common
Consent and Council, happen to be ordained.

Provided, and it is hereby Declared, That the persons so chosen shall not have
power to alter the Government as it is now settled in one single Person and a
Parliament. In witness whereof as well the Seal of Office of the said Sheriff,
as also the Seals of the Electors aforesaid, the day, year, and place
abovesaid to these Indentures are put and affixed.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.

The Form of An Indenture between the Sheriff and the Burgesses and Inhabitants
of Buroughs.
THis Indenture made the (...) day of (...) In the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred fifty and four, Between A.B. High Sheriff of the County
of (...) of the one part, And C.D. E. F. G. H. etc. Burgesses and Inhabitants
of the Borough of (...) of the other part, Witnesses, That by virtue of a
Warrant unto I. K. (...) of the said Borough of (...) from the said High
Sheriff to him directed, for the Electing and Choosing of (...) Burgesses of
good understanding, knowledge and discretion for Causes concerning the Public
good of this Commonwealth, To be at His Highness Parliament to be holden at
Westminster, the third day of September next; We the said Burgesses and
Inhabitants there, have made Choice and Election of L. and M. to be Burgesses
of the said Borough of (...) to attend at the said Parliament according to the
tenor of the said Warrant unto him the said I. K. directed in that Behalf; who
for themselves and all the People of the said Borough have full power to do
and consent unto those things which in the aforesaid Parliament shall then and
there, by Common Council and Consent, happen to be Ordained. Provided and it is
hereby declared, That they shall not have power to alter the Government as it
is now settled in one Single Person and a Parliament. In Witness whereof we the
parties above named to these presents interchangably set our hands and Seals,
the day and year first above written.

Thursday the 8. of June, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, That the several
forms of Indentures between the Sheriff and the Electors of Persons to serve in
Parliament for Counties, and of the Indentures between the Sheriff and the
Burgesses and Inhabitants of Buroughs, be forthwith Printed and Published, and
that printed Copies thereof be sent down to the several Sheriffs, to the end
the Indentures may be made according to these Forms.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


