AN ORDER OF PARLIAMENT; With the Consent of His Highness the Lord Protector,
For a Day of PUBLIC THANKSGIVING WITHIN The Cities of London and Westminster,
the late Lines of Communication, and Weekly Bills of Mortality, on Wednesday
the Third of June next; For the great Success God has been pleased to give the
Navy of this Commonwealth under the Command of General Blake against the
Spaniard. Together with a NARRATIVE Of the same Success, as it was Communicated
in a Letter from the said GENERAL.

Thursday the 28th of May, 1657.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Narrative be Printed and Published, with
the Order of the House for the Day of Thanksgiving.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1657.

Thursday the 28 of May, 1657.
ORdered by the Parliament, That Wednesday next be set apart for a Day of
Public Thanksgiving, within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
late Lnies of Communication, and Weekly Bills of Mortality, for the mavelous
Goodness of God to this Nation, in Preserving the Fleet of this Commonwealth in
their late Action at Sancta Cruz, in the Island of Teneriff, under General
Blake; and giving them great Success against the Ships of the King of Spain.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

A NARRATIVE Of the Action at SANCTA CRUZ.
AFter taking in the Supply of Victuals that was brought us the latter end of
March, we spent two or three days before the Town of Cadiz, and finding the
Enemy there in no great forwardness to come forth with a Fleet as was expected;
The General on the Thirteenth of April, One thousand six hundred fifty seven,
called the Commanders together, and communicated his thoughts to go for Sancta
Cruz on the Island of Teneriff, laying before them the reasons that induced him
to it, which they all approved of, and a favorable Gale just at the time
presented to carry us thither. On the Eighteenth following in the evening we
discovered Land, supposed to be Point Negro, but being thick and hazy, could
not certainly make it till Noon the next day, whereby the Enemy had longer
notice of our being on the Coast, then we designed he should before we came to
Action.

On Monday the twentieth of April one thousand six hundred fifty seven, we were
by break of day fair in the Offin of Sancta Cruz, and, as soon as 'twas light,
perceived by a signal from one of our Friggots a head, that the West India
Fleet were in the bay. Whereupon, after a short conference how to order the
attempt, and earnest seeking to the Lord for his presence, we fell in amongst
them, and by eight of the clock were all at an Anchor, some under the Castle
and Forts, and others by the ships sides, as we could birth our selves to keep
clear one of another, and best annoy the Enemy.

They had there five or six Galleons (whereof were Admiral, Vice Admiral, and
Rere-Admiral, with their Standart and Flags aloft) and other considerable Ships
making up the number of sixteen, some having Goods brought from the Indies
still on board them, others had taken in Goods and Provisions to carry back
again: Most of them were furnished with Brass Ordnance, and (as we have been
informed since) had their full companies of Seamen and Soldiers kept
continually on board them, from their first coming thither, which was about the
beginning of February last, their General himself in all the time lying but one
night out of his Ship: they were moared close along the shore, which lies in
the manner of a Semicircle, commanded, as far as the Ships rid, by the Castle,
and surrounded besides with six or seven Forts, with almost a continued line
for Musketeers and great shot, as the Ground between admitted; And we were
forced to come so near to do our work, that many of the men we have slain and
wounded, were shot by the Musketeers from the shore; Notwithstanding it
pleased God that in four hours time their men were beaten out, and all the
Ships put ashore, except the Admiral, and Vice Admiral, who made the most
considerable resistance. About two of the clock the Vice Admiral was set on
fire, and the Admiral, by some happy shot, or other accident, suddenly blown
up; having (as we perceived just before) many men on board her; by the evening
all the rest were fired, only two that sunck down to rights, and had little
but their Masts appearing above water.

It remained to complete this Mercy, that our own Ships should come off well,
wherein the greatest hazard and difficulty lay; for some riding near into the
shore and being sorely maimed, did require to be warped off, others when we
came to weigh, drove with the wind all the while blowing right into the bay,
and one of our best Frigates struck: The enemy in the mean time supplied fresh
men into his Forts for those we had killed and beaten out in the heat of the
Action, and from them and the Castle continued plying upon us, till about seven
of the Clock at night, every Ship and vessel belonging to our Fleet, were by
the good hand of God got safe out of Command.

In this service we had not above fifty slain outright, and one hundred and
twenty wounded, and the damage to our Ships was such as in two days time we
indifferently well repaired for present security: Which we had no sooner done,
but the wind veered to the Southwest (which is rare among those Islands) and
lasted just to bring us to our former Station near Cape Mary's, where we
arrived the second of May following: For which merciful appearance all along
with us, we desire the Lord may have the praise and glory, to whom only it is
due; And that all that hear of it may turn and say (as of a truth we have
found) that among the gods there is none like unto him, neither are there any
works like unto his works.

The names of the Commanders of the New Spain Fleet, and of the other Ships
that were burnt in the Sancta Cruce Road on the 20th of April, 1657.
Don Diego Diagues, General. Don Josepho Sentenno, Vice Admiral. Roque
Gallindo, Rear-Admiral. Gasper Goteras, in the great Campeachan. Martin De
Lazondo, in the little Campeachan.
These Commanders with their Ships came from La vela Cruce in New Spain.
John Quintero. Francisco De Estoeta. Pedro Fegoroa. Don Francisco Velasques.
Pedro Oreguel.
Commanders of the Admiral and Vice Admiral of Hundoras.
Francisco Martines. Francisco De Arana. Pedro Sorrillio Commander of the Ship
which came from Sancto Domingo.
These Commanders with their Ships were in Sancta Cruce before their Fleet
arrived from the Indies.
Gregory Gomes. Francisco Marcadel. Fernando Sohes.
Thursday 28. May, 1657.
ORdered by the Parliament, that this Narrative be Printed and Published with
the Order of the House for the day of Thanksgiving.

Henry Scobel, Clerk of the Parliament.


