AN ORDINANCE TOUCHING SVRVEYORS OF THE HIGHWAYS For this present year, 1654.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Wednesday April 12. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

HENRY SCOBELL Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE TOUCHING SURVEYORS of the HIGHWAYS For this present year, 1654.
WHereas in an Ordinance for better amending and keeping in Repair the Common
Highways within this Nation, It is Ordained, amongst other things, That two
or more able and sufficient Hous-holders, as in that Ordinance is expressed,
should be elected and chosen upon the first Tuesday next ensuing the five and
twentieth day of March yearly, to be Surveyors of the Highways within their
respective Parishes for the year ensuing; And whereas by reason of the late
publishing of the said Ordinance, the time aforesaid for such election for this
year was elapsed, so as such election could not be made on that day in
pursuance of the said Ordinance, whereby the benefit intended to the people
thereby is obstructed; Be it ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and
with the advice and consent of his Council, That the Persons which already are
chosen, or shall be chosen before the first day of May 1654. to be Surveyors of
the Highways, (which election is hereby enjoined to be made in every Place
and Parish by the time aforesaid, under the penalties in that Ordinance
expressed) in case no election has been already made, shall undertake the said
Office, and be sworn on, or before, the sixth day of May aforesaid, under the
penalties in the said Ordinance set down in that behalf, and shall be Surveyors
for this present year, as if such election had been made on the said first
Tuesday after the said five and twentieth day of March last, any thing in the
said Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding; And the said Surveyors so
sworn, and all other persons authorized by the said Ordinance, shall be, and
are hereby empowered, to proceed in, and put in execution all the Directions,
Powers and Authorities in the said Ordinance contained, as fully, to all
intents and purposes, as if the election had been made on the day therein
appointed.

Wednesday April 12. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

HEN. SCOBELL, Clerk of the Council.


