AN ORDINANCE for Continuation of one Act of Parliament, ENTITLED, An Act for
Redemption of CAPTIVES.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Saturday the 24. of December 1653.
Ordered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

HEN. SCOBELL, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by Hen. Hills, Printer to His Highness the Lord Protector,
MDCLIII.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE for Continuation of one Act of Parliament, ENTITLED, An Act for
Redemption of Captives.
BE it Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector, with the advice and consent
of his Council, That one Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for the
Redemption of Captives, Printed by Order of Parliament of the six and twentieth
day of March one thousand six hundred and fifty, for and concerning the payment
of one fourth part of one per Centum, being one shilling for every twenty
shillings paid for Custom and Subsidy according to the now Book of Rates, and
all and every the Clauses, Forfeitures, Penalties, Provisoes and Powers therein
contained, in reference to the collecting, receiving, and due payment of the
said Duty of one per Centum, in such sort as by the said Act is appointed, be
continued from and after the twenty sixth day of December, one thousand six
hundred fifty and three, until the third day of October, which shall be in the
year one thousand six hundred fifty and four, and no longer; and that the
Commissioners for the Customs for the time being, their Deputy and Deputies, do
receive and collect the same, and shall pay out and employ all such sum and
sums of money, as have been or shall be by them received and collected by
virtue of the said befor-mentioned Act, or any subsequent Act for continuation
thereof, or by virtue of this present Ordinance, in such sort as His Highness,
with the advice of his Council, or such person or persons as shall be appointed
thereunto, shall order and direct, whose Order from time to time shall be a
sufficient discharge unto the said Commissioners for the Customs, for the same.

Saturday the 24. of December 1653.
Ordered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


