AN ACT For holding an ASSIZE For the County of LANCASTER.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Friday, August 5. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold
at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.

AN ACT For holding an ASSIZE For the County of LANCASTER.
BE it Enacted by Authority of Parliament, and it is hereby Ordained and
Appointed, That an Assizes and Jail-deliver for the County of Lancaster, shall
be holden and kept at Lancaster in the said County, the Seven and twentieth day
of this instant August, in this present year one thousand six hundred fifty
nine; And that Francis Thorpe one of the Judges of this Commonwealth, and John
Parker one other of the Judges of this Commonwealth, shall be Justices of the
said Assizes, and of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver for the said County:
And that all Actions as well Real as Personal, and all other Actions mixed or
otherwise, and all Pleas, Precepts, Writs, Process, Demurrers, Recognizances,
Fines, Recoveries, and all other Proceedings, Matters and Things, which were
depending in any of the Courts, within the said County of Lancaster, upon the
Twentieth day of April, one thousand six hundred fifty three, or at any time
since, shall be and stand revived, continued, and of as full force and effect
in Law to all intents and purposes, as they were the said Twentieth day of
April, one thousand six hundred fifty three, or at any time since, and may be
proceeded in at the same Assizes according to Law, as if the same had been
taken and proceeded in before lawful Justices; And that the Seal of that County
heretofore appointed by this Parliament, and now in the Custody of John
Bradshaw, Sergeant at Law, shall and may be made use of for the carrying on the
said Assizes, Oyer and Terminer, Jail-deliver, and Matters aforesaid, and all
and every the proceedings concerning the same, until the First day of November
now next coming, and no longer.

Friday, August 5. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.


