seal of the Commonwealth of England
Saturday 13th of June, 1657. At the Council at WHITE-HAL.
WHereas in an Act made this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for an
Assessment upon England, at the Rate of Sixty thousand Pounds by the Month,
for Three Months; from the Twenty fifth day of March, One thousand six hundred
fifty seven, to the Twenty fourth day of June then next ensuing, It is, amongst
other things, Provided and Declared, That in case the ordering and payment of
the Moneys by the said Act appointed, into the immediate Receipt of the
Exchequer, shall be found inconvenient, so as the Moneys raised thereby cannot
be paid in by the time limited in the said Act for the seasonable supply of the
Public Service, That then it shall and may be lawful for His Highness the
Lord Protector and Council (if they shall so judge it fit) to Order and Direct
the Managing, Levying and Payment of the said Moneys in such a way, method and
manner, as the Monthly Assessments for the Army have been formerly managed,
rated and paid, Any thing in the said Act to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And for as much as the time for bringing in of the said Three Months
Assessment draws so nigh, and the present necessity of the Commonwealth being
so urgent, that it will not admit of so much delay, as the Alteration from the
former way and method in bringing in Assessments will necessarily produce, It
is Ordered by His Highness the Lord Protector, by, and with the Advice and
Consent of His Council, That the Commissioners in the said Act named, do take
Security of the Receivers-General for the respective Counties, Cities, Towns
and Places, in such sort as formerly. And that the said Receivers-General, and
every of them respectively, are hereby Authorized and Required from time to
time, to make payment of the several sums which shall be by them received, of
all and every Collector and Sub-collector, upon the said Three Months
Assessment, by virtue of the said Act, unto John Blackwel the younger, and
Richard Dean, Esqs Receivers-General for the said whole Three Months
Assessment, at Guild Hall London (or where, or to whom they shall appoint) to
be by them paid into, and accounted for, in the Receipt of His Highness
Exchequer; And that all and every the Acquittance and Acquittances of the said
Receivers-General for the said whole Three Months Assessment, shall be unto
the said Receivers for the said respective Counties, Cities, Towns and Places,
a sufficient Discharge.

Will: Jessop, Clerk of the Council.

Saturday 13th of June, 1657.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That this Order be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Will: Jessop, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.


