AN ORDINANCE FOR Continuation of an Act OF PARLIAMENT, Entitled, An Act for
the CONTINUATION of the CUSTOMS until the 26th day of March, in the year 1653.

Monday 20th March, 1653.

ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON, Printed, by William du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector. 1654.

seal of the CommonwealthAN ORDINANCE For Continuation of an Act of Parliament,
entitled, An Act for the CONTINUATION of the CUSTOMS until the 26th day of
March, in the year 1653.
Be it Ordained by his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, with the advice and
consent of his Council, That one Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for
Continuation of the Customs until the 26 of March, in the year 1653; and all
Powers and Clauses therein contained, be, and are hereby continued, and shall,
and do stand in full force, until the six and twentieth day of March, in the
year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred fifty right. And be it further
Ordained that the Commissioners of the Customs shall not hereafter make
repayment of the half Subsidy for any goods at any time exported, which have
been, or hereafter shall be sold unto, or in the possession of any Shopkeeper
or retailer of the same Commodity, or for any such goods where the property
form or nature of the Commodity once imported, is in any wise altered,
mingled, amended or confounded. And be it hereby further Ordained, That the
Commissioners of the Customs for the time being shall have and receiv upon
every twenty shillings coming clear unto the Commonwealth upon their account
such salarie of Poundage as is or shall be agreed upon by the Committee for
Regulating the Customs, or any other thereunto authorized by his Highness and
his Council.

Monday 20th March, 1653.
Ordered by his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the COUNCIL, that this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


