depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp
AN ORDINANCE FOR Suspending the proceedings of the Judges named in the Act,
Entitled, An ACT for the Relief OF Creditors and poor Prisoners.
WHereas upon perusal and serious consideration had of one Act of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the Relief of Cretors and poor Prisoners; many doubts and
difficulties do appear, which must necessarily occasion an Explanation of the
said Act, for the better inabling the Judges in the said Act named and
authorized for Sale of such Estates as are to be Sold by the said Act, for
satisfaction of Creditors, which cannot in short time be effected; and without
such Explanation and further direction to be given to the several and
respective Judges, authorized in and by the said Act, several inconveniences
and mischiefs would grow, not only to the said Creditors and Prisoners, but to
diverse other persons, not meant or intended to be included within the said
Act, and will occasion many troubles, and suits in Law, and Equity; For the
prevention whereof, due care is likewise to be had: And whereas many of the
said Prisoners have offered really to endeavor the satisfaction of the said
Creditors, if some further time may be given for that purpose; Be it therefore
Ordained by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, by and with the advice and consent
of His Council, That the said several and respective Judges mentioned in the
said Act, or any of them, shall not proceed to the Sale or Disposition of any
the Estates Real or Personal, of any of the said Prisoners, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever mentioned or intended in or by the said Act; nor
shall otherwise intermeddle in the execution of the said Act, or of any the
powers or authorities given by the same, until the 20th day of April next. And
be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all acts or things to
be don by the said several and respective Judges, or any of them, by virtue,
color, or pretense of the said Act, from henceforth, and before the said 20th
day of April, shall be utterly void, null, and of none effect; saving only
that it shall and may be lawful for the said several and respective Judges
that have bailed or let out any Prisoners upon Suerties or otherwise, out of
Prison (which Prisoners are to appear again at a certain day before the said
Judges, and are not absolutely discharged by any Order of the said Judges) to
sit only for the remanding and recommitting of the said Prisoners into their
former Prisons and Goals, where they formerly were detained in Prison, there to
remain in safe custody, and to continue and be in the same condition as
formerly they were at the time of their Bailing or letting out as aforesaid.

Friday the 31 March, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

HEN. SCOBEL, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON, Printed, by William du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector. 1654.


