AN ORDER AND DECLARATION Of His Highness and the Council, for An Assessment Of
sixty thousand pounds per mensem, from the four and twentieth of June, 1655.

seal of the Commonwealth

Tuesday 29. of May, 1655.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, that this Order
and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1655.

(...) thousand Horse and Dragoons, and twenty thousand Foot in England,
Scotland and Ireland, for the Defense and Security thereof, and also for a
convenient number of Ships for guarding the Seas, besides two hundred thousand
pounds per annum, for defraying other necessary Charges for Administration of
Justice, and other Expenses of the Government; which Revenue shall be raised by
the Customs, and such other ways and means as shall be agreed upon by the Lord
Protector and Council, and shall not be taken away or diminished, nor the way
agreed upon for rasing the same, altered, but by consent of the Lord Protector
and the Parliament, And whereas in pursuance of the said seven and twentieth
Article of the Government upon Consideration had by His Highness the Lord
Protector and his Council, how the said Revenue might be raised with greatest
ease to the people, It was Agreed upon and Declared by His Highness and His
Council, That the same should be raised (among other things) by the Customs
and Subsidies upon Goods and Merchandises, and by the Duty of excise and New
Impost, and by a Tax of eighty thousand pounds per mensem, to be raised in
England, Scotland and Ireland, from and after the five and twentieth day of
December One thousand six hundred fifty and four, whereof the proportion to be
raised in England is also agreed by His Highness and His Council, not to exceed
the sum of threescore thousand pounds by the Month, to be assessed, taxed
levied, collected and paid, (saving as is hereafter expressed) in such manner,
and by such ways and means as the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand
pounds by the Month, by an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for an
Assessment, at the rate of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the
Month, for six Months, from the twenty fifth day of December, One thousand
six hundred and fifty three, to the four and twentieth day of June, then next
ensuing, toward the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this
Commonwealth, was appointed to be Taxed, Assessed, Levied, Collected, and
Paid, and according to the several Rates and Proportions of the Moiety of the
Respettive Sums by the said Act set upon the Respective Counties, Cities and
Places therein mentioned, That is to say,

UPon the County of Bedford, the sum of eight hundred pounds.

The County of Berks, the sum of nine hundred thirty three pounds six shillings
and eight pence.

The City and County of the City of Bristol, the sum of one hundred forty
six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.

The County of Buckingham, the sum of one thousand one hundred pounds.

The County of Cambridge, the sum of nine hundred and forty five pounds.

The Isle of Ely, the sum of three hundred and fifteen pounds.

The County of Chester, the sum of six hundred and sixty pounds.

The City and County of the City of Chester, the sum of seventy three pounds
six shillings and eight pence.

The County of Cornwall, the sum of one thousand four hundred pounds.

The County of Cumberland, the sum of ninety two pounds eleven shillings and
four pence.

The County of Derby, the sum of eight hundred pounds.

The County of Devon, the sum of two thousand five hundred seventy four
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.

The City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of ninety two pounds.

The County of Dorset, the sum of eleven hundred twenty four pounds three
shillings and four pence.

The Town and County of Pool, the sum of nine pounds three shillings and four
pence.

The County of Durham, the sum of one hundred thirty one pounds fifteen
shillings one penny farthing.

The County of York, with the City and County of the City of York, the sum of
two thousand six hundred and eight pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.

The Town and County of Kingston upon Hull, the Sum of fifty and eight pounds.

The County of Essex, the sum of three thousand pounds.

The County of Gloucester, the Sum of one thousand three hundred ninety four
pounds.

The City and County of the City of Gloucester, the sum of one hundred thirty
nine pounds six shillings and eight pence.

The County of Hereford, the sum of one thousand pounds.

The County of Hertford, the sum of one thousand two hundred pounds.

The County of Huntingdon, the sum of five hundred thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The County of Kent, with the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the
sum of three thousand one hundred thirty three pounds six shillings eight
pence.

The County of Lancaster, the sum of eight hundred pounds.

The County of Leicester, the sum of nine hundred thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the
Sum of two thousand three hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight
pence.

The City of London, the sum of four thousand pounds.

The County of Middlesex, with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the sum of
one thousand five hundred thirty three pounds six shillings eight pence.

The County of Monmouth, the sum of four hundred pounds.

The County of Northampton, the Sum of one thousand two hundred pounds.

The County of Nottingham, the sum of seven hundred seventy four pounds four
shillings.

The Town and County of the Town of Nottingham, the sum of twenty five pounds
sixteen shillings.

The County of Norfolk, the sum of three thousand one hundred and six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence.

The City and County of the City of Norwich, the sum of one hundred and sixty
pounds.

The County of Northumberland, the Sum of one hundred fifty four pounds five
shillings six pence three farthings.

The Town of Newcastle, the sum of thirty pounds and ten shillings.

The County of Oxon, the Sum of nine hundred sixty six pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence.

The County of Rutland, the sum of two hundred thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The County of Salop, the Sum of one thousand one hundred thirty three pounds
six shillings and eight pence.

The County of Stafford, the sum of seven hundred eighty eight pounds.

The City and County of the City of Litchfield, the sum of twelve pounds.

The county of Somerset, the Sum of Two thousand three hundred thirty three
pounds six shillings and eight pence.

The county of Southampton, with the town and county of Southampton, the Sum of
One thousand seven hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence.

The county of Suffolk, the Sum of Three thousand one hundred thirty three
pounds six shillings and eight pence.

The county of Surrey, the Sum of One thousand three hundred forty one pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence.

The Borough of Southwark, the Sum of One hundred fifty eight pounds six
shillings eight pence.

The county of Sussex, the Sum of One thousand six hundred thirty three pounds
six shillings and eight pence.

The county of Warwick, with the city and county of the city of Coventry, the
Sum of One thousand sixty six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.

The county of Worcester, the Sum of One thousand and thirteen pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The city and county of the city of Worcester, the Sum of Fifty three pounds
six shillings and eight pence.

The county of Wilts, the Sum of One thousand six hundred sixty six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence.

The county of Westmerland, the Sum of Sixty three pounds eight shillings.

The Istle of Anglesey, the Sum of One hundred and sixteen pounds six shillings
and eight pence.

The county of Brecknock, the Sum of Three hundred and ten pounds.

The county of Cardigan, the Sum of Three hundred sixty six pounds.

The county of Carmarthen, the Sum of Three hundred and two pounds.

The county of Carnarvan, the Sum of One hundred seventy three pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The county of Denbigh, the Sum of Two hundred thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The county of Flint, the Sum of One hundred and sixteen pounds six shillings
and eight pence.

The county of Glamorgan, the Sum of Three hundred ninety and three pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The county of Merioneth, the Sum of One hundred and six pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence.

The county of Montgomery, the Sum of Two hundred fifty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The county of Pembroke, the Sum of Three hundred forty eight pounds.

The county of Radnor, the Sum of Two hundred and eighteen pounds.

The Town of Haverford-West, the Sum of Twelve pounds and ten shillings.

The Town of Berwick, the Sum of Five pounds.

By which Agreement and Declaration of His Highness and His Council, It is
Provided, That in case the Moneys arising by the Customs and other the Revenues
therein mentioned, should be improved and amount to a greater Yearly value then
they were at the time of making the said Agreement, or any other Revenue or
Moneys shall be added or accrue to the Use of the Commonwealth, in such Case
there shall be a proportionable Abatement of the said Monthly Assessment; His
Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, in pursuance of the said twenty
seventh Article of the Government, and of the said Agreement and Declaration
aforesaid, and for preventing the Burden and Evils attending Free Quarter,
which must otherwise unavoidably fall upon this Nation, Do Declare and Order,
That the said Sum of Threescore thousand Pounds by the Month for Six Months,
commencing from the Four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred
fifty five, Shall be Taxed, Assessed, Levied, Collected and Paid in the several
Counties and Places, in such manner, and by such ways and means, and according
to the several Rates and Proportions before hereby set down and expressed; And
do Order and Require the several Commissioners and other Persons nominated and
mentioned in the beforementioned Act, and such others, as by any Order of that
Parliament, or of His Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, have been
since added as Commissioners, or so many of them as by the said Act are
thereunto respectively authorized, to Use, Exercise and put in Execution all
and every the Powers and Authorities for the Assessing, Levying, Collecting and
Paying the present Six Months Assessment hereby appointed; as also the Arrears
of all former Assessments, which they had or were empowered to Use and Exercise
by the said recited Act, for the Assessing, Collecting, Levying and Payment of
the aforesaid Six Months Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand Pounds
by the Month: And for the better effecting thereof, the several and respective
Commissioners for the said respective Counties, Cities and Towns, shall meet
together at the most common and usual place of Meeting, in each of the said
Counties, Cities and Towns respectively, on or before the Twenty sixth day of
June next. And the said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall then and
there attend and be present, shall put this present Order in execution, for the
directing, managing, levying and bringing in the said Monthly Assessment
hereby required; and shall then, if they see cause, appoint a second General
Meeting on or before the Tenth day of July then next following, to the end the
Rules and Directions aforesaid may be as is before declared, timely prosecuted
and observed, so as the full Sum of the first Three Months Assessment, charged
upon each Division, Hundred, Parish and Place, may be at once wholly Collected
and Paid in to the respective Receivers-General at or before the Twentieth day
of July, One thousand six hundred fifty five, and the latter Three Months
Assessment to be also fully Collected and Paid in to the respective
Receivers-General, at or before the Tenth day of October then next following.
And it is further Ordered, That in case the way and manner of Assessing by a
Survey and Poundrate, in such sort as is prescribed by the said recited Act,
shall prove prejudicial and obstructive to the Bringing in of the Six Months
Assessment aforesaid, by the times limited for paying in of the same; That
then, and in all such cases, the said Commissioners in any of the said
Counties, Cities, Towns and Places in the said Act mentioned, where such
Obstructions shall be or happen, or the major part of them present at their
General-Meeting, may, and are hereby Authorized for the Removal of such
Obstructions, to proceed according to the most just and equal way of Rates held
in such places, in the Proportioning, Levying and Assessing the respective Sums
charged upon them and every of them, according to the Directions of an
Ordinance of the Eighth of June, One thousand six hundred fifty four, for an
Assessment for Six Months thereby appointed: And the several and respective
Commissioners, Receivers-General, Collectors, Sub-Collectors, and all other
persons, who are or shall be Entrusted or Employed in the Assessing, Levying,
Collecting or Receiving of the said Six Months Assessments, or any part
thereof, are hereby Enjoined and Required to observe such Orders and Directions
as shall from time to time be made and given forth by the Commissioners for the
Treasury, or by the Committee or Commissioners for the Army, or any three of
them, in and concerning the Premises. Provided always, and it is hereby
Ordered, That in stead of the Treasurers at Wars mentioned in the said Act, the
Receivers-General for this Whole Six Months Assessment, shall be, and are
hereby authorized and empowered to Receive from the Receivers-General of the
respective Counties, Cities and Places, and every of them, All and every the
Sums of Money hereby to be Taxed, Assessed, Levied, Collected and Paid for the
said Six Months Assessment, or otherwise as aforesaid; and to give
Acquittances and Discharges, and to make such Alowances in and about the
premises, in as full and ample manner to all intents and purposes, as the
Treasurers at War (mentioned in the said Act) by the said Act, or by one
Ordinance of the Nine and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty
four, Entitled, An Ordinance for Continuing a Committee for the Army, and
Treasurers at War, were empowered and enabled to do: And the said
Receivers-General of the respective Counties, Cities and Places, and every of
them, are hereby Authorized and Required to make Payment of the said several
Sums which shall be by them received of all and every Collector and
Sub-Collector by virtue hereof, unto John Blackwel the younger, and Richard
Dean, Esquires, Receivers-General for this whole Six Months Assessment, at
Guid-Hall London, to be by them paid in to, and accounted for in the Receipt of
His Highness Exchequer; and that all and every the Acquittance and Acquittances
of the said Receivers-General for this whole Six Months Assessment, shall be
unto the said Receivers-General for the said respective Counties, Cities and
Places, and to all other persons who shall by virtue hereof pay any Moneys unto
them for the purposes aforesaid, a sufficient Discharge.

Tuesday the 29th of May, 1655.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That this Order
and Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


