blazon of the Commonwealth
A DECLARATION Of His Highness the Lord Protector AND THE PARLIAMENT Of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, For a Day of Solemn FASTING
and HUMILIATION in the three NATIONS.
WHo is such a stranger in our Israel that has not taken notice of the great
things God has brought to pass amongst us by his outstretched arm? What
nation is there who has had God more nigh unto them, than the Lord our God
has been to us, in all things we have called unto him for? Ask of the days
that are past, which have been before us, in these later ages, whether there
have been any such things as those many blessings and signal deliverances
vouchsafed to us from his own hand, in answer to the voice of tears and blood
that have been powered forth.

But in the mean while this is matter of great lamentation, whilst God, by a
continual series of his loving kindnesses and providence, has multiplied
mercies and forgivenesses to us, we of these Nations, instead of an answerable
return of thankfulness and obedience, have, as the highest aggravation of our
sin, multiplied our provocations against him;

In that general ignorance, unthankfulnes, and unfruitfulness, under all those
dews of grace and Gospel-mercies.

In not acknowledging fully to this very day our calamities to have come upon
us from the hands of God alone, provoked by us, who uses what instruments he
pleases to execute his indignation.

In not bemoaning our selves, as sons, and smiting upon our thighs with Ephraim,
in the sense of our own iniquities, and of the patience and forbearing mercies
of our heavenly Father.

In that profane, sensual, worldly, formal and Laodicean spirit generally
amongst us, some hating the power of godliness, and despising the true
professors thereof, for having the image of God upon them; and others, by being
loose in their opinions and practices, have turned the grace of God into
wantonness.

In that great neglect and want of zeal and courage in Magistrates, and other
officers and persons therein concerned, to suppress enormities, in conscience
to perform the duty incumbent upon them to God and man.

All which, with other the crying sins of these three Nations, call aloud upon
us, that as we are now united to be one Commonwealth under one Government, so,
having been sinful and sufferers together, we would with one heart and lip be
persuaded to unite in our humble and serious addresses and supplications to
Almighty God,

That the fruit of all our mercies might not be with Jesurun, to kick, or to be
found fighters against him, nor opposers of his will, as if we were preserved
to commit yet more abominations.

That we may wrestle and prevail with him for pardon and removal of our
darkness, vanities, blasphemies and profaneness, with all that worldly
mindedness, formality, and other abominations, which are yet found amongst us
under the glorious light of the Gospel.

That as God has been pleased to make choice of these Islands wherein to
manifest many great and glorious things, so he would answerably make us a
chosen generation, and a peculiar people, that in thankfulness to him, and
example to others, we might show forth his praises, who has separated us from
other nations, and called us out of darkness into his light.

That God would now speak with a strong hand to quiet the spirits of men that
are apt to murmr, by causing them clearly to see where the true and spiritual
interest of Christians lies, and that in keeping close thereunto is wrapped up
their safety, that so When he utters his voice, All flesh may be silent
before him, and know that he is raised out of his holy habitation.

That though he has had just cause to be angry with us for our murmurings,
backslidings, and other miquities, and has therefore smitten us, yet that he
would now heal us, and restore comfort to us and our Mourners.

And especially that God would enable the Rulers of these Nations now in
consultation about their peace, settlement and welfare, to proceed with
faithfulness, zeal, wisdom and union, to fulfill the end of their being called
together, and to be such, and do such things for the interest of Christ and his
members, and for the good of all the People, as they ought, and as he has
promised Governors should be and do in subserviency to those glorious ends;

That so at last, through the goodness and mercy of our God, these three
Nations, after so great and various revolutions, may be established together
upon the sure foundations of Truth, Righteousness and Peace.

It is therefore declared by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, that for the ends and
purposes aforesaid they do appoint Wednesday, being the eleventh day of
October next, for a day of solemn humiliation and seeking the face of God,
through the mediation of Christ, in all places within England and Scotland; and
Wednesday the first day of November next, in all places in Ireland. And do
therefore hereby incite and encourage all such whose hearts God shall persuade
and make sensible of their duty, and of the Commonwealths present condition,
that the respective days aforesaid be set apart by them for the purposes
aforesaid; whereof the Ministers and Preachers of the respective Parishes and
Congregations are to take notice. For which end, It is Ordered that Copies of
this Declaration be printed and sent into the several parts of the three
Nations, that the same may be Published accordingly.

Passed the Nineteenth of September, 1654.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.



London, Printed by William du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.


