AN ORDINANCE For continuing an Ordinance, ENTITLED, An Ordinance for further
suspending the proceedings of the Judges named in an Act of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners. Until the one and
thirtieth day of May instant.

Tuesday May 16. 1654.

ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

seal of the Commonwealth AN ORDINANCE For continuing an Ordinance, Entitled,
An Ordinance for further suspending the proceedings of the Judges named in an
Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners,
Until the 31th day of May instant.
BE it Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector by and with the advice and
consent of his Council, That one Ordinance of the eighteenth of April one
thousand six hundred fifty and four, Entitled, An Ordinance for further
suspending the proceedings of the Judges named in an Act, Entitled, An Act for
the Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners, be continued and shall stand in
force until the one and thirtieth day of May instant; And that the several and
respective Judges mentioned in the said Act, or any of them, shall not proceed
to the sale or disposition of any the Estates real or personal of any of the
Prisoners, or other person or persons whatsoever, mentioned or intended in, or
by the said Act, nor shall otherwise intermeddle in the execution of the said
Act, or of any the Powers or Authorities given by the same, until the said one
and thirtieth day of May instant, otherwise than as in the said Ordinance is
limited, and that all other Acts or things to be done by the said respective
Judges, or any of them, by virtue of the said Act from henceforth until the one
and thirtieth day of May aforesaid, shall be and are hereby declared to be
utterly null and void.

Tuesday May 16. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


