AN ORDINANCE For giving further time for APPROBATION OF Public Preachers.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Friday June 23. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For giving further time for approbation of Public Preachers.
WHereas by an Ordinance, Entitled, An Ordinance appointing Comissioners for
approbation of Public Preachers, It is, among other things, Ordained, That in
case any person who since the first day of April, One thousand six hundred
fifty and three, has been placed in any Benefice or Public Lecture, shall
not, before the four and twentieh day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty
and four, obtain approbation and admittance, in manner as in the said Ordinance
is expressed, Then the person or persons, who have right thereunto, shall or
may present or nominate some other fit and able person to such place; Forasmuch
as diverse persons concerned in that Clause of the said Ordinance, have tendered
themselves to approbation, whose cases could not by the time aforesaid be
determined, Be it Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the
Advice and Consent of His Council, That the said Commissioners be, and hereby
are Empowered to give Approbation and admittance to any person concerned in that
clause of the said Ordinance, according to the rules mentioned and expressed in
the said Ordinance, at any time before the three and twentieth day of July
next, and that in the mean time no person or persons shall present or nominate
any person to any Benefice or Public Lecture, in the place of any such
person, for want of such approbation, by the time aforesaid, any thing in the
said recited Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding. But if such approbation
and admittance be not by the said three and twentieth of July obtained by the
persons therein concerned, then such person or persons as have right thereunto
may present or nominate some other fit and able person to such place, according
to the said Ordinance.

Friday June 23. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


