blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For reviving the COURT OF THE Duchy of Lancaster.
WHereas diverse suits have been begun in the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster,
commonly called the Court of the Duchy Chamber of Lancaster at Westminster,
some whereof are ready for hearing, others cannot proceed but remain there
undetermined, in regard there is no Person authorized as Judge to hear and
determine ye same, to the great prejudice of such persons whom the Causes
aforesaid do concern, for remedy whereof, Be it Ordained by His Highness the
Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by and
with the advice and consent of His Council, That the said Court of the Duchy
Chamber of Lancaster at Westminster, and all Pleas, Precepts, Writs, Process,
Demurrers, Commissions, Depositions, Bills, Answers, Replications, and all
other matters, concerning any the suits in that Court depending or begun, Be,
and hereby are, and revived, for the intent and purpose only that all the said
Causes and Suits already begun or depending in the said Court may be there
proceeded in, heard and determined. And for that purpose also John Bradshaw
Sergeant at Law, and Thomas Fell Esquire are hereby constituted and appointed
Commissioners and Judges, and they or one of them, are hereby authorized to
Hear and Determine all Suits and Causes formerly begun, and yet depending and
undetermined in the said Court and no other; And may sit as well out of the
Term, as in Term, as often as they shall see Cause, until the said Causes be all
fully heard and determined. And that the said John Bradshaw and Thomas Fell,
shall be keepers of the Seal of the Duchy of Lancaster, and they or one of
them shall and may use and exercise and put in execution, all Powers,
Jurisdictions and Authorities that any Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, of
right should or might have done, until the said Causes and Suits heretofore
begun, and yet depending undetermined in the said Court be finally ended and
determined: And all Orders, Judgments and Decrees to be made in the said
Causes begun, and yet undetermined by the said Commissioners as aforesaid,
according to the Rules of Equity, and the Customs and Vsages of that Court,
shall be of the same force and validity, as any other or former Orders,
Judgments or Decrees in the said Court have been or ought to be; and shall be
observed, executed and obeyed by all persons whom the same may concern. And all
Officers usually attending the said Court, are hereby authorized and enjoined
again to attend the said Court, according to ye duty of their several Offices
and Places during ye Continuance thereof, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, unless they shall be removed upon just Cause. And
the said Commissioners and other Officers shall and may, during the time
aforesaid, and no longer, take and receive such Fees and Perquisits, as
formerly of right belonged and appertained to their several Places.

Wednesday February 14. 1654. At the Council at White Hall.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That an Ordinance,
entitled, An Ordinance for reviving the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster,
being passed by His Highness the Lord Protector, with the consent of His
Council, the 9th. of June 1654. be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness,
MDCLIV.


