AN ORDINANCE For the ejecting of Scandalous, Ignorant and Insufficient
MINISTERS AND Schoolmasters.

coat of arms of the Protectorate

Tuesday August 29. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.

coat of arms of the Protectorate AN ORDINANCE For the Ejection of Scandalous,
Ignorant and Insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters.
WHereas by the continuance of diverse scandalous and insufficient Ministers and
Schoolmasters in many Churches, Chapels and public Schools within this
Nation, the more effectual propagation of the Gospel, and settlement of a godly
and painful Ministry, is much obstructed, and no Authority now in force for
removing such Ministers and Schoolmasters; For remedy thereof, Be it Ordained
by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of His Council,
That the persons hereafter named, shall be and are hereby appointed and
constituted Commissioners for and within the respective Counties within England
and Wales, for the ends and purposes hereafter in and by this Ordinance
expressed and directed; That is to say,

Bedford.
For the County of Bedford, Samuel Brown Sergeant at Law, John Harvey, John
Okey, Richard Edwards, Peter Neal, John Neal, Joseph Barbor, St. John Charnock,
John Cockayn, Edmund Wingate, Samuel Bedford, Francis Astrey, Richard Wagstaff,
Gaius Squire, Edward Cater, Esqs Peter Malory, Gent. John Crook, John Grew of
Bedford.

Berks.
For the county of Berks, Philip Lord Wharton, Samuel Dunch of Puzey, Cornelius
Holland, Arthur Evelin of Bradfield, (...) Trapham of Abington, Thomas Wood of
Windsor, (...) Stroud of Ruscum, Esqs; Major Richard Fincher of Cheetly, Mr.
Angel Bell of Ockingham, Mr. Nutkin of Ockingham, Major Francis Allen of
Abington, Mr. Mills of Hungerford, Robert Stanton, Samuel Bellingham of
Redding, Esqs Colonel Christopher Whitchcot Governor of Windsor, Samuel
Wightwick Esquire; Mr. Cook of Wallingford, Mr. Rusden of Wallingford, Mr. Thomas
Fettiplace, Thomas Cox of Stanford, John Collins of Betterton, Robert Lush of
Sparshalt, Andrew Keep of West-Hendred, Philip Allen of Wantage, Thomas Stanton
of Upton, George Lambole of Redding, Esquires.

Bucks.
For the county of Bucks, Philip Lord Wharton, Philip Skippon Major General,
Isaac Pennington Alderman of London, Richard Ingoldsby Esquire; Thomas Scot Esquire;
Christopher Eggleton Esquire; John Deveril Esquire; Anthony Ratcliff Esquire; George
Fleetwood Esquire; William Grange of St. Leonard, Thomas White Esquire; Henry
Whitbread, William Scot, Esquire; Richard Baldwin Gent. William Grimesdale Gent.
Francis Russel Esquire; Edmond West, Simon Mayn, Richard Beke, Esqs

Cambridge and Huntington, with the Isle of Ely.
For the county of Cambridge and Huntington, with the Isle of Ely, Henry Lord
Cromwell, Henry Lawrence Lord President of His Highness Council, John Disbrow
Esquire; Edward Mountague Esquire; John Thurloe Esquire; Stephen Phesant Esquire; (...)
Pickering of Cambridge, Richard Tyms Alderman of Cambridge, Alderman French,
Robert Castle Esquire; Thomas Bendish, Joseph Eversden, Richard Stayn Doctor of
Physic, Francis Russel Esquire; Edward Leeds of Croxton Gent. Isaac Disbrow, John
Lowrey, Henry Pickering Esquire; Mr. Bryan Alderman of Cambridge, Samuel Spaulding,
Robert Vinter, Griffith Lloyd, Gentlemen, Nicholas Pedley Esquire; Gervase Fulwood,
Doctor Syncots, Ralph Mallory.

Chester.
For the county of Chester, Humphrey Mackworth Esquire; Sir William Brereton
Baronet; Sir George Booth Baronet; Sir Henry Delves Baronet; Robert Duckenfield
Esquire; Thomas Manwaring Esquire; Jonathan Brewen Esquire; Henry Birkenhead, John Crew of
Utkinton Esqs Mr. John Ratcliff of Chester, William Tuchet Esquire; John Lee of
Booth Esquire; Robert Gregg, James Gartfide, Nicholas Goulborn, Calven Bruen
Alderman of Chester, Peter Leigh Alderman of Chester, Richard Green Esquire;
Richard Wright Gent. Edward Bradshaw Major of Chester.

Cornwall.
For the county of Cornwall, Francis Rous Esquire; Anthony Rous Esquire; Hugh Boscawen
Esquire; John Moyl Esquire; Anthony Nicol Esquire; Richard Carter Esquire; Andrew Trevil Esquire;
Thomas Ceely Esquire; John Thomas Esquire; Richard Penwarn, Esquire; Robert Ben^et Esquire;
John Fox of Pendinnis, Thomas Howel ^f Truro, Peter Ceely, (...) Chattey of
Truro.

Cumberland, Durham, Northumberland, and Westmerland.
For the counties of Cumberland, Durham, Northumberland and Westmerland, Philip
Lord Wharton, Sir Arthur Hesilrige Baronet; George Fenwick Esquire; Charles Howard
Esquire; Henry Ogle Esquire; Robert Fenwick Esquire; Ralph Salkeild Esquire; William Webb,
Andrew Crisp, Edward Nelson, Thomas Craister of Carlisle, John Wood of
Cockermouth, Cuthbert Studholm, Thomas Langhorn, William Thompson, William
Brisco Esquire; John Middleton, Anthony Smith of Durham, Thomas Lacy of Sunderland,
Thomas Huntley, Robert Sharp, Robert Lilburn Esquire; Alderman Ledgard of
Newcastle, Mr. Johnson of Newcastle, William Garnet of Oasterton, William
Applegarth, James Cock of Kendal, John Archer of Kendal, Christop: Lister Esquire;

Derby and Notingham.
For the counties of Derby, and Notingham, Sir Francis Burdet Baronet; Sir
Samuel Sleigh Knight, John Ferrars Esquire; James Abney Esquire; Thomas Sanders Esquire;
John Gell junior Esquire; Nathaniel Hallows Esquire; Robert Mellor, Edward Gell, Jervis
Bennet, Nathaniel Barton, Edward Mould, John Spateman, Edward Charleton, Edward
Whaley Esquire; Gervase Piggot Esquire; Edward Cludd, William Wightman of Stoke, Thomas
Linley, Charles White, John Oddingsels, Christopher Wilson of Newark, Thomas
Bristow of Elston Gent. Richard Trueman, Philip Lacock of Stoke Esquire;

Devon and Excester.
For the county of Devon and Excester, John Disbrow Esquire; Arthur Upton Esquire;
Thomas Reynel Esquire; Thomas Sanders Esquire; John Blackmore, Esquire; James Erisie Esquire;
John Elford, Henry Hatsel, John Copleston, John Serl, William Morris, Esquire; John
Plea of Dartmouth, Christopher Ceely, Justinian Peard, Martin Parris of
Plymouth, John Wollacomb, Rowland Whiddon, Thomas Bampfield, James Pearl, Esqs
John Row of Crediton, Christopher Martin Esquire; John Champneys Esquire; William Fry,
Robert Roll, Esqs William Yeo of Plymouth, William Bastard Esquire;

Dorset and Pool.
For the county of Dorset and Pool, Sir Anthony-Ashley Cooper Baronet, William
Sydenham Esquire; Sir Walter Earl Knight, John Bingham, Dennis Bond, John
Trenchard, Henry Henley, John Whiteway, Thomas Moor, John Bushrod, Walter Foy
Esqs Edward Butler, James Dewy, Edward Chick, John Lea, Jeremy Pothecary,
George Skutt, William Thornhul, James Mew Gent.

York East Riding, and Kingston upon Hull.
Thomas Lord Fairfax, John Lambert Major General of the Army, Walter Strickland
Esquire; Sir Thomas Widdrington Knight, one of the Lords Commissioners of the Great
Seal; Sir William Constable Baronet, Sir William Strickland, John Lawson Esquire;
Mr. Stillington, Mr. Bryan Dawson, Captain Bradford, Richard Darley Esquire;
William Coulson, Thomas Hudson and James Nelthrop, Aldermen of Beverley, Thomas
Ness, Robert Leppington, Edward Atkinson, Timothy Lun, Hugh Bethel Esquire;

West Riding and City of York.
Thomas Lord Fairfax, John Lambert Major General of the Army; Sir Thomas
Widdrington Knight, one of the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, Colonel
John Bright, Alderman Thomas Dickenson, Alderman Stephen Watson, Alderman
Geldard, Colonel Charles Fairfax, Captain Henry Westby, Mr. John Penrose, Mr.
Washington, Mr. John Wadsworth, Mr. John Iscot, Mr. Marmaduke Rivers, Master
John Vincent of Warnsworth, Mr Ashton of Arnolds-biggon, Mr Stanhop, Mr
Dineley, William Farror of Evvood, William Ingleby of Ripley, Alexander
Johnson, Mr William Drake, Captain George Byard, Thomas Bourchier, Robert
Smith, Jeremy Dickson.

North Riding.
North Riding; Thomas Lord Fairfax, John Lambert Major General of the Army, Sir
Thomas Widdrington Knight, one of the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal,
Sir John Bourchier, Thomas Wastall Esquire, Francis Lassells Esquire, George
Lord Eure, William Aschough, Captain Nicolas Co^yers, Captain Thomas Davill, Mr
Thomas Harrison.

Essex.
For the County of Essex; Dudley Templer Esquire; Dionysius Wakering Esquire; Robert
Crane Gent. John Fenning Gent. Sir Thomas Honywood, Sir William Masham, William
Masham Esquire; Henry Mildmay of Graces, Oliver Raymond, Gobert Barrington, Thomas
Cook of Pedmarsh, Carey Mildmay, Richard Herlackendon, Arthur Barnadiston,
Robert Maidston, John Brewster, John Meade, Hezekiah Haines Esquires, Joachim
Mathews Esquire, Henry Barrington Esquire, Herbert Pelham Esquire.

Gloucester.
For the County of Gloucester; and for the City and County of the City of
Gloucester, Nathanael Stephens, Adrian Scroope, Thomas Hodges, John Stevens,
John Dorney, Giles Hancock, Jasper Clutterbuck Esquire, Sylvanus Wood Gent.
John Waade, John Crofts, Thomas Purey Esquire, William Webley, Anthony Kingscot
Esquire.

Hereford.
For the County of Hereford; Sir Robert Harley, Edward Harley, John James, John
Scudamore of Kenchurch, Thomas Rawlins, Wroth Rogers, John Flacker, John
Pateshall of Puddlestone, Sylvanus Tailor Esquires, Thomas Eaton Gent. John
Ashton of Ludlow in Shropshire Gent. Priamus Davies Esquire, John Chelmeld
Gent. Thomas Blaney Gent. Richard Reed Gent. William Botterell Esquire, Thomas
Seabourne, William Lane, Francis Pember Gent.

Hertford.
For the County of Hertford; Henry Lawrence Lord President of His Highness
Council, Sir John Wittronge, John Fiennes, John Marsh, Francis White Esquires,
Isaac Puller Esquire, William Turner of Hertford, Alban Cox, Master Combs the
younger of Hemsted, Colonel Washington, Thomas Nicholl, William Leman Esquire,
Ralph Gladman Gent. William Packer Esquire, William Hickman Gent.

Kent.
For the County of Kent; Philip Lord Viscount Li^le, Henry Oxenden of Dean
Esquire, Thomas Foach of the Isle of Thanet Esquire; Thomas Kelsey Esquire, Peter
Peek, Thomas St Nicolas of Ash Esquires, John Boys of Betshanger Esquire; Thomas
Wilson of Sandwich Gent. William Cullen of Dover Esquire, John Dixwell, Thomas
Scot of Canterbury Esquires, Thomas Munnings, Robert Maskall of Canterbury,
Edward Ower Gent. Whittington Wood of Canterbury Esquire, James Sceat, of
Tenterdeane, Robert Gibon, Richard Beale, Lambert Godfrey Esquires, Sir Thomas
Styles Knight and Baronet, Charles Bowls of Rochester Esquire; Master Kennet of
Lie, Master Lancaston of Rumney, Ralph Welden Esquire.

Lancaster.
For the County of Lancaster; Sir Richard Houghton, Gilbert Ireland Esquire,
Thomas Fell, Thomas Birch, William Ashurst, Richard Haworth, Edward Robinson
Esquires, William West Gent. Jerijah Aspinwall, Randall Sharplesse, George
Piggot, John Sawrey Gent. Charles VVorsley Esquire, John VViggan Esquire.

Leicester.
For the Counties of Leicester and Rutland; Henry Lord Cromwell, Sir Arthur
Hesilrige Baronet, Francis Hacker Esquire, Peter Temple Esquire; Master John Prat,
Master John Godman, William Hubbard Gent. Mr. William Stanley, Mr. Edmund
Craddock Aldermen of Leicester; Mr. Samuel Wanley the elder, Mr. Anthony Mayor
of Leicester, Mr. John Horton, Thomas Cockran, Gent. (...) Palmer, Henry Smith,
Edward Smith Esquire; Evers Ermyne Esquire, Robert Horsman Esquire; Edward Horsman
Esquire, William Shield Esquire; Benjamin Norton, John Weaver Esquires.

Lincoln.
For the County of Lincoln; Nathanael Fiennes Esquire, William Savile of Newton
Esquire, Edward Rossiter, Thomas Coppledick of Harrington Esquire, John Archer
Esquire, Nehemiah Rawson of Bickwood Esquire, Robert Yearborough Esquire,
Master Wilsby of Spaulding, Philip Mounton Esquire, Humphrey Walcott of Lincoln
Esquire, Master Thomson of Roxby, Theophilus Heart Gent. Thomas Hall of
^annington Esquire, John Disney Gent. Master Harvey of Lincoln, Master Marshall
of Lincoln, William Berry of Grantham Esquire, Master Matthias Brown of
Horbling, Mr. Thomas Law, Mr. Whyteing, Mr. Tilson jun. Aldermen of Boston,
James Berry, Francis Clinton, alias Fiennes Esquire; Mr. Cole of Stamford, Samuel
Cust of Boston.

Middlesex.
For the County of Middlesex and City of Westminster, Sir Gilbert Pickering
Baronet, Philip Skippon Esquire; Sir James Harrington Knight and Baronet, Sir
William Roberts Knight, Edmond Harvey Esquire, Edward Whaley, William Goffe
Esquires, John Humphreyes, Richard Downton, Daniel Proctor, Paul Wittoll,
Walter Bigg, John Brown, William Bosvile, John Baldwyn, Maurice Thompson, John
Stone, Francis Bloomer Esquires, John Barkstead Lieutenant of the Tower, Edward
Cresser, Justinian Paget, John Downs, Henry Scobell Esquire, George Evelyn
Gent.

London.
For the City of London; Sir Thomas Vyner Knight Lord Mayor, Philip Skippon
Major General, Isaac Pennington, Thomas Andrews, Robert Tichburne, Tempest
Milner Aldermen of London, William Steel Sergeant at Law Recorder, John Sadler
Esquire, Maurice Gethings, Thomas Stains, Master Ashurst, John Strange, Mr.
Barrer, John Langley, John Stone Esquires, Alderman Pack, Alderman Riccot,
Stephen Eastwick Alderman, Abraham Babington, William Hobson, Charles Doyley,
William Puckle of Broadstreet, William Thompson Alderman, Francis Warren of
New-Fishstreet-hill, Mark Coe, Richard Lloyd, Maurice Thompson.

Monmouth.
For the County of Monmouth; Richard Lord Cromwell, Philip Lord Viscount Lisle,
Philip Jones Esquire, Henry Herbert, William, Blethyn, John Nicolas, Francis
Blethyn, Roger Williams, Edward Herbert, Christopher Catchmay, Robert Jones,
Rice Williams, William Packer, Samuel Jones, John Morgan, Thomas Evans Esquires.

Norfolk.
For the County of Norfolk, Henry Lawrence Lord President of His Highness
Council, Philip Skippon Esquire, Hezekiah Haynes, Charles George Cock Esquire; Sir
John Hobbart Knight, and Baronet, Sir Thomas Hogan, Robert Wood, Edward Ward,
Tobias Friar, Henry King, Edward Bulwer of Heyden, John Reins, Ralph Woolmer,
Roger Harper, Joshua Green and Thomas Scot of Lyn, Thomas Barret, Nicolas
Saulter of Norwich, Isaac Preston of Yarmouth, Master Dunn, Master Thomas
Garret, Thomas Russell of North-Basham Esquire; Edmund Creamar of Snetsham Esquire,
Martin Hastings of Hindringham Esquire; John Toft of Norwich.

Northampton.
For the County of Northampton; Sir Gilbert Pickering Baronet, Sir John Dreydon
Baronet, John Crew of Stene Esquire, John Thornton, Edward Farmer of Daventry,
Peter Whaley of Northampton, Thomas Brooks of Great Okely Esquire; John Cleypool
of Narborough Esquire, Thomas Pentlow of Wilby, William Boteler of Owndle,
Alexander Blake of Peterburgh, John Brown of Kettering, Robert Guy of Isham,
John Woodford of Northampton, (...) Rushworth of Northampton, Mr. Grindon of
Blacheley.

Oxon.
For the County of Oxon; William Lord Say and Seal, Nathanael Fiennes Esquire,
Sir Charles Wolseley Baronet, John Fiennes, Adrian Scroope, Walter Elwood
Esquires, Master Berry of Oxford, Thomas Appletree, John Vue of Watlington
Gent. Master Beale of Banbury, Tobias Garbrand Doctor of Physic, John Carey of
Dichley Gent. William Whateley of Banbury Gent. Master George Blunt of
Wiggington, Master William Allen of Banbury, John Nikon Alderm. of Oxford,
Thomas Weeks, Matthew Martyn, Master Francis Webb of Bodicoate, Master Elisha
Coals, (...) Hunt Gent. John Goddard Doctor of Physic, Doctor Cross of
Magdalen College, Master Stephens of Oxford.

Salop.
For the County of Salop; Humfrey Mackworth Esquire, John Corbet, ^reswel
Tailor, Robert Corbet, Thomas Mackworth, Thomas Baker, Roger Evans, Launcelet
Ley, Thomas Ketilby, Samuel Moore, Thomas Hunt, Rowland Hunt, Charles Langford,
Edward Cresset, John Downs Esquires, Captain Richard Smith, John Ashon
Gentlem. William Botterell Gentleman, Richard Cheshire Alderman of Shrewsbury,
Richard Henage Gentleman, Richard Piggot of Shrewsbury Gent.

Stafford.
For the County of Stafford; Sir Charles Wolseley Baronet, John Swinfen junior,
(...) Adshead, John Lee of Rushall, Henry Stone, William Bendy junior, Thomas
Bagnall Esquire; William Turton Gentl. Zachary Babington, Thomas Sanders Esquire;
Thomas Whitgrave Esquire; William Gent Gentleman, George Bello^, John Chetwood
Esquires, Master Mott, Master Myners, Master Saxon, John Ley, Thomas Fox of
Tamworth Gent. Alexander Wightwick Esquire.

Somerset.
For the County of Somerset and City of Bristol; John Disbrow Esquire, Robert
Blake, Adrian Scroope Esquires, Alexander Popham Esquire; Sir Thomas Wroth, Mr
James Powell, Richard Aldworth, Robert Aldworth, Thomas Gorges, John Gorges
Esquires, John Buckland, Richard Jones, Thomas Syderfin Esquires, Sir John
Horner, Henry Henley, Robert Hunt, John Carey of Castle-Cary, Doctor Palmer,
John Preston, Roger Hill, of Pounsford Esquires, George Milward of Shepton
Mallet Gent. Henry Bonner, Thomas Hipsley John Hagger Esquires, Luke Hodges,
John Harrington, John Sealy of Bridgwater.

Southampton.
For the County of Southampton, and the Town and County of Southampton; Richard
Lord Cromwell, William Sydenham, Richard Major Esquires, John Lisle one of the
Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, Richard Norton, Richard Whithead, John
Buckley Esquires, Nathanael VVhetham Governor of Portsmouth, Sir John Dingley,
Knight, William Bowerman, Thomas Bowerman, Francis River, Robert Goffe, John
Hildesley, John Pitman Esquires, Richard Moore, Peter Legay, George Searle,
Samuel Bull, Thomas Chase, Captain Newhan, John Greenowes, Mr Horwood of the
City of Winchester, John VVat^^man, Daniel Her^end.

Suffolk.
For the County of Suffolk; James Hubland, Robert Brewster, Francis Brewster,
Thomas Bacon, John Gurdon, William Gibbs Esquires, Robert Gurdon, Joseph Brand
Esquires, Sir Thomas Barnadiston, Giles Barnadiston Esquires, John Clerk of
Bury St Edmonds, Francis Theob^l^ Gentlemen, Nathanael Bacon, Francis Bacon,
Esqs Samuel Moody of Bury St. Edmunds, Humphrey Moseley Esquire; Barnaby Bowtel
Esquire; Henry Sampson of Framlington, Edward Barker of Aye, Mr. Woodal of
Woodbridge.

Surrey.
For the County of Surrey, Philip Lord Viscount Lisle, John Lambert, Major
General of the Army, William Sydenham esquire; Sir Richard Onslow, Arthur Onslow
esquire; Robert Titchburn, Alderman of London, Sir William Brereton, Francis Drake
esquire; Sidrack Brice, John Blackwell, Robert Goodwin, John Corbet, George
Thompson, Lewis Audley, William Molins, Walter St. John, Francis Allen,
esquires, John Blackwel junior, James Shirley, Abraham Babington, (...)
Tarlton, John Rushworth, esquires.

Sussex.
For the County of Sussex, Anthony Stapley esquire; John Stapley, Nathanael
Studley, William Cawley the elder, Arthur Bettsworth, Anthony Shearly,
esquires, John Poling, John Love, Gentlemen, William Polhill of Burrish, Mr.
Got, Herbert Morley, John Fagg of Wiston, William Freeman of Cowfold, Richard
Knowls of Waterfeild, Edward Cook of Fieldplace, William Hayes of Hawsted,
esquires John Holloway of North-Chappel, Edward Prat, Anthony Hilton, Richard
Manning, Thomas Thorncomb, Thomas Ballard Gentlemen, Mr. Burdit, Mr. Bret, Mr.
Russel, John Busbridge.

Warwick.
For the County of Warwick, William Purefoy, esquire, Richard Lucy, Thomas
Willoughby, Joseph Hawksworth, esquires, Walden Willington, Mr. John St.
Nicholas, John Hawford Esquire; Mr. Thomas Basnet, Robert Beke Esquire; William
Thornton, Matthew Bridges, Esqs Mr. William Cliff, George Wills Gent. John
Brook of Stratford upon Avon, Francis Smith of Cleyton Gent. Thomas Fish.

Worcester.
For the county of Worcester, John VVilde Sergeant at Law, Sir Thomas Rous,
Gervase Buck in the College Esquire; Nicholas Lechmer of Hundley Esquire; William
Collyn of the College, Gent. Francis Frank of Worcester Gent. Robert Stirrup
of Worcester Gent. Henry Philips of Worcester Gent. Nicholas Blick of
Bramsgrove Gent. Thomas Young of Handley Gent. John Butler of Bramsgrove Gent.
John Hayler of Bewdley Gent. John Bridges Esquire; Edward Elvins Alderman of
Worcester, Thomas Folly, (...) Barker, John Corbet, (...) Pit of Keen, Henry
Broad, Talbot Badger, Esqs Thomas Martin Gent. Edmond Giles the younger, Thomas
Roberts Gent. John James Esquire;

Wilts.
For the county of Wilts, Sir Anthony-Ashley Cooper Baronet; Thomas Grove Esquire;
George Cooper Esquire; George How of Cole-Barwick Esquire; William Coals of Downton,
Gabriel Martin, Edward Mitchel of Chittern, William Sadler, William Shute, Esqs
Mr. William Blisset, Mr. Humphrey Ditton and Mr. Richard Phelps of Salisbury,
Mr. Tho: Hunt and Mr. Tho: Baily of Marlborough, Mr. William Temple of
Bishopstrow, Mr. Middlecot of Warminster, Sir John Evelin, Alexander Popham
Esquire; Alexander Thislethwait, Mr. Jamts Hely, William Ludlow of Claringdon,
Esquires.

Anglesey; Carnarvan, Montgomery, Denbigh, Merioneth and Flint.
For the counties of Anglesey, Carnarvan, Montgomery, Denbigh, Merioneth and
Flint, Humphrey Mackworth Esquire; Hugh Price, Evan Lloid, Robert Griffiths,
Richard Price, Thomas Lloyd, Lewis Price of the county of Montgomery, Esqs
George Twisleton, John Carter, Thomas Ball, Garrald Barbar of the county of
Denbigh, Esqs Ralph Weld Gent. John Kinaston Esquire; Edward Thomas Gent. William
Speed Gent. Samuel Swanwick Gent. John Jones Esquire; of the same county, Thomas
Dymock, Andrew Ellis, Luke Lloid of the county of Flint, Esqs Thomas Mason,
Esquire; Daniel Matthews Gent. John Maddocks of Hanmer Parish in the same county
Gent.

Pembrook, Cardigan, Glamorgan, Carmarthen, Brecon and Radnor.
For the counties of Pembrook, Cardigan, Glamorgan, Carmarthen, Brecon and
Radnor; The Lord Henry Cromwell, Philip Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, Philip
Lord Vis. Lisle, Philip Jones Esquire; Bussey Mansel, Edw: Thomas, Edward Prichard,
John Price, Rowland Dawkins, Edward Stradling, John Nicholas Governor of
Chepstow, John Herbert, John Galer, Evan Lewis, John Bowen, Henry Morgan,
Robert Thomas, Jenkin Franklen, Rice Powel, John Daniel, Sir Erasmus Philips,
Sir Hugh Owens, James Philips, Arthur Owen, Sampson Lort, Jenkin Lloid, James
Lewis Esquire; John Lloid de Vairdreff, Richard Brewn, Hector Philips, Rowland
Gethings, Abel Griffiths, Griffith Bowen, David Morgan, Edward Games, Silvanus
Tailor, Esqs John Walsam, John Williams, John Dancy, William Jones, William
Watkins, Thomas Watkins, David Morgan, Gent.

And the said Commissioners for the respective counties aforesaid, or any five
or more of them, are hereby authorized and empowered to call before them or any
five of them, any public Preacher, Lecturer, or other persons formerly called
Parsons, Vicars or Curats, settled, or which hereafter shall be settled in any
Benefice, commonly called, A Benefice with cure of Souls, or public Lecture,
having any stipend or salary legally annexed, or belonging thereunto; and all
and every Schoolmasters, who are or shall be ignorant, scandalous,
insufficient, or negligent in their several and respective places: And shall
and may receive all Articles or Charges which shall be exhibited against them
for ignorance, insufficiency, scandal in their lives and conversations, or
negligence in their respective callings and places, and proceed to examination
and determination of such offenses, according to the Rules and Directions
hereafter specified, viz. such Ministers and Schoolmasters shall be deemed and
accounted scandalous in their Lives and Conversations, as shall be proved
guilty of holding or maintaining such Blasphemous and Atheistical opinions as
are punishable by an Act; entitled, An Act against several Atheistical
Blasphemous and execrable opinions, deregatory to the Honor of God, and
destructive to humane Society, or guilty of profane cursing or swearing;
perjury, subornation of Perjury; such as shall hold, teach, or maintain any of
those Popish opinions, required in the Oath of Abjuration (mentioned in an
Ordinance of Parliament of the 19. of August, 1643) to be abjured; or be guilty
of Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness; common haunting of Taverns, or
Alehouses, frequent quarrelling or fighting, frequent playing at Cards or
Dice, Profaning of the Sabbath day, and such as do or shall allow the same in
their Families, or countenance the same in their Parishioners or Sholars; such
as have publicly and frequently read or used the Common Prayer Book since the
first of January last, or shall at any time hereafter do the same; such as do
publicly and profanely scoff at, or revile the strict profession or
Professors of Religion or Godliness, or do encourage and countenance by word or
practice any Whitson-Ales, Wakes, Morris-Dances, May-poles, Stage Plays, or
such like Licentious practices, by which men are encouraged in a loose and
profane Conversation; such as have declared, or shall declare by Writing,
Preaching, or otherwise publishing their dis-affection to the present
Government; such Ministers shall be accounted negligent, as omit the public
Exercises of Preaching and Praying upon the Lord's Day (not being hindered by
necessary absence or infirmity of body) or that are or shall be non-Resident;
such Schoolmasters shall be accounted negligent as absent themselves from
their Schools, and do wilfully neglect their duties in teaching their Scholars.

And such Minister and Schoolmaster shall be accounted ignorant and
insufficient, as shall be so declared and adjudged by the Commissioners in
every County, or any five of them together, with any five or more of the
Ministers hereafter nominated in this present Ordinance, to be assistant to the
said Commissioners, viz.

Bedford.
For the County of Bedford, Francis Walsall Dr. of Divinity, Mr. Linford of
Sutton, Mr. Thomas Aspine, Mr. Isaac Bedford, Mr. Heward of Hawnes, Mr. John
Cole of Clophill, Mr. (...) Lawry of Bletso.

Berks.
For the County of Berks, Mr. Fowler of Redding, Mr, Woodbridge of Newberry,
Mr. James Baron of Hendred, Mr. Johnson of Lockin, Mr. Hughes of Hinton, Mr.
Tickle of Abbington, Mr. Stephens of Appleton, Mr. Lee of Brightwell, Mr.
Bateman of Ockingham.

Bucks.
For the County of Bucks, Mr. Ellis, Mr. Butler, Mr. Dobson, Mr. Luffe, Mr.
Perkins, Mr. Gladman, Mr. Bennet, Mr. Beverly of Quainton, Mr. Marriot.

Cambridge and Huntington, with the Isle of Ely.
For the Counties of Cambridge and Huntington, with the Isle of Ely, Dr. Samuel
Bolton, Mr. of Christ College in Cambridge, Dr. Lazarus Seaman, Mr. of
Peterhouse, Mr. Robert West, Mr. Coldwell of Wisbich, Mr. (...) Sheldrake of
Levingston, Dr. Warner of Balsam, Mr. Jephcot of Sofham, Mr. John Nigh of
Cottenham, Mr. Bradshaw of Willingham, Mr. Hayes of Papworth, Mr. Lee of
Outwell, Mr. Wells of St. Ives, Mr. Isham of Hammerton, Mr. Meryll of
Kimbolton, Mr. Vinter of Keyston, Mr. Williams of Pidley, Mr. Tailor of
Huntington, Mr. Halsey of Hurst, Mr. Wallis of Broughton, Mr. Cooper of Elton,
Mr. Spencer Minister of Shelton.

Chester.
For the County of Chester, Mr. Thomas Langley of Heldstretnam, Mr. Samuel
Langley, Mr. Nathaniel Lancaster of Tarperley, Mr. Samuel Eaton, Mr. James
Marbury, Mr. William Manwairing, Mr. Newcomb of Gawsworth, Mr. Pemberton, Mr.
Peertree, Mr. Glendal of Chester, Mr. Thomas Upson, Mr. Sillito of Laughton.

Cornwall.
For the County of Cornwall, Mr. Jasper Hicks of Lanrake, Mr. Tinkham of Truro,
Mr. Thomas Peter's of Milor, Mr. Caswel of St. Germans, Mr. Toms of St.
Stephens, Mr. John Wills, Mr. Thomas Travers, Mr. Robert Jagoe, Mr. Welsteed of
St. Ives, Mr. George Highes of Plymouth, master Delbridge, master Mawl of Foy,
Mr. Powell of Clements, master Martin of Plymouth, Mr. Hancock.

Cumberland, Durham, Northumberland, and Westmerland.
For the Counties of Cumberland, Durham, Northumberland, and Westmerland,
master Wells of Newcastle, master Hamond of Newcastle, master Prideaux of
Newcastle, master Theophilus Polwheele, master Richard Gilpin, master Mathias
Simpson, master Comfort Star, master Roger Baldwin, master Thomas Troyt, master
George Larkham, master William Hepkins, master Herris, master Halsey, master
Lane, master Lapthorne, master Truryn, master Smith of Kirkby-Langsdale, master
Walker of Kendall.

Derby and Nottingham.
For the counties of Derby and Nottingham, master John Rowlinson Senior, master
Emanuel Barn, master Joseph Swetnam, master Walter Tailor, Mr. Peter
Watkinson, Mr. Edmund Barton, Mr. John Baylston, Mr. John Hieron, Mr. Thomas
Bakewell, Mr. Thomas Shelmardine, Mr. Frith of Mansfield, Mr. Samuel Coats of
Westbridgford, Mr. Laurence Palmer of Gedling, Mr. Vere Harcourt of Plumtree,
Mr. Cook of Sibthorp.

Devon and City of Excester.
For the County of Devon and city of Excester, Mr. George Hughes of Plymouth,
Mr. Fardinando Nicols, Mr. Ford of Excester, Mr. Anthony Hartford, Mr. Sanders
of Hoslworthy, Mr. Bartlet of Excester, Mr. Yeo of Newton, Mr. Bartlet of
Beddiford, Mr. Herring of Maston, Mr. John Row, Mr. Jonathan Hanmore of
Barnstable, Mr. Francis Sourton of Honyton, Mr. William Trevethick, Mr. Lewis
Stickley of Excester, Mr. John Chishul.

Dorset and Pool.
For the County of Dorset and Pool, Mr. William Ben, Mr. Stanley Gowre, Mr.
William Allen, Mr. John Hardy, Mr. Walter Burges, Mr. John Trortle, Mr. John
Eaton, Mr. Constance Jessop, Mr. John Loder, Mr. Thomas Chaplin, Mr. George
Thorn, Mr. William Hussie, Mr. Jeremy Turner, Mr. Wats of Morecreechel.

York, and Kingston upon Hull.
For the East Riding of the county of York, and Kingston upon Hull, Mr.
Luddington of Cowscots, Mr. Aty of Agnes-Burton, Mr. William Hyde of Wighton,
Mr. Peter Clerk, Mr. Robert Johnson, Mr. (...) Micklethwait, Mr. Hame of
Flamborough, Mr. Fowler of Thwing, Mr. Garthwait of Carnaby, Mr. Crozer of
Bridlington.

York City.
For the West Riding and City of York, Mr. Fisher of Sheafield, Mr. Boles of
York, Mr. More-house of Castleford, Mr. Smalwood, Mr. Marshal of Wood-church,
Mr. Roots of Hallifax, Mr. Herring of York, Mr. William Styles of Leeds, Mr.
Calvert.

For the North Riding, Mr. Philip Nesbet, Mr. Manors, Mr. Dove of Appleton,
Mr. Peter Clerk, Mr. Calvert, Mr. Boles, Mr. Herring.

Essex.
For the County of Essex, Mr. Stalham of Tarling, Mr. Willis of Ingerston, Mr.
Sams of Cogshal, Mr. Sparrow of Halsted, Mr. Glover of Finchingfield, Mr. Peck
of Pritlewel, Mr. Warren of Hatfield-Broadoak, Mr. Martin Holbech of Felstead,
Mr. Matthew Newcomen of Dedham.

Gloucester.
For the County of Gloucester, and County of the City of Gloucester, Mr.
Alexander Gregory of Cirencester, Mr. Giles Wortman, Mr. William Mew of
Essington, Mr. Anthony Palmer of Borton of the Water, Mr. Helm of Winchcomb,
Mr. William Tray of Odington, Mr. William Beal of Stow of the Would, Mr.
William Fowler of Walsterley.

Hereford.
For the County of Hereford, Mr. Woodriff, Mr. Low, Mr. Boyer, Mr. Briton, Mr.
Primrose, Mr. Woodward of Rickards Castle, Mr. John Beal, Mr. Smith, Mr. Voyle.

Hertford.
For the county of Hertford, Mr. Philip Goodwyn, master John Warren, Dr. John
Lightfoot of Munden-magna, master Samuel Tomlin, master Thomas Mocket, master
Thomas Halseter, master John Young, master Isaac Bedford, master Nathaniel
Eels, master Tutty, master Slater, master John Pointer, master Daniel Dyke,
master Lee of Hatfield.

Kent.
For the county of Kent, master John Davis of Dover, master Player, master
Tailor and master Durant of Canterbury, master French of Stroud, master Steed,
master Samuel Selliard, master Crump, master Bright, master John Swan.

Lancaster.
For the County of Lancaster, master Herl, master Hollinworth, master Anger,
master Herrick, master Latham, master Thomas Johnson, master Ambrose, master
Harrison, master Gee, master Michael Briscoe.

Leicester and Rutland.
For the counties of Leicester and Rutland, Mr. Simon Peck, Mr. Thomas
Doughtey, Mr. Thomas Laurey, Mr. Richard Pyke, Mr. (...) Pits, Mr. Henry
Pierce, Mr. John Yaxley, Mr. Nicholas Kestyn, Mr. William Sheffield, Mr. Samuel
Blackerby, Mr. Maurice Boheme, Mr. Barry of Costmore, Mr. Beacham of Seaton,
Mr. Rowel of Little-Casterton, Mr. Johnson of Timwel, Mr. Levit of Ashwel, Mr.
King of Okeham, Mr. Wells of Baroden.

Lincoln.
For the County of Lincoln, Mr. Edward Reyner, Mr. Scortreth of Lincoln, Mr.
Anderson, Mr. Nayler of Boston, Mr. Male of Faulkingham, Mr. Ram of Spaulding,
Mr. Reynold of Heyting, Mr. Finch of Bellow, Mr. Hanserd Knollis, Mr. Moreton
of Billingborn and Hirbling, Mr. Law of Wiberton, Mr. Angel of Grantham, Mr.
Whiting, Mr. Northan of Harlaxton, Mr. Beck of Rippinghal, Mr. Brown of
Stamford, Mr. William How of Gedney.

Middlesex, and City of Westminster.
For the County of Middlesex, and the city of Westminster, Mr. Robert Malthus,
Mr. (...) Perkins, Mr. (...) Symmer, of Cheswick, Mr. Isaac Knight, Mr. Thomas
Gilbert, Mr. Willis, Mr. Rolls of Thistleworth, Mr. Price of Stains, Mr.
Kentish of Kattern, Mr. Williams of Wappin, Dr. Spurstow of Hackney, Mr. John
Bond, Master of the Savoy, Mr. Sangar, Mr. Philip Ny, Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, Mr.
Bates of Dunstans in the West.

London.
For the City of London, Lazarus Seaman Dr. of Divinity, Dr. Drake, Mr. Samuel
Clerk, Mr. Matthew Barbar, Mr. Gouge of Sepulchers, Mr. Abraham Molin, Mr.
Richard Vines, Mr. Griffith of the Charterhouse, Mr. Jacomb, Mr. Sheffeild, Mr.
Rutton, Mr. Bragg, Mr. Arthur Jackson, Mr. John Bond, Mr. Sangar, Mr. Philip
Ny, Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, Mr. Joseph Caril, Mr. Cooper.

Monmouth.
For the County of Monmouth, Mr. Walter Craddock, Mr. Henry Walter, Mr. George
Robinson, Mr. Roger Charnock, Mr. Francis Syms, Mr. George White, Mr. Thomas
Barns, Mr. Abbatts.

Norfolk.
For the County of Norfolk, Mr. William Bridges, Mr. John Brinsley of
Yarmouth, Mr. John Martin of Edgfield; Mr. John Money of VVymandham, Mr.
Timothy Armitage of Norwich, Mr. Charles Franck of Thetford, Mr. Nathaniel
Brewster of Alby, Mr. Edmund Broom of Southrep, Mr. Breniter, Mr. Samuel Smith
of Sistern, Mr. Richard Wells of Takenham, Mr. Harmer of Saxingham, Mr. Israel
Shipdem of Swafham, Mr. Thomas Thorrowgood, Mr. Johnson of Lynn, Mr. Edward
Corbet, Master Collings of Norwich, Mr. Peck of Hingham, Mr. Hogan of Lyn, Mr.
John Newton of Great Dunham, Mr. William Hall of Heveringham.

Northampton.
For the County of Northampton, Mr. Gyfford, of Gayton, Mr. Daniel Rogers of
Wotten, Mr. Ball of Northampton, Mr. Pearn of Wilby, Mr. Floid of Woodford, Mr.
Resbury of Owndle, Mr. Cawthorn, Mr. Wilson of Peterburgh, Mr. William Hodges
of Tickmarsh, Mr. Stephen Fowler of Creek, Mr. Timothy Dodd.

Oxen.
For the County of Oxen, John Owen, Thomas Goodwin, Doctors of Divinity, Mr.
Thankful Owen, Mr. Samuel Wells, Minister of Banbury, Mr. John Tailor, Minister
of Broughton, Christopher Rogers, Doctor of Divinity, Mr. Ambrose Upton, Mr.
Peter French, Prebends of Christ Church, Doctor Wilkinson of Christ Church,
Doctor Stanton, Warden of Corpus Christi, Dr. Robert Harris, Master of Trinity
College, Mr. Ralph Button, Mr. Brice of Henley, Mr. Owen of Remnam, Mr.
Francis Howel, Mr. Henry Cornish.

Salop.
For the County of Salop, Mr. Thomas Paget, Mr. Francis Talents, Mr. (...)
Heath, Mr. James Smith, Mr. Samuel Smith, Mr. Thomas Gilbert, Mr. Francis
Boughey, Mr. Thomas Porter, Mr. Samuel Hildersham, master Andrew Pairsons,
master Samuel Campion, Master Rowland Nevet, Mr. Samuel Bartlet, Mr. George
Bartlet, Mr. John Sadler, Mr. Fraysel, Mr. Bryan, Mr. Wright of Preston in the
Wilmores, Mr. Francis Wright, Mr. George Lawson of the Moor.

Stafford.
For the County of Stafford, Mr. Burdel Minister of Walshal, Mr. Burgess
Minister of Sutton-Cofield in Warwickshire, Mr. Butler Minister of Leichfield,
Mr. Blake Minister of Tamworth, Mr. John Greensmith Minister of Colwich, Mr.
Machyn, Mr. Cleyton Minister of Wolverhampton, Mr. Sharp Minister of Burton,
Mr. Sound of Newcastle under Line, Mr. Not of Sheriffhales, Mr. Tailor.

Somerset.
For the County of Somerset and City of Bristol, Mr. George Newton of Taunton,
Mr. John Moor of Aller, Mr. John Bennet of Southpetherton, Mr. William Thomas
of Ubley, Mr. Francis Roberts of VVrington, Mr. Richard Fairclough of Mells,
Mr. Richard Allen of Dichet, Mr. Richard Allen of Batcomb, Mr. Thomas Lee of
Chard, Mr. William Ball, Mr. Elford of VVestmunckton, Mr. Stubs of Wells, Mr.
John Devenish of VVestonzoiland, Mr. Parker of Bruton, Mr. Bat of Creech, Mr.
Cross of Chew, Mr. Ralph Farmer, Mr. Knowls, Mr. Hassard.

Southampton.
For the County of Southampton, and Town and County of Southampton, Mr.
Whitfeild, Mr. James Terry, Mr. Henry Bartlet, Mr. Symonds of Southweek, Mr.
Awdley of Clanfield, Mr. Cox of Bishops-stoak, Mr. Robert Webb, Mr. Merriet of
Cliedsden, Mr. Downs, Mr. Nathaniel Robinson, Mr. Robert Dingley, Mr. Edward
Buckler, Mr. John Martin, Mr. Robert Tuchyn, Mr. Barns, Mr. Sparks, Mr. Langley
of Titherly.

Suffolk.
For the County of Suffolk, Mr. Phillips of Wrentham, Mr. Marshall of Ipswich,
Mr. Ward of Ipswich, Mr. Hudson of Capel, Mr. Mot of Stoke next Neyland, Mr.
Brunning of Seymore, Mr. Gurnall of Lavenham, Mr. Faircloth of Ketton, Mr.
Gibbons of Bury, Mr. Burrel, Mr. Cook of Glempsford.

Surry.
For the county of Surry, Mr. Richard Bifield, Mr. Rayner of Eggham, Mr.
George Farrold, Mr. Gery, Mr. John Arthur of Clapham, Dr. Temple of Battersea,
Mr. Parks of Morelack, Mr. Roberts, Mr. Wright of Charlwood, Mr. Noel of
Ockley, Mr. Brisco, Mr. Plot, Mr. Peter Sterry.

Sussex.
For the County of Sussex, Doctor Chenel of Petworth, Mr. Anthony Hilton of
Billingsworth, Mr. William Speed, Mr. Cusley of Arundel, Mr. Pickering, Mr.
Maynard of Mayfield, Mr. Vinter, Mr. Hawksworth, Mr. Smith, Mr. Stafford, Mr.
Chatfield of Horsham, Mr. Simons, Mr. Osborn, Mr. Corbet of Chichester, Mr.
Dorrand.

Warwick.
For the County of Warwick, Dr. Bryon, Dr. Grew of Coventry, Mr. Wills of
Brumingham, Mr. Burges of Sutton Cofield, Mr. Blake of Tamworth, Mr. Walden,
Mr. John Trap, Mr. Alexander Bean, Mr. Dooley of Alveston, Mr. Butler and Mr.
Richard Venner of Warwick.

Worcester.
For the County of Worcester, Mr. Richard Baxter of Kidderminster, Mr. Benjamin
B^xter of Upton, Master Giles Collyer of Blockley, Mr. Hopkin of Evesham,
Master Bramage of Kemsey.

Wilts.
For the County of Wilts, Dr. Chambers, Dr. Chaldcote, Mr. Adonyram Byfield of
Collingborn, Mr. John Strickland, Mr. William Airs of Salisbury, Mr. Profit,
Mr. Hughes of Malborough, Mr. Hunton of Westbury, Mr. Peter Inch of Dinchead,
Mr. Hounsel of Chilton, Mr. William Clifford of East-Knoyl, Mr. John Priaulx of
Fovant.

Anglesey, Carnarvan, Montgomery, Denbigh, Merioneth and Flint.
For the counties of Anglesey, Carnarvan, Montgomery, Denbigh, Merioneth and
Flint, Mr. Ambrose Mostin, Mr. Morgan Lloid, Mr. Edward Boles of Harding, Mr.
Steel of Hanmer, Mr. Robert Fog, Mr. Orlando Fog, Dr. John Ellis, Mr. William
Jones, Mr. Ellis Rowland, Mr. Matthew Jenkin, Mr. Jonathan Roberts, Mr. Stephen
Lewis, Mr. James Quarrel, Mr. Rowland Nevet of Oswestree in the county of
Salop, Mr. Samuel Barklay of Clungunis, Mr. George Lawson of Moor in the county
of Salop.

Pembrook, Cardygan, Glamorgan, Carmarthen, Brecon and Radnor.
For the counties of Pembrook, Cardigan, Glamorgan, Carmarthen, Brecon and
Radnor, Mr. Walter Cradock, Mr. Bedwel, Mr. Ellis, Mr. Miles, Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Nichols, Mr. Samuel Jones, Mr. David Davies, Mr. Miller, Mr. French, Mr.
Higgs, Mr. Love, Mr. Philips, Mr. Charles Price, Mr. Powel of St. Lythans, Mr.
Larver, Mr. Davies, Mr. Warren, Mr. Jenkin Jones, Mr. Swain, Mr. Richard Powel,
Mr. Abbot of Abergeny, Mr. White of the county of Monmouth, Mr. Lucas of
Preistign.

And the Commissioners in this present Ordinance authorized, shall and may
grant out Warrants under the hands and Seals of them the respective
Commissioners, or any five of them, to be directed unto the person faulty as
aforesaid, or against whom such Articles, Charge or Information shall be
prepared or exhibited, requiring his appearance before the said Commissioners,
or any five of them, at a certain day and place in the said warrant mentioned,
to answer the said charge or Articles respectively. And after notice of the
said Warrant personally given to the party so convented or articled against, or
left at his dwelling place, or ordinary place of abode, and that notice proved
by Oath to have been made, or given by the space of five days before the day
of appearance in the said warrant mentioned (no just cause being showed and
proved to excuse the not appearing) And likewise after answer made by such as
shall appear upon Summons, or default of appearance, or answer after such
Summons, proved as aforesaid, Then the said Commissioners, or any five of them,
are hereby enabled and authorized to proceed to examination of Witnesses upon
Oath (if the case so require) as well for, and on the behalf of the person
accused or articled against, for making good his answer, as for proof of the
said Charge, Articles or Information; which oaths the said Commissioners for
the respective Counties aforesaid, or any five of them, are hereby authorized
to administer; And after due examination and confession of the party, or proof
made by the Oath of two credible Witnesses, or of one Witness with other
concurrent evidence of the Charge, Articles, or Crime objected against him,
according to any the particulars before expressed, to eject and displace all
and every such person and persons from such his and their respective Cures,
Benefices, Places and Charges as the said Commissioners, or any five or more of
them, upon such hearing, shall adjudge to be guilty of any the Crimes
aforesaid; and shall enter their said Judgments into a Book fairly written,
and to be kept for that purpose; and to sequester as well the Houses, Gleab,
Stipend, and all other profits, and fruits belonging to such Churches,
Chapels, Schools, or Lectures whereof they are then possessed (allowing such
convenient time for his removal out of such house) as the said Commissioners,
or any five or more of them, shall think fit.

Provided always, And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
before the said several and respective Commissioners shall sequester or eject
any Minister or Schoolmaster for ignorance or insufficiency, such Ministers or
Schoolmasters, accused or questioned for ignorance or insufficiency, shall be
examined by the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, together with
the Ministers beforenamed for the respective Counties, or any five or more of
them, and if upon such examination or proof made upon Oath, it shall appear and
be so declared under the hands of the said Commissioners and Ministers who
shall be present at such examination and proof, or any ten or more of them,
whereof five at least to be of the said Ministers, that such Minister or
Schoolmaster is ignorant or insufficient, Then the said Minister or
Schoolmaster shall be taken and deemed to be ignorant or insufficient, and
shall for the same by the said Commissioners in this present Ordinance
authorized, be sequestered and ejected out of such Benefice, Lecture, or School,
and the said Judgment entered in their Register book, and the reasons of such
their Judgment.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in all cases where
any Minister or Lecturer has been formerly ejected or sequestered, and is yet
living and none placed before the thirtieth day of August, One thousand six
hundred fifty and four, in his room or shall be ejected or sequestered by virtue
of this present Ordinance, it shall and may be lawful from time to time, to and
for any person or persons, having the lawful right of Patronage, Election, or
Nomination at any time within four months from the eight and twentieth day of
August, in case of such as are or shall be ejected or sequestered before that
time and within four months after such ejection or sequestration by force of
this Ordinance, to nominate unto the Commissioners appointed by Ordinance, for
approbation of public Preachers, a fit and able person in the place and room
of such Preacher or Lecturer so displaced, who upon such approbation by the
said last mentioned Commissioners, as in the said Ordinance is directed, shall
and may have, hold, enjoy and receive all and every the Houses, Gleab, Tyths,
and other Profits and Fruits belonging to such Place, during the natural life
of such person so nominated and approved, unless he shall be afterward removed
by the Commissioners authorized by this Ordinance, for any the Causes before
mentioned, in as full and ample manner as such person so displaced might have
received or enjoyed the same. And for that purpose, in case of the death or
resignation of such person so ejected or sequestered, the Commissioners for
approbation of Public Preachers, shall and are hereby authorized, upon such
Nomination as is before mentioned, without any further presentation, and upon
such approbation as aforesaid, to grant unto such person admittance unto such
Benefice or Lecture, by an Instrument in writing, as in other cases of
Presentation they are enabled to do; and in default of such Nomination within
the respective times aforesaid, the Presentation for that turn shall devolve in
lapse unto the Lord Protector, and His Successors.

Provided nevertheless, That in case the said Commissioners shall find that
such Minister so displaced has no other temporal estate sufficient to maintain
his Wife and Children, (if he have any) and in case such Minister so displaced
shall, by the time limited by the said Commissioners, leave the quiet and
peaceable possession of the Houses, Gleab, or any oath Lands belonging to such
place, and remove his habitation out of such Parish where the Church or Chapel
from whence he was so ejected, is situate, That then the said Commissioners,
or any five of them shall allow unto the wife and Children of such Minister so
ejected or displaced, for their maintenance, a proportion not exceeding the
fifth part of the profits of such Benefice with Cure (all Parish charges,
public Taxes and other duties being first deducted out of the whole) which
the said Commissioners are hereby authorized to cause to be paid unto such Wife
and Children accordingly, and in default of conformity unto their order therein,
from time to time to sequester the profits of such Benefice for the payment
thereof, and all Charges in and about the same, during the life of such
Minister so ejected; And the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them;
are hereby also empowered and authorized to place some fit and able person in
such School in the place and room of him so displaced, or in the place and room
of any other Schoolmaster formerly by any Authority of Parliament ejected,
sequestered, or displaced, and so may continue to do during the life of such
sequestered or ejected Schoolmaster, as often as the said School shall be void;
which person so to be placed shall and is hereby enabled to have, hold and
enjoy all Houses, Lands, or other Stipend belonging unto any such School, as
fully as the person so displaced ought to have done.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Ministers or
Schoolmasters nominated, presented, placed or settled by virtue of, or
according to the true meaning of this present Ordinance shall have the like
Title to, and Interest in, all the profits, dues and perquisits, belonging and
appertaining to the said Parsonage, Vicaridge, Ecclesiastical promotion or
School, and shall and may enjoy, have and make use of the same remedy in Law or
Equity for recovery thereof in case of substraction, dispossession, trespass,
or any other injury, as any former Incumbent Lecturer or Schoolmaster,
presented, elected, inducted or settled in such Church, place or School had or
enjoyed, or might have, had, enjoyed received or used. And all Judges and
Justices of Peace are to take notice of this present Ordinance and to allow the
same to be pleaded and given in evidence, and shall award and give Judgments
and executions for such Ministers, Lecturers and Schoolmasters placed and
settled by virtue of this Ordinance, as their case in Law requires. And if any
such Minister, Lecturers or Schoolmaster nominated or recommended in the room
of such ejected Minister, Lecturer or Schoolmaster, and approved as aforesaid,
cannot quietly obtain the possession of such Church, Chapel or School, or the
dwelling Houses thereunto belonging, but shall find resistance therein, or shall
at any time be opposed or disturbed in the exeecise of their Ministry or
calling in the said Churches, Chapels or Schools by the said ejected Ministers
or Schoolmasters, or by their means or procurement, or by any other person
whatsoever, That in such Cases the said Commissioners respectively authorized
by this present Ordinance, or any five or more of them shall and may upon
complaint to them made, make such Orders under their hands and seals to the
High Sheriff, or any one or more Justice or Justices of Peace of the said
County, as they shall think meet, who are hereby authorized and required to
execute the same for settling the said Ministers, Lecturer or Schoolmasters,
so nominated, appointed and approved as aforesaid, in possession of the said
Churches, Chapels and Schools to which they were recommended, and for removing
of all force, and preventing all disturbance and opposition, and for the
binding over the Ryotours, breakers of the Peace, and disturbers thereof to the
next Assizes, or quarter Sessions of the said County, or for committing them to
prison, as the case shall require. And all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers and Ministers of Justice
whatsoever are hereby required to be aiding and assisting to the said
Commissioners within their several limits, precincts and Jurisdictions in all
things touching the premises.

And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said several
and respective Commissioners, in this present Ordinance authorized, shall and
may take a view of all the Benefices with Cure, public Lectures and Schools
within their several and respective Counties, and of the Ministers and
Schoolmasters therein placed, and where they find any Ministers unapproved by
the Commissioners authorized to approve of public Preachers, who ought to
have been approved by them, to certify the^r names to the last mentioned
Commissioners: And where they find that any Minister or Schoolmaster, that
has been formerly, or shall be sequestered or ejected has without authority
intruded or shall intrude into the same Churches, Schools, or places from
whence they were so sequestered and ejected, That then the said Commissioners
cause such ejected or sequestered Incumbent, Minister, or Schoolmaster, to be
forthwith removed as aforesaid, and that in that, and all other cases of
vacancy, either of any Benefice with Cure, Lecture or School within the said
County, they do forthwith authorize some of the most honest and sufficient
persons, in such parish where the said vacant Church or School is situated to
receive and gather the profits, perquisits and dues belonging unto such Church
or School and that they manage, order and preserve the same for the best
advantage and Benefit of such Schoolmaster and Minister, as shall by virtue of
this Ordinance; or by any other lawful Authority be afterward settled and
placed in the said Church or School, saving that all necessary Charges incident
to the ejecting, sequestring or removing of the former Minister and
Schoolmaster, and placing of another there, according to the meaning of this
Ordinance, and the supplying of the said Churches and Schools, during the
vacancy, with fit persons to teach and instruct both the people and Scholars
and repair of the buildings belonging to the said Schools, Parsonages,
Vicaridges or Curatships may be deducted out of the profits, and the residue
justly and duly accounted for by such persons so authorized; unto which last
mentioned purpose it shall and may be lawful for the said Commissioners to
appoint and pay a Register or Clerk to be made use of in the premises, and
other Officers, and to allow such salaries, and defray such incident charges as
they shall find requisite; the same salaries and charges being allowed and
approved by the Trustees for maintenance of preaching Ministers and otherpious
uses; and shall issue out of the moneys which shall be so raised in vacancies,
as aforesaid, and to call to account not only all persons so by them
authorized to gather and preserve the said Profits, Dues and Perquisits, but
also all other persons that have received and taken any Profits, Dues and
Pecquisits belonging unto any Church or Chapel, out of which any Minister has
heretofore been ejected or sequestered during the vacancy thereof; and in case
of refusal to account, or to deliver the surplusages after the allowances and
deductions made, which by this Ordinance are appointed; then to cause such
persons to be committed until they account, and duly render and deliver such
surplusage according to the true meaning of this Ordinance.

And further it is Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Ministers
and Schoolmasters as have been or shall be placed by any Authority of
Parliament, or of this present Ordinance, shall constantly, and from time to
time keep all the Houses, and Buildings belonging unto the Parsonages,
Vicaradges, Curatships, Lectures and Schools wherein they have been or shall be
placed as aforesaid, and the Chancels and Church yard, usually and of right by
their Predecessors repaired in such good and sufficient repair, as the same
buildings were at the time of their being settled and placed therein; And for
default thereof, upon Complaint made thereof by the Churchwardens, or any
other Inhabitant of such Parish, where such neglect of reparations shall
happen, unto the Justices of the Peace at their General Quarter Sessions, or
to any three of them out of the Sessions, the said Justices of the Peace are
hereby empowered to send for such Minister or Schoolmaster before them, and to
examine all such defects of repair upon Oath, and after proof made thereof, and
of the Charge that the making of such reparations must necessarily require, to
set down such Order for making the said reparations as the said Justices shall
adjudge to be reasonable and just; And if such Order, as shall be so declared
and made, after notice thereof given to such Minister or Schoolmaster, be not
by them observed and performed, That then it shall and may be lawful for the
said Justices of Peace, by warrant to be issued under their hands and seals, to
cause to be levied so much as by the said Justices of Peace shall be Ordered
and Adjudged as a requisite and necessary sum of money to defray the Charges
of such reparations, by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattles of such
Minister or Schoolmaster, who ought to have made the same reparations as
aforesaid, rendering the overplus back to the owner thereof.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no person after
the nine and twentieth day of September one thousand six hundred fifty and
four, shall keep any School, or be a Schoolmaster within any County of England
or Wales in such Town, Parish or Place where such School is situate, out of
which he has been, or shall be sequestered or ejected upon pain that as well
the Schoolmaster, as also the party that shall retain or maintain any such
Schoolmaster contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, and
being thereof convicted before the Justices of Peace at their General Quarter
Sessions of the said County, shall forfeit each of them for every day so
wittingly offending, ten shillings to the use of the poor of the Parish where
such offense is committed.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the several and
respective Commissioners by this Ordinance authorized shall not defer the
putting in execution the powers to them entrusted by this present Ordinance,
and their meeting for that purpose longer than twenty days after the
publication of this present Ordinance, but shall with all diligence and care
forthwith endeavor the discharge of their said Trust, and from time to time
appoint some one convenient place in their said respective Countys for their
meeting as aforesaid, as may be most convenient for resort of such persons as
shall be called before them.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said several
and respective Commissioners, upon complaint made unto them, by any Minister
that has been formerly placed by the late Committee for plundered Ministers, or
any other Authority of Parliament, in any Church or Chapel in the room of any
sequestered or ejected Incumbent and now removed from thence, or dispossessed
thereof by reason of the death of such sequestered or ejected Incumbent; or who
has been presented by any Patron since the first of April one thousand six
hundred fifty and three, and has not or shall not obtain a Testimonial from
the Commissioners for approbation of Public Preachers, as by the Ordinance
appointing Commissioners for approbation of public Preachers is directed, that
there is du unto such M^nister any Arrears of Tyths, or other duties whatsoever
belonging to the said Churches or Chapels which have incurred while such
Minister did exercise his Ministry in such Church or Chapel; That in all such
Cases the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, shall and may
without requiring any such Testimonial to be produced by such Minister, summon
to come before them all and every such person and persons as do or shall refuse
to pay such Arrears, and proceed to hear and determine the said Complaints, and
give such remedy for obtaining such Arrears as any the Justices of Peace may do
for recovery of Tithes subtracted or withheld from the Incumbent by virtue of
an Ordinance of Parliament, entitled, An Ordinance for the true payment of
Tithes, and other such duties according to the Law and Customs of the Realm;
or as any such Justices of Peace might have done by virtue of another Ordinance
of the ninth of August one thousand six hundred forty and seven, and
entitled, An Additional Ordinance for the true payment of Tithes and other
duties.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said last
mentioned Ordinance of the n^nth of August one thousand six hundred forty and
seven shall be, and is hereby revived, and shall be and stand in full power,
force and virtue.

Provided, That this Ordinance or any thing therein contained shall not extend
to enable any person or persons heretofore declared a Delinquent by authority
of Parliament, his or their Heirs or Assigns, to present or nominate to any
Benefice or Ecclesiastical promotion, otherwise than he or they might have done
before the passing of this Ordinance.

Tuesday August 29. 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


