AN ORDINANCE Touching FINES.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Saturday 2 September, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.



LONDON, Printed, by William Du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector. 1654.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE Touching FINES.
WHereas by one Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the taking away of
Fines upon Bills, Declarations, and Original Writs, It was enacted, that from
and after the fifth of August, One thousand six hundred fifty three, no Fines
should be taken upon Bills, Declarations, or Original Writs, but that such
Writs should be from thenceforth issued, and such Bills and Declarations
admitted and filed without taking any Fine; And whereas upon the seventh of
November, One thousand six hundred fifty three, It was resolved, That the
general words in the said Act, do extend to take away the Fines upon Writs of
Covenant, and Writs of Entry, but no care or pr^vision is had or made for
making good Writs of Covenant, and the Fine and assurance thereupon,
notwithstanding the not entering of the Fines heretofore called the Kings
Silver, which may cause disputes and differences in after times, and be very
prejudicial to the people of this Commonwealth in their common assurances: For
preventing of which danger, and for the better satisfaction of purchasors and
others in their assurances, Be it Declared and Ordained by His Highness the
Lord Protector, by and with the advice and consent of His Council, That such
Purchasor or Purchasors as have since the said fifth day of August, sued out
such Writs of Covenant and Writs of Entry, may, if they think fit, cause such
Writs to be brought to the Alienation Office, and have Fines there set, and in
such cases no new Fees shall be taken for passing the said Writs in those
Offices through which they have already passed; And that from and after the
fifth day of September, One thousand six hundred fifty four, Fines shall be
set and taken upon such Writs of Covenant and Entry, by the Officers who
formerly did, or shall be hereafter authorized to do the same, any thing in
the said Act or Vote aforesaid to the contrary notwithstanding.

Saturday 2. September, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


