AN ORDINANCE FOR Further Suspending the proceedings of the Judges named in an
Act, Entitled, An ACT for the Relief OF Creditors and poor Prisoners.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Tuesday 18th April, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.



LONDON, Printed, by William Du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector. 1654.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For further Suspending the proceedings of the Judges named in an
Act, Entitled, An Act for the Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners.
WHereas in regard of many doubts arising upon an Act of the late Parliament,
for the Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners, and several inconveniences and
mischiefs like to grow from thence, not only to the Creditors and Prisoners
themselves, but to diverse other persons, without some explanation and further
direction to be given to the several and respective Judges authorized in and
by the said Act; It is by an Ordinance of the 31 of March last Ordained, that
the said several and respective Judges should not proceed to sale or
disposition, nor otherwise intermeddle in the execution of the said Act, or of
any the powers and authorities given by the same, until the twentieth day of
April instant; and whereas the way for prevention of those evils, and the
better accomplishing the ends intended by the said Act, is now under
consideration, which will necessarily require some longer time to perfect the
same: Be it Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the
consent of his Council, That the said several and respective Judges mentioned
in the said Act, or any of them, shall not proceed to the sale or disposition
of any the estates real or personal, of any of the said prisoners, or of any
other person or persons whatsoever, mentioned or intended in or by the said
Act, nor shall otherwise intermeddle in the execution of the said Act, or of
any the powers or authorities given by the same, until the fifteenth day of May
next coming; And be it further Ordained, that all acts and things to be don
by the said several and respective Judges, or any of them, by virtue, color, or
pretense of the said Act from henceforth and before the said fifteenth day of
May aforesaid (saving only in such cases, and according to such limitations,
as by the said Ordinance they had power to do, before the said twentieth day of
April) shall be and are hereby declared to be utterly null and void.

Tuesday the 18. of April, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.


