AN ORDINANCE Appointing who shall be Justices of Assize FOR THE County
Palatine of Lancaster.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Wednesday 21 June, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and the Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.



LONDON, Printed, by William Du-Gard, and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector. 1654.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE Appointing who shall be Justices of Assize for the County
Palatine of Lancaster.
WHereas by an Ordinance of His Highness the Lord Protector and his Council,
for reviving the jurisdiction of the County Palatine of Lancaster, and for
holding of Assizes there, Matthew Hales, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, and Hugh Windham Sergeant at Law, were appointed
Justices of Assize and Goal deliverie within the said County Palatine; Be it
Ordained by His Highness the Lord Protector, by the advice of His Council, That
from hence forth such of the Justices of the Court of the Upper Bench, or of
the Justices of the Conet of the Common Pleas, or of the Barons of the Court of
the Public Exchequer, or Sergeants at Law, or one or more of them, as from
time to time are or shall be appointed Judges for the time being, for the
Northern Circuit, shall be Justices of Assizes and Goal deliverie within the
said County Palatine, in the room and place of the said Matthew Hales, and
Hugh Windham, and the said Justices or either of them that are or shall be from
time to time so appointed, shall and may act, do, and perform all matters and
things, as well concerning Criminal as Common Pleas: And all other Pleas and
Process whatsoever, in such manner and form as any other Justice or Justices of
Assizes at Lancaster have lawfully acted, don and performed at any time
heretofore. And the Commissioner for keeping the Seal of the said County
Palatine of Lancaster (for the time being) is hereby authorized and appointed
from time to time, to issue forth to the said Justices that are or shall be so
appointed for the execution of the premises, such Commission or Commissions as
in such cases have been heretofore in the said County Palatine used and
accustomed.

Wednesday 21 June, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Council.


