AN ORDINANCE for continuing the Powers of Commissioners for COMPOUNDING, etc.
THE COMMITTEE FOR Advance of Money, AND Commissioners of INDEMPNITIE.

blazon of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness
the Lord PROTECTOR. MDCLIII.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE For continuing the Powers of Commissioners for Compounding, etc.
the Committee for Advance of Money, and Commissioners of Indempnitie.
Be it Ordained by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR by and with the advice and
consent of His Council, That an Act of Parliament, entitled, an Act impouring
several Commissioners to put in execution all and every the Powers and
Authorities heretofore given to the Commissioners for Compounding with
Delinquents, and for managing all Estates under Sequestration; And to the
Committee for Advance of Money, formerly sitting at Haberdashers Hall, be, and
is hereby continued, and shall stand, be, and continue in force until the
first day of February 1653. And that Samuel Moyer, Johas Berners, Richard
Moore, John Upton, Edward Carry, and Rice Williams Esquires: or any four of them
be hereby empowered and authorized to put in execution the said Act, and all
and every the Powers and Authorities in and by the said Act given, and every
Clause, Article and thing therein contained. And be it further Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, That one Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for
Transferring the Powers of the Commissioners for Indempnitie, be, and is
hereby continued, and shall stand, be, and continue in full force, until the
said first day of February, 1653. And that the Commissioners herein named, or
any four or more of them, be hereby empowered and authorized to put in
execution the said last mentioned Act, and all and every the Powers and
Authorities in and by the same Act given, and every Clause and Thing therein
contained.

Saturday, the 31th of December, 1653.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Scobell Clerk of the Council.


